I talked over the whole thing with Mr. West, described to him the  effect Unto This Last had produced on my mind, and proposed that  Indian Opinion should be removed to a farm, on which everyone should labour,  drawing the same living wage, and attending to the press work in  spare time. Mr. West approved of the proposal, and £3 was laid down  as the monthly allowance per head, irrespective of colour or  nationality.  But it was a question whether all the ten or more workers in the  press would agree to go and settle on an out-of-the-way farm, and be  satisfied with bare maintenance. We therefore proposed that those  who could not fit in with the scheme should continue to draw their  salaries and gradually try to reach the ideal of becoming members of  the settlement.  I talked to the workers in the terms of this proposal. It did not  appeal to Sjt. Madanjit, who considered my proposal to be foolish  and held that it would ruin a venture on which he had staked his  all; that the workers would bolt,  Indian Opinion would come to a stop, and the press would have to be closed down. Among the men working in the press was Chhaganlal Gandhi, one of my  cousins. I had put the proposal to him at the same time as to West.  He had a wife and children, but he had from childhood chosen to be  trained and to work under me. He had full faith in me. So without  any argument he agreed to the scheme and has been with me ever  since. The machinist Govindaswami also fell in with the proposal.  The rest did not join the scheme, but agreed to go wherever I  removed the press.  I do not think I took more than two days to fix up these matters  with the men. Thereafter I at once advertised for a piece of land  situated near a railway station in the vicinity of Durban. An offer  came in respect of Phoenix. Mr. West and I went to inspect the  estate. Within a week we purchased twenty acres of land. It had a  nice little spring and a few orange and mango trees. Adjoining it  was a piece of 80 acres which had many more fruit trees and a  dilapidated cottage. We purchased this too, the total cost being a  thousand pounds.  The late Mr. Rustomji always supported me in such enterprises. He  liked the project. He placed at my disposal second-hand corrugated  iron sheets of a big godown and other building material, with which  we started work. Some Indian carpenters and masons, who had worked  with me in the Boer War, helped me in erecting a shed for the press.  This structure, which was seventy-five feet long and fifty feet broad, was ready  in less than a month. Mr. West and others, at great personal risk,  stayed with the carpenters and masons. The place, uninhabited and  thickly overgrown with grass, was infested with snakes and obviously  dangerous to live in. At first all lived under canvas. We carted  most of our things to Phoenix in about a week. It was 14 miles  from Durban, and two and a half miles from Phoenix station.  Only one issue of Indian Opinion  had to be printed outside, in the Mercury press.  I now endeavoured to draw to Phoenix those relations and friends who  had come with me from India to try their fortune, and who were  engaged in business of various kinds. They had come in search of  wealth, and it was therefore difficult to persuade them; but some  agreed. Of these I can single out here only Manganlal Gandhi's name.  The others went back to business. Manganlal Gandhi left his business  for good to cast in his lot with me, and by ability, sacrifice and  devotion stands foremost among my original co-workers in my ethical  experiments. As a self-taught handicraftsman his place among them is  unique. Thus the Phoenix Settlement was started in 1904, and there in spite  of numerous odds Indian Opinion continues to be published.  But the initial difficulties, the changes made, the hopes and the  disappointments demand a separate chapter. 