The officers at the head of the new department were at a loss to know  how I had entered the Transvaal. They inquired of the Indians who  used to go to them, but these could say nothing definite. The  officers only ventured a guess that I might have succeeded in  entering without a permit on the strength of my old connections. If  that was the case, I was liable to be arrested!  It is a general practice, on the termination of a big war, to invest  the government of the day with special powers. This was the case in  South Africa. The government had passed a Peace Preservation  Ordinance, which provided that anyone entering the Transvaal without  a permit should be liable to arrest and imprisonment. The question  of arresting me under this provision was mooted, but no one could  summon up courage enough to ask me to produce my permit.  The officers had of course sent telegrams to Durban, and when they found  that I had entered with a permit, they were disappointed. But they  were not the men to be defeated by such disappointment. Though I had  succeeded in entering the Transvaal, they could still successfully  prevent me from waiting on Mr. Chamberlain.  So the community was asked to submit the names of the representatives  who were to form the Deputation. Colour prejudice was of course in  evidence everywhere in South Africa, but I was not prepared to find  here the dirty and underhand dealing among officials that I was  familiar with in India. In South Africa the public departments were  maintained for the good of the people and were responsible to public  opinion. Hence officials in charge had a certain courtesy of manner  and humility about them, and coloured people also got the benefit of  it more or less. With the coming of the officers from Asia, came  also its autocracy, and the habits that the autocrats had imbibed  there. In South Africa there was a kind of responsible government or  democracy, whereas the commodity imported from Asia was autocracy  pure and simple; for the Asiatics had no responsible government,  there being a foreign power governing them. In South Africa the  Europeans were settled emigrants. They had become South African  citizens and had control over the departmental officers. But the  autocrats from Asia now appeared on the scene, and the Indians in  consequence found themselves between the devil and the deep sea. I had a fair taste of this autocracy. I was first summoned to see  the chief of the department, an officer from Ceylon. Lest I should  appear to exaggerate when I say that I was 'summoned' to see the  chief, I shall make myself clear. No written order was sent to me.  Indian leaders often had to visit the Asiatic officers. Among these  was the late Sheth Tyeb Haji Khanmahomed. The chief of the office  asked him who I was and why I had come there.  'He is our adviser,' said Tyeb Sheth, 'and he has come here at our  request.'  'Then what are we here for? Have we not been appointed to protect  you? What can Gandhi know of the conditions here?' asked the  autocrat.  Tyeb Sheth answered the charge as best he could: 'Of course you are  there. But Gandhi is our man. He knows our language and understands  us. You are after all officials.'  The Sahib ordered Tyeb Sheth to fetch me before him. I went to the  Sahib in company with Tyeb Sheth and others. No seats were offered,  we were all kept standing.  'What brings you here?' said the Sahib addressing me.  'I have come here at the request of my fellow countrymen to help  them with my advice,' I replied.  'But don't you know that you have no right to come here? The permit  you hold was given you by mistake.  You cannot be regarded as a  domiciled Indian. You must go back. You shall not  wait on Mr. Chamberlain. It is for the protection of the Indians  here that the Asiatic Department has been especially created. Well,  you may go.' With this he bade me good-bye, giving me no opportunity  for a reply.  But he detained my companions. He gave them a sound scolding and  advised them to send me away.  They returned chagrined. We were now confronted with an unexpected  situation.