Just about the time when I gave up milk and cereals, and started on the  experiment of a fruit diet, I began fasting as a means of  self-restraint. In this Mr. Kallenbach also joined me. I had been  used to fasting now and again, but for purely health reasons. That  fasting was necessary for self-restraint I learnt from a friend.  Having been born in a Vaishnava family and of a mother who was given  to keeping all sorts of hard vows, I had observed, while in India,  the Ekadashi and other fasts, but in doing so I had merely copied my mother and  sought to please my parents.  At that time I did not understand, nor  did I believe in, the efficacy of fasting. But seeing that the  friend I have mentioned was observing it with benefit, and with the  hope of supporting the brahmacharya vow, I followed his example and began keeping the  Ekadashi fast. As a rule Hindus allow themselves milk and fruit on a fasting  day, but such fast I had been keeping daily. So now I began complete  fasting, allowing myself only water.  When I started on this experiment, the Hindu month of Shravan and  the Islamic month of Ramzan happened to coincide. The Gandhis used  to observe not only the Vaishnava but also the Shaivite vows, and  visited the Shaivite as also the Vaishnava temples. Some of the  members of the family used to observe pradosha1  in the whole of the month of Shravan. I decided to do likewise. These important experiments were undertaken while we were at Tolstoy  Farm, where Mr. Kallenbach and I were staying with a few Satyagrahi  families, including young people and children. For these last we had  a school. Among them were four or five Musalmans. I always helped  and encouraged them in keeping all their religious observances. I  took care to see that they offered their daily namaz.  There were Christians and Parsi youngsters too, whom I considered it  my duty to encourage to follow their respective religious  observances.  During this month, therefore, I persuaded the Musalman youngsters to  observe the ramzan fast. I had of course decided to observe  pradosha myself, but I now asked the Hindu, Parsi and Christian youngsters to  join me. I explained to them that it was always a good thing to join  with others in any matter of self-denial. Many of the Farm inmates  welcomed my proposal. The Hindu and the Parsi youngsters did not  copy the Musalman ones in every detail; it was not necessary.  The Musalman youngsters had to wait for their breakfast until sunset,  whereas the others did not do so, and were thus able to prepare  delicacies for the Musalman friends and serve them. Nor had the  Hindu and other youngsters to keep the Musalmans company when they  had their last meal before sunrise next morning, and of course all  except the Musalmans allowed themselves water.  The result of these experiments was that all were convinced of the  value of fasting, and a splendid esprit de corps  grew up among them.  We were all vegetarians on Tolstoy Farm, thanks, I must gratefully  confess, to the readiness of all to respect my feelings. The  Musalman youngsters must have missed their meat during ramzan,  but none of them ever let me know that they did so. They delighted  in and relished the vegetarian diet, and the Hindu youngsters often  prepared vegetarian delicacies for them, in keeping with the  simplicity of the Farm.  I have purposely digressed in the midst of this chapter on fasting,  as I could not have given these pleasant reminiscences anywhere  else, and I have indirectly described a characteristic of mine,  namely that I have always loved to have my co-workers with me in  anything that has appealed to me as being good. They were quite new  to fasting, but thanks to the pradosha and ramzan  fasts, it was easy for me to interest them in fasting as a means of  self-restraint.  Thus an atmosphere of self-restraint naturally sprang up on the  Farm. All the Farm inmates now began to join us in keeping partial  and complete fasts, which, I am sure, was entirely to the good. I  cannot definitely say how far this self-denial touched their hearts  and helped them in their striving to conquer the flesh. For my part,  however, I am convinced that I greatly benefited by it both  physically and morally. But I know that it does not necessarily  follow that fasting and similar disciplines would have the same  effect for all.  Fasting can help to curb animal passion, only if it is undertaken  with a view to self-restraint. Some of my friends have actually  found their animal passion and palate stimulated as an after-effect  of fasts. That is to say, fasting is futile unless it is accompanied  by an incessant longing for self-restraint. The famous verse from  the second chapter of the Bhagavad Gita  is worth noting in this connection: 