      H A     I
 I  
   
           .
  I    
  A 
 
A     
I
(MR. DOUGLAS WAS not present.)
FELLOW-CITIZENS: 
— 
Another 
election, 
which 
is
deemed an important one, is approaching, and, as I
suppose, the Republican party will, without much diﬀiculty,
elect their State ticket. But in regard to the Legislature,
we, the Republicans, labor under some disadvantages. In
the ﬁrst place, we have a Legislature to elect upon an
apportionment of the representation made several years
ago, when the proportion of the population was far greater
in the South (as compared with the North) than it now is;
and inasmuch as our opponents hold almost entire sway in
the South, and we a correspondingly large majority in the
North, the fact that we are now to be represented as we
were years ago, when the population was diﬀerent, is to us
a very great disadvantage. We had in the year 1855,
according to law, a census, or enumeration of the
inhabitants, taken for the purpose of a new apportionment
of representation. We know what a fair apportionment of
representation upon that census would give us. We know
that it could not, if fairly made, fail to give the Republican
party from six to ten more members of the Legislature than
they can probably get as the law now stands. It so
 happened at the last session of the Legislature that our
opponents, holding the control of both branches of the
Legislature, 
steadily 
refused 
to 
give 
us 
such 
an
apportionment as we were rightly entitled to have upon the
census already taken. The Legislature steadily refused to
give us such an apportionment as we were rightfully
entitled to have upon the census taken of the population of
the State. The Legislature would pass no bill upon that
subject, except such as was at least as unfair to us as the
old one, and in which, in some instances, two men in the
Democratic regions were allowed to go as far toward
sending a member to the Legislature as three were in the
Republican regions. Comparison was made at the time as to
representative and senatorial districts, which completely
demonstrated that such was the fact. Such a bill was
passed and tendered to the Republican Governor for his
signature; but, principally for the reasons I have stated, he
withheld his approval, and the bill fell without becoming a
law.
Another disadvantage under which we labor is that there
are one or two Democratic Senators who will be members
of the next Legislature, and will vote for the election of
Senator, who are holding over in districts in which we
could, on all reasonable calculation, elect men of our own,
if we only had the chance of an election. When we consider
that there are but twenty-ﬁve Senators in the Senate,
taking two from the side where they rightfully belong, and
adding them to the other, is to us a disadvantage not to be
lightly regarded. Still, so it is; we have this to contend with.
 Perhaps there is no ground of complaint on our part. In
attending to the many things involved in the last general
election 
for 
President, 
Governor, 
Auditor, 
Treasurer,
Superintendent 
of 
Public 
Instruction, 
Members 
of
Congress, of the Legislature, County Oﬀicers, and so on, we
allowed these things to happen by want of suﬀicient
attention, and we have no cause to complain of our
adversaries, so far as this matter is concerned. But we have
some cause to complain of the refusal to give us a fair
apportionment.
There is still another disadvantage under which we labor,
and to which I will ask your attention. It arises out of the
relative positions of the two persons who stand before the
State as candidates for the Senate. Senator Douglas is of
world-wide renown. All the anxious politicians of his party,
or who have been of his party for years past, have been
looking upon him as certainly, at no distant day, to be the
President of the United States. They have seen in his
round, 
jolly, 
fruitful 
face 
post-oﬀices, 
land-oﬀices,
marshalships, and cabinet appointments, charge-ships and
foreign missions bursting and sprouting out in wonderful
exuberance, ready to be laid hold of by their greedy hands.
And as they have been gazing upon this attractive picture
so long, they cannot, in the little distraction that has taken
place in the party, bring themselves to give up the
charming hope; but with greedier anxiety they rush about
him, sustain him, and give him marches, triumphal entries,
and receptions beyond what even in the days of his highest
prosperity they could have brought about in his favor. On
 the contrary, nobody has ever expected me to be President.
In my poor, lean, lank face, nobody has ever seen that any
cabbages were sprouting out. These are disadvantages all,
taken together, that the Republicans labor under. We have
to ﬁght this battle upon principle, and upon principle alone.
I am, in a certain sense, made the standard-bearer in behalf
of the Republicans. I was made so merely because there
had to be some one so placed, — I being in nowise
preferable to any other one of twenty-ﬁve, perhaps a
hundred, we have in the Republican ranks. Then I say I
wish it to be distinctly understood and borne in mind that
we have to ﬁght this battle without many — perhaps
without any of the external aids which are brought to bear
against us. So I hope those with whom I am surrounded
have principle enough to nerve themselves for the task, and
leave nothing undone that can be fairly done to bring about
the right result.
After Senator Douglas left Washington, as his movements
were made known by the public prints, he tarried a
considerable time in the city of New York; and it was
heralded that, like another Napoleon, he was lying by and
framing the plan of his campaign. It was telegraphed to
Washington City, and published in the Union, that he was
framing his plan for the purpose of going to Illinois to
pounce upon and annihilate the treasonable and disunion
speech which Lincoln had made here on the 16th of June.
Now, I do suppose that the Judge really spent some time in
New York maturing the plan of the campaign, as his friends
heralded for him. I have been able, by noting his
 movements since his arrival in Illinois, to discover
evidences conﬁrmatory of that allegation. I think I have
been able to see what are the material points of that plan. I
will, for a little while, ask your attention to some of them.
What I shall point out, though not showing the whole plan,
are, nevertheless, the main points, as I suppose.
They are not very numerous. The ﬁrst is popular
sovereignty. The second and third are attacks upon my
speech made on the 16th of June. Out of these three points
— drawing within the range of popular sovereignty the
question of the Lecompton Constitution — he makes his
principal assault. Upon these his successive speeches are
substantially one and the same. On this matter of popular
sovereignty I wish to be a little careful. Auxiliary to these
main points, to be sure, are their thunderings of cannon,
their marching and music, their ﬁzzlegigs and ﬁreworks;
but I will not waste time with them. They are but the little
trappings of the campaign.
Coming to the substance, — the ﬁrst point, “popular
sovereignty.” It is to be labeled upon the cars in which he
travels; put upon the hacks he rides in; to be ﬂaunted upon
the arches he passes under, and the banners which wave
over him. It is to be dished up in as many varieties as a
French cook can produce soups from potatoes. Now, as this
is so great a staple of the plan of the campaign, it is worth
while to examine it carefully; and if we examine only a very
little, and do not allow ourselves to be misled, we shall be
able to see that the whole thing is the most arrant
Quixotism that was ever enacted before a community. What
 is the matter of popular sovereignty? The ﬁrst thing, in
order to understand it, is to get a good deﬁnition of what it
is, and after that to see how it is applied.
I suppose almost every one knows that, in this
controversy, whatever has been said has had reference to
the question of negro slavery. We have not been in a
controversy about the right of the people to govern
themselves in the ordinary matters of domestic concern in
the States and Territories. Mr. Buchanan, in one of his late
messages (I think when he sent up the Lecompton
Constitution) urged that the main point to which the public
attention had been directed was not in regard to the great
variety of small domestic matters, but was directed to the
question of negro slavery; and he asserts that if the people
had had a fair chance to vote on that question there was no
reasonable ground of objection in regard to minor
questions. Now, while I think that the people had not had
given, or oﬀered, them a fair chance upon that slavery
question, still, if there had been a fair submission to a vote
upon that main question, the President’s proposition would
have been true to the utmost. Hence, when hereafter I
speak of popular sovereignty, I wish to be understood as
applying what I say to the question of slavery only, not to
other minor domestic matters of a Territory or a State.
Does Judge Douglas, when he says that several of the
past years of his life have been devoted to the question of
“popular sovereignty,” and that all the remainder of his life
shall be devoted to it, does he mean to say that he has been
devoting his life to securing to the people of the Territories
 the right to exclude slavery from the Territories? If he
means so to say he means to deceive; because he and every
one knows that the decision of the Supreme Court, which
he approves and makes especial ground of attack upon me
for disapproving, forbids the people of a Territory to
exclude slavery. This covers the whole ground, from the
settlement of a Territory till it reaches the degree of
maturity entitling it to form a State Constitution. So far as
all that ground is concerned, the Judge is not sustaining
popular sovereignty, but absolutely opposing it. He sustains
the decision which declares that the popular will of the
Territory has no constitutional power to exclude slavery
during their territorial existence. This being so, the period
of time from the ﬁrst settlement of a Territory till it reaches
the point of forming a State Constitution is not the thing
that the Judge has fought for or is ﬁghting for, but, on the
contrary, he has fought for, and is ﬁghting for, the thing
that annihilates and crushes out that same popular
sovereignty.
Well, so much being disposed of, what is left? Why, he is
contending for the right of the people, when they come to
make a State Constitution, to make it for themselves, and
precisely as best suits themselves. I say again, that is
quixotic. I defy contradiction when I declare that the Judge
can ﬁnd no one to oppose him on that proposition. I repeat,
there is nobody opposing that proposition on principle. Let
me not be misunderstood. I know that, with reference to
the Lecompton Constitution, I may be misunderstood; but
when you understand me correctly, my proposition will be
 true and accurate. Nobody is opposing, or has opposed, the
right of the people, when they form a constitution, to form
it for themselves. Mr. Buchanan and his friends have not
done it; they, too, as well as the Republicans and the Anti-
Lecompton Democrats, have not done it; but on the
contrary, they together have insisted on the right of the
people to form a constitution for themselves. The diﬀerence
between the Buchanan men on the one hand, and the
Douglas men and the Republicans on the other, has not
been on a question of principle, but on a question of fact.
The dispute was upon the question of fact, whether the
Lecompton Constitution had been fairly formed by the
people or not. Mr. Buchanan and his friends have not
contended for the contrary principle any more than the
Douglas men or the Republicans. They have insisted that
whatever of small irregularities existed in getting up the
Lecompton Constitution were such as happen in the
settlement of all new Territories. The question was, Was it a
fair emanation of the people? It was a question of fact, and
not of principle. As to the principle, all were agreed. Judge
Douglas voted with the Republicans upon that matter of
fact.
He and they, by their voices and votes, denied that it was
a fair emanation of the people. The Administration aﬀirmed
that it was. With respect to the evidence bearing upon that
question of fact, I readily agree that Judge Douglas and the
Republicans had the right on their side, and that the
Administration was wrong. But I state again that, as a
matter of principle, there is no dispute upon the right of a
 people in a Territory, merging into a State, to form a
constitution for themselves without outside interference
from any quarter. This being so, what is Judge Douglas
going to spend his life for? Is he going to spend his life in
maintaining a principle that nobody on earth opposes?
Does he expect to stand up in majestic dignity, and go
through his apotheosis and become a god in the
maintaining of a principle which neither man nor mouse in
all God’s creation is opposing? Now something in regard to
the Lecompton Constitution more specially; for I pass from
this other question of popular sovereignty as the most
arrant humbug that has ever been attempted on an
intelligent community.
As to the Lecompton Constitution, I have already said
that on the question of fact, as to whether it was a fair
emanation of the people or not, Judge Douglas, with the
Republicans 
and 
some 
Americans, 
had 
greatly 
the
argument against the Administration; and while I repeat
this, I wish to know what there is in the opposition of Judge
Douglas to the Lecompton Constitution that entitles him to
be considered the only opponent to it, — as being par
excellence the very quintessence of that opposition. I agree
to the rightfulness of his opposition. He in the Senate and
his class of men there formed the number three and no
more. In the House of Representatives his class of men —
the Anti-Lecompton Democrats — formed a number of
about twenty. It took one hundred and twenty to defeat the
measure, against one hundred and twelve. Of the votes of
that one hundred and twenty, Judge Douglas’s friends
 furnished twenty, to add to which there were six Americans
and ninety-four Republicans. I do not say that I am
precisely accurate in their numbers, but I am suﬀiciently so
for any use I am making of it.
Why is it that twenty shall be entitled to all the credit of
doing that work, and the hundred none of it? Why, if, as
Judge Douglas says, the honor is to be divided and due
credit is to be given to other parties, why is just so much
given as is consonant with the wishes, the interests, and
advancement of the twenty? My understanding is, when a
common job is done, or a common enterprise prosecuted, if
I put in ﬁve dollars to your one, I have a right to take out
ﬁve dollars to your one. But he does not so understand it.
He declares the dividend of credit for defeating Lecompton
upon 
a 
basis 
which 
seems 
unprecedented 
and
incomprehensible.
Let us see. Lecompton in the raw was defeated. It
afterward took a sort of cooked-up shape, and was passed
in the English bill. It is said by the Judge that the defeat
was a good and proper thing. If it was a good thing, why is
he entitled to more credit than others for the performance
of that good act, unless there was something in the
antecedents of the Republicans that might induce every
one to expect them to join in that good work, and at the
same time something leading them to doubt that he would?
Does he place his superior claim to credit on the ground
that he performed a good act which was never expected of
him? He says I have a proneness for quoting Scripture. If I
should do so now, it occurs that perhaps he places himself
 somewhat upon the ground of the parable of the lost sheep
which went astray upon the mountains, and when the
owner of the hundred sheep found the one that was lost,
and threw it upon his shoulders and came home rejoicing,
it was said that there was more rejoicing over the one
sheep that was lost and had been found than over the
ninety and nine in the fold. The application is made by the
Saviour in this parable, thus: “Verily, I say unto you, there
is more rejoicing in heaven over one sinner that repenteth,
than over ninety and nine just persons that need no
repentance.”
And now, if the Judge claims the beneﬁt of this parable,
let him repent. Let him not come up here and say: “I am the
only just person; and you are the ninety-nine sinners!”
Repentance before forgiveness is a provision of the
Christian system, and on that condition alone will the
Republicans grant his forgiveness.
How will he prove that we have ever occupied a diﬀerent
position in regard to the Lecompton Constitution or any
principle in it? He says he did not make his opposition on
the ground as to whether it was a free or slave constitution,
and he would have you understand that the Republicans
made their opposition because it ultimately became a slave
constitution. To make proof in favor of himself on this point,
he reminds us that he opposed Lecompton before the vote
was taken declaring whether the State was to be free or
slave. But he forgets to say that our Republican Senator,
Trumbull, made a speech against Lecompton even before
he did.
 Why did he oppose it? Partly, as he declares, because the
members of the convention who framed it were not fairly
elected by the people; that the people were not allowed to
vote unless they had been registered; and that the people
of whole counties, some instances, were not registered. For
these reasons he declares the Constitution was not an
emanation, in any true sense, from the people. He also has
an additional objection as to the mode of submitting the
Constitution back to the people. But bearing on the
question of whether the delegates were fairly elected, a
speech of his, made something more than twelve months
ago, from this stand, becomes important. It was made a
little while before the election of the delegates who made
Lecompton. In that speech he declared there was every
reason to hope and believe the election would be fair; and if
any one failed to vote, it would be his own culpable fault.
I, a few days after, made a sort of answer to that speech.
In that answer I made, substantially, the very argument
with which he combated his Lecompton adversaries in the
Senate last winter. I pointed to the facts that the people
could not vote without being registered, and that the time
for registering had gone by. I commented on it as wonderful
that Judge Douglas could be ignorant of these facts which
every one else in the nation so well knew.
I now pass from popular sovereignty and Lecompton. I
may have occasion to refer to one or both.
When he was preparing his plan of campaign, Napoleon-
like, in New York, as appears by two speeches I have heard
him deliver since his arrival in Illinois, he gave special
 attention to a speech of mine, delivered here on the 16th of
June last. He says that he carefully read that speech. He
told us that at Chicago a week ago last night and he
repeated it at Bloomington last night. Doubtless, he
repeated it again to-day, though I did not hear him. In the
ﬁrst two places — Chicago and Bloomington I heard him;
to-day I did not. He said he had carefully examined that
speech, — when, he did not say; but there is no reasonable
doubt it was when he was in New York preparing his plan
of campaign. I am glad he did read it carefully. He says it
was evidently prepared with great care. I freely admit it
was prepared with care. I claim not to be more free from
errors than others, — perhaps scarcely so much; but I was
very careful not to put anything in that speech as a matter
of fact, or make any inferences, which did not appear to me
to be true and fully warrantable. If I had made any mistake,
I was willing to be corrected; if I had drawn any inference
in regard to Judge Douglas or any one else which was not
warranted, I was fully prepared to modify it as soon as
discovered. I planted myself upon the truth and the truth
only, so far as I knew it, or could be brought to know it.
Having made that speech with the most kindly feelings
toward Judge Douglas, as manifested therein, I was
gratiﬁed when I found that he had carefully examined it,
and had detected no error of fact, nor any inference against
him, nor any misrepresentations of which he thought ﬁt to
complain. In neither of the two speeches I have mentioned
did he make any such complaint. I will thank any one who
will inform me that he, in his speech to-day, pointed out
 anything I had stated respecting him as being erroneous. I
presume there is no such thing. I have reason to be
gratiﬁed that the care and caution used in that speech left
it so that he, most of all others interested in discovering
error, has not been able to point out one thing against him
which he could say was wrong. He seizes upon the
doctrines he supposes to be included in that speech, and
declares that upon them will turn the issues of this
campaign. He then quotes, or attempts to quote, from my
speech. I will not say that he wilfully misquotes, but he
does fail to quote accurately. His attempt at quoting is from
a passage which I believe I can quote accurately from
memory. I shall make the quotation now, with some
comments upon it, as I have already said, in order that the
Judge 
shall 
be 
left 
entirely 
without 
excuse 
for
misrepresenting me. I do so now, as I hope, for the last
time. I do this in great caution, in order that if he repeats
his misrepresentation it shall be plain to all that he does so
wilfully. If, after all, he still persists, I shall be compelled to
reconstruct the course I have marked out for myself, and
draw upon such humble resources, as I have, for a new
course, better suited to the real exigencies of the case. I set
out in this campaign with the intention of conducting it
strictly as a gentleman, in substance at least, if not in the
outside polish. The latter I shall never be; but that which
constitutes the inside of a gentleman I hope I understand,
and am not less inclined to practice than others. It was my
purpose and expectation that this canvass would be
conducted upon principle, and with fairness on both sides,
 and it shall not be my fault if this purpose and expectation
shall be given up.
He charges, in substance, that I invite a war of sections;
that I propose all the local institutions of the diﬀerent
States shall become consolidated and uniform. What is
there in the language of that speech which expresses such
purpose or bears such construction? I have again and again
said that I would not enter into any of the States to disturb
the 
institution 
of 
slavery. 
Judge 
Douglas 
said, 
at
Bloomington, that I used language most able and ingenious
for concealing what I really meant; and that while I had
protested against entering into the slave States, I
nevertheless did mean to go on the banks of the Ohio and
throw missiles into Kentucky, to disturb them in their
domestic institutions.
I said in that speech, and I meant no more, that the
institution of slavery ought to be placed in the very attitude
where the framers of this government placed it and left it. I
do not understand that the framers of our Constitution left
the people of the free States in the attitude of ﬁring bombs
or shells into the slave States. I was not using that passage
for the purpose for which he infers I did use it. I said:
“We are now far advanced into the ﬁfth year since a
policy was created for the avowed object and with the
conﬁdent promise of putting an end to slavery agitation.
Under the operation of that policy that agitation has not
only not ceased, but has constantly augmented. In my
opinion it will not cease till a crisis shall have been reached
and passed. ‘A house divided against itself cannot stand.’ I
 believe that this government cannot endure permanently
half slave and half free; it will become all one thing or all
the other. Either the opponents of slavery will arrest the
further spread of it, and place it where the public mind
shall rest in the belief that it is in the course of ultimate
extinction, or its advocates will push it forward till it shall
become alike lawful in all the States, old as well as new,
North as well as South.”
Now, you all see, from that quotation, I did not express
my wish on anything. In that passage I indicated no wish or
purpose of my own; I simply expressed my expectation.
Cannot the Judge perceive a distinction between a purpose
and an expectation? I have often expressed an expectation
to die, but I have never expressed a wish to die. I said at
Chicago, and now repeat, that I am quite aware this
government has endured, half slave and half free, for
eighty-two years. I understand that little bit of history. I
expressed the opinion I did because I perceived — or
thought I perceived — a new set of causes introduced. I did
say at Chicago, in my speech there, that I do wish to see
the spread of slavery arrested, and to see it placed where
the public mind shall rest in the belief that it is in the
course of ultimate extinction. I said that because I
supposed, when the public mind shall rest in that belief, we
shall have peace on the slavery question. I have believed —
and now believe — the public mind did rest on that belief
up to the introduction of the Nebraska Bill.
Although I have ever been opposed to slavery, so far I
rested in the hope and belief that it was in the course of
 ultimate extinction. For that reason it had been a minor
question with me. I might have been mistaken; but I had
believed, and now believe, that the whole public mind, that
is, the mind of the great majority, had rested in that belief
up to the repeal of the Missouri Compromise. But upon that
event I became convinced that either I had been resting in
a delusion, or the institution was being placed on a new
basis, a basis for making it perpetual, national, and
universal. Subsequent events have greatly conﬁrmed me in
that belief. I believe that bill to be the beginning of a
conspiracy for that purpose. So believing, I have since then
considered that question a paramount one. So believing, I
thought the public mind will never rest till the power of
Congress to restrict the spread of it shall again be
acknowledged and exercised on the one hand or, on the
other, all resistance be entirely crushed out. I have
expressed that opinion, and I entertain it to-night. It is
denied that there is any tendency to the nationalization of
slavery in these States.
Mr. Brooks, of South Carolina, in one of his speeches,
when they were presenting him canes, silver plate, gold
pitchers, and the like, for assaulting Senator Sumner,
distinctly aﬀirmed his opinion that when this Constitution
was formed it was the belief of no man that slavery would
last to the present day. He said, what I think, that the
framers of our Constitution placed the institution of slavery
where the public mind rested in the hope that it was in the
course of ultimate extinction. But he went on to say that
the men of the present age, by their experience, have
 become wiser than the framers of the Constitution, and the
invention of the cotton gin had made the perpetuity of
slavery a necessity in this country.
As another piece of evidence tending to this same point:
Quite recently in Virginia, a man — the owner of slaves —
made a will providing that after his death certain of his
slaves should have their freedom if they should so choose,
and go to Liberia, rather than remain in slavery. They chose
to be liberated. But the persons to whom they would
descend as property claimed them as slaves. A suit was
instituted, which ﬁnally came to the Supreme Court of
Virginia, and was therein decided against the slaves upon
the ground that a negro cannot make a choice; that they
had no legal power to choose, could not perform the
condition upon which their freedom depended.
I do not mention this with any purpose of criticizing it,
but to connect it with the arguments as aﬀording additional
evidence of the change of sentiment upon this question of
slavery in the direction of making it perpetual and national.
I argue now as I did before, that there is such a tendency;
and I am backed, not merely by the facts, but by the open
confession in the slave States.
And now as to the Judge’s inference that because I wish
to see slavery placed in the course of ultimate extinction, —
placed where our fathers originally placed it, — I wish to
annihilate the State Legislatures, to force cotton to grow
upon the tops of the Green Mountains, to freeze ice in
Florida, to cut lumber on the broad Illinois prairie, — that I
am in favor of all these ridiculous and impossible things.
 It seems to me it is a complete answer to all this to ask if,
when Congress did have the fashion of restricting slavery
from free territory; when courts did have the fashion of
deciding that taking a slave into a free country made him
free, — I say it is a suﬀicient answer to ask if any of this
ridiculous nonsense about consolidation and uniformity did
actually follow. Who heard of any such thing because of the
Ordinance of ‘87? because of the Missouri restriction?
because of the numerous court decisions of that character?
Now, as to the Dred Scott decision; for upon that he
makes his last point at me. He boldly takes ground in favor
of that decision.
This is one half the onslaught, and one third of the entire
plan of the campaign. I am opposed to that decision in a
certain sense, but not in the sense which he puts it. I say
that in so far as it decided in favor of Dred Scott’s master,
and against Dred Scott and his family, I do not propose to
disturb or resist the decision.
I never have proposed to do any such thing. I think that
in respect for judicial authority my humble history would
not suﬀer in comparison with that of Judge Douglas. He
would have the citizen conform his vote to that decision;
the member of Congress, his; the President, his use of the
veto power. He would make it a rule of political action for
the people and all the departments of the government. I
would not. By resisting it as a political rule, I disturb no
right of property, create no disorder, excite no mobs.
When he spoke at Chicago, on Friday evening of last
week, he made this same point upon me. On Saturday
 evening I replied, and reminded him of a Supreme Court
decision which he opposed for at least several years. Last
night, at Bloomington, he took some notice of that reply,
but entirely forgot to remember that part of it.
He renews his onslaught upon me, forgetting to
remember that I have turned the tables against himself on
that very point. I renew the eﬀort to draw his attention to
it. I wish to stand erect before the country, as well as Judge
Douglas, on this question of judicial authority; and
therefore I add something to the authority in favor of my
own position. I wish to show that I am sustained by
authority, in addition to that heretofore presented. I do not
expect to convince the Judge. It is part of the plan of his
campaign, and he will cling to it with a desperate grip.
Even turn it upon him, — the sharp point against him, and
gaﬀ him through, — he will still cling to it till he can invent
some new dodge to take the place of it.
In public speaking it is tedious reading from documents;
but I must beg to indulge the practice to a limited extent. I
shall read from a letter written by Mr. Jeﬀerson in 1820,
and now to be found in the seventh volume of his
correspondence, at page 177. It seems he had been
presented by a gentleman of the name of Jarvis with a
book, or essay, or periodical, called the Republican, and he
was writing in acknowledgment of the present, and noting
some of its contents. After expressing the hope that the
work will produce a favorable eﬀect upon the minds of the
young, he proceeds to say:
 “That it will have this tendency may be expected, and for
that reason I feel an urgency to note what I deem an error
in it, the more requiring notice as your opinion is
strengthened by that of many others. You seem, in pages 84
and 148, to consider the judges as the ultimate arbiters of
all constitutional questions, — a very dangerous doctrine
indeed, and one which would place us under the despotism
of an oligarchy. Our judges are as honest as other men, and
not more so. They have, with others, the same passions for
party, for power, and the privilege of their corps. Their
maxim is, ‘Boni judicis est ampliare jurisdictionem’; and
their power is the more dangerous as they are in oﬀice for
life, and not responsible, as the other functionaries are, to
the elective control. The Constitution has erected no such
single tribunal, knowing that, to whatever hands conﬁded,
with the corruptions of time and party, its members would
become despots. It has more wisely made all the
departments co-equal and co-sovereign with themselves.”
Thus we see the power claimed for the Supreme Court by
Judge Douglas, Mr. Jeﬀerson holds, would reduce us to the
despotism of an oligarchy.
Now, I have said no more than this, — in fact, never quite
so much as this; at least I am sustained by Mr. Jeﬀerson.
Let us go a little further. You remember we once had a
National Bank. Some one owed the bank a debt; he was
sued, and sought to avoid payment on the ground that the
bank was unconstitutional. The case went to the Supreme
Court, and therein it was decided that the bank was
constitutional. The whole Democratic party revolted against
 that decision. General Jackson himself asserted that he, as
President, would not be bound to hold a National Bank to
be constitutional, even though the court had decided it to
be so. He fell in precisely with the view of Mr. Jeﬀerson,
and acted upon it under his oﬀicial oath, in vetoing a
charter for a National Bank. The declaration that Congress
does not possess this constitutional power to charter a
bank has gone into the Democratic platform, at their
National Conventions, and was brought forward and
reaﬀirmed in their last Convention at Cincinnati. They have
contended for that declaration, in the very teeth of the
Supreme Court, for more than a quarter of a century. In
fact, they have reduced the decision to an absolute nullity.
That decision, I repeat, is repudiated in the Cincinnati
platform; and still, as if to show that eﬀrontery can go no
further, Judge Douglas vaunts in the very speeches in which
he denounces me for opposing the Dred Scott decision that
he stands on the Cincinnati platform.
Now, I wish to know what the Judge can charge upon me,
with respect to decisions of the Supreme Court, which does
not lie in all its length, breadth, and proportions at his own
door. The plain truth is simply this: Judge Douglas is for
Supreme Court decisions when he likes and against them
when he does not like them. He is for the Dred Scott
decision because it tends to nationalize slavery; because it
is part of the original combination for that object. It so
happens, singularly enough, that I never stood opposed to a
decision of the Supreme Court till this, on the contrary, I
have no recollection that he was ever particularly in favor
 of one till this. He never was in favor of any nor opposed to
any, till the present one, which helps to nationalize slavery.
Free men of Sangamon, free men of Illinois, free men
everywhere, judge ye between him and me upon this issue.
He says this Dred Scott case is a very small matter at
most, — that it has no practical eﬀect; that at best, or
rather, I suppose, at worst, it is but an abstraction. I submit
that the proposition that the thing which determines
whether a man is free or a slave is rather concrete than
abstract. I think you would conclude that it was, if your
liberty depended upon it, and so would Judge Douglas, if
his liberty depended upon it. But suppose it was on the
question of spreading slavery over the new Territories that
he considers it as being merely an abstract matter, and one
of no practical importance. How has the planting of slavery
in new countries always been eﬀected? It has now been
decided that slavery cannot be kept out of our new
Territories by any legal means. In what do our new
Territories now diﬀer in this respect from the old Colonies
when slavery was ﬁrst planted within them? It was planted,
as Mr. Clay once declared, and as history proves true, by
individual men, in spite of the wishes of the people; the
Mother Government refusing to prohibit it, and withholding
from the people of the Colonies the authority to prohibit it
for themselves. Mr. Clay says this was one of the great and
just causes of complaint against Great Britain by the
Colonies, and the best apology we can now make for having
the institution amongst us. In that precise condition our
Nebraska politicians have at last succeeded in placing our
 own new Territories; the government will not prohibit
slavery within them, nor allow the people to prohibit it.
I defy any man to ﬁnd any diﬀerence between the policy
which originally planted slavery in these Colonies and that
policy which now prevails in our new Territories. If it does
not go into them, it is only because no individual wishes it
to go. The Judge indulged himself doubtless to-day with the
question as to what I am going to do with or about the Dred
Scott decision. Well, Judge, will you please tell me what you
did about the bank decision? Will you not graciously allow
us to do with the Dred Scott decision precisely as you did
with the bank decision? You succeeded in breaking down
the moral eﬀect of that decision: did you ﬁnd it necessary
to amend the Constitution, or to set up a court of negroes
in order to do it?
There is one other point. Judge Douglas has a very
aﬀectionate leaning toward the Americans and Old Whigs.
Last evening, in a sort of weeping tone, he described to us
a death-bed scene. He had been called to the side of Mr.
Clay, in his last moments, in order that the genius of
“popular sovereignty” might duly descend from the dying
man and settle upon him, the living and most worthy
successor. He could do no less than promise that he would
devote the remainder of his life to “popular sovereignty”;
and then the great statesman departs in peace. By this part
of the “plan of the campaign” the Judge has evidently
promised himself that tears shall be drawn down the
cheeks of all Old Whigs, as large as half-grown apples.
 Mr. Webster, too, was mentioned; but it did not quite
come to a death-bed scene as to him. It would be amusing,
if it were not disgusting, to see how quick these
compromise-breakers administer on the political eﬀects of
their dead adversaries, trumping up claims never before
heard of, and dividing the assets among themselves. If I
should be found dead to-morrow morning, nothing but my
insigniﬁcance could prevent a speech being made on my
authority, before the end of next week. It so happens that in
that “popular sovereignty” with which Mr. Clay was
identiﬁed, 
the 
Missouri 
Compromise 
was 
expressly
reversed; and it was a little singular if Mr. Clay cast his
mantle upon Judge Douglas on purpose to have that
compromise repealed.
Again, the Judge did not keep faith with Mr. Clay when
he ﬁrst brought in his Nebraska Bill. He left the Missouri
Compromise unrepealed, and in his report accompanying
the bill he told the world he did it on purpose. The manes of
Mr. Clay must have been in great agony till thirty days
later, when “popular sovereignty” stood forth in all its glory.
One more thing. Last night Judge Douglas tormented
himself with horrors about my disposition to make negroes
perfectly equal with white men in social and political
relations. He did not stop to show that I have said any such
thing, or that it legitimately follows from anything I have
said, but he rushes on with his assertions. I adhere to the
Declaration of Independence. If Judge Douglas and his
friends are not willing to stand by it, let them come up and
amend it. Let them make it read that all men are created
 equal except negroes. Let us have it decided whether the
Declaration of Independence, in this blessed year of 1858,
shall be thus amended. In his construction of the
Declaration last year, he said it only meant that Americans
in America were equal to Englishmen in England. Then,
when I pointed out to him that by that rule he excludes the
Germans, the Irish, the Portuguese, and all the other
people who have come among us since the revolution, he
reconstructs his construction. In his last speech he tells us
it meant Europeans.
I press him a little further, and ask if it meant to include
the Russians in Asia; or does he mean to exclude that vast
population from the principles of our Declaration of
Independence? I expect ere long he will introduce another
amendment to his deﬁnition. He is not at all particular. He
is satisﬁed with anything which does not endanger the
nationalizing of negro slavery. It may draw white men
down, but it must not lift negroes up.
Who shall say, “I am the superior, and you are the
inferior”?
My declarations upon this subject of negro slavery may
be misrepresented, but cannot be misunderstood. I have
said that I do not understand the Declaration to mean that
all men were created equal in all respects. They are not our
equal in color; but I suppose that it does mean to declare
that all men are equal in some respects; they are equal in
their right to “life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness.”
Certainly the negro is not our equal in color, perhaps not in
many other respects; still, in the right to put into his mouth
 the bread that his own hands have earned, he is the equal
of every other man, white or black. In pointing out that
more has been given you, you cannot be justiﬁed in taking
away the little which has been given him. All I ask for the
negro is that if you do not like him, let him alone. If God
gave him but little, that little let him enjoy.
When our government was established we had the
institution of slavery among us. We were in a certain sense
compelled to tolerate its existence. It was a sort of
necessity. We had gone through our struggle and secured
our own independence. The framers of the Constitution
found the institution of slavery amongst their own
institutions at the time. They found that by an eﬀort to
eradicate it they might lose much of what they had already
gained. They were obliged to bow to the necessity. They
gave power to Congress to abolish the slave trade at the
end of twenty years. They also prohibited it in the
Territories where it did not exist. They did what they could,
and yielded to the necessity for the rest. I also yield to all
which follows from that necessity. What I would most desire
would be the separation of the white and black races.
One more point on this Springﬁeld speech which Judge
Douglas says he has read so carefully. I expressed my belief
in the existence of a conspiracy to perpetuate and
nationalize slavery. I did not profess to know it, nor do I
now. I showed the part Judge Douglas had played in the
string of facts constituting to my mind the proof of that
conspiracy. I showed the parts played by others.
 I charged that the people had been deceived into
carrying the last Presidential election, by the impression
that the people of the Territories might exclude slavery if
they chose, when it was known in advance by the
conspirators that the court was to decide that neither
Congress nor the people could so exclude slavery. These
charges are more distinctly made than anything else in the
speech.
Judge Douglas has carefully read and reread that speech.
He has not, so far as I know, contradicted those charges. In
the two speeches which I heard he certainly did not. On
this own tacit admission, I renew that charge. I charge him
with having been a party to that conspiracy and to that
deception for the sole purpose of nationalizing slavery.
