    
  
I
  
  A    A       
  
AUGUST 27, 1858
LADIES AND GENTLEMEN: — On Saturday last, Judge
Douglas and myself ﬁrst met in public discussion. He spoke
one hour, I an hour and a half, and he replied for half an
hour. The order is now reversed. I am to speak an hour, he
an hour and a half, and then I am to reply for half an hour. I
propose to devote myself during the ﬁrst hour to the scope
of what was brought within the range of his half-hour
speech at Ottawa. Of course there was brought within the
scope in that half-hour’s speech something of his own
opening speech. In the course of that opening argument
Judge 
Douglas 
proposed 
to 
me 
seven 
distinct
interrogatories. In my speech of an hour and a half, I
attended to some other parts of his speech, and
incidentally, as I thought, intimated to him that I would
answer the rest of his interrogatories on condition only that
he should agree to answer as many for me. He made no
intimation at the time of the proposition, nor did he in his
reply allude at all to that suggestion of mine. I do him no
injustice in saying that he occupied at least half of his reply
in dealing with me as though I had refused to answer his
interrogatories. I now propose that I will answer any of the
interrogatories, upon condition that he will answer
 questions from me not exceeding the same number. I give
him an opportunity to respond.
The Judge remains silent. I now say that I will answer his
interrogatories, whether he answers mine or not; and that
after I have done so, I shall propound mine to him.
I have supposed myself, since the organization of the
Republican party at Bloomington, in May, 1856, bound as a
party man by the platforms of the party, then and since. If
in any interrogatories which I shall answer I go beyond the
scope of what is within these platforms, it will be perceived
that no one is responsible but myself.
Having said thus much, I will take up the Judge’s
interrogatories as I ﬁnd them printed in the Chicago Times,
and answer them seriatim. In order that there may be no
mistake about it, I have copied the interrogatories in
writing, and also my answers to them. The ﬁrst one of these
interrogatories is in these words:
Question 1.— “I desire to know whether Lincoln to-day
stands, as he did in 1854, in favor of the unconditional
repeal of the Fugitive Slave law?” Answer: — I do not now,
nor ever did, stand in favor of the unconditional repeal of
the Fugitive Slave law.
Q. 2.— “I desire him to answer whether he stands
pledged to-day, as he did in 1854, against the admission of
any more slave States into the Union, even if the people
want them?” Answer: — I do not now, nor ever did, stand
pledged against the admission of any more slave States into
the Union.
 Q. 3.— “I want to know whether he stands pledged
against the admission of a new State into the Union with
such a constitution as the people of that State may see ﬁt to
make?” Answer: — I do not stand pledged against the
admission of a new State into the Union, with such a
constitution as the people of that State may see ﬁt to make.
Q. 4.— “I want to know whether he stands to-day pledged
to the abolition of slavery in the District of Columbia?”
Answer: — I do not stand to-day pledged to the abolition of
slavery in the District of Columbia.
Q. 5.— “I desire him to answer whether he stands
pledged to the prohibition of the slave-trade between the
diﬀerent States?” Answer: — I do not stand pledged to the
prohibition of the slave-trade between the diﬀerent States.
Q. 6.— “I desire to know whether he stands pledged to
prohibit slavery in all the Territories of the United States,
north as well as south of the Missouri Compromise line?”
Answer: — I am impliedly, if not expressly, pledged to a
belief in the right and duty of Congress to prohibit slavery
in all the United States ‘Territories.
Q. 7.— “I desire him to answer whether he is opposed to
the acquisition of any new territory unless slavery is ﬁrst
prohibited therein?” Answer: — I am not generally opposed
to honest acquisition of territory; and, in any given case, I
would or would not oppose such acquisition, accordingly as
I might think such acquisition would or would not
aggravate the slavery question among ourselves.
Now, my friends, it will be perceived, upon an
examination of these questions and answers, that so far I
 have only answered that I was not pledged to this, that, or
the other. The Judge has not framed his interrogatories to
ask me anything more than this, and I have answered in
strict accordance with the interrogatories, and have
answered truly, that I am not pledged at all upon any of the
points to which I have answered. But I am not disposed to
hang upon the exact form of his interrogatory. I am rather
disposed to take up at least some of these questions, and
state what I really think upon them.
As to the ﬁrst one, in regard to the Fugitive Slave law, I
have never hesitated to say, and I do not now hesitate to
say, that I think, under the Constitution of the United
States, the people of the Southern States are entitled to a
Congressional Fugitive Slave law. Having said that, I have
had nothing to say in regard to the existing Fugitive Slave
law, further than that I think it should have been framed so
as to be free from some of the objections that pertain to it,
without lessening its eﬀiciency. And inasmuch as we are not
now in an agitation in regard to an alteration or
modiﬁcation of that law, I would not be the man to
introduce it as a new subject of agitation upon the general
question of slavery.
In regard to the other question, of whether I am pledged
to the admission of any more slave States into the Union, I
state to you very frankly that I would be exceedingly sorry
ever to be put in a position of having to pass upon that
question. I should be exceedingly glad to know that there
would never be another slave State admitted into the
Union; but I must add that if slavery shall be kept out of the
 Territories during the territorial existence of any one given
Territory, and then the people shall, having a fair chance
and a clear ﬁeld, when they come to adopt the constitution,
do such an extraordinary thing as to adopt a slave
constitution, uninﬂuenced by the actual presence of the
institution among them, I see no alternative, if we own the
country, but to admit them into the Union.
The third interrogatory is answered by the answer to the
second, it being, as I conceive, the same as the second.
The fourth one is in regard to the abolition of slavery in
the District of Columbia. In relation to that, I have my mind
very distinctly made up. I should be exceedingly glad to see
slavery abolished in the District of Columbia. I believe that
Congress possesses the constitutional power to abolish it.
Yet as a member of Congress, I should not, with my present
views, be in favor of endeavoring to abolish slavery in the
District of Columbia, unless it would be upon these
conditions: First, that the abolition should be gradual;
second, that it should be on a vote of the majority of
qualiﬁed 
voters 
in 
the 
District; 
and 
third, 
that
compensation should be made to unwilling owners. With
these three conditions, I confess I would be exceedingly
glad to see Congress abolish slavery in the District of
Columbia, and, in the language of Henry Clay, “sweep from
our capital that foul blot upon our nation.”
In regard to the ﬁfth interrogatory, I must say here that,
as to the question of the abolition of the slave-trade
between the diﬀerent States, I can truly answer, as I have,
that I am pledged to nothing about it. It is a subject to
 which I have not given that mature consideration that
would make me feel authorized to state a position so as to
hold myself entirely bound by it. In other words, that
question has never been prominently enough before me to
induce me to investigate whether we really have the
constitutional power to do it. I could investigate it if I had
suﬀicient time to bring myself to a conclusion upon that
subject; but I have not done so, and I say so frankly to you
here, and to Judge Douglas. I must say, however, that if I
should be of opinion that Congress does possess the
constitutional power to abolish the slave-trade among the
diﬀerent States, I should still not be in favor of the exercise
of that power, unless upon some conservative principle as I
conceive it, akin to what I have said in relation to the
abolition of slavery in the District of Columbia.
My answer as to whether I desire that slavery should be
prohibited in all the Territories of the United States is full
and explicit within itself, and cannot be made clearer by
any comments of mine. So I suppose in regard to the
question whether I am opposed to the acquisition of any
more territory unless slavery is ﬁrst prohibited therein, my
answer is such that I could add nothing by way of
illustration, or making myself better understood, than the
answer which I have placed in writing.
Now in all this the Judge has me, and he has me on the
record. I suppose he had ﬂattered himself that I was really
entertaining one set of opinions for one place, and another
set for another place; that I was afraid to say at one place
what I uttered at another. What I am saying here I suppose
 I say to a vast audience as strongly tending to Abolitionism
as any audience in the State of Illinois, and I believe I am
saying that which, if it would be oﬀensive to any persons
and render them enemies to myself, would be oﬀensive to
persons in this audience.
I 
now 
proceed 
to 
propound 
to 
the 
Judge 
the
interrogatories, so far as I have framed them. I will bring
forward a new installment when I get them ready. I will
bring them forward now only reaching to number four. The
ﬁrst one is:
Question 1. — If the people of Kansas shall, by means
entirely unobjectionable in all other respects, adopt a State
constitution, and ask admission into the Union under it,
before they have the requisite number of inhabitants
according to the English bill, — some ninety-three
thousand, — will you vote to admit them?
Q. 2. — Can the people of a United States Territory, in
any lawful way, against the wish of any citizen of the United
States, exclude slavery from its limits prior to the formation
of a State constitution?
Q. 3. If the Supreme Court of the United States shall
decide that States cannot exclude slavery from their limits,
are you in favor of acquiescing in, adopting, and following
such decision as a rule of political action?
Q. 4. Are you in favor of acquiring additional territory, in
disregard of how such acquisition may aﬀect the nation on
the slavery question?
As introductory to these interrogatories which Judge
Douglas propounded to me at Ottawa, he read a set of
 resolutions which he said Judge Trumbull and myself had
participated in adopting, in the ﬁrst Republican State
Convention, held at Springﬁeld in October, 1854. He
insisted that I and Judge Trumbull, and perhaps the entire
Republican party, were responsible for the doctrines
contained in the set of resolutions which he read, and I
understand that it was from that set of resolutions that he
deduced the interrogatories which he propounded to me,
using these resolutions as a sort of authority for
propounding those questions to me. Now, I say here to-day
that I do not answer his interrogatories because of their
springing at all from that set of resolutions which he read. I
answered them because Judge Douglas thought ﬁt to ask
them. I do not now, nor ever did, recognize any
responsibility upon myself in that set of resolutions. When I
replied to him on that occasion, I assured him that I never
had anything to do with them. I repeat here to today that I
never in any possible form had anything to do with that set
of resolutions It turns out, I believe, that those resolutions
were never passed in any convention held in Springﬁeld.
It turns out that they were never passed at any
convention or any public meeting that I had any part in. I
believe it turns out, in addition to all this, that there was
not, in the fall of 1854, any convention holding a session in
Springﬁeld, calling itself a Republican State Convention;
yet it is true there was a convention, or assemblage of men
calling themselves a convention, at Springﬁeld, that did
pass some resolutions. But so little did I really know of the
proceedings of that convention, or what set of resolutions
 they had passed, though having a general knowledge that
there had been such an assemblage of men there, that
when Judge Douglas read the resolutions, I really did not
know but they had been the resolutions passed then and
there. I did not question that they were the resolutions
adopted. For I could not bring myself to suppose that Judge
Douglas could say what he did upon this subject without
knowing that it was true. I contented myself, on that
occasion, with denying, as I truly could, all connection with
them, not denying or aﬀirming whether they were passed
at Springﬁeld. Now, it turns out that he had got hold of
some resolutions passed at some convention or public
meeting in Kane County. I wish to say here, that I don’t
conceive that in any fair and just mind this discovery
relieves me at all. I had just as much to do with the
convention in Kane County as that at Springﬁeld. I am as
much responsible for the resolutions at Kane County as
those at Springﬁeld, — the amount of the responsibility
being exactly nothing in either case; no more than there
would be in regard to a set of resolutions passed in the
moon.
I allude to this extraordinary matter in this canvass for
some further purpose than anything yet advanced. Judge
Douglas did not make his statement upon that occasion as
matters that he believed to be true, but he stated them
roundly as being true, in such form as to pledge his
veracity for their truth. When the whole matter turns out as
it does, and when we consider who Judge Douglas is, that
he is a distinguished Senator of the United States; that he
 has served nearly twelve years as such; that his character
is not at all limited as an ordinary Senator of the United
States, but that his name has become of world-wide
renown, — it is most extraordinary that he should so far
forget all the suggestions of justice to an adversary, or of
prudence to himself, as to venture upon the assertion of
that which the slightest investigation would have shown
him to be wholly false. I can only account for his having
done so upon the supposition that that evil genius which
has attended him through his life, giving to him an
apparent astonishing prosperity, such as to lead very many
good men to doubt there being any advantage in virtue
over vice, — I say I can only account for it on the
supposition that that evil genius has as last made up its
mind to forsake him.
And I may add that another extraordinary feature of the
Judge’s conduct in this canvass — made more extraordinary
by this incident — is, that he is in the habit, in almost all
the speeches he makes, of charging falsehood upon his
adversaries, myself and others. I now ask whether he is
able to ﬁnd in anything that Judge Trumbull, for instance,
has said, or in anything that I have said, a justiﬁcation at all
compared with what we have, in this instance, for that sort
of vulgarity.
I have been in the habit of charging as a matter of belief
on my part that, in the introduction of the Nebraska Bill
into Congress, there was a conspiracy to make slavery
perpetual and national. I have arranged from time to time
the evidence which establishes and proves the truth of this
 charge. I recurred to this charge at Ottawa. I shall not now
have time to dwell upon it at very great length; but
inasmuch as Judge Douglas, in his reply of half an hour,
made some points upon me in relation to it, I propose
noticing a few of them.
The Judge insists that, in the ﬁrst speech I made, in
which I very distinctly made that charge, he thought for a
good while I was in fun! that I was playful; that I was not
sincere about it; and that he only grew angry and
somewhat excited when he found that I insisted upon it as a
matter of earnestness. He says he characterized it as a
falsehood so far as I implicated his moral character in that
transaction. Well, I did not know, till he presented that
view, that I had implicated his moral character. He is very
much in the habit, when he argues me up into a position I
never thought of occupying, of very cosily saying he has no
doubt Lincoln is “conscientious” in saying so. He should
remember that I did not know but what he was
ALTOGETHER “CONSCIENTIOUS” in that matter. I can
conceive it possible for men to conspire to do a good thing,
and I really ﬁnd nothing in Judge Douglas’s course of
arguments that is contrary to or inconsistent with his belief
of a conspiracy to nationalize and spread slavery as being a
good and blessed thing; and so I hope he will understand
that I do not at all question but that in all this matter he is
entirely “conscientious.”
But to draw your attention to one of the points I made in
this case, beginning at the beginning: When the Nebraska
Bill was introduced, or a short time afterward, by an
 amendment, I believe, it was provided that it must be
considered “the true intent and meaning of this Act not to
legislate slavery into any State or Territory, or to exclude it
therefrom, but to leave the people thereof perfectly free to
form and regulate their own domestic institutions in their
own way, subject only to the Constitution of the United
States.” I have called his attention to the fact that when he
and some others began arguing that they were giving an
increased degree of liberty to the people in the Territories
over and above what they formerly had on the question of
slavery, a question was raised whether the law was enacted
to give such unconditional liberty to the people; and to test
the sincerity of this mode of argument, Mr. Chase, of Ohio,
introduced an amendment, in which he made the law — if
the amendment were adopted — expressly declare that the
people of the Territory should have the power to exclude
slavery if they saw ﬁt. I have asked attention also to the
fact that Judge Douglas and those who acted with him
voted that amendment down, notwithstanding it expressed
exactly the thing they said was the true intent and meaning
of the law. I have called attention to the fact that in
subsequent times a decision of the Supreme Court has been
made, in which it has been declared that a Territorial
Legislature has no constitutional right to exclude slavery.
And I have argued and said that for men who did, intend
that the people of the Territory should have the right to
exclude slavery absolutely and unconditionally, the voting
down of Chase’s amendment is wholly inexplicable. It is a
puzzle, a riddle. But I have said, that with men who did look
 forward to such a decision, or who had it in contemplation
that such a decision of the Supreme Court would or might
be made, the voting down of that amendment would be
perfectly rational and intelligible. It would keep Congress
from coming in collision with the decision when it was
made. Anybody can conceive that if there was an intention
or expectation that such a decision was to follow, it would
not be a very desirable party attitude to get into for the
Supreme Court — all or nearly all its members belonging to
the same party — to decide one way, when the party in
Congress had decided the other way. Hence it would be
very rational for men expecting such a decision to keep the
niche in that law clear for it. After pointing this out, I tell
Judge Douglas that it looks to me as though here was the
reason why Chase’s amendment was voted down. I tell him
that, as he did it, and knows why he did it, if it was done for
a reason diﬀerent from this, he knows what that reason
was and can tell us what it was. I tell him, also, it will be
vastly more satisfactory to the country for him to give some
other plausible, intelligible reason why it was voted down
than to stand upon his dignity and call people liars. Well, on
Saturday he did make his answer; and what do you think it
was? He says if I had only taken upon myself to tell the
whole truth about that amendment of Chase’s, no
explanation would have been necessary on his part or
words to that eﬀect. Now, I say here that I am quite
unconscious of having suppressed anything material to the
case, and I am very frank to admit if there is any sound
reason other than that which appeared to me material, it is
 quite fair for him to present it. What reason does he
propose? That when Chase came forward with his
amendment expressly authorizing the people to exclude
slavery from the limits of every Territory, General Cass
proposed to Chase, if he (Chase) would add to his
amendment that the people should have the power to
introduce or exclude, they would let it go. This is
substantially all of his reply. And because Chase would not
do that, they voted his amendment down. Well, it turns out,
I believe, upon examination, that General Cass took some
part in the little running debate upon that amendment, and
then ran away and did not vote on it at all. Is not that the
fact? So conﬁdent, as I think, was General Cass that there
was a snake somewhere about, he chose to run away from
the whole thing. This is an inference I draw from the fact
that, though he took part in the debate, his name does not
appear in the ayes and noes. But does Judge Douglas’s
reply amount to a satisfactory answer?
[Cries of “Yes,” “Yes,” and “No,” “No.”]
There is some little diﬀerence of opinion here. But I ask
attention to a few more views bearing on the question of
whether it amounts to a satisfactory answer. The men who
were determined that that amendment should not get into
the bill, and spoil the place where the Dred Scott decision
was to come in, sought an excuse to get rid of it
somewhere. One of these ways — one of these excuses —
was to ask Chase to add to his proposed amendment a
provision that the people might introduce slavery if they
wanted to. They very well knew Chase would do no such
 thing, that Mr. Chase was one of the men diﬀering from
them on the broad principle of his insisting that freedom
was better than slavery, — a man who would not consent to
enact a law, penned with his own hand, by which he was
made to recognize slavery on the one hand, and liberty on
the other, as precisely equal; and when they insisted on his
doing this, they very well knew they insisted on that which
he would not for a moment think of doing, and that they
were only bluﬀing him. I believe (I have not, since he made
his answer, had a chance to examine the journals or
Congressional Globe and therefore speak from memory) —
I believe the state of the bill at that time, according to
parliamentary rules, was such that no member could
propose an additional amendment to Chase’s amendment. I
rather think this is the truth, — the Judge shakes his head.
Very well. I would like to know, then, if they wanted Chase’s
amendment ﬁxed over, why somebody else could not have
oﬀered to do it? If they wanted it amended, why did they
not oﬀer the amendment? Why did they not put it in
themselves? But to put it on the other ground: suppose that
there was such an amendment oﬀered, and Chase’s was an
amendment to an amendment; until one is disposed of by
parliamentary law, you cannot pile another on. Then all
these gentlemen had to do was to vote Chase’s on, and
then, in the amended form in which the whole stood, add
their own amendment to it, if they wanted to put it in that
shape. This was all they were obliged to do, and the ayes
and noes show that there were thirty-six who voted it down,
against ten who voted in favor of it. The thirty-six held
 entire sway and control. They could in some form or other
have put that bill in the exact shape they wanted. If there
was a rule preventing their amending it at the time, they
could pass that, and then, Chase’s amendment being
merged, put it in the shape they wanted. They did not
choose to do so, but they went into a quibble with Chase to
get him to add what they knew he would not add, and
because he would not, they stand upon the ﬂimsy pretext
for voting down what they argued was the meaning and
intent of their own bill. They left room thereby for this Dred
Scott decision, which goes very far to make slavery national
throughout the United States.
I pass one or two points I have, because my time will
very soon expire; but I must be allowed to say that Judge
Douglas recurs again, as he did upon one or two other
occasions, to the enormity of Lincoln, an insigniﬁcant
individual like Lincoln, — upon his ipse dixit charging a
conspiracy upon a large number of members of Congress,
the Supreme Court, and two Presidents, to nationalize
slavery. I want to say that, in the ﬁrst place, I have made no
charge of this sort upon my ipse dixit. I have only arrayed
the evidence tending to prove it, and presented it to the
understanding of others, saying what I think it proves, but
giving you the means of judging whether it proves it or not.
This is precisely what I have done. I have not placed it upon
my ipse dixit at all. On this occasion, I wish to recall his
attention to a piece of evidence which I brought forward at
Ottawa 
on 
Saturday, 
showing 
that 
he 
had 
made
substantially the same charge against substantially the
 same persons, excluding his dear self from the category. I
ask him to give some attention to the evidence which I
brought forward that he himself had discovered a “fatal
blow being struck” against the right of the people to
exclude slavery from their limits, which fatal blow he
assumed as in evidence in an article in the Washington
Union, published “by authority.” I ask by whose authority?
He discovers a similar or identical provision in the
Lecompton Constitution. Made by whom? The framers of
that Constitution. Advocated by whom? By all the members
of the party in the nation, who advocated the introduction
of 
Kansas 
into 
the 
Union 
under 
the 
Lecompton
Constitution. I have asked his attention to the evidence that
he arrayed to prove that such a fatal blow was being
struck, and to the facts which he brought forward in
support of that charge, — being identical with the one
which he thinks so villainous in me. He pointed it, not at a
newspaper editor merely, but at the President and his
Cabinet and the members of Congress advocating the
Lecompton Constitution and those framing that instrument.
I must again be permitted to remind him that although my
ipse dixit may not be as great as his, yet it somewhat
reduces the force of his calling my attention to the
enormity of my making a like charge against him.
Go on, Judge Douglas.
