      H A   HI A
   
           .
I
        
   
A 
  
 A
DELIVERED AT CHICAGO, SATURDAY EVENING, JULY 10,
1858.
(Mr. DOUGLAS WAS NOT PRESENT.)
[Mr. LINCOLN was introduced by C. L. Wilson, Esq., and as he made his
appearance he was greeted with a perfect storm of applause. For some
moments the enthusiasm continued unabated. At last, when by a wave of his
hand partial silence was restored, Mr. LINCOLN said,]
MY FELLOW-CITIZENS: — On yesterday evening, upon
the occasion of the reception given to Senator Douglas, I
was furnished with a seat very convenient for hearing him,
and was otherwise very courteously treated by him and his
friends, and for which I thank him and them. During the
course of his remarks my name was mentioned in such a
way as, I suppose, renders it at least not improper that I
should make some sort of reply to him. I shall not attempt
to follow him in the precise order in which he addressed
the assembled multitude upon that occasion, though I shall
perhaps do so in the main.
There was one question to which he asked the attention
of the crowd, which I deem of somewhat less importance —
at least of propriety — for me to dwell upon than the
 others, which he brought in near the close of his speech,
and which I think it would not be entirely proper for me to
omit attending to, and yet if I were not to give some
attention to it now, I should probably forget it altogether.
While I am upon this subject, allow me to say that I do not
intend to indulge in that inconvenient mode sometimes
adopted in public speaking, of reading from documents; but
I shall depart from that rule so far as to read a little scrap
from his speech, which notices this ﬁrst topic of which I
shall speak, — that is, provided I can ﬁnd it in the paper:
“I have made up my mind to appeal to the people against
the combination that has been made against me; the
Republican leaders having formed an alliance, an unholy
and unnatural alliance, with a portion of unscrupulous
Federal oﬀice-holders. I intend to ﬁght that allied army
wherever I meet them. I know they deny the alliance; but
yet these men who are trying to divide the Democratic
party for the purpose of electing a Republican Senator in
my place are just as much the agents and tools of the
supporters of Mr. Lincoln. Hence I shall deal with this allied
army just as the Russians dealt with the Allies at
Sebastopol, — that is, the Russians did not stop to inquire,
when they ﬁred a broadside, whether it hit an Englishman,
a Frenchman, or a Turk. Nor will I stop to inquire, nor shall
I hesitate, whether my blows shall hit the Republican
leaders or their allies, who are holding the Federal oﬀices,
and yet acting in concert with them.”
Well, now, gentlemen, is not that very alarming? Just to
think of it! right at the outset of his canvass, I, a poor, kind,
 amiable, intelligent gentleman, — I am to be slain in this
way! Why, my friend the Judge is not only, as it turns out,
not a dead lion, nor even a living one, — he is the rugged
Russian Bear!
But if they will have it — for he says that we deny it —
that there is any such alliance, as he says there is, — and I
don’t propose hanging very much upon this question of
veracity, — but if he will have it that there is such an
alliance, that the Administration men and we are allied, and
we stand in the attitude of English, French, and Turk, he
occupying the position of the Russian, in that case I beg
that he will indulge us while we barely suggest to him that
these allies took Sebastopol.
Gentlemen, only a few more words as to this alliance. For
my part, I have to say that whether there be such an
alliance depends, so far as I know, upon what may be a
right deﬁnition of the term alliance. If for the Republican
party to see the other great party to which they are
opposed divided among themselves, and not try to stop the
division, and rather be glad of it, — if that is an alliance, I
confess I am in; but if it is meant to be said that the
Republicans had formed an alliance going beyond that, by
which there is contribution of money or sacriﬁce of
principle on the one side or the other, so far as the
Republican party is concerned, — if there be any such
thing, I protest that I neither know anything of it, nor do I
believe it. I will, however, say, — as I think this branch of
the argument is lugged in, — I would before I leave it state,
for the beneﬁt of those concerned, that one of those same
 Buchanan men did once tell me of an argument that he
made for his opposition to Judge Douglas. He said that a
friend of our Senator Douglas had been talking to him, and
had, among other things, said to him:
“...why, you don’t want to beat Douglas?” “Yes,” said he,
“I do want to beat him, and I will tell you why. I believe his
original Nebraska Bill was right in the abstract, but it was
wrong in the time that it was brought forward. It was
wrong in the application to a Territory in regard to which
the question had been settled; it was brought forward at a
time when nobody asked him; it was tendered to the South
when the South had not asked for it, but when they could
not well refuse it; and for this same reason he forced that
question upon our party. It has sunk the best men all over
the nation, everywhere; and now, when our President,
struggling with the diﬀiculties of this man’s getting up, has
reached the very hardest point to turn in the case, he
deserts him and I am for putting him where he will trouble
us no more.”
Now, gentlemen, that is not my argument; that is not my
argument at all. I have only been stating to you the
argument of a Buchanan man. You will judge if there is any
force in it.
Popular sovereignty! Everlasting popular sovereignty!
Let us for a moment inquire into this vast matter of popular
sovereignty. What is popular sovereignty? We recollect that
at an early period in the history of this struggle there was
another name for the same thing,— “squatter sovereignty.”
It was not exactly popular sovereignty, but squatter
 sovereignty. What do those terms mean? What do those
terms mean when used now? And vast credit is taken by
our friend the Judge in regard to his support of it, when he
declares the last years of his life have been, and all the
future years of his life shall be, devoted to this matter of
popular sovereignty. What is it? Why, it is the sovereignty of
the people! What was squatter sovereignty? I suppose, if it
had any signiﬁcance at all, it was the right of the people to
govern themselves, to be sovereign in their own aﬀairs
while they were squatted down in a country not their own,
while they had squatted on a Territory that did not belong
to them, in the sense that a State belongs to the people
who inhabit it, when it belonged to the nation; such right to
govern themselves was called “squatter sovereignty.”
Now, I wish you to mark: What has become of that
squatter sovereignty? what has become of it? Can you get
anybody to tell you now that the people of a Territory have
any authority to govern themselves, in regard to this
mooted question of slavery, before they form a State
constitution? No such thing at all; although there is a
general running ﬁre, and although there has been a hurrah
made in every speech on that side, assuming that policy
had given the people of a Territory the right to govern
themselves upon this question, yet the point is dodged. To-
day it has been decided — no more than a year ago it was
decided — by the Supreme Court of the United States, and
is insisted upon to-day that the people of a Territory have
no right to exclude slavery from a Territory; that if any one
man chooses to take slaves into a Territory, all the rest of
 the people have no right to keep them out. This being so,
and this decision being made one of the points that the
Judge approved, and one in the approval of which he says
he means to keep me down, — put me down I should not
say, for I have never been up, — he says he is in favor of it,
and sticks to it, and expects to win his battle on that
decision, which says that there is no such thing as squatter
sovereignty, but that any one man may take slaves into a
Territory, and all the other men in the Territory may be
opposed to it, and yet by reason of the Constitution they
cannot prohibit it. When that is so, how much is left of this
vast matter of squatter sovereignty, I should like to know?
When we get back, we get to the point of the right of the
people to make a constitution. Kansas was settled, for
example, in 1854. It was a Territory yet, without having
formed a constitution, in a very regular way, for three
years. All this time negro slavery could be taken in by any
few individuals, and by that decision of the Supreme Court,
which the Judge approves, all the rest of the people cannot
keep it out; but when they come to make a constitution,
they may say they will not have slavery. But it is there; they
are obliged to tolerate it some way, and all experience
shows it will be so, for they will not take the negro slaves
and absolutely deprive the owners of them. All experience
shows this to be so. All that space of time that runs from
the beginning of the settlement of the Territory until there
is suﬀiciency of people to make a State constitution, — all
that portion of time popular sovereignty is given up. The
seal is absolutely put down upon it by the court decision,
 and Judge Douglas puts his own upon the top of that; yet he
is appealing to the people to give him vast credit for his
devotion to popular sovereignty.
Again, when we get to the question of the right of the
people to form a State constitution as they please, to form
it with slavery or without slavery, if that is anything new, I
confess I don’t know it. Has there ever been a time when
anybody said that any other than the people of a Territory
itself should form a constitution? What is now in it that
Judge Douglas should have fought several years of his life,
and pledge himself to ﬁght all the remaining years of his
life for? Can Judge Douglas ﬁnd anybody on earth that said
that anybody else should form a constitution for a people?
[A voice, “Yes.”] Well, I should like you to name him; I
should like to know who he was. [Same voice, “John
Calhoun.”]
No, sir, I never heard of even John Calhoun saying such a
thing. He insisted on the same principle as Judge Douglas;
but his mode of applying it, in fact, was wrong. It is enough
for my purpose to ask this crowd whenever a Republican
said anything against it. They never said anything against
it, but they have constantly spoken for it; and whoever will
undertake to examine the platform, and the speeches of
responsible men of the party, and of irresponsible men, too,
if you please, will be unable to ﬁnd one word from anybody
in 
the 
Republican 
ranks 
opposed 
to 
that 
popular
sovereignty which Judge Douglas thinks that he has
invented. I suppose that Judge Douglas will claim, in a little
while, that he is the inventor of the idea that the people
 should govern themselves; that nobody ever thought of
such a thing until he brought it forward. We do not
remember that in that old Declaration of Independence it is
said that:
“We hold these truths to be self-evident, that all men are
created equal; that they are endowed by their Creator with
certain inalienable rights; that among these are life, liberty,
and the pursuit of happiness; that to secure these rights,
governments are instituted among men, deriving their just
powers from the consent of the governed.”
There is the origin of popular sovereignty. Who, then,
shall come in at this day and claim that he invented it?
The Lecompton Constitution connects itself with this
question, for it is in this matter of the Lecompton
Constitution that our friend Judge Douglas claims such vast
credit. 
I 
agree 
that 
in 
opposing 
the 
Lecompton
Constitution, so far as I can perceive, he was right. I do not
deny that at all; and, gentlemen, you will readily see why I
could not deny it, even if I wanted to. But I do not wish to;
for all the Republicans in the nation opposed it, and they
would have opposed it just as much without Judge
Douglas’s aid as with it. They had all taken ground against
it long before he did. Why, the reason that he urges against
that constitution I urged against him a year before. I have
the printed speech in my hand. The argument that he
makes, why that constitution should not be adopted, that
the people were not fairly represented nor allowed to vote,
I pointed out in a speech a year ago, which I hold in my
hand now, that no fair chance was to be given to the
 people. [“Read it, Read it.”] I shall not waste your time by
trying to read it. [“Read it, Read it.”] Gentlemen, reading
from speeches is a very tedious business, particularly for an
old man that has to put on spectacles, and more so if the
man be so tall that he has to bend over to the light.
A little more, now, as to this matter of popular
sovereignty 
and 
the 
Lecompton 
Constitution. 
The
Lecompton Constitution, as the Judge tells us, was
defeated. The defeat of it was a good thing or it was not. He
thinks the defeat of it was a good thing, and so do I, and we
agree in that. Who defeated it?
[A voice: Judge Douglas.]
Yes, he furnished himself, and if you suppose he
controlled the other Democrats that went with him, he
furnished three votes; while the Republicans furnished
twenty.
That is what he did to defeat it. In the House of
Representatives he and his friends furnished some twenty
votes, and the Republicans furnished ninety odd. Now, who
was it that did the work?
[A voice: Douglas.]
Why, yes, Douglas did it! To be sure he did.
Let us, however, put that proposition another way. The
Republicans could not have done it without Judge Douglas.
Could he have done it without them? Which could have
come the nearest to doing it without the other?
[A voice: Who killed the bill?]
[Another voice: Douglas.]
 Ground was taken against it by the Republicans long
before Douglas did it. The proportion of opposition to that
measure is about ﬁve to one.
[A voice: Why don’t they come out on it?]
You don’t know what you are talking about, my friend. I
am quite willing to answer any gentleman in the crowd who
asks an intelligent question.
Now, who in all this country has ever found any of our
friends of Judge Douglas’s way of thinking, and who have
acted upon this main question, that has ever thought of
uttering a word in behalf of Judge Trumbull?
[A voice: We have.]
I defy you to show a printed resolution passed in a
Democratic meeting — I take it upon myself to defy any
man to show a printed resolution of a Democratic meeting,
large or small — in favor of Judge Trumbull, or any of the
ﬁve to one Republicans who beat that bill. Everything must
be for the Democrats! They did everything, and the ﬁve to
the one that really did the thing they snub over, and they do
not seem to remember that they have an existence upon
the face of the earth.
Gentlemen, I fear that I shall become tedious. I leave this
branch of the subject to take hold of another. I take up that
part of Judge Douglas’s speech in which he respectfully
attended to me.
Judge Douglas made two points upon my recent speech
at Springﬁeld. He says they are to be the issues of this
campaign. The ﬁrst one of these points he bases upon the
language in a speech which I delivered at Springﬁeld,
 which I believe I can quote correctly from memory. I said
there that “we are now far into the ﬁfth year since a policy
was instituted for the avowed object, and with the conﬁdent
promise, of putting an end to slavery agitation; under the
operation of that policy, that agitation has not only not
ceased, but has constantly augmented.” “I believe it will
not cease until a crisis shall have been reached and passed.
‘A house divided against itself cannot stand.’ I believe this
government cannot endure permanently half slave and half
free.” “I do not expect the Union to be dissolved,” — I am
quoting from my speech, “ — I do not expect the house to
fall, but I do expect it will cease to be divided. It will
become all one thing or all the other. Either the opponents
of slavery will arrest the spread of it and place it where the
public mind shall rest in the belief that it is in the course of
ultimate extinction, or its advocates will push it forward
until it shall become alike lawful in all the States, north as
well as south.”
What is the paragraph? In this paragraph, which I have
quoted in your hearing, and to which I ask the attention of
all, Judge Douglas thinks he discovers great political
heresy. I want your attention particularly to what he has
inferred from it. He says I am in favor of making all the
States of this Union uniform in all their internal
regulations; that in all their domestic concerns I am in
favor of making them entirely uniform. He draws this
inference from the language I have quoted to you. He says
that I am in favor of making war by the North upon the
South for the extinction of slavery; that I am also in favor of
 inviting (as he expresses it) the South to a war upon the
North for the purpose of nationalizing slavery. Now, it is
singular enough, if you will carefully read that passage
over, that I did not say that I was in favor of anything in it. I
only said what I expected would take place. I made a
prediction only, — it may have been a foolish one, perhaps.
I did not even say that I desired that slavery should be put
in course of ultimate extinction. I do say so now, however,
so there need be no longer any diﬀiculty about that. It may
be written down in the great speech.
Gentlemen, Judge Douglas informed you that this speech
of mine was probably carefully prepared. I admit that it
was. I am not master of language; I have not a ﬁne
education; I am not capable of entering into a disquisition
upon dialectics, as I believe you call it; but I do not believe
the language I employed bears any such construction as
Judge Douglas puts upon it. But I don’t care about a
quibble in regard to words. I know what I meant, and I will
not leave this crowd in doubt, if I can explain it to them,
what I really meant in the use of that paragraph.
I am not, in the ﬁrst place, unaware that this government
has endured eighty-two years half slave and half free. I
know that. I am tolerably well acquainted with the history
of the country, and I know that it has endured eighty-two
years half slave and half free. I believe — and that is what I
meant to allude to there — I believe it has endured because
during all that time, until the introduction of the Nebraska
Bill, the public mind did rest all the time in the belief that
slavery was in course of ultimate extinction. That was what
 gave us the rest that we had through that period of eighty-
two years, — at least, so I believe. I have always hated
slavery, I think, as much as any Abolitionist, — I have been
an Old Line Whig, — I have always hated it; but I have
always been quiet about it until this new era of the
introduction of the Nebraska Bill began. I always believed
that everybody was against it, and that it was in course of
ultimate extinction. [Pointing to Mr. Browning, who stood
near by.] Browning thought so; the great mass of the nation
have rested in the belief that slavery was in course of
ultimate extinction. They had reason so to believe.
The adoption of the Constitution and its attendant history
led the people to believe so; and that such was the belief of
the framers of the Constitution itself, why did those old
men, about the time of the adoption of the Constitution,
decree that slavery should not go into the new Territory,
where it had not already gone? Why declare that within
twenty years the African slave trade, by which slaves are
supplied, might be cut oﬀ by Congress? Why were all these
acts? I might enumerate more of these acts; but enough.
What were they but a clear indication that the framers of
the Constitution intended and expected the ultimate
extinction of that institution? And now, when I say, as I said
in my speech that Judge Douglas has quoted from, when I
say that I think the opponents of slavery will resist the
farther spread of it, and place it where the public mind
shall rest with the belief that it is in course of ultimate
extinction, I only mean to say that they will place it where
the founders of this government originally placed it.
 I have said a hundred times, and I have now no
inclination to take it back, that I believe there is no right,
and ought to be no inclination, in the people of the free
States to enter into the slave States and interfere with the
question of slavery at all. I have said that always; Judge
Douglas has heard me say it, if not quite a hundred times,
at least as good as a hundred times; and when it is said that
I am in favor of interfering with slavery where it exists, I
know it is unwarranted by anything I have ever intended,
and, as I believe, by anything I have ever said. If, by any
means, I have ever used language which could fairly be so
construed (as, however, I believe I never have), I now
correct it.
So much, then, for the inference that Judge Douglas
draws, that I am in favor of setting the sections at war with
one another. I know that I never meant any such thing, and
I believe that no fair mind can infer any such thing from
anything I have ever said.
Now, in relation to his inference that I am in favor of a
general consolidation of all the local institutions of the
various States. I will attend to that for a little while, and try
to inquire, if I can, how on earth it could be that any man
could draw such an inference from anything I said. I have
said, very many times, in Judge Douglas’s hearing, that no
man believed more than I in the principle of self-
government; that it lies at the bottom of all my ideas of just
government, from beginning to end. I have denied that his
use of that term applies properly. But for the thing itself, I
deny that any man has ever gone ahead of me in his
 devotion to the principle, whatever he may have done in
eﬀiciency in advocating it. I think that I have said it in your
hearing, that I believe each individual is naturally entitled
to do as he pleases with himself and the fruit of his labor, so
far as it in no wise interferes with any other man’s rights;
that each community as a State has a right to do exactly as
it pleases with all the concerns within that State that
interfere with the right of no other State; and that the
General Government, upon principle, has no right to
interfere with anything other than that general class of
things that does concern the whole. I have said that at all
times. I have said, as illustrations, that I do not believe in
the right of Illinois to interfere with the cranberry laws of
Indiana, the oyster laws of Virginia, or the liquor laws of
Maine. I have said these things over and over again, and I
repeat them here as my sentiments.
How is it, then, that Judge Douglas infers, because I hope
to see slavery put where the public mind shall rest in the
belief that it is in the course of ultimate extinction, that I
am in favor of Illinois going over and interfering with the
cranberry laws of Indiana? What can authorize him to draw
any such inference?
I suppose there might be one thing that at least enabled
him to draw such an inference that would not be true with
me or many others: that is, because he looks upon all this
matter of slavery as an exceedingly little thing, — this
matter of keeping one sixth of the population of the whole
nation in a state of oppression and tyranny unequaled in
the world. He looks upon it as being an exceedingly little
 thing, — only equal to the question of the cranberry laws of
Indiana; as something having no moral question in it; as
something on a par with the question of whether a man
shall pasture his land with cattle, or plant it with tobacco;
so little and so small a thing that he concludes, if I could
desire that anything should be done to bring about the
ultimate extinction of that little thing, I must be in favor of
bringing about an amalgamation of all the other little
things in the Union. Now, it so happens — and there, I
presume, is the foundation of this mistake — that the Judge
thinks thus; and it so happens that there is a vast portion of
the American people that do not look upon that matter as
being this very little thing. They look upon it as a vast
moral evil; they can prove it as such by the writings of
those who gave us the blessings of liberty which we enjoy,
and that they so looked upon it, and not as an evil merely
conﬁning itself to the States where it is situated; and while
we agree that, by the Constitution we assented to, in the
States where it exists, we have no right to interfere with it,
because it is in the Constitution; and we are by both duty
and inclination to stick by that Constitution, in all its letter
and spirit, from beginning to end.
So much, then, as to my disposition — my wish to have
all the State legislatures blotted out, and to have one
consolidated government, and a uniformity of domestic
regulations in all the States, by which I suppose it is meant,
if we raise corn here, we must make sugar-cane grow here
too, and we must make those which grow North grow in the
South. All this I suppose he understands I am in favor of
 doing. Now, so much for all this nonsense; for I must call it
so. The Judge can have no issue with me on a question of
establishing uniformity in the domestic regulations of the
States.
A little now on the other point, — the Dred Scott
decision. Another of the issues he says that is to be made
with me is upon his devotion to the Dred Scott decision,
and my opposition to it.
I have expressed heretofore, and I now repeat, my
opposition to the Dred Scott decision; but I should be
allowed to state the nature of that opposition, and I ask
your indulgence while I do so. What is fairly implied by the
term Judge Douglas has used, “resistance to the decision”?
I do not resist it. If I wanted to take Dred Scott from his
master, I would be interfering with property, and that
terrible diﬀiculty that Judge Douglas speaks of, of
interfering with property, would arise. But I am doing no
such thing as that, but all that I am doing is refusing to
obey it as a political rule. If I were in Congress, and a vote
should come up on a question whether slavery should be
prohibited in a new Territory, in spite of the Dred Scott
decision, I would vote that it should.
That is what I should do. Judge Douglas said last night
that before the decision he might advance his opinion, and
it might be contrary to the decision when it was made; but
after it was made he would abide by it until it was reversed.
Just so! We let this property abide by the decision, but we
will try to reverse that decision. We will try to put it where
Judge Douglas would not object, for he says he will obey it
 until it is reversed. Somebody has to reverse that decision,
since it is made, and we mean to reverse it, and we mean to
do it peaceably.
What are the uses of decisions of courts? They have two
uses. As rules of property they have two uses. First, they
decide upon the question before the court. They decide in
this case that Dred Scott is a slave. Nobody resists that, not
only that, but they say to everybody else that persons
standing just as Dred Scott stands are as he is. That is, they
say that when a question comes up upon another person, it
will be so decided again, unless the court decides in
another way, unless the court overrules its decision. Well,
we mean to do what we can to have the court decide the
other way. That is one thing we mean to try to do.
The sacredness that Judge Douglas throws around this
decision is a degree of sacredness that has never been
before thrown around any other decision. I have never
heard of such a thing. Why, decisions apparently contrary
to that decision, or that good lawyers thought were
contrary to that decision, have been made by that very
court before. It is the ﬁrst of its kind; it is an astonisher in
legal history. It is a new wonder of the world. It is based
upon falsehood in the main as to the facts; allegations of
facts upon which it stands are not facts at all in many
instances, and no decision made on any question — the ﬁrst
instance of a decision made under so many unfavorable
circumstances — thus placed, has ever been held by the
profession as law, and it has always needed conﬁrmation
before the lawyers regarded it as settled law. But Judge
 Douglas will have it that all hands must take this
extraordinary decision, made under these extraordinary
circumstances, and give their vote in Congress in
accordance with it, yield to it, and obey it in every possible
sense. Circumstances alter cases. Do not gentlemen here
remember the case of that same Supreme Court some
twenty-ﬁve or thirty years ago deciding that a National
Bank was constitutional? I ask, if somebody does not
remember that a National Bank was declared to be
constitutional? 
Such 
is 
the 
truth, 
whether 
it 
be
remembered or not. The Bank charter ran out, and a
recharter was granted by Congress. That recharter was
laid before General Jackson. It was urged upon him, when
he denied the constitutionality of the Bank, that the
Supreme Court had decided that it was constitutional; and
General Jackson then said that the Supreme Court had no
right to lay down a rule to govern a coordinate branch of
the government, the members of which had sworn to
support the Constitution; that each member had sworn to
support that Constitution as he understood it. I will venture
here to say that I have heard Judge Douglas say that he
approved of General Jackson for that act. What has now
become of all his tirade about “resistance of the Supreme
Court”?
My fellow-citizens, getting back a little, — for I pass from
these points, — when Judge Douglas makes his threat of
annihilation upon the “alliance,” he is cautious to say that
that warfare of his is to fall upon the leaders of the
Republican party. Almost every word he utters, and every
 distinction he makes, has its signiﬁcance. He means for the
Republicans who do not count themselves as leaders, to be
his friends; he makes no fuss over them; it is the leaders
that he is making war upon. He wants it understood that
the mass of the Republican party are really his friends. It is
only the leaders that are doing something that are
intolerant, and that require extermination at his hands. As
this is dearly and unquestionably the light in which he
presents that matter, I want to ask your attention,
addressing myself to the Republicans here, that I may ask
you some questions as to where you, as the Republican
party, would be placed if you sustained Judge Douglas in his
present position by a re-election? I do not claim,
gentlemen, to be unselﬁsh; I do not pretend that I would
not like to go to the United States Senate, — I make no
such hypocritical pretense; but I do say to you that in this
mighty issue it is nothing to you — nothing to the mass of
the people of the nation, — whether or not Judge Douglas
or myself shall ever be heard of after this night; it may be a
triﬂe to either of us, but in connection with this mighty
question, upon which hang the destinies of the nation,
perhaps, it is absolutely nothing: but where will you be
placed if you reindorse Judge Douglas? Don’t you know how
apt he is, how exceedingly anxious he is at all times, to
seize upon anything and everything to persuade you that
something he has done you did yourselves? Why, he tried to
persuade you last night that our Illinois Legislature
instructed him to introduce the Nebraska Bill. There was
nobody in that Legislature ever thought of such a thing;
 and when he ﬁrst introduced the bill, he never thought of
it; but still he ﬁghts furiously for the proposition, and that
he did it because there was a standing instruction to our
Senators to be always introducing Nebraska bills. He tells
you he is for the Cincinnati platform, he tells you he is for
the Dred Scott decision. He tells you, not in his speech last
night, but substantially in a former speech, that he cares
not if slavery is voted up or down; he tells you the struggle
on Lecompton is past; it may come up again or not, and if it
does, he stands where he stood when, in spite of him and
his opposition, you built up the Republican party. If you
indorse him, you tell him you do not care whether slavery
be voted up or down, and he will close or try to close your
mouths with his declaration, repeated by the day, the week,
the month, and the year. Is that what you mean? [Cries of
“No,” one voice “Yes.”] Yes, I have no doubt you who have
always been for him, if you mean that. No doubt of that,
soberly I have said, and I repeat it. I think, in the position
in which Judge Douglas stood in opposing the Lecompton
Constitution, he was right; he does not know that it will
return, but if it does we may know where to ﬁnd him, and if
it does not, we may know where to look for him, and that is
on the Cincinnati platform. Now, I could ask the Republican
party, after all the hard names that Judge Douglas has
called them by all his repeated charges of their inclination
to marry with and hug negroes; all his declarations of Black
Republicanism, — by the way, we are improving, the black
has got rubbed oﬀ, — but with all that, if he be indorsed by
Republican votes, where do you stand? Plainly, you stand
 ready saddled, bridled, and harnessed, and waiting to be
driven over to the slavery extension camp of the nation, —
just ready to be driven over, tied together in a lot, to be
driven over, every man with a rope around his neck, that
halter being held by Judge Douglas. That is the question. If
Republican men have been in earnest in what they have
done, I think they had better not do it; but I think that the
Republican party is made up of those who, as far as they
can peaceably, will oppose the extension of slavery, and
who will hope for its ultimate extinction. If they believe it is
wrong in grasping up the new lands of the continent and
keeping them from the settlement of free white laborers,
who want the land to bring up their families upon; if they
are in earnest, although they may make a mistake, they will
grow restless, and the time will come when they will come
back again and reorganize, if not by the same name, at
least upon the same principles as their party now has. It is
better, then, to save the work while it is begun. You have
done the labor; maintain it, keep it. If men choose to serve
you, go with them; but as you have made up your
organization upon principle, stand by it; for, as surely as
God reigns over you, and has inspired your mind, and given
you a sense of propriety, and continues to give you hope, so
surely will you still cling to these ideas, and you will at last
come back again after your wanderings, merely to do your
work over again.
We were often, — more than once, at least, — in the
course of Judge Douglas’s speech last night, reminded that
this government was made for white men; that he believed
 it was made for white men. Well, that is putting it into a
shape in which no one wants to deny it; but the Judge then
goes into his passion for drawing inferences that are not
warranted. I protest, now and forever, against that
counterfeit logic which presumes that because I did not
want a negro woman for a slave, I do necessarily want her
for a wife. My understanding is that I need not have her for
either, but, as God made us separate, we can leave one
another alone, and do one another much good thereby.
There are white men enough to marry all the white women,
and enough black men to marry all the black women; and in
God’s name let them be so married. The Judge regales us
with the terrible enormities that take place by the mixture
of races; that the inferior race bears the superior down.
Why, Judge, if we do not let them get together in the
Territories, they won’t mix there.
[A voice: “Three cheers for Lincoln”. — The cheers were
given with a hearty good-will.]
I should say at least that that is a self-evident truth.
Now, it happens that we meet together once every year,
sometimes about the 4th of July, for some reason or other.
These 4th of July gatherings I suppose have their uses. If
you will indulge me, I will state what I suppose to be some
of them.
We are now a mighty nation; we are thirty or about thirty
millions of people, and we own and inhabit about one
ﬁfteenth part of the dry land of the whole earth. We run our
memory back over the pages of history for about eighty-two
years, and we discover that we were then a very small
 people in point of numbers, vastly inferior to what we are
now, with a vastly less extent of country, with vastly less of
everything we deem desirable among men; we look upon
the change as exceedingly advantageous to us and to our
posterity, and we ﬁx upon something that happened away
back, as in some way or other being connected with this
rise of prosperity. We ﬁnd a race of men living in that day
whom we claim as our fathers and grandfathers; they were
iron men; they fought for the principle that they were
contending for; and we understood that by what they then
did it has followed that the degree of prosperity which we
now enjoy has come to us. We hold this annual celebration
to remind ourselves of all the good done in this process of
time, of how it was done and who did it, and how we are
historically connected with it; and we go from these
meetings in better humor with ourselves, we feel more
attached the one to the other, and more ﬁrmly bound to the
country we inhabit. In every way we are better men in the
age and race and country in which we live, for these
celebrations. But after we have done all this we have not
yet reached the whole. There is something else connected
with it. We have — besides these, men descended by blood
from our ancestors — among us perhaps half our people
who are not descendants at all of these men; they are men
who have come from Europe, German, Irish, French, and
Scandinavian, — men that have come from Europe
themselves, or whose ancestors have come hither and
settled here, ﬁnding themselves our equals in all things. If
they look back through this history to trace their
 connection with those days by blood, they ﬁnd they have
none, they cannot carry themselves back into that glorious
epoch and make themselves feel that they are part of us;
but when they look through that old Declaration of
Independence, they ﬁnd that those old men say that “We
hold these truths to be self-evident, that all men are
created equal”; and then they feel that that moral
sentiment, taught in that day, evidences their relation to
those men, that it is the father of all moral principle in
them, and that they have a right to claim it as though they
were blood of the blood, and ﬂesh of the ﬂesh, of the men
who wrote that Declaration; and so they are. That is the
electric cord in that Declaration that links the hearts of
patriotic and liberty-loving men together, that will link
those patriotic hearts as long as the love of freedom exists
in the minds of men throughout the world.
Now, sirs, for the purpose of squaring things with this
idea of “don’t care if slavery is voted up or voted down,” for
sustaining the Dred Scott decision, for holding that the
Declaration of Independence did not mean anything at all,
we have Judge Douglas giving his exposition of what the
Declaration of Independence means, and we have him
saying that the people of America are equal to the people of
England. According to his construction, you Germans are
not connected with it. Now, I ask you in all soberness if all
these things, if indulged in, if ratiﬁed, if conﬁrmed and
indorsed, if taught to our children, and repeated to them,
do not tend to rub out the sentiment of liberty in the
country, 
and 
to 
transform 
this 
government 
into 
a
 government of some other form. Those arguments that are
made, that the inferior race are to be treated with as much
allowance as they are capable of enjoying; that as much is
to be done for them as their condition will allow, — what
are these arguments? They are the arguments that kings
have made for enslaving the people in all ages of the world.
You will ﬁnd that all the arguments in favor of kingcraft
were of this class; they always bestrode the necks of the
people not that they wanted to do it, but because the
people were better oﬀ for being ridden. That is their
argument, and this argument of the Judge is the same old
serpent that says, You work, and I eat; you toil, and I will
enjoy the fruits of it. Turn in whatever way you will,
whether it come from the mouth of a king, an excuse for
enslaving the people of his country, or from the mouth of
men of one race as a reason for enslaving the men of
another race, it is all the same old serpent; and I hold, if
that course of argumentation that is made for the purpose
of convincing the public mind that we should not care
about this should be granted, it does not stop with the
negro. I should like to know, if taking this old Declaration of
Independence, which declares that all men are equal upon
principle, and making exceptions to it, where will it stop? If
one man says it does not mean a negro, why not another
say it does not mean some other man? If that Declaration is
not the truth, let us get the statute book, in which we ﬁnd
it, and tear it out! Who is so bold as to do it? If it is not
true, let us tear it out! [Cries of “No, no.”] Let us stick to it,
then; let us stand ﬁrmly by it, then.
 It may be argued that there are certain conditions that
make necessities and impose them upon us; and to the
extent that a necessity is imposed upon a man, he must
submit to it. I think that was the condition in which we
found ourselves when we established this government. We
had slavery among us, we could not get our Constitution
unless we permitted them to remain in slavery, we could
not secure the good we did secure if we grasped for more;
and having by necessity submitted to that much, it does not
destroy the principle that is the charter of our liberties. Let
that charter stand as our standard.
My friend has said to me that I am a poor hand to quote
Scripture. I will try it again, however. It is said in one of the
admonitions of our Lord, “As your Father in heaven is
perfect, be ye also perfect.” The Savior, I suppose, did not
expect that any human creature could be perfect as the
Father in heaven; but he said, “As your Father in heaven is
perfect, be ye also perfect.” He set that up as a standard;
and he who did most towards reaching that standard
attained the highest degree of moral perfection. So I say in
relation to the principle that all men are created equal, let
it be as nearly reached as we can. If we cannot give
freedom to every creature, let us do nothing that will
impose slavery upon any other creature. Let us then turn
this government back into the channel in which the framers
of the Constitution originally placed it. Let us stand ﬁrmly
by each other. If we do not do so, we are turning in the
contrary direction, that our friend Judge Douglas proposes
— not intentionally — as working in the traces tends to
 make this one universal slave nation. He is one that runs in
that direction, and as such I resist him.
My friends, I have detained you about as long as I
desired to do, and I have only to say: Let us discard all this
quibbling about this man and the other man, this race and
that race and the other race being inferior, and therefore
they must be placed in an inferior position; discarding our
standard that we have left us. Let us discard all these
things, and unite as one people throughout this land, until
we shall once more stand up declaring that all men are
created equal.
My friends, I could not, without launching oﬀ upon some
new topic, which would detain you too long, continue to-
night. I thank you for this most extensive audience that you
have furnished me to-night. I leave you, hoping that the
lamp of liberty will burn in your bosoms until there shall no
longer be a doubt that all men are created free and equal.
