  HI 
  
I
  
  A    A   
   
 
SEPTEMBER 15, 1858
MR. LINCOLN’S REPLY.
LADIES AND GENTLEMEN: — There is very much in the
principles that Judge Douglas has here enunciated that I
most cordially approve, and over which I shall have no
controversy with him. In so far as he has insisted that all
the States have the right to do exactly as they please about
all their domestic relations, including that of slavery, I
agree entirely with him. He places me wrong in spite of all I
can tell him, though I repeat it again and again, insisting
that I have no diﬀerence with him upon this subject. I have
made a great many speeches, some of which have been
printed, and it will be utterly impossible for him to ﬁnd
anything that I have ever put in print contrary to what I
now 
say 
upon 
this 
subject. 
I 
hold 
myself 
under
constitutional obligations to allow the people in all the
States, without interference, direct or indirect, to do
exactly as they please; and I deny that I have any
inclination to interfere with them, even if there were no
such constitutional obligation. I can only say again that I
am placed improperly — altogether improperly, in spite of
all I can say — when it is insisted that I entertain any other
view or purposes in regard to that matter.
 While I am upon this subject, I will make some answers
brieﬂy to certain propositions that Judge Douglas has put.
He says, “Why can’t this Union endure permanently half
slave and half free?” I have said that I supposed it could
not, and I will try, before this new audience, to give brieﬂy
some of the reasons for entertaining that opinion. Another
form of his question is, “Why can’t we let it stand as our
fathers placed it?” That is the exact diﬀiculty between us. I
say that Judge Douglas and his friends have changed it
from the position in which our fathers originally placed it. I
say, in the way our father’s originally left the slavery
question, the institution was in the course of ultimate
extinction, and the public mind rested in the belief that it
was in the course of ultimate extinction. I say when this
government was ﬁrst established it was the policy of its
founders to prohibit the spread of slavery into the new
Territories of the United States, where it had not existed.
But Judge Douglas and his friends have broken up that
policy, and placed it upon a new basis, by which it is to
become national and perpetual. All I have asked or desired
anywhere is that it should be placed back again upon the
basis that the fathers of our government originally placed it
upon. I have no doubt that it would become extinct, for all
time to come, if we but readopted the policy of the fathers,
by restricting it to the limits it has already covered,
restricting it from the new Territories.
I do not wish to dwell at great length on this branch of
the subject at this time, but allow me to repeat one thing
that I have stated before. Brooks — the man who assaulted
 Senator Sumner on the ﬂoor of the Senate, and who was
complimented with dinners, and silver pitchers, and gold-
headed canes, and a good many other things for that feat —
in one of his speeches declared that when this government
was originally established, nobody expected that the
institution of slavery would last until this day. That was but
the opinion of one man, but it was such an opinion as we
can never get from Judge Douglas or anybody in favor of
slavery, in the North, at all. You can sometimes get it from a
Southern man. He said at the same time that the framers of
our 
government 
did 
not 
have 
the 
knowledge 
that
experience has taught us; that experience and the invention
of the cotton-gin have taught us that the perpetuation of
slavery is a necessity. He insisted, therefore, upon its being
changed from the basis upon which the fathers of the
government left it to the basis of its perpetuation and
nationalization.
I insist that this is the diﬀerence between Judge Douglas
and myself, — that Judge Douglas is helping that change
along. I insist upon this government being placed where
our fathers originally placed it.
I remember Judge Douglas once said that he saw the
evidences on the statute books of Congress of a policy in
the origin of government to divide slavery and freedom by a
geographical line; that he saw an indisposition to maintain
that policy, and therefore he set about studying up a way to
settle the institution on the right basis, — the basis which
he thought it ought to have been placed upon at ﬁrst; and
in that speech he confesses that he seeks to place it, not
 upon the basis that the fathers placed it upon, but upon one
gotten up on “original principles.” When he asks me why
we cannot get along with it in the attitude where our
fathers placed it, he had better clear up the evidences that
he has himself changed it from that basis, that he has
himself been chieﬂy instrumental in changing the policy of
the fathers. Any one who will read his speech of the 22d of
last March will see that he there makes an open confession,
showing that he set about ﬁxing the institution upon an
altogether diﬀerent set of principles. I think I have fully
answered him when he asks me why we cannot let it alone
upon the basis where our fathers left it, by showing that he
has himself changed the whole policy of the government in
that regard.
Now, fellow-citizens, in regard to this matter about a
contract that was made between Judge Trumbull and
myself, and all that long portion of Judge Douglas’s speech
on this subject, — I wish simply to say what I have said to
him before, that he cannot know whether it is true or not,
and I do know that there is not a word of truth in it. And I
have told him so before. I don’t want any harsh language
indulged in, but I do not know how to deal with this
persistent insisting on a story that I know to be utterly
without truth. It used to be a fashion amongst men that
when a charge was made, some sort of proof was brought
forward to establish it, and if no proof was found to exist,
the charge was dropped. I don’t know how to meet this
kind of an argument. I don’t want to have a ﬁght with Judge
Douglas, and I have no way of making an argument up into
 the consistency of a corn-cob and stopping his mouth with
it. All I can do is — good-humoredly — to say that, from the
beginning to the end of all that story about a bargain
between Judge Trumbull and myself, there is not a word of
truth in it. I can only ask him to show some sort of evidence
of the truth of his story. He brings forward here and reads
from what he contends is a speech by James H. Matheny,
charging such a bargain between Trumbull and myself. My
own opinion is that Matheny did do some such immoral
thing as to tell a story that he knew nothing about. I believe
he did. I contradicted it instantly, and it has been
contradicted 
by 
Judge 
Trumbull, 
while 
nobody 
has
produced any proof, because there is none. Now, whether
the speech which the Judge brings forward here is really
the one Matheny made, I do not know, and I hope the Judge
will pardon me for doubting the genuineness of this
document, since his production of those Springﬁeld
resolutions at Ottawa. I do not wish to dwell at any great
length upon this matter. I can say nothing when a long
story like this is told, except it is not true, and demand that
he who insists upon it shall produce some proof. That is all
any man can do, and I leave it in that way, for I know of no
other way of dealing with it.
[In an argument on the lines of: “Yes, you did. — No, I
did not.” It bears on the former to prove his point, not on
the negative to “prove” that he did not — even if he easily
can do so.]
The Judge has gone over a long account of the old Whig
and Democratic parties, and it connects itself with this
 charge against Trumbull and myself. He says that they
agreed upon a compromise in regard to the slavery
question in 1850; that in a National Democratic Convention
resolutions were passed to abide by that compromise as a
ﬁnality upon the slavery question. He also says that the
Whig party in National Convention agreed to abide by and
regard as a ﬁnality the Compromise of 1850. I understand
the Judge to be altogether right about that; I understand
that part of the history of the country as stated by him to be
correct I recollect that I, as a member of that party,
acquiesced 
in 
that 
compromise. 
I 
recollect 
in 
the
Presidential election which followed, when we had General
Scott up for the presidency, Judge Douglas was around
berating us Whigs as Abolitionists, precisely as he does to-
day, — not a bit of diﬀerence. I have often heard him. We
could do nothing when the old Whig party was alive that
was not Abolitionism, but it has got an extremely good
name since it has passed away.
[It almost a natural law that, when dead — no matter
how bad we were — we are automatically beatiﬁed.]
When that Compromise was made it did not repeal the
old Missouri Compromise. It left a region of United States
territory half as large as the present territory of the United
States, north of the line of 36 degrees 30 minutes, in which
slavery 
was 
prohibited 
by 
Act 
of 
Congress. 
This
Compromise did not repeal that one. It did not aﬀect or
propose to repeal it. But at last it became Judge Douglas’s
duty, as he thought (and I ﬁnd no fault with him), as
Chairman of the Committee on Territories, to bring in a bill
 for the organization of a territorial government, — ﬁrst of
one, then of two Territories north of that line. When he did
so, it ended in his inserting a provision substantially
repealing the Missouri Compromise. That was because the
Compromise of 1850 had not repealed it. And now I ask
why he could not have let that Compromise alone? We were
quiet from the agitation of the slavery question. We were
making no fuss about it. All had acquiesced in the
Compromise measures of 1850. We never had been
seriously disturbed by any Abolition agitation before that
period. When he came to form governments for the
Territories north of the line of 36 degrees 30 minutes, why
could he not have let that matter stand as it was standing?
Was it necessary to the organization of a Territory? Not at
all. Iowa lay north of the line, and had been organized as a
Territory and come into the Union as a State without
disturbing that Compromise. There was no sort of necessity
for destroying it to organize these Territories. But,
gentlemen, it would take up all my time to meet all the little
quibbling arguments of Judge Douglas to show that the
Missouri Compromise was repealed by the Compromise of
1850. My own opinion is, that a careful investigation of all
the arguments to sustain the position that that Compromise
was virtually repealed by the Compromise of 1850 would
show that they are the merest fallacies. I have the report
that Judge Douglas ﬁrst brought into Congress at the time
of the introduction of the Nebraska Bill, which in its
original form did not repeal the Missouri Compromise, and
he there expressly stated that he had forborne to do so
 because it had not been done by the Compromise of 1850. I
close this part of the discussion on my part by asking him
the question again, “Why, when we had peace under the
Missouri Compromise, could you not have let it alone?”
In complaining of what I said in my speech at Springﬁeld,
in which he says I accepted my nomination for the
senatorship (where, by the way, he is at fault, for if he will
examine it, he will ﬁnd no acceptance in it), he again
quotes that portion in which I said that “a house divided
against itself cannot stand.” Let me say a word in regard to
that matter.
He tries to persuade us that there must be a variety in
the diﬀerent institutions of the States of the Union; that
that variety necessarily proceeds from the variety of soil,
climate, of the face of the country, and the diﬀerence in the
natural features of the States. I agree to all that. Have
these very matters ever produced any diﬀiculty amongst
us? Not at all. Have we ever had any quarrel over the fact
that they have laws in Louisiana designed to regulate the
commerce that springs from the production of sugar? Or
because we have a diﬀerent class relative to the production
of ﬂour in this State? Have they produced any diﬀerences?
Not at all. They are the very cements of this Union. They
don’t make the house a house divided against itself. They
are the props that hold up the house and sustain the Union.
But has it been so with this element of slavery? Have we
not always had quarrels and diﬀiculties over it? And when
will we cease to have quarrels over it? Like causes produce
like eﬀects. It is worth while to observe that we have
 generally 
had 
comparative 
peace 
upon 
the 
slavery
question, and that there has been no cause for alarm until
it was excited by the eﬀort to spread it into new territory.
Whenever it has been limited to its present bounds, and
there has been no eﬀort to spread it, there has been peace.
All the trouble and convulsion has proceeded from eﬀorts
to spread it over more territory. It was thus at the date of
the Missouri Compromise. It was so again with the
annexation of Texas; so with the territory acquired by the
Mexican war; and it is so now. Whenever there has been an
eﬀort to spread it, there has been agitation and resistance.
Now, I appeal to this audience (very few of whom are my
political friends), as national men, whether we have reason
to expect that the agitation in regard to this subject will
cease while the causes that tend to reproduce agitation are
actively at work? Will not the same cause that produced
agitation in 1820, when the Missouri Compromise was
formed, that which produced the agitation upon the
annexation of Texas, and at other times, work out the same
results always? Do you think that the nature of man will be
changed, that the same causes that produced agitation at
one time will not have the same eﬀect at another?
This has been the result so far as my observation of the
slavery question and my reading in history extends. What
right have we then to hope that the trouble will cease, —
that the agitation will come to an end, — until it shall either
be placed back where it originally stood, and where the
fathers originally placed it, or, on the other hand, until it
shall entirely master all opposition? This is the view I
 entertain, and this is the reason why I entertained it, as
Judge Douglas has read from my Springﬁeld speech.
Now, my friends, there is one other thing that I feel
myself under some sort of obligation to mention. Judge
Douglas has here to-day — in a very rambling way, I was
about saying — spoken of the platforms for which he seeks
to hold me responsible. He says, “Why can’t you come out
and make an open avowal of principles in all places alike?”
and he reads from an advertisement that he says was used
to notify the people of a speech to be made by Judge
Trumbull at Waterloo. In commenting on it he desires to
know whether we cannot speak frankly and manfully, as he
and his friends do. How, I ask, do his friends speak out their
own sentiments? A Convention of his party in this State met
on the 21st of April at Springﬁeld, and passed a set of
resolutions which they proclaim to the country as their
platform. This does constitute their platform, and it is
because Judge Douglas claims it is his platform — that
these are his principles and purposes — that he has a right
to declare he speaks his sentiments “frankly and manfully.”
On the 9th of June Colonel John Dougherty, Governor
Reynolds, 
and 
others, 
calling 
themselves 
National
Democrats, met in Springﬁeld and adopted a set of
resolutions which are as easily understood, as plain and as
deﬁnite in stating to the country and to the world what they
believed in and would stand upon, as Judge Douglas’s
platform Now, what is the reason that Judge Douglas is not
willing that Colonel Dougherty and Governor Reynolds
should stand upon their own written and printed platform
 as well as he upon his? Why must he look farther than their
platform when he claims himself to stand by his platform?
Again, in reference to our platform: On the 16th of June
the Republicans had their Convention and published their
platform, which is as clear and distinct as Judge Douglas’s.
In it they spoke their principles as plainly and as deﬁnitely
to the world. What is the reason that Judge Douglas is not
willing I should stand upon that platform? Why must he go
around hunting for some one who is supporting me or has
supported me at some time in his life, and who has said
something at some time contrary to that platform? Does the
Judge regard that rule as a good one? If it turn out that the
rule is a good one for me — that I am responsible for any
and every opinion that any man has expressed who is my
friend, — then it is a good rule for him. I ask, is it not as
good a rule for him as it is for me? In my opinion, it is not a
good rule for either of us. Do you think diﬀerently, Judge?
[Mr. DOUGLAS: I do not.]
Judge Douglas says he does not think diﬀerently. I am
glad of it. Then can he tell me why he is looking up
resolutions of ﬁve or six years ago, and insisting that they
were my platform, notwithstanding my protest that they
are not, and never were my platform, and my pointing out
the platform of the State Convention which he delights to
say nominated me for the Senate? I cannot see what he
means by parading these resolutions, if it is not to hold me
responsible for them in some way. If he says to me here
that he does not hold the rule to be good, one way or the
other, I do not comprehend how he could answer me more
 fully if he answered me at greater length. I will therefore
put in as my answer to the resolutions that he has hunted
up against me, what I, as a lawyer, would call a good plea
to a bad declaration. I understand that it is an axiom of law
that a poor plea may be a good plea to a bad declaration. I
think that the opinions the Judge brings from those who
support me, yet diﬀer from me, is a bad declaration against
me; but if I can bring the same things against him, I am
putting in a good plea to that kind of declaration, and now I
propose to try it.
At Freeport, Judge Douglas occupied a large part of his
time in producing resolutions and documents of various
sorts, as I understood, to make me somehow responsible
for them; and I propose now doing a little of the same sort
of thing for him. In 1850 a very clever gentleman by the
name of Thompson Campbell, a personal friend of Judge
Douglas and myself, a political friend of Judge Douglas and
opponent of mine, was a candidate for Congress in the
Galena District. He was interrogated as to his views on this
same slavery question. I have here before me the
interrogatories, and Campbell’s answers to them — I will
read them:
