 I
    
A 
 I  
“1ST. WILL YOU, if elected, vote for and cordially support a
bill prohibiting slavery in the Territories of the United
States?
“2d. Will you vote for and support a bill abolishing
slavery in the District of Columbia?
“3d. Will you oppose the admission of any Slave States
which may be formed out of Texas or the Territories?
“4th. Will you vote for and advocate the repeal of the
Fugitive Slave law passed at the recent session of
Congress?
“5th. Will you advocate and vote for the election of a
Speaker of the House of Representatives who shall be
willing to organize the committees of that House so as to
give the Free States their just inﬂuence in the business of
legislation?
“6th. What are your views, not only as to the
constitutional right of Congress to prohibit the slave-trade
between the States, but also as to the expediency of
exercising that right immediately?”
  A
             .
“TO THE FIRST and second interrogatories, I answer
unequivocally in the aﬀirmative.
“To the third interrogatory I reply, that I am opposed to
the admission of any more Slave States into the Union, that
may be formed out of Texas or any other Territory.
“To the fourth and ﬁfth interrogatories I unhesitatingly
answer in the aﬀirmative.
“To the sixth interrogatory I reply, that so long as the
Slave States continue to treat slaves as articles of
commerce, the Constitution confers power on Congress to
pass laws regulating that peculiar COMMERCE, and that
the protection of Human Rights imperatively demands the
interposition of every constitutional means to prevent this
most inhuman and iniquitous traﬀic.
“T. CAMPBELL.”
I want to say here that Thompson Campbell was elected
to Congress on that platform, as the Democratic candidate
in the Galena District, against Martin P. Sweet.
[Judge DOUGLAS: Give me the date of the letter.]
The time Campbell ran was in 1850. I have not the exact
date here. It was some time in 1850 that these
interrogatories were put and the answer given. Campbell
was elected to Congress, and served out his term. I think a
 second election came up before he served out his term, and
he was not re-elected. Whether defeated or not nominated,
I do not know. [Mr. Campbell was nominated for re-election
by the Democratic party, by acclamation.] At the end of his
term his very good friend Judge Douglas got him a high
oﬀice from President Pierce, and sent him oﬀ to California.
Is not that the fact? Just at the end of his term in Congress
it appears that our mutual friend Judge Douglas got our
mutual friend Campbell a good oﬀice, and sent him to
California upon it. And not only so, but on the 27th of last
month, when Judge Douglas and myself spoke at Freeport
in joint discussion, there was his same friend Campbell,
come all the way from California, to help the Judge beat
me; and there was poor Martin P. Sweet standing on the
platform, trying to help poor me to be elected. That is true
of one of Judge Douglas’s friends.
So again, in that same race of 1850, there was a
Congressional Convention assembled at Joliet, and it
nominated R. S. Molony for Congress, and unanimously
adopted the following resolution:
“Resolved, That we are uncompromisingly opposed to the
extension of slavery; and while we would not make such
opposition a ground of interference with the interests of the
States where it exists, yet we moderately but ﬁrmly insist
that it is the duty of Congress to oppose its extension into
Territory now free, by all means compatible with the
obligations of the Constitution, and with good faith to our
sister States; that these principles were recognized by the
Ordinance of 1787, which received the sanction of Thomas
 Jeﬀerson, who is acknowledged by all to be the great oracle
and expounder of our faith.”
Subsequently the same interrogatories were propounded
to Dr. Molony which had been addressed to Campbell as
above, with the exception of the 6th, respecting the
interstate slave trade, to which Dr. Molony, the Democratic
nominee for Congress, replied as follows:
“I received the written interrogatories this day, and, as
you will see by the La Salle Democrat and Ottawa Free
Trader, I took at Peru on the 5th, and at Ottawa on the 7th,
the aﬀirmative side of interrogatories 1st and 2d; and in
relation to the admission of any more Slave States from
Free Territory, my position taken at these meetings, as
correctly reported in said papers, was emphatically and
distinctly opposed to it. In relation to the admission of any
more Slave States from Texas, whether I shall go against it
or not will depend upon the opinion that I may hereafter
form of the true meaning and nature of the resolutions of
annexation. If, by said resolutions, the honor and good faith
of the nation is pledged to admit more Slave States from
Texas when she (Texas) may apply for the admission of such
State, then I should, if in Congress, vote for their
admission. But if not so PLEDGED and bound by sacred
contract, then a bill for the admission of more Slave States
from Texas would never receive my vote.
“To your fourth interrogatory I answer most decidedly in
the aﬀirmative, and for reasons set forth in my reported
remarks at Ottawa last Monday.
 “To your ﬁfth interrogatory I also reply in the aﬀirmative
most cordially, and that I will use my utmost exertions to
secure the nomination and election of a man who will
accomplish the objects of said interrogatories. I most
cordially approve of the resolutions adopted at the Union
meeting held at Princeton on the 27th September ult.
“Yours, etc., R. S. MOLONY.”
All I have to say in regard to Dr. Molony is that he was
the 
regularly 
nominated 
Democratic 
candidate 
for
Congress in his district; was elected at that time; at the end
of his term was appointed to a land-oﬀice at Danville. (I
never heard anything of Judge Douglas’s instrumentality in
this.) He held this oﬀice a considerable time, and when we
were at Freeport the other day there were handbills
scattered about notifying the public that after our debate
was over R. S. Molony would make a Democratic speech in
favor of Judge Douglas. That is all I know of my own
personal knowledge. It is added here to this resolution, and
truly I believe, that among those who participated in the
Joliet Convention, and who supported its nominee, with his
platform as laid down in the resolution of the Convention
and in his reply as above given, we call at random the
following names, all of which are recognized at this day as
leading Democrats:
“Cook County, — E. B. Williams, Charles McDonell, Arno
Voss, Thomas Hoyne, Isaac Cook.”
I reckon we ought to except Cook.
“F. C. Sherman.
“Will, — Joel A. Matteson, S. W. Bowen.
 “Kane, — B. F. Hall, G. W. Renwick, A. M. Herrington,
Elijah Wilcox.
“McHenry, — W. M. Jackson, Enos W. Smith, Neil
Donnelly.
La Salle, — John Hise, William Reddick.”
William Reddick! another one of Judge Douglas’s friends
that stood on the stand with him at Ottawa, at the time the
Judge says my knees trembled so that I had to be carried
away. The names are all here:
“Du Page, — Nathan Allen.
“De Kalb, — Z. B. Mayo.”
Here is another set of resolutions which I think are
apposite to the matter in hand.
On the 28th of February of the same year a Democratic
District Convention was held at Naperville to nominate a
candidate for Circuit Judge. Among the delegates were
Bowen and Kelly of Will; Captain Naper, H. H. Cody, Nathan
Allen, of Du Page; W. M. Jackson, J. M. Strode, P. W. Platt,
and Enos W. Smith of McHenry; J. Horssnan and others of
Winnebago. Colonel Strode presided over the Convention.
The following resolutions were unanimously adopted, — the
ﬁrst on motion of P. W. Platt, the second on motion of
William M. Jackson:
“Resolved, That this Convention is in favor of the Wilmot
Proviso, both in Principle and Practice, and that we know of
no good reason why any person should oppose the largest
latitude in Free Soil, Free Territory and Free speech.
“Resolved, That in the opinion of this Convention, the
time has arrived when all men should be free, whites as
 well as others.”
[Judge DOUGLAS: What is the date of those resolutions?]
I understand it was in 1850, but I do not know it. I do not
state a thing and say I know it, when I do not. But I have
the highest belief that this is so. I know of no way to arrive
at the conclusion that there is an error in it. I mean to put a
case no stronger than the truth will allow. But what I was
going to comment upon is an extract from a newspaper in
De Kalb County; and it strikes me as being rather singular,
I confess, under the circumstances. There is a Judge Mayo
in that county, who is a candidate for the Legislature, for
the purpose, if he secures his election, of helping to re-elect
Judge Douglas. He is the editor of a newspaper [De Kalb
County Sentinel], and in that paper I ﬁnd the extract I am
going to read. It is part of an editorial article in which he
was electioneering as ﬁercely as he could for Judge
Douglas and against me. It was a curious thing, I think, to
be in such a paper. I will agree to that, and the Judge may
make the most of it:
“Our education has been such that we have been rather
in favor of the equality of the blacks; that is, that they
should enjoy all the privileges of the whites where they
reside. We are aware that this is not a very popular
doctrine. We have had many a confab with some who are
now strong ‘Republicans’ we taking the broad ground of
equality, and they the opposite ground.
“We were brought up in a State where blacks were
voters, and we do not know of any inconvenience resulting
from it, though perhaps it would not work as well where
 the blacks are more numerous. We have no doubt of the
right of the whites to guard against such an evil, if it is one.
Our opinion is that it would be best for all concerned to
have the colored population in a State by themselves [in
this I agree with him]; but if within the jurisdiction of the
United States, we say by all means they should have the
right to have their Senators and Representatives in
Congress, and to vote for President. With us ‘worth makes
the man, and want of it the fellow.’ We have seen many a
‘nigger’ that we thought more of than some white men.”
That is one of Judge Douglas’s friends. Now, I do not
want to leave myself in an attitude where I can be
misrepresented, so I will say I do not think the Judge is
responsible for this article; but he is quite as responsible
for it as I would be if one of my friends had said it. I think
that is fair enough.
I have here also a set of resolutions passed by a
Democratic State Convention in Judge Douglas’s own good
State of Vermont, that I think ought to be good for him too:
“Resolved, That liberty is a right inherent and inalienable
in man, and that herein all men are equal.
“Resolved, That we claim no authority in the Federal
Government to abolish slavery in the several States, but we
do claim for it Constitutional power perpetually to prohibit
the introduction of slavery into territory now free, and
abolish it wherever, under the jurisdiction of Congress, it
exists.
“Resolved, That this power ought immediately to be
exercised in prohibiting the introduction and existence of
 slavery in New Mexico and California, in abolishing slavery
and the slave-trade in the District of Columbia, on the high
seas, and wherever else, under the Constitution, it can be
reached.
“Resolved, That no more Slave States should be admitted
into the Federal Union.
“Resolved, That the Government ought to return to its
ancient policy, not to extend, nationalize, or encourage, but
to limit, localize, and discourage slavery.”
At Freeport I answered several interrogatories that had
been propounded to me by Judge Douglas at the Ottawa
meeting. The Judge has not yet seen ﬁt to ﬁnd any fault
with the position that I took in regard to those seven
interrogatories, which were certainly broad enough, in all
conscience, to cover the entire ground. In my answers,
which have been printed, and all have had the opportunity
of seeing, I take the ground that those who elect me must
expect that I will do nothing which will not be in
accordance with those answers. I have some right to assert
that Judge Douglas has no fault to ﬁnd with them. But he
chooses to still try to thrust me upon diﬀerent ground,
without paying any attention to my answers, the obtaining
of which from me cost him so much trouble and concern. At
the same time I propounded four interrogatories to him,
claiming it as a right that he should answer as many
interrogatories for me as I did for him, and I would reserve
myself for a future instalment when I got them ready. The
Judge, in answering me upon that occasion, put in what I
suppose he intends as answers to all four of my
 interrogatories. The ﬁrst one of these interrogatories I have
before me, and it is in these words:
“Question 1. — If the people of Kansas shall, by means
entirely unobjectionable in all other respects, adopt a State
constitution, and ask admission into the Union under it,
before they have the requisite number of inhabitants
according to the English bill,” — some ninety-three
thousand,— “will you vote to admit them?”
As I read the Judge’s answer in the newspaper, and as I
remember it as pronounced at the time, he does not give
any answer which is equivalent to yes or no, — I will or I
won’t. He answers at very considerable length, rather
quarreling with me for asking the question, and insisting
that Judge Trumbull had done something that I ought to say
something about, and ﬁnally getting out such statements as
induce me to infer that he means to be understood he will,
in that supposed case, vote for the admission of Kansas. I
only bring this forward now for the purpose of saying that if
he chooses to put a diﬀerent construction upon his answer,
he may do it. But if he does not, I shall from this time
forward assume that he will vote for the admission of
Kansas in disregard of the English bill. He has the right to
remove any misunderstanding I may have. I only mention it
now, that I may hereafter assume this to be the true
construction of his answer, if he does not now choose to
correct me.
The second interrogatory that I propounded to him was
this:
 “Question 2. — Can the people of a United States
Territory, in any lawful way, against the wish of any citizen
of the United States, exclude slavery from its limits prior to
the formation of a State Constitution?”
To this Judge Douglas answered that they can lawfully
exclude slavery from the Territory prior to the formation of
a constitution. He goes on to tell us how it can be done. As I
understand him, he holds that it can be done by the
Territorial Legislature refusing to make any enactments for
the protection of slavery in the Territory, and especially by
adopting unfriendly legislation to it. For the sake of
clearness, I state it again: that they can exclude slavery
from the Territory, 1st, by withholding what he assumes to
be an indispensable assistance to it in the way of
legislation; and, 2d, by unfriendly legislation. If I rightly
understand him, I wish to ask your attention for a while to
his position.
In the ﬁrst place, the Supreme Court of the United States
has decided that any Congressional prohibition of slavery in
the Territories is unconstitutional; that they have reached
this proposition as a conclusion from their former
proposition, that the Constitution of the United States
expressly recognizes property in slaves, and from that
other Constitutional provision, that no person shall be
deprived of property without due process of law. Hence
they reach the conclusion that as the Constitution of the
United States expressly recognizes property in slaves, and
prohibits any person from being deprived of property
without due process of law, to pass an Act of Congress by
 which a man who owned a slave on one side of a line would
be deprived of him if he took him on the other side, is
depriving him of that property without due process of law.
That I understand to be the decision of the Supreme Court.
I understand also that Judge Douglas adheres most ﬁrmly
to that decision; and the diﬀiculty is, how is it possible for
any power to exclude slavery from the Territory, unless in
violation of that decision? That is the diﬀiculty.
In the Senate of the United States, in 1850, Judge
Trumbull, in a speech substantially, if not directly, put the
same interrogatory to Judge Douglas, as to whether the
people of a Territory had the lawful power to exclude
slavery prior to the formation of a constitution. Judge
Douglas then answered at considerable length, and his
answer will be found in the Congressional Globe, under
date of June 9th, 1856. The Judge said that whether the
people could exclude slavery prior to the formation of a
constitution or not was a question to be decided by the
Supreme Court. He put that proposition, as will be seen by
the Congressional Globe, in a variety of forms, all running
to the same thing in substance, — that it was a question for
the Supreme Court. I maintain that when he says, after the
Supreme Court have decided the question, that the people
may yet exclude slavery by any means whatever, he does
virtually say that it is not a question for the Supreme Court.
He shifts his ground. I appeal to you whether he did not say
it was a question for the Supreme Court? Has not the
Supreme Court decided that question? when he now says
the people may exclude slavery, does he not make it a
 question for the people? Does he not virtually shift his
ground and say that it is not a question for the Court, but
for the people? This is a very simple proposition, — a very
plain and naked one. It seems to me that there is no
diﬀiculty in deciding it. In a variety of ways he said that it
was a question for the Supreme Court. He did not stop then
to tell us that, whatever the Supreme Court decides, the
people can by withholding necessary “police regulations”
keep slavery out. He did not make any such answer I
submit to you now whether the new state of the case has
not induced the Judge to sheer away from his original
ground. Would not this be the impression of every fair-
minded man?
I hold that the proposition that slavery cannot enter a
new country without police regulations is historically false.
It is not true at all. I hold that the history of this country
shows that the institution of slavery was originally planted
upon this continent without these “police regulations,”
which the Judge now thinks necessary for the actual
establishment of it. Not only so, but is there not another
fact: how came this Dred Scott decision to be made? It was
made upon the case of a negro being taken and actually
held in slavery in Minnesota Territory, claiming his freedom
because the Act of Congress prohibited his being so held
there. Will the Judge pretend that Dred Scott was not held
there without police regulations? There is at least one
matter of record as to his having been held in slavery in the
Territory, not only without police regulations, but in the
teeth of Congressional legislation supposed to be valid at
 the time. This shows that there is vigor enough in slavery to
plant itself in a new country even against unfriendly
legislation. It takes not only law, but the enforcement of law
to keep it out. That is the history of this country upon the
subject.
I wish to ask one other question. It being understood that
the Constitution of the United States guarantees property
in slaves in the Territories, if there is any infringement of
the right of that property, would not the United States
courts, organized for the government of the Territory, apply
such remedy as might be necessary in that case? It is a
maxim held by the courts that there is no wrong without its
remedy; and the courts have a remedy for whatever is
acknowledged and treated as a wrong.
Again: I will ask you, my friends, if you were elected
members of the Legislature, what would be the ﬁrst thing
you would have to do before entering upon your duties?
Swear to support the Constitution of the United States.
Suppose you believe, as Judge Douglas does, that the
Constitution of the United States guarantees to your
neighbor the right to hold slaves in that Territory; that they
are his property: how can you clear your oaths unless you
give him such legislation as is necessary to enable him to
enjoy that property? What do you understand by supporting
the Constitution of a State, or of the United States? Is it not
to give such constitutional helps to the rights established
by that Constitution as may be practically needed? Can you,
if you swear to support the Constitution, and believe that
the Constitution establishes a right, clear your oath,
 without giving it support? Do you support the Constitution
if, knowing or believing there is a right established under it
which 
needs 
speciﬁc 
legislation, 
you 
withhold 
that
legislation? Do you not violate and disregard your oath? I
can conceive of nothing plainer in the world. There can be
nothing in the words “support the Constitution,” if you may
run counter to it by refusing support to any right
established under the Constitution. And what I say here will
hold with still more force against the Judge’s doctrine of
“unfriendly legislation.” How could you, having sworn to
support the Constitution, and believing it guaranteed the
right to hold slaves in the Territories, assist in legislation
intended to defeat that right? That would be violating your
own view of the Constitution. Not only so, but if you were
to do so, how long would it take the courts to hold your
votes unconstitutional and void? Not a moment.
Lastly, I would ask: Is not Congress itself under
obligation to give legislative support to any right that is
established under the United States Constitution? I repeat
the question: Is not Congress itself bound to give legislative
support to any right that is established in the United States
Constitution? A member of Congress swears to support the
Constitution of the United States: and if he sees a right
established by that Constitution which needs speciﬁc
legislative protection, can he clear his oath without giving
that protection? Let me ask you why many of us who are
opposed to slavery upon principle give our acquiescence to
a Fugitive Slave law? Why do we hold ourselves under
obligations to pass such a law, and abide by it when it is
 passed? Because the Constitution makes provision that the
owners of slaves shall have the right to reclaim them. It
gives the right to reclaim slaves; and that right is, as Judge
Douglas says, a barren right, unless there is legislation that
will enforce it.
The mere declaration, “No person held to service or
labor in one State under the laws thereof, escaping into
another, shall in consequence of any law or regulation
therein be discharged from such service or labor, but shall
be delivered up on claim of the party to whom such service
or labor may be due,” is powerless without speciﬁc
legislation to enforce it. Now, on what ground would a
member of Congress, who is opposed to slavery in the
abstract, vote for a Fugitive law, as I would deem it my duty
to do? Because there is a constitutional right which needs
legislation to enforce it. And although it is distasteful to me,
I have sworn to support the Constitution; and having so
sworn, I cannot conceive that I do support it if I withhold
from that right any necessary legislation to make it
practical. And if that is true in regard to a Fugitive Slave
law, is the right to have fugitive slaves reclaimed any better
ﬁxed in the Constitution than the right to hold slaves in the
Territories? For this decision is a just exposition of the
Constitution, as Judge Douglas thinks. Is the one right any
better than the other? Is there any man who, while a
member of Congress, would give support to the one any
more than the other? If I wished to refuse to give legislative
support to slave property in the Territories, if a member of
Congress, I could not do it, holding the view that the
 Constitution establishes that right. If I did it at all, it would
be because I deny that this decision properly construes the
Constitution. But if I acknowledge, with Judge Douglas,
that this decision properly construes the Constitution, I
cannot conceive that I would be less than a perjured man if
I should refuse in Congress to give such protection to that
property as in its nature it needed.
At the end of what I have said here I propose to give the
Judge my ﬁfth interrogatory, which he may take and answer
at his leisure. My ﬁfth interrogatory is this:
If the slaveholding citizens of a United States Territory
should need and demand Congressional legislation for the
protection of their slave property in such Territory, would
you, as a member of Congress, vote for or against such
legislation?
[Judge DOUGLAS: Will you repeat that? I want to answer
that question.]
If the slaveholding citizens of a United States Territory
should need and demand Congressional legislation for the
protection of their slave property in such Territory, would
you, as a member of Congress, vote for or against such
legislation?
I am aware that in some of the speeches Judge Douglas
has made, he has spoken as if he did not know or think that
the Supreme Court had decided that a Territorial
Legislature cannot exclude slavery. Precisely what the
Judge would say upon the subject — whether he would say
deﬁnitely that he does not understand they have so
decided, or whether he would say he does understand that
 the court have so decided, — I do not know; but I know that
in his speech at Springﬁeld he spoke of it as a thing they
had not decided yet; and in his answer to me at Freeport,
he spoke of it, so far, again, as I can comprehend it, as a
thing that had not yet been decided. Now, I hold that if the
Judge does entertain that view, I think that he is not
mistaken in so far as it can be said that the court has not
decided anything save the mere question of jurisdiction. I
know the legal arguments that can be made, — that after a
court has decided that it cannot take jurisdiction in a case,
it then has decided all that is before it, and that is the end
of it. A plausible argument can be made in favor of that
proposition; but I know that Judge Douglas has said in one
of his speeches that the court went forward, like honest
men as they were, and decided all the points in the case. If
any points are really extra-judicially decided, because not
necessarily before them, then this one as to the power of
the Territorial Legislature, to exclude slavery is one of
them, as also the one that the Missouri Compromise was
null and void. They are both extra-judicial, or neither is,
according as the court held that they had no jurisdiction in
the case between the parties, because of want of capacity
of one party to maintain a suit in that court. I want, if I
have suﬀicient time, to show that the court did pass its
opinion; but that is the only thing actually done in the case.
If they did not decide, they showed what they were ready to
decide whenever the matter was before them. What is that
opinion? After having argued that Congress had no power
to pass a law excluding slavery from a United States
 Territory, they then used language to this eﬀect: That
inasmuch as Congress itself could not exercise such a
power, it followed as a matter of course that it could not
authorize a Territorial government to exercise it; for the
Territorial Legislature can do no more than Congress could
do. Thus it expressed its opinion emphatically against the
power of a Territorial Legislature to exclude slavery,
leaving us in just as little doubt on that point as upon any
other point they really decided.
Now, my fellow-citizens, I will detain you only a little
while longer; my time is nearly out. I ﬁnd a report of a
speech made by Judge Douglas at Joliet, since we last met
at Freeport, — published, I believe, in the Missouri
Republican, on the 9th of this month, in which Judge
Douglas says:
“You know at Ottawa I read this platform, and asked him
if he concurred in each and all of the principles set forth in
it. He would not answer these questions. At last I said
frankly, I wish you to answer them, because when I get
them up here where the color of your principles are a little
darker than in Egypt, I intend to trot you down to
Jonesboro. The very notice that I was going to take him
down to Egypt made him tremble in his knees so that he
had to be carried from the platform. He laid up seven days,
and in the meantime held a consultation with his political
physicians; they had Lovejoy and Farnsworth and all the
leaders of the Abolition party, they consulted it all over, and
at last Lincoln came to the conclusion that he would
answer, so he came up to Freeport last Friday.”
 Now, that statement altogether furnishes a subject for
philosophical contemplation. I have been treating it in that
way, and I have really come to the conclusion that I can
explain it in no other way than by believing the Judge is
crazy. If he was in his right mind I cannot conceive how he
would have risked disgusting the four or ﬁve thousand of
his own friends who stood there and knew, as to my having
been carried from the platform, that there was not a word
of truth in it.
[Judge DOUGLAS: Did n’t they carry you oﬀ?]
There that question illustrates the character of this man
Douglas exactly. He smiles now, and says, “Did n’t they
carry you oﬀ?” but he said then “he had to be carried oﬀ”;
and he said it to convince the country that he had so
completely broken me down by his speech that I had to be
carried away. Now he seeks to dodge it, and asks, “Did n’t
they carry you oﬀ?” Yes, they did. But, Judge Douglas, why
didn’t you tell the truth? I would like to know why you did
n’t tell the truth about it. And then again “He laid up seven
days.” He put this in print for the people of the country to
read as a serious document. I think if he had been in his
sober senses he would not have risked that barefacedness
in the presence of thousands of his own friends who knew
that I made speeches within six of the seven days at Henry,
Marshall County, Augusta, Hancock County, and Macomb,
McDonough County, including all the necessary travel to
meet him again at Freeport at the end of the six days. Now
I say there is no charitable way to look at that statement,
except to conclude that he is actually crazy. There is
 another thing in that statement that alarmed me very
greatly as he states it, that he was going to “trot me down
to Egypt.” Thereby he would have you infer that I would not
come to Egypt unless he forced me — that I could not be
got here unless he, giant-like, had hauled me down here.
That statement he makes, too, in the teeth of the
knowledge that I had made the stipulation to come down
here and that he himself had been very reluctant to enter
into the stipulation. More than all this: Judge Douglas,
when he made that statement, must have been crazy and
wholly out of his sober senses, or else he would have known
that when he got me down here, that promise — that windy
promise — of his powers to annihilate me, would n’t
amount to anything. Now, how little do I look like being
carried away trembling? Let the Judge go on; and after he
is done with his half-hour, I want you all, if I can’t go home
myself, to let me stay and rot here; and if anything happens
to the Judge, if I cannot carry him to the hotel and put him
to bed, let me stay here and rot. I say, then, here is
something extraordinary in this statement. I ask you if you
know any other living man who would make such a
statement? I will ask my friend Casey, over there, if he
would do such a thing? Would he send that out and have his
men take it as the truth? Did the Judge talk of trotting me
down to Egypt to scare me to death? Why, I know this
people better than he does. I was raised just a little east of
here. I am a part of this people. But the Judge was raised
farther north, and perhaps he has some horrid idea of what
this people might be induced to do. But really I have talked
 about this matter perhaps longer than I ought, for it is no
great thing; and yet the smallest are often the most diﬀicult
things to deal with. The Judge has set about seriously
trying to make the impression that when we meet at
diﬀerent places I am literally in his clutches — that I am a
poor, helpless, decrepit mouse, and that I can do nothing at
all. This is one of the ways he has taken to create that
impression. I don’t know any other way to meet it except
this. I don’t want to quarrel with him — to call him a liar;
but when I come square up to him I don’t know what else to
call him if I must tell the truth out. I want to be at peace,
and reserve all my ﬁghting powers for necessary occasions.
My time now is very nearly out, and I give up the triﬂe that
is left to the Judge, to let him set my knees trembling again,
if he can.
