 2 Storms Before the Storm: 
1912-1914 
KRAKOW 
Residence in Switzerland and France was endured stoically by 
Russian emigres. They had left their motherland involuntarily; and 
most of them regarded Geneva, Berne and Zurich as the least hateful 
of alternative bases. At first glance it is mystifying that they did not 
gravitate towards citadels of Europe's contemporary avant-garde, 
such as Vienna. Why did they, in the main, avoid lengthy stays in 
centres of economic power such as London or Berlin? The main 
reason was that Switzerland's constitution provided an unusual 
degree of civic tolerance. Russian revolutionaries attracted little 
attention from the authorities. The snowy winters were bitter-
sweetly reminiscent of home. The mountains were strange, certain-
ly, to inhabitants of the Russian empire unless they happened to 
come from the Caucasus. Yet all the emigres, whatever their 
geographical origins, adored the Alps. Hill-walking was as popular 
among them as among Swiss townsfolk - in those days it was only a 
few aristocratic Britons who were mountaineering enthusiasts. Swiss 
orderliness could grate upon the sensibilities of Russians (although 
this was never Lenin's reaction!), but in general earned its due 
esteem. The efficiency of libraries and postal services was a godsend 
to these bibliophile rebels. Russian socialists as Second International 
members also found the country well situated for communications 
with Central, Western and Southern Europe. A large Russian 
community inhabited Switzerland. Before the First World War, 
10,000 of Nikolai II's subjects lived there. They even had their own 
bookshops, restaurants and printing presses. 
There was no joy for Lenin in deciding, in June 1912, to move to 
Austria-Hungary. He had spent several months of the previous year 
in France, teaching at the party school at Longjumeau and editing 
Workers' Newspaper and setting up his notorious Committee of the 
Foreign Organisation in Paris. 1 In March 1912 he still intended to 
remain in France for the entire summer; the plan was to leave the 
34 
 Storms Before the Storm 
35 
capital, where accommodation prices were high, and move to its 
'more pleasant and peaceful' environs in the small town of 
Fontenay.Z By May he had changed his mind, getting Krupskaya 
to make enquiries about leaving France and about taking her mother 
with them. But instead of moving back to Switzerland, Lenin and she 
were planning to relocate the base of their operations in Galicia, the 
Habsburg-ruled territory of historic Poland. Enquiries were made 
about prices and passport regulations, and about the intensity of the 
local police's interest in Russian revolutionaries. 3 
And yet Lenin and Krupskaya were still considering spending 
summer 1912 in Geneva prior to any firm decision on their long-term 
residence.4 Not even the police shooting of 170 striking workers in 
the Lena goldfields in Siberia in April, and the surge of demonstra-
tions against the government, had tempted him into moving eastward 
more quickly. And yet by the latter half of June they were in Galicia. 5 
The decision was formally explained by Lenin as being motivated by 
a desire to study the 'local agrarian conditions' and to learn the 
Polish language.6 This pretence was needed to satisfy the authorities 
in the Galician capital of Krakow. A more plausible explanation 
came in a letter to the writer Maksim Gorki. Lenin affirmed that 
Krakow afforded faster communications with St Petersburg. It was 
possible to receive Russian newspapers within three days, and easier 
to contribute to and collaborate with the editors of the legal 
Bolshevik press. 7 Krupskaya was to recall that Lenin was drawn to 
Galicia especially by his wish to influence the affairs of the factional 
daily newspaper, Pravda, which had at last been issued in the capital 
on 22 April 1912 under N. G. Poletaev's aegis. 8 An announcement 
that a daily would be appearing had been made by the St Petersburg 
Bolsheviks on 15 January (while the Prague Conference was taking 
place);9 and the Prague delegates had supported schemes for an 
intensification of efforts in the legal press. 10 Lenin's belatedness in 
moving from Paris could well have been a further sign of his 
disapproval of the project. Once established, however, Pravda had 
to be controlled! Perhaps, too, police agents were right that Lenin 
was already looking forward to the working of the Fourth State 
Duma. II The Third Duma's natural time-span ran out in June 1912, 
and elections were arranged for the Fourth's convocation by 
November. Again, it was easier to co-operate with Bolshevik Duma 
deputies from Krakow than from Geneva or Paris. 
But Lenin may have had little choice. The Prague Conference had 
ordered that increased emphasis and resources be devoted to party 
 36 
Lenin: A Political Life 
activity in Russia. Lenin's letter to Gorki specified that the Central 
Committee subsequently set up a Foreign Bureau in Galicia, 12 and 
this could signify that he had moved under some pressure. Be that as 
it may, Lenin came to feel glad about the transfer. The opportunity 
for mountain-walking in the Tatras; the similarities of everyday life 
to conditions in the Russian empire; the physical separation from the 
atmosphere of internecine factional struggle in France and Switzer-
land, which took its toll on Lenin despite his relish for it; and the 
greater chances for Russia-based Bolsheviks to travel out to meet 
him: all these factors contributed to a feeling that the Galician 
sojourn was only 'a semi-emigration'. 13 
He also developed a casualness about the emigre central press, 
which was remarkable for a politician who had been perpetually 
involved in campaigns to dominate it. Workers' Newspaper was 
issued only twice in 1912; publication of Social Democrat conti-
nued, but less frequently than before. Only three issues appeared in 
1913. Lenin continued to contribute; but the main work was 
entrusted to L. B. Kamenev in Paris. 14 In the year before moving 
to Galicia Lenin was contributing fewer articles to the Workers' 
Newspaper and Social-Democrat than to the Russia-based newspaper 
The Star and the new periodical Enlightenment. 15 Nor were he and 
other emigre Bolsheviks alone in re-orientating their literary en-
deavours. The Mensheviks took more drastic action when Fyodor 
Dan risked returning not merely to a cross-border zone like Galicia, 
but to Russia proper. On 31 December 1912 he arrived in St 
Petersburg, amazed that the informal assurances from the author-
ities about his safety had been honoured. 16 Dan assumed the 
editorial direction of Luch. Martov joined him ten months later, 
after a semi-amnesty for political offenders had been announced as 
part of the official celebrations of the Romanov dynasty's tercente-
nary.17 The motivations of the Ministry of Internal Affairs are 
uncertain; but perhaps the fact that no Bolshevik had up to then 
been similarly treated indicates that the Okhrana wanted to boost the 
more moderate forces of Marxism in an attempt to check the growing 
radicalism of the workers' movement. Lenin, astounded that Dan 
had even managed to visit Menshevik deputies in the State Duma, 
confessed his bafflement about the 'game' being played by the 
authorities. 18 
The Zinovievs accompanied Lenin and Krupskaya to Krakow, and 
both couples quickly found apartments in the city. Finance and 
predilection drew them quickly to the countryside. In March 1913, 
 Storms Before the Storm 
37 
Lenin opted for a house near the summer resort village of Zakopane, 
which lay close by the town railway station of Poronin and a hundred 
kilometres from Krakow. 19 To maintain contact with Krakow and 
the outside world, Lenin walked twice daily to the post office in 
nearby Bialy Dunajec.20 In October 1913, after a delightful summer 
which allowed him to travel abroad with Krupskaya as well as to 
enjoy the peace of the Polish countryside, he moved back to 
Krakow.21 
The Bolsheviks were not the only anti-Romanov revolutionaries in 
the area. Polish socialists too appreciated the convenience of the 
Krakow region for the preparation of subversive activities across the 
frontier. Not only the Social-Democracy of the Kingdom of Poland 
and Lithuania but also the Polish Socialist Party had representatives 
there, and they made a lively contribution to open political debates in 
Krakow. The Polish Socialist Party was as internally divided as the 
Social-Democracy of the Kingdom of Poland and Lithuania. Josef 
Pilsudski, the future vanquisher of the Red Army in the Soviet-
Polish war in 1920 and dominant Polish politician in the inter-war 
period, led a faction which controlled the party's Combat Organisa-
tion. He had taken a group of activists into the Russian empire in 
1908 and robbed a train carrying 200,000 roubles. 22 Pilsudski was 
already more nationalist than socialist, and Lenin preferred to talk 
mainly to the left-wing elements who had left the Polish Socialist 
Party to form the PPS-Lewica. Yet the two men knew about each 
other in Galicia: they often drank coffee in the same cafe. 
Nevertheless they scrupulously avoided conversing even when their 
elbows brushed against each other. That their private contacts were 
closer is probable, since Zinoviev subsequently suggested that 
Pilsudski's men helped the Bolsheviks with their security precau-
tions. In addition, Pilsudski had been sentenced to exile in 
connection with the 1886 conspiracy of Lenin's elder brother 
Aleksandr to assassinate the Russian emperor. The past, as well as 
the present, linked them together. 23 
Thus the emigre Bolshevik leadership was not the exclusive source 
of concern for the Romanovs in Galicia. Indeed, it was Pilsudski, not 
Lenin, whose extradition was requested by the St Petersburg 
authorities.Z4 It was Pilsudski's military units which exercised in 
the streets and fields around Zakopane;25 and Lenin, always being 
alert to the practical requirements of armed revolution, cannot have 
failed to have been impressed by Pilsudski's project to twin 
revolutionism with nationalism. It is not too fanciful to suppose 
 38 
Lenin: A Political Life 
that the Galician sojourn greatly reinforced Lenin's feeling that 
Russian social-democrats should take the 'national question' in the 
Romanov empire more seriously. 
Lenin, however, did not confine himself to Galicia. Trips were also 
made to countries to the West. He accepted an invitation to Leipzig 
to give a lecture in April 1913;26 and in June he accompanied 
Krupskaya on a longer trip to Berne in Switzerland in search of 
medical treatment for her worsening thyroid problem. Doctor 
Kocher had been recommended by the Krakow social-democrat 
and physician S. 0. Bagocki.27 Lenin took a dislike to Kocher, 
calling him capricious in his arrangements. 28 After Krupskaya's 
operation, which was only a temporary success, the couple returned 
to Galicia in late July. Life was hectic but pleasurable. The elections 
to the Fourth State Duma had resulted in victory for six Bolsheviks 
and were marred, in Lenin's view, only by the fact that seven 
Mensheviks also were elected. Visits to Galicia by Bolshevik Duma 
deputies occurred sporadically through 1913, and on two occasions 
these coincided with Central Committee meetings in Krakow and 
Poronin. 29 Lenin offered plenty of advice to the deputies. 30 As for the 
Central Committee, meetings took place more often than in the past: 
seven took place between November 1912 and the end of 1913. All 
occurred in Galicia,31 and Lenin, naturally, played a prominent role. 
Letters to and from Galicia rose in number. 32 Pravda and the Duma 
deputies were the addressees most frequently contacted, but commu-
nication was kept up also with many other Bolshevik supporters in 
the Romanov lands. Krupskaya's address-book was being rapidly 
filled and by mid-1914 it contained 271 names of contacts in the 
Russian empire, and included Bolsheviks for nearly every province of 
the Romanov empire. 33 
And yet, for all its advantages over Switzerland, Galicia was not 
wholly favourable for international political organisation. Krups-
kaya soon complained that the postal service to Russia was 
'inconvenient'; and she sometimes resorted to sending bundles of 
mail to Bolsheviks in Berlin for further dispatch. She intimated that 
Vladimir Ilich, who expected to travel to Berlin in January 1914, 
would refund the expenditure. 34 The flow of news, moreover, 
between non-metropolitan towns in Russia and Galicia was inter-
mittent. Lenin railed at those who would not write regularly. 35 
Revolutionaries in the Russian political underground, harassed by 
a life on the run from the Okhrana, responded frostily to his 
imprecations. The Central Committee distributed its members 
 Storms Before the Storm 
39 
between a Russian Bureau and a Foreign Bureau. The Foreign 
Bureau, since only Lenin and Zinoviev were based in the emigra-
tion, sounded grander than it really was; and the joint sessions of the 
emigres and the Russian undergrounders prevented Lenin from 
claiming to speak in the name of all Bolsheviks without consulta-
tion.36 Russia-based correspondents felt that he had a cheek to 
accuse them of failing to write and his own assiduity was called into 
question. 37 He was also deemed to be insufficiently energetic in 
supplying the drafts of official party statements (for example, about 
the trade unions) which were requested from St Petersburg by the 
Duma deputies and others.38 His factitiousness, not surprisingly, still 
irked the undergrounders. With the exception of Malinovski, the 
Bolshevik Duma deputies rejected his calls for a clean split from the 
Menshevik deputies; they were willing to sit in the Duma under the 
chairmanship of Menshevik N. S. Chkheidze39 (and Malinovski 
wanted a split only because the Okhrana wanted it). Most of the 
Bolshevik Duma deputies even wanted a merger of Bolshevik Pravda 
and Menshevik Luch.40 The editors of Pravda too proved capable of 
standing up to Lenin. References to 'Liquidators' were sometimes cut 
from his articles,41 and M.S. Olminski directly reproved him for 
polemical excesses.42 Lenin muttered that Pravda was a 'sleepy old 
spinster'.43 The editors were undeterred; 47 out of 331 submitted 
articles were turned down before the First World War.44 
Without ever becoming dominant, on the other hand, Lenin's 
influence grew stronger. The numbers can be turned upside down: 
Pravda accepted as many as 284 submitted articles out of 331.45 In 
addition, the Pravda-Luch merger did not take place; and, if Pravda's 
editors were irritated when he did not supply them with commis-
sioned articles, he cannot have been entirely a persona non grata in 
the first instance. Even his refusal to follow the precedent of Dan and 
Martov by returning to Russia had its advantages. Central Commit-
tee meetings might be held in his Galician house; and, in his domestic 
surroundings and in face-to-face meetings, he was a match for most 
opponents. As the host, he had a psychological edge. Unsophisti-
cated undergrounders, some of them never having been abroad 
before, were not in the best position to resist being browbeaten. 
And Lenin made the most of his advantages. The Prague 
Conference had empowered the Central Committee to co-opt new 
members; and among those who first gained membership in this way 
was Iosif Stalin, who was regarded by Lenin as 'the marvellous 
Georgian' and who allied himself with Lenin in the debate on the 
 40 
Lenin: A Political Life 
'national question'.46 In autumn 1912, Stalin was chosen by a Central 
Committee meeting to go to St Petersburg and take charge of 
Pravda.47 Pravda's rising readership figures made the Central 
Committee, and especially Lenin, keen to guide its editorial 
policies. Workers' Newspaper, accordingly, was closed down in 
August 1912.48 Yet Stalin declined to be as aggressive towards the 
Mensheviks as Lenin desired. Not for the last time, Lenin acted to 
correct Stalin's line. A Central Committee meeting delivered an 
implicit rebuke to Stalin and sent yet another of its co-opted 
members, Yakov Mikhailovich Sverdlov, to join Stalin as co-editor.49 
Unfortunately for them as well as for Lenin, both Sverdlov and 
Stalin were arrested in February 1913, but their replacement as 
editor, Miron Chernomazov, was greatly to Lenin's liking. Taking 
over in May 1913, Chernomazov took exactly the polemical posture 
traditionally demanded by Lenin; and fifty articles by Lenin 
appeared in the initial two months of his editorship. 5° Chernoma-
zov, however, was a police agent, his instructions being not only to 
stir up inter-factional enmity but also to publish overtly anti-regime 
material which would give a pretext for the authorities to shut down 
the newspaper. Pravda's circulation dropped; the stress on factional-
ism proved to be unpopular among workers who had never accepted 
the need for two separate Marxist parties and who had always 
wanted a less theoretical and more popular style and format for the 
newspaper; 51 and the shut-downs of production were hardly designed 
to retain such readers as the newspaper had already attracted. 
In the Duma fraction, Bolsheviks such as M. K. Muranov and G.l. 
Petrovski held out for months against the demand by Lenin and their 
fellow deputy (and Okhrana agent) Malinovski for a split with the 
Mensheviks. At Poronin in September 1913, ten months after taking 
their seats in the Duma, they finally acceded to his arguments: 52 in 
October, Bolshevik and Menshevik deputies sat apart. Petrovski and 
Muranov possibly looked at the growing turbulence in the form of 
workers' strikes and demonstrations, and judged that the Mensheviks 
were displaying insufficient revolutionary zeal. The Menshevik daily, 
Luch, staffed by Liquidators among others, was Pravda's chief 
Marxist rival newspaper and tended to discourage strikes. 53 The 
police had crushed an attempt to establish a daily which would 
follow a more orthodox Menshevik line. But the persuasiveness of 
Lenin, and indeed of Malinovski who worked alongside them, must 
also have contributed to the Bolshevik deputies' eventual decision to 
break with their Menshevik counterparts. 
 Storms Before the Storm 
41 
The year 1913 had done much to compensate for the difficulties of 
1912. Lenin had exerted considerable authority in Central Commit-
tee, in the Bolshevik Duma fraction and in Pravda. Yet his impact 
was small outside these central party bodies. Strikes increased. The 
Lena shootings had engendered a lasting bitterness. Trade union 
boards lost an ever greater number of Mensheviks;54 and Luch's 
allegations about 'playing at strikes' evoked an effusion of sarcasm 
from Lenin. 55 He boasted in public about the election of Bolsheviks 
to the union boards. But he coupled this with a private acknowledge-
ment that the unions exerted scant influence on the labour move-
ment. 56 No evidence has emerged, to this day, that the strikes were 
mainly union-led; outbreaks of industrial conflict were sporadic and 
localised. Furthermore, the illegal party apparatus was in no better 
shape than before 1912. The Russian Bureau, as chosen after the 
Prague Conference, was in prison or exile except for Malinovski. 57 
Local Bolshevik bodies experienced no general renaissance. Acting as 
Central Committee secretary, Krupskaya received doleful messages 
from the Russian empire. 58 And, even though Pravda's print-run on 
the occasion of its second anniversary momentarily reached 130,000 
copies, the largest-selling popular paper for the working man and 
woman remained the somewhat scurrilous and largely unpolitical 
Gazeta-Kopeika. The working class's antagonism towards the mon-
archy, the police and the employers was intense; but the Okhrana was 
efficient. The Bolsheviks had no answer to the police's interventions. 
THE 'NATIONAL QUESTION' 
Lenin, despite frequent invitations from Pravda, wrote next to 
nothing about the trade unions; there was to be no equivalent of 
What Is To be Done? for the legal labour movement. His energies in 
the realm of theory, between the Prague Conference and mid-1914, 
were spent on the so-called national question. In the first half of 1913 
he drafted 'theses' which were incorporated in a resolution of a 
Central Committee meeting in Poronin in September. His most 
controversial recommendation related to the future of the Russian 
empire. He went further than any Russian Social-Democratic Labour 
Party leader in taking account of the national aspirations of non-
Russians, and demanded that 'the nations oppressed by the tsarist 
 42 
Lenin: A Political Life 
monarchy' should be granted 'the right of self-determination, i.e. of 
secession'. 59 
Socialists in the Romanov lands had typically hoped to maintain a 
multi-national state once the monarchy had been removed. Lenin the 
centralist and internationalist par excellence agreed, but argued that 
tactical subtlety was required. He condemned 'Great Russian' 
chauvinism and castigated Romanov absolutism as 'the most 
reactionary and barbaric state system in Europe and in Asia'. The 
monarchy's overthrow should be followed by a declaration of 
educational and cultural equality for all nationalities; and 'broad 
regional autonomy and completely democratic local self-government' 
should be realised. These concessions, he hoped, would dispel 
distrust of the Russians among the non-Russian nationalities and 
would actually diminish the likelihood of secessionist movements. 
Lenin, moreover, did not want the 'right of secession' to be confused 
with the 'wisdom of secession'. As a socialist internationalist, he 
aimed to keep workers together in mass organisations regardless of 
national origin. He raged against the bourgeoisie for using national-
ism as a means of deflecting the working class from an appreciation 
of its best interests; and he suggested that any particular decision on 
secession should be assessed 'from the viewpoint of the interests of 
societal development as a whole and the interests of the class struggle 
of the proletariat for socialism'.60 He did not promise to grant 
national independence even if a native popular movement called for 
it. The Central Committee resolution, despite broaching the topic of 
secession, was therefore not a little vague and gave few political 
hostages to fortune. 61 
In the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party, it had been the 
Jewish Bund which had most persistently highlighted the national 
question; but, since Jews did not inhabit a territory where they were 
the demographic majority and where they could form a nation state, 
the Bundists did not aspire to secession for Jewish people. Instead 
they called for 'national-cultural autonomy' within a multi-national 
state. The August 1912 gathering of non-Bolshevik factions con-
voked by Trotski had approved this very slogan. 62 
The concept of national-cultural autonomy had been deeply 
influenced by Austrian Marxists, who lived in the other great empire 
on the European continent: Austria-Hungary. The pioneering work, 
The National Question and Social-Democracy, had been written by 
Otto Bauer and published in Vienna in 1907.63 Other Marxists, 
including Lenin, had stated their preferences in policy without much 
 Storms Before the Storm 
43 
theoretical investigation of the definition and conditions of nation-
hood. Bauer filled the lacuna. His book attacked the almost universal 
conventional notion that modern nations had been centuries-old 
phenomena embracing whole peoples. He stressed that a number of 
contingent factors could make and unmake nations: wars and 
conquest; geographical dispersal; alien cultural penetration. He 
argued, too, that until recently it had only been the upper echelons 
of any society which had a sense of their nationality; and that the 
peasantry in particular was characteristically without true national 
feeling. For Bauer (as for some later non-Marxist theorists), it was 
industrialisation and the establishment of a national educational 
system which drew a people into a common basic sense of 
nationhood. As a Marxist, he anticipated a time when national 
differences counted for nothing in human relationships. But his 
contention was that, for years ahead, social-democrats would have 
to take account of nationalism as an important political factor. The 
development of a capitalist economy and culture was bound to 
strengthen national feelings. 64 
Lenin read Bauer's book immediately after its appearance, but 
made no open comment on it for six years.65 He came back to the 
national question in 1912-13, and vehemently attacked the Austrian 
Marxists. This should not be allowed to disguise how much had been 
learned by Lenin from Bauer, especially on the contingent nature of 
nationhood. Lenin also started to emphasise, as he had not done 
before reading the work of Bauer (as well as of Karl Kautsky), that 
nationalism would neither disappear for a lengthy epoch nor rule out 
the possibility of economic and cultural advance for newly-indepen-
dent nations.66 
Yet Lenin, as was his wont, concentrated on the points of 
disagreement between himself and Bauer. The National Question 
and Social-Democracy, while allowing for national independence as a 
goal for several peoples, emphasised the practical impediments in 
areas such as the Habsburg empire where the national groups were 
territorially intermingled in bewildering complexity. No independent 
territory for an individual nation was feasible without including 
unwilling minorities from other nations on the same territory. Bauer 
recommended that the old empire, instead of being broken up into 
separate chunks, should be transformed into a socialist federation; 
and he wanted each national group in the federation to have elective, 
representative institutions to protect its 'extra-territorial national 
autonomy'.67 The Jewish Bund in the Russian Social-Democratic 
 44 
Lenin: A Political Life 
Labour Party had always Ieant in this direction and successfully 
advocated it in Vienna in August 1912.68 The Polish social-democrats 
under Jogiches and Luxemburg added an economic dimension to the 
feeling that multinational states should be maintained. Luxemburg 
asserted that Poland's industrial development was tied into relations 
of production and commerce which would be disrupted without 
access to foreign capital and foreign markets; and that national 
independence would be industrially retrogressive and damage the 
interests of the Polish working class.69 Bauer did not have Jogiches's 
absolute hostility to national independence movements in Europe; 
but that did not stop Lenin from banding them together in his 
polemics against them. 70 
Lenin's main criticism was that the respective proposals of both 
Bauer and the non-Bolshevik factions at Trotski's Vienna gathering 
in August 1912 were inherently bureaucratic, inefficient and anti-
centralist. They would, he argued, increase rather than diminish the 
divisions in the international proletariat. The counter-scheme 
sketched in Lenin's theses of 1913 rejected extra-territorial proposals 
for the national question and insisted that nationally-discrete 
territories at local level were the best assurance that multinational 
states would not break up into fragments. 71 
The replies of Lenin's opponents have fallen into undeserved 
neglect. Nor was it only the Bundists and the Polish social-
democrats who prolonged the dispute. Both the outstanding 
Georgian Menshevik leader and theorist Noi Zhordania and 
Trotski's sympathiser S. Semkovski declared that Lenin had under-
estimated the complexity of the problems highlighted by Bauer. 
Ethnic intermingling was as intense in the Romanov as in the 
Habsburg empire, and Lenin was unjustified in portraying Bauer as 
having been overly influenced by the' peculiar demographic features 
of the Habsburg lands. Zhordania confined his comments mainly to 
the Transcaucasus: Georgians, Azeris and Armenians lived through-
out its regions; and Armenians were supposedly not even a majority 
in historic Armenia. 72 In the Ukraine, as Semkovski added, there 
were Jews, Kalmyks, Tartars, Greeks and Russians as well as 
Ukrainians. 73 The various national groups had their rivalries, even 
hatreds. Lenin had written breezily about protection of the minor-
ities; but, apart from equality of language rights, he had been 
extremely unspecific. Lenin treated Semkovski and Zhordania with 
vituperation concerning their extra-territorial ideas; but he presented 
no defence against their objections to his own theses. His noncha-
 Storms Before the Storm 
45 
lance is all the more remarkable in view of his residence in Galicia, 
where there was a striking demographic mixture of Poles, Jews, 
Ukrainians and Germans. His silence was perhaps a pragmatic 
device; a response to Zhordania and Semkovski would only have 
drawn further attention to his argument's weak spots. But it was 
hardly an adequate intellectual approach. 
Lenin in power was to appreciate the need to go beyond dealing 
with the national question through autonomous nationally-based 
territorial units. For example, Jews in the Ukraine and Armenians in 
Georgia had never lived a life so free from tension as in the 1920s. 
The Soviet central government took steps to ensure that Ukrainian 
and Georgian national dominance in the Ukraine and Georgia did 
not impinge on the cultural freedoms of other nationalities. 
Nevertheless, even when we recognise that Stalin in the 1930s 
exacerbated all the country's problems over the national question, 
the Nagorno-Karabakh dispute which erupted in 1988 indicates that 
failure to protect the interests of minority groups can have explosive 
consequences. 74 
At all events Zhordania, rightly impugned Lenin in 1913 for trying 
to terminate debate before discussions had run their course.75 Lenin 
was, in fact, more forthcoming in the other half of the dispute: in his 
polemic against Luxemburg and Jogiches. Possibly he found these 
Poles hard to dismiss so abruptly because they were not Mensheviks 
or Trotskyists. Moreover, he knew that most leading Bolshevik 
theorists sympathised with Luxemburg's analysis. 76 Some were 
Russian neophytes like Nikolai Bukharin and Georgi Pyatakov; 
others were non-Russians such as the Georgian Filip Makharadze 
and the Jewish Evgeniya Bosh. 77 Lenin could not afford not to 
engage them in an exchange of opinions. He continued to assert that 
there might be occasions when secession would have to be refused on 
the grounds of harming the working class of a given nation. 78 He still 
refused to advocate national independence as a general rule. 79 A 
letter to Kamenev in 1913 included the following sentence: 'It is 
necessary to wage a struggle for truth against the separatists and 
opportunists from the Bund and from the Liquidators.'80 Publicly he 
was less intemperate; but his theses contained the notion that the 
bourgeoisies of Finland and Poland were pro-tsarist and that 
liberation would come to the Finnish and Polish proletariats only 
through alliance with the Russian proletariat.81 He made a similar 
argument about the Ukraine in the November-December 1913 issue 
of Enlightenment. 82 He avoided repeatedly both outright support for 
 46 
Lenin: A Political Life 
and outright opposition to Finnish, Polish and Ukrainian indepen-
dence. A myriad of unpredictable factors, he affirmed, would have to 
be taken into account. 83 
Even so, he never ceased to feel that retention of all the Romanov 
nations within a multinational political unit might be impossible. He 
asserted, against Luxemburg, that Poland and Finland were notably 
suitable cases for independence since they were the 'most cultured 
and most separate' entities in the Russian empire.84 Alone of leading 
Bolshevik theorists, Stalin came to Lenin's assistance before the 
1914-1918 war.85 Indeed, Stalin provided easily the most compre-
hensive Bolshevik analysis of the national question. Lenin supplied 
mainly fragmented materials, whereas Stalin leaned heavily on 
Kautsky and produced definitions, bibliographical surveys and 
arguments aplenty.86 And yet even Stalin, writing in Enlightenment 
from March 1913 onwards, was more eager to excoriate the Bund 
than to argue the positive case for Lenin's policy. The right of 
secession as a right appeared in Stalin's article, but only fitfully. 87 
But it was close enough to Lenin's views for Lenin to be 
enormously grateful. 88 Stalin had given useful theoretical assis-
tance, and his lengthy pieces in Enlightenment relieved Lenin of the 
necessity to work up his own fragments into a sustained piece of 
work. Not that these fragments are without interest. He suggested, 
for example (and here he, too, followed Kautsky), that the nation 
state was the normal vehicle for capitalist economic development. 89 
This was hard to reconcile with the industrial success of the United 
States of America with its multi-ethnic immigrant population. But 
Lenin glossed over the difficulty. 90 Secondly, Lenin firmly rejected 
federalism in all its guises. This should be noted in contrast with his 
later practice, after coming to power, when he felt compelled to 
conclude that the country was ungovernable without federal admin-
istrative arrangements.91 And, thirdly, he proposed that the ultimate 
objective for Marxists was not merely a rapprochement of the 
nationalities, but a 'fusion' which would permanently eradicate 
national differences and consciousness.92 Under Stalin in the 1930s 
this objective became, as Lenin had never intended, a pretext for a 
programme of 'Russification'; nor did the tendency entirely vanish 
after Stalin's death. A fourth point, though, is much more to Lenin's 
credit: after the October Revolution of 1917, Lenin's government 
confirmed the independence of Poland (which was in any case under 
German occupation) but also gave it to Finland (which was not). On 
the other hand, independence was summarily refused to the Ukraine. 
 Storms Before the Storm 
47 
The Red forces sent out from Russia had no orders to conduct a 
Ukrainian plebiscite.93 
SCANDALS 
Lenin none the less continued to exude exceptional self-confidence. 
Nor did he worry at all about his own motives and comportment. He 
acquired his reputation as a polemicist in the 1890s and, upon 
emigrating, became notorious for unfairly bending the party's rules 
in his favour. He always complained when his opponents trespassed 
the slightest regulation of procedure; but this never prevented him 
from believing that his own acts of trespass were necessitated by a 
higher revolutionary duty. 
Outside politics he observed contemporary public propriety; but 
he did not insist on these personal standards among his associates. 
An early example was the so-called Bauman affair. N. E. Bauman 
was a social-democratic activist exiled to Vyatka province in 1899, 
where he had an affair with the wife of a fellow revolutionary. The 
unfortunate woman became pregnant. So far from showing sym-
pathy or even common tactfulness, Bauman openly mocked her; and 
a cartoon ridiculing her plight was circulated among comr;.des. In 
despair she hanged herself. Her suicide note drew attention to the 
need to insist on high standards of behaviour, on a social level, 
among revolutionaries whose party wished to transform the life of 
society. The Bauman affair was adjudicated by the Iskra board at 
the instigation of the cuckolded comrade in early 1903. To his 
colleague's disgust, Lenin refused to countenance the party's right to 
interfere and certainly not to discipline Bauman for bringing 
disfavour upon Russian Marxists.94 He argued that the party's task 
was to make revolution against the Romanov monarchy and to vet 
the morality of comr-ades only when and in so far as their actions 
affected the implementation of the task. He welcomed Bauman 
enthusiastically as a future Bolshevik, using his services as a 
troublemaker from the floor at the Second Party Congress.95 
Bauman's death in 1905 inspired Lenin to write a fulsome obituary 
dedicated to 'the eternal memory of a fighter in the ranks of Russian 
social-democracy'. 96 
The choice of an undesirable personage such as Bauman as not 
only an acceptable but even a respected associate boded ill for the 
 48 
Lenin: A Political Life 
behaviour of Bolsheviks when (as, admittedly, hardly seemed very 
likely before the First World War) they took power in Russia. 
Doubts continued to arise about Lenin's judgement of individuals; 
and his mode of behaviour tacitly encouraged others to act in a 
similar manner. The disputative tricks of Grigori Zinoviev and P. A. 
Krasikov were sharpened, even if not originally learned, at the feet of 
a master polemicist. Stalin, too, elaborated such a skill. 
Lenin did not have our retrospective vantage point and could not 
anticipate the full range of horrors breeding in the mind of Stalin. 
Yet he can surely be faulted for a persistent blindness to the 
unpleasant characteristics of his associates. It was only as he lay 
dying, in 1922-23, that he acquired a recognition of Stalin's 'crudity'. 
For years, Lenin had in any case spoken warmly of the efficiency of 
the guillotine in the French Revolution. 97 He perceived in his 
boisterous comrades the incarnation of the 'proletarian' ruthlessness 
vital to the making of a revolution. This was part and parcel of his 
support for the armed robberies conducted by Bolsheviks in the 
Russian empire in 1906-9 as well as his condoning of the marriage of 
Bolsheviks A.M. Andrikanis and V. K. Taratuta to rich heiresses, in 
quest of their heirlooms. 98 Practical activists and practical results 
were Lenin's objectives: the criteria for assessing the means to these 
ends were prudential, not moral for him. In 1914, furthermore, it 
became abundantly clear that Lenin's prudence could not be taken 
for granted; and it was not Stalin but a more pressing evil, R. V. 
Malinovski, who demonstrated this. Malinovski, Central Committee 
member and Bolshevik spokesman in the State Duma, vanished from 
St Petersburg in mid-May.99 The intensifying rumours that he was an 
Okhrana informer were confirmed for everyone but Lenin. 
Lenin had spurned them as a slur on Malinovski and an attempt 
to sow dissension among Bolsheviks loyal to him. This was 
psychologically easier to do when it was the Mensheviks who cast-
igated the Duma deputy. But in 1912 the young Bolshevik theorist 
Nikolai Bukharin arrived in Krakow. 100 Bukharin plainly meant 
Lenin well, and Lenin was pleased to welcome a comrade who 
regarded himself as a 'pupil'; but Bukharin was convinced that the 
stories about Malinovski and his undercover role for the Okhrana 
were accurate. 
The business of unmasking a police spy was never a matter of 
arithmetical precision. It proceeded by calculations of logarithmic 
probability. Miron Chernomazov was eventually fired from Pravda 
 Storms Before the Storm 
49 
in February 1914 on evidence which was far from being conclu-
sive. 101 He had not been caught talking to police contacts or 
receiving police money or instructions; he was rumbled because his 
outrageous behaviour had repeatedly given the Ministry of Internal 
Affairs an excuse to close down Pravda. The Okhrana, which advised 
him on tactics, had overplayed its hand. Malinovski, however, was 
more cautious and the police were more circumspect in their handling 
of him; he was not asked to fulfil the role of a cantankerous hothead. 
Yet the circumstantial data against him was pretty strong. He was 
better off than his Duma stipend permitted; he enthusiastically 
backed Lenin's schismatic schemes among Bolsheviks even in that 
first year after the Prague Conference when other pro-Lenin 
Bolshevik leaders, such as Stalin, were loathe to endorse them 
without qualification; and arrests of comrades were made which 
were only explicable either by boundless ill-luck or by the existence of 
a highly-placed police agent: nobody seriously suspected Lenin, 
Zinoviev or Kamenev. Malinovski was one of the very few others 
who was in a position to know the secrets of the faction's inner 
sanctum. 102 Bukharin gamely went over the details with Lenin in 
Krakow; and he sent letters corroborating the accusations. But Lenin 
intransigently refused to accept the case. 103 
Even when Malinovski absconded in 1914, Lenin refused to 
acknowledge reality. It would have been an unpleasant undertak-
ing. Lenin, at the Prague Conference, had prided himself on his anti-
police precautions. When two candidates tied for the last place in the 
elections to the Central Committee, he had suggested that the voters 
in the second ballot should whisper their choice in his ear; and he had 
also insisted that the list of the Central Committee's members should 
not be announced at the Conference. 104 All in vain. Malinovski, as a 
Central Committee member, conveyed the list without further ado to 
his secret employers. Again, in 1913, Lenin had written to Kamenev: 
'We have suffered some heavy arrests. Koba [Stalin's other main 
pseudonym] has been taken. I've discussed the measures now 
required with Malinovski.' 105 To have recognised Malinovski for 
what he was would have led to a bout of self-reproach which was not 
congenial to Lenin. Scarcely a major factional decision had been 
taken without the two of them conferring. Malinovski had been the 
Bolshevik chiefs eyes, ears and even mouth in Russia. Lenin was 
reluctant to acknowledge that his surrogate had exerted these same 
organs in the service of the head of the Okhrana. 
 50 
Lenin: A Political Life 
This blunder of Lenin's was not his worst error. His incorrect 
prediction of European socialist revolutions in 1917-18 was a 
misjudgement of epochal significance, compelling him to sign the 
treaty of Brest-Litovsk. By comparison, the Malinovski affair was 
petty and ephemeral. 106 Nevertheless a party boss ought to be 
capable of sounder assessment of character. The problem was not 
that Malinovski had flattered him but that he had fooled him. Such 
was Lenin's naivete that, even after Malinovski had disappeared and 
left political activity (and therefore left the party in the lurch), he 
claimed that Malinovski had been the victim of slander. Lenin 
believed what he wanted to believe. Firing off telegrams to Paris, 
he tried to challenge the emergent consensus that comrade Mal-
inovski was a police agent. Duma deputy G. I. Petrovski had initially 
informed Lenin that the 'Liquidators' were sowing the rumours, 107 
but Lenin sensed that Petrovski would not long stand by Malinovski. 
A telegram was sent from Krakow adjuring the Bolshevik Duma 
fraction not 'to get nervous'; its members were asked to refrain from 
expelling Malinovski from the fraction. Why? Lenin's reasoning was 
strictly pragmatic: 'Everything is over with Malinovski, everything's 
finished. He's finished. Suicide.' 108 By this he meant that Malinovski 
had killed off his own career and that the party's task was to forget 
him and get on with other business at hand. 
Yet Malinovski had retained credence in his ability to delude 
Lenin. He craftily fled directly to Galicia and requested a party trial 
to clear his name. A commission was formed, with Lenin and 
Zinoviev as members and Jan Hanecki as chairman. There was still 
no watertight case against Malinovski, who threatened to commit 
suicide unless acquitted. The commission sat for weeks and had not 
completed its work when the First World War began. Lenin avoided 
stern words of censure; he could not bring himself to disbelieve 
Malinovski even while conceding that, after several exposures of 
police provocateurs, 'everything was possible'. 109 Krupskaya was 
willing, by 4 June, to condemn Malinovski's 'scoundrelish esca-
pade'; 110 but she, too, contended that the Liquidators could 'not 
adduce a single fact or even anything like a fact' against the Duma 
delinquent. 111 Lenin, judging by his dismissive remarks about 
Bukharin's being 'credulous about gossip' in 1916, 112 continued to 
feel that the entire affair was a provocation concocted by as yet 
unidentified enemies of Bolshevism; he even wrote to Malinovski, 
after he fell into German captivity in the war, in pursuit of further 
collaboration. 113 
 Storms Before the Storm 
51 
DEBATES ON WAR AND IMPERIALISM 
If Lenin's choice of associates was widely thought to be faulty, his 
attitude to imperialism and militarism caused small resentment in his 
party. There was debate about both subjects in European social-
democracy in the two decades before the First World War. Lenin 
read the literature, but did not essay a major contribution of his own. 
We can surely sympathise: the demands on his time as leader and 
theorist were already enormous. Yet the abstention is also signif-
icant. Lenin made choices about his priorities in apportioning his 
time; by writing much about the national question in the Russian 
empire and little about the inter-imperial questions of colonies and 
war, he signalled an ordering of importance. 114 
The Bolshevik I. I. Skvortsov-Stepanov produced a lengthy two-
part essay on imperialism for the journal Enlightenment; but he 
elaborated few new ideas and, as with other Russian Marxists, drew 
his inspiration on this issue mostly from theorists elsewhere in 
Europe. 115 Among these the most prominent were Karl Kautsky, 
Eduard Bernstein, Rudolf Hilferding, Rosa Luxemburg and Karl 
Radek. All had been impressed by the scramble for colonies in the 
late nineteenth century. They noted the support for imperialism from 
liberals as well as conservatives. Ideologies of 'racial superiority', 
they observed, were proliferating. They also perceived that the major 
industrial powers of Europe and North America had reduced 
virtually the entire remainder of the world to the condition of 
colonies, or at least semi-colonies, and were locked into rivalries 
about the existing division of 'the spoils'. Armaments industries were 
fostered to enhance the national interests of the imperial powers, and 
militaristic attitudes were widely encouraged. The prospect of war 
between contending coalitions of the world's imperial powers thrust 
itself forward. 
Only Bernstein, of the above-mentioned writers, felt that that 
colonial expansion might have a generally progressive effect. The 
others found his opinion unpalatable. Luxemburg and Radek 
welcomed the fact that the conquests of colonies created larger 
economic units (and they opposed socialists like Lenin who were 
willing to contemplate their break-up in the future under the aegis of 
European socialist governments). Yet both Luxemburg and Radek 
condemned Bernstein's perception of capitalist imperialism as any-
thing other than a brutal and brutalising process. 116 
 52 
Lenin: A Political Life 
The first to undertake a serious analysis of the causes of 
imperialism was Karl Kautsky, who summarised his arguments in 
his book Socialism and C o/onialism, in 1907. Karl Marx and 
Friedrich Engels had described capitalism's propensity to produce 
a greater quantity of industrial goods than the market for such goods 
could sustain, and they identified this as a reason for recurrent 
economic crises. Their contention was that the potential for 
'consumption' was likely to be insufficient in each capitalist 
society. Marxologists continue to debate whether Marx and Engels 
believed that such underconsumptionist factors would be the crucial 
cause of capitalism's ultimate demise. A neat summary of their 
thought is impossible since, as on other questions, they appear not to 
have attempted a definitive answer for themselves. Be that as it may, 
Kautsky took up the theme of underconsumption with alacrity. 
Already in 1884, he was writing that contemporary large-scale 
capitalists experienced a need to find overseas markets for their 
surplus goods. According to Kautsky, the acquisition of colonies 
provided a nation's industry and finance with a secure base for such 
trade, and the underlying cause of modern imperialism and modern 
militarism was capitalism itself. 117 Thus he attacked the gentler 
interpretation of the overt 'revisionists' such as Bernstein and the 
various German right-wing social-democrats who found talk of 
revolution disturbing. 
Kautsky wrote in a period of growing nationalism at home. After 
the Franco-Prussian war of 1870, there had been no major 
continental military conflict involving Germany; and Chancellor 
Bismarck had usually contented himself with diplomatic pressure 
to achieve his international ends. German political influence in 
central Europe increased as the position of the Habsburg monarchy 
in Austria-Hungary became unstable, and the industrial might of 
Germany grew. There were also moves towards the establishment of 
a German empire in Africa. Togoland and parts of south-west Africa 
were conquered in 1884-85. Germany's lateness in becoming an 
imperial power meant that few countries remained for easy annexa-
tion, and Britain's imperial ambition had not faded, as wars against 
the Boers showed. This stimulated the Prussian-staffed high com-
mand and the Rhenish 'iron barons' to build up a navy capable of 
taking on the British; and Kautsky denounced the encouragement 
given to militarist values in Germany. 118 
Lenin read Kautsky's articles in Die Neue Zeit, but barely added to 
the literature. A few desultory remarks appeared in the 1890s. 119 The 
 Storms Before the Storm 
53 
notable exception was his statement in The Development of 
Capitalism that the absence of an overseas empire would not prevent 
capitalist economic development. Russian capitalists, he suggested, 
could continue in business even without colonies across the oceans 
because they already possessed conquests which offered a ready-
made market for their industrial products. 120 But in Iskra, in 1900, he 
added that domestic industrial expansion could be enhanced by 
guaranteed access to trade with China; and that this was the reason 
for the imperial government's entanglement in the Russo-Chinese 
crisis in 1900. Lenin was equally in line with Kautsky's argument 
when he added that Russian armaments manufacturers had an 
interest in promoting an expansionist foreign policy. 121 A few 
similar statements came from Lenin before 1904,122 when Russia 
went to war against Japan. He attributed the Russian military 
adventure especially to pressures from industrialists and merchants 
who, knowing that the Russian working class and peasantry had 
been impoverished under the impact of industrial growth, needed to 
seek other outlets for their goods. 123 It was, to that date, his least 
qualified promotion of underconsumptionist economic theory. 
Evidently Lenin was no less ambiguous about it than was Marx. 
About one thing, he was distinct: victory for Japan was desirable; 
and a large number of Russian socialists held the same opinion. In 
Lenin's view, the Russo-Japanese war was a struggle 'between a 
despotic and backward government and politically free and culturally 
fast progressing people'. 124 Lenin's judgement on the extent of 
freedom in Japan may be challenged; but, in the tradition of Marx 
and Engels, he took sides in a given war by the criterion of the 
respective political and economic 'progressiveness' of the two 
belligerent states. 125 Yet he largely overlooked such subjects, until 
in 1907 he attended the Stuttgart Congress of the Second Socialist 
International. Kautsky, for the German Social-Democratic Party, 
wrote passionately about the rise of militarism in Europe; and Lenin, 
Martov and Rosa Luxemburg wanted to shape a framework for 
action in the event of a general European \\ar. 126 
Luxemburg, with Lenin's consent, took on the main task of 
sharpening the draft resolution of August Bebel, the German 
social-democratic leader. 127 Bebel's formulations were airily va-
gue.128 Luxemburg's successful amendments described militarism as 
the chief instrument of 'class oppression' in Europe and demanded 
that, if war were to break out, the crisis should be used 'to accelerate 
the fall of the bourgeoisie' .129 Lenin was content. Both he and 
 54 
Lenin: A Political Life 
Luxemburg would have preferred an even firmer resolution; but he, 
unlike Luxemburg, accepted that a more strongly-worded formula-
tion would gravely damage Europe's greatest mass socialist party, the 
German Social-Democratic Party, in its dealings with the German 
government. 130 He still took Kautsky's professions of revolutionary 
commitment at their face value, and ignored the warnings of Rosa 
Luxemburg, Karl Liebknecht and other far-left commentators on 
German socialism. In any case, neither Luxemburg nor Lenin was the 
fieriest participant at Stuttgart. Gustave Herve, a French leftist, had 
demanded that the outbreak of a European war should be met with a 
'military strike' and a 'popular insurrection'. Lenin argued that 
Herve's proposal would bind the Second International to an 
inflexible policy and would in any case disclose tactics to the forces 
of capitalism. Herve also seemed to adhere to pacifist ideas. Lenin 
(and here he left Luxemburg behind) emphasised that 'revolutionary 
wars' might be necessary. 131 
After Stuttgart, Lenin returned to questions on imperialism only 
fitfully. The emergence of nationalist movements in Persia, Turkey, 
India and China attracted his attention, and in 1908 he asserted that 
European socialism was obtaining 'an international ally' in Asia. 132 
In addition, he affirmed that wars could arise from economic 
competition and that militarism was the child of capitalism. 133 
Occasional remarks on international crises were forthcoming; like 
all political commentators, he wrote about the Balkans. In 1908 he 
still thought that the crowned heads of the houses of Habsburg, 
Hohenzollern and Romanov would effect a peaceful, anti-democratic 
settlement. 134 In 1912, when war broke out between Bulgaria and the 
Ottoman empire, he mentioned the dangers of a geographical 
extension of the conflict. A Congress of the Second International 
was held in Basle while the war raged; but he did not attend, 
preferring to dispatch Kamenev to represent the Bolshevik stand-
point. In general, Lenin welcomed the Basle Congress's adherence to 
the Stuttgart Congress's anti-war policies, and left the matter at 
that. 135 
On imperialism, it was the Austrian social-democrat Rudolf 
Hilferding who broke fresh ground. His Finance Capital, published 
in 1910, 136 focussed on the growth of industrial cartels and 
monopolies in each national economy and the increasing depen-
dence of industrialists on the financial support of the banks as the 
need to expand fixed-capital investment grew. Increasingly, accord-
ing to Hilferding, the nation's industrial sectors jointly pursued their 
 Storms Before the Storm 
55 
respective interests since a small number of banks controlled the 
whole process. Moreover, the difficulties of maintaining profits on 
the domestic market stimulated a quest for foreign outlets and for 
foreign sites for factories where both labour and land were cheap. 
The most dependable receptacle for such 'capital exports' was the 
colony. Thus contemporary capitalism was linked to the rise of the 
power of the banks and in turn to imperialism, racialism and anti-
democratism.137 Hilferding's book was recognised to be not only a 
massive contribution to Marxist theory but also a contemporary 
economic classic.138 It is not known when Lenin read it; but he 
probably knew its contents soon after publication. He had always 
kept abreast of continental socialist debates, and was in any case a 
voracious reader. And yet, even if he had read the book, he refrained 
from comment. 
This contrasted with two other 'East Europeans', Karl Radek and 
Rosa Luxemburg. Hilferding had suggested that each imperialist 
nation's economy would undergo periodic crises and that the only 
practical alternative was socialism; and he maintained that this 
would be not an unduly difficult transition since, with the concentra-
tion of banking capital, a socialist government would merely need to 
nationalise the handful of central banks in order to inaugurate 
socialism. 139 This emphasis on economic measures with little 
reference to politics was to call forth criticism from Lenin in the 
First World War. 140 But it was left to Radek and Luxemburg to 
tackle Hilferding at the time. 
In 1911, Radek published a lengthy pamphlet, German Imperialism 
and the Working Class, in Bremen. He described imperialism as 
'capitalism in its latest stage of development' - a phrase picked up by 
Lenin after 1914.141 His pamphlet was a call to revolution and was 
less scholarly in tone than Hilferding's book. It also discussed 
German imperialism in darker terms. Radek noted that German 
workers were gaining material benefit from German colonial 
exploitation, 142 and was not complacent about the working class as 
the unchallengeable constituency of socialists. He also emphasised 
the massive investment in the development and production of 
armaments in Germany in recent years; his prognosis of the 
prospects of peace were pessimistic. 143 Radek stressed the increasing 
inadequacies of parliaments in restraining governments. Lenin read 
Radek's pamphlet and took notes, but again he did not reveal his 
opinion;144 nor did he comment on the possibility, mooted by 
Kautsky from 1911, that the imperial nations might mitigate their 
 56 
Lenin: A Political Life 
rivalry and avoid war by reaching a concordat for the peaceful 
collective exploitation of all colonial peoples. 145 This idea, which 
became known as the theory of 'ultra-imperialism', caused Lenin to 
put pen to paper only after 1914. Luxemburg was quicker to react. 
Her Accumulation of Capital, which appeared in 1913, surveyed the 
evolution of capitalism and examined Hilferding's arguments. She 
had also noted the shifts in Kautsky's thinking, which indeed led him 
by 1914 to deny that capitalism was inherently militarist. 146 
Luxemburg denounced such views. She also felt that Marx's 
Capital, with its claim that capitalism in any given country brought 
poverty to the mass of its population, had never explained 
capitalism's longevity and continued growth. 147 How, in fact, did 
capitalism reproduce itself? Luxemburg's answer, supported by 
reproduction-cycle diagrams, was that industrial capitalism must 
discover and hold on to foreign agrarian societies as its major 
market and as a location for cheap production. Lenin, having failed 
to be disconcerted by Hilferding and Radek, was annoyed with 
Luxemburg. Firstly, he objected to her temerity (as he saw it) in 
correcting Marx. This, as a true believer, he could forgive in nobody; 
and he jotted down diagrams which, he thought, were more closely in 
line with Marx's. 148 The second irritation for him was that 
Luxemburg referred to the Russian socialist debates of the 1890s, 
contending that 'V. Ilin' (which was Lenin's main legal pseudonym) 
had been wrong to criticise populists such as V. P. Vorontsov and 
N. F. Danielson who maintained that the absence of foreign markets 
hobbles the growth of a nation's capitalism. She also asserted that 
the populist emphasis on the importance of the growth of industrial 
consumer goods in the initial phase of capitalist development was 
wholly justified. 149 
Lenin was enraged, standing by his old positions and taking 
offence at her few complimentary remarks about his Development 
of Capitalism. These were, he opined, 'oracle-like' condescension. 150 
Luxemburg's book would probably have pulled him at last into the 
theoretical battle over imperialism, albeit within the narrow field of 
capital-reproduction cycles. He drafted a plan for an article in March 
1913. 151 He congratulated Anton Pannekoek and Otto Bauer (whom, 
on the national question, he so despised) for attacking Luxemburg in 
their reviews. 152 But his campaign against Luxemburg was limited to 
brief sallies as other worries intervened. He pointed out that even 
large imperial states such as Russia could be net importers of finance 
capital. This was in order to prove that Luxemburg's neat contrast 
 Storms Before the Storm 
57 
between the industrial imperial powers and the rest of the world did 
not entirely fit reality. 153 He also continued to write pieces 
intermittently on international developments in 1913-14; and his 
journalism included remarks on militarism, on banking capital, 
immigration to Europe, and on the corrupting effects of national-
ism.154 But his thinking required the jolt of the First World War to 
shake him into a full-blooded consideration of the issues. And, while 
deploring nationalism, he continued to believe that the European 
working class would respond positively to the revolutionary move-
ment; and that even the 'English proletariat' was awakening from its 
alleged political quiescence. Radek's stress on the spread of 
imperialist ideas among workers was ignored. 155 
THE INTERNATIONAL SOCIALIST BUREAU 
Europe's leading Marxist writers were familiar with the theories of 
Lenin. But the level of acquaintance was low outside that group; only 
a few eccentrics with a highly-developed interest in Marxian theory 
or with an idiosyncrasy for staying in touch with the Russian Social-
Democratic Labour Party's affairs could have filled an area bigger 
than a postage stamp with their knowledge about Bolshevism. Lenin 
and Krupskaya rented a succession of apartments in central and 
eastern Europe in streets where the neighbours had no idea of 
Bolshevik politics and, as likely as not, would not have cared to 
acquire one either. 
Nonetheless there was one political forum on the Continent where 
Lenin was not only famous but also a major and obtrusive figure: the 
International Socialist Bureau. He became the bane of the Bureau's 
deliberations, and he reciprocated in his thoughts about the Bureau. 
The International Socialist Bureau was drawn from the various 
national parties belonging to the Socialist International. This was 
not the First Socialist International of Karl Marx and Mikhail 
Bakunin, but the Second, which had existed since 1889. Lenin had 
briefly been one of the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party's 
representatives on the International Socialist Bureau (ISB) in 
October 1905; but his departure for Russia forced him to resign 
the post. 156 The Central Committee elected him again as an ISB 
representative in June 1907;157 and he held this office after the 
Socialist International Congress in Stuttgart in August. His work was 
mostly confined to correspondence, since the ISB's members did not 
 58 
Lenin: A Political Life 
have to reside in Brussels, its base. Lenin attended Bureau sessions in 
the autumns of 1908 and 1909. 158 Up to that time, despite annoying 
its members on account of his schismatic antics inside Russian 
socialism, he had not disturbed the Second Socialist International 
as a whole. This tranquillity started to come to an end with the 
January 1910 Central Committee plenum, which reunited the 
factional leaderships of Russian social-democracy and turned over 
the disputed funds from the legacy of N. P. Shmidt to an arbitra-
tional 'court' of Karl Kautsky, Franz Mehring and Clara Zetkin. All 
three were prominent figures in the Socialist International, and their 
deliberations about Russian social-democratic finances dragged the 
ISB into the morass of Bolshevik-Menshevik disputes. 159 
Not approving of the outbreak of peace with the Mensheviks at the 
January 1910 plenum, Lenin felt uneasy about what the arbitrators 
might do with the money. By November 1910 he was claiming that it 
rightfully belonged only to the Bolsheviks. 160 He journeyed to Berlin 
to lobby Kautsky in person, 161 and he called for a Central 
Committee plenum to discuss the delay in the arbitrators' decision, 
but he could not yet get a sufficient number of Central Committee 
members to back him. 162 
Lenin refused to relent, visiting Berlin in March 1911 with N. G. 
Poletaev, the Bolshevik editor of The Star, to negotiate with Kautsky 
and his two colleagues. 163 He badgered Kautsky by letter in May and 
met Zetkin in Stuttgart in June. 164 In fact, it was only in July 1911 
that, finally, he transferred the money into Zetkin's keeping. Neither 
Zetkin nor the other two arbitrators could forget that Lenin wished 
to split the Bolsheviks from the Mensheviks, and that a definitive 
release of the money to two separate factions would hasten such a 
division. Abstention from a definitive ruling, coupled with piecemeal 
grants in response to requests from each faction, was considered 
preferable; but it was a thankless task nevertheless, especially with a 
Lenin who had a record of nagging away interminably and had a 
lawyer's training into the bargain. The arbitrators had to tread 
circumspectly, and they knew it. Lenin looked into the German laws 
on private financial arbitration and planned to hire professional 
lawyers. 165 Arbitrators Kautsky and Franz Mehring had already had 
enough of the entanglement in Russian socialism. By October 1911, 
both had pleaded ill-health and resigned their position. 166 Lenin 
wrote officially to Clara Zetkin that the original arbitrational 
agreement had therefore lapsed and that, unless she immediately 
returned the money to him, legal proceedings would be initiated. He 
 Storms Before the Storm 
59 
appended a more informal letter, excusing the formal tone of his 
request but asking her what else he could do in the given situation. 167 
Zetkin tried to temporise. She was unwilling to act unaccompanied 
as an arbitrator and, as Lenin could see, was not averse to supposing 
that the Bolsheviks had better legal title to the money than the 
Mensheviks; 168 but still she declined to take a decision. In 
annoyance, Lenin carried out his threat to turn to the lawyers. He 
took advice from the Swiss socialist and advocate Karl Zraggen; 169 
and in May 1912 he resorted to Georges Ducos de la Haille, a French 
socialist as well as a barrister, offering him payment of 5000 francs 
on condition that the case against Zetkin was successfully completed 
by August 1912. 170 
His insistence on haste was caused not only by the perennial 
shortage of cash suffered by all Russian revolutionary groups, but 
also by his dread that further delay would increase the possibility of 
the ISB's becoming involved. 171 Bolsheviks G. L. Shklovski and L. B. 
Kamenev ran errands in the judicial business over following months 
since Lenin had meanwhile decamped to Galicia; but the telegrams, 
letters and official statements by Lenin on the Shmidt money did not 
abate. The bemused Ducos de la Haille predictably got nowhere in 
the time appointed - not that this was condoned by Lenin, who wrote 
to complain in September 1912. 172 Lenin sought another lawyer. The 
snag was that Lenin had entrusted all the original documents to 
Ducos's safekeeping, and he perceived that Ducos might refuse to 
give them up without receiving some compensation for his work. In 
March 1913, admitting to his own 'hyper-suspiciousness', Lenin 
requested Kamenev not to pay out any cheque until he had received 
the necessary documents. 173 Then the Stuttgart advocate A. Kahn 
was drawn into the case, and Ducos de la Haille was informed that he 
would have to share his fees with him; Zraggen, too, was pulled back 
in for assistance. 174 In December 1913, Lenin's trepidations were 
realised: the Socialist International started to take an interest in the 
Bolshevik-Menshevik dispute. Karl Kautsky, the ex-arbitrator and 
long-time commentator on Russian socialist affairs, spoke at an ISB 
session in London. Declaring that the Russian Social-Democratic 
Labour Party had ceased to exist, he felt justified in calling for a 
meeting of 'all factions of the Russian labour movement' in the 
Romanov empire which accepted the social-democratic party pro-
gramme. 
The ISB accordingly urged the calling of a gathering which might 
effect 'a mutual exchange of opinions' .175 Lenin foresaw that this 
 60 
Lenin: A Political Life 
could lead not only to a financial settlement quite unsatisfactory to 
him but also to moves towards the party's organisational reunifica-
tion. He was alarmed by the noises made recently by Rosa 
Luxemburg in this direction in Vorwiirts. Luxemburg's attitude had 
always been the same as Zetkin's. 176 Now it was Lenin's turn to 
temporise. The ISB's invitation to Bolsheviks and Mensheviks to 
exchange opinions could not be resisted unless he was willing to 
appear to be the party splitter he really was; and, in any case, 
socialist lawyers such as Zraggen (who was now regarded as 'very 
weak and cowardly' by Lenin) 177 did not wish to obstruct the ISB's 
plan. 
Lenin's ploy was to accept the invitation to 'a mutual exchange of 
opinions' of the Russian factions while expressing objection to 
Kautsky's characterisation of the Russian Social-Democratic La-
bour Party. 178 Meanwhile 'all kinds of reconnaissance' should be 
undertaken to find out the political line-up and agenda. 179 What 
about the Shmidt money? Lenin's room for manoeuvre had shrunk, 
and he strove for general recognition that the financial question and 
the question of party reunification should be kept separate; he 
remarked that Kautsky, too, had once conceded that directly 
'political' considerations were not at stake in the controversy over 
Shmidt's legacy. 180 He also repudiated any offer from the German 
Social-Democratic Party to mediate further in the matter. 181 
Simultaneously, he endeavoured to seem as well-intentioned as 
possible. He beavered away at the statistics of the votes for 
Bolsheviks and Mensheviks at the 1912 State Duma elections and 
at the respective print-run of Bolshevik and Menshevik newspapers. 
His motivations were only barely disguised: Lenin wanted to seize 
and retain the mantle of legitimacy for the Bolshevik-controlled 
'party' he had inaugurated at the Party Conference in Prague in 1912; 
and he had no intention of going to the ISB's proposed 'exchange of 
opinions' meeting in order to give up his grasp on a Bolshevik-
dominated Central Committee. But this would require a barrage of 
preparatory propaganda to convince the ISB that the Bolsheviks 
were indeed the sole representatives of organised Marxism in the 
Russian empire and that the Mensheviks comprised only a gaggle of 
unattached emigres and anti-party, Russia-based 'Liquidators'. 182 
He discerned that the wrangling had dragged the party's name in 
the mud across Europe; and he frequently emphasised that he had no 
personal financial interest in the judicial to-and-fro. But the patience 
of the ISB was wearing thin. With so many issues to be resolved in 
 Storms Before the Storm 
61 
the Socialist International, it was irritating for so much time and 
effort to be put into Russian affairs. But no concession was 
forthcoming from him. To have yielded over the money would have 
increased the hated possibility of party reunification. Lenin had not 
attended the ISB meeting in December 1913, and he made clear that 
he would absent himself from international gatherings in the months 
to come. 183 
RUSSIA IN 1914 
And so, in the first half of 1914, Lenin faced organisational problems 
both international and Russian. One complicating factor was of his 
own making. Since July 1913 he and the Central Committee had been 
talking about holding a Party Congress. 184 This was another device 
to arrogate legitimacy for the Bolsheviks as the principal constituent 
members of the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party. Although 
Conferences could and did take major decisions on behalf of the 
party, Congresses were considered more authoritative. Lenin wanted 
to follow up the Prague Conference with a Krakow Congress. 185 His 
calculations were not publicly revealed, but can easily be guessed: he 
was 'going for broke'. In order to win his forthcoming struggles in 
the Socialist International, he had to call a Congress which would 
'demonstrate' that the Mensheviks had no significant following in 
Russia; and he had the confidence, or rather the gall, to plan to 
manipulate the Congress rules to produce the desired political 
composition of delegates. The ISB had to be presented with a 
plausible performance if he was to get away with his scheme. The 
Central Committee reconvened in Krakow from 2 April 1914 and 
approved a proposal to convoke the Sixth Party Congress in Krakow 
in August, just before the time when the Socialist International was 
scheduled to hold a Congress in Vienna. The Krakow delegates 
would be able to travel on to Vienna to lobby for the Bolshevik 
cause. 186 
This was characteristic bluff and skulduggery from Lenin. As with 
the Prague Conference arrangements, various commissions were 
appointed to ensure that Bolsheviks commanded the selection and 
vetting of delegates. 187 Lenin had either learned from Prague or 
bowed to advice from colleagues: a genuine invitation would be 
issued in a timely fashion to the Poles, Latvians and Lithuanians so 
as to avoid the criticisms of his neglect of the non-Russian segments 
 62 
Lenin: A Political Life 
of the party in 1912. But they still would not receive a fair proportion 
of available seats at the Congress. There would be between sixty and 
ninety seats. The Poles would receive only five, the Latvians two or 
even one, and the Lithuanians one. The Jewish Bund would be 
invited, but the letter would deliberately be dispatched so as to arrive 
too late. It was not even clear that the 'national' parties would be 
allowed to vote at this Sixth Congress in Galicia. 188 
Lenin knew full well that his Congress's self-proclamation as the 
party's supreme assembly would be challenged by all non-Bolsheviks. 
Among his tasks in 1914 was the continued gathering of quantitative 
data on the support for Bolshevism in Russia. As regards news-
papers, he noted that Pravda's print-run had ascended to a fairly 
regular 40,000 whereas the Menshevik-edited Luch had attained less 
than half of this figure. 189 He highlighted the activity of the 
Bolshevik deputies to the Fourth State Duma, and emphasised that 
the Bolsheviks had swept the board in the workers' constituencies in 
St Petersburg and Moscow, whereas the Mensheviks had scored 
victories in more peripheral areas and often through electoral pacts 
with liberals. Much was also made about the election of Bolshevik 
activists to trade union boards. His claim, which may have been 
somewhat exaggerated, was that at least sixteen out of the capital's 
twenty boards had moved towards the Bolsheviks.190 In the absence 
of a freely-conducted survey of popular opinion, Lenin fell back on 
arithmetical extrapolations. He asserted that four-fifths of the 
Russian imperial urban working class were consciously pro-Bol-
shevik.191 This was trumpery even by Lenin's standards. The 
extrapolations came from the limited sample of Pravda's circulation 
alongside the elections to the capital's trade unions. The data, in 
other words, were in effect confined largely to St Petersburg's skilled 
workers, which was far from being typical of the Russian empire's 
urban society and economy. Someone who had been born in the 
Volga town of Simbirsk and had, in his Development of Capitalism in 
Russia, castigated others for their sloppy statistics must have been 
aware of the mathematical sleight of hand here. 
Working-class unrest, however, certainly increased in 1914. Strikes 
in enterprises surveyed by the official factory inspectorate rose to 
3534 from 2404 in the previous year (and the number of strikers to 
985,655 from 502,442). 192 The Ministry of Internal Affairs was 
seriously concerned. Workers were enraged with both employers 
and government, and anti-Romanov street demonstrations were 
organised in St Petersburg. It was claimed that the slogans carried 
 Storms Before the Storm 
63 
on several banners mentioned demands for a democratic republic, 
confiscation of gentry-owned land and an eight-hour day. These were 
Bolshevik slogans, 193 but it is a moot point whether acquaintance 
with Bolshevism went beyond this or indeed whether most workers 
on demonstrations acquired their ideas directly from Bolsheviks. 
Pravda editorials; speeches by the Bolshevik Duma deputies; public 
statements of Bolshevik trade unionists: all these had to be cautiously 
formulated so as not to attract punitive actions by police and censor. 
Unconstrained discussion of Bolshevik ideas occurred only in the 
Russian political underground, in Siberian exile and in the emigra-
tion. Lenin and Krupskaya had no illusions about the weakness and 
low morale in the illegal party apparatus. In February 1914, 
Krupskaya wrote bluntly: 'The illegal organisation is pulverised.' 194 
Regional centres had vanished; local urban organisations were cut 
off from each other. Almost all experienced activists had been 'taken 
out of circulation'. 195 Reports from Russia, such as we know them 
from published documents, confirm her judgement. The Moscow 
comrades talked of 'a complete break-up' of party groups. 196 Lenin 
put the problem in a nutshell (but did so in a private letter, 
presumably to avoid further demoralisation among his followers in 
Russia): 'The revolutionary mood arising in recent times in Russia 
has the tendency to keep growing but, being insufficiently guided in 
the absence of well-established underground organisations, can 
become powerless and aimless.' 197 The Bolshevik leader was not 
the only politician to wring his hands. Mensheviks and Socialist 
Revolutionaries had still less to cheer about; and the Kadets, while 
suffering less from the Okhrana's attentions, had little serious hope 
of attracting workers to their cause. The trade unions seem to have 
had as many difficulties as before. The labour movement, illegal and 
legal, was severely harassed. 198 
And yet this did not expunge working-class discontent. The 
ruthless suppression of strikes, sometimes with Cossack cavalrymen 
riding into pickets, caused lasting embitterment; and conditions in 
the factories worsened for the labour force as employers in St 
Petersburg and elsewhere imposed new working practices to raise 
productivity. 199 The industrial scene was a tinder-box awaiting 
ignition. The authorities persisted with their policy of restricting 
the freedom of trade unions. As always, the huge size of many 
factories and accompanying feelings of 'alienation' among workers 
created difficulties; and the appalling environment, with its under-
provision of housing and poor sewage and recreational facilities, 
 64 
Lenin: A Political Life 
increased the probability of political crisis. Workers, denied easy 
opportunities to join trade unions or political parties, found other 
places to discuss their grievances: groups of men gathering in taverns, 
many of them coming from the same towns or villages and feeling 
able to trust each other, talked about their misfortunes. There were 
also heated debates between shifts at the factories. 200 
Such circumstances made it likely that strikes would erupt without 
warning and take both revolutionaries and government by surprise. 
Lenin recognised this; and, when he was not busy explaining to the 
International Socialist Bureau that the Bolsheviks were in better 
shape and had greater support than the Mensheviks, urged his 
comrades to do their utmost to re-establish the illegal party 
apparatus. Krupskaya's notebook continued to acquire names/01 
but it was of limited practical use since the police were so skilful in 
capturing revolutionaries. Signs of vigorous communication between 
the Central Committee and the Russian political underground are 
few. In three out of the first six months of 1914, apparently, Lenin 
did not even write to the Bolshevik Duma deputies; and these 
deputies, overburdened with Duma activities and other speaking 
and writing engagements, seldom visited him. Petrovski seems to 
have done so twice. 202 There was also the usual pressure on Lenin to 
cool his polemical ardour. At the turn of the year a Central 
Committee session in Galicia had passed a resolution that Pravda 
should avoid abusing so-called Liquidators: a veiled censure of Lenin 
and his friends. 203 Dissatisfaction with Lenin was also expressed in 
his discharge of technical duties. Despite the stress laid by the Prague 
Conference upon the legal labour movement, Lenin failed, as before, 
to supply the requested articles and advice on the subject.204 Even the 
second anniversary of the Lena goldfields massacre did not inspire 
him to compose a suitable piece. E. F. Rozmirovich wrote from St 
Petersburg, by then more in sorrow than in anger: 'My closest friends 
are grumbling that you're doing nothing for them. They're upset.'205 
By 1914 Lenin, too, had come to see that his protege Chernoma-
zov's zest for polemics was causing more harm than good; and that 
the Ministry of Internal Affairs was being provided with regular 
excuses to shut down Pravda. Lenin acceded to Chernomazov's 
removal and was able, because of the shortage of competent 
journalistic talent in the capital, to secure agreement for his 
associate Kamenev (who no longer had Workers' Newspaper to edit 
in Paris) to take over Pravda's direction in February 1914. Kamenev 
was also expected to liaise with the Bolshevik Duma deputies as 
 Storms Before the Storm 
65 
Fyodor Dan did for the Menshevik deputies. 206 Kamenev's appoint-
ment soothed Lenin; and, for the first time since its foundation, 
Pravda ceased to give him worry. 207 
Nor was the Central Committee as troublesome to Lenin as it once 
had been. The Bolshevik underground members who had been 
elected at Prague and had objected to his methods - Ordzhoni-
kidze, Goloshchekin, Spandaryan - had been arrested; and the sole 
Central Committee member from the Party Mensheviks, D. M. 
Shvartsman, dropped out entirely from Central Committee work: 
and he too was put in prison in 1914.208 Meanwhile Zinoviev and, 
until his abscondment, Malinovski supported Lenin on most 
questions. Several activists were co-opted to fill the gaps: I. V. 
Stalin, I. S. Belostotski, Y. M. Sverdlov, G.l. Petrovski, A. E. 
Badaev and A. S. Kiselev. None of them, with the exception of 
Stalin, 209 stood up to Lenin as Ordzhonikidze and his friends had 
done. At any rate Lenin was accorded much scope for initiative, at 
least in regard to the politics of the emigration. The International 
Socialist Bureau's December 1913 decision to invite all factions of the 
Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party to an 'exchange of views' 
meeting in Brussels lay on the table.210 For some months, Lenin was 
unruffled. His constantly-updated collection of data purporting to 
demonstrate the conscious support of most workers in Russia for 
Bolshevism was periodically issued;211 and, since the International 
Socialist Bureau had called for the meeting, he left it to the Bureau to 
convoke it. The delay seemed to guarantee that his own 'Sixth 
Congress' would occur in advance of the Brussels meeting and that a 
new Central Committee, formed under Lenin's guidance, would be 
created. 
But this fait accompli was pre-empted by the Bureau's sudden 
scheduling of the inter-factional 'exchange of views' meeting for 
July.212 Things became stickier for Lenin when the Malinovski 
scandal erupted and, as might easily have been predicted, non-
Leninists in the party were raising a hue and cry about Lenin's 
convoking his own Party Congress.213 The --.ongress plan was 
shunted quietly to the side; all efforts were ce..tred on the ISB's 
Brussels gathering. Lenin felt he was not the faction's ideal spokes-
man: he would lose his temper and his opponents would have a 
chance to interrogate him. He implored Inessa Armand to fulfil the 
role,214 offering to supply a report and a speech if she would deliver 
them.215 He had been outmanoeuvred. The Brussels meeting opted to 
hold a Party Congress to reunify the party; and the Executive 
 66 
Lenin: A Political Life 
Committee of the International Socialist Bureau, whose representa-
tives attended, concluded that no irreconcilable basic disagreements 
divided the various Russian factions. 216 Armand, having been told by 
Lenin that 'the essential thing is to prove that only we are the party', 
abstained in the vote on a unifying Congress.217 
Lenin worked to extricate himself from the mess. He went on 
collating information on the respective strengths of the Bolsheviks 
and Mensheviks in the legal labour movement in Russia. 218 From 29 
June to 6 July he held a meeting in Poronin of his closest supporters. 
Zinoviev, Petrovski and Kiselev attended as Central Committee 
members, and N. P. Glebov-Avilov and A. N. Nikiforova took part 
as leading Bolshevik activists in Russia.219 Kiselev later wrote that 
the talk was mainly about the Brussels meeting, the forthcoming 
Congress of the Second International in Vienna and the Russian 
State Duma.220 Lenin's subsequent letter to Bolshevik Duma deputy, 
F. N. Samoilov, who was convalescing in Switzerland, referred only 
to the trouble engendered by the decisions of the International 
Socialist Bureau. He predicted that the 'workers of Russia' would 
take no notice of the Brussels meeting.221 
The absorption in intra-party concerns was extreme. Summer 1914 
witnessed renewed labour unrest in the Romanov empire: a general 
strike was organised by workers in Baku in June; and, from 4 July, 
strikes and demonstrations began in St Petersburg. Barricades went 
up in some suburbs. The employers hit back and were actively 
supported by the Ministry of Internal Affairs. 222 It is impressive that 
the Bolshevik supreme leadership, which had insisted that the 
Mensheviks underrated the revolutionary potential of the working 
class, sat around on Lenin's veranda in Poronin oblivious of the 
disorder in St Petersburg. Even more noteworthy is that, with war 
about to break out in central Europe and to envelope all the major 
powers on the Continent, the chieftains of Bolshevism assumed that 
the major international issue for them was how to comport 
themselves at the Vienna Congress of the Second International.223 
