 8 
To All the Peoples: 
September to October 
1917 
INTERNATIONAL PROJECTS 
The evaluation of Lenin as a party leader and national politician also 
entails consideration of factors of general significance. The specific 
characteristics of Bolshevik party life in 1917 must not be ignored, 
but certain phenomena are common to nearly all modern political 
parties operating in multi-party systems. Few parties have central 
decision-making bodies possessing complete harmony among their 
members. Nor do all committee members and activists at lower levels 
always agree with their central bodies. Local committees may well 
agree on a range of policies (and this is far from being a universal 
phenomenon) while giving an idiosyncratic twist to particular 
policies. No central leadership, even if disciplinary sanctions are 
employable, is wise to alienate perpetually most of its activists. 
Prudence calls for some ambiguity in pronouncements on policy. 
Parties which seriously seek popular support, moreover, have to 
develop an attractive political programme. Ordinary party members 
are seldom acquainted with the details of their respective party's 
policies as closely as are party officials, and the mass of the electorate 
characteristically has even smaller knowledge. Hence there arises a 
stimulus to simplify the contents of policy, to accentuate those ideas 
with the greatest appeal to supporters, and to play down ideas which 
might alienate them. Fudging is not the whole of politics; but there 
are not many episodes in the history of modern political parties 
when, to a greater or lesser extent, it has not been in evidence. 
Thus the principal leader of any party faces daunting tasks of 
elaboration and communication. Policies have to be crafted in such a 
fashion as to gain the sympathy of various groups inside and outside 
the party. The language has to suit the wishes of each group without 
excessively offending the sensibilities of the other groups. If these 
difficulties are large in the late twentieth century, when the 
239 
 240 
Lenin: A Political Life 
instruments of the mass media are profusely available to political 
leaders, they were still larger in earlier decades. 
Lenin's opponents, at the time and afterwards, focused upon his 
delight in manipulative politics. 1 Manipulator he certainly was, and 
he massively outmatched his Menshevik and Socialist-Revolutionary 
rivals in underhandedness. Yet we should also recognise that all 
effective politicians calibrate their statements to their perceptions of 
the character of their political support. Not only most workers, 
soldiers and peasants but also even most rank-and-file Bolsheviks in 
1917 had barely heard of Karl Marx and knew little of the 
complexities of Russian and global politics. Furthermore, most 
Bolsheviks had only recently become Bolsheviks. 2 This does not 
signify that 'the masses' were irrational. But it does mean that, after 
years of limitations on free political discussion in the Romanov 
imperial state, there was a considerable lack of information and 
understanding about issues which did not directly impinge upon the 
lives of most subjects of the old empire. In the committees of the 
party there was greater awareness, and Lenin needed to express 
himself more sophisticatedly among activists and leaders in Petro-
grad. And yet greater subtlety did not always involve greater 
openness. Lenin sometimes had to modify his ideas or push some 
of them into the background in order to maintain his support; he did 
not rule the Central Committee. But he appeared to be content so 
long as he had his way on the few policies he thought crucial. 
While he did not always achieve complete self-control, he was not 
a politician who always spoke his mind. No statement can 
automatically be taken at its face value. Whether in a treatise like 
The State and Revolution, or in a mass-circulation newspaper article, 
or at an open-air workers' gathering, or in a Central Committee 
closed session, or even merely in a jotted note which remained 
unpublished until after his death (and such notes elucidate vital 
aspects of his career): all his pronouncements must be analysed in the 
light of the prevailing circumstances and of the specific objectives 
pursued by Lenin at the time. 3 
Even so, it is a widely-held but erroneous assumption that the 
policies of a man whose collected works run to dozens of volumes are 
easy to ascertain. The difficulties are exemplified by his speeches, 
articles and letters about international relations. Ambiguity and 
inchoateness proliferated, but this partly derived from the reluctance 
of Lenin and other Bolsheviks to analyse developments in other 
countries in much detail. Strictly speaking, Lenin had no 'foreign 
 To All the Peoples 
241 
policy'. The Bolshevik party's concern with countries to the West 
rested with the project of European revolution. As an international-
ist, Lenin in spring and summer 1917 recognised no overt obligation 
to any single country, not even his own.4 His perspective was global, 
and he saw himself as having an international rather than a foreign 
policy. In addition, the Bolshevik outlook was orientated upon 
classes rather than upon political elites.5 Lenin had asserted that 
class-based struggle across Europe was desirable. For him, modern 
capitalism had given birth to imperialism and all the belligerent states 
in the war were either the perpetrators or victims of imperialist 
aggrandisement. Without explicitly saying so, he thought it a waste 
of time to analyse the distinctions of political stance within states. 
Liberals and conservatives were barely different shades of the same 
phenomenon; and such socialists as entered governmental coalitions 
with them or even just failed to oppose them were crypto-imperial-
ists, or 'social-chauvinists' in Lenin's phrase.6 
Hence the astounding neglectfulness of Lenin and most other 
Bolsheviks for the vicissitudes of high politics in Germany, Britain, 
France and the USA. No doubt too, such factors explain why he did 
not show much interest in changes in diplomatic or even military 
relations between states. 7 Lenin regarded them as topics of distract-
ingly trivial importance beside the objective of international socialist 
revolution. Zinoviev and Radek wrote more about them, but even 
their articles were thin in substance.8 
Lenin was preoccupied by the search for signs of discontent in 
factories and barracks in Germany. He stressed the problem of 
Berlin's bread shortages, going so far as to assert: 'In Russia it is 
possible to obtain bread, in Germany it is impossible to obtain it.'9 
This assertion exaggerated Germany's plight even after the 'turnip 
winter' of 1916-17, and failed to mention its source. Lenin as a party 
boss aimed to convince his colleagues and rank-and-file Bolsheviks, if 
they harboured doubts, that a seizure of power in Petrograd would 
quickly be followed by a fraternal revolution in Berlin. He was 
guessing and, as often, overstating. If he himself had doubts, he kept 
quiet about them. In any case he himself surely believed in his own 
contention that the epoch of European socialist revolution was at 
hand, and that the Bolsheviks would be prominent in ushering in the 
new age. He was excited by the strikes in German cities in April 1917 
and by the mutiny in the Kiel naval garrison in August. 10 The 
Bolshevik central newspaper kept a steady eye on such events as they 
became public news. 11 Its editors, as well as Lenin from his Finnish 
 242 
Lenin: A Political Life 
hiding place, frequently claimed that there was evidence of a 'growing 
revolution' in Germany. 12 Other countries also exhibited unrest: 
Lenin was cheered by reports that governments in both Italy and 
Austria-Hungary were experiencing troubles similar to those reported 
in Germany. 13 Europe-wide revolution seemed imminent at last. 
But events were to prove him wrong. Lenin was mistaking war-
weariness and political discontent for a pan-European revolutionary 
situation. He was not, however, alone. Not only far-left socialists but 
even many conservative and liberal politicians, in the rest of Europe 
as well as in Russia, considered the disturbances to be signalling the 
possible outbreak of 'Red revolution': Bavaria and Hungary did, in 
fact, acquire revolutionary socialist administrations in 1919. More-
over, Lenin no longer had access to the accurate and up-to-date 
reportage about central Europe from Switzerland's newspapers, and 
his communication with Karl Radek and other associates in 
Scandinavia was apparently not detailed enough to be an adequate 
substitute. 14 
Unavoidably, he relied heavily on the Russian press, which did not 
supply comprehensive information. The French government success-
fully kept secret the mutiny in the French army in summer 1917 
involving tens of thousands of troops. Only severe punishment by 
General Petain prevented the dissolution of his forces. Lenin can 
scarcely be faulted for acting on the premise that the public record 
understated the continental tumult. 15 On the other hand, it remains 
remarkable that he offered only a few brief sentences on events which 
had a great impact upon the military and political conflicts of 1917. 
Neither he nor his Bolshevik colleagues provided serious commen-
tary upon the German submarine attacks on American shipping, or 
the ensuing entry of the USA into the war on the side of the Allies. 
Lenin barely bothered to follow the changing fortunes of the armies 
locked in battle on the Eastern and Western fronts. 16 He and his 
associates were uninterested even by crucial re-appointments of 
personnel in Berlin. The German Chancellor, Bethmann Hollweg, 
resigned in July 1917. He had been harassed both by those who 
wanted him to make stronger overtures for peace and those who 
thought him hostile to an ali-or-nothing military campaign. The 
German High Command, under P. von Hindenburg and Erich 
Ludendorff, pressed for his replacement by a chancellor more 
pliable to their demands. Their nominee, Georg Michaelis, was duly 
sworn in and an ultra-militarist government, shorn of the previous 
inhibitions, was installed. 
 To All the Peoples 
243 
Writers in the non-Bolshevik Russian press perceived these events 
as having a cardinal significance. 17 And yet not once did Lenin 
mention Michaelis by name. 18 His attention to developments in the 
British and French Cabinets was no more assiduous, nor did he 
reflect on the foreign policy of the American President, Woodrow 
Wilson, who was already declaring his hostility to a punitive peace 
treaty in Europe in the event of military victory for the Allies. 19 
Menshevik, Socialist-Revolutionary and Kadet commentators inter-
preted Lenin's attitude in two ways: either Lenin lacked all trace of 
military and political realism, or else his zeal to pull Russia out of the 
War was so overpowering that he would sign a separate treaty with 
the Germans.20 He appeared as either a simpleton or a deceiver. Calls 
by him and other Bolshevik Central Committee members for 
'fraternisation' between Russian and German soldiers corroborated 
this dual conclusion among his enemies. 21 
And so Lenin was obliged to enunciate what he would do if, 
should he come to power, a European socialist revolution failed to 
ensue. His usual gambit was to brush the matter aside by contending 
that the Bolsheviks, simply by proposing a 'democratic peace' and 
publishing the secret treaties, would stimulate popular insurrections 
in Europe. Lenin proclaimed that the chances of success were '99 to 
I 00'. 22 His confidence was enhanced by the precedent of the Russian 
near-revolution of 1905-6, when rebels in Asia and Europe had been 
inspired to demand democratic reforms. Lenin frequently called 
Turkey and Persia to mind, 23 and in 1917 predicted that the 
European imperial powers would face colonial revolts around the 
world once a socialist government had announced its existence in 
Russia. 24 References by him and by Stalin to the importance of non-
European nationalism marked them off from several other leading 
Bolshevik strategists. Trotski, while not ignoring political possibili-
ties in Asia, gave greater emphasis to Europe.25 Bukharin and 
Pyatakov continued to regard the idea of encouraging nationalist 
movements with distaste. 26 Yet these differences shrank into 
insignificance alongside the agreement of Lenin and nearly all his 
c~lleagues that a series of socialist insurrections in Europe was on the 
immediate agenda and that capitalism's day was nearly over; they 
took it as axiomatic that an administration of revolutionary socialists 
would very soon be set up in Berlin. Even Bukharin and other 
Bolsheviks who, unlike Lenin, had always recognised the deeply-felt 
patriotism of the German working class in 1914, concurred. It was an 
article of Bolshevik faith. 27 
 244 
Lenin: A Political Life 
Opponents nagged away that the Bolsheviks needed a policy for 
the contingency that the European socialist revolution might not 
occur. In mid-May 1917, Lenin gave them his old answer in Pravda: 
'Then we should have to complete preparations for and wage a 
revolutionary war.'28 At the first all-Russian Congress of Soviets of 
Workers' and Soldiers' Deputies, he replied in like manner. In his 
first speech, on 4 June, he suggested that, 'if circumstances ... were 
to place us in the situation of a revolutionary war', the Bolsheviks 
would not refuse the challenge;29 and in his second speech five days 
later he announced that 'in certain circumstances we cannot get by 
without revolutionary war'. 30 
His words clash with what was to become Bolshevik policy in 
March 1918; there is an obvious contradiction between the Lenin of 
1917 who fulminated against any notion of a separate peace with 
Germany and Austria-Hungary, and the Lenin of 1918 who insisted 
on the signature of exactly such a peace. 31 The contrast has 
sometimes been interpreted as proof of his blatant disregard for his 
own commitmentsY But care should be exercised in drawing 
conclusions from these pre-October declarations. Firstly, it must be 
noted that none displays the enthusiasm for revolutionary war which 
he had shown before the February Revolution. Lenin's statements 
implied that the Bolsheviks would fight only if circumstances forced 
their hand; and he eschewed any indication about the timing of such 
a war. 33 In the second place, the circumstances of Lenin's remarks 
deserve scrutiny. His Pravda articles and his speeches to the First 
Soviet Congress were framed as a response to the allegations that the 
Bolsheviks would sign a separate treaty with Germany.34 He had to 
propose his contingency plan for war if he was to rebut this charge. 
Thirdly, and most importantly, his public statements from mid-June 
right through to the October Revolution entirely ceased to commit 
his party to war in the event that the continental socialist revolution 
did not take place. 35 This cannot have been accidental or insignifi-
cant; his previous talk about revolutionary war had been too strong 
for his silence to have been an aberration. 
Consequently, most Bolsheviks did not know that 'revolutionary 
war' had ever been among Lenin's proposals. Only party members, 
not to mention people outside the party, who had followed debates 
with more than ordinary attentiveness were acquainted with what he 
had said in emigration or shortly after his return from Switzerland. 
Such rank-and-filers were a tiny proportion of the fast-growing mass 
party of midsummer and autumn 1917.36 Lenin's journalism and 
 To All the Peoples 
245 
open speech-making gave an ever-diminishing impression of a man 
who contemplated the renewal of the war even as a contingency plan. 
His reluctance to call publicly for a war, on the other hand, fitted 
badly with his attitude in behind-the-scenes discussions among his 
close colleagues. 37 On 30 August, he wrote to the Central Committee 
reindicating his adherence to a policy of revolutionary war if the 
Euwpean socialist revolution did not occur.38 The discrepancy is 
puzzling. Possibly Lenin recognised that his party's popularity lay in 
its promise to end the war, and that even a conditional prospect of 
continuing with the fighting would be unattractive. Other far-left 
socialists had been reticent about war talk for much longer than 
Lenin. Before 1917, Bukharin and Trotski objected to Lenin's 
dismissiveness towards the European peace movement. 39 The inclina-
tion to talk about peace and play down the theme of a possible 
revolutionary war grew stronger after the February Revolution, and 
Lenin followed rather than led his colleagues in this.40 The Central 
Committee's official statements after April1917 ceased to mention a 
contingency plan for war and accentuated the need to terminate 
military hostilities and compose a 'just peace'.41 In June, July and 
August there was barely a mention of 'revolutionary war', and the 
few examples by individual leading Bolsheviks were typically tied to 
denials of the intention to sign a separate peace.42 Even so, most 
leading Bolsheviks privately remained committed to revolutionary 
war if no European revolution occurred.43 
Thus not only Lenin but also his Central Committee associates 
largely avoided a topic that would have damaged the party's 
popularity. Again, the avoidance was surely not fortuitous. But did 
Lenin, even in 1917, really have the same approach as the majority of 
his associates? There can be no definitive answer; but it is not 
inconceivable that, when writing privately in favour of revolutionary 
war, he was not revealing his genuine intentions but felt that the time 
had not yet arrived to convince his colleagues, especially those on the 
left wing of the Bolshevik party, of the impracticability of prolonging 
military engagement. Furthermore, even his private statements on 
t:evolutionary war from May through to October were rare, occurring 
in largely parenthetical remarks. Lenin did not inflate the balloon 
unnecessarily. 
Indeed, it may be wrong to assume that Lenin really had a firm 
and considered attitude to 'revolutionary war' in these months. 
Perhaps, since he genuinely believed in the imminence of European 
socialist revolution, he felt no need to work out a detailed 
 246 
Lenin: A Political Life 
contingency policy. Such an elaboration, from this viewpoint, would 
muddy the waters of the party's propaganda with the public and stir 
up trouble in the Central Committee; it would also distract an 
already overworked man from other political business. Not that 
Lenin's thinking on international relations became stagnant before 
October 1917. Retaliating against the Provisional Government's 
accusation that he was pro-German, he chose to highlight the 
military danger posed to Russia by her own Allies. He wrote of the 
British (or English, as he put it) army as a potential future invader. 
This reflected his insistence on seeing the Allies and the Central 
Powers as equally imperialistic; and perhaps it also shows that he 
never seriously envisaged a protracted war with Germany because he 
took it for granted that the German working class would soon rise up 
and establish its own socialist government.44 A second development 
in his thought, after April 1917, took place in his analysis of the 
Provisional Government. He stopped describing ministers as mere 
errand-boys of British and French capitalists, and stressed their 
autonomy in foreign policy. 45 Zinoviev and others had taken this line 
earlier in the war.46 
Lenin's reasons for changing his emphasis are unclear. Subsequent 
economic or political research has demonstrated that the cabinets of 
Lvov and Kerenski did not act in direct subordination to Allied 
interests;47 and Lenin may simply have been taking belated cogni-
sance of the real situation.48 He may also have sensed that his 
polemics against the Provisional Government would be more biting if 
the specifically Russian dimensions of governmental problems were 
pin-pointed by the Bolsheviks. Needless to say, this did not stop him 
from affirming that ministers were subject to the whims of capitalists. 
The Provisional Government, for Lenin, remained a capitalist 
government. But he saw not only British and French capital but 
rather 'Anglo-French and Russian capital' as being involved in a 
condominium over Russian state policy.49 Again he exaggerated; but 
not totally unfairly. He was right to declare that the controls over 
capitalism introduced by Menshevik ministers in summer 1917 were 
ineffectual, and that the concessions on the land question extracted 
from the Cabinet by the Socialist Revolutionaries did not radically 
alter the rural economic order.50 
None the less Lenin's thinking had its incoherences as well as its 
exaggerations. When it pleased him, he reverted to his description of 
the other Allies as the genuine masters of the Russian state's actions. 
Kerenski, according to Lenin, was a puppet of London and Paris and 
 To All the Peoples 
247 
was merely acceding to direct external pressure in instigating the June 
offensive on the Eastern front. 51 Obviously, this was a guess; it was 
also untrue: the Provisional Government sensed the desirability of 
impressing its Allies with a resumed offensive but did not receive 
orders to fight. 52 But Lenin would beat Kerenski with any stick that 
lay to hand. And he could perceive that it would do the Bolsheviks 
no harm if they put themselves forward as better protectors of the 
national interest than were the Kadets, the Mensheviks and the 
Socialist Revolutionaries. Lenin started to sound an almost patriotic 
note, especially after the German advance along the Baltic coast in 
August, and the capture of Riga. He claimed, erroneously once more, 
that Kerenski was so scared about Bolshevism that he was planning 
to surrender Petro grad to the Germans without resistance. 53 At any 
rate Lenin disowned the aim of seeking the dissolution of the Russian 
armed forces. 54 It was an extraordinary outcome. Lenin, the 
unbending internationalist and harrier of all professed patriots, was 
simultaneously standing forward as the only sure defender of Mother 
Russia. 55 
THE GERMAN CONNECTION 
Lenin disclosed no reasons for this modified stance on international 
relations. He had seldom commented on such modifications in the 
past, and saw no reason to break the habits of a political lifetime. He 
may also have decided that the cards of national defence were too 
high-scoring to be left unused. He could also have had a more 
personal motive. The German military danger, Kerenski's alleged 
treason and the need to keep the Russian army in operational order 
were themes helping to repudiate the accusation that Lenin and other 
Bolshevik leaders were German agents. The fabrication of the 
counter-charge that the Provisional Government was aiding the 
German war effort put his attackers on the back foot. 
Most non-Bolshevik socialist commentators did not credit the 
Bolshevik central leadership with a genuine wish to inaugurate a pan-
European socialist revolution. It would have been illogical to portray 
Lenin as a devoted underling of Kaiser Wilhelm II while suggesting 
that Lenin was aiming at the dissolution of the German Reich. Their 
charges laid emphasis on the presence in Stockholm of known 
German governmental agents such as the social-democrat and 
millionaire Alexander Parvus. The main accusers in the press, 
 248 
Lenin: A Political Life 
Vladimir Burtsev and Grigori Aleksinski, stated that Lenin had met 
up with Parvus on his trip back from Switzerland. Without a German 
subsidy, they claimed, the Bolsheviks would not have been in a 
position to acquire their various printing presses and other facilities 
in the early days of the February Revolution: Pravda had appeared 
from early March 1917. Aleksinski published a recorded list of 
telegrams which had passed between Lenin (or other members of 
the Ulyanov family in Petrograd) and Bolshevik representatives such 
as Hanecki, Radek and M. Kozlovski in Sweden. These representa-
tives, according to Aleksinski, were in collusion with German purse-
holders and spymasters. 56 German gold, German gold! Here we 
arrive at the source of the legend that the Bolsheviks would never 
have come to power in Petrograd without having been funded by the 
German foreign ministry. 57 
Certainly, German diplomacy had an interest in looking favour-
ably upon the party of Lenin. Bolshevik propaganda about peace 
assisted in increasing Russian weariness with the war; and politicians 
in Berlin knew that if the Bolsheviks came to power in Russia, at the 
very least a truce could be arranged on the Eastern front. The 
advantage to the German government would be that its armies could 
concentrate their efforts on the Western front against Britain and 
France before the American units started to arrive in Europe.58 
Lenin and Zinoviev maintained that their various accusers were 
motivated by political spite. Their contention, expressed in a series of 
formal statements from April to July, was that personal defamation 
was being used as a means of achieving the annihilation of the 
Bolshevik party.59 Thus, in the 1890s, had French ultra-nationalists 
trumped up a case of treason against Alfred Dreyfus, a Jewish army 
officer, to fan the flames of anti-semitism and to shift the centre of 
gravity of French politics to the right. A Russian Dreyfusiade was 
supposedly in the making.60 Most socialists in Petrograd, with the 
exception of Burtsev and Aleksinski, recognised the fatuousness of 
the claim of espionage. Even Plekhanov held back from such an 
accusation. Yet the allegation of some financial-cum-political 
connection remained in the air. Lenin's training in jurisprudence 
made him reply to it cautiously. He and Zinoviev denied both having 
met Parvus en route from Switzerland and having received funds 
from either Hanecki or Kozlovski.61 This was probably true in a 
strict sense. And yet it does not amount to a refutation of the charge 
that the Bolshevik Central Committee frequently and knowingly 
received donations from the German government. The verbal 
 To All the Peoples 
249 
parsimony of Lenin and Zinoviev was almost certainly a sign of 
economy with the truth. Ways can always be found by cunning 
leaders to ensure that potentially compromising transactions are 
dealt with by trusted intermediaries. Karl Radek has been suggested 
as the person who negotiated the cash transfers.62 
That some cash was conveyed from Berlin to Petrograd is very 
likely, since the German official archives prove that German 
diplomats requested and obtained millions of Deutschmarks for 
subversive political purposes in Russia in spring 1917.63 What is 
missing is incontrovertible proof that the money was aimed 
specifically at the Bolsheviks in the months between the February 
and October Revolutions, and that it reached them. But it is 
probable that at least some funds got through. Possibly Kozlovski 
sent a cheque through to Petrograd;64 but the extent of forgery of 
documents by officials of the Provisional Government has yet to be 
ascertained. The German archives are more reliable: they indicate 
that money was given to the Soviet government after October 1917,65 
and there is little reason to disbelieve that such transfers had not 
happened before. 
No moral considerations inhibited the Bolshevik Central Commit-
tee from receiving a subsidy from anyone at all. The Devil himself 
could be supped with, and his money taken. Lenin took Plekhanov's 
remark at the Second Party Congress as his guideline that the only 
question to be asked about any policy was whether it helped the 
prospects of revolution.66 Every revolutionary party needed money. 
In 1900 the Russian Marxists had received funds from Russian 
liberal figures even though Lenin and his friends thought liberals to 
be likely, in a future political crisis, to make a deal with the absolute 
monarchy.67 Lenin's principles allowed him to receive subventions 
from a 'bourgeois government' with equanimity. The fact that the 
government offering the funds in 1917 was at war with the 
government of one's own country was a matter of indifference for 
him. His self-justification would have been, if he had been able to 
announce it, that his party's strategy envisaged the speedy overthrow 
<?f both the Russian and German governments; and that the German 
authorities' recklessness in assisting the Bolsheviks financially would 
not alter his commitment to the strategy.68 The only inhibition was a 
sense of prudence. Kerenski would treat the receipt of such monies 
by the Bolsheviks as high treason, and most Russian citizens would 
have sympathised with Kerenski's assessment. Trial and even 
execution of Lenin might easily follow. Not even all Bolsheviks 
 250 
Lenin: A Political Life 
would necessarily approve of the German connection. The new rank-
and-filers, and even many central and local leaders, might well have 
been offended by it. 69 
Lenin consequently had every stimulus to keep quiet about the 
financial arrangements. How many members of the party's leadership 
were initiated into the secret is not known. But presumably the 
number was small. This may explain why Volodarski and Manuilski, 
in the July Days, initially insisted that Lenin and Zinoviev should 
give themselves up to police custody instead of going into hiding. 
Such Bolsheviks were almost certainly unaware that much dirt might 
have come out in the wash of a public trial. 70 
Yet account needs to be taken that German financial subventions 
were not unique to the Bolsheviks. Berlin engaged in political warfare 
in the First World War: arms and money were passed to Irish 
nationalists, who attempted to overthrow the British authorities in 
Dublin in 1916 - and no one portrays such nationalists as mere 
agents of Germany.71 In addition, the German archives show that 
funds had also been available for transfer to Russia's Socialist 
Revolutionaries before the February Revolution (even though their 
Central Committee does not seem to have been involved). Attempts 
were apparently made to do the same with non-Russian nationalists 
in the Russian empire.72 The British and French governments, too, 
attempted to undermine the military capacity of Germany and the 
Austro-Hungarian empire by means of subsidies to political groups 
working for the destruction of the territorial status quo. The 
possibility of supporting anti-war German groups was limited, since 
few of them existed and these had no emigre bases to act as contact 
points. But the Habsburg lands were a different matter. Czech 
nationalists, in particular, aspired to grasp their independence at 
the moment of Vienna's distraction by the war. 73 Nor is it a uniquely 
twentieth-century idea that a state should aid the enemy of the state's 
enemy. Herodotus and Thucydides, the fathers of historiography, 
recorded an abundance of such tactics in ancient times. 
And yet Aleksinski and his friends, as well as their successors since 
the Second World War, did not merely state that the Bolshevik 
Central Committee received 'German gold'; they asserted that the 
funds from Berlin were indispensable for the Bolshevik political 
advance in 1917. Seldom have so many non-Marxists proposed so 
extreme a variant of economic determinism for so important an 
historical conjuncture. No German subsidy, no October Revolu-
tion.74 
 To All the Peoples 
251 
Aleksinski, however, could not supply all the monetary details; and 
we still do not know how much money arrived in the Bolshevik 
exchequer. 75 The finances of political warfare were necessarily 
clandestine, with officials avoiding committing many details to 
paper. Characters such as Alexander Parvus, moreover, had a well-
attested liking for money, young women and the high life; 76 it is by 
no means certain that all the funds at their disposal were handled 
scrupulously. Finances were in any case not the greatest difficulty for 
Russian parties in the months from March 1917. Not everything had 
to be paid for. The Bolshevik Central Committee obtained its 
premises in the Kshesinskaya Palace, but paid nothing for it and 
ejected the owner, the ex-ballerina and court favourite M. Kshesins-
kaya, from her property.77 Nor did it have to pay for the sites of the 
various mass meetings through the year. The pavements outside 
factory gates were free of charge. Also, the 200-300,000 people who 
joined the Bolshevik party were expected to contribute to party 
funds, 78 and Pravda, after its first issue, was not given away but sold. 
Bolshevik officials, as the party gathered political backing, were able 
to get paid jobs in the soviets, the trade unions and the factory-
workshop committees. And the material conditions and political 
worries affecting workers, soldiers and sailors and disposing them to 
look for a radical socialist party to solve their problems existed 
independently of Bolshevik instigation. A German governmental 
subsidy may have helped the Bolsheviks, but it cannot have been 
'the key' to the party's political success in 1917. 
THE BOLSHEVIK CENTRAL COMMITTEE 
Lenin would have been the last person to think that money was more 
important than party organisation in making revolutions. In the 
summer he remained under Central Committee instructions to stay in 
hiding, and until the Central Committee's repudiation of his ideas on 
15 September he had contentedly (nay, keenly) complied. But on 23 
qr 24 September, he left Helsinki for the town of Vyborg, eighty 
miles from the Russian frontier. 79 In the following discussions with 
Central Committee emissaries, Lenin insisted on returning to put his 
case. Even so, weeks passed. Only on 10 October was his request 
granted, and a Central Committee session was held in the flat of 
Galina Flakserman, an assistant in the Secretariat, in a district to the 
north of the centre of Petrograd. She was married to the left-wing 
 252 
Lenin: A Political Life 
Menshevik Nikolai Sukhanov, whom she craftily persuaded not to 
come home that night because the weather was so 'wretched'.80 Lenin 
arrived bewigged and beardless. Having fled to Finland dressed as a 
footplateman, he reappeared in the guise of a Lutheran pastor.81 
Twelve Central Committee members attended. The proceedings 
were opened at 10 pm by Sverdlov, who passed on information about 
the party's difficulties in various zones and asserted that 'dirty 
business' was being planned by counter-revolutionary officers in 
Minsk, near the Northern front. 82 Then Lenin spoke for an hour. His 
theme was 'the current moment'. For conspiratorial reasons, the 
detailed minutes of the meeting were not written down; Trotski, 
Stalin, Zinoviev and Kamenev attended, but their speeches are lost to 
us.83 The gist of Lenin's words, however, has survived. Again, he 
contrasted mid-October with early July, arguing that 'the majority' 
was behind the Bolsheviks.84 He even acknowledged that the party 
would not win the Constituent Assembly ballot since the peasants 
were by far the largest section of the population and could not be 
expected to vote Bolshevik;85 but he repeated that this did not matter 
since 'the agrarian movement' could no longer be suppressed by the 
Provisional Government, and that both the Bolshevik party and the 
peasantry agreed on the necessity of 'a transfer of power'.86 Lenin 
did not deny that 'the masses' had lately exhibited a certain 
'indifference' to high politics. But he contended that the cause was 
a dissatisfaction with mere 'words and resolutions'. Lenin's final and 
underlying argument was that the international situation was highly 
propitious, especially after the mutiny in the Kiel naval garrison in 
northern Germany. 87 
Before such an audience, which was in closer touch than he with 
current political developments, Lenin sought to argue that insurrec-
tion was urgently required. But his case was sketchily-constructed, 
resting heavily on the blunt allegation that the Provisional Govern-
ment had decided to abandon Petrograd to the Cer.tr::.l Powers. 
Hence, according to Lenin, the need for a pre-emptive uprising. Thus 
he tried to turn his only defensive point into grounds for an 
aggressive political strategy. He unequivocally urged that the 
regional congress of soviets from north Russia, due to meet in 
Minsk in a few hours' time on II October, should be the occasion for 
the announcement of Kerenski's downfall and the transfer of 
authority to the soviets. 88 
Heated, though necessarily quiet, debate ensued in the softly-lit 
apartment. M.S. Uritski, while being on the left of the Bolshevik 
 To All the Peoples 
253 
spectrum, asserted that the military force available for an insurrec-
tion was insubstantial; but he took this as a reason for conducting 
strenuous propaganda among the Petro grad garrison soldiers. 89 
Neither Kamenev nor Zinoviev, however, pulled their punches in 
attacking Lenin. After the Central Committee meeting they were to 
compose a letter to various leading Bolshevik bodies; and its contents 
presumably give an indication of the arguments used by them at the 
meeting itself.90 They did not claim that a socialist government 
should not soon be formed; the Menshevik left wingers, after all, 
already advocated such a move. And Kamenev and Zinoviev agreed 
with Lenin that the Bolsheviks would not win the Constituent 
Assembly elections; but they concluded that popular opinion would 
compel the so-called 'petit-bourgeois parties' (as the Bolsheviks 
described the Mensheviks and the Socialist Revolutionaries) to 
'seek out a union with the proletarian party against the gentry 
landlords and the capitalists'. This scheme for a socialist coalition 
Cabinet could be implemented with minimal force; and the Bol-
sheviks would either belong to such a coalition or, by virtue of being 
a large minority fraction in the Assembly, be able to influence the 
new Cabinet's policies. Kamenev and Zinoviev also reminded the 
Central Committee that the soldiers presently voting for the 
Bolsheviks would withdraw support if the party, in the absence of 
a European socialist revolution, engaged in a revolutionary war; and 
that the evidence that such a revolution was imminent was lacking. 
The clinching argument for Kamenev and Zinoviev was the 
uncontested information that few workers in Petrograd were willing 
to get out on to the streets and take part in an armed action.91 
Yet the Central Committee solidly took Lenin's side, by a margin 
of ten to two.92 Early on 11 October, as dawn broke, the members of 
the party's supreme body tucked into breakfast. Too tired to ponder 
the historic nature of their decision, they diverted themselves with a 
gentle teasing of Kamenev and Zinoviev.93 None the less, Lenin had 
not got quite everything his way: the suggestion that the transfer of 
power should take place at the northern regional soviet gathering was 
r~jected. 94 Trotski and others perceived that immediate action was 
impossible. Lenin, who preached that insurrection was 'an art', was 
thought to be inviting the party to commit political suicide. His 
colleagues also felt that, even if an uprising in Minsk were to succeed 
(which was unlikely), a damaging impression would be given that 
power was passing not to the soviets in general but to a splinter 
group of soviets dominated by Bolsheviks.95 
 254 
Lenin: A Political Life 
So Lenin had carried off a crushing strategical victory. None the 
less, the question of timing and tactics was still not settled. It also 
remained to be discovered how the rest of the Bolshevik party would 
take to the Central Committee's line. Kamenev and Zinoviev 
dispatched their critical letter to the Petersburg and Moscow City 
Committees as well as to other influential party bodies and fractions 
inside the soviets;96 they knew that other right-wing members of the 
Central Committee - notably Milyutin, Nogin and Rykov - had not 
attended on 10 October: the hope was nurtured that a further debate 
might pull Lenin back from the brink. Yet Sverdlov was also hard at 
work, sending out letters which propagated the official line. The 
party's local leaderships in cities as distant as Saratov were 
informed.97 By its nature this could not be an open debate lest the 
Provisional Government might be alerted. Nor do all the major city 
committees of the Bolshevik party seem to have been initiated into 
the decision of 10 October. This possibly suited Lenin, since he knew 
he had a strong chance of support from the Petrograd and Moscow 
leaderships. But there is small reason to assume that Kamenev and 
Zinoviev would have succeeded if a greater number of committees 
had been drawn into the Central Committee's confidence. Through-
out the Bolshevik party there was a growing sense that the time for 
the installation of a socialist administration had arrived; and even 
Kamenev and Zinoviev concurred that a socialist regime should 
quickly be established.98 
Lenin's two critics in the Central Committee, however, were 
readying themselves for a last attempt to change the decision on 
the seizure of power. Another meeting of the Central Committee was 
planned for 16 October. Representatives from Bolshevik party 
committees and soviet and trade union organs in Petrograd were to 
be present; Kamenev and Zinoviev (who felt buoyed up this time by 
the presence of Milyutin, Nogin and Rykov) hoped to win them over 
to a more cautious strategy for the advance to socialism.99 
Sverdlov took the chair. Lenin, the key speaker, arrived late. He 
was still beardless and wore a wig; and Joffe was to recall that he 
seemed to be in a bad mood. 10° Casually snatching off his wig and 
placing it on the table in front of him, Lenin repeated the arguments 
in favour of speedy insurrection. 101 He rejected all compromise with 
the Mensheviks and the Socialist Revolutionaries and claimed that 
the country faced a stark choice: 'either a Kornilovite dictatorship or 
the dictatorship of the proletariat and the poorest strata of the 
peasantry'. He also asserted: 'It is impossible to be guided by the 
 To All the Peoples 
255 
mood of the masses, since it is changeable and is not susceptible to 
calculation; we must be led by an objective analysis and evaluation of 
the revolution.' 102 If he offered such an analysis, it does not appear in 
the minutes. His recorded words indicate a still stronger restriction 
on his ideas as expres>ed in The State and Revolution than in his mid-
September letters to the Central Committee. 103 Lenin's commitment 
to mass political participation and to respect for the popular will had 
not been absolute even before the July Days. But the commitment 
had not been insignificant, and did not cease to exist after the 
October Revolution (although it became increasingly attenuated). 
But the scathing reference to 'the mood of the masses', with all the 
implicit condescension of a middle-class intellectual politician, 
constituted a throw-back to the strategical and organisational 
authoritarianism of What is to be Done?. The 'masses' could not be 
entrusted with their own revolution. If their wishes accorded with 
those of the party, they were displaying mature 'consciousness'; if 
not, their 'mood' should be ignored. 104 
There followed several reports from Petrograd representatives. 
Sverdlov stated, with characteristic numerical inflation, that the 
number of party members had risen to 400,000. 105 On behalf of the 
City Committee, G. I. Boki said that active support for an insurrec-
tion was patchy in the metropolis. N. V. Krylenko, for the Military 
Bureau, stated that its members were divided on this question. 106 
S. F. Stepanov from the Provincial Committee asserted that attitudes 
were favourable to the Central Committee's line in the environs of 
the capital; but he was accused by Boki, himself a leftist, of exagger-
ation.107 V. Volodarski from the Petrograd Soviet maintained that 
workers would answer a summons from the Soviet ·to take to the 
streets. Shmidt and Shlyapnikov rallied to him. Only Ravich claimed 
that the workers would obey a call simply from the party. 108 
And yet Kamenev and Zinoviev were isolated. Every other 
speaker, including the Bolshevik rightist V. P. Milyutin, took it for 
granted that an armed clash was imminent and inevitable. 109 The 
failure of Milyutin, Nogin and Rykov to take a stand unequivocally 
~gainst the Central Committee decision of 10 October was emble-
matic of a shift in opinion among Bolsheviks. It also displayed a 
feeling throughout Russian politics that Kerenski's government had 
lost its way; that Kerenski would not go quietly and would try to 
disarm the soviets; that the Bolsheviks should not flinch in the 
coming trial of strength. And so discussion shifted towards the 
question whether the Bolsheviks should initiate the clash. Milyutin 
 256 
Lenin: A Political Life 
thought not, and argued against insurrection. 110 This was not 
surpnsmg in view of Milyutin's long-known viewpoint. But then 
Shotman, a leftist, announced agreement with Milyutin. Lenin 
castigated both of them for ignoring 'objective conditions'. 111 He 
was enraged that Kamenevism was being sneaked in by the back 
door; his opponents were suggesting that Kerenski should be allowed 
the opportunity to undertake counter-revolution before a revolu-
tionary uprising should be attempted. Lenin's sharp words did not 
have an immediate effect. N. V. Krylenko, a leftist Bolshevik, argued 
that the party should support any insurrection but not organise one 
in the first instance: a curious standpoint for a Military Bureau 
member. 112 
It was beginning to look as if the meeting regarded defence as the 
best form of attack; and Zinoviev and Kamenev, sensing that their 
position was not in fact irretrievable, restated their objection to 
Lenin. 113 Zinoviev discerned that a purely negative attitude to the 10 
October decision would not carry a majority. He had to supply an 
positive alternative policy. His solution was to suggest that the 
forthcoming All-Russian Congress of Soviets of Workers' and 
Soldiers' Deputies be kept in permanent session until the Consti-
tuent Assembly so as to pressurise the Assembly to carry out the 
appropriate decisions. Kamenev charged Lenin with forcing the 
political pace. '1,' he declared, 'have a greater faith in the Russian 
revolution.' 114 
But several advocates of insurrection then took the floor: 
Fenigstein, Stalin, Kalinin, Skrypnik, Dzierzynki, Ravich, Sokolni-
kov, Skalov, Joffe, Shmidt, Latsis, S. F. Stepanov. 115 No one offered 
succour to Kamenev and Zinoviev. 116 Probably the other Central 
Committee members felt that Zinoviev's scheme erred too much on 
the side of caution and indeed inaction. There was no guarantee that 
the Constituent Assembly would be held quickly. Lenin had for 
months declared that only the Bolsheviks would dare to convoke the 
Assembly. Zinoviev had fumbled tactically. Even so, only Ravich and 
Skrypnik took Lenin's ultra-impatient approach. Stalin, while heark-
ening to the insurrectionary summons, added the reservation: 'The 
day of the uprising must be convenient.' 117 A specific timetable was 
still avoided. Yet disquiet was expressed that nothing had yet been 
done to carry out the 10 October decision; the majority of the Central 
Committee concurred that insurrection would very soon have to be 
organised. Lenin's motion reaffirmed the 10 October decision and 
 To All the Peoples 
257 
expressed 'complete confidence that the Central Committee and the 
Soviet would at the right time indicate the propitious moment and the 
appropriate methods of the offensive'. 118 Nineteen voted in favour 
and two against with four abstentions. 119 The two against were 
Kamenev and Zinoviev; and, although a vagueness about timing 
persisted, they perceived that only a few days remained before the 
uprising which they wanted to prevent would be attempted. 
THE OVERTHROW OF THE GOVERNMENT 
The same organisational looseness permitting local party committees 
to act independently of the Central Committee had allowed the 
Central Committee to take measures with little chance for the local 
committees to influence or repeal them. The Central Committee 
appointed a Military-Revolutionary Centre consisting of Sverdlov, 
Stalin, Bubnov, M. S. Uritski and Dzierzynski; all were instructed to 
'enter the membership of the revolutionary Soviet committee' .120 It is 
likely that the reference was to the Military-Revolutionary Commit-
tee of the Petrograd Soviet, and that this was its preferred instrument 
for the government's overthrow. 
The idea of a Military-Revolutionary Committee had been debated 
by the Petrograd Soviet on 9 October. The Soviet sanctioned its 
formation on 16 October, empowering it to co-ordinate the garrisons 
for the capital's defence; 121 and the importance of the matter may 
explain why Trotski, who had been chosen as Soviet chairman, was 
absent from the Central Committee. In fact, the Military-Revolu-
tionary Centre did not participate in the Petrograd Soviet's Military-
Revolutionary Committee. When this Committee was selected on 20 
October, its five-man Bureau included three Bolsheviks: Antonov-
Ovseenko, Podvoiski and Sadovski. The remaining two members, 
Laasimer and Sukharkov, were left-wing Socialist Revolutionaries. 
Lenin approved the Central Committee's choi ·e of the Military-
Revolutionary Committee as the organ of insurredion and wished to 
keep its activities under review. After 16 October he had taken 
himself to the first-floor flat of M. V. Fofanova, who worked for the 
Bolshevik Central Committee, in the Vyborg district. Sverdlov main-
tained contact with Podvoiski, whom he sent to Lenin - probably on 
some date between 20 and 23 October. 122 Lenin conducted a 
 258 
Lenin: A Political Life 
gruelling interview since Podvoiski wanted the Bolshevik Military 
Organisation to head the uprising. Lenin supported the Central 
Committee in insisting that a non-party organ, the Petrograd 
Soviet's Military-Revolutionary Committee, should have charge. 123 
This made practical sense. For the purposes of political presenta-
tion it was vital that 'the Soviet' and not 'the party' was seen to be 
seizing power. Others had said this in the Central Committee. 124 
Lenin was merely accentuating their point (and at last displaying the 
tactical subtlety which was to win him such renown); but his 
intervention put a useful check on Podvoiski. 125 He wanted no 
repetition of the trouble caused by the Bureau of the Bolshevik 
Military Organisation in the July Days. Podvoiski got his own back 
by enquiring about Lenin's progress with 'the decrees on the land, on 
peace, on workers' control over production and on the organisation 
of the Soviet republic'. But Lenin laughed off Podvoiski's implied 
reproach: 'First it's necessary to seize power and then set about 
printing the decrees!' 126 
He was confident in his capacity to turn out any such decrees on 
the day (or night, as it turned out with the Decree on Land) of the 
uprising. 127 His own hotheadedness, furthermore, had not vanished. 
He was infuriated by the persistent struggle of Kamenev and 
Zinoviev to derail the Central Committee from its insurrectionary 
line. Kamenev and Zinoviev had dispatched an anti-Lenin letter to 
Bolshevik party organisations; and, on 18 October, Kamenev 
published a declaration against a seizure of power in the far-left 
socialist but non-Bolshevik newspaper Novaya Zhizn (or 'New 
Life'). 128 Kamenev did not specifically divulge the Central Commit-
tee's decisions of 10 and 16 October. Even so, Lenin condemned this 
as 'strike-breaking' and urged the Central Committee to expel 
Kamenev and Zinoviev from the party. 129 His appeal was brushed 
aside by the Central Committee, and Workers' Path published an 
editorial comment playing down the differences between Lenin and 
his two adversaries. 130 Zinoviev himself wrote in the same issue and 
announced his solidarity with the position taken by Trotski in the 
Petrograd Soviet. J3J Trotski had taken to suggesting that, if the 
Bolsheviks took tg the streets, it would happen only in reaction to an 
attack by the Provisional Government; 132 and Zinoviev was attracted 
to such a proposition even though he knew that Trotski was using it 
merely as a subterfuge. 
The Central Committee acted carefully. The expulsion of Kamenev 
and Zinoviev would have ruined the chances of lulling Kerenski into 
 To All the Peoples 
259 
delusions of safety until the last possible moment. It would also have 
lost the service of two talented leaders; Kamenev and Zinoviev were 
willing to stand by the party during an insurrection which they had 
deplored. Stalin, Workers' Path editor, probably calculated also that 
Zinoviev and Kamenev would help in restraining Lenin from too 
reckless a strategy in the days ahead. The Bolshevik Central 
Committee needed to stay in touch with movements of opinion in 
the garrison and the industrial suburbs and to monitor the 
Provisional Government's security measures. Lenin's incaution had 
acquired deserved notoriety in August and September; his harangues 
in favour of action at any price could have cost the party dearly in 
October. 
Trotski manoeuvred astutely in the public arena and his oratorical 
mastery was put to the party's use. The Petrograd Soviet's Military-
Revolutionary Committee continued preparations for an uprising 
whenever the moment seemed ripe. The Red Guards were readied for 
action and messages reached the Kronstadt naval garrison and 
various leading party centres in the country. The Bolshevik press in 
Petrograd warned constantly of the dangers posed by a resuscitation 
of Kornilovite conspiracies. A Bolshevik-led coup was the daily 
speculative fare of the other newspapers; the main substance of their 
guess-work was not whether the Bolsheviks would revolt but whether 
their power would last for very long after their rebellion. Delegates to 
the Second All-Russian Congress of Soviets of Workers' and 
Soldiers' Deputies were arriving in Petrograd; the Bolsheviks were 
already sure that a majority would be held by those socialists who 
opposed coalition with the Kadets and wanted a solidly socialist 
administration. On 22 October, Trotski broke cover by advocating 
that the forthcoming Congress of Soviets should select a new 
government for the country. Such a step, he affirmed, would halt 
the alleged moves to surrender to the Germans and to facilitate the 
solution of the problems of peace, land and industry. He asked a 
Petrograd Soviet crowd to pledge support to him and his endeavours. 
A resounding cry came back at him: 'We swear it!' 133 
. There remained several Bolsheviks, not only in the Military-
Revolutionary Committee but also in the· party's City Committee, 
who demanded an immediate seizure of power: Lenin was not the 
only Leninist. But he was the only one holding Central Committee 
membership. The Central Committee leaned in favour of Trotski's 
solution; and Stalin wrote in Workers' Path on 24 October about the 
need for the Congress of Soviets to appoint a new government. Thus 
 260 
Lenin: A Political Life 
it would be hard for the anti-Bolshevik groups to claim that the 
military action was merely a Bolshevik coup. 134 
Lenin lived on in M. V. Fofanova's flat. He acted circumspectly as 
the city's militia commander had put out an order for searches to be 
made for him, 135 and the newspapers reported that the Minister of 
Justice had become directly engaged in the hunt. 136 Fofanova, who 
worked in the Bolshevik Central Committee Secretariat, implored 
him not to venture out of doors. 137 He had plenty to do. The Central 
Committee had obliged him to prepare 'theses' for the Congress 'on 
the land, on the war, on power'. Milyutin was to do the same on 
workers' control; Stalin on the national question; and the 'report on 
the current moment' was entrusted to Trotski. 138 Events were 
hurtling to their conclusion. On 24 October, Kerenski tried to 
suppress Bolshevik newspapers in the capital; police raids were 
frequent. His obvious intention was to render it difficult for the 
Military-Revolutionary Committee to carry out an insurrection. 
Early in the day he appeared to have the support of the Pre-
Parliament; but its evening meeting was a different affair: a majority 
of Mensheviks and Socialist Revolutionaries advocated the forma-
tion of a new government which would immediately inaugurate land 
reform and peace negotiations, and the proposal was accepted in the 
Pre-Parliament. Kerenski's last political prop had been kicked away; 
an all-socialist coalition Cabinet was demanded. 139 
Trotski, encouraged by the left-wing Socialist Revolutionaries in 
the Military-Revolutionary Committee, wished to avoid seizing 
power until the opening of the Congress of Soviets. To the Central 
Committee's delight, Kerenski's repressive demarche was widely 
taken to authenticate the Bolshevik claim that they were simply 
defending themselves when making their military dispositions. The 
Military-Revolutionary Committee had appointed its commissars to 
various regiments and units and arranged for the neutralising of 
hostile forces. Plans were in hand for the taking of post and telegraph 
offices, and the siege of the Winter Palace was being projected. 
Assistance from the Kronstadt naval garrison was requested. 
And yet the proffered help of one central figure, Lenin, was 
shrugged aside. Lenin sent out Fofanova several times to the Central 
Committee in the Smolny Institute on 24 October with his pleas to be 
allowed out of hiding. Each request was denied. 'I do not understand 
them!' he exploded: 'What is it that scares them?' 140 Towards early 
evening, at six o'clock, he wrote his last letter to the Central 
Committee. By then he was frantic with suspicion that his colleagues 
 To All the Peoples 
261 
were shirking their obligations. He wondered even whether the 
Congress of Soviets could be relied on: 'It would be a disaster, or 
just a formality, to wait for the vacillating vote on 25 October; the 
people have the right and duty to decide such questions not by votes 
but by force. The people have the right and duty at critical moments 
of the revolution to direct its representatives, even its best representa-
tives, and not to wait for them.' 141 Delay, he maintained, was 'a 
crime'. He no longer minded which organisation assumed power: 
'That's unimportant now: let the Military-Revolutionary Committee 
"or some other institution" seize it' .142 He left a note behind for the 
peripatetic Fofanova: 'I have gone where you did not want me to 
go'. 143 He could no longer contain himself in the Vyborg apartment. 
He covered part of his face with a bandage, positioned his trusty wig 
on his head, grabbed his cap and went with Eino Rahja towards 
Bolshevik headquarters in the Smolny Institute. 144 On the way, he 
engaged in political conversation with the conductress of the 
tramcar: his conspiratorial instincts flew to the wind. Lenin and 
Rahja arrived at the Smolny Institute, after a narrowly-avoided 
encounter with a cavalry patrol, towards midnight. 145 
As yet the Military-Revolutionary Committee had limited itself to 
reacting to the Provisional Government's measures designed to 
prevent an uprising, but within a couple of hours of Lenin's arrival 
a more aggressive demeanour was displayed. The central electrical-
generating station was occupied. Bridges over the Neva were 
lowered. The cruiser Aurora was moved to within firing range of 
the Winter Palace. In the early light of 25 October, the State Bank 
and the telephone offices were taken, and by 8 am the Warsaw 
Station, which was the terminal of the rail link with army head-
quarters and the northern sector of the Eastern front, was in the 
Military-Revolutionary Committee's hands. As the Bolsheviks and 
their supporters in the armed forces and the Red Guard spread their 
power through the capital, a surprised and dejected Kerenski made 
his plans for escape from the cordon around the Winter Palace. 146 
The October Revolution in Petrograd on 25 October 1917 was 
violent, but, by the standards of revolutions, fairly bloodless. Lenin's 
i~pact was considerable, but not as great on the day of the uprising 
or on the preparatory tactics as it had been on the Central 
Committee's original decisions of 10 and 16 October. The crucial 
figures were Trotski in the Petrograd Soviet, Sverdlov in the Central 
Committee and Dzierzynski and Antonov-Ovseenko and their 
colleagues in the Military-Revolutionary Committee -
not to 
 262 
Lenin: A Political Life 
mention those hundreds of local Bolsheviks and their sympathisers in 
Petrograd who used their initiative and took decisions in their own 
districts. The switch from pseudo-defensive to outwardly aggressive 
tactics was likely to occur at some point on 25 October, and probably 
before the opening of the Congress of Soviets. The Bolsheviks at the 
Smolny Institute, moreover, were aware that power was more or less 
already theirs. As G. I. Bokii put it: 'At night, at around 3 o'clock in 
the morning, the situation was clarified: power was in fact in our 
hands'. 147 Lenin's tactical recommendations were therefore little 
distinguishable from the Central Committee's current practice. 
There is one exception to this generalisation, and the exception is 
important. Whereas the Central Committee's activity might have led 
to a total overthrow of Kerenski before the Congress, there does not 
appear to have been a deliberate policy about such timing. Lenin 
sought to change this. The Congress was meant to meet on 25 
October. It was Lenin's will to ensure that, when the delegatt:s 
assembled, power would already have been grasped from the 
Provisional Government; and, as soon as he reached the Institute, 
he imparted this idea to his colleagues with characteristic insistence. 
It is therefore entirely credible that his presence made a few hours' 
difference to the precise moment when the Kerenski cabinet was 
demonstrably incapable of further rule. 148 Lenin demanded, inspired, 
energised. He had attended the dawn meeting of the Central 
Committee. Not only Trotski but also Lenin's opponents Kamenev 
and Zinoviev were present. 149 Members crowded round the table in 
Room 36, with several participants and onlookers sitting on the 
floor. 150 
Lenin, usually a punctiliously efficient person, still had not 
prepared the various 'theses' asked for by the Central Committee 
on 21 October. 151 Milyutin and Larin had drafted a Decree on the 
Land, for presentation to the Congress of Soviets. Its contents are 
unknown; 152 but Lenin took over the final elaboration. 153 There was 
discussion, too, about the name for the new administration and its 
officials. 'Ministers' seemed too bourgeois a nomenclature. Trotski, 
to general acclaim, suggested 'people's commissars'; and Lenin added 
that the government could be called the 'Council of People's 
Commissars'. 154 A list of potential commissars was compiled. 155 By 
mid-morning on 25 October, the Winter Palace was the only major 
building not yet in the possession of the insurrectionaries. Most 
ministers of the Provisional Government remained there at their 
posts even though the cabinet knew that the chances of a successful 
 To All the Peoples 
263 
defence of the palace were slim. At 10 am Lenin decided that the 
moment was appropriate to announce the regime's removal. 
Composing a manifesto 'to the citizens of Russia', he declared: 
'The Provisional Government has been overthrown. State power had 
passed into the hands of tht" organ of the Petrograd Soviet of 
Workers' and Soldiers' Deputies: the Military-Revolutionary So-
viet, which stands at the head of the Petrograd proletariat and 
garrison'. 156 
THE SECOND CONGRESS OF SOVIETS 
The manifesto carefully mentioned the time of its publication. Lenin 
presumably wanted to have it recorded that the insurrection had been 
undertaken before the Congress met. He would have damaged his 
party's interests if several days had intervened between insurrection 
and Congress; but the interim of a few hours was short enough for 
the action still to appear as a true transfer of power to the soviets 
rather than to a single party. This interim, on the other hand, 
prevented any possible vacillation by the non-Bolshevik ·delegates to 
the Congress about Kerenski's overthrow; they would meet with a 
fait accompli. 
Lenin's case for urgent measures was not entirely a figment of his 
fevered brain. The Bolsheviks, while knowing that they would 
constitute by far the largest party at the Congress with around 300 
out of 670 delegates, knew they would lack a clear majority. 157 He 
wanted to leave nothing to chance. Kerenski took leave of his 
ministers in the Winter Palace and took a limousine through the 
ill-guarded cordon at II am to seek military support outside 
Petrograd. Lenin redoubled his demands for a storming of the 
palace, but the besieger!> were reluctant to spill blood. A Petrograd 
Soviet session opened at 2.35 pm under the chairmanship of Trotski. 
His statement that Lenin was to address the Petrograd Soviet drew 
\mremitting applause'. Trotski gave him a suitable introduction: 
'Long live comrade Lenin, who has now returned to us!' 158 Lenin, 
hardly identifiable without his moustache, spoke briefly on the 
programme of the as yet unformed Soviet government. His voice 
was loud and hoarse, but every word was enunciated with clarity; a 
Menshevik participant noted how he stressed the ends of his 
sentences: obviously he wanted his policies to be clearly under-
 264 
Lenin: A Political Life 
stood. 159 He was followed by Zinoviev, who made an equally rousing 
contribution. For the while, the appearance of Bolshevik political 
unity was maintained. There was no debate on the speeches. An 
unnamed member of the audience interjected that the Bolshevik 
party had improperly arrogated the rights of the Congress of Soviets. 
But Trotski firmly closed the meeting and the leaders rushed away to 
their other duties. 160 
Still the Winter Palace had not fallen. The Congress's opening, 
scheduled for 2 pm, was several times postponed; the fractions of the 
various socialist parties prepared themselves all day for a confronta-
tion. The Left Socialist Revolutionaries and the Menshevik Inter-
nationalists decided to convene separately from their respective 
parties; both these leftist groups of anti-Bolsheviks felt it would be 
counter-productive to abandon the Congress of Soviets to the 
Bolsheviks. Yet Dan and Chernov, guiding the majority of Socialist 
Revolutionaries and Mensheviks, disagreed. They were infuriated by 
the pre-Congress overthrow, and planned to demonstrate their 
annoyance by walking out from the Congress. 161 
Neither then nor later did Lenin indicate whether his tactics had 
been deliberately geared towards this very result. But there can be no 
doubt that the reaction of Dan and Chernov played into his hands. 
Martov, himself no great tactician, could scarcely believe that Dan 
and Chernov, who twenty four hours previously had endorsed 
policies designed to bring about an immediate peace and an 
immediate confiscation of gentry-owned land, would walk out of a 
Congress which was about to announce exactly such policies, and 
that they would toss aside the opportunity to bargain with the 
Bolsheviks about the composition of an all-socialist coalition 
government. 162 Dan opened the proceedings on behalf of the Central 
Executive Committee from the previous Congress at 10.40 pm in the 
Smolny Institute. The incongruities of the occasion were sensed by 
everyone. A building which once had served as a private school for 
privileged metropolitan girls and whose ceilings were hung with 
delicate candelabras, was seething with hundreds of representatives 
of the working class and soldiery of all Russia. Many were armed. 
The crowd was packed so tightly that some deputies had to perch 
precariously on the window ledges. The air was fuggy with smoke; 
protests were made by non-smokers, and it was agreed that cigarettes 
should be stubbed out- but the smokers kept on smoking. 163 Dan, in 
almost a caricature of Menshevik diffidence, announced on this most 
political occasion that he would avoid making a political speech on 
 To All the Peoples 
265 
the grounds that his friends were under fire in the Winter Palace. His 
statement evoked little sympathy. 164 
Elections were held for the Congress's presidium. Fourteen 
Bolsheviks, led by Trotski, and seven Left Socialist Revolutionaries 
took the platform. A place was also reserved for a Menshevik 
Internationalist; but Martov refused to let his group become 
identified with the day's violence, and the place remained un-
filled.165 Martov rose, on the Congress floor, to call for a peaceful 
resolution to the conflict on Petrograd's streets, and for negotiations 
to produce a government consisting of all the parties represented in 
the soviets. Most delegates to the Congress, including many 
Bolsheviks, had come to the capital' with the intention of creating 
just such a coalition government. 166 
And Martov's speech, according to the Socialist-Revolutionary 
newspaper, drew warm applause from a majority in the hall. 167 The 
Left Socialist Revolutionary, S.D. Mtsislavski announced approval; 
and A. V. Lunacharski, a member of the Novaya Zhizn group, who 
had rejoined the Bolsheviks with the Interdistricters, declared that he 
had 'absolutely no objection' to Martov's suggestion. The main-
stream leaderships of the Mensheviks and the Socialist Revolutionar-
ies, however, held to their plan; they castigated the Bolshevik-led 
violence, demanded further negotiations with Kerenski and walked 
out. Their departure at last left the Bolsheviks with an absolute 
majority at the Congress and with a freer hand to influence the make-
up of the next government. 168 The ineptitude, while understandable 
in the circumstances, was stunning. Martov stood up again to plead 
for a general coalition of socialists in government. But this time 
Trotski was the master of the situation. Tersely he exclaimed: 'No, 
here no compromise is possible. To those who have left and to those 
who tell us to do this we must say: you are miserable bankrupts, your 
role is played out; go where you ought to go: into the dustbin of 
history!' Martov was provoked beyond endurance, and he too led his 
group from the hall. Trotski was unrepentant, claiming that the 
walkouts had served to purge 'the workers' and peasants' revolution 
o.f counter-revolutionary influences'. 169 
Earlier in the year, there had been vituperative claims that Lenin 
had returned to Russia to claim the long-vacant throne of the 
anarchist Bakunin. Such claims misread Lenin's intentions; for the 
stateless communities of anarchism were no part of the Bolshevik 
leader's intentions for the 'dictatorship of the proletariat and the 
poorest peasants'. Even those who had made the claims, however, 
 266 
Lenin: A Political Life 
must have been surprised by the lack of ceremony attendant upon 
Lenin's 'coronation'. The first full day of the Congress of Soviets 
proceeded without him. 
He continued to try to precipitate the Military-Revolutionary 
Committee into action. Midnight passed and still no action, but 
the Winter Palace's defenders steadily diminished in number. At 
around 2 am on 26 October the troops of the Military-Revolutionary 
Committee burst in. Resistance was minimal. The ministers of the 
Provisional Government were placed under arrest and the comple-
tion of the insurrection was announced to the Second Congress of 
Soviets by the insurrection's earliest critic, Lev Kamenev. Lenin 
remained in Smolny for a while, but had not yet visited the Congress. 
The task of writing and editing decrees and public announcements 
demanded his close attention. It was he who composed the 
proclamation, 'To The Workers, Soldiers and Peasants!', which 
announced the assumption of power by the Congress of Soviets. 
But he consigned the job of reading it out to Lunacharski. 170 The 
Congress ratified the proclamation at 5 am, and Lenin left the 
Smolny Institute to take a few hours' rest in the nearby flat of V. D. 
Bonch-Bruevich. 171 Busy discussions followed through the day. The 
Bolshevik fraction of the Congress of Soviets met to co-ordinate 
tactics. The Military-Revolutionary Committee met and then the 
Bolshevik fraction met with the Left Socialist-Revolutionary fraction 
in a vain effort to bring about a two-party soviet government. The 
Bolshevik Central Committee met. Lenin was busy in all of them: he 
had returned to the centre of action. Decrees and resolutions on the 
government, on the land and on peace were hastily negotiated - and 
Lenin, having sent his sister Mariya back to Fofanova's flat for 
material, undertook most of the composition. 172 The Second 
Congress of Soviets reconvened at 9 pm on 26 October. Trotski 
and Lenin, joint architects of the October Revolution, shared the 
stage; and Lenin, to tumultuous applause, introduced the proceed-
ings and laid the 'Decree on Peace' and the 'Decree on Land' before 
the Congress. 173 
FIRST WEEK, FIRST DECREES 
The various pronouncements made by the Bolshevik leadership in the 
week after the October seizure in Petrograd were of momentous 
significance in modern Russian history; and they also deserve 
 To All the Peoples 
267 
scrutiny inasmuch as their wording reveals much about the worries 
which the Bolshevik party leadership had about the political 
situation. Lenin had previously been arguing that the party's 
supporters would appreciate action better than words. The seizure 
of power placed an extra premium on words. In a country where 
power had become locally-based there was a corresponding increase 
in the effort needed for communication and persuasion. An outline 
of the hopes and intentions of the revolutionary socialist administra-
tion was urgently required for both Russia and the world, and 
Lenin's literary fluency was put to intensive use. 
The proclamation written by him for the Congress of Soviets on 25 
October174 had justified the 'victorious uprising' in Petrograd by 
reference to the 'will of the huge majority of workers, soldiers and 
peasants'. Lenin stressed that several peasant delegates had been 
present at the Congress. 175 This revealed a nervous recognition that 
the gathering had been drawn overwhelmingly from elections by 
workers and soldiers in a country with a demographic preponderance 
of peasants. These were early days, and the Bolsheviks and their 
supporters watched warily how the countryside would react to them. 
The proclamation described the intentions of 'soviet power'. 'An 
immediate democratic peace to all peoples' would be proposed. Land 
owned by the gentry, the crown and the monasteries would pass 'to 
the disposal of peasant committees'. 'Workers' control' would be 
introduced 'over production'. 176• The Constituent Assembly would 
be convoked in a timely fashion. Care would be taken about the 
acquisition of bread for the towns and essential products for the 
villages. 'Soviet power' would also guarantee the right of self-
determination for 'all nations inhabiting Russia' .177 Emphasis was 
also placed upon the armed forces. There would be a 'democratisa-
tion of the army'; and a promise was made to tax 'the property-
owning classes' heavily and to requisition their property in order to 
secure the well-being of soldiers and their families. Soldiers, for their 
part, were asked to 'render active resistance to the Kornilovite 
Kerenski' .178 
. The Decree on Peace, issued by the Congress on 26 October, had 
equally portentous significance. 179 For the first time in the First 
World War a major belligerent country's government called for a 
speedy and omnilateral end to the fighting. The most important 
aspect was the aim of 'a democratic or just peace'. Military victory by 
any nation; territorial annexations; post-war financial indemnities: 
all these possibilities were expressly repudiated. The forcible 
 268 
Lenin: A Political L(fe 
incorporation of 'small nationalities' was explicitly rejected. 180 The 
Soviet authorities declared a wish to abandon secret diplomacy 
forever. The treaties concluded by Nikolai II with the Allies would 
shortly be published, and the revolutionary administration in 
Petrograd promised to deal 'entirely openly' with the outside 
world. 181 
This last commitment was unprecedented in world history. Yet 
Lenin was not quite as incautious and lacking in guile as might 
appear. Throughout the previous months he had spoken unremitt-
ingly about the achievement of a democratic peace in Europe 
through European socialist revolution. The overthrow of existing 
belligerent governments had been a basic demand. The Decree on 
Peace made a proposal 'to all warring peoples and their governments 
quickly to begin negotiations about a just, democratic peace' .182 It 
contained no call for revolution, no direct threat to the governments 
of either side in the conflict, no mention of imperialism. 183. The 
reasons were not explained by Lenin. The claim has sometimes been 
made that he was already backing away from his earlier commitment 
to international revolution, or at least that he was placing the 
interests of the Soviet state's survival above those of potential 
revolutions elsewhere. 184 This seems far-fetched. A more likely 
explanation that he was playing on American President Woodrow 
Wilson's known wishes to see the war terminated speedily and a 
peace composed on the basis of national self-determination. Lenin 
consequently employed uncharacteristic vocabulary, describing the 
continuation of the War as 'the greatest crime against humanity'. 185 
Evidently he calculated that such wording would make it harder for 
the British and French governments, in the event of an Allied victory, 
to impose an annexationist peace. 
In addition, the fact that he expressed an appeal to 'peoples and 
their governments' indicated a break with the diplomatic practice 
which recognised only relations between governments or states; and a 
section of the decree was devoted to a denunciation of secret 
diplomacy and secret treaties. From then onward only open and 
reported negotiations would be entertained. 186 The last paragraph 
addressed itself 'especially to the conscious workers' of 'England [sic], 
France and Germany', declaring that they had supplied 'models of 
proletarian heroism and historical creativity' and expressing con-
fidence that they 'would understand the tasks resting on them for the 
liberation of mankind from the horrors of the war and its 
consequences'. The decree ended with a summons for workers to 
 To All the Peoples 
269 
bring about a peace which would involve 'the emancipation of the 
labouring and exploited masses of the population from all slavery 
and all exploitation'. 187 
This was as near as Lenin could go towards a call for international 
socialist revolution without aggravating the already great risk that 
his decree would not be published outside Russia. 188 He had no 
similar problem with the Decree on Land. It contained five brief 
clauses. The landed property of the gentry, the imperial family and 
the church was 'abolished without compensation' and placed 'at the 
disposal' of local land committees and peasant soviets until a 
definitive ruling on the land question was given by the Consti~uent 
Assembly. A warning was given against wastage of confiscated soil 
and equipment, which 'now belonged to the entire people': a strict 
inventory was to be kept. The decree also stipulated that 'the lands of 
rank-and-file peasants and rank-and-file cossacks' were not subject 
to confiscation. 189 These generalisations were accompanied by a 
word-by-word reproduction of the 242 'peasant instructions' colla-
ted by the Socialist Revolutionaries. The absolute and final end of 
'the right to private landed property' was asserted. Land could no 
longer be bought, sold, rented or mortgaged; it was to become an 
'all-people legacy' .190 Only estates engaged in specialised forms of 
farming, such as stud farms or orange groves, were to become the 
property of the state. The vast remainder was to stay with 'the 
people'. Even resources, such as woods, small lakes and farm 
equipment were to be used by peasant communes as they saw fit; 
and every citizen was accorded 'the right of use of the land'. 
Distribution of the land was to be egalitarian, with local factors 
determining whether equality was to be assessed by the number of 
mouths to be fed in a family or the number of hours of labour 
expendable by a family on the land alloted to it. Peasants were also 
allowed to separate from the commune if they desired. 191 
There were gross uncertainties in the decree. Not the least was the 
confusion about the division of responsibility among land commit-
tees, peasant communes and peasant soviets. Furthermore, Lenin 
~sserted that the land of 'rank-and-file peasants' was not subject to 
confiscation. He omitted to define such peasants; and it may be that 
he allowed his inveterate anti-kulak attitude to creep into the decree 
here (or at least suggested that he would not be aghast if the poor 
peasants expropriated their richer brethren). 192 Such vagueness 
cannot have been simply the result of hasty composition. On the 
other hand, the decree's central thrust was plain. The new govern-
 270 
Lenin: A Political Life 
ment wanted the peasants to get on with their own revolution with 
the minimum of interference from the towns. A party resting its main 
hopes upon the support of the urban working class was directing its 
first major social reform, not to the workers but to the peasants: it is 
yet another indication of the worries of the Bolsheviks in the first 
weeks of their power. 
Also on 26 October, an enactment193 was made affirming that 'a 
workers' and peasants' government' would rule until the convocation 
of the Constituent Assembly. Its name would be the Council of 
People's Commissars and 'Vladimir Ulyanov (Lenin)' was announced 
as its 'chairman' .194 The new government would follow 'the pro-
gramme proclaimed' by the Second Congress of Soviets. 195 The 
emphasis was on liberation and mass participation. The principal 
measure signalling the other side of Bolshevik intentions was the 
Decree on the Press which was published on 27 October. This 
allowed for the closure of newspapers deemed to be producing 
material inimical to the new political order. 196 It marked a contrast 
with the early activities of the Provisional Government when 
virtually unlimited civic freedoms were implemented. The Decree 
on the Press made plain that the Soviet authorities under the 
Bolsheviks would brook no fundamental opposition (and the 
contemporaneous searches of houses and printing enterprises by 
the Military-Revolutionary Committee enforced the decree immedia-
tely). Bolshevik spokesmen argued, as had Lenin in The State and 
Revolution that the propertied classes had always had an unfair 
advantage in setting up newspapers, and that the use of the press 
should not be confined mainly to the rich. Yet the basic intention to 
close down anti-Bolshevik newspapers was only lightly veiled. 
Themes of repression figured less in the output of decrees and 
instructions than themes of liberation; but this did not signify that 
Lenin came to government with gentle aims. The absence of terms 
such as 'dictatorship of the proletariat and the poorest peasants' 
from his formulations was cosmetic and temporary. 
One other crucial decree, on the eight-hour working day, was 
passed in the first week. This included several limitations not only on 
the length of each working day but also on night work and on work 
by women and minors. 197 It was an important reform. Yet it hardly 
amounted to the radical transformation in human relationships 
represented by the Decree on Land. Laws to nationalise banks and 
industrial syndicates, which Lenin had talked of before the October 
seizure of power, had yet to be formulated. 198 
 To All the Peoples 
271 
Thus the urban working class was not informed about what was to 
happen to finance and industry. The party and government of the 
workers gave greater attention in its public pronouncements to 
defusing potential hostility from the peasants and the soldiers. This 
made political sense, since working-class support for the removal of 
Kerenski's administration, if not monolithic, was strong. And yet it is 
hard to suppress the suspicion that the slowness of legislative 
movement in the sector of the economy affecting the working class 
was an involuntary, preliminary sign of the inherent intractability of 
the problems of industrial recovery and expansion. Eventually, on 5 
November, twelve days after the Petrograd uprising, Lenin released a 
statement calling on workers to 'introduce the strictest control over 
production and accounts' and to arrest anyone found committing 
sabotage. 199 It was, again, vague and incomplete as a declaration of 
policy. Instead, the new authorities laid their stress on the rupture 
with the politics of Russia and Europe constituted by the October 
seizure of power. And a truly historic rupture it was. Workers, along 
with soldiers and peasants, were being encouraged to 'take all power 
in the localities into the hands of their soviets'.200 No such summons 
had been issued by a government before; and Lenin and his 
associates were convinced that the dawn of a new era would soon 
shine upon them. 
