 5 Unsealed Messages: 1916 
to April 1917 
THE RUSSIAN EMPIRE ON THE BRINK 
Popular uprisings are often described in volcanic imagery: the 
storming of the Bastille in 1789 grips the imagination two centuries 
later; the anti-Soviet revolt in Hungary in 1956 comes to us in 
pictures of uncontrolled mass fury on Budapest streets. The February 
Revolution of 1917 in Petrograd is no exception. The sudden 
outbreak of disturbances has been likened to the early stages of a 
hurricane. It happened so very quickly, and the crowds of workers 
and garrison soldiers constituted the force that brought it about. 
None the less, the notion that 'the masses' surged on to the Nevski 
Prospekt in spontaneous violence is at best a half-truth. The terms 
used betray the prejudices of the commentators (and these include 
Lenin and other leading Bolsheviks). 'The masses' and 'the crowd' 
are conventional terms for describing the participants in events in 
Petrograd. Yet the February Revolution was not just the outburst of 
some force of nature. Years of preparation had preceded it. Workers 
had turned against the monarchy in increasing numbers. They had 
not done this primarily under the influence of the political parties; 
but such parties also had for years been at work among them. 
Furthermore, although the party activists were few in Petrograd in 
February 1917, there were enough to give guidance to an uprising 
once the chance to overthrow the autocracy had become fully 
evident. Bolsheviks, Mensheviks and Socialist Revolutionaries were 
operating in the suburbs. Trade unionists were actively engaged in 
the struggle; and even the work-gangs in the factories provided a 
vehicle for organising the attack on the monarchy. 1 
Nevertheless there was no planning from on high for these events; 
and the surprise at the February Revolution was universal at Court, 
in the Duma, in the public organisations, among the revolutionary 
undergrounders and in the emigration. Vladimir Ilich Lenin, Marxist 
commentator and lifelong foe of the Romanov monarchy, has been 
128 
 Unsealed Messages 
129 
mocked for not sensing that the dynasty's downfall was imminent 
despite having predicted it for years. But his forecasts had not 
pretended to strictly chronological exactitude: he had not set himself 
up as a day-by-day revolutionary astrologer. Writing about the 
wartime political situation, he stated: 'Will it lead to revolution? 
This we don't know, and no one can know this.'2 
Even so, he cannot be let entirely off the hook. It is a remarkable 
fact that in 1915-16, except for commentary on disputes among 
socialists in Petrograd, he wrote only one article specifically about 
general politics in the Russian empire - and a short article at that;3 
and he overlooked the provinces altogether. It was events in central 
Europe which grasped most of his attention. He kept a steady eye on 
Germany, observing every sign that the leftists were gaining in 
popularity in the German Social-Democratic Party.4 He felt too 
that his own star was on the rise. Lenin jotted down in his notebooks 
that a German centrist had described Liebknecht as a follower of 'the 
Russian Lenin'. 5 
But life in Europe was not without its niggling worries on the 
domestic plane. Lenin's finances remained shaky; Nadezhda Krups-
kaya was distressed that her inability to get regular work as a part-
time teacher compelled him to take on too much literary work for 
money. 6 His health, too, was unstable. In May 1916, he took to his 
bed for three days (although he typically added a postscript to a 
letter by Krupskaya to the effect that he only had 'a little 
influenza'). 7 Periodically, the mental strain on him was also 
tremendous and Lenin sometimes refused invitations to speak in 
public. 'My nerves,' he explained, 'are no good. I'm scared of giving 
lectures.'8 Work pressure was a factor. An additional irritant was the 
possibility that Switzerland might get drawn into the war. Russian 
emigres might fall subject to deportation. Dire contingencies called 
for dire measures. Lenin contemplated a campaign to persuade Swiss 
socialists to press for all foreigners with six months' residence in 
Switzerland to have automatic right to Swiss citizenship. Rather that 
than exile from Europe.9 
Lenin's absorption in mid-European affair:: was not wholly 
voluntary. The war destroyed all but a few of his links with 
Russia, and he complained that he had 'incredibly little news'. 10 In 
September 1916 he moaned that he was 'sitting here without Russian 
newspapers' .11 Swiss newspapers were no adequate substitute. At the 
very least he wanted to read the Petrograd liberal legal dailies 
regularly. When he obtained copies of these, however, the informa-
 130 
Lenin: A Political Life 
tion was far from being exhaustive. Nor could the Foreign Bureau of 
the Central Committee obtain data through Bolsheviks arriving in 
Switzerland from Russia. Only in January 1917 did he finally meet 
anyone who had been in the Romanov empire since the war's 
outbreak. This, too, failed to provide a comprehensive report. The 
newcomers were not Bolsheviks but a pair of ordinary conscripts 
who had escaped from German captivity. 12 
So Russian political emigrants in Switzerland had greater excuse 
than most in failing to perceive in early 1917 that the ultimate crisis 
for the Romanov monarchy was maturing fast. The disaster at 
Tannenberg in the war's first months was followed by successful 
retrenchment. The Germans' advance was halted, and Russian forces 
intimidated the Austrian-Hungarian troops on the Eastern front's 
southern belt. On the Western front the British and French held the 
line after the loss of Belgium and northern France. The protraction 
of the fighting, involving vast expenditure of human and material 
resources, made necessary the total mobilisation of each combatant 
country's economy. The Germans, not being able to import by sea 
because of the British navy, had to do this most quickly. But even 
Britain, which had a traditionally low level of state intervention in 
economic affairs, was compelled to recast her arrangements. David 
Lloyd George, who became Prime Minister in 1916, had made his 
name by securing an increase in the munitions available to the British 
Expeditionary Force. The government's regulation of production and 
supplies in industry grew everywhere. Output, too, expanded; and the 
labour-forces of all countries were 'diluted' with unskilled workers, 
including women, who had no prior experience of factory or mining 
employment. Technological modernisation continued and was even 
speeded up in wartime. 
Social pressures built up most dangerously in those countries 
where the economic and cultural transformation associated with 
industrialisation was least advanced. Of all major belligerent powers, 
this was most evident in Russia. The railway network was dense 
enough to handle passenger and freight traffic in peacetime, but not 
after 1914, when the army's requirements -which included hay for 
the horses as well as men and machines for the regiments - grew 
sharply. 13 The quality of rolling stock deteriorated. The transport of 
food supplies to the towns was bound to be affected and the harvests 
stay close to the pre-war level. The German naval blockade 
prevented the usual export of grain, but by 1916 the trains were no 
 Unsealed Messages 
131 
longer running as smoothly and the beginnings of a shortage of 
deliveries was becoming apparent. 14 
For an economic commentator like Lenin, this worsening situation 
would normally have called forth pages of analysis; and, as a 
revolutionary, he would normally have displayed an informed 
pleasure. But he was distracted by mid-European events. No 
Russian Marxist except Petr Maslov was better-noted for his 
attention to rural affairs. But Lenin ignored, or probably more 
accurately, was unaware of, the peasantry's problems. Inflation 
rocketed after 1914 as the state borrowed heavily and printed paper 
roubles frantically in order to finance armaments production. The 
incentive for peasant households to trade their grain with the towns 
decreased. Apart from the problem of a depreciating currency, the 
peasantry was annoyed at finding so few goods to purchase. 
Factories produced primarily for the army. In the crucial machine-
tool sector, 78 per cent of business was directed at military purposes. 
Peasants preferred to keep their grain; they fed themselves and their 
animals better and also, when the government banned the sale of 
vodka for the war's duration, they distilled and drank their own 
spirits using their harvested grain. There was acquiescence in the 
conscription of millions of rural lads and few signs of revolt were 
noticed, yet the countryside's loyalty, after the troubles of 1905-6, 
was no longer to be taken for granted by the emperor and his 
government; and even the landlords, who had difficulty obtaining 
labourers as a result of mass conscription, were grumbling. 15 
Factory workers were openly discontented. The early rally to the 
government's cause faded. Strikes swept over Russia in the winter of 
1915-16 and again in late 1916. The authorities blamed German 
provocateurs and pointed to the rise in real wages for skilled 
labourers in the armaments sector as a sign that things were not as 
bad as was claimed. But the food shortages of winter 1916--17 
affected even the better-paid workers. The huge industrial expansion 
(and Lenin, when in 1917 he was to take a closer interest in wartime 
economic processes, was virtually alone in emphasising that an 
expansion of output in factories and mines had occurred) 16 was 
accompanied by problems. Funds were unavailable for an increase in 
housing stock and social and cultural amenities. Nor did the state 
enforce its own safety standards. In officially-monitored factories 
there were 3.5 million workers by January 1917. The cities and towns 
teemed with discontent. 
 132 
Lenin: A Political Life 
The moderate conservatives and liberals in the Fourth State Duma 
saw the need to contact the working class through war-industry 
committees which were constituted by both industrialists and work-
ers. The Octobrist leader Aleksandr Guchkov remained prominent 
among them. He used them astutely to confirm his case that the 
Duma leaders were more competent at the tasks of government than 
were the imperial Council of Ministers. 17 The court became a 
national laughing stock. Rasputin debauched himself until, after 
several attempts, he was assassinated in December 1916; and the 
German background of the empress Aleksandra formed the basis of 
popular allegations that she unpatriotically sought a separate peace 
with Germany and Austria-Hungary. Nikolai II, after the initial 
military set-backs, resolved to demonstrate his commitment to the 
struggle for victory by appointing himself as Commander-in-Chief in 
1915. The Russian armies continued to acquit themselves well, and in 
1916 General Brusilov succeeded in breaching the Austrian lines and, 
albeit only temporarily, forcing the enemy to retreat. The problem 
for the emperor was not military but political. His position at army 
headquarters in Mogilev, nearly 800 kilometres from Petrograd, left 
him almost as isolated from knowledge of current developments in 
Petrograd as were emigres such as Lenin. 
The regime's nerve had not cracked. Nikolai II and his ministers, 
who constituted an increasingly gerontocratic administration after 
1914, doled out splendidly shabby treatment to the State Duma 
throughout the war. The Kadets and Octobrists who had formed a 
'Progressive Bloc' in 1 iJ 13 called in vain for a 'government of 
confidence', meaning principally the introduction of Duma politi-
cians to the government. The incompetence of the administration was 
exaggerated by the Progressive Bloc, but the myth struck deep roots. 
In 1916, Kadet leader Pavel Milyukov, whose preference was for a 
constitutional monarchy, asked provocatively whether ministers were 
guilty of stupidity or treason. In the winter of 1916-1917 the equally 
exasperated Octobrist leader Guchkov took discreet soundings 
among the generals about their attitude to a potential coup against 
the emperor. 18 
The Minister of Internal Affairs strengthened its policy of clamp-
down: strikes were broken up and socialist activists were incarcera-
ted. Yet the underlying threat to the dynasty remained, and the 
disorganisation of the indigenous socialist movement was never 
complete. Throughout the First World War, socialist journals 
continued publishing. Newspapers were persecuted severely, and 
 Unsealed Messages 
133 
direct discussions of the government's war aims and general 
competence were not tolerated. But a degree of public debate among 
the intellectuals persisted; even Swiss-based emigres, such as Lenin 
himself, were not disbarred from publication so long as they 
employed the conventional Aesopian language. The war-industry 
committees, despite being shunned by Bolsheviks on the grounds that 
they were merely a means for prosecuting an imperialist war more 
successfully, allowed the Mensheviks to organise covert anti-regime 
propaganda. Bolsheviks no longer had seats in the Duma; all their 
deputies languished in Siberian exile. But the Menshevik N. S. 
Ckhkeidze and his colleagues maintained their carefully-phrased 
criticism of the government; and Chkheidze, after a period of 
vacillation, came down against any support for the regime against 
Germany and Austria-Hungary. 19 The Russian empire's stability was 
even more brittle than in the Russo-Japanese war of 1904-5; the 
internal fissures were widening. And the man who was wrestling with 
the intellectual dilemmas of Hegel and Aristotle in the Bern Public 
Library was about to enter the pages of world history. 
THE KIENTHAL CONFERENCE 
Lenin's considerations on Russia at war skirted developments on the 
Eastern front. Nearly all statements by him in 1915-16 referred to 
political rather than military aspects of the war; the contingencies of 
battles, troop transfers, sieges, strategical thrusts and diversions did 
not interest him. From late 1915 the Russian armed forces acquitted 
themselves adequately. Germany's armies had occupied all of 
Poland, and the Turks proved more troublesome in the south than 
had been expected. But the front held; shell-shortages began to be 
surmounted; and Russian generals recovered confidence. Austria-
Hungary had experienced even greater difficulties and, with Italy's 
entry into the war in 1915, repeatedly needed German armies to 
rescue her. 
On the Western front, the French and British had fought back 
strongly after the initial disasters of 1914 when the German lines 
came to within sixty miles of Paris. The Schlieffen plan of the 
German High Command had assumed that a rapid surge through 
Belgium would leave France at Germany's mercy and make victory 
 134 
Lenin: A Political Life 
on both Western and Eastern fronts inevitable. This had not 
occurred. Nevertheless, the German armies yielded little ground, 
and the Allied governments turned to other strategems. The British 
expedition to the Straits of the Dardanelles was an unmitigated 
disaster; Austria attacked and overran Serbia; and a joint Allied 
landing at Salonika failed to shake the pattern of the war. Both the 
Allies and the Central Powers, particularly Germany, judged that the 
Western front was the decisive military theatre. In February 1916, the 
Germans launched an enormous assault on the fortress of Verdun. 
Fierce resistance followed, as the French regarded the town's defence 
as a symbol of the national war-effort. Governments on both sides 
worried Jest continued Jack of success might breed popular disaffec-
tion. Mutinies took place in the French forces. Strikes broke out in 
all countries as working conditions worsened and bread rations were 
lowered. In order to undermine the Central Powers' war effort, the 
British imposed a naval blockade on Germany and tried to foment 
unrest among Austria-Hungary's minorities. Germany replied by 
opening a submarine offensive on Allied shipping. 20 
It took the Dublin Easter Rising of 1916 before Lenin began to pay 
close attention to the Irish factor in British politics, and a mini-
polemic occurred with Radek (who, true to his anti-nationalist 
standpoint, refused to greet the insurrection with acclaim). 21 But 
Lenin's day-to-day preoccupation was not so much with general 
politics and social life as with the factional strife among Europe's 
socialists after the Zimmerwald Conference of September 1915. It 
was plain to him that Robert Grimm would do his utmost to prevent 
a further leftward shift among Zimmerwaldists. Lenin had never 
trusted him: this was Lenin's usual reaction to someone with whom 
he disagreed and who wielded influence. Zinoviev had to spend a Jot 
of time reassuring Lenin that the Swiss socialist did not seek to 
exclude him from discussions. 22 
This boded ill for future relations. Zinoviev, the Bolshevik 
representative on the International Socialist Commission established 
at Zimmerwald, constantly expressed reservations about Grimm's 
centrist motivations. The Commission met on 3 February 1916 to 
plan a second 'Zimmerwald Conference'. Lenin, Radek and Zinoviev 
wanted one for its own sake, while Grimm supported the idea only 
because the International Socialist Bureau had remained inactive. 23 
Two months were set aside to send out the invitations and allow the 
delegates to arrive. Much had happened since the previous Con-
ference. Events in Germany in particular appeared to be moving in a 
 Unsealed Messages 
135 
direction favourable to Zimmerwaldists. The German Social-Demo-
cratic Party was beset by divisions as Haase and Kautsky revealed 
their objections to the official party's leadership's policy on the war. 
In December 1915, at last, Haase's group in the Reichstag took the 
plunge and voted against war credits. Even so, this did not bring 
about a rapprochement with the far-left faction: Kautsky and Haase 
called for peace without annexations, but gave little indication about 
how to achieve it. Liebknecht and Luxemburg, along with Lenin, 
called unequivocally for a campaign of opposition to the govern-
ment. In Luxemburg's case, the anti-war propaganda had to be 
produced from a Berlin prison after her arrest in 1915; Liebknecht's 
immunity as a Reichstag deputy as yet protected him. The German 
Social-Democratic Party, renowned for its unity and discipline, 
moved towards schism.24 
Grimm took pleasure from the shift in the tactics of Haase and 
Kautsky, which resembled his own. The strengthening of a 'left-
centrist' bloc among Europe's socialists would, he hoped, marginalise 
those such as Lenin, Zinoviev and Radek whom he regarded as 
impulsive extremists. This was yet another reason why Lenin detested 
Kautsky. He feared that Kautsky might emerge as the leader of a 
mass German anti-war movement; and what happened in Germany, 
in the eyes of the Zimmerwald Left, was crucial to the prospects of 
European socialist revolution. Grimm keenly sent another invitation 
to the forthcoming Conference in Switzerland.25 
Proceedings opened in the Volkshaus in Bern on 24 April 1916, 
and were transferred on the following day to the Barenhotel in the 
nearby village of Kienthal. There were about forty delegates, who 
varied in number from day to day.26 The Kienthal Conference, like 
its Zimmerwald predecessor, could have been placed in a handful of 
charabancs without undue discomfort. Grimm had a harder time 
than anticipated. Haase and Kautsky, denouncing the whole 
Conference as an infringement of the International Socialist Bur-
eau's prerogatives, refused their invitation.27 Lenin and Zinoviev, 
delighted by the snubbing of Grimm, aggravated the situation by 
introducing intra-Russian disputes on to the Conference floor. The 
mandate of Martov and Akselrod to represent any Russian group 
was, as usual, challenged by the Bolsheviks.28 The objection was 
overruled, but then the Left won a further victory: the Swiss social-
democrat, Hermann Greulich, who had met up with a German 
governmental emissary, had come to the Conference. After heated 
debate, he was compelled to leave.29 Worse was to follow for Grimm: 
 136 
Lenin: A Political Life 
the leading French delegate at Kienthal, Pierre Brizon, had voted in 
favour of war credits. The Left at Kienthal circulated a petition 
criticising Brizon, and collected nineteen signatories. 30 Only Grimm's 
intervention as chairman stopped Brizon from storming out in retort. 
Two precious days had already passed. Pressed for time, the 
Conference resolved to start discussions on 26 April at eight 
o'clock in the morning.31 
They nearly succeeded: Grimm opened proceedings just a quarter 
of an hour late. Again the Left, though comprising a minority of the 
delegates, had been causing another upset: Zinoviev resumed the 
attack on Martov and Akselrod on the grounds that the group they 
claimed to represent, the Petrograd Mensheviks, were hostile to the 
Zimmerwald Manifesto. The objection was overruled. 32 Radek, too, 
made trouble. The Dutch socialists had been unable to send a 
contingent to Kienthal, and Radek claimed the right to sit as their 
representative. For Grimm, this was almost the last straw. Karl 
Radek, a Polish Jew, might well claim to have been Germanised by 
his lengthy sojourns in Germany and by his former membership of 
the German Social-Democratic Party; but no trace of a Dutch 
connection existed. 33 
All this, and Lenin had not yet opened his mouth. At last the 
Conference turned to its main business: the question of war and 
peace. Grimm read out his theses. Their content showed that he, too, 
had shifted leftwards since Zimmerwald. He castigated 'bourgeois-
pacifist' schemes for the termination of the war. Only 'the revolu-
tionary struggle of the proletarian class', he asserted, would bring 
about peace. 34 But the Left at the Conference were unsatisfied. Their 
pressure upon Grimm, as well as the upsurge of strikes in Europe, 
had still not brought him to specify a series of measures to bring 
about the war's end. C. Meyer called for an unequivocal ban on both 
voting war credits and paying taxes. 35 There was a brief relief for 
Grimm. A telegram was read out from 'Robert and the Family 
Roland Holst' about the outbreak of street demonstrations in 
Holland. But this only served to stir the delegates of the Left to 
greater confidence. Radek stood up to present a rival project, 
cobbled together by Russian Bolsheviks, the Polish left socialists 
and the German social-democrats from Bremen. Radek urged that 
even 'democratised diplomacy' would never end the war; that 
peaceful capitalism was a 'utopia'; and that the German centrists, 
such as Kautsky, belonged to the category of 'the petit-bourgeois, the 
opportunists and the social-pacifists'. 36 Martov, too, offered a 
 Unsealed Messages 
137 
project. Vigorously hostile to every aspect of the war, it had the 
very pacifist undertones that Radek deprecated. 37 
A clash was imminent; and all agreed that a compromise would be 
achieved only if the main groups were invited to join a Conference 
commission. The atmosphere remained highly charged. Brizon's 
presence at Kienthal still offended the Left. An ebullient figure, he 
scribbled a quick note to Lenin charging that his ideas were mere 
'theory'. Lenin passed a note back to him stating yet again that only 
political revolution would suffice to terminate the war. 38 Brizon felt 
himself to be generally isolated and humiliated. He defended himself 
as 'a socialist and a Frenchman'; and, while admitting that he had 
not previously opposed war credits, he claimed that to have acted 
otherwise would have courted political suicide. He also gave his word 
not to vote for war credits in future. 39 
The session ended in tumult; the mutual wounds inflicted at 
Zimmerwald festered at Kienthal. But balm was applied overnight, 
and proceedings were resumed on 27 April. Still Lenin had hardly 
opened his mouth in the open sessions. But he had been a member of 
a second commission set up by the Conference to discuss what to do 
about the International Socialist Bureau, which had been relocated 
to The Hague after the German conquest of Belgium.40 In the 
commission, he and his associates were again in a minority. The 
Italian delegate, C. Lazzari, giving the majority's report, was still 
willing to acknowledge the International Bureau's authority so long 
as it met without delay, rejected war credits and demanded peace 
without annexations and indemnities. Lenin intervened for the 
commission minority, stating that the Bureau had had more than 
enough time to convene. In reality, he insisted, a split in the 
international socialist movement had already occurred.41 His speech 
brought all the private unhappiness with him into the open. Martov 
declared that, if there was a problem in inter-socialist relations, then 
the Bolsheviks had helped to cause it.42 Akselrod spoke scathingly of 
'Lenin and his friends'. 43 Grimm lost his customary poise, accusing 
the Left of not wanting to be practical.44 Lenin retreated into the 
background, resuming an angelic silence. It was Radek who 
demanded, unsuccessfully, that Grimm retract his 'insinuation'.45 
But the Left, too, did not want the Kienthal proceedings to end 
without an agreement on policy. After much haggling, Zinoviev 
produced a form of words acceptable to the delegates on both sides. 
The Conference roundly criticised the International Socialist Bureau 
and planned to substitute its own Commission for the Bureau; but it 
 138 
Lenin: A Political Life 
would meet again to reconsider its position in the event that a general 
meeting of the Bureau took place. This compromise obviously left 
the question open even though the Left had managed to harden the 
resolution.46 The commission on 'the relationship of the proletariat 
to the peace question' had not yet completed its work, and the 
Conference went into recess on 28 April to allow a draft to be agreed. 
Proceedings recommenced next day, and Grimm's line was accepted. 
In particular, the Conference called for a ban on war indemnities and 
for 'compulsory arbitration courts' to decide territorial disputes 
among nations. The demand was made for an immediate truce on 
all fronts. 47 
The Left saw this as utopian thinking; but they had nevertheless 
inserted sections more to their liking. 'Socialist pacifism' was 
deprecated. The emphasis was also made that workers would 
influence the course of the war only by 'vigorous action directed 
towards the capitalist class's overthrow'.48 The Left voted for the 
resolution, but made clear their reservations. In fact, the Left itself 
was divided. As at Zimmerwald, Radek usually had the edge over 
Lenin. It had been Lenin's intention to coax the Left into 
promulgating the principle of national self-determination; but 
Radek's influence forced him to back down.49 Lenin could not 
afford to split the Left without risking making the already small 
group of far-left socialists still smaller and less authoritative, and 
even ridiculous. The Conference was not yet over, since a manifesto 
had not been produced. A third commission was created. Brizon 
protested about its leftist composition; Radek laughed that it would 
be 'idiocy' for him to sit on the same commission as Brizon.50 A 
shambles loomed again, but Brizon was eventually calmed down. The 
commission sat for the rest of the day, presenting its work to the 
weary Conference at 1.15 in the morning of 30 April. Nearly three 
hours of debate ensued. The Left wanted the Manifesto to call for 
illegal political activity, political strikes and even civil war. This was 
totally unacceptable to Brizon. In the end, no agreement could be 
reached. Grimm's proposal was accepted to hand over the final 
drafting to the International Socialist Commission.51 The Left had 
not won, but their ability to stop the Conference majority from 
getting its way had made the Kienthal Conference quite different 
from its predecessor at Zimmerwald. The exhausted delegates 
dispersed from the Barenhotel at four o'clock on a beautiful spring 
morning in the second year of the bloodiest and largest war in 
history. 
 Unsealed Messages 
139 
'MARXISM ON THE STATE' 
Lenin was a serious thinker; but he was also in serious need of 
sustaining his confidence. He would turn anywhere in order to 
validate his strategical optimism. His predictions about political 
conturbation in Europe swung from one country to another. At 
one moment he was anticipating upheaval in Russia, at another in 
Switzerland, 52 but the country which he most usually expected to 
initiate the European socialist revolution was Germany. In 1915 he 
had denied 'that the victory of socialism in one country is impossible' 
(although he still assumed that the full achievement of socialism 
would require its dissemination to more countries than just one).53 
He did not nominate a country where socialism might first triumph, 
but he must have had Germany in mind. The passage continues as 
follows: 'The victorious proletariat of that country, having expro-
priated the capitalists and organised socialist production, would 
stand up against the capitalist remainder of the world, attracting to 
its cause the oppressed classes of other countries. '54 There is no 
reason to suppose that he thought that Russia, whose industrial 
capacity and cultural level he judged to be immensely lower than 
Germany's, could have fulfilled sucfi a role.55 
Until January 1917, Lenin did not ponder exactly how the 
inception of socialism, wherever it took place, would be under-
taken; the future dictatorship of the proletariat lay undefined. 56 But 
certain tangential statements give clues about his orientation as it 
developed. In 1915, he studied the nineteenth-century German 
military theorist Karl von Clausewitz, and the lessons he learnt 
were selective. Largely neglecting Clausewitz's discussion of the 
variegated aspects of warfare, Lenin underscored the sections 
deriding the pretensions of generals.57 For the Bolshevik leader, it 
was Clausewitz's description of the organisational simplifications 
brought about by modern technology that were impressive (as well as 
his sangfroid about war and death). 58 When he read Engels's military 
works, Lenin focused on the same theme and was convinced by the 
assertion that 'an army's need for lengthy, specialist training had been 
made obsolete by modern conditions. 59 Lenin also surveyed the 
changes in the wartime capitalist economies. Bukharin had post-
ulated the emergence of 'state capitalism', meaning that the 
'bourgeois state' no longer merely reflected capitalist interests. It 
had become a prime organiser of economic production; it was also 
fast accumulating capital. The system remained capitalist. Profits still 
 140 
Lenin: A Political Life 
accrued to large private enterprises in particular. But the state, as 
Bukharin emphasised, was acquiring greater autonomy in economic 
regulation. 60 
Until 1916, Lenin had baulked at accepting the term 'state 
capitalism', perhaps because it infringed the premise that capitalism 
by its nature was an anarchic mode of economy.61 But the extension 
of planning inside the German and British economies was an 
irrefutable reality, and Lenin contended that the Russian economy 
too had the same features to an increasing degree. 62 He did not 
propose a theory of state capitalism, but scattered sentences 
displayed his feeling that such economic developments simplified 
the tasks of any forthcoming socialist administration. Centralisation 
and state control under capitalism had been augmented; and, 
according to Lenin, what 'the Junkers and petty gentry' were doing 
today could be done tomorrow by 'conscious workers'. Not only did 
a revolutionary situation exist in Europe but the revolution could 
swiftly and easily be carried through. 63 As Marxists, Lenin and 
Bukharin might have been expected to explore the technological 
changes that, in their view, had made 'the transition to socialism' an 
imminent possibility in advanced industrial countries. But it was the 
wartime changes in political and social organisation that mostly 
grasped their attention; in particular, they were mightily impressed 
by the militarisation of the German economy after 1914. 
Lenin, furthermore, began to show an edginess in his rejection of 
Bukharin's claim that a future socialist government would have to 
destroy the old capitalist state and construct its own state from 
scratch. Lenin merely urged him to 'allow his views to mature' before 
publishing his ideas:64 not a symptom of comprehensive criticism of 
Bukharin. In January and February 1917 Lenin took his own notes 
on Marxism and the state. Filling forty-eight closely-written pages, 
he examined what had been said by Marx and Engels on the subject. 
Bukharin had mentioned them only fleetingly; for him, the need to 
crush the bourgeois state was justifiable on intrinsic grounds.65 Lenin 
desired the textual security of support from Marxism's co-founders. 
His notes give glimpses of his mind at work: early on, he becomes 
sure that Marx had somewhere talked of destroying the bourgeois 
state; but where? Lenin searched furiously, and decided that it was in 
The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Napo/eon. 66 He was equally zealous 
to discover when Marx had first mentioned 'the dictatorship of the 
proletariat'. Surely it was before 1871? 'Apparently not', was Lenin's 
conclusion until his further research convinced him otherwise.67 Then 
 Unsealed Messages 
141 
there were the tiny embarrassments. Of all people, what was Engels 
doing using a tautology like 'political state'?68 Every state is by 
definition political. These, however, were minor frissons. An admiring 
excitement pervades the 'blue notebooks'. And Lenin's conclusions 
were a shock to him: Marx and Engels had indeed recommended a 
destruction of the old state machine; and, therefore, Kautsky's wish 
to inherit such a machine was thoroughly un-Marxist.69 
Lenin correctly emphasised that Kautsky had put pressure on 
Engels himself to delete sentences from his commentary on Marx in 
1895 which advocated the use of force as a means of bringing about 
the transition to socialism.70 Marx in the 1870s, as Lenin knew, had 
granted the possibility of peaceful change. 71 Yet Lenin asserted that 
'bureaucratism' had entered into all public and commercial life since 
then, including even socialist parties. The bulwarks of capitalist self-
defence were growing stronger year by year, and violent revolutions 
would be necessary. 72 
But what about the dispositions to be made after power had been 
seized. Here Lenin, referring to Bukharin's call for the destruction of 
the old state, backtracked by proposing that 'in the essence of the 
matter Bukharin is nearer the truth than Kautsky', 73 but this was still 
only a qualified approval of Bukharin. Lenin continued to believe 
Bukharin to be misguided on a number of points, especially in his 
apparent conviction that there would be no need for a state at all 
once the socialist seizure of power had occurred. 74 Lenin, on his side, 
urged the need for proletarian dictatorship.75 In addition, Bukharin 
as well as his fellow far-left Marxists in Europe such as Pannekoek 
and Gorter failed to offer a practical plan for the dismantlement of 
the old state machine. 76 Lenin called for an innovation of cardinal 
strategical significance: that the dictatorship of the proletariat should 
be constructed on the institutional basis of the soviets.77 In 1905 he 
had seen them as organs of insurrection against the absolute 
monarchy, and suggested that they could constitute the framework 
for the ensuing provisional revolutionary government. In January 
and February 1917 he went further: the workers' soviets were not 
merely to bring down the Russian monarchy and establish a 
democratic political framework for capitalism, they were also to 
initiate the entire transition to socialism. In addition, their impor-
tance would not be confined to Russia: they should be regarded as 
vehicles for revolution across Europe. 78 
As to the functions of such soviets, he was less concerned to 
investigate how they had actually operated in 1905 than to indicate 
 142 
Lenin: A Political Life 
how they might operate in the future. They would be able, according 
to Lenin, to eradicate all material privileges. Abuse of authority 
would cease. Deputies elected to the soviets could be recalled at the 
request of their constituents. There would be mass participation in 
the running of the state, and the majority of the population would be 
involved. Sounding a note that was novel for him, Lenin declared the 
desirability of the 'fullest local self-administration'.79 A standing 
army and a professional police and civil service would be neither 
necessary nor desirable. He wanted to limit the bounds of authority 
exercised 'from above', declaring: 'On the basis of socialism 
"primitive" democracy will not be primitive.'80 
It occurred to Lenin that such a system, being based upon social 
self-regulation, was hardly describable any longer as a 'state'. The 
dictatorship of the proletariat evoked images of ultra-centralism. 
Now Lenin readily cited Marx as treating it as merely a 'semi-state'.81 
Even this would not be the final stage. Under the dictatorship of the 
proletariat, which would introduce socialism, the principle would 
prevail that 'he that does not work neither shall he eat'. Pay would be 
given in accordance with the amount of work done. But the objective 
would be the ultimate stage: communism. Then and only then would 
social classes cease to exist. Then the state would have disappeared 
entirely. The previous division between mental and physical labour 
would have vanished. The society's productive resources would have 
attained a high level of development; work would have ceased being a 
burden and have been accepted as a 'primary necessity of life'; and 
the time devoted to work would have been drastically reduced. Then 
at last the principle would be secure: from each according to his 
talents, to each according to his needs. 82 Thus Lenin's notebooks, 
which he headed 'Marxism on the State', offered not only the most 
detailed but also one of the most elevated statements by a twentieth-
century Marxist on the transition from capitalism; they undermine all 
those interpretations of him as a desolate, worried individual in 
1916-17. Only the news of events back in Russia in February 1917 
interrupted the writing up of his materials. 
And yet, despite the assertions that the proletarian dictatorship 
would be so pleasant an affair, there were very grim sides to his 
thinking. The dictatorship would suspend the civic rights of the other 
classes. Lenin's notes, moreover, took it for granted that capitalist 
society is neatly divided into two contending classes, the proletariat 
and the bourgeoisie. They made no comment on the fate of 
intermediate groups; the peasantry and the town traders are not 
 Unsealed Messages 
143 
mentioned. A deep contempt for parliaments, which he regarded as 
mere talking shops, was also evident. The dictatorship, by contrast, 
was meant to be a 'workers' corporation'.83 Uniting all legislative, 
executive and judicial powers, it would simply get on with 'the 
administration of things'. The dangers of abuse of power were 
brushed unreflectingly aside. Furthermore, Lenin began from the 
premise that the proletariat would be a monolithic whole. No 
differing interests would divide it. Hence there seemed no require-
ment to talk of competing parties - and this most party-minded of 
theorists did not once refer to parties in the course of his forty eight 
pages of notes. The combination of direct intention, naive expecta-
tion and failure to think issues through boded ill for the chances of 
realising the freedoms that, in the first two months of 1917, he 
professed to desire. 
THE FEBRUARY REVOLUTION 
Abruptly, from the beginning of March 1917, Lenin was forced to 
take greater account of developments in current politics in Russia. 
On 23 February 1917, International Women's Day, women textile 
workers went on strike in Petrograd. They contravened advice from 
the local revolutionaries of all parties, who remained demoralised by 
the police arrests earlier in the winter. But the lengthening bread 
queues and the worsening factory conditions had snapped the 
women's patience. Streaming out on to the streets, they called on 
workers in other factories, men and women, to show solidarity. The 
strike movement grew fast. By 25 February, almost all Petrograd 
factories had been closed. The revolutionary activists gathered their 
nerve and began again to organise for the speedy overthrow of the 
government. Bolsheviks, Mensheviks and Socialist Revolutionaries 
were involved. The emigre leaders could play no part since they heard 
about what was happening only after the thrust towards revolution 
had occurred. Activists in Petrograd improvised as best they could, 
and calls for the re-establishment of soviets were already being heard. 
Demonstrations were arranged: the proximity of the Vyborg 
industrial quarter to the centre of the city increasingly worried the 
authorities. Yet the crucial unknown factor was the attitude of the 
troops garrisoned in Petrograd. The answer came on 27 February, 
when the Volynski Regiment mutinied. It was on the same day that 
 144 
Lenin: A Political Life 
the revolutionaries, mainly at Menshevik instigation, formed the 
Petrograd Soviet of Workers' Deputies.84 
The revolt was headed by workers and soldiers. The emperor 
prorogued the Duma on 26 February, but this was really a preventive 
measure: the Progressive Bloc did not try to lead the people on the 
streets. To the end of the old regime the emperor could count on the 
parlousness of the liberals and moderate conservatives in the Duma; 
and the Kadet leader Pavel Milyukov aspired to the dynasty's 
preservation as a constitutional monarchy. Lenin's contemptuous 
dismissal of Russian liberalism as the fifth wheel on the carriage of 
tsarism was harsh but, at such a time of crisis, not wide of the mark. 
The most that the liberals did in February 1917 was to form an 
unofficial Duma Committee to hold discussions until the Duma 
should be reconvened.85 
On 28 February, Nikolai II belatedly recognised the emergency in 
Petrograd for what it was. He left general headquarters in Mogilev 
for his palace in Tsarskoe Selo outside the capital. All Petrograd was 
in ferment. The Petrograd Soviet had issued a proclamation 
demanding the dynasty's removal. Demonstrations filled the central 
thoroughfares. The Duma Committee, which had been acting like a 
government for some days, plucked up courage to demand a transfer 
of power. The next day, 1 March, found the emperor still en route to 
Tsarskoe Selo. He declared his willingness to form 'a responsible 
ministry', which would have included Duma Committee members. 
But the revolution was spreading elsewhere. Disturbances broke out 
in Moscow and the Kronstadt naval garrison. The Petrograd Soviet, 
moreover, had a Menshevik and Socialist-Revolutionary majority 
favouring the abolition of the monarchy and the installation of a 
'bourgeois' government drawn from the Duma leadership. On 2 
March the Soviet's representatives negotiated with the Duma 
Committee to this end, and Octobrist leader Aleksandr Guchkov 
met the emperor at Pskov to seek his abdication. In Petrograd, Pavel 
Milyukov announced the formation of a Provisional Government; 
and in Pskov, Nikolai II agreed to abdicate.86 On 3 March Prince 
G. E. Lvov was proclaimed premier of the Provisional Government. 
Milyukov the Kadet became Foreign Minister, Octobrist Guchkov 
became Minister for Military and Naval Affairs, and the Socialist 
Revolutionary Aleksandr Kerenski, Minister of Justice. An absolut-
ist dynasty which had ruled Russia since 1613 had been supplanted, 
in the space of little more than a week, by an administration led by 
its liberal opponents. 
 Unsealed Messages 
145 
The emigre revolutionaries perforce relied mainly on non-Russian 
sources of information. Petrograd dailies arrived only after the 
February Revolution's occurrence. The Swiss newspapers Zurcher 
Post and Neue ZurcherZeitung appreciated the momentous political 
possibilities in Russia; but their Germanophile editorials made their 
reports suspect.87 On 28 February, in his latest extant letter from the 
days before the emperor's abdication, Lenin wrote to Inessa Armand 
without mentioning events in the Russian capital. The Bolshevik 
leader's continuing preoccupation was with socialist polemics in 
Europe, and he noted trenchantly: 'There is nothing coming from 
Russia, not even letters!!' .88 But at last, on 2 March, the Zurcher Post 
carried the announcement that the emperor had been overthrown 
and that Duma leaders had taken power.89 
The Russian emigration was ecstatic. There were celebratory 
embraces and evening-parties, congratulatory messages to the 
newspapers; Bolsheviks, Mensheviks and Socialist Revolutionaries 
proclaimed that a millstone had been removed from the shoulders of 
the people of Russia and her subject territories. Lenin shared in the 
cheer without Jetting himself be carried away. On 2 March 1917 he 
was not ruling out that 'the Germans' had manufactured a story 
which the world's press had foolishly fallen for. 90 On 3 March, in a 
letter to Aleksandra Kollontai in Oslo, he could not resist patting 
himself on the back (and why should he not have done?) for having 
predicted, on New Year's Day 1917, that Milyukov, Guchkov and 
Kerenski might soon be forming a post-Romanov government.91 To 
Kollontai, too, he repeated his opposition to policies involving 
'defence of the fatherland'; and so deep was his mistrust of the 
Kadets that he proposed the retention of an underground central 
party apparatus in Petrograd. He called for 'international proletarian 
revolution', but offered no prescription as to what should be done in 
Russia.92 By 4 March, he was writing to Kollontai that 'peace would 
come only from an armed Soviet if it will seize power';93 and on the 
same day he sketched a statement of policy.94 This included a 
demand for a 'workers' government', effecting 'a union with the 
poorest mass of the rural population' as well as 'with the revolu-
tionary workers of all belligerent countries'.95 This constituted a 
rupture with the old Bolshevik programme. Bolsheviks in 1905 called 
for a coalition of socialist parties representing all the workers and all 
the peasants. Lenin now demanded a government representing the 
entire working class but only the most impoverished sections of the 
peasantry. 
 146 
Lenin: A Political Life 
'A workers' government' had figured prominently as an objective 
in Trotski's writings, which Lenin had previously rejected. 96 Trotski 
was to make much of the similarity in his memoirs. But it has lain 
unobserved that Lenin's phraseology about the poorest peasants was 
like that of Leo Jogiches and Rosa Luxemburg. Lenin seldom 
collected his eggs from a single nest.97 At any rate, he had severely 
distorted the conventional Russian Marxist two-stage revolutionary 
schedule. To this he did not own up, saying only that 'the 
revolutionary proletariat' could not help but 'set itself the task of 
continuing the struggle for the achievement of a democratic republic 
and of socialism'.98 This was near to appealing for the inauguration 
of the transition to socialism. But he was not yet ready to commit 
himself totally to this. In a telegram to Bolsheviks leaving Scandi-
navia for Russia, also on 4 March, he restricted his recommenda-
tions: no support for the Provisional Government; suspicion of 
Kerenski; the arming of the proletariat; elections to the Petrograd 
municipal council; and no rapprochement with other parties.99 
His reference to the Petrograd municipal council, whose impor-
tance was negligible, demonstrated how isolated he was from 
happenings in Russia; and he was equally out of touch in imagining 
that Nikolai II aimed at a return to power by means of a separate 
peace with the Germans. 100 Nothing was further from the former 
emperor's mind, and the pressures on the Provisional Government 
came from elsewhere. The Petrograd Soviet insisted that the cabinet 
should promulgate a full range of civic freedoms, hold elections to a 
Constituent Assembly, and fight only a defensive war against 
Germany and Austria-Hungary. The ministers in any case aimed to 
introduce a liberal constitution and to convoke a Constituent 
Assembly. Yet Milyukov and others shared Nikolai II's expansionist 
objectives, and the whole cabinet ruled legislation on fundamental 
social reform in advance of the Constituent Assembly. The land 
question in particular was held in abeyance. The Provisional 
Government had to act circumspectly since the Soviet's Menshevik 
and Socialist-Revolutionary leaders had been elected by workers and 
soldiers who had overthrown the monarchy. When the Soviet issued 
its Order No. 1 to garrison troops, relieving them of the harsher 
aspects of discipline and allowing them to set up their own soldiers' 
committees, the cabinet reluctantly gave its assent. 101 
The consolation for the Provisional Government was that the 
Mensheviks and Socialist Revolutionaries did not want to take 
power; and, not wishing to unsettle military defence, they advocated 
 Unsealed Messages 
147 
a compact with the middle class so that factory production might be 
maintained. A socialist assumption of power, in their view, would 
lead to civil war. Doctrinally too they were inhibited by the tenet that 
the country's cultural and economic level had to be raised before 
socialism could be contemplated. A 'bourgeois government' ought to 
carry through a 'bourgeois revolution'. Mensheviks and Socialist 
Revolutionaries aimed to influence policies by providing the Provi-
sional Government with conditional support, and indicated that this 
support would be withdrawn if any deviation from democratic politics 
were to be observed. Only 'revolutionary defence' would be tolerated. 
Those Mensheviks such as Maslov who advocated a campaign for 
outright victory over Germany were in the minority; the 'centrists', 
under Irakli Tsereteli, who had just returned from Siberian exile, and 
N. S. Chkheidze, held sway among Mensheviks and were backed by 
prominent Socialist Revolutionaries such as Abram Gots. 102 
Lenin had long before made his mind up about Chkheidze as being 
an inveterate and untrustworthy compromiser, and ruled out 
unification with him and his adherents. 103 Bolsheviks in Petrograd 
at the time of the February Revolution independently felt a similar 
distaste. The Russian Bureau of the Central Committee, meeting on 
28 February under Shlyapnikov's guidance, called for the formation 
of a provisional revolutionary government of socialists, in line with 
traditional Bolshevism. 104 The Bureau refused to offer any support to 
Lvov's cabinet. But the Menshevik and Socialist-Revolutionary 
acceptance of the Provisional Government prevented the Bureau's 
aims from being realised; and the Bolshevik City Committee, too, 
opposed the Bureau. 105 Shlyapnikov and his associates, being forced 
to reconsider tactics, edged towards advocating a role for the soviets 
as 'embryos of the new power'. 106 Allies for Lenin were coming into 
existence without either the allies or Lenin being conscious of such an 
alliance. Yet the Bureau faced difficulties from 12 March with the 
return from exile of Lev Kamenev, Iosif Stalin and M. K. Muranov. 
Kamenev and Stalin had been leaders in the pre-war illegal party 
machine; Muranov had been a Duma deputy: each wanted condi-
tional support of the Lvov cabinet. 107 Kamenev's behaviour at his 
trial in 1915, when he had disowned Lenin's defeatist policy on the 
war, rankled with the Bureau; but Stalin was accepted as a co-editor 
of the revived Pravda. 108 Stalin proceeded to print an article by 
Kamenev articulating the policy of conditional support. Disputes 
between Pravda and the Russian Bureau persisted through March 
1917. 109 
 148 
Lenin: A Political Life 
Lenin rued the absence of rapid communication between Petrograd 
and Switzerland. On 7 March he drafted the first of five 'Letters from 
Afar'. He repeated that the European 'imperialist war' would lead to 
a continental war between classes - and erroneously suggested that 
workers had overthrown the emperor in the interests of bringing 
about peace; he also still averred that the Provisional Government 
sought a deal with the dynasty. 110 A novel proposal was for the 
creation of 'soviets of agricultural workers'. 111 But his most 
significant request was for the Bolsheviks to move from 'the first 
to the second stage of the revolution'. 112 This phrase was even more 
ambiguous than his ideas as drafted on 4 March. Did he mean a 
socialist revolution or didn't he? 
On 8 March, writing a second 'Letter from Afar', he left less room 
for doubt by calling for a workers' militia combining 'all-state 
functions with military functions and with control over social 
production and the distribution of products' .113 He also shifted his 
analysis of foreign policy, now claiming that the Russian cabinet 
functioned merely as 'the agent of English capital'. 114 The third 
'Letter from Afar', composed on 11 March, showed signs of 
awareness of the transformation wrought by such ideas in the 
generally accepted concept of Bolshevik strategy. Such a revolu-
tion, Lenin claimed, would not be decreeing socialism or even 
inaugurating the dictatorship of the proletariat. Instead, in back-
ward Russia, it would establish 'the revolutionary-democratic 
dictatorship of the proletariat and the poor peasants'; and only 
time would tell whether the workers would show sufficient 'con-
sciousness' to carry it through. 115 The next day, in the fourth 'Letter', 
Lenin stopped talking of the militia and said instead that 'an All-
Russian Soviet (or a Petersburg Soviet temporarily acting as its 
substitute)' should take power. 116 But if the future socialist state was 
not the dictatorship of the proletariat but a peculiar Russian hybrid 
form, what were the measures to be enacted? In the fifth 'Letter', 
written but not finished on 26 March, he said that they would be only 
'transitional measures' leading ultimately to socialism. 117 
It is not evident when most of his telegrams and articles reached 
Russia. Certainly Pravda carried only the first 'Letter from Afar', on 
21 and 22 March, and the editors hacked off the more radical 
recommendations from its contents. 118 The last four 'Letters' 
remained unpublished until after Lenin's death. His own informa-
tion, however, was gradually improving in quality. He combed the 
abundant foreign press which, after its early failures, was improving 
 Unsealed Messages 
149 
in quality and dependability; and he excerpted from not only Swiss 
newspapers but also The Times, The Manchester Guardian and the 
Frankfurter Zeitung. 119 And yet, while feeling impelled to offer a 
strategical analysis, Lenin cautiously refrained from presenting them 
as the formal policy of the Central Committee's Foreign Bureau even 
though Kollontai seems expressly to have requested 'directives'Y0 
This showed a recognition that the Foreign Bureau, consisting of 
himself and Zinoviev, should not throw its weight about when it had 
neither the knowledge to impress the Russian Bureau and Pravda nor 
the formal right to instruct them. But Lenin's self-restraint did not 
signify a lack of confidence. His jauntiness was proved on 14 March 
when he gave a talk on his developing ideas, 'The Russian 
Revolution, its Significance and its Tasks', to a gathering of 
Russians in the Volkshaus on Helvetiaplatz in Ziirich. 121 It is 
conventionally supposed that debate between Lenin and his oppo-
nents began in Petrograd, after his return to Russia in April. Not so: 
he reappeared at the Volkhaus on 16 March to hear the responses of 
others and to respond to them in his turn. 122 Menshevik and Bundist 
luminaries turned out in force. Lenin's perennial adversary, A. S. 
Martynov, deriding his recommendations as 'utopian' and 'over-
simplified', urged trenchantly: 'Don't get in a hurry, comrade Lenin. 
We still don't have a republic, we still lack the eight-hour working 
day.' R. A. Abramovich accused him of an unthinking and dangerous 
inclination 'to pull leftwards' and thereby to ignore the 'correlation 
of forces'. He declared Lenin's ideas to be 'Blanquist', exhibiting an 
unbridled frustration with objective political circumstances and a will 
to deploy violence to attain socialist ends. S. Semovski, another old 
foe since their entanglement over the national question before the 
war, stated that the scheme for a workers-and-peasants dictatorship 
appeared to intimate a coalition of Kerenski and Lenin. Martov, too, 
joined the attack. There was wide agreement that Lenin had 
produced a woefully 'confused idea'. 123 The construction of the 
anti-Lenin Marxist case in 1917 had begun. 124 
RETURNING LEADER 
For a while it was not these issues but the problems of organising the 
journey home which chiefly concerned the emigres. The obvious first 
option, which was taken seriously by Lenin and all the Swiss 
emigration, was to take a North Sea steamer. Plekhanov, sailing to 
 150 
Lenin: A Political Life 
Sweden, took a train through to Petrograd in the company of British 
socialist Will O'Grady and was feted in a hero's welcome in 
Petrograd. 125 This was not the physically ideal route to take: there 
was the danger that German submarines were sinking Allied 
shipping; but at least such a trip had the advantage of not giving 
rise to the objection that it was undertaken under the auspices of the 
Central Powers. 126 
Yet the British and French authorities would not facilitate the 
passage of Russian politicians opposed to the Allied cause. Lev 
Trotski and Nikolai Bukharin, making their way back from New 
York, had little choice but to risk travelling via Britain. 127 They paid 
the price: both were held up by the British government and did not 
reach Russia until midsummer. That the majority of Russian 
socialists in Western and Central Europe could count on the same 
treatment was demonstrated by the failure of the Socialist-Revolu-
tionary leader Viktor Chernov to obtain the necessary official 
documents of transit from France. Lenin, who had a declared 
preference for Germany to defeat Russia, was still Jess likely to be 
successful. He cursed his decision to sit out the war in Switzerland 
and not to join other Bolsheviks in Scandinavia. 128 But he 
determined not to temporise as in 1905, when it was nine months 
after Bloody Sunday before he returned. Any danger was worth 
running. Lenin fantasised about crossing Germany unrecognised by 
donning a wig and using V. A. Karpinski's passport. 129 (Karpinski's 
response to the proposal to deprive him of his passport is not known 
to posterity.). Another daydream, with even spindlier roots in reality, 
was to assume the identity of a deaf, dumb and blind Swede. 
Krupskaya, more amused than horrified, dissuaded Lenin by 
pointing out that he would give himself away by muttering 
complaints in his sleep about Mensheviks. 130 Lenin even considered 
chartering an aeroplane to fly him across the Eastern front; but the 
impracticality of the enterprise, in the era before planes had fuel 
tanks to last them hundreds of miles, put him off. 131 
Martov cooked up the most practical idea: an exchange of the 
Russian political emigrants in Switzerland for German citizens 
interned in Russia. This would require permission to traverse 
Germany from not only the German government but also the 
Russian Provisional Government, to arrive in Petro grad. 132 Lenin 
latched on to the plan, and Zinoviev attended an International 
Socialist Commission meeting on 6 March to discuss its handling. 
The Commission set up an inner body for negotiations with the 
 Unsealed Messages 
151 
relevant authorities. These were protracted. Russian Foreign Mini-
ster Pavel Milyukov did not yearn to greet politicians struggling 
against his government's policies and even, in Lenin's case, working 
for its overthrow. The negotiating body dispatched telegrams to the 
Petrograd Soviet requesting that pressure be put upon the Provi-
sional Government. Still no satisfaction from Russia. On the other 
hand, the talks with the Germans proceeded wonderfully. Swiss 
socialists Robert Grimm and Fritz Platten had approached the Swiss 
Foreign Minister Hermann Hoffmann; Hoffmann had consulted with 
German diplomats, who obtained the consent of the German high 
command for the German consul in Bern, Gisbert von Romberg, to 
issue transit documents. 133 
Lenin, never having expected much good from Milyukov and 
suspecting that Grimm lacked singlemindedness as a negotiator, 
grabbed the initiative. 134 He gave the talks entirely into Platten's 
hands, and a deal was put together. The German authorities would 
allow sixty internationalist socialists to travel across Germany by 
train unimpeded by customs checks or any interference en route; 
there was not even to be an examination of the names of the 
travellers. 135 The journey was to begin on 27 March. Lenin sent 
invitations to fellow socialists to join him. He also obtained 
supportive statements from figures on the European socialist left, 
such as Paul Levi and Henri GuilbeauxY6 There remained the fear 
lest he might be arrested in Russia. 'Your arrival is desirable, his 
sister telegraphed to him, but avoid taking a risk.' 137 Risk was 
inherent in the situation, and Lenin was ready to take his chances. 
Martov spurned Lenin's invitation and waited for the Provisional 
Government's sanction, condemning himself to starting out weeks 
after Lenin 138 Several Bundists and the Polish social-democrat Karl 
Radek, however, did consent. The final number of passengers was 
thirty-two, and twenty of them were Bolsheviks139 Krupskaya talked 
of coming later so that she could wind up factional and personal 
business; but Lenin would not hear of this. They packed three large 
suitcases and a primus stove to cook for themselves on the train and 
the two of them bustled about so much in the last days 140 that Lenin 
had no time to finish the fifth and last of his 'Letters from Afar'. 141 
On 27 March the travellers assembled for lunch in Zurich's 
Zahringerhof. Lenin was mindful of the European political perspec-
tive and read out a 'Farewell Letter to Swiss Workers'. Polemical to 
the last, he excoriated the socialist centrists under Grimm and called 
for the victory of the leftists in Swiss socialism. He claimed that, 
 152 
Lenin: A Political Life 
despite having been mocked for his slogan of 'turning the imperialist 
war into a civil war' in 1914, the February Revolution's occurrence 
meant that 'only the blind cannot see that this slogan is correct'. Far-
left socialists in Europe in general, and Germany and Switzerland in 
particular, should be steadfast and optimistic: 'Long live the 
proletarian revolution IVhich is beginning in Europe. d 42 With a 
bluntness absent from his 'Letters from Afar', which were intended 
for Russian Bolshevik readers, he declared: 'Russia is a peasant 
country. It is one of the most backward of European countries. 
Socialism cannot triumph there immediately.' 143 
The difference between the 'Letters from Afar' and the 'Farewell 
Letter' is of slant and style rather than content; for the fifth 'Letter 
from Afar' had stated that Lenin's measures constituted only 'a 
transition to socialism' and did not embody socialism. 144 Yet he had 
refrained from so bald a statement of the difficulties in Russia. and 
the contrast says much about his perceptions about how to 
encourage Russian and Swiss socialists respectively (as well as about 
our need to calibrate our assessment of Lenin's opinions to the 
specific political context woven around them). Needless to add. 
Lenin's mind after the reading out of his 'Farewell Letter' was fixed 
on the journey to Russia. At 3.10 pm the group left the hotel and. 
after walking through a crowd of malevolently raucous fellow 
Russian emigres. crossed to Zurich central railway station to take 
the suburban train up to the Swiss border village of Gottmadingen. 
A certain Oscar Blum, who was a social-democrat suspected by Lenin 
of being a Russian spy, surreptitiously joined the party on the train. 
Lenin put his regular physical exercises to use and hauled him bodily 
out of the carriage. 145 The train departed to the hisses of bystanders. 
Drawing up to the border, the passengers were subjected to Swiss 
customs searches at Schaffhausen and Thayngen; but only their food 
was confiscated. 146 At Gottmadingen the two German army officers 
who were to accompany them across Germany ordered them, 
without warning, to form themselves into separate groups of men 
and women. Panic gripped the travellers, who felt they had walked 
into a trap. Lenin edged back towards a wall and the other Bolshevik 
men stood protectively in front of their leader. But the Germans 
merely wanted to complete formalities, and minutes later the party 
boarded the train. 147 
It was one carriage long, with eight compartments. Despite the 
limitation on space, Lenin and Krupskaya were given a compartment 
to themselves by their comrades. Lenin protested at the discrimina-
 Unsealed Messages 
153 
tion; but it was explained to him that the arrangement would allow 
him to work more conveniently. The catalyst for this generosity was 
his companions' knowledge of his fastidiousness. Karl Radek, Inessa 
Armand, Olga Ravich and Georgi and Valentina Safarov occupied 
the next-door compartment, and wished to enjoy themselves. The trip 
across Germany was to stretch over four days since the train would 
halt every night. The route from Gottmadingen was to take the 
Russians via Stuttgart, Frankfurt-on-Main and Berlin to the small 
ferry-port of Sassnitz. Lenin went on filling his notebooks. Yet he 
could not bear the noise made by the impish Radek and by Olga 
Ravich with her high-pitched laughter. On the first evening Lenin 
burst out of his compartment, banged on their door and pulled out a 
surprised Olga. Her companions, however, stood up for her; and 
Lenin released her to their continuing carousing. 148 
At Stuttgart, with the German government's co-operation, the 
German social-democrat and trade union leader W. Janson sought a 
meeting with Lenin. The request was turned down by Lenin, who 
threatened to beat him up if he came on board. 149 Tiffs among the 
Russians persisted. Lenin stipulated that all smoking should be 
confined to the lavatory. This quickly caused congestion as non-
smokers were driven to waiting in a queue to answer calls of nature. 
As inventive as he was punctilious, Lenin introduced a priority 
system whereby those wishing to smoke were issued with a 'second-
category' pass and had to give way to those with 'first-category' 
passes. 150 Radek poked fun at Lenin, declaring that his imperious 
dispositions in the carriage fitted him to 'assume the leadership of the 
revolutionary government'. 151 This was a joke whose acidity was to 
lose its bite later in the year; at the time it played upon the 
uncertainties of a trainload of Russian Marxists approaching their 
destination without guarantee that arrest did not await them in 
Petrograd. Sassnitz was reached on 30 March. Boarding the ferry 
Queen Victoria for the Swedish port of Trelleborg, Lenin, out of 
habit, gave an assumed name. Consternation resulted since his 
contact man in Sweden, Jan Hanecki, had telegraphed to enquire 
whether a Mr Ulyanov had arrived on ship; but the situation was 
clarified and Lenin owned up to his identity. 152 Trelleborg was 
reached, and the passengers boarded a train for Malmo. That night 
they caught another train for Stockholm, which they reached at ten 
o'clock on the morning of 31 March. 
News of his trip was being picked up by Sweden's socialist 
newspapers. Lenin received an invitation from Alexander Parvus-
 154 
Lenin: A Political Life 
Helphand, a member of the German Social-Democratic Party who 
carried out missions for the German government with funds to 
disburse to Russian revolutionaries whose activity might destabilise 
the Russian government, to meet for discussions. Lenin declined. 153 
He also tried to brush off Radek's call for him to go on a shopping 
spree, but in vain. Radek was disconcerted by the thought of the 
leader of emigre Bolsheviks returning to Petrograd in a pair of 
hobnailed mountain boots, so a reluctant Lenin agreed to buy new 
footwear. Radek also persuaded him that a new pair of trousers 
would not go amiss. Beyond that, however, Lenin would not budge, 
expostulating that he was not going back to Russia in order to set up 
an off-the-peg clothes stall. 154 
The Russian group took the train that evening for the Finnish 
frontier. Radek, who was an Austrian subject, had to be left behind 
as an enemy alien; he could, however, perform useful technical 
services for the Bolsheviks by basing himself in Stockholm. 155 A 
day later the passengers alighted at Haparanda and took a sleigh-ride 
over the border bridge into the town of Tornio. But several nasty 
surprises awaited them. Firstly, at the border post they were searched 
by British guards being used by the Russian customs authorities. 
Nothing incriminating was found, and Lenin telegraphed a message 
to his sisters that he would arrive in Petrograd on 3 April. 156 It was 
at Tornio, too, that he obtained copies of the new central Bolshevik 
newspaper Pravda; 157 and, in the dimly-lit customs hall, he found 
himself a quiet corner to read them while Zinoviev busied himself 
with practical arrangements for the journey. Two further surprises 
were contained in the newspapers. Flicking through the pages, Lenin 
suddenly turned pale: 'Malinovski,' he shouted over to Zinoviev, 'has 
turned out to be a provocateur!' 158 He also read the editorials by 
Kamenev and Stalin and discovered their policy of conditional 
support for the Provisional Government. Again he called over to 
Zinoviev: 'Look how they're muddling things!' This surprise, 
unpleasant as it was for him, caused him less worry than the news 
about Malinovski, however. 'Well,' he muttered confidently, 'we'll 
soon sort this out!' 159 
Boarding the train at Tornio on 2 April, the travelling revolutio-
naries had a further seven hundred miles to go. The carriages were 
halted at the Russian-Finnish border at Beloostrov. Central 
Committee member Kamenev and other Bolsheviks had journeyed 
out to meet them. Lenin curtailed the exchange of pleasantries, 
blurting out to Kamenev: 'What have you been writing in Pravda? 
 Unsealed Messages 
155 
We've seen a few copies and have called you all kinds of names!' 160 
But Kamenev took no offence; and he reassured a concerned Lenin 
that the Provisional Government did not plan to arrest him in the 
Russian capital. Shortly before midnight on 3 April they pulled into 
Petrograd's Finland station. 
A massive crowd was waiting. This had already become the 
traditional experience for revolutionary leaders coming home from 
the emigration. Plekhanov had had a similar reception some days 
beforehand. Each party or faction tried to outdo the rest in turning 
out a large gathering of supporters; but the co-operation among the 
capital's socialists in March 1917 meant that most receptions became 
an opportunity for general festivities. Presumably Kamenev had 
forewarned him, and Lenin showed neither astonishment nor 
embarrassment. It was a high point in his career. The popular 
acclaim of a mass of ordinary people (who as yet, let us remember, 
knew next to nothing about Lenin except that he had suffered at the 
hands of the Romanovs and had refused to give up the revolutionary 
struggle) had not happened to him before. A month after the 
monarchy's collapse, he was being treated as a major figure in 
Russia's legal politics, but Lenin did not let the occasion go to his 
head. Chkheidze from the Petrograd Soviet greeted him with a speech 
calling for unity among all socialists. Lenin, with a deliberate snub, 
made no reply but announced the need for 'worldwide socialist 
revolution'. As he left the station waiting-room, he was pressed by 
his supporters to address the crowd. He did this from on top of an 
armoured car requisitioned by the Petrograd Bolsheviks. His tirade 
against the capitalist order in Russia and abroad was fiercer than 
minutes earlier. The challenge to the Provisional Government and to 
its conditional supporters among the ranks of socialism, including 
many Bolsheviks, was posed on the streets of the capital. 161 
'THE APRIL THESES' 
On the trains across Germany, Sweden and Finland Lenin had 
worked on his ideas, and he made yet another and final draft of 
them just hours after leaving the Finland station. This had the title, 
'On the Tasks of the Proletariat in the Present Revolution' and was 
presented in the shape of ten theses; it gained immediate fame as The 
April Theses. The text as a whole ran to 579 words. It was Lenin's 
shortest major work, by a margin of many thousand words. It was 
 156 
Lenin: A Political Life 
also the opus by him which had the greatest direct impact on the 
history of Russia; its significance is comparable both with Con-
stantine's Edict of Milan in 313 and with the ninety-five theses 
pinned by Martin Luther to the doors of Wittenburg Cathedral in 
1517. 
Lenin's motives in March-April 1917 for breaking with the 
traditional Bolshevik strategy of revolution are obscure. He omitted 
to state what had changed between 1905-6 and 1917 to alter his 
mind, and he made a virtue out of this avoidance. As regards his 
proposals, he had declared in March that he did not intend to 
'classify them theoretically' in Marxist terms. The priority was to 
deal with 'the complex, essential, fast-developing tasks of revolu-
tion'.162 The April Theses abided by this theoretical self-abnegation 
(or self-liberation). It is noteworthy that neither 'the dictatorship of 
the proletariat' nor even 'the dictatorship of the proletariat and the 
poorest peasants' appeared in them. As an item of political 
propaganda they were masterly; as Marxology they were brazenly 
evasive. The kindest interpretation, never offered by Lenin, is that 
The April Theses were essentially a reproduction of the notebooks on 
'Marxism on the State'. 163 Lenin had begun, in the winter of 1916-
17, to perceive Russia as being characterised by aspects of 'state 
capitalism'; 164 but these were preliminary musings. On the other 
hand, he still acknowledged that Russia was not in the front rank of 
the industrial powers, and in his 'Letters from Afar' urged the 
concept of a 'revolutionary-democratic dictatorship of the proletar-
iat and the poorest peasants' for Russia. 165 The notebooks, then, 
influenced the theses but were not the exclusive factor. 
Not having explained why the economic 'forces of production' had 
become adequate for the establishment of socialism in industrialised 
Europe, he now also avoided stating why a largely agrarian society 
like Russia could begin to undertake a similar enterprise. In fact the 
older Bolshevik strategy had never been a clear two-stage revolu-
tionary strategy. Thus there was but a short step from the 
'provisional revolutionary-democratic dictatorship of the proletar-
iat and the peasantry' of 1905-6 to the 'revolutionary-democratic 
dictatorship of the proletariat and the poorest peasants' in 1917; and, 
regardless of Bolshevik intentions, the traditional strategy would 
always have hobbled a 'bourgeois revolution' in Russia. 166 
Moreover, the First World War and its political repercussions 
dominated Lenin's life after 1914, leading him to reject all persons 
and notions which appeared to him to fail to oppose imperialism in a 
 Unsealed Messages 
157 
fundamental fashion. 167 And Lenin in 1917 obviously sensed the 
existence of a crack in the dam, giving him an opportunity to unleash 
the flooding waters of history. To conceive him as having elaborated 
a theory in The April Theses, based on a discrete analysis of Russian 
circumstances, before recommending specific measures, is to fly in 
the face of the evidence. 168 In the main, he was announcing his 
measures in advance of his theory. This does not mean that 
theoretical understandings and inclinations did not condition his 
thinking; but it is ludicrous to pretend that theory preceded and 
predetermined everything. Another point has to remain speculative. 
But surely Lenin, being a politician competing with other politicians, 
experienced a temptation noted by political scientists with regard to 
most openly-competitive systems of politics: namely to mark out for 
himself an easily identifiable spot on the political spectrum; and, as 
an inveterate adherent of far-left socialist ideas, he felt himself at his 
most comfortable when criticising other socialist parties and groups 
for their insufficiency of radicalism. 169 
The April Theses's fundamental message, expressed and re-
expressed in Theses One and Two, was a call for a second stage of 
the revolution to put power 'into the hands of the proletariat and the 
poorest strata of the peasantry'. 170 There were definite shifts away 
from the 'Letters from Afar'. For example, the fourth thesis 
conceded that 'revolutionary defencism' was sincerely advocated by 
a vast number of elected popular representatives in the soviets, and 
that the Bolsheviks constituted merely a 'pale minority'. 171 Lenin 
also admitted: 'Russia at the moment is the freest country in the 
world of all the belligerent countries.' The Bolsheviks should 
concentrate upon using the new political liberties. 172 Lenin's 
finessing probably resulted from conversations in Sweden with 
Bolsheviks in closer contact with Russian conditions than the 
correspondent of Zurcher Post, or from his exchanges with Kame-
nev at the Finnish frontier. Or perhaps his own few hours' experience 
of the freedoms of Petrograd induced the fresh nuances. 
At any rate, Lenin contended flatly that the workers' soviets were 
'the sole possible form of revolutionary government. 173 In line with 
his last 'Letter from Afar', he argued that the establishment of a 
parliamentary republic would be a retrograde step. The old state 
machine ought to be superseded by a 'republic of soviets of workers', 
farm-labourers' and peasants' deputies'; and payment of officials, all 
of whom should be elected to office and subject to instant recall by 
their electorate, should be at a rate no higher than the wage of a 
 158 
Lenin: A Political Life 
'good worker'. 174 Thesis Nine called for alterations m the party 
programme so as to incorporate ideas about imperialism and the 
'imperialist war' and to put forward 'our demand for a "commune-
state'".175 In economic policy Lenin had a couple of proposals. In 
Thesis Six, he advocated land nationalisation (which he had failed to 
have officially accepted by Bolsheviks in the past). 176 In contrast with 
1905-6, however, he looked more to the farm labourers than to the 
peasantry as a whole as the reservoir of rural political support. He 
wished such labourers to establish their own separate soviets and to 
set up 'model farms' on the larger agricultural estates. In Thesis 
Seven he recommended that the country's banking should be 
centralised and brought under the control of the soviets. 177 This, 
according to Lenin's eighth thesis, signified not a scheme for instant 
socialism but 'a transition immediately only to the control by the 
workers' soviets over social production and the distribution of 
products'. 1 78 
A sense of urgency was fostered by the style of the ten theses. They 
varied a great deal in length. The first was the longest, running to 142 
words. But a thumping brevity was typical, and the tenth thesis was 
rapped out in twelve Russian words: 'Renovation of the Interna-
tional. Initiative to create a revolutionary International, an Interna-
tional against social-chauvinists against the centre.' 179 Snappy, 
truculent phrases abounded, often without being incorporated in 
full sentences; and ideas were reiterated, despite Lenin's self-imposed 
confines of space, to drive home the message. Italics and exclamation 
marks accentuated the abruptness, conveying his clenched-teethed 
determination. 180 At one point, in the first thesis, he simply urged: 
'Fraternisation'. His invocation in Thesis Five dispensed with the 
word 'and' from a list of nouns: 'The elimination of police, army, 
bureaucracy.' 181 All of this enhanced the effect of the drumbeat 
rhythms. Despite the inelegance and the hurried composition, the 
rhetorical subtleties of Lenin's writing were arresting. 182 
Curtness of style, furthermore, was balanced by a degree of 
political tact. In regard to adherents of 'revolutionary defencism', 
the party's task was 'to explain their mistake to them especially 
circumstantially, insistently, patiently'. 183 (Now there's a typical 
adverbial triptych for connoisseurs of Lenin's prose!) In his second 
thesis he admitted that this would require intensive effort. Propa-
ganda would have to be undertaken 'in the milieu of the incredibly 
broad masses of the proletariat which had recently awoken to 
political life' .184 (It may be thought that the phrasing betrays a 
 Unsealed Messages 
159 
certain intellectualist condescension; but Lenin wrote The April 
Theses mainly for the party's leaders, central and local, who used 
such terminology regardless as to whether they were of middle-class 
or working-class background.) But the question arose: how was 
power to be taken from the Provisional Government? The third 
thesis came nearest to addressing this ticklish subject by stipulating 
that 'no support' be given to the Lvov cabinet. 185 This was scarcely a 
plan of detailed guidance for Bolshevik organisers, but at least it 
advised what was not to be done. Lenin knew that the April Theses 
were merely a preliminary sketch. Only his thesis on land nationalisa-
tion, demanding that 'model farms' should be formed from expro-
priated estates of 'around 100 desyatinas to 300 desyatinas [270 to 
810 acres] depending on local and other conditions', 186 achieved a 
slight measure of specificity - and even this wording left much 
unclear. 
Most surprisingly, Lenin made no mention of the organisation of 
industry under the proposed socialist regime. There was nothing 
about the level and nature of governmental intervention. Not a word 
about nationalising factories and mines. Nothing about central 
planning, except for a very general plea for soviet control 'over 
social production and exchange of products'. 187 Nor do the theses 
say anything on the growing food-supplies crisis. Equally striking 
was Lenin's silence on the economic and social rights and duties of 
workers, peasants and soldiers. He focused on politics and on the 
soviets as the centre of political life; he made no mention of possible 
reforms in the running of factories; and the influence of workers over 
industrial management was ignored. Nor did Lenin confront the 
problems of relations between peasants in the rural economy once 
the gentry had been removed: there was nothing in the theses on the 
hiring of labour or the renting of land. 
Lenin's technique was to deliver assertions and demands, not 
explanatory analysis. Kamenev, his main rival in Bolshevik theory 
in the post-February days, issued only Pravda articles; no straight-
forward summons to action came from him. Lenin was emerging as a 
master of the channels of debate in his party, and a principal aspect 
of that mastery was his ability to give a wide berth to uncongenial 
issues. The theses were not a comprehensive sketch of future politics 
even though political issues constituted the bulk of the contents. The 
relations among the respective soviets of the workers, peasants, 
farmworkers and soldiers were left unclear. It was also unclear 
whether the workers' soviets would have powers superior to the 
 160 
Lenin: A Political Life 
soviets of the other social groups. 188 Furthermore, the rural network 
of soviets was only patchily described; and Lenin, using a variety of 
formulations, gave scant guidance as how to settle relationships 
among the farmworkers, the poorest peasants and the peasantry as a 
whole. 189 But the skimpiness of theory in The April Theses caused 
Lenin himself no embarrassment. He dealt with the doubters by 
claiming that 'the art of administrating cannot be learned from 
books' and that the Paris Commune of 1871 provided an excellent 
precedent. He urged, 'Try it out, make mistakes, learn how to 
administrate. ' 190 
These were the early days of a revolutionary era and these were 
revolutionary politics. The April Theses were the first broad-ranging 
statement of a fundamental Bolshevik alternative to the policies of 
Kamenev and Stalin. Many Bolsheviks agreed on the desirability of 
another revolution in Russia in the near future; but neither 
Shlyapnikov nor any other Bolshevik radical had come forward 
with quite so broad-ranging a schema. The theses instigated a bitter 
dispute among Bolsheviks, and Lenin had made striking contribution 
to the politics of Bolshevism after the February Revolution. 
 6 
There Is Such a Party! 
April to July 1917 
FIGHTING FOR BOLSHEVISM 
The February Revolution span the kaleidoscope of Russia's politics, 
jolting the alliances and rivalries among the parties, and politicians 
gained a freedom of choice unrestricted by the Romanov monarchy. 
Lenin's April Theses were the acme of free will. Yet no political 
leader, not even Lenin, could escape the constraints of circumstance 
in their entirety. Each had to take the measure of terrifyingly exigent 
pressures: the Eastern front, economic dislocation, and popular 
discontent. Parties coped by modifying their physiognomies, and 
the changes were by no means random occurrences. Monarchism for 
a time was defunct as a political force. 1 The possibilities for a right-
wing military dictatorship were as yet limited by the destruction of 
the old order in the armed forces. So it came about that the Kadets, 
who had traditionally advocated parliamentary democracy and 
universal civic liberties, were the nearest party to the righthand pole 
of the political spectrum with the slightest chance of holding power. 
The situation was daunting. A centralised state structure was 
retained by the Provisional Government; but its authority was 
fragile from the start. The commissars and other newly-appointed 
functionaries in the provinces of the old empire had to consult in 
reality with local elective bodies. Many of these were sectional mass 
organisations, especially the soviets, which quickly set up agencies in 
every town and city. In Petrograd there was sad to be 'dual power', 
shared by the Provisional Government anc. the City Soviet. 
Aleksandr Guchkov took a gloomier view, claimmg that the Soviet 
had all the ultimate power. Other organisations, too, had influence in 
both the capital and the localities; trade unions and factory-work-
shop committees in the urban areas, and peasant communes in the 
countryside impeded the implementing of the Provisional Govern-
ment's policies. Sanctions of coercion available to the Lvov cabinet 
were frail. The police had fled, and the garrison soldiers regarded 
161 
