 4 War's Divisions: 
1915-1916 
ATTACHMENTS AND DETACHMENTS 
Seven million soldiers were slaughtered in the First World War, and 
thirteen million civilians perished through the diseases and malnutri-
tion brought on by the fighting; the imperturbability of the statesmen 
involved became notorious to later generations. A stiff-upper lip 
mentality was not peculiar to the British; the idea that the burdens 
had to be endured without complaint was shared by the other Allies 
and by the Central Powers. A feeling that national honour was at 
stake was potent. Nor could the ruling elites in each belligerent state 
ever forget that defeat would almost certainly bring their rule to an 
end. Most conscripts, moreover, were drawn from Europe's working 
classes and peasantries. The dangers of discontent with the worsening 
conditions in town and countryside were obvious to ministers. The 
upper and middle classes were affected also, since military officers 
were killed in their tens of thousands. The politicians knew this; but 
their offices were in London, Paris, Berlin, Vienna and Petrograd, 
hundreds of miles from the muddy, dispiriting, blood-stained 
trenches. Ministerial visits by a Lloyd George or a Clemenceau 
were fleeting episodes. Furthermore, the various military high 
commands were baffled by the stationary form taken by the war 
on both Western and Eastern fronts. In the first couple of years of 
the fighting it seemed that there was no strate~ic alternative to the 
man-hungry trench cross-fire that raged on botl. fronts. 
Lenin's sang froid about the mass homicide was far from making 
him unusual among political leaders. It was widespread among those 
holding office. Parliamentarians in opposition were a more varied 
bunch; and some, including revolutionaries such as the German 
social-democrat Karl Liebknecht felt an emotional as well as an 
intellectual repugnance about the war. Yet others, who were probably 
the majority, qualified their opposition to their governments by 
97 
 98 
Lenin: A Political Life 
indicating that they would use their armies in a similar way even if 
their war aims were different. They saw themselves as facing up to 
the political and military realities of the time. 
Lenin had predicted the war's outburst in a detached frame of 
mind, and from 1914 detested its actual occurrence in a similarly 
abstract fashion. He showed emotion about the military conflict only 
intermittently; and, when he did, anger and not pity was his 
dominant sensation. His outbursts were seldom directed at the 
war's consequences for the wretches in the trenches or even at the 
responsibility of governments. His preferred target was the behaviour 
of fellow socialists, and none annoyed him more than Karl Kautsky. 1 
He lived through 1915 and 1916 in a state of constant and even near-
hysterical irascibility, such was his sense of betrayal on the part of 
the Second International and most of its leaders. There were only 
rare periods of remission from his anger. Lenin's pen-portrait of the 
death of Marxism's co-founder contains an example of sentimental-
ism with few parallels in his works: 'On 14 March 1883 Marx quietly 
fell asleep forever in his armchair.'2 This was the language of 
obituaries in popular newspapers. In a letter to Inessa Armand in 
January 1917, Lenin gave a slightly less cliched but even more 
startling tinge to his feelings. He was still, he averred, 'in love with 
Marx'. 3 He informed Inessa that none of Marx's critics had managed 
to quench his ardour.4 Yet his affections for Marx had a jealous side; 
he was never more vicious in disputes than with other Marxists who 
challenged his interpretation of Marxism. The altercations with 
Kautsky and with Menshevik theorists over social-democratic 
attitudes to the war were but one manifestation among many during 
Lenin's long relationship with Marx. 
It was ironical that Lenin's profession of love for Marx was made 
in a letter to Inessa. Tales were told in the Russian Marxist 
emigration that Lenin was sexually promiscuous. Lidiya Dan, 
Martov's sister, claimed that his extramarital adventures started in 
middle age. 5 It was widely supposed that Inessa had been among his 
mistresses. She was an attractive woman, five years younger than 
Lenin. She was also married and had children; and her commitment 
to the revolutionary cause was firm. Lenin had met her for the first 
time in 1911, and there can be no doubt that he quickly developed 
affectionate feelings towards Inessa. 6 
That there was also a sexual liaison between them is not clearly 
demonstrated. It is indisputable that Inessa participated in a menage 
a trois with Lenin and Krupskaya in 1912/ but so long as Lenin 
 War's Divisions 
99 
remains an iconic figure for the Soviet state, the revelation of the full 
truth will be fraught with difficulties of a political nature.8 Yet much 
circumstantial evidence points in a positive direction: in particular, 
Krupskaya apparently hinted that she was ready to accept such a 
situation. She had a strong inner strength, and continued to be on 
warm terms with Inessa's children.9 Nevertheless any possible 
relationship between Lenin and Inessa can hardly have been an all-
consuming passion even though it would imply a chilling of feelings 
between Lenin and Krupskaya. Lenin's duties to Krupskaya could in 
any case not be ignored. Her health was deteriorating: the chronic 
thyroid illness showed itself with severity, and surgery was for a time 
contemplated. Lenin's own health was not perfect either. Pictures of 
him after the outbreak of war show him looking older than his forty-
four years. But the greatest impediment to a lasting love affair with 
Inessa was the driving force in Lenin's life: his preoccupation with 
politics and all that this meant - literary invective, organisational 
attentiveness, philosophical speculation and economic study. Time 
for pleasures of the flesh was exiguous in this man's supremely 
political life. 
Inessa's beauty shines out of all the extant photographs; only 
Lidiya Dan rivalled her amidst the Russian revolutionary sorority. 
But by 1915, to judge by the published record, the heat of his letters 
to her had cooled. He began to sign with the non-familiar version of 
'Yours' in Russian, and often he gave his name not as Vladimir or 
Volodya but baldly as 'V.U.', his mere initials. 10 On the other hand, 
he often used this signature even in letters to his mother, in poor 
health in wartime Russia. Lenin could do little to help at all, 
marooned as he was in neutral Switzerland. His younger brother 
had become a doctor, and tried to guide her medical regimen, but in 
1914 she was already 73 years old. Her family's difficulties never 
ceased; at the beginning of the war she had to contend with the fact 
that her daughter Mariya, also a Bolshevik, was arrested in 
Petrograd; 11 and exile to Vologda province ensued. Vladimir Ilich's 
mother spent her last remaining years in this far-northern city, with 
its dark and icy-cold winter months. 
Not that Ulyanov-Lenin lacked his share of personal worries. His 
original intention was to live out the war in Bern. On arrival, he 
faced financial circumstances less happy than before 1914. As an 
economist he expected, and as an apartment-tenant dreaded, a rise in 
the cost of rented rooms if the anticipated influx of refugee French 
revolutionary socialists should occurY Yet French socialism by and 
 100 
Lenin: A Political Life 
large did not oppose French involvement in the war, and the wave of 
Gallic immigrants to Switzerland failed to take place. This, for 
Lenin, was the only desirable consequence of the 'collapse of the 
Second International'. But problems with money were not dispelled. 
In 1915 he could not travel to make speeches unless a fee, however 
small, was promised. This was not money-grubbing but necessity. He 
would write to friends asking for an overnight stay to be arranged in 
as cheap a couple of rooms as possible, preferably with self-catering 
facilities to cut down expenditure on cafe foodY He was not as 
robust as previously; but his stamina was sustained by his anger and 
sense of duty. Yet it was a hermetically-contained existence. With all 
his talk about Russia, he met no Russian who had seen military 
combat until shortly before the February Revolution of 1917. He saw 
nothing of the barbed wire and the trenches and, though everyone 
read about them, wrote little on them. His isolation was greater than 
for others, like Trotski and Martov, who were based in Paris. They at 
least saw the trainloads of conscripts going off to the front, and 
equally saw the wounded soldiers returning and the wrecked families 
who had lost their menfolk. 
Perhaps this inexperience accounts for Lenin's blithely innocent 
use of military metaphors. There was an incongruity of scale, at the 
height of the the First World War, in designating 'a war upon the 
opportunists and the social-chauvinists' as the priority of the 
moment. His over-statements, too, were egregious. He bracketed 
the German army commander Paul von Hindenburg and the British 
left-wing socialist H.M. Hyndman as politically indistinguishable, 14 
as if Hyndman, who gave merely conditional support to the British 
Government in 1914, espoused any single great power's militarist 
subjugation of the Continent. Lenin was writing off everyone who 
disagreed with him on any major policy. 
He presented this as a cut-and-dried affair. Those who, in his view, 
had failed the supreme test of July-August 1914 could never be 
trusted again. Great events can break individuals on their wheel, and 
this is what he thought had happened to the German Social-
Democratic Party leadership. Repeatedly he returned to the figure 
of Kautsky. Lenin assumed that the socialist 'centrists' were most 
dangerous to his policy because they might win left-wing socialists to 
the path of moderation and, eventually, of a betrayal as great as that 
already perpetrated by the ascendant party leaders. But this was only 
part of Lenin's motivation. The other reason was that he had 
esteemed Kautsky so highly. Despite the various pre-war disagree-
 War's Divisions 
101 
ments, Lenin had continued to admire Kautsky's economic expertise, 
and had taken his revolutionary strategy for Germany at its face 
value. Lenin regarded Kautsky's words from 1914 as mere rhetoric, 
as the worst sort of hypocrisyY And, although Hugo Haase was a 
more influential figure among the centrists of the German Social-
Democratic party in the war, it was Kautsky who drew Lenin's 
unrelenting fire. The obverse side of the coin was that Lenin tacitly 
took a higher view of his own stature inside European revolutionism. 
Among younger revolutionaries who had a benign estimation of him, 
he was becoming akin to an elder statesman. He began to talk of 'us, 
the old men'. 16 As a senior politician, he felt a duty to contact young 
socialists. Opportunities were limited in wartime, nevertheless he 
snatched his chances to address meetings of the young Swiss 
socialists in the Zurich Volkshaus. 17 
As he passed on the torch, he attempted to keep his words simple 
and maximalist; but his prognoses were not without nuances and 
qualifications. In his moods of pessimism he conceded that the 
European revolution might not occur until after the end of the 
present war. Politics, he stressed, was a volatile process. He foresaw, 
too, that this might not be the last world war: an unconventional 
prediction in its time and a typically hard-headed pronouncement 
from him. 18 Lenin could not abide the cant of those governmental 
ministers and political commentators who trumpeted that the 
military conflict was a war to end all wars. Intermittently, he was 
also perspicacious about Germany. Laying aside his apocalyptic 
over-simplifications, he once even recognised that Germany was 
not in fact characterised by a revolutionary crisis. 19 But such an 
acknowledgement was unique among his public comments. Not 
surprisingly, few colleagues in Switzerland took much notice of the 
remark. 
THE ZIMMERW ALD CONFERENCE 
Robert Grimm and Odino Morgari were the first European socialists 
trying to organise an international anti-war conference who, in 
Lenin's opinion, could not be ignored. The earliest of such initiatives 
had come with a meeting of representatives from the Allied countries 
in London in February 1915 and a meeting in Vienna for socialist 
 102 
Lenin: A Political Life 
parties from the Central Powers in April 1915. But these gatherings 
had the obvious weakness that Germans and Austrians were not 
speaking with Britons, French and Russians. A second kind of 
enterprise was embodied in efforts made by socialists from neutral 
countries to contact each other. In September 1914, a group of Swiss 
and Italian socialists met in Lugano and agreed to prepare a 
conference, under Hermann Greulich's direction. The Danish and 
Swedish parties were moving in the same direction; for them, as for 
their friends in Switzerland and Italy, the immediate priority was to 
prevent the spread of the war to their countries. Steadily, however, 
the ambition of many participants widened and the idea of a 
gathering of anti-war socialists of all nations was born. The 
International Socialist Bureau's lethargy incensed such socialists. 
The Bureau, which was transferred to The Hague after Belgium's 
conquest by the German armies, did little more than conduct routine 
discussions after 1914.20 
Grimm decided to be bold. Encouraged by the Lugano arrange-
ments and spurred on by Russian Marxists such as Martov,21 he 
convoked a conference of all socialists who opposed their govern-
ments, rejected policies of 'civil peace' and wanted an end to the war. 
Grimm and his fellow conferees were heartened by the news in 
December 1914 that a German social-democrat, Karl Liebknecht, 
had broken instructions by voting against war credits in the 
Reichstag. A strongly anti-war group was forming around 
Liebknecht in the Reichstag, and Rosa Luxemburg outside. It was 
a tiny minority of the German Social-Democratic Party, but a breach 
in the wall of party unity had been made. 22 
Hugo Haase and Karl Kautsky regarded both of them as 
demagogues. And yet they, too, were disconcerted by the growing 
evidence of the German government's expansionist war aims. Unlike 
Liebknecht, they refrained from open criticism of the party's policy 
on the war but hoped to steer it towards a demand for a peace 
without annexations. 23 Exposure of governmental intentions, under-
taken by Haase in spring 1915 in respect of Bethmann Hollweg, was 
not confined to Germany. In Britain, the Independent Labour Party 
remained a thorn in the side of the authorities, and the Confedera-
tion Generale du Travail and the Section 
Fran~aise de 
l'Internationale Ouvriere had a rising number of anti-war activists. 
Many socialists in the Russian political underground persisted in 
their actions against the Romanov government despite the campaigns 
of arrest and exile. Italy's government moved towards war on the 
 War's Divisions 
103 
Allied side in summer 1915, but the Italian Socialist Party contained 
several thousand anti-war members. In June 1915 Liebknecht 
deepened the rift among German social-democrats by suggesting in 
a pamphlet that the party's policy of 'civil peace' (Burgfrieden) for 
the war's duration ought to be abandoned; he drew support from 
twelve Reichstag members. He also helped to found Die 
Internationale with the aim of disseminating his ideas more widely; 
but his conscription into the army prevented him from accepting 
Grimm's invitation to join the anti-war socialist conference in 
Switzerland. 24 
Proceedings commenced on 5 September 1915. Thirty-eight people 
assembled in the centre of Bern and embarked on four charabancs to 
travel the six miles to the mountain village of Zimmerwald. No one 
pretended that it was a large gathering, or even that all the 
participants were on friendly terms with each other: long-standing 
animosities divided socialists from the Romanov empire in particu-
lar. But international socialist gatherings were accustomed to 
disputes among Russians, and the passengers in Bern resolved to 
be cheerful. The joke went the rounds that, half a century after the 
First International's foundation, all Europe's internationalists could 
still be accommodated in just four charabancs. 25 
The Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party, the Italian Socialist 
Party and the Balkan Socialist Federation sent official representa-
tives (although the Russians made their customary insistence on 
sending separate factional representatives); these were necessarily but 
a small minority of European socialist organisations. Most other 
major parties, having voted war credits for their respective govern-
ments, were shunned. Thus the ascendant leaderships of the German 
Social-Democratic Party, the French Socialist Party and the British 
Labour Party received no invitation. Yet the list of participants 
would have been longer if the governments of belligerent states had 
not been obstructive. Some delegates, such as Bruce Glasier of the 
Independent Labour Party in Britain, could not obtain travel 
documents. 26 French anti-war socialists managed to send representa-
tives; but these made their journey at a time of jingoism at home, and 
were not sure whether they would be permitted to return safely.27 
Even Robert Grimm, editor of Berner Tagwacht, was in an 
anomalous position. The Swiss Social-Democratic Party instructed 
him to attend in the capacity of a private observer; his colleagues, 
despite having done much to call the Conference, wanted to minimise 
any possible offence to their government.28 
 104 
Lenin: A Political Life 
Not even a quartet of charabancs would have been needed if Lenin 
had had his way. He had joined in the planning for the Conference, 
urging that only those groups who unconditionally wanted to vote 
against war credits should be invited.29 This was unacceptable to 
Grimm and most others. Grimm's hope remained that German 
social-democratic 'centrists', perhaps even Haase and Kautsky in 
person, would attend. In the event, ten German social-democratic 
leaders arrived; and only one of them, Julian Borchardt, advocated 
Liebknecht's outright opposition to war credits.30 Lenin tried also to 
limit the nature of the Russian delegation. He stiffened the resolve of 
Zinoviev, his representative in the formal pre-Conference negotia-
tions, not to make too many concessions to Trotski as leader of the 
Paris-based Nashe Slovo ('Our Word') group.31 
Lenin's rationale for the Conference was tacit but plain: the fewer 
the participants, the bigger the proportion of the far left. Even Lenin, 
however, needed allies. European revolution could not be undertaken 
solely by Russians. The comradely spirit between the Bolsheviks and 
the Polish left-wing social-democrats grew. Of these Poles, Karl 
Radek displaced Hanecki and others as the central figure in Lenin's 
calculations. Radek was not a practical organiser like Hanecki, but a 
leading Marxist pamphleteer, and the Conference's labours would be 
taken up with issues of policy. Lenin and he got together in Bern in 
July. Independently of each other, both had been composing material 
to be presented to the Conference. Lenin had a draft resolution. It 
castigated the 'social-chauvinists' who supported the slogan of 
'defence of the fatherland', describing their policy as a 'betrayal of 
socialism'. It called for a break with the official socialist leaderships 
which took such a line, and it indicated that Kautsky and the 
German 'centrists' were also to be categorised as advocates of social-
chauvinism. 32 Radek's proposed theses were not as specific or 
rebarbative. In his initial draft he neither mentioned social-chauvin-
ism nor referred to the offending socialist leaders by name. Radek 
was vague too about practicalities. His theses did not explicitly 
demand a rejection of war credits and of socialist participation in 
belligerent governments. 33 
These omissions were caused more by oversight than by deliberate 
intent, and Radek was content to accept several modifications 
demanded by Lenin. Yet he would not yield entirely. His revised 
version did not include approval of the tactic of defeatism; Radek 
remained baffled that the Bolsheviks had approved such a policy at 
their emigre conference in Bern in February 1915. Nor did Radek's 
 War's Divisions 
105 
second draft uphold the principle of national liberation movements, 
and he persisted in opposing Lenin on the question of nationalities. 
In addition, Radek refused to call for a break with the official 
socialist parties,34 he was not persuaded about the wisdom of 
alienating the entire German Social-Democratic Party even though 
he had a longer record of hostility to Kautsky than had Lenin; and 
he would not condone Lenin's cold-shouldering of Trotski.35 
Radek had a mordant wit and was in awe of nobody (and in the 
1930s he was to pay the ultimate price for this under Stalin). He was 
also a potentially uncomfortable ally for the Bolsheviks inasmuch as 
he had an intimate knowledge of Bolshevism not shared by many far-
left socialists in Europe. He had perennially objected to Lenin's 
sectarian leanings, and referred scathingly to the Bolsheviks as 'an 
orientation of a tiny group of revolutionaries'.36 It was the sort of 
quip which, as Radek knew, got deep under Lenin's skin. But Lenin's 
only response at the time was to resume his collation of data from 
Russia to emphasise how much stronger the Bolsheviks were than the 
Mensheviks. He could not afford to alienate Radek entirely since not 
only would this confirm the veracity of Radek's quip but also a rare 
non-Bolshevik ally would be lost at Zimmerwald. There was no 
alternative but to agree to differ on several matters and to restrain 
mutual criticisms in public. Both found this difficult; Lenin never 
liked losing a comma or semi-colon from his proposed drafts, and 
Radek, a gregarious and gossipy soul, was a stranger to self-
discipline. Radek and Lenin sent their materials to the various 
socialist emigrant groups in Switzerland. Letters were also dispat-
ched to far-left socialist leaders abroad in order to make the left as 
strong as possible at the Conference.37 
But it was already clear that the Zimmerwald Left, as such leaders 
became known, would constitute a minority. A private meeting was 
held a day before the Conference's first session. A joint strategy for 
the Left was thought essential, and Bolsheviks and Polish social-
democrats were past masters of the skills of the organisational 
cabale. E. Hoglund from Norway; J. Borchardt from Germany; J. 
Berzins from the Leftish social-democrats; T. Nerman from Norway: 
these were to prove to be usefully eloquent allies at Zimmerwald. 
Radek was undaunted by the Left's numerical weakness. Nor was he 
bashful about competing directly with Lenin for the Zimmerwald 
Left's favour. A vote was taken, and Radek's drafts were taken as the 
basis for the Zimmerwald Left's submission to the Conference. Lenin 
continued to contribute amendments. But it had been made plain to 
 106 
Lenin: A Political Life 
him that he had better take a careful view of the art of the possible if 
he was not to be entirely isolated; and, in the end, eight signatories 
put their hands to the Left's draft manifesto.38 
Grimm opened the Conference. Rehearsing the sins of omission of 
the International Socialist Bureau, he explained the steps taken by 
Italian and Swiss comrades in arranging the gathering at Zimmer-
wald. He carefully eschewed calling for a Third International, and 
stressed the need for joint socialist action for peace. He described the 
Conference as a means of bringing together the Left and the so-called 
Centre in international socialism. 39 Lenin was on his best Conference 
behaviour. This meant that on the first day he totally refrained from 
speech, leaving Zinoviev to act as Bolshevik spokesman. It was 
Georg Lebedour, a German centrist to Kautsky's left, who 
introduced acrimony by challenging the validity of Borchardt's 
mandate to the Conference. Lenin could scarcely contain himself. 
Borchardt was a crucial member of the Zimmerwald Left since he 
was its only German. A flurry of notes passed between Lenin and 
Lebedour (or possibly an associate of Lebedour's). Lenin wrote: 
'You want to exclude the only German group standing on the 
viewpoint of the leftists, and you don't want to say this openly.'40 
Lebedour was equally frank in reply: 'But you're still here! And there 
are three of you! And we're not driving you out. '41 Lebedour's 
attitude reflected an undercurrent of feeling that subjects of the 
Romanov empire were represented unduly well at the Conference. In 
truth there were eleven of them in all; and it was hardly in Lenin's 
interest to deepen the squabble over mandates. 
Furthermore, most delegates wished the Conference to work out 
decisions in such a form as to allow everyone to support them. A 
unanimous Conference would look more impressive to the rest of the 
world. And yet this was still hard to achieve. A further complication 
was that a letter had arrived from Karl Liebknecht. The contents 
called explicitly for civil war and urged socialists not to make a fetish 
out of party unity.42 For Lenin, this was manna from heaven. 
Perhaps no event in the first two years of the First World War 
gave Lenin quite so much delight and reassurance that things would 
turn favourably in his direction sooner or later. 
There followed a discussion of the German Social-Democratic 
Party's vote for war credits. The Zimmerwald Conference was not 
like Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party Congresses, with their 
debates on the grand theory. The discussion was severely practical. 
Lebedour tried to speak positively, calling for a joint anti-war 
 War's Divisions 
107 
declaration by German and French delegates. But Bertha Thalhei-
mer came out strongly for Liebknecht.43 This intra-German dispute 
persisted into the second day. Russians and other East Europeans 
became involved. Condemnation of the German Social-Democratic 
Party's ascendant party leadership in 1914 was common to all at 
Zimmerwald; but proposals for action were varied. Akselrod wanted 
the Germans to avoid a party split, whereas Zinoviev called precisely 
for that. On 7 September, Radek raised the temperature of the 
proceedings by presenting the Left's draft manifesto and draft 
resolution. 44 Lebedour opposed. In particular, he argued that 
Radek's talk of street demonstrations and political strikes would 
give advance warning of socialist intentions to the German govern-
ment. Lenin at this point made his only lengthy contribution at the 
Conference table. Turning to Lebedour, he stated: 'The German 
movement is faced with a decision. If we are indeed on the threshhold 
of a revolutionary epoch in which the masses will go over to 
revolutionary struggle, we must also make mention of the means 
necessary for this struggle.' For good measure he added, 'you cannot 
make a revolution without explaining revolutionary tactics. '45 
Trotski too supported Radek in general terms, yet he retained 
doubts about Bolshevik attitudes to the peace movement and to 
Kautsky and the German centrists; he and Henrietta Roland-Holst 
from Holland put forward their own draft manifesto along such 
lines.46 
Zinoviev disliked Trotski personally but did not share Lenin's 
automatic disdain, and beckoned him to come closer to the Radek-
Lenin standpoint. He declared his pleasure that Trotski had taken 'a 
step towards' the Left.47 But the rest of the Conference took little 
note of these amicable soundings since nothing would give victory to 
the Left in the proceedings; and Trotski in any case did not welcome 
Zinoviev's overture. The majority of the Conference, especially 
Lebedour and the French socialist Alfred Merrheim, felt that the 
Left underestimated the demoralisation of European working 
people.48 The Left's plan for a detailed resolution was turned 
down. The Conference opted to publish only a short manifesto and 
a commission was created to elaborate it. But the Left's draft 
manifesto was doomed to failure; only Lenin, among its signator-
ies, was included on the eight-person commission.49 
Grimm announced an agreed Conference manifesto on 8 Septem-
ber. It defined the war as imperialist. It recalled the Second 
International's decisions on war before 1914 with approval, and 
 108 
Lenin: A Political Life 
stated that the official socialist leaderships had failed the European 
working class. It noted that ruling classes everywhere pleaded for 
civil peace for the duration of military hostilities. It called for 
'irreconcilable proletarian class struggle'. 50 Had it not been for the 
Left, such phrases would have been weaker. Yet the manifesto was 
mainly a triumph for Grimm. He had stopped Lenin from specifying 
the need for party splits everywhere; he had kept the names of 
particular official leaders out of the limelight. He had also succeeded 
in avoiding mention of the practical steps needed to foster the cause 
of the anti-war movement. Lenin and Radek had expected this. And 
yet they insisted that the Left be allowed to register their objections 
in any future official Conference report. They were not too 
displeased. The Zimmerwald Left, a very assorted group, had 
attained a reasonable degree of co-ordination. The lines of disagree-
ment had been drawn. Signs of the break-up of the German Social-
Democratic Party had been glimpsed. Radek and Lenin were starting 
to emerge as European socialist leaders to whom it behoved the 
socialist parties of Central and Eestern as well as Eastern Europe to 
listen. Radek had made a stronger showing than Lenin. But Lenin 
was not a man to accept his secondary status permanently. 
LENIN, BUKHARIN AND PYA T AKOV 
Not even Radek was perfectly au fait with the widening rift among 
the Bolsheviks. The problem was concealed at Zimmerwald since 
Lenin and Zinoviev were the only members of the Central Committee 
abroad and such disagreements as they had were kept secret. Lenin, 
while thinking Zinoviev was soft on Trotski, consoled himself that 
Zinoviev considered Trotski to be soft on Kautsky. 51 On the other 
hand, Zinoviev also differed from Lenin in refusing to blame the 
German Social-Democratic Party's behaviour overwhelmingly upon 
the party leadership. 52 
There were minor personal tiffs. Lenin was crotchety about 
Zinoviev's dilatoriness in exchanging books, while Zinoviev accused 
Lenin of'egoism' in such matters. 53 The younger Bolshevik was wily. 
In summer 1915 Lenin moved from Bern to the mountainside village 
of Sorenberg above Lucerne. Zinoviev and his wife rented rooms in 
Hertenstein overlooking the VierwaldsHitter Lake. Unable to 
persuade Zinoviev to transfer to Sorenberg, Lenin urged him to 
bicycle over for the day to discuss party business. The route from 
 War's Divisions 
109 
Hertenstein via Schupheim and Fliihli would allow Zinoviev to ride 
downhill for the last twenty minutes. 54 Zinoviev declined. Lenin tried 
again by reminding his plump associate that the downhill stretch 
could be done 'without legs'. 55 Zinoviev, not a stupid man, refused 
again; he was well capable of calculating that, if there were twenty 
minutes of freewheeling down to Sorenberg, the return trip would 
involve a strenuous haul back up the same mountain. Nor was he 
likely to overlook the fact that the distance from Hertenstein to 
Sorenberg was over forty miles. A Swiss mountain, to Zinoviev's 
evident relief, continued to divide one half of the Bolshevik Central 
Committee in emigration from the other. 
Krupskaya had remained with her husband. Regretting the 
growing fractiousness, she wrote to Karpinski in January 1915: 
'These are difficult times, and the slightest clumsy expression or 
any tiny nuance [sic] gives grounds for opponents to "deepen" 
disagreements amongst Bolsheviks.'56 At the time of writing, Lenin 
had not seriously fallen out with other Bolsheviks, but the tensions 
between him and Bukharin sharpened, and the fault lay with Lenin, 
not with Bukharin. Lenin was only biding his time for a confronta-
tion. Krupskaya's comments were becoming eminently applicable to 
husband Volodya himself as 'full principled solidarity' gave way to 
polemics. 57 
Lenin communicated with Bukharin and the Baugy group con-
fidentially, urging them to alter their stance on national self-
determination. The urgency for victory over fellow Bolsheviks was 
increased, in Lenin's judgement, by the moves towards collaboration 
among the sympathisers of the Zimmerwald Left before and after the 
Conference. Among these sympathisers there were several, notably 
Luxemburg and Pannekoek as well as Radek, who opposed Lenin on 
the national question; and their hostility grew in wartime as far-left 
groups in socialist parties sensed that the war might well end with 
socialist seizures of power. They detested concessions to nationalism 
during a war which could not have occurred in the absence of 
aggressive nationalisms. Trotski proposed the slogan of United 
States of Europe, aiming at a post-war continental map without 
frontiers. 58 Neither Radek nor Luxemburg accepted the slogan since 
it was directed exclusively at Europe and failed to offer a global 
perspective. 59 Bukharin and Pyatakov, however, were attracted to 
Trotski's idea.60 Lenin for a while vacillated. Initially he, too, was 
inclined to take up the 'United States of Europe' slogan; perhaps he 
thought that a continental socialist government, modelled on the 
 110 
Lenin: A Political Life 
structure of the capitalist USA or capitalist Switzerland, would allow 
sufficient self-expression to nationalities and ethnic groups for the 
national question to be resolved. 61 But he had second thoughts. 
Sensing that a chance to utilise repressed nationalisms might be lost, 
Lenin repeated that the right of secession from the European empires 
ought to be asserted. The Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party's 
programme and the pre-war decisions of the Bolsheviks were not to 
be abandoned. 
He was right to take the national question so seriously and his 
annoyance with Bukharin's dismissal of his arguments is under-
standable: Lenin pointed out that 55 per cent of the population in 
Eastern Europe were national minorities in the various existing 
states.62 But Bukharin was unpersuadable. Against Luxemburg, in 
addition, Lenin repeated that an independent Poland or Finland 
would suffer economically from being separated from the Russian 
empire. In a curious attempt to corroborate his arguments that the 
nation state was the normal vehicle of industrialisation, Lenin 
focused on the USA. Stressing that less than 11 per cent of its 
population were Negroes, he implied that ethnic homogeneity was an 
asset to economic advance.63 This was a doubtful proposition, if only 
because the Whites in North America came from an even greater 
diversity of national backgrounds than did the peoples of Eastern 
Europe. Wisely, he omitted such contentions from his published 
material. 
In opposing the United States of Europe slogan, the magpie-like 
Lenin also used arguments made against the slogan by the Bolshevik 
G. L. Shklovski when Lenin had advocated it.64 He declared that the 
USA had the most advanced economy in the world. The establish-
ment of a European state monolith would unite less-developed 
industrial countries whose interest would lie in obstructing the 
success of both North America and Japan. A United States of 
Europe would also, he asserted (in line with, but without acknow-
ledgement to Rosa Luxemburg), oppress the non-European colonies 
more fiercely. There was in any case little chance that European 
capitalist states would bury their rivalries since the disjunctions of 
economic interest were too great among them. 65 Bukharin and 
Pyatakov retorted that Lenin had grasped the wrong end of the 
stick since the United States of Europe slogan was based on the 
assumption that socialists, not capitalists, would be in government. 
This only stimulated Lenin to pose a still larger question: was a 
complete European socialist revolution likely in the short term? 
 War's Divisions 
Ill 
Lenin's answer was no. For him, such a revolution would probably 
require a whole epoch to come to completion. It would involve wars, 
and these would produce defeats as well as victories.66 Political 
futurology has a giddying effect. But such talk was not peculiar to 
socialists in wartime. Let us remember, too, the German industrial-
ists who dreamt up schemes for a new cartography of Russia and its 
periphery; or the Czech lobbyists who supplied the British Foreign 
Office with sketches of how to divide up the Habsburg domains into 
nation states at the war's end. 
Lenin and Bukharin were even further from influence over general 
politics in their countries than German industrialists and Czech 
lobbyists in theirs; but the wartime disagreements of the two 
Bolsheviks would assume cardinal practical importance in 1917 
when, as leaders of a Bolshevik party in power in Petrograd, they 
debated the strategy and time-scale for the introduction of socialism 
to Russia. Furthermore, their disputes were not only based upon 
political prognostication. They also revolved around questions about 
worldwide economic development. Bukharin, Pyatakov and the 
Baugy group believed that capitalism had more or less achieved 
global comprehensiveness. It had carved up the entire world. For 
Lenin, this was an empirical nonsense, ignoring the fact that China 
and many other semi-colonial countries had not yet been pulled fully 
into the imperialist thrall. 67 
Far from conceding ground, Bukharin pressed his analysis to 
another conclusion. The completion of the capitalist order had 
produced a hideously powerful innovation: 'the imperialist robber 
state'. Tossing aside laissez-faire economic objectives, it subvented 
the functions which had previously been carried out by private and 
semi-public capitalist associations. The state had begun not only to 
intervene directly in the economy but also to exert enormous 
ideological influence over the working 'masses', especially through 
the fostering of chauvinism. An all-powerful 'Leviathan' had been 
born. Bukharin looked back briefly to Marx's writings, and these 
appeared to confirm the orientation of Bukharin's thought: namely 
that the capitalist state could not simply be inherited by a socialist 
government and redeployed for socialist objectives. It had to be 
destroyed root and branch.68 This fundamental revision of Russian 
Marxism's understanding of its tasks had echoes in the writings of 
other left-wing Marxists; in particular, Anton Pannekoek and 
Hermann Gorter in Holland had similar ideas.69 But it caused 
offence to Lenin. It seemed akin to anarchism; it was a break with 
 ll2 
Lenin: A Political Life 
the tradition of Russian social-democracy. Relations between Lenin 
and Bukharin worsened over 1915. The journal Kommunist began 
publication in Geneva in July 1915. It lasted for only two issues. In 
his subsequent account, Lenin claimed that the journal had served its 
purpose once it had printed Socialism and the War by Lenin and 
Zinoviev.70 Thereafter, the gloves of ideological dispute were pulled 
off, and a struggle with no holds barred began. 
The responsibility of Bukharin to act as a link between Shlyapni-
kov and Switzerland predictably became a bone of contention. In 
November 1915, a letter arrived from Stockholm requesting that 
Bukharin's group be sanctioned to act independently in the Central 
Committee's name in relations with Russia. 71 For Lenin, this was a 
thinly-disguised attempt to supplant the Central Committee, and 
some such thought surely must have been in Bukharin's mind. Lenin 
was outraged, and he announced his refusal to have any future 
connection with Kommunist. 72 Zinoviev was near to despair, discern-
ing that Radek's description of the Bolshevik emigres as a tiny group 
seemed about to become an overestimation of their strength. 
Lenin came back to Zinoviev in 1916 and restated his self-
justification. Zinoviev expressed boredom with the whole sorry 
mess. 73 A profession of almost any other emotion would have 
incited Lenin less. But boredom! Lenin administered a blistering 
dressing-down to Zinoviev. 74 Yet Zinoviev would not budge; and, 
moreover, Bukharin retained his sensitive position along the line of 
Bolshevik communications with Russia. Lenin wrote to Shlyapnikov 
explaining his stand. 75 Shlyapnikov remained unconvinced, regarding 
the scrap between the two Bolshevik writers as yet another 
unedifying emigre spectacle. 76 
Even Lenin contained his rage at Shlyapnikov; he recognised that 
otherwise he would have wrecked all chance of regular contact with 
and influence over Bolsheviks in Petrograd. Meanwhile he prevailed 
upon the long-suffering and reluctant Zinoviev to collaborate on the 
production of a rival journal to Kommunist, to be called Digest of 
Social-Democrat.77 His letters to Bukharin became more abusive. 
Bukharin had heard that Lenin could not tolerate the other stars in 
his own galaxy; but he had rejected this as a slur on Bolshevism and 
its leader. 78 Suddenly he saw Lenin differently. He had thought that 
the disagreements could be kept within comradely bounds, and the 
eruption of conflict caught him wrongfooted. He wrote on 23 April 
1916, to say that he bitterly resented Lenin's attacks, and adding that 
he continued to regard Lenin as his 'teacher'. 79 In midsummer he left 
 War's Divisions 
113 
unannounced for New York. 80 The emigre shenanigans in Europe 
had become altogether intolerable. Nothing could illustrate the 
contrast in styles better. It would be inconceivable for Lenin to 
have walked away from close political involvement at such a 
moment; and he would not have relinquished a position of such 
logistical importance as Bukharin occupied in Scandinavia. Feelings 
of a spoiled friendship would not have affected his decisions. 
'IMPERIALISM AS THE HIGHEST STAGE OF CAPITALISM' 
Both Lenin and Bukharin thought the war to be 'imperialist', and 
wanted to produce an explanation of imperialism. Both felt mutually-
goaded into a bout of furious writing. First to complete a textbook 
was Bukharin, who completed The World Economy and Imperialism 
in 1915.81 Lenin read it in draft and, despite his increasingly poor 
relations with Bukharin, composed an introduction. He basically 
approved of Bukharin's account, but phrased himself cautiously and 
offered no direct praise. There was also a section wherein Lenin tried 
to distance himself from Bukharin's chapters. Bukharin suggested 
that, if contemporary trends persisted, the economies would be 
directed by a 'world economic trust'. Lenin affirmed this to be an 
abstract extrapolation which would not become a reality, and 
implicitly criticised Bukharin's notion that capitalism was on the 
threshold of complete development around the earth. 82 
Lenin wanted to clarify his own thoughts on imperialism and 
connected subjects. He used not only Bukharin's but also many other 
books as his sources. The Austrian Marxist, Rudolf Hilferding's 
Finance Capital had a huge influence, which Lenin acknowledged. He 
also mentioned that the English radical liberal, J. A. Hobson, had 
been important to him (and indeed he had translated some of his 
work earlier in the century).83 But this was not a job of simply 
elaborating an interpretation from other men's analyses. Lenin read 
a mountain of empirical literature: 148 books and 232 articles,84 
laboriously copying out excerpts which appear in his notebooks on 
imperialism - and the bulk of his reading was in German. He finished 
his own book in July 1916. His case studies came mainly from 
Germany and, to a lesser extent, Britain. This was not fortuitous 
since Lenin wished to secure publication in Petrograd, and a 
denunciation of Russian imperialism would not have helped. Even 
the notebooks have little on the Romanov lands, with a few sentences 
 ll4 
Lenin: A Political Life 
on cotton-growing in Turkestan constituting the lengthiest exam-
ple.85 Lenin was also careful about his title. His first idea was 'The 
Basic Characteristics of Contemporary Capitalism'. This was 
inoffensive but vague and unlikely to attract many readers. So 
instead he opted for 'Imperialism as the Latest Stage of Capital-
ism'.86 
This is not the present title, which is 'Imperialism as the Highest 
Stage of Capitalism'; but terms like 'highest stage' signified that there 
might be a further non-capitalist stage (which, of course, was exactly 
what was in Lenin's mind). And so, like Hilferding and Radek before 
him, settled for 'latest stage'. The contents had also to be moderated. 
This in part involved self-restraint; Lenin stressed that his book did 
not deal with the 'non-economic side' of imperialism. 87 Political 
commentary would have annoyed the censor. Yet both the publishers 
and Lenin's sister Anna wanted further emendations, and unilaterally 
excised several abusive references to Kautsky.88 
In fact, the February Revolution of 1917 took place before Lenin's 
book appeared in print (as was also true of Bukharin's). But the 
contents are a useful guide to his wartime thought. They are 
proposed as 'a popular sketch',89 and Lenin included apt quotations 
from various tracts on the international economy. The style is 
punchy and simple, marking a resumption of the style of his Iskra 
days. Lenin - like Bukharin as well as Luxemburg, Radek and 
Skvortsov-Stepanov - started from Hilferding's arguments. All of 
them affirmed that the /aissez-faire capitalist era had ended. 
Emphasis was laid upon the emergence of monopolies; on the 
growing impact of banks and 'finance capital' upon industrial 
decision-making; on the inadequacy of the domestic market for 
goods; on the increasing appeal to the state to intervene to protect 
each nation's industry; and the resort to foreign conquests in search 
of both cheap labour and controllable colonial markets. Thus 
modern imperialism was held to be the inevitable consequence of 
advanced capitalist development. Many scholars in subsequent 
generations have challenged aspects of Hilferding's brilliant analy-
sis. It has been pointed out that banks did not have so important a 
role either in Britain, France or the USA as they did in Germany and 
Austria. 90 Secondly, he implied that a country's monopolies shared 
common interests. Yet clashes between them were endemic. Soviet 
historians, for example, have highlighted the rivalry among heavy 
industrial cartels in Russia before 1917.91 The benefits of colonial 
expansion too have been challenged. Indeed Lenin's acknowledged 
 War's Divisions 
115 
influence, J. A. Hobson, had originated this view. Before the First 
World War, Britain was the world's greatest imperial power. Hobson 
claimed that the outflow of funds from the metropolitan country 
damaged industrial growth at home; and that the possession of an 
empire merely fostered militarist policies, causing wars which 
disrupted the economy as a whole. Imperialism has thereby been 
criticised as neither necessary nor rational for a country's material 
well-being.92 
Lenin and Bukharin rejected such criticisms, including those by 
Hobson. They followed Luxemburg, Radek and Skvortsov-Stepanov 
in taking Hilferding's arguments to an extreme. The Austrian 
emphasised that a few banking magnates had come into possession 
of entire economies and that, once the banks were nationalised, 
socialism could quickly and easily be realised. Both Bolshevik writers 
agreed with him here. But Hilferding, in their view, had underplayed 
the political conflicts that would be entailed. He said little about the 
'division of the world' by rival imperial powers. The transition 
towards socialism would therefore be accompanied by war and 
bloody revolution. In his notes, Lenin castigated Hilferding: 'It is 
necessary for us ourselves to seize power in the first place, and not 
chatter vainly about "power".m Furthermore, Hilferding's policy on 
the war was close to Kautsky's. Bukharin and Lenin criticised him as 
a 'centrist'.94 
Lenin had previously not offered an opinion on Kautsky's notion, 
which broke with the assumptions of Marx as well as of Second 
International leaders such as Rosa Luxemburg and Jean Jaures, that 
war was not inevitable among the imperial powers. The First World 
War made up Lenin's mind for him that economic rivalry made inter-
imperial wars unavoidable. But Kautsky pointed to data indicating 
that imperial expansion sometimes brought little economic advant-
age. In Egypt, Britain's semi-colony, German trade had increased 
while British trade declined.95 So what were the benefits of empire? 
Lenin replied in Imperialism: highlighting imperialist clashes before 
1914, he referred to wars in South America and China. Germany's 
economic barons, he affirmed, resented the tariff walls obstructing 
their penetration of foreign markets because of Germany's paucity of 
colonies. Nor, for Lenin, did the Egyptian case prove Kautsky's 
point. On the contrary, it only went to show that Germany's 
economic vigour was 'fresher, more organised, higher' than Bri-
tain's.96 Lenin continued to assert that colonies were crucial for the 
sustaining of profits; and that economic motives therefore fuelled the 
 116 
Lenin: A Political Life 
eruption of the First World War. The balance of truth between Lenin 
and Kautsky remains controversial. Few historians, except those 
writing with official sanction in communist states, would extrude 
non-economic factors so sweepingly.97 Kautsky's attentiveness to 
free will, to political contingency and to the variety of possible 
outcomes would now attract greater support than opposition. It is 
also true, at least since the Second World War, that direct colonial 
rule has been disbanded by the European powers. In addition, the 
rivalries of the advanced industrial countries have been conducted 
more or less peacefully. 
On the other hand, Lenin's feeling that the First World War was 
scarcely avoidable has elements of cogency. The struggle by Germany 
for continental supremacy was powered by forces at home which 
were indeed hard to resist. The pressures on both Austria-Hungary 
and Russia not to flinch from war were strong. Both Britain and 
France had reasons to decide that Germany's continental and, 
possibly, global power endangered them. And the fact that a Second 
World War followed the First indicates that Kautsky was more 
optimistic than was justified. 
If Lenin was a determinist against Kautsky, though, he remained a 
less than absolute one. Again, the contrast with Bukharin was 
perceptible. The map of the world was not simply a matter of a 
few imperial powers and their numerous direct colonies. 'China,' he 
asserted, 'has just begun to be divided up.' Argentina's position, 
moreover, was somewhere between an independent state and a 
colony.98 Lenin also recognised, unlike Bukharin but like Maslov, 
the different qualities of the rival 'imperialisms'. The USA's 
economic progressiveness put it in the first rank. Germany and 
Japan were its near rivals. Britain and France came lower, and it was 
their aim to cripple the outpacing power of Germany that had led 
them into war. Near the bottom of the imperial heap lay Russia. 
Lenin noted that capitalist development in the Russian Far East was 
rudimentary. Portugal was at the nadir: formally speaking, it 
possessed colonies; but its empire was virtually a British protector-
ate.99 Such differentiation appeared throughout Imperialism. Even 
subtler considerations were committed to his notebooks. It was a 
commonplace of many 'patriotic' Russian industrialists that Russia 
was a state debtor of France, and that this was reducing Russia to 
near-colonial status. Lenin guessed that the opposite was the case. So 
massive was the Russian debt, he wrote, that France was becoming 
dependent on Russia. French investors could not afford to threaten 
 War's Divisions 
117 
Russia too blatantly for fear that the Russia might renege on the 
repayments. 100 So there were multiple potential consequences of such 
a global situation. Further divisions and redivisions of the world 
could be at hand. Bukharin's idea of a world economic trust was 
inappropriate; and sanguine thoughts of instant global socialism 
were misplaced. 
According to Lenin, Bukharin had exaggerated the degree of 
'planning' that had typified national industries. 101 Chaos and 
conflict remained intrinsic to capitalism even with the developments 
of cartels and monopolies. The disproportionality between invest-
ments in agriculture and in industry was unavoidable; and the fact 
that heavy industry became so efficient and attractive to investors 
harmed the development of light industries. Even this appeared to 
Lenin to constitute too light a verdict on capitalism. He added that 
firms, once placed in a monopolistic position, tended to become 
technologically conservative, and to buy up pioneering patents and 
allow them to gather dust on the shelves. Economic stagnation 
would, therefore, set in under capitalism.102 Lenin was extrapolating 
from a small number of examples. His generalisations do not 
withstand scrutiny. For instance, the development of nuclear 
power, word-processing computers and genetic engineering have all 
been boosted by capitalist enterprise in the late twentieth century. 
Nor did Lenin's sociological analysis of advanced capitalist 
societies display any greater sophistication than before 1914. The 
very word 'sociology' remained a term of contempt in his eyes; and, 
to the end of his life, he was annoyed at Bukharin for incorporating 
so much non-Marxist scholarship from this field in his own work. 103 
Bukharin was unabashed by Lenin's criticism and pursued his 
interest in those social groups in capitalist society which seemed to 
show special favour to the politics of imperialism. Deepening insights 
derived from Hilferding, he described how industrial investment 
increasingly came from a mass of small investors, who had no direct 
part in production, rather than from self-financing industrialists. 
And these investors, or rentiers, vigorously backed imperial expan-
sion.104 Lenin knew of this trend, and jotted down material in his 
notebooks. He even suggested, like Bukharin, that the South of 
England might shortly become a region where an opulent, sizeable, 
indolent, parasitic class surrounded by servants would live out their 
lives on the basis of the exploitation of colonial countries. 105 But 
Lenin did not include these ideas in Imperialism. He preferred to 
rehearse the image of the tiny class of powerful, wealthy capitalists 
 118 
Lenin: A Political Life 
that needed to be overthrown. Banking magnates and industrial 
barons made for an easier target than the more pervasive but less 
easily caricatured middle classes. He wanted to keep his ideas on 
revolution simple and supple: targets had to be easily identified. 
POLICIES FOR RUSSIA 
Lenin resigned himself, in so far as this reflexive verb was ever 
applicable to so unbending a character, to the possibility that the 
European socialist revolution might be a decade or more ahead. But 
about its eventual occurrence he had no doubt; he was sure, too, that 
the current 'epoch' was revolutionary. 106 His comments upon Russia 
in particular contained nothing but optimism about the chances of 
pulling down the Romanov monarchy. It is widely believed that by 
the winter of 1916-17 he was virtually in despair about politics in his 
own country, but there is no evidence to support this. Throughout 
the war, as before, Lenin assumed Russia to be ripe for revolution; 107 
and, as Social-Democrat announced in its January 1917 issue: 'The 
revolution is approaching, the government is preparing itself.' 108 
Bolsheviks did not underestimate the regime's resourcefulness. 
Lenin and Zinoviev, stressing the connections between foreign and 
domestic policies, suggested that the emperor might sign a separate 
peace with the Central Powers in order to prevent civil disorder at 
home. 109 Rumours about secret negotiations between the belligerent 
states on the Eastern front grew from 1915. Lenin thought Nikolai II 
to be cunning enough to carry off such a policy. He contended that 
no formal signature of a treaty might be required. All that would be 
necessary would be a secret gentlemen's agreement between Petro-
grad and Berlin that no more offensive would be undertaken. 
Everyone's prestige could thereby be preserved. 110 Lenin percept-
ively argued that such an arrangement might be seen as the only way 
of avoiding the autocracy's replacement by a coalition of the Kadet 
Pavel Milyukov and the moderate conservative Aleksandr Guchkov. 
Worse still for Nikolai II, he might otherwise be replaced by 
Milyukov and the right-wing Socialist Revolutionary Aleksandr 
Kerenski. 111 The events of spring 1917 were shortly to show how 
important these three opponents of the emperor would become. 
According to Lenin, a separate peace on the Eastern front might well 
result in Russia obtaining Galicia as war booty from an accommoda-
 War's Divisions 
119 
ting Kaiser Wilhelm II (who was quite capable of betraying his 
Austro-Hungarian ally). 112 Lenin also emphasised that the Anglo-
Russian alliance was laden with tension. British and Russian interests 
were at variance in south-eastern Europe and the Near East, and 
there was no reason to suppose that Petrograd was meekly following 
everywhere in London's footsteps. 113 
Zinoviev went further. For him, the regime was gambling 
ferociously upon military victory in order to make annexations 
which would win domestic popularity. 114 His claim was that Russian 
foreign policy was not formed by the bourgeoisie. According to 
Zinoviev, 'tsarism' had decided upon expansionism and the indu-
strialists had simply consented - and not vice versa. There was a 
natural corollary to this, and Zinoviev did not fail to articulate it. 
Russian imperialism was peculiar among the Great Powers. It was 
'military, feudal' .115 Indeed, it was not even 'an expression of the 
dominance of finance capital' since Russia was an importer rather 
than an exporter of capital. 116 
He was touching on the tricky area of inter-imperialist economic 
relations. Russian Marxists were debating this robustly. In the 
Petrograd legal press, the Menshevik Petr Maslov argued that 
Germany was hell-bent upon Russia's economic subjugation and 
the destruction of Russian industry (which was why Maslov 
supported the national war effort). He acknowledged that not all 
Germans wanted such a result; but argued that the most influential 
interest groups did, and that even the German social-democrats 
demanded specially favourable economic conditions for Germany as 
the price of peace. 117 Other Mensheviks felt unhappy with such an 
analysis. 0. A. Ermanski maintained that German industrial interests 
were not uniform; and that the volume of Germany's exports to the 
Russian empire before 1914 would incline her eventually towards a 
policy of accommodation with Russia. 118 This controversy is yet 
another example of the subtlety of debates among contemporary 
Russian intellectuals. Only half a century later did historians evaluate 
the issues as clearly. No definitive answer has been given, but most 
work has supported Maslov's darker interpretation of Russo-Ger-
man relations in the event of a German victory. Why Lenin so 
uncharacteristically did not join in the dispute among his own long-
standing opponents is unclear. Later, in 1917, he was to judge 
Russian capitalism in the First World War to have fallen into 
dependence upon foreign capital. 119 He had always contended in 
any case that Russia's imperialism was inferior in quality to that of 
 120 
Lenin: A Political Life 
most other imperialist powers. 120 Perhaps he thought that Zinoviev, 
in drawing attention to the import of capital to Russia, was wrong in 
inferring that Russia thereby became economically dependent on her 
capital suppliers. This would tally with his notebook jottings of 
1915-16. 121 Or had he changed his mind? Or simply not applied his 
mind to the problem until after the Romanov dynasty's overthrow? 
Or was there a calculation of convenience at work: namely that any 
such interpretation would rob him of his major political debating 
point that the Russian government was a major imperialist sinner 
which sinned independently and ought, for all Europe's sake, to be 
overthrown immediately? 
It would have been harder to call for Russia's defeat if he had 
conceded that the Germans might try to crush Russian political and 
economic power. Freeing Russia from the Romanovs was his aim, 
and his expectation remained that the forthcoming revolution would 
be of the 'bourgeois-democratic' kind. Talk of the immediate 
inception of socialism repelled him. He took Bukharin to be 
advocating just such a deviation from Russian Marxist orthodoxy, 
and criticised him accordingly. 122 Lenin believed that only the end of 
'the capitalist order' throughout Europe would prevent further wars; 
but, like members of the Central Committee's Russian Bureau, he did 
not expect the forthcoming revolution in Russia to be a socialist 
one. 123 The slogans of other Bolshevik groups, such as the Petersburg 
Committee, were similarly traditional. 124 They called for a demo-
cratic republic, the eight-hour day and the confiscation of gentry 
land. 125 Russia, he asserted, had not yet reached the level of 'the 
advanced countries of the West and North America'. She was not 
ready for socialism. 126 
But already in 1905 he had privately wondered whether to scrap 
the orthodox strategic schedule. His plan to establish a provisional 
revolutionary government of socialists was deprecated by Menshe-
viks as being essentially populistic; but Lenin had also asked himself, 
in his notebooks, whether there was any need to let the bourgeoisie 
come to power thereafter. 127 Russia in 1915-16 was not gripped by a 
revolutionary crisis as in 1905. But occasional remarks revealed 
where Lenin's instincts might lead him in the following year. Firstly, 
he castigated a seemingly totally innocuous call by Martov for social-
democrats to demand the convention of a Constituent Assembly. He 
also took umbrage at a similar pre-war piece along the same lines by 
Rosa Luxemburg. Calls for a Constituent Assembly, according to 
Lenin, were not 'fighting' slogans. 128 This in itself did not signify a 
 War's Divisions 
121 
break with his idiosyncratic version of the two-stage theory of 
revolution. Lenin, after all, desired a temporary socialist dictator-
ship to initiate a fully democratic order in Russia. The Constituent 
Assembly would therefore not happen immediately after the mon-
archy's overthrow. 129 In the second place, he emphasised that the 
character of the war would remain the same even if the bourgeoisie 
came to power. Only the accession of 'the party of the proletariat' 
could change that. 130 Again, strictly speaking, this did not contradict 
the 1905 Leninist version of the two-stage revolutionary process. But 
a remark in an article published in October 1916 edged nearer to 
contradiction. He urged Bolsheviks to abandon 'the Menshevik 
theory of stages' whereby a democratic republic had to precede the 
inception of a socialist revolution. 131 The comment comes in 
connection with a discussion of Germany; but the phrasing does 
not explicitly exclude applicability to Russia. Moreover, the winter of 
1916-17 was a period when Lenin began to believe that the most 
advanced phenomena of capitalist society were starting to character-
ise Russia. 132 
The temptation, then, to foreshorten the revolutionary schedule 
was again growing stronger. Lenin was returning closer to Trotski's 
demand for 'permanent revolution'; and on this occasion he had seen 
fit to air his views in a Bolshevik journal instead of at a closed 
Bolshevik Party Congress (or in his private notes). 133 These were 
straws in the wind. The views which caused Lenin to astonish his 
followers in March and April 1917 were already germinating in the 
previous year. They were as yet tentative; they were not the main 
theme of his discourse: and for that very reason they did not attract 
much attention either at the time or indeed among subsequent 
generations of scholars. 134 
The brunt of Lenin's writing about Russia in 1916 fell not so much 
upon anticipated stages as upon the significance of a Russian 
revolution for Europe as a whole. Before 1914 he had presented 
the Romanov autocracy's overthrow as a possible means of 
triggering off socialist revolutions elsewhere on the Continent. He 
had also highlighted the tendency for semi-colonial countries like 
Turkey after the Russian political upheaval of 1905-6 to experience 
an upsurge in the movement for democracy, and this continued to be 
a theme of his in the First World War. 135 Revolution, he repeated, 
could be an imitative experience. But he was also keen to stress a 
further development in his thinking in wartime. The emphasis of 
Imperialism had lain upon economic processes which had made the 
 122 
Lenin: A Political Life 
political world much smaller since the turn of the century: everything 
that happened in one major power had its impact on all the others. 
The continued existence of the Russian absolute monarchy was 
consequently a threat to the prospects of revolutions elsewhere. 
Lenin put it as follows: 'The bourgeois-democratic revolution in 
Russia is now already not only a prologue but an inalienable integral 
part of socialist revolution in the West..J 36 The phrasing is neither 
neat nor precise, but, if it means anything at all, it surely signifies 
Lenin's adoption of the opinion that an anti-autocratic revolution in 
Russia was not one of several possible detonators of 'the socialist 
transition' in the advanced industrial nations but rather a fuel whose 
absence would render ignition impossible. 
LEADERSHIP AND THE RUSSIAN BOLSHEVIKS 
Yet distance and war as well as the Okhrana, however, combined to 
minimise Lenin's impact on fellow members of the Bolshevik faction 
in the Russian empire. To an even greater extent than before 1914, 
Lenin depended upon communication by letter, yet the Eastern front 
prevented the mail reaching him in less than a month after 
dispatch. 137 An additional snag was that postal services to and 
from Russia in wartime passed through Petrograd, and the police 
had a greater chance to intercept subversive literature. 
Nor did the Central Committee's Foreign Bureau recover fully 
from the effects of Roman Malinovski's treachery and exposure. 
Krupskaya's pre-war address book contained 287 names and 
locations for correspondence with the Russian empire, including 
most provinces. 138 The business of changing addresses had just begun 
when war broke out. In late 1916 it held the names of only 130 
persons. The vast majority of these lived in central and western 
Europe: only twenty-six were political contacts in the Russian 
empire; 139 and, of the twenty six, sixteen had become inoperative 
before 1917. 140 Arrests of local Bolsheviks had a disruptive con-
sequences. Consequently Petrograd, Moscow and far-eastern Siberia 
were the main holding points for mail. The statistics speak for 
themselves; only three other places in the empire figured in 
Krupskaya's book: Nizhni Novgorod, Simferopol and Vilno. 141 
Krupskaya as Central Committee secretary issued an impassioned 
appeal to the Russian Bureau: 'We need direct relations with other 
 War's Divisions 
123 
towns.' 142 But the Petrograd-based Bolsheviks deemed it poor 
conspiratorial practice to put a highly sensitive list of addresses in 
the post. The impact on Lenin's activity was predictable. The official, 
and admittedly incomplete, chronicle of his life in 1916 records him 
as having dispatched only nineteen letters to the Russian empire in 
that year, and just four addressees seem to have been non-members 
of the Ulyanov family. 143 
Apparently whole months passed, furthermore, without his 
sending letters to non-relatives. The longest gap was from May 
through to August 1916, and another occurred from October to 
December144 The passage of correspondence in the opposite direc-
tion, from the Russian empire to Switzerland, was equally weak and 
intermittent. Just seven Bolsheviks outside the Ulyanov family are 
known to have written to him in 1916. They included Shlyapnikov, 
on his various trips to Petro grad; 145 but others came from men like 
Kamenev and Stalin who were trapped in inactivity in Siberian 
exile. 146 Lenin, as ever, tried to cheer up his associates who had fallen 
into the hands of the Okhrana; he was a considerate party leader by 
any standards. But the fact that such letters bulk large in his 
correspondence is yet another sign that his links with the active 
party committee undergrounders was weak. 
So, far from controlling the Bolshevik factional network in the 
Russian empire, Lenin could not expect to provide detailed advice on 
events as they developed. He hoped, of course, that some broad 
influence would be exerted by Social-Democrat. It continued to be 
issued approximately every month and to consist of a single sheet of 
closely-printed type; the only difference was that publishing costs 
forced up the price from ten to fifteen Swiss centimes. 147 Nevertheless 
the Okhrana rated it highly, reporting that 'guiding instructions' 
were reaching Russia-based Bolsheviks, 'even if with a large 
delay'. 148 Yet we must bear in mind the universal propensity of 
secret policemen to justify their functions and budgets by exaggera-
ting the strength of the revolutionary movement; the Okhrana was no 
exception. Quite how many copies were successfully smuggled 
through customs is not known. In April 1915, Anna Elizarova-
Ulyanova wrote that the newspaper was reaching Petrograd only in 
single copies. 149 In November she said that the first (and last) double 
issue of the journal Kommunist was in such short supply that she was 
holding on to it and charging Bolsheviks for reading her copy. 150 
Outside Petrograd the situation must have been much worse; but, 
again, the figures are unavailable. Nor has any computation been 
 124 
Lenin: A Political Life 
made of the confiscations of Lenin's writings in wartime. Possibly 
this reflects a continuing official embarrassment that the number was 
small even at a time when the police were especially effective in their 
arrests of Bolsheviks. 151 
Fellow members of his faction could not fairly hold Lenin 
responsible for the lapses in communications. As practical revolu-
tionaries, they recognised that organisational co-ordination in Russia 
would have to remain largely a Russian affair. Local Bolshevik 
leaders had to get on with things in their own way and regard counsel 
from abroad as a boon which only occasionally might come their 
way. In the circumstances, it is surprising how much they achieved. 
In Saratov, moreover, they even managed to put out nine numbers of 
an officially-permitted newspaper before police intervened. 152 But 
this was an exceptional occurrence. Most Bolshevik activists who 
desired to publish their works in the First World War had to turn to 
the major Petrograd 'thick journals'; and it was typically the 
acknowledged theoreticians, including the emigre Lenin and the 
exiled Kamenev, who achieved this since non-Bolshevik editors 
chose what they took to be most interesting to their readerships. 
The alternative was to publish illegally; but the efficiency of the 
police, made this inordinately hard. 153 
Meanwhile the Russian Bureau of the Central Committee did its 
best. Lenin and Zinoviev did not rush to restore its membership after 
the arrests of 1912-14; no doubt they wanted to co-opt members only 
after reassuring themselves that the newcomers would follow their 
political line. At last, in September 1915, Aleksandr Shlyapnikov was 
rewarded with a place on the Russian Bureau; and he in turn drew 
G.l. Osipov, E. A. Dunaev and Anna Elizarova-Ulyanova into its 
membership. 154 But arrests began after Shlyapnikov departed for 
Scandinavia to pick up messages from Switzerland. 155 By 1916 the 
running of the Russian Bureau was in the hands of Anna Elizarova-
Ulyanova with assistance from K. M. Shvedchikov. 156 But then 
Anna, too, was arrested. In autumn 1916 Shlyapnikov returned to 
reconstitute the Bureau, appointing V. M. Molotov and P. A. 
Zalutski as fellow members. 157 The Bureau's efforts were frenetic; 
but Molotov was later to recall how difficult it was even to know 
where the provincial Bolsheviks could be contacted. Turning up in 
Moscow, he searched for several fruitless days and then returned 
home. 158 Bolshevik illegal organisations had never been weaker. The 
Okhrana broke them up time and again. The Moscow City 
Committee, for example, was persistently smashed. 159 Social-
 War's Divisions 
125 
Democrat in 1916 announced the re-creation of groups in Samara 
and Nizhni Novgorod only to declare, in the same issue, that the 
police had re-intervened. 160 
The authorities had feared lest the link-up between the revolu-
tionary social-democrats and the striking workers should become 
firm. Bolshevism was essentially the victim of the strike movement's 
success. The faction's active adherents must have amounted to no 
greater than a handful of thousands in wartime. 161 The Okhrana 
devastated the illegal committees. The only positive result, from 
Lenin's viewpoint, was that the arrests in Russia enhanced his 
position as Bolshevik leader. A harsh calculus was at work: the 
more enfeebled the faction's Russian committees, the greater the 
need for energetic, dedicated leaders based abroad. 
Lenin was more than just an eminent leader among Bolsheviks. He 
was their 'Old Man'. He had acquired this nickname as a young 
activist in the St Petersburg Marxist movement of the early 1890s 
when his precocious gravitas impressed the fellow members of his 
group. In ensuing years the epithet steadily obtained a descriptive 
accuracy. Born in 1870, he was considerably older than any rival 
Bolshevik leader. Stalin was born in 1879, Zinoviev and Kamenev in 
1883; the distance of a whole revolutionary generation separated 
them from Lenin - and they themselves were also senior figures 
among the faction's established figures. Most provincial committee 
members in the Russian empire were in their early twenties. Lenin's 
contemporaries from his St Petersburg days were no longer with him; 
they had either joined other factions after the turn of the century or, 
in one of other of the intra-Bolshevik struggles, were pushed out of 
Lenin's faction. Lenin was the great Bolshevik survivor: a real 
veteran. He was the sole member of his faction who had attended 
all Party Congresses since 1903. Security precautions disallowed the 
publication of full records of the faction's history, and long-serving 
participants had a distinct advantage over the younger leaders. They 
knew the careers of others and remembered past activities. 
It must still be emphasised, however, that Lenin's impact on the 
faction in Russia was frail. Social-Democrat carried whatever news 
was forthcoming about the upsurge; but it was reporting and not 
directing actvity. In pre-war Bolshevik newspapers edited by Lenin 
there had always been regular features on developments in Russia. 
Difficulties in communications reduced this to a single and irregular 
section. 162 As in the Iskra days, the language and contents were 
aimed at the well-informed activist. Social-Democrat was not meant 
 126 
Lenin: A Political Life 
to be a popular workers' paper. Lenin had learnt over the years not 
to use too esoteric a terminology: he no longer used German-
language phrases without translation, and he admonished Zinoviev 
for not following his example. 'Eh! eh!', he would scribble alongside 
the offending words. 163 
And yet the dwindling band of his correspondents in Russia did 
not give Lenin high marks in this regard either. His insistence on 
writing about abstract theory had irked activists before the war. 
After 1914, he was also criticised for his slogans. The call for 
'European civil war' was extremely controversial. War-weary work-
ers were hardly likely to be attracted to a party promising peace only 
through the eruption of yet another war. Sister Anna badgered him 
to compose a pamphlet, in a popular style, to put his case. 164 He 
ignored the request. Nor did he allow himself to be disturbed by 
complaints that he had attempted to fix party policy without prior 
consultation with Russia-based leaders. Kamenev was irritated that 
Social-Democrat had carried Lenin's theses on defeatism before the 
underground Bolsheviks in Petrograd and elsewhere had time to 
debate them. 165 Social-Democrat was quick to advertise any support 
for its policies. Its February 1916 issue reproduced an item from the 
Moscow Committee which incorporated a commitment to the slogan 
of 'civil war'; but the item also indicated continuing resistance to 
Lenin's idea that Bolsheviks should work for Russia's defeat. 166 An 
editorial comment somewhat lamely suggested that the subsequent 
modification of the defeatist policy (which had to be accepted by a 
reluctant Lenin) had cleared up such misunderstandings between 
Russia-based Bolsheviks and the faction's emign!s. 167 
Anna tried to handle her brother tactfully; but, while sympathising 
with his policies, she was annoyed by his spikiness and complained: 
'You are terrorising me: I'm afraid of any incautious expression.' 168 
Others went further. Shlyapnikov had always resented the emigre 
wrangling, and was 'embittered' by Lenin's treatment of Bukharin. In 
this instance Anna sided with Shlyapnikov, 169 but brother Volodya 
retorted that she 'had never made sense in politics'. 170 This was his 
mildest jibe at his critics. Just once Lenin acknowledged his wildness: 
'I am now so badly disposed to Bukharin that I cannot write to 
him.' 171 This was not repentance but the bravado of a committed and 
conscious recidivist. In any case he seldom disguised his feelings, and 
now this most proper of middle-class Russians was starting to use 
foul language in his correspondence. 'Kautskyite shits' was a term 
deployed against non-Bolsheviks. 172 
 War's Divisions 
127 
It was indeed a heavy period for him. For distraction he turned to 
the published letters of Anton Chekhov and the Russian translation 
of Goethe's Faust. 173 Moreover, he suffered a family bereavement. 
His mother, whose health had been steadily deteriorating, died in 
July 1916. 174 No letter from him to his family about her death has yet 
come to light; but he was said by his brother Dmitri to be deeply 
upset. Perhaps he was assailed by feelings of guilt. His mother had 
been an inspiration to him since the days of childhood; she had 
sustained him morally and materially to the end of her life. Her 
financial assistance had often been crucial; she had never lost interest 
in his career; nor, it would seem, had she striven to dissuade him 
from the path of revolutionism. He had not seen her in her last few 
years, and often he had not written to her when she asked for 
letters. 175 His siblings, by contrast, had helped to sustain her. Dmitri 
had become a military doctor in wartime; his profession allowed him 
to keep a watch, if sometimes at a distance, upon his mother's 
condition. 176 Mariya, too, had taken up paramedical work, and both 
she and Anna kept in close contact with their mother. 177 Lenin in 
exile could do little but grieve after the event. Among the first things 
Vladimir did upon arriving back in Petrograd after the February 
Revolution was to visit her grave in the Volkovo cemetery to pay his 
last respects. 178 
He rationalised his career as a politician in a letter written to 
Inessa Armand in December 1916: 'This then is my fate. One 
campaign of combat after another - against political stupidities, 
vulgarities, opportunism, etc.' 179 The trace of self-pity was unchar-
acteristic of him. But the years of war took their emotional toll; and 
he probably found it easier to confide in Inessa than in most others: 
or possibly he felt, with a person who had been so close to him, a 
stronger need to justify his political behaviour. At any rate, he was 
right to suppose that his life was bound up inextricably with political 
struggle. The paradox was that, in the winter of 1916-17, the 
grandiosity of his ideas sprouted in inverse proportion to his 
immediate impact upon the politics of his native land. 
