 202 
Lenin: A Political Life 
the Central Committee. Kerenski's cabinet, he declared, constituted 
'a military dictatorship'; and the Menshevik and Socialist-Revolu-
tionary leadership had become 'the fig-leaf of the counter-revolu-
tion'.3 Lenin concluded: 'All hopes of a peaceful development of the 
Russian revolution have disappeared definitively.' Now that the 
Menshevik-led soviets had supported the persecution of Bolsheviks 
it was vital to withdraw the slogan 'All Power to the Soviets!'. The 
need, according to Lenin, was for nothing less than 'armed 
insurrection'. 4 
His new theses massively overstated the repressive capacity and 
intentions of the Kerenski cabinet: most Bolshevik party organisa-
tions encountered little harassment. The Central Committee met on 
13-li:,July, in the absence of Lenin and Zinoviev (as well as the 
imprisoned Kamenev), 5 to consider strategy. Representatives of the 
party's localleaderships of Moscow and Petrograd as well as Central 
Bureau of the Military Organisation also attended. In demanding the 
abandonment of 'All Power to the Soviets!', according to Ordzhoni-
kidze's later account, Lenin let it be known that the factory-
workshop c9mmittees could provide the institutional base for the 
forthcoming socialist administration.6 Even the April Party Confer-
ence had given no absolute commitment to rule by soviets;7 and in 
The State and Revolution, written in the months after the July Days, 
Lenin had barely mentioned the soviets. 8 Even so, the Central 
Committee was aghast. Only Sverdlov fully accepted Lenin's view-
point immediately after the July Days.9 The idea that the soviets 
should be the institutions to deploy revolutionary power had taken a 
hold on the Bolshevik imagination. In addition, the party had 
invested its energies in persuading workers that 'soviet power' was 
the noblest objective; and the practical difficulties of justifying 
Lenin's proposed change of slogans, when Bolshevik activists spoke 
at open mass meetings, would be considerable. The Central 
Committee meeting rejected Lenin's invocation by ten votes out of 
fifteen. 10 
Lenin wrote a short article, 'On Slogans', in reply and condemned 
the Central Committee for what he saw as a lack of tactical 
flexibility. With a dismissiveness extraordinary even among Bol-
sheviks, he mocked the existing soviets as being 'like sheep brought 
to the abattoir'." 'On Slogans' was published by the Kronstadt 
Bolsheviks, and reached a number of activists in the provinces. 12 
Lenin's efforts did not go unrewarded; and a shift towards his stance 
had in any case been occurring in the Central Committee even before 
 The Fire Next Time 
203 
'On Slogans' became widely known. Stalin was nominated to speak 
on the Central Committee's behalf at the Second City Party 
Conference in Petrograd on 16 July. Stalin concurred with Lenin 
that Kerenski had presided over 'the triumph of the counter-
revolution'. 13 When pressed in debate, furthermore, Stalin conceded 
that the 'All Power to the Soviets!' slogan had lost its appropriate-
ness.14 Yet he affirmed that the ultimate objective remained the same: 
namely to establish a socialist administration of soviets. Stalin added: 
'We are unequivocally in favour of those soviets where we have a 
majority, and we shall try to set up such soviets.'15 The Central 
Committee's motion still stopped short of calling for the old slogan's 
abandonment and was approved by the City Conference by twenty-
eight votes to three. 16 
Yet Lenin's fortunes were not as bad as they seemed. Twenty-eight 
delegates to the City Conference refused to take sides and abstained, 
but he could reasonably hope to win them over. Furthermore, he was 
willing to move a little towards the Central Committee. 'On Slogans' 
contained the following pronouncement on the post-Kerenski era: 
'The soviets can and must emerge in this new revolution, but not the 
soviets of today, not the organs of collaboration with the bourgeoisie 
but the organs of revolutionary struggle with it. It is indeed true that 
we would then be in favour of the construction of the whole state on 
the soviet model.' 17 Thus he made clear that his rejection of the 
soviets was not to be regarded as permanent. Perhaps this clarifica-
tion (or modification, if Ordzhonikidze's statement in his memoirs 
about the factory-workshop committees is to be believed)18 nudged 
Stalin and the Central Committee majority towards accepting that 
Lenin's hostility to the 'All Power to the Soviets!' might not be as 
impolitic as they had thought. Lenin's Bolshevik critics may also 
have been reassured to note that he acknowledged that an immediate 
insurrection was impracticable.19 A further factor assisting his case 
was the continued harassment of the Bolsheviks in the capital and the 
complicity of the Menshevik and Socialist-Revolutionary leaderships. 
Such a situation must have convinced at least many wavering 
Bolsheviks that Lenin's demand for 'All Power to the Soviets!' to be 
abandoned was reasonable. Discussions were turning in his favour 
and, as the date of the Sixth Party Congress's convocation 
approached, a definitive decision was in prospect. The Central 
Committee pressed ahead with the Congress despite the difficulties 
in Petrograd. On 26 July 1917, the 157 voting and 107 non-voting 
delegates convened.20 Lenin and Zinoviev could not risk the journey; 
 204 
Lenin: A Political Life 
and Trotski, Lunacharski and Kamenev were in prison. Precautions 
were taken to avoid alerting the Provisional Government. Halfway 
through the proceedings, the venue was changed from an assembly 
hall in the Vyborg district to a workers' club in the Narva district. 
Tension was increased by a governmental decree, announced on 28 
July, enabling ministers to ban any gathering deemed to threaten 
state security.21 
The decree was not unwelcome to Lenin inasmuch as it dissuaded 
Bolshevik critics from continuing to demand that he should deliver 
himself up to the authorities.22 He also kept in contact with the 
Central Committee in order to influence the Congress discussions. 
Apparently, a secret meeting between him and Stalin took place 
shortly before the proceedings commenced.23 There is a strong 
possibility that the Central Committee's motion on the political 
situation, as presented to the Congress by Stalin, was based on a 
draft handed over by Lenin.24 Lenin's physical absence did not 
preclude his political semi-presence. Even so, he influenced the Party 
Congress to a much smaller degree than he had the April Party 
Conference. The haste of the Congress's convocation meant that the 
Central Committee, too, had to entrust its representatives with 
considerable initiative. Close vetting of official reports did not 
occur. Central Committee spokesmen often had to write their 
speeches on their laps just before delivering them. 25 This may well 
have resulted in a freer expression of opinions than was usual. And 
the anti-Bolshevik campaign of the Provisional Government after the 
July Days compelled the promotion of less famous members of the 
Central Committee to greater prominence. A troika of leaders guided 
the debates at the Congress: Sverdlov, Stalin and Bukharin. 
At the first session, Sverdlov obtained agreement on the Congress 
agenda. The next day, 27 July, Stalin delivered the Central 
Committee's report on its activities since the April Conference. His 
main aim was to show that the Bolshevik leadership had not 
provoked the clashes on the streets of the capital in early July. 26 
Clamour ensued when E. A. Preobrazhenski impugned Stalin for his 
preoccupation with metropolitan politics. But the Moscow-based 
Central Committee member V. P. Nogin leapt to Stalin's defence.27 
Sverdlov's organisational report in the third session claimed a rise 
in the number of party members to 200,000.28 But the proceedings 
continued to be troublesome for the Central Committee. Y. Larin, a 
Menshevik-Internationalist visitor to the Congress, produced a flurry 
of excitement on 28 July when he objected to the abandonment of the 
 The Fire Next Time 
205 
slogan of 'All Power to the Soviets!'.29 Stalin's report had avoided 
the topic, but Congress delegates knew that the Central Committee 
was proposing to debate the wording of a new slogan. Larin's 
intervention was a sign of uneasiness among several delegates about 
any change. Another voice of protest was heard when M.l. Vasilev 
complained that the party's agrarian policy was still so vague that the 
Bolsheviks were failing to win support among peasants.30 On 30 July, 
Bukharin delivered the report 'on the current moment'. He asserted 
that the June offensive was made on the orders of 'Allied capital'; 
and that support for the Provisional Government's aggressive foreign 
policy was forthcoming from the peasantry31 But he added that the 
workers could nevertheless effect an alliance with the peasants by 
offering them the land. He looked forward also to socialist revolution 
in the West. Yet Bukharin acknowledged that, if such a revolution 
did not break out immediately after the Bolsheviks had taken power 
in Russia, the Russian armed forces might well be incapable of 
triggering it off by an offensive revolutionary war. In such a 
contingency, according to Bukharin, the Bolsheviks would have to 
fight a defensive revolutionary war against the Germans. 32 
M. M. Kharitonov objected to the tendency in Bukharin's draft 
resolution to treat the European political situation as a uniform 
whole and to play down the peculiar opportunities afforded in 
Russia; he also pointed out that, so far from there being certainty 
that socialist governments would be established in the West, the war 
might end with 'an imperialist peace'.33 N. Osinski, like Bukharin on 
the left of the party, nevertheless objected to Bukharin's refusal to 
differentiate the respective interests of the richer and the poorer 
peasants.34 Lenin, while sharing Osinski's concern intellectually, 
would surely have approved of Bukharin's tactful reticence. Bukhar-
in, in fact, agreed that 'an imperialist peace' was possible, and 
sarcastically added that 'our peasant isn't becoming a Left Zimmer-
waldist'. 35 
Stalin intervened to defend the Central Committee against more 
basic opposition. He mentioned that 'certain comrades' still believed 
i~ to be 'utopian to raise the ,question of socialist revolution' in 
Russia. His reply shows a willingness to confront a problem evaded 
by LeniTl. Why had the strategy of the Bolsheviks changed after the 
February Revolution? Whereas Lenin had held forth about the era of 
imperialism and the imminence of European socialist revolution, 
Stalin addressed the specificity of Russia. A socialist administration, 
he declared, had been made necessary by the wartime devastation 
 206 
Lenin: A Political Life 
and by the refusal of the Russian bourgeoisie, unlike the bourgeoisie 
elsewhere, to accept the desirability of state economic regulation; and 
the high degree of organisation and morale among Russian workers 
made such an administration feasible at last. 36 In retrospect, this 
appears a much less light-headed justification for Bolshevism in 1917 
than the Europe-centred Marxologisms of Lenin. Stalin stated, more 
simply, that the country faced ruin; that its present rulers had no 
solutions; and that the only group with the capacity to do anything 
was the working class together with other sympathetic groups. 
Stalin's viewpoint, moreover, was not radically different from the 
standpoint being supported by increasing numbers of leaders such as 
Martov on the left of the Menshevik party. Martov, too, could see no 
salvation coming from further collaboration with the Russian 
bourgeoisie. 37 On the other hand, Stalin as a Bolshevik did not 
agree with Martov that there was any point in expending much 
energy in persuading the centrist and right-wing Mensheviks that an 
all-socialist government coalition should be formed. 
Even Stalin's cautious arguments for a socialist take-over were 
resisted by N. Angarski, a delegate from Moscow province, who had 
criticised Lenin at the April Party Conference and who still 
advocated a return to pre-1917 Bolshevik tenets. 38 ·The other critics 
accepted The April Theses, but concentrated on the persistent 
evasiveness of official spokesmen about the party's slogans. Stalin 
read out the Central Committee's motion 'on the political situation', 
which called for the abandoning of 'All Power to the Soviets!'. In his 
accompanying comments,· interestingly enough, he still omitted to 
mention this abandonment - possibly a manifestation of lingering 
personal doubts. In any event he placed emphasis on the desirability 
of an alliance between the proletariat and the poorest peasantry. 
This vagueness was castigated by Preobrazhenski, who enquired 
what he meant by 'poor peasants'; and K. K. Yurenev said that Stalin 
had offered no sensible slogan to replace the previous one. 39 Trying 
to rescue Stalin, Milyutin suggested a new slogan: 'All power to the 
proletariat supported by the poorest peasantry and the revolutionary 
democracy organised into soviets of workers', soldiers' and peasants' 
deputies'. This was less a slogan than a mini-treatise, and the 
Congress adjourned until the following morning, 31 July.40 Stalin 
reopened the debate in his own right: 'Now we are putting forward 
the slogan of the transfer of power into the hands of the proletariat 
and the poorest peasantry.'41 He was attacked immediately by P. A. 
Dzhaparidze for ignoring the prospect of socialist revolution in the 
 1. Lenin in January 1910. 
 2. Lenin, after release from prison in Poland, August 1914. 
 3. Aged-looking Lenin goes mountain walking in Galicia, Summer 1914. 
 4. A rejuvenated Lenin not long before leaving Switzerland for the last time. 
 5. (above) Lenin and his fellow travellers reach Stockholm, April 1917. 
6. (below) Lenin delivers 'The April Theses', 4 April 1917. 
 7. Lenin in disguise, July 1917. 
 ,. ,., . 
8. The Central Committee elected at the Sixth Party Congress. 
 J J 
J J 
The Military-Revolutionary Committee of the Petrograd Soviet after the October seizure 
of power. 
 In Boellla • PnalllloDDD KoMJma DPI 
DmorPUCKOJfll COB\r\ 
PaOIPIX\ I CWalCKNn JenYTGTOBl 
---------~ 
K"'l rpaHCAIHIM"b Pocchl. 
BpBMDIDlDD UpuKTGJILCTBD RB31D!KDHD. racy;.p· 
meaa.a aaw uepem& B'L PYRB apru& fieTpD· 
rp"R&ra Caatm P&bD'IIIX'L H CaanTCKBX'L ~enyT&· 
TDD'L Baaaa·Peaamo~iammra KoMHTeTa, cTD~aro 
ID raaa1 IllparpalCKarD DpDmapiaTa H 
rapBHODHa. 
lltno. ~ KO'IlJPOO OOPQnCH H8lJ()lfb: HBMBHRCHHOB J111CH· 
nmule neMOKJJ8TH'IBCK81'0 MHll~ OTMtHa llOMtiiUI'lhBK 
COOc'I'BeHHOCTII 88 3eMJllO, pafioqil KOHTPORb HaJI'b IIPOH3BOH-
CTOOM}.... coan81lie Cmrt'roKaro 
llPaBHTIHil>liTBa -
aTO 
ntno mneqeuo. 
llA 3llP ABCTBYEib PEBOHIOUIH PABOlJHXo. COW To 
B KPBCTbHifbl 
Boe•xo•Pe•ORJIOJ(iOMIIf.ut Bo••r•~• 
•P• Berpor,..,Rcxo~ Co•:lr:l 
.Pa6o•M.Za. a CO .. A&TCIUI.Z:a. .l{ea,yraro.,.. 
26 OlTIGp• m7 r. tO '1. yrpa. 
10. Proclamation of the Provisional Government's overthrow, 25 October 1917. 
 11. (left) Lenin: official por-
trait, January 1918. 
12. (below) Lenin and mem-
bers of the Sovnarkom 
Coalition. 
 13. (above) Poster including both Leni11 
and the Mayor of Cork among the 
seven greatest men in the world. 
14. (left) Anti-Bolshevik poster saying 
that 'The Federal Soviet Monarchy 
had 
promised 
'Bread, 
Peace 
Freedom' but had given 'Famine 
War, The Cheka'. 
 15. (left) The magazine Punch considers the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk. 
16. (above) Lenin goes for a stroll in Moscow, Spring 1918. 
A WALK-OVER!' 
 The Fire Next Time 
207 
West, and by D. Z. Manuilski for undermining faith in the soviets.42 
V. M. Molotov got to the root of the matter with a statement that 
was vintage Lenin: 'It is necessary to point out the path for the 
taking of power into our hands: that is the basic problem. '43 But no 
agreed slogan emerged. The Central Committee, for all its con-
fidence, had not come properly prepared to the Congress. Its own 
members engaged in controversy, with an exasperated Stalin 
castigating Bukharin for asserting that the peasantry as a whole 
was in league with the bourgeoisie.44 The only answer was to choose 
a commission to compose an acceptable resolution' on the political 
situation'.45 
Then came Milyutin's report on the economic situation. It was 
very pessimistic: 'It is often said to us that we and our slogans are 
promising to avoid a crisis. That is untrue. We cannot avoid a 
crisis.'46 He itemised the problems: food-supplies shortages, trans-
port breakdowns, a lack of regulation of industry, and inflation. 
Milyutin's measures included action from above and below. A 
socialist admini .tration would nationalise large-scale enterprises 
and push oth';C enterprises into forming trusts and syndicates; it 
would control production and distribution of goods, including 
foodstuffs. A stronger system of fixed prices would be introduced 
and profiteering would be eradicated. Power would be given to 
workforces to supervise the work of their managements. The 
Provisional Government's method of bargaining with the industrial-
ists and the bankers had not worked. The time had come to give the 
workers their chance.47 
Milyutin was convinced that the basic solution to the country's 
problems lay with the ending of the war and the reorientation of 
industry to civilian production so as to draw the peasantry back into 
the marketplace.48 In the meantime Russia was 'on the eve of 
famine'. 49 D.P. Bogolepov agreed, but concluded that sterner 
measures were therefore required 'right through to the introduction 
of famine communism'. 50 He failed to specify what such measures 
might involve. Osinski wanted more fundamental reforms; and yet he 
~lso objected to the slogan of governmental control over production 
since such control would be dangerous if exercised not by the 
Bolsheviks but by Kerenski. 51 Other speakers too thought that the 
severity of the economic crisis called for an expansion of the party's 
objectives. Milyutin defended himself: 'So has our slogan "Land to 
the peasantry" become outmoded? Of course not. In just the same 
way many of our economic measures have not become outmoded. '52 
 208 
Lenin: A Political Life 
But he agreed that a greater specificity about Bolshevik economic 
projects was essential. 53 The debate ended with Milyutin's motion 
being taken as the basis for the Congress resolution. It had been 
notable for Milyutin's difficulties with the left wing of the party, 
difficulties which would become acute in the winter ahead. It was 
also remarkable for its tacit confirmation that Lenin's land nationa-
lisation proposal, which had been accepted by the Seventh Party 
Congress in April, should be dropped. No delegate even mentioned 
it. The Central Committee, as Stalin and Milyutin had intimated, had 
for months been using slogans which simply urged the transfer of the 
land to the peasantry. 54 
After a day's break, the proceedings were resumed on 2 August to 
discuss the party rules. 55 Time was running out and the delegates 
agreed that the revision of the party programme would have to be 
postponed until the Seventh Party Congress. 56 Bukharin presented 
the motion on 'the current moment and the war' which had been 
agreed by a Congress commission. He had been forced to make 
concessions. Originally, he had said that the entire petit bourgeoisie 
had supported Kerenski's aggressive foreign and military policy; now 
he stated (but did he really agree?) that only 'the upper layers of the 
petite bourgeoisie and the peasantry' gave that support. He had also 
been persuaded to introduce a more cautious formulation on 
revolutionary war: the first version had proposed a defensive 
revolutionary war if a war of attack proved impossible; the second 
declared merely that a socialist administration would confront 'the 
task of rendering every kind of support, including armed support, for 
the militant proletariat of other countries'. 57 
The Central Committee debate in January 1918 was to show that 
Bukharin was stepping on the throat of his opinions at the 
Congress. 58 But the remaining discussions were swiftly expedited. 
Mi1yutin's economic resolution was accepted, and Glebov-Avilov 
delivered a report on the trade unions. A feeling of expectancy grew 
as Stalin rose to present the Congress commission's resolution 'on 
the political situation'. Its main interest was the choice of a new 
official slogan for the party: 'the complete liquidation of the 
dictatorship of the counter-revolutionary bourgeoisie'. 59 While most 
delegates concurred with the dropping of the slogan of 'All Power to 
the Soviets', I. T. Smilga thought Stalin's proposed replacement was 
too negative and vague; and the Congress passed his amendment 
which added a phrase declaring that only a revolution of the 
proletariat with the support of poor peasants was capable of 
 The Fire Next Time 
209 
accomplishing the removal of the so-called bourgeois 'dictator-
ship'.60 Stalin's last point emphasised the need for 'a seizure of 
state power'. But this, too, drew criticism. Preobrazhenski wanted to 
specify that the movement towards socialism in Russia was 
dependent on 'proletarian revolution in the West'. Stalin, with the 
Congress behind him, retorted that such an idea underestimated what 
could be achieved in Russia on the country's own resources.61 Here 
Lenin would probably have sympathised with Preobrazhenski's basic 
point. Stalin's later advocacy of 'socialism in one country' was being 
broached in a sketchy manner even before the October Revolution. 
The Congress elected a Central Committee. Only four of the 
twenty names were made public; concern about security remained 
and the party reverted to pre-1917 conspiratorial precautions. All 
these four were in hiding or in prison: Lenin, Zinoviev, Kamenev and 
Trotski. 62 The election of leaders who perforce could not attend 
meetings was not only a break with convention but also a sign of 
their prestige in the party. Trotski, who had only recently become a 
Bolshevik, now joined the central party leadership. Yet the most vital 
change in the Central Committee's composition went unnoticed at 
the time. The Bolshevik right, which had been strongly represented in 
the central party body after the Seventh Conference in April, had lost 
ground.63 Only five Central Committee members were definitely 
rightists: L. B. Kamenev, V. P. Milyutin, V. P. Nogin, A. I. Rykov 
and G. E. Zinoviev. As Lenin put his thoughts in order for a seizure 
of power and for a programme of social and economic reforms, he 
could look to a more receptive set of colleagues than he had 
possessed since entering the politics of Russian Marxism. 
KERENSKI AND KORNILOV 
Despite the dispute over slogans, no Bolshevik at the Congress gave 
the impression of expecting to take power in the immediate future. If 
Lenin had been there, things might have been different. Possibly; but 
<i;elegates were more fearful about the party's prospects of survival 
than intent on planning Kerenski's overthrow. This situation 
changed later in August 1917. Kerenski had put together a second 
coalition cabinet on 25 July, containing a majority of socialist 
ministers for the first time. For Lenin, this proved conclusively that 
the Mensheviks and Socialist Revolutionaries were collaborating 
with the forces of counter-revolution.64 Kerenski's policies, even 
 210 
Lenin: A Political Life 
though Lenin exaggerated, undoubtedly moved rightwards. The 
peasants, while being appeased by a doubling of state-imposed grain 
prices in August, were warned that no solution to the 'land question' 
would be permitted until the Constituent Assembly's convocation. 
Groups of gentry landowners, moreover, had been formed to pre-
empt the popular challenge to the existing agrarian order.65 Kerenski 
refused to promise autonomy to non-Russian areas of the old empire 
and spared no effort to convince the urban middle and upper classes 
that the Provisional Government intended to quell unrest among the 
working class. In foreign policy, the Allies were told that the Russian 
commitment to winning the War was undiminished. The policies of 
the Lvov cabinet survived under Kerenski. Chernov, the Socialist-
Revolutionary leader, was finally disillusioned and resigned as 
Minister of Agriculture in late August. With his departure there 
vanished any slight evidence of the Provisional Government 
accommodating itself to the aspirations of workers, peasants and 
soldiers; the field of political agitation was cleared for the Bol-
sheviks.66 
Kerenski, as Lenin continually asserted, relied on military support 
to reimpose the cabinet's will in Petrograd. There were risks in 
following this course. Hoping to terminate the Provisional Govern-
ment's isolation, Kerenski convoked a 'State Conference' in Moscow 
on 12 August. The Conference was attended by an array of public 
groups: the cabinet; the political parties; the army high command; 
deputies of the pre-revolutionary Dumas; the soviets, trade unions 
and co-operatives. The sole major omission from the list of 
participants was the Bolshevik party.67. 
This was an appalling time for Kerenski. On 21 August, the city of 
Riga fell to the Germans, pushing the Eastern front to within six 
hundred kilometres of the Russian capital. No positive consequence, 
furthermore, flowed from the State Conference; and, from Kerenski's 
standpoint, much harm ensued. The problem was the truculent 
posture of Commander-in-Chief, Lavr Korni1ov. His presence in 
Moscow was accompanied by right-wing demands that Kerenski 
should take a hard line with the soviets; rumours grew that army 
officers were planning to place Kornilov in power.68 Discussions 
were held between Kerenski and Kornilov about Petrograd. With 
Kerenski's consent, Kornilov began to move regiments from the 
Eastern front to the capital; but confusion thereupon intervened 
between Kerenski and Kornilov, being aggravated by the mischief of 
their aides. On 28 August Kerenski panicked, fearing that Kornilov 
 The Fire Next Time 
211 
might be plotting a coup d'etat. There is no proof that this was true. 
And yet Kornilov's demeanour had constituted a menace to any 
government failing to do what he thought was patriotically 
necessary. At any rate Kornilov disobeyed Kerenski's order which 
countermanded the transfer of troops to Petrograd. Rebellion had 
broken out, and Kornilov continued to move on the capital. The fate 
of both the cabinet and the soviets hung in the balance.69 
The immediate effect was to compel Kerenski to muster support 
not only from Mensheviks and Socialist Revolutionaries but also 
from Bolsheviks. The military forces available to the Provisional 
Government could not halt Kornilov. Only agitators despatched to 
mingle with Kornilov's troops were able to prevent a coup. By 2 
September, to the capital's relief, Kornilov was under house arrest. 
The Bolshevik Central Committee was cock-a-hoop. A counter-
revolutionary mutiny had restored them to free activity in the 
capital; the sole major Bolshevik who could not afford to appear 
in the open was Lenin. In fact, the obstacles to the party's activities 
had never been so great elsewhere as in Petro grad. But the relief that 
the struggle for power in Petrograd could occur without harassment 
was cause for celebration.70 
Lenin, analysing the events as reported in the press, swung between 
interpretations. Sometimes he described Kerenski as the puppet of 
the counter-revolution; but he also occasionally portrayed him as a 
putative Russian Bonaparte who had succeeded in strengthening his 
personal rule while politics in the capital remained tensely balanced 
among the various political and military groups. 71 Both versions had 
an element of truth, but an even larger element of inaccuracy. The 
authority of Kerenski and his cabinet never recovered from the 
Kornilov revolt. The detestation of Kadet leaders for the Kerenski 
cabinet had been obvious throughout the summer. Lenin's claim that 
Milyukov colluded with the Kornilov revolt has not been corro-
borated; 72 but it was widely believed that he expected a coup and 
would give it his approval. Kerenski's relations with the Kadet party 
deteriorated sharply in September. Accordingly, Kerenski badly 
11eeded to mend his fences with the Mensheviks and Socialist 
Revolutionaries in the soviets. The Provisional Government's desire 
to legitimate its position was intense. Remembering the fiasco of the 
State Conference, Kerenski announced the calling of a Democratic 
Conference which would include all parties and mass organisations 
to the left of the Kadets. The rising influence of the Mensheviks and 
the Socialist Revolutionaries induced even Lenin to raise, on 1 
 212 
Lenin: A Political Life 
September, the question of whether a peaceful development of the 
revolution was possible. In an article, 'On Compromises', he 
suggested that the Bolsheviks might drop their ideas about a violent 
seizure of power if the Mensheviks and Socialist Revolutionaries 
would agree to take power for themselves in the name of the soviets. 
The Bolsheviks would then promise to avoid violence and try to 
obtain power from their rivals by the strength of their persuasion. 73 
Lenin noted that peaceful revolutions, while being rare, were not 
inconceivable. 74 
It was an intriguing phase in Lenin's career. Was he sincere in 
offering a truce to his fellow socialists? It is possible, but not certain, 
that his reconsiderations reflected his true feelings. Nevertheless, the 
feelings were insecure. 'On Compromises' contained a long post-
script, written on 3 September, which contended that 'the offer of a 
compromise had already been outdated' by events.75 Even so, he still 
toyed for a few more days with the feasibility of a peaceful political 
development of the revolution. Other articles written in the first two 
weeks of September gave no definitive indication for or against. 76 
Lenin, in short, was wavering. But not for long. By 12 September 
he was writing 'The Bolsheviks Must Seize Power' and demanded an 
immediate uprising; and, on 14 September, he repeated this call in 
'Marxism and Insurrection';77 both documents were letters addressed 
to the Central Committee. The 'compromise' offered by him had 
never been innocent of violent implications. If the Mensheviks and 
Socialist Revolutionaries were going to take power, they could hardly 
expect Kerenski to withdraw without a fight. Thus the 'peaceful 
development' of the revolution sketched by Lenin would have started 
only after a violent phase had been endured. But now he shrugged off 
restraint. He had tacitly abandoned his previous denial that he would 
take power without having secured majorities in revolutionary mass 
organisations. From mid-September he urged his party to seize 
power and acquire formal popular sanction only afterwards. His 
first justification was that both the Petrograd and Moscow Soviets 
had acquired Bolshevik working majorities earlier in the month. 78 He 
also asserted that Kerenski was planning to surrender Petrograd to 
the Germans and would hold negotiations with them for a separate 
peace on the Eastern front. Above all, he maintained: 'On our side is 
the majority of the class - the vanguard of the revolution, the van-
guard of the people - which is capable of attracting the masses. On 
our side is the majority of the people since Chernov's departure is far 
 The Fire Next Time 
213 
from being the only sign but is rather the most obvious and glaring 
sign that the peasantry won't receive the land from the Socialist-
Revolutionary bloc (or from the Socialist Revolutionaries).'79 
This last point was unbuttressed by factual references. He did not 
pause to examine the Central Committee's likely reaction. The two 
letters were literary steamrollers. The Central Committee, in any 
case, did not receive them until 15 September.80 Meanwhile, on 13 
September, the central party newspaper (which had been renamed 
Worker's Path) continued to call for an agreement between the 
Bolsheviks and the Mensheviks and Socialist Revolutionaries.81 The 
Central Committee met on the same day to consider the party's 
tactics for the opening session of the Democratic Conference the 
following day.82 Kamenev and Trotski, who had both been released 
from prison, were nominated as Bolshevik spokesmen and required 
to demand the removal of Kerenski and the installation of a 
government composed entirely of socialists.83 
Lenin, however, now demanded a Bolshevik-led insurrection and 
no longer contemplated an interim period of government by the 
Mensheviks and the Socialist Revolutionaries. Trotski, too, was 
moving towards such a standpoint and earned a plaudit from Lenin 
for the taunts he flung at the non-Bolshevik socialists at the 
Democratic Conference: 'Bravo, comrade Trotski!'84 But even 
Trotski believed that insurrection could not immediately be under-
taken, and the Central Committee as a whole resisted Lenin's 
proposal. On 15 September, its members met to consider his two 
letters. Both were treated as documents which might endanger the 
party's very existence if they fell into the hands of the authorities. It 
was as if Lenin had been the boss of a gang intent on robbing a bank 
who had incautiously confided his intentions to paper - his fellow 
gang-members wished to destroy the incriminating evidence. Efforts 
were undertaken to discover and obliterate all but the copies in the 
hands of the Central Committee Secretariat.85 Lenin's discomfiture 
was emphasised on 16 September by the publication of an article in 
Worker's Path, 'The Russian Revolution and Civil War', which had 
~een written in the brief phase of his support for inter-party 
compromise. 86 Thus the Central Committee deftly used the prestige 
and authority of 'Lenin' to oppose Lenin. Its members rejected as 
sheer madness his notion that Bolshevik delegates to the Democratic 
Conference should walk out, travel to the gates of factories and 
barracks in the capital and organise an uprising without delay.87 
 214 
Lenin: A Political Life 
Lenin's tactical acumen waxed and waned in 1917; it was eclipsed 
for a time in late September. It was great good fortune for the party 
that their leader and his acknowledged powers of cajolement were 
safely removed to Finland. A September Revolution, taking place 
before the party held many soviets in Russia, would have been a 
disaster for Bolshevism.88 A successful revolutionary needs to be 
impatient and demanding; but a certain self-control is also required. 
Time was really on the Bolshevik party's side. Martov and the 
Menshevik-lnternationalists and the Left Socialist Revolutionaries 
had already moved towards accepting the need for an exclusively 
socialist government to be formed. 89 Having been annoyed with 
Kerenski in July for his repressiveness, they had become even more 
enraged since the Kornilov revolt and the Democratic Conference 
with his powerlessness. Their own parties had helped to create 
problems for him. The Democratic Conference, meeting between 14 
and 20 September, had been unable to agree whether the Kadets 
should be invited to join the Mensheviks and Socialist Revolutionar-
ies in the next coalition government.90 
Ostensibly this indecisiveness gave Kerenski free rein; and on 27 
September he introduced a new cabinet including representatives 
from all those parties. But his practical authority was reduced. The 
Democratic Conference had established from its own midst a Council 
of the Republic (or 'Pre-Parliament'). Its powers in relation to the 
Provisional Government were to be solely advisory, but Kerenski 
could not feel able to act independently of its wishes in October. Such 
institutional factors none the less counted for less in the Provisional 
Government's decline than the general erosion of its authority in the 
country as a whole. The Cabinet's ability to call in the assistance 
from the generals on the Eastern front had been damaged by 
Kerenski's behaviour towards Kornilov; and it was scarcely wise to 
transfer soldiers from the trenches when the German troops had so 
recently rampaged along the Baltic littoral. In addition, Kerenski 
knew that his reputation with the conscripts at the front was as low 
as it had long been with the Petrograd garrison.91 Nor were 
expeditionary units available from the Allies. Local government in 
many towns and cities, moreover, was already in the hands of the 
soviets even where a formal declaration of 'soviet power' had not 
occurred. Through the first weeks of October there was a series of 
victories for the Bolsheviks in elections to the various mass 
organisations. Soviets, trade unions and factory-workshop commit-
tees were falling into their control. This was especially obvious in 
 The Fire Next Time 
215 
northern and central Russia; but the pattern was also beginning to be 
observable elsewhere.92 
To be sure, these pro-Bolshevik voters were not wholly conscious 
of the nature of Bolshevism; and, outside Russia and the Russian-
dominated cities in the peripheral regions of the old empire, direct 
support for the party was minuscule. Lenin's affirmation that 'the 
majority of the people' favoured the Bolsheviks lacked cogency. And 
yet the majority was indubitably antagonistic to the Provisional 
Government. The Bolsheviks were continuing to work with the grain 
of popular grievances, and Lenin correctly discerned that the 
opposition to the installation of a socialist government would not 
be robust. 
This perception drew strength from developments in society and 
the economy. Inflation mounted. Foreign loans were unobtainable; 
Russia's Allies thought their money was best put to use in financing 
their own armies. Transport difficulties grew more serious. Supplies 
of raw material to factories shrank fast: coal output fell by 27 per 
cent between January and August 1917; and factories received less 
than two-fifths of their needs in pig-iron as early as April.93 
Manufacturing industry collapsed. Profits were tightly squeezed, 
bankruptcies were frequent. Workers used their freedom to strike; 
but the danger of forced redundancy was driving them to other forms 
of struggle. In Petrograd there were a few takeovers of enterprises by 
their workforces to pre-empt attempts by owners to closedown 
operations. This saved jobs, but did not halt the decline in real 
wages. Moreover, the poor in the towns faced a winter of starvation. 
Food supplies in the eight months of the Provisional Government 
were only 48 per cent of the country's officially-calculated require-
ments. 94 The Menshevik and Socialist Revolutionaries in the 
provinces still held most soviets. Workers and soldiers turned to 
other mass organisations for more radical solutions. Hostility to the 
Kerenski cabinet was focused on trade unions and factory-workshop 
committees (as well as suburb soviets). Nor were the peasants 
quiescent. Land seizures had occurred as early as March 1917, and 
the number rose steadily through to July.95 There was then a decline 
in such expropriations; but the government's writ was never the less 
ignored as the village land communes exerted their influence: it was a 
rare landlord who stayed behind on his estate to risk the wrath of his 
peasants. 
Lenin's insistence that time was not on the side of the Bolshevik 
party is therefore hard to explain. Kerenski's days were numbered. 
 216 
Lenin: A Political Life 
Lenin suggested that a further Kornilovite coup attempt could be in 
the offing; he also maintained that Kerenski would deliberately hand 
the country over to the Germans. These allegations remained 
unsubstantiated. Why, then, the urgency of the call to insurrection? 
We can only guess about Lenin's motives. He was probably showing 
the effects of having been in hiding for several months. He was 
frustrated: he wanted to be centrally involved, he wanted to do 
something. Lenin wanted a revolution and, surely, he wanted it on 
his own terms. He knew that the idea of a post-Kerenski socialist 
coalition was gaining in popularity among Mensheviks and Socialist-
Revolutionaries. He had already mentally rejected all but the left 
wings of these two rival parties as potential collaborators; and he did 
not want to moderate his policies in the compromises needed inside a 
coalition with Tsereteli and Chernov. He needed 'his' revolution to 
take place before the Mensheviks and Socialist Revolutionaries 
officially advocated the formation of a socialist coalition ministry. 
If he was to succeed, he had to act fast. 
'THE STATE AND REVOLUTION' 
Lenin's hardheaded campaign for what he saw as his party's interests 
was one aspect of a multifaceted political personality. He was also a 
theorist, and wanted to put down a general statement on the nature 
of socialist revolution. The result was his treatise on The State and 
Revolution. Since it remained unpublished until 1918, the book did 
not and could not have shaped events before the October Revolution; 
but its ideas reveal the contours of mind of the man who helped to 
instigate the seizure of power. On every page his sincere disgust with 
the nature of capitalism was abundantly evident. The State and 
Revolution was the most refined embodiment of Lenin's strategy for 
the carrying through of a socialist transformation in modern 
industrial societies. 
Written in the weeks of hiding in Finland, the book was planned to 
have seven brief chapters. It contained somewhat fewer than thirty 
thousand words and was a feat of rapid literary labour. The contents 
amounted to a co-ordination and explication of the textual data 
collected in the notes on Marxism and the state taken before the 
February Revolution. He had continued with the research after the 
July Days, requesting copies of Marx and Engels's Communist 
Manifesto and Marx's The Poverty of Philosophy to be sent out to 
 The Fire Next Time 
217 
him.96 His basic thinking had largely been done in Switzerland. The 
novelty was to have been constituted by chapter seven, dealing with 
the Russian revolutionary process in 1917. But only six chapters were 
written. As the author festively explained in his postscript, he had 
been weighed down by 'the encumbrance' of assisting with the 
October Revolution.97 Lenin had always intended to present himself 
as a mere re-teller of the original Marxian story, and the absence of 
the projected last chapter reinforced the work's exegetical character. 
Thus the first chapter resumed the writings of Marx and Engels on 
the nature of the state. As Lenin pointed out, Marxism's co-founders 
believed that every society since the ending of ancient communism 
had been divided into rival classes. Harmony among them had never 
been possible, and the structure of economic power had always led to 
the emergence of a ruling class (or classes). This power required 
political self-expression. The ruling class consolidated its position by 
creating and controlling its own state apparatus, and deployed it 
against all internal and external threats. Revolutionaries could not 
expect to come to power peacefully. Violent overthrows, as Engels 
had written in his Anti-Diihring, would be the norm.98 
Lenin's second chapter discussed the viewpoint of Marx and 
Engels on the revolutionary upsurge across Europe in 1848-51. 
Their Communist Manifesto contained a summons to the proletariat 
to turn itself into 'a ruling class'. Marx's The Eighteenth Brumaire of 
Louis Bonaparte emphasised the need to smash the existing state 
'machine'.99 Lenin tossed these citations in the face of Karl Kautsky. 
How on earth could a Marxist, he asked, believe that the civil service 
and the standing army under the capitalist order was politically 
neutral? Would they not associate themselves with the status quo? 
Had not Kautsky exaggerated the tension between 'the bourgeois 
state' and the middle classes?100 
The third chapter focused on Marx's writings on the Paris 
Commune of 1871. Marx had stated in The Civil War In France 
that 'the working class cannot simply take charge of the state 
machine ready-made and set it in motion for its own particular 
qbjectives'; and, in a letter to L. Kugelmann at the time of the 
Commune, he had stressed the need 'to smash' the existing 
'bureaucratic-military machine'. 101 The Paris Commune, for Marx, 
embodied the political framework required 'to eliminate not only the 
monarchical form of class domination but even class domination as 
such'. Lenin retailed the characteristics approved by Marx. These 
included the abolition of a standing army and its replacement by the 
 218 
Lenin: A Political Life 
people under arms; the disbandment of the police; the introduction 
of the elective principle to the civil service and the right of electors to 
insist on the immediate recall of officials and representatives. No 
official, moreover, would be paid more than the average worker's 
wage. 102 Marx, as Lenin explained, did not intend the new 
institutions to work like parliaments with their lengthy gaps between 
elections and their separation of legislative from executive organs. 
Instead, he wanted a 'working corporation', and Lenin perceived this 
fundamentally as a plea for mass participation in public life. 103 
How had such a proposal become realistic? Lenin's answer was 
that modern capitalism had simplified the functions of administra-
tion. Large-scale factories, railways, postal services and telephones 
had put the running of the state within the range of the abilities of 
'all literate people' (or to 'townspeople in general'). The need for a 
specialised and privileged bureaucracy had disappeared. State 
functions were now reducible to 'the simplest operations of registra-
tion, recording and checking'. 104 It would be a retrograde action to 
place the new structure on federal foundations. Centralism, as Marx 
had repeatedly stated in criticism of the French socialist P. J. 
Proudhon, was more efficient. 105 
The result of the establishment of the dictatorship of the 
proletariat would be the beginning of the movement towards the 
end of the need for a state at all. As every citizen became involved in 
public affairs, so the dawn of communism would draw nearer. 106 By 
any standard this was hyper-confidence; the return to Russia in 1917 
had reinforced his sanguine earlier hopes as articulated in 'Marxism 
on the State'. The fourth chapter dealt with Engels's elaboration of 
such ideas. Lenin noted the Anti-Diihring's notion that the state 
would eventually 'wither away'. 107 This, however, was not a relapse 
into anarchism. Lenin reproduced the arguments of Marx and Engels 
in the 1870s against contemporary anarchists. The ultimate Marxist 
objective was a state-free society; but Lenin maintained that the 
transition from capitalism to communism required an intermediate 
stage of socialism which would be inaugurated by the formation of a 
socialist state: the dictatorship of the proletariat. 108 Marx's attacks 
on anarchism had led Karl Kautsky and others to treat the state as a 
permanent feature of human society. Lenin repudiated this, drawing 
attention to Engels's letter to the German social-democratic leader 
August Bebel in March 1875. Engels had argued that the Paris 
Commune constituted a form of rule which lacked qualities 
characteristic of previous states; and that it was better described as 
 The Fire Next Time 
219 
a Gemeinwesen (which was the German equivalent of the French 
commune). 109 Thus Engels admired the Paris Commune partly 
because of its statelike features and partly because it appeared as a 
possible mode for the eventual 'withering away' of the state as 
such. 110 
As a Marxist, Lenin wanted to examine 'the economic founda-
tions' for this withering away. His fifth chapter castigated 'capitalist 
democracy' as 'truncated, squalid, false' on the grounds that it was 
'democracy only for the insignificant minority, for the rich'. 111 His 
supportive points were few; but he mentioned both the various 
limitations on parliamentary suffrage, especially the non-enfranchise-
ment of women, and 'the purely capitalist organisation of the daily 
press' .112 This was argumentative brevity taken to an extreme. 
Lenin's allegations of financial corruption and political manipulative-
ness were cogent; and an ampler indication of the collusion between 
governmental ministers, industrial magnates and press barons would 
have bolstered his case considerably. But Lenin was writing for 
Marxists, who needed no persuasion on such issues. He flatly 
declared that the dictatorship of the proletariat would rid the great 
mass of the population of exploitation and oppression. Complete 
freedom would not exist until communism itself had been attained; 
but the dictatorship would not last forever, and eventually the state 
itself would disappear and a communist society would emerge: from 
each according to his talents, to each according to his needs. 113 
In the sixth chapter Lenin turned to the reasons why, in his view, 
Marxian ideas on state and revolution had previously been misunder-
stood by Marxists. He was offering his book as a work of explication, 
not of theoretical inventiveness. Among his main purposes was a 
desire to demonstrate his own ideological authenticity as a Marxist. 
Reviewing the controversies between Karl Kautsky and Eduard 
Bernstein in the 1890s, Lenin pointed out that Kautsky had 
expressly refused to engage in debate about 'the problem of the 
proletarian dictatorship'. Again in 1902, in The Social Revolution, 
Kautsky had avoided the topic. 114 According to Lenin, Kautsky had 
P.erennially overlooked the crucial aim of destroying the state. This 
naturally raised the question of why Lenin had not criticised such 
alleged neglect before 1914. Lenin replied that Kautsky had at least 
adhered to basic Marxist standpoints until 1914, particularly the idea 
that 'the revolutionary era was beginning' (which appeared in The 
Path To Power in 1909).115 On the other hand, Lenin recognised that 
Anton Pannekoek, Rosa Luxemburg and Karl Radek had convinc-
 220 
Lenin: A Political Life 
ingly exposed Kautsky's 'passive radicalism' before the war. 116 
Kautsky had objected to Pannekoek's call for the elimination of a 
professional civil service. For Lenin, this had come to demonstrate 
Kautsky's lack of understanding that a socialist political order would 
be based on the model of the Paris Commune and would dispense 
altogether with the need for a 'bureaucracy'. 117 
At this point Lenin stressed his own theme, stating that Panne-
koek's writings suffered 'from imprecision and insufficient concrete-
ness' .118 This was a reference to the absence of a description of the 
'dictatorship of the proletariat' in general and the soviets in 
particular. It also made Lenin's State and Revolution seem more 
original than it was. Bukharin's name was not mentioned even 
though his wartime reconsiderations of Marxism had been influen-
tial in leading Lenin to the basis of his new contentions. 119 
Lenin and Bukharin continued to have their disagreements about 
revolutionary strategy, but no direct discussion of The State and 
Revolution ensued between them.'2° Non-Bolsheviks felt no such 
inhibition. Kautsky and Martov attacked the book robustly; their 
remarks were all the more interesting inasmuch as both were 
Marxists and shared many of Lenin's intellectual premises. They 
rejected The State and Revolution's claim to orthodoxy. 121 Kautsky 
questioned whether Marx, when he mentioned 'the dictatorship of 
the proletariat', was referring to a specific form of rule. Did Marx 
aim at the suspension of universal civic freedoms? Did he oppose a 
general suffrage? Kautsky's answer was a resounding no. He asserted 
that Marx conceived of the dictatorship as a general political 
'condition' rather than a specific political technique, and that a 
Marxian dictatorship would simply allow the proletariat to pursue its 
interests without impediment. It would not involve the disenfranchi-
sement of other social groups. On the contrary, since the proletariat 
and the rest of the exploited population would be a massive majority 
there could be no excuse for fearing the electoral menace posed by 
the middle classes. 122 Martov, agreeing with Kautsky's basic analysis 
of the attitudes of Marx and Engels, supplied a close examination of 
their texts. He emphasised that Marx's Civil War In France involved 
approval of the universal-suffrage arrangements of the Paris 
Commune;123 and that Engels's introduction to the 1891 edition of 
the same work had described these arrangements as being among the 
Commune's 'infallible methods' .124 
Martov's examination of such texts matched Lenin in exegetical 
skill. This was an important accomplishment since The State and 
 The Fire Next Time 
221 
Revolution was aimed at arrogating exclusive Marxist orthodoxy for 
its author. Martov delighted in exposing Lenin's sleights of hand. A 
crucial example was Lenin's suggestion that Engels had endorsed a 
democratic republic as an objective solely on the grounds that it 
provided 'the shortest way which leads to the dictatorship of the 
proletariat'. 125 Engels, as Martov's lengthy quotation indicated, 
indicated no such thing. The passage contained no reference to an 
ensuing dictatorship. 126 Martov and Kautsky had proved that 
Lenin's interpretation of Marx was not watertight. 
This is not to say that their own interpretations were correct. 
Kautsky, bending over in the opposite direction, overstated the 
commitment of Marxism's co-founders to democratic proce-
dures. 127 Martov's treatment was more complex since he was more 
willing to discern changes in Marx's thought (whereas Lenin, devoted 
disciple of Marx, took it as axiomatic that his master's thought 
exhibited undeviating, progressive development). For example, 
Martov stressed that Marx's advocacy of locally-based communes 
in 1871 was aberrant from his normal standpoint, and that it 
contradicted his more typical ridiculing of such opinions as mere 
anarchism of the type propounded by Proudhon. 128 No doubt 
Martov underplayed Marx's long-standing interest in popular and 
local self-emancipation (as opposed to emancipation through a 
centralist state); but it is equally arguable that Lenin overestimated 
the continuity between the 'statism' of The Communist Manifesto 
with the anti-statism of The Civil War In France. 129 Above all, 
Martov and Kautsky were right that Marx did not state that the 
proletarian 'dictatorship' would typically involve disenfranchisement 
of non-proletarians. 130 Both felt that Lenin's raucous claims to 
'orthodoxy' were therefore illegitimate. The reverential tone of his 
references to Marx and Engels did not prevent them from affirming 
that the true precedents for his attitude were non-Marxist. Wilhelm 
Weitling in Germany and Louis-Auguste Blanqui in France were 
picked out for their dictatorial inclinations. 131 
They might also have mentioned the Russian agrarian socialist 
~etr Tkachev. 132 But Martov and Kautsky were fair-minded pole-
micists and presumably they recognised that The State and 
Revolution, unlike anything composed by Tkachev, at least empha-
sised the need for mass political support and participation in the 
making of revolutions. His book was far from being a summons to 
conspiracy and elitism. Indeed, Lenin saw himself as offering a vision 
of a totally harmonious and self-regulating society which was 
 222 
Lenin: A Political Life 
realisable within a not too lengthy period; and he anticipated a more 
or less easy, trouble-free socialist revolution. 133 
His non-Bolshevik critics, however, did not limit themselves to 
Marxology. Kautsky drew attention to the large proportion of the 
population even in an advanced capitalist country such as Germany 
which would lose civic rights under the dispensation of Lenin's 
recommendations; he questioned whether the level of repression 
could ever be as low, under such circumstances, as Lenin 
claimed. 134 Martov took another approach. Starting from Lenin's 
assumption that the proletariat would constitute the immense 
majority in a society undergoing a socialist revolution, he asked 
what there would be to fear from allowing the supposedly tiny 
middle-class minority to continue to vote (especially if Lenin was 
sincere in saying that such a revolution was inconceivable unless 
mass popular support already existed). 135 Martov and Kautsky saw 
the protection of the rights of minorities as a vital safeguard against 
abuses of power. 136 As practical political analysts, history has shown 
them to have been true prophets in this regard. Moreover, Lenin's 
two antagonists did not share the unargued premise of his book that 
each class would gravitate permanently towards support for a single 
party. The State and Revolution did not mention parties at all; and 
Kautsky and Martov were introducing data from 1918, when a one-
party state became an enduring phenomenon in Russia. 137 But 
Kautsky was justified in saying that the existence of a plurality of 
parties permits a diversity of opinion and interests to be represented 
more easily and that suppression of competing parties is bound to 
diffuse authoritarian abuses throughout the political and social 
order. 138 Furthermore, Martov had a sound point when he stated 
that no working class is devoid of differentiated immediate inter-
ests. 139 
Lenin very probably had no conscious intention that a socialist 
dictatorship should undertake a large-scale and bloody repression; 
but this only serves to demonstrate the facile quality of his thinking: 
the objective likelihood of such a dictatorship having to turn to 
terrorist methods in order to sustain its power was strong. The State 
and Revolution was reticent on the point. But his other writings in 
1917, especially as regards the future governance of Russia, revealed 
an abiding fascination with terror as a technique of rule. 
Other gaps in the book's argumentation existed. Lenin failed, for 
example, to explain how the local soviets would interact with central 
soviet organs after the revolution. He simply asserted that harmony 
 The Fire Next Time 
223 
would prevail. 140 Nor did he give his reasons for supposing that the 
fusion of legislative, executive and judicial institutions in the new 
socialist state would be more just and efficient than the separate 
institutions were in democratic capitalist states. He merely scoffed at 
the very idea that parliaments could be 'working' organs and moved 
on to other topics. 141 This is not to claim that Western parliamentary 
democracies always embody a just and efficient system of rule in 
every way; but the point at issue is that Lenin's alternative does not 
seem inherently more just or more efficient even from a theoretical 
standpoint. Nowhere was his naivete more obvious than in his 
treatment of administration. He argued that the tasks of running a 
modem capitalist society were becoming ever simpler. Professional 
experts would need to be retained only temporarily. Literate ordinary 
workers, Lenin maintained, could take over these tasks with ease. In 
fact, the need for experts, as contemporary sociologists such as Max 
Weber and Roberto Michels affirmed, does not diminish with the 
onset of industrialisation. Rather, it increases. 142 If anything, the 
administrators of yesteryear were amateurs in comparison with the 
professionals of today. The days are gone when British under-
graduates with an ability to translate Shakespeare into Greek 
iambics were expected to have all the necessary skills to administer 
a modem state. Technological inventions expand the number of 
fulfillable tasks and the speed of their fulfilment: they do not 
dispense with the necessity for specialisation. 
It is not sensible to assume, as Lenin did, that administrators can 
be prevented from forming themselves into a corporate group (or 
into groups) simply by insisting on electivity, on the right of instant 
recall and on payment at a worker's rate. Administrators, by virtue 
of their job and training, tend to comprehend and manipulate 
political systems better than 'ordinary' people'; and the scarcity-
value of their skills usually enables them to obtain a level of 
remuneration higher than that enjoyed by the mass of waged 
people. Kautsky put it in a nutshell when he retortc;d to Lenin that 
classes can rule but cannot govern; and that mass participatory 
qemocracy is utopian. 143 
POLITICAL PROJECTS 
The State and Revolution was an attempt at grand theory. Yet what 
was the relationship between such theory and subsequent Russian 
 224 
Lenin: A Political Life 
history? Many have argued that Lenin's book was a calculated 
deception inasmuch as he had no intention of trying to establish 
mass participatory democracy: he was not so huge a hypocrite. 
Several political leaders who knew him intimately, including Yuli 
Martov, implied that the first person he deceived was Vladimir Ilich 
Ulyanov-Lenin. Some writers have argued that The State and 
Revolution is therefore best regarded as a libertarian tract. In their 
opinion, the repression and civil war after 1917 constituted a clean 
break by Lenin with the tenets of his book; and it is often stressed 
that Lenin the libertarian in any case was a temporary aberration 
from a pattern of thinking that was characteristically authoritarian. 
Yet Kautsky and Martov pointed out that many aspects of The State 
and Revolution were bound to lead to violent conflict if implemen-
ted.144 
Even they presented too straightforward a picture. For they 
overlooked another side of The State and Revolution: its many 
internal contradictions. Lenin dreamed about locally-based mass 
self-emancipation while also anticipating a future socialist economy 
which would be 'organised like a postal service', such as he had 
witnessed in Switzerland.145 He did not see that the vision of mass 
initiative and discussion and the vision of rigid hierarchy and order 
were at variance with one another. Lenin's offering was a strange 
concoction. It was the utopian expression of a utopian mind, and its 
results were likely to involve large-scale bloodshed even though its 
author probably did not consciously intend this. It was also a half-
baked intellectual product. The cook had yet to decide which 
ingredients were to be given the greatest weight and importance in 
the final dish. 146 A further complication is that the book had all 
industrialised countries as its subject. Russia was not the exclusive 
focus; and, when he started taking notes on socialist revolution in 
January 1917, Lenin must have had Germany more firmly in mind 
than his native land. The State and Revolution was meant to be about 
an entire epoch in future world history. Lenin did not specifically 
state that his book was intended as a blueprint for the immediate 
future of Russian politics (even though many scholars have treated it 
simply as such). 147 But he did not specifically dissociate it from 
Russia's future either. As is true of many other areas of this thought 
in 1917, he left no very clear opinion to posterity. 148 
Even so, there was an obvious need for him to say to his followers 
what kind of state he wanted to establish at home once he came to 
power. In The State and Revolution he had referred repeatedly to 'the 
 The Fire Next Time 
225 
dictatorship of the proletariat'. All therefore knew of Lenin's 
intentions with the utmost clarity. Or did they? In the first place, 
of course, The State and Revolution appeared only in 1918. 149 
Secondly, Lenin's other writings in 1917 usually avoided suggesting 
that 'the proletariat' should hold exclusive power. 
He knew only too well that the old Russian empire's population 
was constituted predominantly by peasants, and wished as a Marxist 
theorist to take account of the fact. Already, in mid-March 1917, 
Lenin had been urging that 'power in the state should belong not to 
the gentry and the capitalists but to the workers and the poorest 
peasants' .150 By April he was demanding government by 'the 
proletarians and the semi-proletarians';151 and in May he rephrased 
this as 'the proletariat supported by the semi-proletarians' .152 In July 
he called for power to be transferred 'into the hands of the 
proletariat supported by the poorest peasantry'. 153 But there was 
no fixed terminological pattern, and Lenin sometimes reverted to the 
formulas he had evolved in the spring. 154 He also occasionally 
employed, even for Russia, the fundamental notion of 'the dictator-
ship of the revolutionary proletariat'. 155 But from September 1917 he 
tended to enunciate a demand for 'the dictatorship of the proletariat 
and the poorest peasants', and it was mainly variations on this 
gruesome and cumbersome formula which were used by him through 
to the October Revolution. 156 Consequently, the proposition that 
Lenin throughout 1917 starkly and regularly advocated 'a dictator-
ship of the proletariat' to his party and its supporters is incorrect. 157 
This topic would have little more than a Marxological antiquarian 
interest if it were not for the curious chronology of his statements. 
For he barely ever used the term 'dictatorship' in public from the end 
of April until the end of August. 158 It was probably Kornilov's revolt 
that made him less restrained. The threat of a right-wing military 
dictatorship may well have made him feel that the concept of a 
socialist dictatorship, which would impose 'order' and 'control' over 
the middle classes, might have become more respectable amidst 
Bolshevik activists; and possibly Kornilovism , ')nvinced even him 
rp.ore strongly that dictatorial methods would be needed. The second 
point is that Lenin apparently made only eight explicit references to 
dictatorship from the start of September through to 25 October159 -
not a enormous number in view of the topic's importance. 
In addition, all those references occurred in the carefully-composed 
prose of Bolshevik newspaper articles and pamphlets. 16° Fair 
enough: what other options of communication were open to a Lenin 
 226 
Lenin: A Political Life 
in hiding? Yet the result was that the great mass of workers and 
peasants outside the Bolshevik party can scarcely have known about 
his full range of plans. This can hardly have been fortuitous; Lenin 
cannot have wanted to upset popular sensibilities unnecessarily, and 
the virtues of dictatorship would not automatically have commended 
themselves to the Russian working class. Not only Lenin but also the 
other Bolshevik leaders in the central (and presumably also local) 
newspapers seldom described their prospective administration as a 
'dictatorship'. The Central Committee's advice to Bolsheviks cam-
paigning for election to the soviets, published in Pravda on 7 May 
1917, was simply to call for 'all power to the soviets'. 161 Stalin's 
writings do not mention dictatorship. 162 Nor do those of Trotski or 
Bukharin or Zinoviev. 163 And Lenin himself, on the few occasions 
when he advocated socialist dictatorship, framed his arguments very 
carefully. Typically, he would assert a desire to emulate and surpass 
the democratic achievements of the Paris Commune. 164 His demands 
for power to be transferred to the working people, for mass 
participation, for an expansion of the rights of workers, peasants 
and soldiers: these were the demands that were most prominent and 
frequent in his writings and speeches in the months before 
October. 165 
On the other hand, notions about dictatorship undoubtedly held 
Lenin within a powerful magnetic field even though he mentioned 
them comparatively rarely. A link therefore exists between his pre-
October thought and his post-October actions. The concept of an 
administration unencumbered by legal restraints was neither random 
nor temporary. And so, whereas the general population - probably 
including most rank-and-file Bolsheviks- was unaware of his fiercer 
intentions, careful and regular readers should have picked up the 
message. 166 
Lenin, indeed, did not stop short of anticipating the use of 'terror' 
in Russia. In June 1917 he expressed unstinted admiration for the 
French Jacobin law of 1793 on 'enemies of the people': 'The example 
of the Jacobins is instructive. Even today it has not become 
outmoded; but we have to apply it to the revolutionary class of the 
twentieth century, to the workers and the semi-proletarians. The 
enemies of the people for this class in the twentieth century are not 
monarchs but landlords and capitalists as a class.' 167 This wide 
definition of enemies of the Russian people was attenuated a little by 
his contention that the guillotine would not be needed. So over-
whelming would be the popular majority in favour of socialism that 
 The Fire Next Time 
227 
the terror would need only to involve the imprisonment of '50-100 
magnates and big-shots of banking capital, principal knights of 
public embezzlement and bank theft'. These prisoners would be 
released within weeks, as soon as their financial dealings had been 
investigated and ascertained. 168 This was Lenin the authoritarian in 
whimsical mood. He was less endearing about capital punishment, 
which was reintroduced by Kerenski in July 1917. Lenin wanted the 
law changed so that 'the exploiters (i.e. the gentry and the capitalists)' 
might be shot 'for concealment from and deception of the people' .169 
Such a desire gave fresh meaning to the proverb: 'One law for the 
rich, another for the poor.' Strictly speaking, Lenin's plan for 
differential legislation on capital punishment did not involve 
arbitrary violence; he wanted capitalists executed for specific 
offences, not just because they were capitalists. Whenever he spoke 
expressly of terror before October, he glossed over the various issues 
by asserting that little terror would be necessary under socialism. The 
projected arrest of merely a few dozen capitalist 'magnates' is an 
example. For most of the year, however, he preferred to avoid the 
topic altogether or to concentrate on what he described as the terror 
being perpetrated against the Bolsheviks by the Provisional Govern-
ment.170 
His statements on the Constituent Assembly too made him appear 
more 'democratic' than he really was. Before returning to Russia in 
1917, he had scorned those Marxists who called for its convocation 
as a major party goal; but after the February Revolution he 
persistently demanded the Assembly's convocation. 171 He accused 
the Provisional Government both of delaying the Assembly and of 
fiddling the arrangements in favour of Kerenski's supporters. 172 In 
Lenin's prognosis, the peasants electing deputies to the Constituent 
Assembly (and who would be the majority of the electorate) would be 
to the left of the Socialist Revolutionaries. 173 He owned to great 
optimism: 'Is it really hard to grasp that with power in the hands of 
the Soviets the Constituent Assembly is assured and its success is 
assured.' 174 Yet this fell short of predicting a victory for the 
~olsheviks as such. In addition, he stated: 'The question of the 
Constituent Assembly is subordinate to the question about the course 
and outcome of the class struggle between the bourgeoisie and the 
proletariat.' 175 This statement, which appeared in an article signific-
antly entitled 'About Constitutional Illusions', showed that Lenin's 
commitment to abiding by the results of the Assembly elections was 
far from being absolute. The 'course and outcome of class struggle', 
 228 
Lenin: A Political Life 
along with his party's victorious role in that struggle, counted for 
more. 176 Bolshevik-led mass organisations would therefore constitute 
the new government whatever the result of the Constituent Assembly 
poll. But, again, only careful readers of his articles would have 
appreciated the nuances of his intentions. 
Nor was Lenin's willingness to ignore the formally-registered will 
of the majority confined to his ideas about the Assembly: he was no 
more solicitous as regards the mass organisations. In The State and 
Revolution he had referred to the soviets only six times, mainly to 
assert how badly the Mensheviks and Socialist Revolutionaries had 
behaved at the helm. 177 Admittedly, he wrote most of the book in the 
period when he was campaigning against the 'All Power to the 
Soviets' slogan. 178 And yet even from September, when he ceased to 
demand the slogan's withdrawal, he offered no depiction of the 
future institutional framework of governance by soviets. His attitude 
to the alliance between workers and peasants in the soviets displayed 
a particularly weak belief in democratic procedures. He frequently 
omitted to refer to the peasants' soviets at all in describing the future 
framework, and his party's opponents noted that this implicit down-
grading of the peasantry's significance and rights cannot have been 
an accident. 179 Being a Marxist rather than a populist, Lenin had a 
firmer trust in the capacities of the workers and was not going to 
hand over the forthcoming socialist revolution to the peasants. The 
working class was to be the revolutionary vanguard. He omitted to 
say what he would do if this vanguard were to turn against the 
Bolsheviks and favour other parties; he had developed no ideas of 
multi-party competition. 
NATIONALITY PROJECTS 
Lenin beat the drum about the struggle for political revolution, 
summoning workers, peasants and soldiers to overthrow the Provi-
sional Government; but the rhythms of the national question were 
not forgotten by him. Before and during the war, he had offended 
many colleagues by tapping out the theme that national self-
determination should be the party's slogan and that the right of 
secession should be advocated; and he had carried the Seventh 
Conference with him in April 1917. The Provisional Government 
and its Menshevik and Socialist-Revolutionary supporters were 
fearful lest the Bolsheviks should take advantage of its difficulties 
 The Fire Next Time 
229 
with some of the non-Russian nationalities. The troubles between the 
cabinet and the Finnish Sejm, which had broken out soon after the 
February Revolution, continued to give cause for concern through 
the summer, and the Ukrainian problem grew more acute even after 
the resignation of the Kadet ministers in early July and the 
assumption of the premiership by Aleksandr Kerenski. Such conflict 
was grist in Lenin's mill, and after the Seventh Bolshevik Party 
Conference he continued to demand that all nations in the old 
Russian empire should be accorded the right of secession. 180 It 
remained his argument that socialists, by advocating the right of 
secession, would earn the trust of the non-Russians and thereby 
persuade them to stay within or to rejoin a multinational state which 
included the Russian people. 181 
A fraternal 'union' of peoples was accordingly required. 182 The 
fact that neither Finns nor Ukrainians were currently striving for 
complete independence bolstered Lenin's case against his party's left 
wing, that his talk of the right of secession was a danger to the 
formation of a large socialist state in the old Russian empire. 183 In 
the main, however, he avoided reference to disputes among Bol-
sheviks on the national question. Having won the fiery debate at the 
April Conference, he did not want to rekindle the embers. His 
aggressiveness was directed at the Provisional Government, and he 
insisted that, if Lvov had imitated Nikolai II, the Mensheviks and the 
Socialist Revolutionaries sought to ape Lvov. 184 
This was scarcely fair. It was the insistence of Tsereteli and 
Chernov on effecting a rapprochement with the Ukrainian Rada 
that had helped to provoke the collapse of the Lvov coalition 
Cabinet in July when the Kadet ministers resigned. The Mensheviks 
had debated the national question at their All-Russian Conference in 
May 1917. They had laid down that 'broad political autonomy' 
should be granted to regions where a large non-Russian population 
existed; and that 'guarantees of cultural development' in schooling 
and in the use of languages should be given. 185 Both the Menshevik 
party and the Jewish Bund at the First Congress of Soviets of 
Workers' and Soldiers' Deputies in June had affirmed that the right 
of national self-determination, even if it led to secession, should be 
promulgated. Subsequently, however, the national question faded 
from prominence among the anti-Bolshevik socialists;186 and the 
Menshevik Congress in August did not have it on their agenda. 187 S. 
Semkovski, the Menshevik Organisational Committee member who 
had disputed the national question with Lenin before 1914, was the 
 230 
Lenin: A Political Life 
only Petrograd-based Menshevik to write extensively on it in 1917. 
His views were consistent: he continued to call for territorially-based 
national autonomy within the existing centralised state. 188 He also 
repeated his pre-war contention, which was welcomed by Mensheviks 
generally, that ethnic intermingling in the Russian empire was so 
complex that internal territorial partitions could not be devised to 
protect the conditions of all non-Russians. He called for the 
enactment of measures to ensure that, in areas like the Ukraine, 
Jews and Poles did not suffer at the hands of Ukrainians. 189 
Mark Liber, the prominent Bundist, had repeated Semkovski's 
arguments in his report on behalf of the Mensheviks, the Socialist 
Revolutionaries and the Bund at the First Congress of Soviets; 190 but 
Lenin treated both Liber and Semkovski with silent contempt 
throughout the year. 191 Admittedly, the Mensheviks and Socialist 
Revolutionaries, even when they had greater opportunity to influence 
the Cabinet after Kerenski's elevation to the premiership, did little to 
demonstrate their commitment to national autonomy in practice. But 
account should also be taken that, in terms of ideas, Lenin's 
proposed solution of the national question within a unitary state 
had much in common with Semkovski's. Lenin too called for 'broad 
regional autonomy' in areas populated by a large non-Russian nation 
and for schooling to take place in the native language. 192 The crucial 
difference was that Lenin entirely refused to consider Semkovski's 
arguments on ethnic intermingling (and it was only after the October 
Revolution that he began to face up to the problem). 193 
In addition, Lenin in 1917 could no longer claim to show much 
greater concern than the Mensheviks lest the non-Russians should be 
held in a multinational state against their will and be refused the 
right of secession. The Mensheviks also acknowledged that a post-
war diplomatic settlement might involve Polish and even Armenian 
independence. 194 But they did not often mention the topic, and it was 
evidently not a primary worry for them. For Lenin it mattered more. 
In particular, he objected to the Menshevik notion that only the 
Constituent Assembly ought to resolve the national question. Nor 
was his thinking confined predominantly to issues arising from the 
old Romanov empire. Indicating that the Provisional Government's 
engagement in the war was determined by global factors, he asserted 
that national self-determination be enshrined as a universal basic 
principle as the means for bringing about a general 'democratic 
peace'. The war, in his estimation, was imperialist, and socialists 
should aim not only to prevent further annexations at the end of the 
 The Fire Next Time 
231 
war but also to reverse the annexationist results of past wars. Each 
empire, including Russia's, ought to proffer the right of national self-
determination. 195 He often mentioned Poland, Finland and the 
Ukraine as possible secessionist states. 196 
And yet we should be wary of assuming that even Lenin made 
national self-determination into a prominently visible plank in his 
platform. What he said and wrote deserves attention. But how often 
he did so, and when, is also significant. In his pre-October 
publications of 1917, he composed only three short articles on 
future national and ethnic policy. All of them, moreover, were 
composed between May and mid-June. Although thereafter he 
commented en passant on the national question, he obviously no 
longer thought it deserved vociferous, sustained commentary. 197 
The reason for this decline in attention is a matter of guesswork. 
Perhaps he was too busy with other questions; but this can hardly 
have been the main reason inasmuch as, until April 1917, he had 
made so much fuss about national self-determination. Possibly he 
recognised that the future boundaries of the old imperial state were 
beyond prediction and that emphatic talk by Bolsheviks about the 
right of secession might induce more secessions than would otherwise 
occur: he explicitly avoided offering a set of 'demands' on behalf of 
specific nationalities. Leading Bolsheviks privately asked him to 
clarify his policy; but he argued that it was more advisable to limit 
the party's pronouncements to a simple 'declaration of principles' 
(and even then he published this prevaricatory remark not in a mass-
circulation newspaper or at an open mass meeting but in the low-
circulation 'thick journal' Enlightenment, which was read mainly by 
Bolshevik intellectuals). 198 Simultaneously he repeated his wish for as 
large a state as possible. 199 Moreover, he rarely suggested that the 
most recently conquered areas of the empire should be allowed to 
secede. He mentioned Turkestan in this connection in only one 
article;200 and all the while he stressed that similar dispersals of 
colonial empires would serve the greater goal of strengthening the 
authority of socialist states in Europe.201 In summary, neither Lenin 
J:!Or anyone else in the Bolshevik Central Committee- contrary to the 
conventional wisdom in Soviet and Western accounts - played 'the 
national card' for all it might be worth in 1917.202 
Lenin probably considered the matter as being less immediately 
critical than he had earlier imagined. The outbursts of fury which 
had shaken the Romanov imperial administration in 1905 did not 
recur in 1917. Nationalist hostility was at its strongest in Finland and 
 232 
Lenin: A Political Life 
the Ukraine. Poland was no longer an internal problem since it was 
occupied by German forces and the Baltic provinces were also under 
Germany's control. And, even where the Provisional Government 
faced troubles in non-Russian areas, the underlying problems were 
characteristically economic and social in nature. Nationalism in the 
Ukraine, for example, was a vehicle for peasant disgust with existing 
land legislation.203 There were also regions where national sentiment 
barely existed. Not only central Asia but even Belorussia constituted 
an example. To have devoted the party's main efforts to the national 
question would have been a pointless diversion.204 It was wiser to 
leave the non-Russian areas to stoke up their own anger against the 
Provisional Government and to await further developments. Lenin 
did precisely that. 
ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL PROJECTS 
He discerned a much more urgent need to state and restate his 
intention in economic and social policy. All Bolsheviks saw that the 
economy's rapid deterioration was a crucial issue in the struggle 
among the political parties, and Lenin was his party's major 
economic spokesman. He got down to elaborating his ideas from 
early summer 1917. Newspapers across the spectrum of Russian 
public opinion were talking of an inevitable catastrophe. Economic 
ruin was the common currency of editorials. Lenin did not share this 
apocalyptic viewpoint. The troubles afflicting industry, agriculture, 
trade and finance were blamed by him on the continuing and 
preventable activities of capitalists.205 His pre-revolutionary writings 
had been focused upon the inherent economic logic of capitalist 
enterprise which imposed itself willy-nilly upon capitalists. He did 
not abandon this approach in 1917, at least not entirely; but he 
shifted his emphasis towards moral condemnation (even though, 
since the 1890s, he had identified such condemnations as being the 
defect of Russian agrarian-socialist thought).206 Lenin railed against 
the greed and selfishness of businessmen. Industrialists in particular, 
he declared in a Pravda article of 20 May, were directly responsible 
for 'the disorganisation of production' .207 Such 'moralism' and 
'subjectivism' were unusual for him, but obviously they were likely 
to attract a great deal of support from a hard-pressed working class. 
Lenin even asserted that the economic crisis was quickly soluble. His 
 The Fire Next Time 
233 
writings contrasted with those of Bolshevik economists such as V. P. 
Milyutin on the right of his party. Milyutin stated that a definitive 
solution was impossible in the short term. 208 Lenin retorted that the 
country abounded in food, coal, oil and metal and confronted fewer 
objective difficulties than did Germany.209 
His recognition that Milyutin was right came only after the 
October Revolution. 21° For the moment he continued to highlight 
the expansion undergone by national economies in wartime. In 
fairness to him, it must be said that his criticism of Russian 
contemporary commentators who had ignored this ph~nomenon 
had had a great deal of cogency in 1915-16; but the crippling 
strains on industry and commerce in 1917, especially from mid-
summer, were unmistakable to all who experienced them. Perhaps his 
removal from Russia from early July affected his perception. 
Another impediment may have been the feeling that, as a party 
leader, he needed to imply that a socialist administration would have 
no difficulties. It is also possible that this underestimation was a 
genuine mistake; but a strong suspicion must persist that he 
deliberately exaggerated his optimism for public consumption. 
The panacea, in Lenin's judgement, was to release the capacities of 
'the people'. Mass participation was vital. Popular 'energy, initiative 
and decisiveness' would triumph where the middle classes had 
already failed;211 and the 'proletariat', guiding the movement, would 
be able to perform 'miracles of organisation'.212 Lenin and the 
Central Committee observed the campaign among workers in 
Petrograd for what he called 'workers' supervision (control)'.213 
Workplace democracy had hitherto not been the party's demand 
and had seemed more like anarchism or, at best, syndicalism to 
several leading theorists of Bolshevism; but the popularity of the 
basic idea was discerned and incorporated into the Bolshevik party's 
list of slogans. Lenin urged the idea's dissemination and implementa-
tion across the country and throughout all major industrial 
syndicates and banking institutions.214 Lenin's intention was for 
wage-earners to supervise owners and managers. They were to have 
~ccess to accounts and to planning decisions; they were to hear 
reports on the progress of business. He did not suggest that existing 
managements should be supplanted by workers' representatives, but 
rather that they should be placed under supervision.215 He rejected as 
'humorous' the notion that, for example, the railways should pass 
'into the hands of the railwaymen'.216 The organisational framework 
was left imprecise. The basic role would be performed by the factory-
 234 
Lenin: A Political Life 
workshop committees elected by the workforce. Yet he added that 
'all authoritative workers' organisations' should play a part, includ-
ing both trade unions and soviets. A multi-organisational control, 
enthusiastically but vaguely articulated, was Lenin's keynote. 217 
Many leftist Bolsheviks wanted to go further than Lenin. 
Bukharin, returning to Russia in May, counselled the inception of 
a 'workers' control' which expelled the existing managers and 
replaced them with a collective board elected by the workforce. 218 
This concorded with his more optimistic views on the extent of global 
capitalist development already achieved and on the speed which 
could characterise the inception of socialism in Russia as well as in 
Europe in general. Bukharin and his sympathisers also tended to 
support wholesale nationalisation of industry, finance and urban 
trade.219 
Lenin was more cautious. In May 1917 he wrote about the 
desirability of governmental control 'over the trusts, over the 
banks, over trade, over the "parasites" ... over food supplies.220 
But already he was contemplating something greater than control. In 
a pamphlet drafted in April and May, and printed in early June, he 
called for the passing of both industrial syndicates and banks into 
governmental ownership.221 It needs emphasising that his proposal is 
drawn up well short of nationalising all large-scale factories and 
mines: he aimed to include only such enterprises of that size which 
had been grouped into some even larger conglomerate. Furthermore, 
he did not contemplate the nationalisation of medium-sized and 
small-scale enterprises; and he repeatedly stated that such measures 
did not amount to an introduction of socialism, and that control and 
regulation of the remaining private industrial sector would be the 
government's objective. 222 He refrained from defining the nature of 
the resultant economic system. In 1918 he was to dub it 'state 
capitalism'; but before the October Revolution he balked at such a 
term. 223 No doubt he sensed that it would hardly rouse his fellow 
Bolsheviks to a socialist seizure of power. Lenin seldom forgot his 
duties as chief of a political party. Possibly another reason was that 
his own thinking became less cautious over the summer months. In 
The Imminent Catastrophe and How To Combat It, a pamphlet 
written in mid-September, he claimed that his economic project 
would at least be 'a step towards socialism'. For he wanted 
industrial syndicates to be formed, under governmental compul-
sion, from not only large but even medium-size enterprises not 
already belonging to them. 224 
 The Fire Next Time 
235 
Other proposals put forward by Lenin included progressive 
taxation on incomes and property; compulsory publication of 
shareholdings of over 5000 roubles; universal labour duty, which 
would mean that those who did not work would not eat either.225 
The 'leftward' movement in his thinking was palpable here. In late 
June 1917 he had made play of his economic caution, noting that he 
was very far from proposing the confiscation of all industrial profits 
as did the Menshevik minister M.l. Skobelev.226 Since then he had 
become less restrained. Lenin may have been cautious by Bukharin's 
standards, if not by Milyutin's, and even stood towards the right of 
Bolshevik economic thought in 1917; but he still occupied a spot on 
the extreme left of the spectrum of Russian economic proposals 
outside his party. 
By and large, he treated the economy's industrial and financial 
sectors separately from its agricultural sector. Occasionally, however, 
he analysed the connections. In May 1917 he mentioned that, with 
the anticipated rapid ending of the war, there would be a demilitar-
isation of industrial production. The state would ensure that the 
factories were encouraged to boost the output of 'agricultural 
implements, clothes, footwear'. 227 This would be done in order to 
regenerate trade between town and countryside. Industrial products 
would be exchanged for grain, and the use of the co-operative 
movement as a channel for such dealing would be essential.228 An 
extra incentive to the peasantry to look kindly on the urban 
authorities, he thought, would be the low level of taxation on 
peasant households.229 It ought to be added none the less that such 
remarks were few before October. We should not allow this to pass 
unnoticed; for young 'V. Ilin' (Lenin's pseudonym as author of The 
Development of Capitalism in Russia in 1899) had focused on the 
intimate relationship between the respective advances of agriculture 
and industry.230 His casualness in 1917 makes a sharp contrast. 
Furthermore, there was no originality in Lenin's points about 
demilitarisation. Not only were they central to his Central Commit-
tee colleague V. P. Milyutin's economic analysis, but they were also 
qfficial Menshevik policy. 231 
As regards the land question, Lenin for months added little to 
what he had said at the Seventh Party Conference in April. His major 
contribution came in a speech to the All-Russian Congress of 
Peasants' Deputies in May. There he had repeated his argument 
that a simple transfer of the land into the hands of the peasantry as a 
whole would not help the village poor, who lacked the equipment, 
 236 
Lenin: A Political L((e 
livestock and finances to farm independently: he was continuing to 
appeal mainly to the poorest section of the peasantry.232 
Yet political considerations were already driving him away from 
enunciating land nationalisation as Bolshevik policy. The Central 
Committee, despite the April Conference's resolution, had never 
drawn attention to nationalisation; in its mid-May electoral advice to 
party activists it had proposed a demand that all lands should 'pass 
without compensation to the peasants'.233 This was in keeping with 
Stalin's long held inclinations, which he repeated after the April 
Conference.234 Even Lenin, at the Congress of Peasants' Deputies in 
June, avoided mentioning nationalisation explicitly; he was turning 
to more ambiguous formulas than before, urging that the land 
become 'the property of the whole people'.235 This reticence about 
nationalisation cannot have been any more coincidental than his 
coyness about revolutionary war. Through the rest of the summer 
months, until the end of August, he continued to avoid the topic of 
land nationalisation. 236 It is likely that Stalin and his friends had 
obtained a reversal of the April Conference resolution at least for the 
purpose of public pr~sentation. Not enough is known about the 
debates behind closed doors to allow us to say why Lenin altered his 
stance; but probably either the Central Committee forced him or he 
independently took cognisance that nationalisation would not prove 
attractive to the peasants. In any case, it is likely that pressure of 
some sort was brought to bear. 
Be that as it may, most party members would have been unaware 
that nationalisation was party policy unless they happened to have 
joined before May 1917; and when, on 29 August, Lenin finally 
addressed the topic it was in order to confirm that the Bolsheviks no 
longer advocated land nationalisation. 237 A survey of peasant 
opinion, which had been undertaken by the Socialist Revolutionar-
ies and published in mid-August, produced evidence that govern-
mental ownership of land was not in line with the peasantry's 
demands. Two hundred and forty-two 'peasant instructions' had 
been collated, and Lenin urged that the party accept them as the 
basis of the Bolshevik party's policy. This was essentially a call for 
'land socialisation'; it meant handing over the land to the peasants to 
do with as they saw fit while hoping that they would agree to desist 
from breaking up the large capitalist estates and to turn them into 
'model farms'. 238 On 31 August, no doubt to Stalin's delight, the 
Central Committee ratified this decision.239 
 The Fire Next Time 
237 
Lenin for a while ceased recommending the establishment of 
separate soviets for agricultural labourers. At last he had become 
the prophet for a general peasant revolution. No more, at least until 
after the October Revolution, did he fulminate against the rich 
peasants or extol the village poor.240 Lenin's change of policy meant 
that he was taking up the Socialist-Revolutionary agrarian pro-
gramme. He did so out of pragmatism, not from belief that 'land 
socialisation' would be realised in every detail. For he continued to 
contend that any attempt at restricting a peasant household's right to 
hire labour (as the 242 'instructions' proposed) would be circum-
vented in practice.241 Nor did he think that the programme would 
bring about socialism. On the contrary, he thought that, despite what 
the Socialist Revolutionaries expected, their policy would in effect 
preside over capitalism in the countryside.242 Lenin in any case 
concentrated on encouraging his party to get his new views through 
to the peasants. He emphasised that, although the Socialist Revolu-
tionaries supported the 242 peasant instructions in principle, they 
refused to act on them until the Constituent Assembly. He noted as 
late as 24 October that S. L. Maslov, the agrarian spokesman of the 
Socialist Revolutionaries, was arguing against immediate peasant 
land seizures. 243 As it happened, the Mensheviks very belatedly came 
round to support the transfer of gentry-owned land to locally-elected 
land committees.244 But this was still not an advocacy of peasant 
direct action, and left the Bolsheviks an open arena for agitation.245 
Lenin enjoyed the discomfiture of his opponents, and was not at all 
disconcerted by the accusation that he had stolen another party's 
policy. He wanted power for himself and his party, and he wanted 
this power to be directed at the eventual attainment of socialism in 
Russia and Europe. The result was not intellectual coherence; indeed, 
the switch from policies aimed at workers and the poorest peasants 
to policies aimed at workers and the entire peasantry destroyed a 
pillar in the edifice of his strategy as announced in April 1917. But he 
was a revolutionary. He desired theoretical consistency and Marxist 
justification if he could obtain it; but it was not his absolute priority. 
J:le had a revolutionary's urgent sense that something needed to be 
done and that mistakes and uncertainties had to be accepted as an 
unavoidable cost. 
This was an engaging and even endearing characteristic; but it also 
showed a casualness and, for a theoretician who had castigated all 
and sundry for their weaknesses of analysis and anticipation, an 
 238 
Lenin: A Political Life 
hypocrisy and irresponsibility. Lenin's self-awareness was not great. 
He had built enough of an intellectual rationale for his plans to 
satisfy himself, and left himself no time for introspection. He was 
living at the highest pitch of political involvement he had yet 
experienced, the frustrations of emigration were behind him for-
ever, but he was not above the melee, he was not a detached thinker. 
He was also a visionary and a believer: if he misled the working class 
of the old Romanov lands in 1917, he also misled himself. He 
expected a considerably harder revolution than he claimed to be 
expecting, and yet he still genuinely thought that this revolution 
would not be unduly difficult and that the socialist epoch was 
imminent in Europe. He and his colleagues sculpted policies which, 
in their public presentation, responded to popular grievances and 
coincided with popular perceptions in several crucial respects. As 
these policies acquired growing popular support in summer 1917, 
Lenin, from his Finnish refuge, dreamed of applying them as 
governmental leader. The scent of real power grew stronger, and 
Lenin's excitement at his opportunity intensified. 
