 1 All or Nothing: 
1910-1912 
CONFLICTS IN THE CENTRAL COMMITTEE 
The political life of Vladimir Ilich Lenin was avidly scrutinised by the 
subjects of the former Russian empire from 1917, and foreign 
politicians and commentators strove to stay abreast of his career. 
Few statesmen had attracted an examination of this intensity. Not 
since the days of Napoleon Bonaparte had an individual so deeply 
intrigued and exercised world opinion. This extraordinary fascination 
was evoked by the nature of the new regime's projects. The first 
socialist state had been born. The objective of pan-European 
revolution was triumphantly proclaimed. The natural reflex of 
contemporaries was to enquire what sort of man had led the 
Bolshevik march on power. Faulty communications inside Russia 
and the disruption caused in Europe by the battles on the Western 
and Eastern fronts made it difficult to gather information on him; 
but his articles in Pravda provided much material. Many decrees of 
the new Soviet government were written by him; he also granted 
occasional interviews. Books which he had written before the First 
World War were republished with large print-runs. Diplomats 
reported back to their governments from Petrograd. Few observers 
doubted that the main inspirer of the October Revolution was Lenin. 
His declaration that the era of European socialist revolution was 
imminent, and that the Bolsheviks of Russia would inaugurate it, 
caused ubiquitous frissons of excitement. 
And yet seven years earlier, in 1910, none of Lenin's contempor-
aries had any presentiment of what the future ht:1d in store for him. 
Before the First World War his name had become a synonym, among 
Russian revolutionaries, for intolerance. But no one had to take him 
unduly seriously until 1917. The consensus had been that he was a 
troublemaker who would come to no good end; and that he was 
causing most trouble inside his own Russian Social-Democratic 
Labour Party. It had crossed nobody's mind that Lenin would soon 
be a realistic contender for supreme power in his native land. 
 2 
Lenin: A Political Life 
Lenin had not expressed such a thought; he had not even given the 
impression that a pan-European socialist revolution was an imminent 
possibility. 1 In the pre-war days his priority had been to exert 
authority within the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party. He 
genuinely detested the entire political and social order of capitalism 
in his country and abroad; his will to rid society of oppression and 
exploitation gave meaning to his life. But his energies in emigration 
were focused on the party's internal struggles, and he took an 
aggressive fanaticism to the extreme. The Central Committee at its 
January 1910 plenum had tried to restrain him. A straitjacket of 
stipulations, designed with him in mind, had been applied. Lenin and 
his Bolsheviks were not explicitly censured, but were asked to 
dismantle their separate factional centre. Their newspaper, 
Proletari, had to cease publication. They were also to hand over 
the finances acquired by them from N. P. Shmidt's legacy to three 
German socialist trustees. The Central Committee, based mainly in 
the Russian empire, was to resume charge of a reunited party; and a 
general party newspaper, Social-Democrat, was to be refounded. 
Bolsheviks were to desist from their polemics against the Liquidators 
and the Ultimatumists. The Liquidators were Russian Marxists who 
refused to belong to illegal party organisations on the grounds that 
the police had broken them up and the State Duma and the legal 
labour movement offered greater chances of political advance. The 
Ultimatumists, on the other hand, were committed to the illegal 
party organisations and wished those party members who had 
secured electiof! to the State Duma (or parliament) to be constrained 
to speak strictly within the guidelines of party policies. Liquidators 
and Ultimatumists were detested equally by Lenin, who wanted both 
a strengthening of the illegal committees and the flexible use of the 
Duma as a forum for party propaganda. 2 
Other Bolsheviks at the plenum had not demurred at the plenum's 
decisions. On the contrary, they too hoped that Lenin would mend 
his ways. But they had not gone through the learning process of an 
all-out contest with Lenin. Yuli Martov as a Menshevik had 
endured this experience, and was less optimistic about the chances 
of the straitjacket remaining secure. He had co-operated in the 
plenum because he had always assumed that a united party was 
desirable. No Menshevik was truly optimistic about the prospects of 
unity. But all of them recognised that the alternative was to do 
nothing at all, and allow Lenin to call them splitters and enemies of 
the party.3 
 All or Nothing 
3 
Immediately after the plenum, Lenin started to pick the locks. He 
did so, but not like some political Houdini, out of sight and with a 
showman's mystery: he relished the display. First of all he needled 
Martov, his fellow editor of Social-Democrat, by trying to include 
critical comments on the Menshevik deputies to the State Duma. 
Only a flurry of letters with the Polish representative on the editorial 
board obviated total rupture. On 13 February 1910, invoking his 
authority as co-editor of Social-Democrat, he published an article 
ironically entitled 'Towards Unity'. It renewed the onslaught on 
Liquidationism and Ultimatumism, and the verbal formulas were 
only slightly less ferocious than in the previous year.4 In March he 
went further, by accusing Martov of wanting to relax the party's 
control over its members in the legal labour movement in Russia. 5 He 
taxed Martov's associate, Fedor Dan, with exuding 'a Liquidationist 
spirit' (even though the Mensheviks heartily supported the main-
tenance of the underground party committees).6 There was cunning 
in this. The January 1910 plenum, though calling off any campaign 
against Liquidationism, proposed that the Liquidators ought to be 
persuaded to alter their views. Lenin contrived to imply that the 
Menshevik leaders had overturned the plenum's resolution. This, in 
his estimation, freed him to resume his earlier themes. He announced 
that the Bolsheviks would re-establish a factional organ, which he 
wanted to call The Workers' Newspaper. 7 Publication began on 30 
October 1910 and, under Lenin's control, an open struggle was 
resumed against all opponents of Bolshevism. 
Not even this satisfied Lenin. By December 1910 he was requesting 
the remittance of the Shmidt monies to his faction and to his alone. 8 
His demand was aimed at abrogating the arrangements made at the 
January 1910 Central Committee. He did not describe them as such. 
Many fellow Bolsheviks among the Marxist emigres distrusted his 
intense anti-Menshevism, and these still desired party unity. They 
wanted to keep up the fight against the Mensheviks without driving 
them into a separate party. It was a tactical finesse that Lenin 
scorned.9 Only a few close supporters, such as Grigori Zinoviev 
wanted an organisational split, and even he was far from approving 
the whole gamut of Lenin's proposals to deal with non-Bolshevik 
groups in the party. 10 The Mensheviks had become accustomed to 
calling him the chief of Bolshevism. Now, at Central Committee 
meetings, they beheld the delicious spectacle of Bolsheviks har-
anguing their leader. 11 To be sure, Lenin's position strengthened in 
the course of 1910. But this was small satisfaction for him; he had 
 4 
Lenin: ~ Political Life 
surged back only to where he had been in 1909 - hardly a year he 
recalled with pleasure. 12 
In the emigration as well as in the Russian empire, moreover, the 
feeling persisted that greater attention should be paid to activity and 
propaganda in Russia. Lenin was regarded as one of those many 
emigres whose Alpine disputations distracted the party from its 
objective of making revolution in St Petersburg. 13 The Russian 
secret police undertook sophisticated measures to hunt down leading 
revolutionaries. In autumn 1910, two Bolshevik members of the 
Central Committee fell into their clutches. The Central Committee 
had created an inner subcommittee, the Russian Bureau, to direct its 
affairs from inside the empire; and two further Bolsheviks belonging 
to it were arrested at the end of the same year. 14 Bolsheviks remained 
on the Central Committee, but none of these were enthusiasts for 
Lenin's factionalism. As Lenin ruefully noted, they were Bolshevik 
Conciliators. 15 Their insistence on keeping a united central apparatus 
was so much to his distaste that he claimed that they constituted a 
separate faction. 16 No less irritating was the support they had from 
the Polish and Latvian representatives in the Central Committee. 17 
And, although Lenin wished the Bolsheviks to form a separate party, 
it was as yet impolitic to articulate such a desire. 18 By December 1910 
he had concluded that another Central Committee plenum might 
break the stalemate. Its membership in emigration contained more 
Bolsheviks than Mensheviks, and Lenin presumably counted upon 
winning some Conciliators to his side. The Menshevik leaders did not 
demur, but subtly suggested that the location of the plenum should 
be in Russia. They were playing upon the idea, which was not 
peculiar to Mensheviks, that the main aptitude of the emigres lay in 
fomenting internal party conflict. 
Lenin punched back. The real intention of the Mensheviks, he 
contended, was to facilitate the round-up of the Central Committee 
by the Okhrana (or political police). 19 This counter-attack was his 
most shameful statement in these years. Mensheviks impassively 
asked him to explain what made him think that they wished to assist 
the imperial regime. Again Lenin aimed his blows low. Menshevik 
strategy, he asserted, neglected the illegal party organisations; and 
Mensheviks allegedly confined themselves to the legal framework of 
politics erected by the emperor, Nikolai II and his Chairman of the 
Council of Ministers, P. A. Stolypin, in 1907. It was therefore no 
coincidence that no Menshevik member of the Central Committee 
had recently been caught and imprisoned.20 
 All or Nothing 
5 
The Okhrana's ability to set one faction against another in the 
Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party by a judiciously selective 
policy of arrests should not be underestimated; but Lenin's imputa-
tion of deliberate connivance by the Mensheviks was scandalous. Yet 
an unexpected result of the altercations was a sudden consensus that 
a Central Committee plenum should be convoked. Lenin wanted it in 
order to aggravate disputes and insulate all Bolsheviks from the rest 
of the party; the other leaders, from the Mensheviks through to the 
Bolshevik Conciliators, desired it so as to eliminate factionalism once 
and for all. Lev Trotski urged that a fresh initiative should be made 
and that a full Party Conference, with properly elected delegates 
from local groups in Russia, should be organised.21 The endless 
disputes after the Central Committee plenum of January 1910 
demonstrated that a comprehensive examination of the party's 
condition was necessary. But his proposal was considered too 
expensive in time and finance. Trotski's emigre journalism, with 
articles excoriating the 'Leninists' for their intransigence and 
sectarianism, increased his influence.22 It was little relief to Lenin 
that his opponent had no organised followers in Russia. To some 
extent this was Trotski's deliberate choice; he wanted to stand 
outside and above factional squabbles, and made no attempt to set 
up yet another faction. Trotski was a talented pamphleteer and 
organiser. His pleas for party unity were bound to have an impact on 
the forthcoming Central Committee meeting. 
Consequently Lenin inveighed against him more than any other 
Russian Marxist, in 1910-11 23 accusing him of 'adventurism'.24 He 
also invented a nickname for him: 'little Judas'.25 Trotski was Jewish; 
and, in most contexts, such nomenclature would have carried an anti-
semitic resonance. This was not Lenin's conscious intention. 26 
Rather, it was an attempt to liken Trotski to a character called 
Little Judas, in a well-known nineteenth-century Russian novel, who, 
in a family whose members were engaged in perpetual animosities, 
indefatigably tried to create an unnatural atmosphere of sweetness 
and light. Trotski's ultra-leftism in the sphere of Marxist political 
strategy did not prevent him from rallying to those Mensheviks in 
Russia who had hit upon the idea of collecting signatures for a 
workers' petition for the government to grant full freedom of 
association. 27 Trotski saw that this would constitute only a 'partial' 
reform of the political system; but, unlike the Bolsheviks, he argued 
that a 'petition campaign' would enhance the standing of socialism 
amidst the working class.28 According to Lenin and Zinoviev, such a 
 6 
Lenin: A Political Life 
standpoint merely brought Trotski together with the Liquidators in 
an unholy and unprincipled alliance. 29 Trotski's ideas were distorted 
by his Bolshevik critics: he continued to assert that both violent and 
peaceful political methods ought to be undertaken by the party. 30 
And yet he would have stood a better chance of inhibiting Lenin's 
disruptiveness if the Mensheviks had not been so inept. The long-
heralded plenum of the Central Committee met for a whole week 
starting on 28 May 1911. No Menshevik leader was willing to repeat 
what they regarded as the charade of January 1910. B. Go rev, their 
representative, walked out when his faction's views were ignored. 
Then Mark Liber from the Jewish Bund joined him when the meeting 
opted to maintain pressure on the so-called Liquidators.31 
The Bolsheviks, for neither the first not the last time, were being 
helped by the voluntary exodus of their enemies. Supported by the 
representatives of both the Polish and Latvian autonomous sections 
of the All-Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party, they called for 
the convocation of a Conference in the near future. A Foreign 
Organisational Commission was chosen to co-ordinate activity 
outside Russia, and a Technical Commission was to handle the 
party's treasury. Meanwhile a Russian Organisational Commission 
was to direct the party in the Russian empire. 32 The Bolshevik 
Conciliator, A. I. Lyubimov, and the Pole Leo Jogiches, had held the 
ring at the meeting, and Lenin went on complaining of their 
prominence. 33 His influence was therefore neither unchallengeable 
nor unchallenged. But he had recovered much strength in the central 
party apparatus and was in better shape to win his future fights than 
a year before. The Mensheviks, for comprehensible reasons but with 
scant sense of tactics, had stormed out. The resistance to Lenin's 
onslaughts in the following months was bound to be weaker; and the 
composition of the forthcoming Party Conference was ever likelier to 
produce a triumph for him. His grand objective was evidently to set 
up a totally separate party. The odds against achievement were 
shortening. 
THE RUSSIAN SOCIAL-DEMOCRATIC LABOUR PARTY IN 
RUSSIA 
No organisational commotion was worthwhile even to Lenin unless 
there was hope of revolutionary unrest in the Russian empire; and, 
for Marxists, expectations centred on the industrial working class. 
 All or Nothing 
7 
Employers launched an offensive after the upheaval of 1905-6. Real 
wages were lowered; unemployment persisted; strikes diminished. 
Prime minister P. A. Stolypin allowed only limited freedom for trade 
unions. They were disallowed from establishing national networks, 
and non-workers were prohibited from belonging to their executive 
boards. 34 The police, guarding against infiltration by subversives, 
closed down about six hundred such unions before 1911.35 Initially it 
was the Mensheviks who won most elections to trade union boards. 
The Bolshevik ambition to use the legal labour movement as a means 
of communicating with and guiding the working class was still only 
weakly realised. 36 
But the tide was on the turn. Industrial production grew sharply 
from around 1908, and the Russian recession was surmounted. 
Estimates suggest that output rose by an annual average of 6 per 
cent in the decade before the First World War. 37 Government 
contracts for armaments, especially in the reconstruction of the 
Russian fleet annihilated by the Japanese at Tsushima in 1904, 
stimulated the metallurgical sector.38 But the factories were also 
expanding production for non-defence needs: textile enterprises 
continued to constitute the largest industry and, together with those 
connected with food-processing, supplied about a half the value of 
the empire's total industrial output.39 Investment poured in from 
abroad. mines and manufacturing plants acquired the most modern 
technology; Russia obtained some of the vastest factories, with the 
largest labour forces in Europe.40 The workforce took advantage of 
this expansion. They had been taught by the revolution <;>f 1905-6 to 
hate the political system; and skilled workers in particular were less 
threatened by unemployment. Strikes returned to the scene. Official 
records state that the number rose to 2404 in 1913.41 The unrest 
occurred, as had been usual, without being co-ordinated by the trade 
unions. Nor were the revolutionary parties the instigators. The Party 
of Socialist Revolutionaries had made efforts to recruit workers to its 
ranks in this period. But the Okhrana found it no more difficult to 
crush such endeavours than it had done with Russian Social-
Democratic Labour Party.42 
Bolsheviks saw that the opportunities for political advance were 
none the less increasing; and the need to enhance involvement in the 
labour movement, both legal and illegal, was conventional wisdom.43 
Lenin was no better informed about the increasing unrest than any 
other emigre leader. The reunification of the various factions in 
Western Europe had deprived him of a separate agency of commu-
 8 
Lenin: A Political Life 
nication. Bolshevik activists moved between Russia and the emigra-
tion; but it was generally agreed that the Okhrana had shattered 
many of the old links.44 
Lenin's objective was to use the instrumentalities available since 
the May 1911 meeting of the Central Committee to convoke a Party 
Conference; and to ensure that the Conference should take place 
entirely under Bolshevik auspices. He was convinced that a tightly-
centralised party offered the best chance to take advantage of 
Russian labour unrest. Serge Ordzhonikidze, as leader of the 
Russian Organisational Commission, chose agents to accompany 
him to Russia to make the arrangements.45 He was far from merely 
being Lenin's stooge. While being enthusiastic about the idea of a 
Conference, he disliked Lenin's preoccupation with the intrigues of 
emigre politics.46 A Russian political focus and geographical base of 
work was Ordzhonikidze's aim, and his opinions were shared by 
countless Bolshevik underground activists.47 The fact that Lenin had 
repeatedly called for the maintenance of the illegal party apparatus 
did not assuage their resentment (and Lenin was as yet protected 
against their wrath only by the police's effectiveness in severing 
contact between Russia and the emigration). His critics noted how 
little service he had recently given to such an apparatus. Certainly he 
had founded Workers' Newspaper; but it did not pass unnoticed that 
he only produced eight issues in 1911. Lenin's qualities as a 
propagandist were accepted. Yet the lack of material which was 
truly accessible to ordinary workers or even rank-and-file party 
members caused exasperation.48 
Not that anyone entirely denied the contribution made by Lenin. 
In 1911 the Central Committee allocated funds to the opening of a 
'party school' in the village of Longjumeau outside Paris.49 The aim 
was to select promising undergrounders, pay their passage out from 
Russia and offer them intensive lecture-courses on Marxism and 
party strategy before releasing them back to their underground 
duties. Not all of them were Leninists. Ordzhonikidze, I. I. Shvarts 
and Boris Breslav were among the ten Bolshevik activists who 
attended as students alongside members of the other factions. Lenin 
was an inveterate pedagogue and spoke in the characteristic pose of a 
schoolmaster, with thumbs pressed hard into the armholes of his 
waistcoat. He delivered fifty-six lectures at Longjumeau, his topics 
including general disquisitions on political economy as well as more 
detailed offerings on his favourite theme: the agrarian question in the 
Russian empire. Some students wished that he had addressed 
 All or Nothing 
9 
questions of practical revolutionary activity, but on the whole he 
received a positive reception. 50 
Furthermore, the condition of the underground committees was so 
dire that no one could reasonably turn Lenin into the sole scapegoat. 
Ordzhonikidze and his fellow Longjumeau graduates, Breslav and 
Shvarts, who were working for the Russian Organisational Commis-
sion, found widespread 'disarray' and 'collapse'. 51 This was the 
situation, according to Ordzhonikidze, in 'the majority of Russian 
provinces'.52 Contacts between one town committee and another 
were minimal; and even within towns there were few ties among the 
various Bolshevik groups. 53 So were Lenin's interfactional polemics 
completely irrational? Not quite, at least in his own terms. In St 
Petersburg a group of Liquidators had scorned the underground 
committees and founded a legal journal, Nasha Zarya ('Our Dawn') 
in 19IO. Its editorials stressed the gains obtainable by workers 
engaging in protests within the framework of imperial legality. 54 
For Lenin, such initiatives would deflect Marxists from taking proper 
advantage of the resurgence of labour unrest. Yuli Martov, Fyodor 
Dan and the other Mensheviks expressed the same opinion, but only 
in private. Their refusal to denounce Nasha Zarya became grist to 
Lenin's mill. 55 Thus Lenin saw himself as a super-optimist. The fact 
that in I91 0 there were only about I 0,000 organised Russian 
Marxists, including all the various factions, 56 did not depress him. 
He felt that the revolution of 1905-6 had demonstrated how quickly 
a mass party could be formed. Even under the regime of Nikolai II, 
he sounded an exultant note: 'The party is the conscious, progressive 
layer of a class, its vanguard. The power of this vanguard is I 0, is I 00 
times greater than its number.' 57 
Lenin also adduced the history of the German Social-Democratic 
Party as evidence. Pointing out that only one in fifteen German 
workers had become a party member, he emphasised that the party's 
impact on the German working class was, nevertheless, enormous. 58 
The German Social-Democratic Party was the Second Socialist 
International's major force. And Lenin proclaimed that in Russia, 
too, 'a small party core' exercised 'an extraordinarily strong influence 
over the vast masses of the workers'.59 Already, too, the Russian 
working class had accomplished wonders in less than two decades. It 
was marching towards its destiny, which was 'the very great global 
task of liberating humanity'. 60 
Trotski retorted that, if it did not really matter that so few party 
members existed, Lenin's rancour and schismatism in the party's 
 10 
Lenin: A Political Life 
affairs was all the more pointless;61 and others, too, maintained that, 
while the Liquidators were misguided to rely exclusively on legal 
operations, Lenin was exhibiting a sectarian obsessiveness.62 Trots-
ki's explanation was that the Marxist movement was dominated by 
intellectuals.63 He failed to recognise that the recruits to pro-
Bolshevism since the 1905-6 revolution had mainly been workers.64 
But he was right about the damage done by disputatious middle-class 
intellectuals in this period. Several Bolshevik groups in Russian drew 
the same conclusion. Compromises with other factions were not 
unknown. Ordzhonikidze, for example, reported approvingly that 
Bolshevik groups in the capital had been collaborating with 
Ultimatumists.65 This was bad enough from Lenin's viewpoint 
(although he knew nothing about it until later, since communica-
tions had broken down). Worse still was the situation in Samara, 
where Bolsheviks and Liquidators co-operated.66 Separate factional 
groups were at work, but these did not belong to separate parties; 
and there were plenty of Marxists endorsing radical but differing 
strategies who found a basis for collaboration. With so few groups in 
existence and with a remorseless political police, it made little sense 
not to avoid unnecessary splintering of the ranks. 
The German philosopher Friedrich Nietzsche had considerable 
vogue among many thinkers in Russia and the rest of Europe around 
the turn of the century. His notion that an heroic individual, through 
the power of personality and will, could pull the mass of society into 
dynamic motion out of stasis was influential. Lenin's refusal to reply 
directly to Trotski's argument convinced his enemies that his 
persistent schismatism had no intellectually respectable rationale; 
they increasingly regarded him as a would-be Nietzschean 'super-
man'. His goatee beard appeared to confirm the validity of the 
daemonic image. 
Like almost all Russian Marxists, Lenin ridiculed this intellectual 
tradition.67 Not once did he mention Nietzsche in his entire published 
output.68 But Lenin's adversaries claimed that, even if unknowingly, 
he had ingested the Nietzschean drug. The legally-published St 
Petersburg Marxist newspaper Luch ('Ray') railed against 'the 
dictatorship in the party of supermen with a cynical attitude to the 
masses'.69 This was exaggeration (but no worse than the exaggerated 
prosecutions that Lenin brought against his victims). A direct 
connection with Nietzsche can neither be proved nor disproved. 
And yet his associate Zinoviev, while denying that Lenin was either 
egocentric or dictatorial, confided the following considerations to his 
 All or Nothing 
11 
notebook: 'But did he have a consciousness (a sensation) that he had 
been 'called'? Yes, he did. Without this he would not have become 
Lenin.'70 Zinoviev conceded that, in the period when Lenin was 
struggling for political 'recognition', the relationship of individuals 
with 'him personally (i.e. not precisely personally but politically and 
theoretically) was the criterion of the measure of things for him'. 
Indeed, according to Zinoviev's revealing memoir, Lenin felt himself 
'responsible for the whole of humanity' and saw himself as 'the leader 
(in the best sense of the word) of the working class and the party'. 71 
Consequently, loyalty to this man of destiny and to his ideas was 
more important, in his own eyes, than the quest for a united party 
which would include opponents as well as followers. His self-
confidence was accompanied by an intolerance bolstered by the 
introspective conditions of the emigre disputes that typified the 
Russian revolutionary movement. Even so, Lenin's willingness to 
split his faction again and again went beyond the norm. Of course, he 
could not speak openly about his sense of personal vocation; this was 
alien to the comradely and collectivist ethic of Marxism. Instead he 
talked about the destiny of 'the proletariat', not about his own; and 
he tried to submerge his identity in the cause of the Marxist 
revolutionary movement, proclaiming that 'we, the workers' were 
marching towards a world socialist order. 72 
Yet this verbal flourish did not convince the Bolshevik deputies to 
the Third State Duma. There were only five of them even though 
several other social-democratic deputies sometimes voted with them 
rather than with the five Menshevik deputies. All were hostile to 
organisational divisiveness. Speaking and acting in consort with the 
eleven Menshevik deputies, they did what they could to embarass the 
government by using the Duma as a forum for denunciation of P. A. 
Stolypin and his Cabinet. Their leading figure was N. G. Poletaev, 
who tried to persuade Lenin to moderate his anti-Liquidator 
campaign. Lenin was angry; but, located in the emigration and 
lacking any sanction to compel Poletaev's obedience, he could only 
persuade and cajole. Poletaev, however, knew his own mind and 
would not budge.73 In vain Lenin put the following proposition to 
him: 'One cannot sit between two stools; it's a matter of being either 
for or against the Liquidators'.74 
Poletaev, a fitter by trade and the Duma deputy for St Petersburg 
province, could also incommode Lenin politically. His seat in the 
Duma gave him a degree of immunity from arrest, and he was able to 
take an active role in the editing of the Bolshevik legal journal The 
 12 
Lenin: A Political Life 
Star. Without Poletaev's permission, Lenin's articles would remain 
unpublished. 75 In addition, Poletaev believed that the surest way to 
outmatch the Liquidators in the capital was to establish a Bolshevik 
daily newspaper. The post-1905 reforms included the disbandment of 
pre-publication censorship. Newspapers continued frequently to be 
banned; but the scope of acceptable political discourse was widened. 
Open calls for the violent overthrow of the state were still impossible, 
but suitably indirect language could keep a revolutionary organ in 
existence for months before the Ministry of the Interior might 
intervene. 76 Poletaev's suggestion evidently did not preclude a 
campaign in the newspaper for political objectives of Bolshevism. 
Despite his theoretical support for the exploiting of all legal as well 
as illegal opportunities, Lenin was not keen. His reasons, as 
expressed in a letter to Maksim Gorki in May 1911, highlighted 
suspicions about Poletaev and his friends. Gorki was bombarded 
with details about Poletaev's insufferable indulgence to the Liquida-
tors and to the Mensheviks. In a rare confession of his intention to 
break with the Mensheviks, Lenin stated that unification 'with 
Mensheviks like Martov is absolutely hopeless'. 77 Lenin also 
claimed, mistakenly, that increased repression of the press was in 
the offing; and not too subtly he tried to dissuade Gorki from 
subsidising Poletaev's scheme. 
There must have been further reasons too. The failure to support 
Poletaev was consonant with Lenin's reluctance to write articles for 
popular consumption. Lenin had written fly-sheets for workers in the 
1890s; and his pamphlet 'To the Village Poor' in 1900 was a model of 
its kind.79 But his literary work had tended to be limited to intra-
party theoretical work since then. He aimed at a readership 
composed of party members, and indeed party members initiated 
in the current debates over Marxism. Poletaev's project surely also 
incurred his disfavour since, if successful, it would further weaken his 
exigous authority over his faction's activity in the Russian empire. 
Ordzhonikidze and his associates on the Russian Organisational 
Commission, so far from supplying directives to the underground 
party committees, frequently could not even discover their where-
abouts.80 Lenin's dream of a tightly co-ordinated and centralised 
party was as distant from fulfilment as ever. No wonder he was 
horrified by Poletaev. A St Petersburg daily newspaper would rob 
Workers' Newspaper, printed in Paris, of its usefulness to the illegal 
Bolshevik organisations in Russia; and Lenin's influence would 
decline. 
 All or Nothing 
13 
THOUGHTS ON RUSSIA 
Lenin's isolation in the West was not all his own fault; it was also the 
price paid by all emigres for their freedom. Moreover, he endea-
voured to stay in touch with contemporary intellectual debates. 
Russian public discussion was effervescent in books, journals and 
newspapers. Lenin kept up with current publications, and himself 
contributed to them. Daily journalism did not interest him. He barely 
mentioned Stolypin's assassination in 1911; nor did he expatiate 
upon the notion, which was common not only to revolutionaries but 
also to conservatives like Prince Yusupov at the Imperial Court itself, 
that the dynasty was lapsing into decadence. There is no trace in 
Lenin's writings of the gossip about the empress Aleksandra, and he 
said little even about the self-styled 'holy man' Grigori Rasputin. 81 
He despised all such discourse as tittle-tattle. Instead, he focused on 
the concerns of a follower of Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels. He 
continued to study Russian economic development, and to ponder 
the implications for the struggle between social classes. He watched 
the agrarian sector keenly. His confidence that the Stolypin land 
reforms would fail was growing. At political gatherings he could talk 
of 'the complete dissolution of the economic position of the 
peasantry' ,82 and he repeated that mass destitution was an unavoid-
able consequence of the government's policy.83 According to Lenin, 
Russia's internal market would therefore remain needlessly restricted. 
He added that only a minority among the peasant households leaving 
their commune became independent farmers. Most sold. up straight-
away; poverty had driven them to break their communal ties. 84 
Scholarship in recent years has by and large confirmed this gloomy 
verdict on Stolypin's agrarian measures.85 It must be added that 
Lenin was doing little other than expressing the conventional 
contemporary wisdom among revolutionaries about the govern-
ment's strategy in the countryside; and that he was very far from 
thinking that Marxists had to hasten their accession to power for fear 
that the programme of Stolypin might succeed. He still perceived the 
landed nobility's existence as an obstacle to economic maturity. His 
idiosyncracy, at least when judged alongside the Mensheviks, was 
that he continued to deny that rural capitalism had reached a dead 
end.86 
Thus he stuck to certain basic tenets of his analysis, and found 
himself subject to a deal of Menshevik teasing. Petr Maslov had 
ceased to worry himself with what Lenin wrote; he had either gained 
 14 
Lenin: A Political Life 
his own confidence over the years, or had decided that there was no 
point in aiming criticisms at a Lenin who had resolved to ignore 
incommodious empirical data. But N. Cherevanin entered the 
controversy, claiming that Lenin had never answered those critics 
of his Development of Capitalism in Russia who had stated that his 
statistics did not conclusively demonstrate his contention that an 
inter-generational process of differentiation of the peasantry into 
rival classes of rural bourgeoisie and rural proletariat was in 
existence.87 Lenin ignored Cherevanin. It was left to another 
Bolshevik, A. Y. Finn-Enotaevski, to defend him. It is an interesting 
vignette in the history of Russian intellectual thought; for Finn-
Enotaevski declared that, in the 1908 second edition of the book, 
Lenin had acknowledged that recently-published figures on horse 
ownership had caused him to retract the assertions of the first 
edition.88 Lenin had made no such retraction; on the contrary, he 
had asserted that the new figures bolstered his original case. The 
episode is yet another sign that Lenin's ideas could be understood in 
ways diametrically opposite to those which he really held (and that 
this was not a phenomenon peculiar to the years after his death); it 
also shows that the Bolsheviks were not devoid of theorists such as 
Finn-Enotaevski who already perceived that rural life was more 
complex than as portrayed by the Lenin of the 1890s. 
Such realism among Bolsheviks came to the fore only after 1921, 
when an anti-Bolshevik peasant revolt pushed Lenin into introducing 
a New Economic Policy granting large economic and social 
concessions to the peasantry. All this, of course, lay in the future. 
In the years immediately before 1917, Lenin's main initiative in the 
field of economic theory lay in his comparisons of the features of 
agricultural development in Russia and the USA. It irritated him 
that, over a decade after the publication of his Development of 
Capitalism, many commentators persisted in imagining that Russia's 
pre-capitalist social vestiges made her unique. 
Through the 1890s he had accumulated notes on German 
economic development. Karl Kautsky's works were read assiduous-
ly; and Lenin admired his attacks on Eduard David, who argued 
against Marx's assumption that large-scale capitalist agricultural 
estates might not turn out to be as competitive on the world market 
as small, owner-occupied farms. 89 Unfortunately, as Cherevanin 
gleefully indicated, Kautsky began to moderate his stridency, 
conceding that the prognostications of the demise of small-scale 
agriculture had not been scientifically based.90 Lenin again opted to 
 All or Nothing 
15 
remain discreetly silent, filling his notebooks before and after the 
1905-6 revolution with data on German and Danish farming.91 In 
1915 he was to read academic works on the USA's agriculture, and 
was gratified to discover that even the world's most dynamic 
economy contained, in the southern states, Negro tenant farmers 
who would starve to death unless they combined their farming with 
labour on nearby modern agricultural estates. The parallel with the 
Russian empire was close.92 Georgi Plekhanov, Petr Maslov and Lev 
Trotski in their books on Russian economic development had 
emphasised the sui generis path taken in Russia; and Trotski in 
particular had stressed the coexistence of backward peasant villages 
and highly-advanced large-scale factories. 93 Lenin delighted in 
arguing that such phenomena coexisted elsewhere. Not for the first 
time, he overstated his case. For in the USA's north east, where most 
industrial enterprises were based, a more technologically-developed 
capitalist agriculture existed than in the south. But there was a kernel 
of truth in his argument. 
He also wrote passionately about the empire's class structure. 
There were, he said, two bourgeoisies in Russia. One was already 
mature: urban-based, it was headed politically by the Kadet and the 
Octobrist parties and was inclined to either liberal or moderate 
conservative aims. Lenin saw it as a ruling class. But he appended the 
qualification that it shared power with 'the Purishkeviches': his 
polemical shorthand for the wealthier among the traditional landed 
nobility.94 This first bourgeoisie, furthermore, was only 'a narrow 
layer'. The second by contrast was 'broad': its members were mostly 
peasants, and Lenin stressed that it had not reached maturity.95 Only 
the beginnings of an analysis were being afforded here. Assertion had 
displaced argument. Yet the substance of his commentary signalled a 
shift of emphasis in his interpretation of Russian economic condi-
tions. His loudly-proclaimed estimates of the 1890s were being 
muted. 'In Russian capitalism,' he proclaimed before the First 
World War, 'the features of Asiatic primitiveness, bureaucratic 
bribery and deals by financiers sharing their monopolistic incomes 
with leading civil servants are still boundlessly strong. ' 96 The 
Development of Capitalism was largely without such fulminations. 
Lenin now scorned economists claiming too much for Russian 
industrial progress. The Menshevik, 0. A. Ermanski (whose view-
point was thought eccentric even by most Mensheviks), was a case in 
point. Ermanski, comparing Russian and German official statistics, 
concluded in 1912 that the concentration of capital in Russian 
 16 
Lenin: A Political Life 
industry was greater than in Germany.97 Lenin revelled in pulling 
another economist's data to bits; he indicated that Ermanski failed to 
include the output of home-based workers and artisans in his 
arithmetic for Russia; and that he consequently overrated the 
modernity of her industry.98 The criticism was perceptive, but also 
marked the limitations of Lenin's own economic enquiries. No longer 
was he pioneering interpretative investigations. Rather, he reacted to 
the books of others. His statements, even if we allow for the many 
practical demands upon his time, were often very cursory. His 
categories for the bourgeoisie were crude. Not for him the social 
subdivisions of capitalism in the towns described by the Austrian 
Marxist Rudolph Hilferding.99 At least until 1914, Lenin portrayed 
industrial production as falling under the control of a united class. 
Hilferding's talk of rival commercial, industrial and financial 
segments of capitalism as yet did not appeal to him. He was happier 
when taking the battle to the middle classes. In 1912, newspapers in 
Russia were exercised by one of their recurrent debates about foreign 
capitalist penetration and domination; xenophobia was rampant. 
Lenin scathingly pointed out that innumerable Russian firms and 
their owners profited from the influx of alien capital; and he urged 
that those Duma deputies who played the 'patriotic' card should 
have their stocks and shares investigated to see whether they stood to 
benefit from a change in the regime's financial policy. 100 
And yet the very strangest gap in Lenin's pre-war writings lay 
elsewhere. Notwithstanding his economic expertise and social 
concern, he failed to produce much material on the conditions of 
Russian industrial labourers. A few scant words on the wage rises 
won through the struggles of 1905 appeared; but they were the 
commonplace of contemporary journalism. 101 He noted the same 
about agricultural workers since 1906. 102 Was this skimpiness 
accidental? It seems a significant lapse for a writer with the special 
bias towards the 'proletariat' that being a Marxist involves. Probably 
the reason was political. Lenin wanted a revolution and wanted all 
workers to take part in it; he may well have felt that the image of a 
working class displaying a variety of skills, material conditions and 
aspirations would have impeded his general objective. 
Nor did Lenin do much to sharpen his recent ideas on the changing 
nature of the Russian imperial state. Since the revolution of 1905-6 
he had noted the regime's adaptiveness, and had argued that official 
policies constituted a series of manoeuvres which balanced the 
interests of the bourgeoisie and the landed gentry. This, in Lenin's 
 All or Nothing 
17 
presentation, was a form of 'Bonapartism'. The state, by playing off 
these two major property-owning classes against one another, was 
achieving a degree of autonomy from them. 103 The extent of such 
autonomy was not defined; but he emphasised that the autocracy 
continued to rely heavily upon the gentry and the bourgeoisie and, he 
implied, could not afford to alienate both classes at once. 104 In 1912, 
however, he proposed that the state's latitude for manoeuvre might 
be so great as to permit it to move completely athwart the interests of 
the gentry. He drew attention to the survival, despite all the reforms 
after 1905-6, of the empire's 'colossal bureaucratic apparatus'. He 
asserted: 'This apparatus has independent interests; when these 
interests so demand, the autocracy moves against its very best 
allies, the gentry, the star chamber and so on.' 105 Lenin ridiculed 
the notion of fellow Bolshevik M.S. Olminski in his booklet, The 
State, Bureaucracy and Absolutism in Russian History, that the 
Romanov state was the plaything of the gentry's interests. 
Thus Lenin's analysis was starting to entwine itself with a 
venerable strand in Russian socialist, liberal and even some 
conservative intellectual thought from the previous century. 106 The 
bureaucracy, accordingly, was regarded as an entirely parasitic 
excrescence. Mensheviks, too, had tended to accept this view. 
Feudalism in Russian was state-created and not, as it had been in 
Western Europe, 'organic'. 107 Lenin's reconsiderations should there-
fore serve as a warning against the belief that his thought before the 
First World War was internally wholly consistent. 108 Moreover, his 
remark showed an awareness of the huge and independent power 
that a ruthless state might wield in the teeth of much public hostility; 
and his actions after the October Revolution of 1917 exemplified his 
own willingness to deploy such power if the opportunity came his 
way.1o9 
THE PRAGUE CONFERENCE 
At any rate, Lenin said little and published less on the topic of the 
Russian imperial state; and, apart from Olminski's book, it was 
many years before Marxists in general began to tackle the thorny 
questions of the forms and intricacies of state power. 110 His single 
piece of sustained political analysis took a more limited subject: the 
Duma. He wrote to M.A. Savelev in 1911 requesting data on the 
 18 
Lenin: A Political Life 
electoral procedures used for the Third State Duma in 1907. These 
researches resulted in a pamphlet on the Fourth Duma elections of 
mid-1912. 111 At its core were Lenin's speculations on the reasons why 
the Kadets, as the leading liberal party, acquired so few seats. The 
Octobrists, who wished to work again for an alliance between 
themselves and the government, were the largest group, with 94 
seats; and the next biggest was constituted by parties even further to 
the political right. The newly ultra-right political complexion of the 
parliamentary chamber, according to Lenin, was the product of the 
calculations and manipulations of the authorities. 112 But an illiberal 
majority was already secured by the political system introduced by 
Stolypin's counter-reforms in 1907, and yet the prescience and fine-
tuning required for the manufacturing of a particular electoral result 
for the Fourth Duma was surely beyond the capacity of the Ministry 
of the Interior. 113 A more cogent explanation is that opinion among 
most members of the property-owning classes, especially the gentry 
in the countryside, had spontaneously moved rightwards; and 
perhaps there was a despondency among many middle-class voters 
which expressed itself in abstention from the elections. The Russian 
empire bestrode a superficially modified autocracy. But it was not a 
regime of total control. 114 
Lenin's 'conspiracy theory' of the Fourth Duma elections divulged 
much about his own instincts about elections and majorities. The 
Central Committee in May 1911 had called for a Party Confer-
ence.115 The convoking organs were the new Foreign and Russian 
Organisational Commissions. Lenin made a cobra-like attack upon 
the Bolshevik Conciliators. His timing and tactics were brilliant. 
Lenin arranged with Sergo Ordzhonikidze, as leader of the Russian 
Organisational Commission of the Central Committee, for an 
ultimatum to be delivered to the Foreign Organisational Commis-
sion to place itself under the Russian Organisational Commission's 
sovereignty. 116 This was bound to cause a furore. The Polish social-
democratic leader Leo Jogiches, provoked beyond endurance by the 
disputes among the Russians, withdrew his Polish associates from the 
Central Committee. The Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party 
was left to its own devices. Lenin gratefully accepted the opportunity 
to call together his emigration-based supporters in Paris in December 
1911, and the consequence was the establishment of a Committee of 
the Foreign Organisation which was to supplant the Foreign 
Organisational Commission in co-ordinating all party organisations 
abroad. 117 
 All or Nothing 
19 
Such manipulations were blatantly factional; no non-Bolshevik 
was given a place on the new body. But Lenin calculated that he 
needed an appearance of procedural legitimacy even if it really was a 
charade. His objective was the confection of a 'Party Conference' 
which would be not merely a predominantly Bolshevik assembly but 
an assembly consisting mainly of Bolsheviks who supported Lenin's 
strategy. Most were also of the younger generation and were 
practical organisers rather than theorists. Prague was chosen as the 
venue. It was close to the Russian imperial frontier, and yet it lay 
within the Habsburg empire and offered a safe refuge for foes of the 
Romanov autocracy; and it was distant from the major centres of 
Russian Marxist emigres in Western and Central Europe. Ordzhoni-
kidze, a hard-working and ruthless Bolshevik, operated efficiently. 
Assisted by Bolsheviks such as L. P. Serebryakov and B. A. Breslav, 
he 'toured' Russia arranging the election of Conference delegates. 118 
Democratic procedures were disregarded. Ordzhonikidze blatantly 
aspired to the arrangement of a Bolshevik-dominated Conference; he 
invited a few Party Mensheviks (who were close to Plekhanov and 
opposed Martov's gentleness with the so-called Liquidators), but 
only with the purpose of giving the impression that the Conference 
was more open to the party as a whole than it really would be. 119 
Trotski was alerted to these developments. He and his friends 
discerned that Lenin aimed to reconstruct a Central Committee 
under his personal control and, by means of the Conference, claim 
that it presided over the entire party. Only Trotski was willing to 
organise the necessary counter-measures. From Paris he put out the 
word that the Conference would be illegitimate. Instead he called for 
a fresh effort to be made to reunite all factions and announced that a 
Conference would be held in Vienna. 120 
Yet the competition for delegates was scarcely intense, not least 
because Lenin's Bolsheviks did not want their rivals to come to 
Prague. The stage-managed Conference opened on 5 January 1912. 
There were eighteen delegates. Nearly all were Bolsheviks. Two 
representatives from Plekhanov's Party Mensheviks turned up and 
stayed, and Ordzhonikidze was used by Lenin as his 'expert' in 
handling them at the Conference. No other faction except the 
Bolsheviks and the Party Mensheviks was present. 121 For most 
purposes, the Prague Conference, which the Bolsheviks dubbed the 
Sixth Party Conference, was a Bolshevik Factional Conference. 122 
This did not mean that it was a Conference made in Lenin's image. 
Ordzhonikidze had had little contact with the emigration while 
 20 
Lenin: A Political Life 
gathering delegates in the Russian empire; and, while admiring most 
of Lenin's general policies, he detested his schismatic excesses. Worse 
still, from Lenin's viewpoint, was the fact that six delegates had come 
under the assumption that other factions were being invited. These 
delegates, including some of Lenin's professed sympathisers, sent 
last-minute invitations to the non-Russian 'national parties' within 
the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party as well as to the emigre 
newspapers of Trotski, Plekhanov and the Vperedists. 123 Ordzhoni-
kidze informed fellow delegates that Lenin might walk out if the 
recipients of these late invitations turned up. 124 Lenin could have 
spared himself his rage. Everyone who had been invited in this way 
refused to lend legitimacy to the Prague proceedings. 125 A reassured 
Lenin came to recognise that these same invitations could be used to 
amplify the fictional story that he had genuinely sought to involve all 
factions in the Prague Conference. He learnt to accept the presence of 
the two Party Mensheviks who had arrived under the aegis of 
Ordzhonikidze and the Russian Organisational Commission, since 
they could not outvote the Bolsheviks. 126 His pressing worry was that 
the Okhrana might discover the whereabouts of the Conference. The 
party had experience of delegates being arrested shortly after 
returning from Congresses and Conferences. Lenin implored dele-
gates not to send postcards from Prague in case of interceptions by 
the Russian police. 127 He could not know that his precautions were 
in vain. Two Bolsheviks at the Conference, R. V. Malinovski and 
A. S. Romanov, were agents of the Okhrana and reported on all that 
went on. 128 
Luckily for Lenin, neither Malinovski nor Romanov had instruc-
tions to impede his progress in Prague. Nevertheless he did not 
advance smoothly with all his schemes; and his opponents in the 
emigration (as well as subsequent historians) exaggerated the ease 
and extent of his victories. He had to sustain much criticism. Firstly, 
there was worry about his obvious disdain for the Polish, Latvian 
and Bundist organisations. The Menshevik Y. D. Zevin was tren-
chant on this point; 129 and there was spirited dispute as to whether 
the Conference's decisions should be binding upon the non-Russian 
organisations. 130 Yet Lenin and Zinoviev, after modifying parts of 
their proposed official statement, persuaded the other delegates to 
cast the blame for the non-attendance of the non-Russians on the 
non-Russians themselves. 131 
Ensuing discussions were replete with imprecations against the 
sustained 'factional conflict' in the emigration. Ordzhonikidze based 
 All or Nothing 
21 
his tactics upon a Conference consisting mainly of Russia-based 
activists, and Lenin had to listen to P. A. Zalutski's criticisms of 
emigre squabbling. 132 Ordzhonikidze demonstratively praised the 
anti-Lenin Vpered activists in St Petersburg who had attacked 
Menshevik Liquidators (and he later talked of the possibility of 
rapprochement between Bolsheviks and Mensheviks). 133 Other dele-
gates, apparently, referred in detail to Lenin's unpleasant polemics 
against other Russian Marxists, including even the Bolshevik 
Conciliators. 134 Lenin was unbowed. For him, it was 'a struggle to 
the death'. He adjured his small audience to recognise what he saw as 
the reality: 'We now have two parties- that is a fact!' Let there be, he 
demanded, no more moaning, no more complaining. 135 E. N. 
Onufriev, F.l. Goloshchekin and 0.1. Pyatnitski answered him 
with further criticisms of the role of the emigration. 136 The least 
barbed objection was that Lenin and his fellow editors had not been 
producing material of sufficiently 'popular' quality; and the call for a 
switch of line was incorporated in a resolution. 137 Ordzhonikidze 
again rubbed salt in his leader's wounds by stating that co-operation 
between Bolsheviks and Mensheviks would be easier if only there did 
not exist "'the damned emigration" and the leaders who, sitting 
around in Paris or San Remo and understanding nothing, write 
directives and produce splits.' 138 He later added the following com-
bative gloss: 'We know that the emigration has failed, all along, to 
give us anything of value.' He added, more starkly: 'The emigration 
is nothing.' 139 S. S. Spandaryan went further, saying that those who 
wanted to do party work should do the work in Russia proper. The 
polemical antics of the emigres, he added, had even resulted in arrests 
of activists at home. 140 
Most of the following debates were focused on the Russian labour 
movement. Topics ranged from the worsening material plight of 
workers (as well as peasants) to the imperial government's project for 
social insurance. 141 But periodically the resentment of the emigres 
resurfaced. Lenin tried to treat it casually: 'Why is this all so 
laughable?' But tempers were frayed, and he tried to explain the 
troubles abroad by reference to objective political conditions, stating 
that the polemics were 'the result of a struggle of two currents'. He 
contended that a fiercer fight with the Liquidators would leave the 
party stronger. 142 Ordzhonikidze took offence, especially at Lenin's 
insinuation that the anti-emigre noises were merely tearful laments. 
'And Lenin,' he declared, 'has not answered a single question of 
ours.' Goloshchekin took Ordzhonikidze's side. There was even a 
 22 
Lenin: A Political Life 
proposal, possibly from M.S. Gurovich, that the Committee of the 
Foreign Organisation should be disbanded. 143 
This particular suggestion was rejected; but so, too, was Zinoviev's 
motion on 'party organisation abroad', which embodied an attempt 
to provide the Committee of the Foreign Organisation with complete 
approva1. 144 Delegates, while allowing the body to survive, would 
agree only to describing it as 'one of the party organisations abroad'; 
they also specified that all foreign organisations should communicate 
with Russia exclusively through the Central Committee and should 
submit entirely to its authority. The Central Committee was to be 
based mostly in Russia: the final resolution defined it pointedly as 
'the Russian centre of social-democratic work'. 145 Everyone, includ-
ing Lenin, agreed that an emphasis on work in the legal channels of 
the labour movement was required. Trade unions, sickness insurance 
schemes and even lecture clubs should be given a priority. 146 Lenin 
stressed that such organisations need not be tightly-structured. The 
formalist of What Is To Be Done? criticised those who were devoted 
to formalism in the party underground, and even Zinoviev himself 
thought this new position to be exaggerated. 147 Zevin, a non-
Bolshevik, was more blunt. He asked how Lenin's recommendation 
for a party founded mainly upon work in 'legal societies' was 
reconcilable with his demand for intensified struggle with the 
Liquidators; and he charged Lenin with underestimating the real 
difficulties of even legal activity in the Russian labour movement. 148 
Goloshchekin concurred with the Menshevik speaker, adding that 
Lenin had painted an 'idealistic picture'. And he resented what he 
took to be Lenin's criticisms of the Bolshevik party activists in 
Russia. 149 Only Onufriev supported Lenin. 150 
And Lenin, perhaps recognising that his advocacy of legal work 
might continue to be misunderstood, suggested that a clause on the 
need to strengthen the illegal party apparatus be included in the 
Conference resolution on party organisation. 151 A tiny episode; but it 
showed that he perceived that his own enthusiastic but one-sided 
presentation could lead to his being misunderstood. He also regretted 
certain phrasings of the motion proposed by his assistant Zinoviev. 
Lenin advised the replacement of a clause which embodied outright 
opposition to the elective principle in party work; his grounds were 
not philosophical but those of political tact. 152 In any case, there was 
universal agreement that legal organisational opportunities ought to 
be explored more energetically. The Conference was united on that 
point. 153 
 All or Nothing 
23 
Zinoviev introduced debate on the other vital question, namely 
how to organise the party for the forthcoming electoral campaign for 
the State Duma. 154 Lenin could safely leave such functions to him. 
The political line followed Lenin's: that 'the party' should put up its 
own candidates in the workers' curiae without pacts with other 
parties. In practice this would mean that factions of the Russian 
Social-Democratic Labour Party which did not accept the legitimacy 
of the Prague Conference ought to be shunned. 155 In addition, Lenin 
and Zinoviev persuaded the Conference to oppose the Menshevik-
supported campaign to collect signatures for a 'petitition' for the 
right of freedom of association to be granted in Russia. Such a 
campaign, he declared, was Liquidationist claptrap; and a further 
resolution was passed asserting that the Liquidators had 'definitively 
placed themselves outside the party' - a device already used by Lenin 
in 1908 to 'expel' Aleksandr Bogdanov from the Bolshevik faction 
without using the word expulsion. 156 Lenin also successfully urged 
the Conference to insist that the party's deputies in the State Duma 
should denounce the Kadets more vigorously and should accentuate 
the slogans of a democratic republic, the eight-hour day, and 
confiscation of gentry-owned land. 157 After three weeks of discus-
sion, the Conference constituted itself as the supreme and legitimate 
assembly of the entire Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party. 158 
The only objector was the Party Menshevik Zevin - and even he 
failed to walk out of the proceedings. 159 
A collective snook was therefore cocked at other factions of the 
Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party. Lenin's victories on policy 
were large; and the non-Bolshevik Marxist press quickly reported on 
the proceedings in such terms. Indeed, many commentators at the 
time, and many more since 1912, dated the essential formation of a 
Bolshevik party from the Prague affair. The formation of a self-
styled Central Committee, staffed mainly by pro-Lenin Bolsheviks, 
was truly a watershed in the history of the Russian Marxist 
movement. The designation of Workers' Newspaper as the Central 
Committee's 'official organ' confirmed the demise of attempts to 
compromise with Trotski and the other aspirants to a broadly-based 
party unity. 160 
Yet the Conference delegates did not see themselves as mere 
auxiliaries in Lenin's war. It is usually overlooked that the 
Committee of the Foreign Organisation, which had been the initial 
channel for the planning of the Conference and which had been 
especially important to Lenin in 1911, had been confirmed not as the 
 24 
Lenin: A Political Life 
supreme emigre party body but simply as 'one of the party 
organisations abroad'. Hardly a fulsome recommendation. The 
resolution on the emigration also specified that foreign-based 
organisations should rally round the Central Committee. 161 Dele-
gates were trying to prevent supreme operational power from falling 
into Lenin's grasp. The Central Committee was meant to govern the 
party, and was not to be encumbered with undesirable emigrant sub-
committees. Thus foreign-based party organisations were required to 
rally round not the Committee of the Foreign Organisation but the 
Central Committee. 162 The seven elected members of the Central 
Committee, moreover, were not as solidly pro-Lenin as is usually 
thought. In the first place, D. M. Shvartsman was one of them. As a 
Party Menshevik, he was obviously welcomed by several delegates as 
proof that they were not aiming at the formation of a totally 
homogeneous, sectarian mini-faction. 163 Secondly, many of the 
'Leninists' had criticised the emigres at the Conference; and they 
included newly-elected members of the Central Committee Ordzho-
nikidze, Spandaryan and Goloshchekin. 164 
Only two emigres, in fact, belonged to the Central Committee: 
Lenin and Zinoviev. The last of the seven members was R. V. 
Malinovski, an as yet unmasked police spy; and his posture at the 
Conference is unclear from the published minutes. But the general 
tendency to fire shafts of warning at Lenin about his future 
behaviour is transparent in the debates, the resolutions and the 
elections even though Lenin, with characteristic imperturbability, 
ended the Conference with a rousing speech. 165 
RUSSIANS AND POLES (AND LATVIANS, LITHUANIANS 
AND JEWS) 
Lenin wasted no time in justifying the Prague Conference to his 
opponents. A brisk sentence or two expressing relief that the 'party' 
had been hauled out of the mess that had enveloped its central 
apparatus was the extent of his pleading. 166 He did not quite stop 
harrying the non-Bolshevik emigres; but he was no longer preoccu-
pied by them after Prague. Rather, he was a happy spectator of their 
chaos. Trotski had not given up trying to call a rival gathering of the 
Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party, properly open to all 
factions, in Vienna. Mensheviks retained their dislike of Trotski's 
ideas on revolutionary strategy, a dislike reinforced by personal 
 All or Nothing 
25 
animus. But on this occasion they would co-operate with him. 
Twenty-three delegates arrived in Vienna for the start of proceedings 
on 23 August 1912. 167 Seven months had passed since the Bolshevik 
venture in Prague. It is scarcely astounding that Lenin, faced with 
such evidence of inefficiency and parlousness, withheld his fire. To 
have attacked too fiercely might have rallied the opposition. The 
'August Bloc' in Vienna included a range of Russian social-
democrats, from a pair of Bogdanovists through to a representative 
of the so-called Liquidators. Apart from hostility to Lenin, nothing 
united them strongly. They also lacked the Bolshevik understanding 
of the tactical importance of nomenclature. Decently but self-
defeatingly, they declined to describe their new supreme party body 
as the Central Committee and opted for a less forceful name: the 
Organisational Committee. In practice, the proclaimed unity was 
seen to be weak even by the delegates; the 'Bloc' was a complete 
misnomer. 168 
Among their resolutions were words of condemnation of the 
Prague Conference. But everyone must have known that the missiles 
aimed at Lenin would not wound him. 'I have no fear,' he had 
announced, 'of a condemnation of factional struggle.' 169 He laughed 
out loud at some anti-emigre remarks by even fellow Bolsheviks in 
Prague. 170 Shortly after the Conference he began to behave as he 
always _had done. He was like a St Sebastian who has burst from his 
bonds, pulled the arrows from his body and shot them in the 
direction of his assailants. 
The attack on him at Prague had been heavy; . but it was 
concentrated upon his factionalism: and it certainly did not include 
any criticism of his attitude to the non-Russian constituent parts of 
the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party. 171 Lenin was mightily 
pleased that he no longer had to worry about the official central 
leadership of the Social-Democracy of the Kingdom of Poland and 
Lithuania, which had belonged to the Russian Social-Democratic 
Labour Party (not to mention the Jewish Bund and the Social-
Democracy of the Latvian Region) since 1906. 172 Disagreements 
between Lenin and Leo Jogiches, the Polish social-democratic leader, 
were of long standing. At the Second Party Congress, in 1903, Lenin 
and the Iskra group had argued that the subject nations of the 
Romanovs should be offered the right of self-determination. This 
alienated the Social-Democracy of the Kingdom of Poland and 
Lithuania. Leo Jogiches and Rosa Luxemburg, instructing their 
representatives at the Congress by letter, argued that Polish 
 26 
Lenin: A Political Life 
independence was an irrelevance in a capitalist world which was 
making economic nonsense of all frontiers. Lenin's refusal to budge 
discouraged the Social-Democracy of the Kingdom of Poland and 
Lithuania from joining the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party 
at the Second Congress. 173 Lenin at first did not regret this situation; 
for the Polish social-democrats objected to Bolshevik attitudes to 
party organisation, and Luxemburg had entered the Bolshevik-
Menshevik controversy about the party rules on the Menshevik 
side. 174 
And yet there was much agreement about general revolutionary 
strategy. There were also good working contacts between Lenin and 
other Polish leaders such as A. Warski and Jan Hanecki; 175 and 
neither Lenin nor Luxemburg allowed their disputes over party 
organisation to get in the way of personal friendship. 176 As the 
divisions between the Bolsheviks and the Mensheviks deepened over 
strategy in 1905, Lenin warmed again to talk of the incorporation of 
the Polish social-democrats of the Romanov empire in the Russian 
Social-Democratic Labour Party. At the Fourth Party Congress in 
April 1906 an agreement was reached, and the Polish social-
democrats entered the larger party with rights of autonomy in the 
territory covered by its existing organisations and with automatic 
representation in the central party apparatus. 177 At the Fifth 
Congress in 1907, the Polish social-democrats constituted roughly a 
sixth of the party's entire membership; 178 their radicalism was vital to 
the success of Bolshevik policies at the Congress. Subsequently, in a 
Central Committee of twelve persons, the Poles Warski and F. E. 
Dzierzynski were supporters of Lenin against Menshevik strategy; 
and Jogiches on the editorial board of Social-Democrat was equally 
anti-Menshevik. At the International Socialist Congress in Stuttgart 
in 1907 Luxemburg, Martov and Lenin collaborated closely. 179 
Nevertheless Polish social-democrats were soon irking Lenin again. 
Niggles about strategical distinctions never disappeared. The Bol-
shevik preference for an alliance between 'the proletariat and the 
peasantry' struck Jogiches as being too close to Russian populist (or 
agrarian-socialist) ideas. Jogiches spoke instead of 'the proletariat 
supported by the peasantry', arguing that an emphasis on the 
primacy of the urban working class was more appropriate to 
Marxism. 180 The disagreement amused the Mensheviks. And it 
annoyed Lenin, but not to the point of rupture; indeed he came, in 
1917, to see the uses of deploying a programmatic slogan very similar 
to that of Jogiches. 181 Much more serious, for Lenin before the First 
 All or Nothing 
27 
World War, was Jogiches's devotion to the retention of Bolsheviks 
and Mensheviks in the same party. Bolshevik organisational 
schismatism was hated by the Poles, and Jogiches would never lend 
support to Lenin's calls to exclude the Mensheviks from the central 
party leadership even though Jogiches opposed Menshevik political 
strategy. 182 The Polish social-democrats, moreover, deftly retained 
the balance of power in the central party apparatus. 183 Lenin was 
frustrated by this. Jogiches, on the other hand, was incensed by the 
attitude taken by Lenin to the other main socialist party in Poland: 
the Polish Socialist Party. A former section of the Polish Socialist 
Party, the PPS-Lewica, appeared to Lenin to be moving towards a 
Marxist programme; and, unlike Jogiches and the Polish social-
democrats, these socialists were sensitive to the need to embrace the 
national aspirations of the Polish population. 184 Relations between 
Lenin and Jogiches worsened. At the January 1910 Central 
Committee plenum, the Polish influence helped to prevent the 
passage of his divisive motions. 185 
Lenin sought pretexts for a definitive conflict with Jogiches. This 
was not difficult. In his own organisation, Jogiches was as author-
itarian and intolerant as Lenin and he entirely lacked the Bolshevik 
leader's more attractive personal qualities. 186 Jogiches resented what 
he regarded as the unnecessarily enthusiastic co-operation between 
Lenin and Warski, who was replaced on Social-Democrat on 
Jogiches's orders by Z. Leder. 187 Not only Warski attracted 
Jogiches's anger. His oppressive personality and methods offended 
many others, and he had even threatened his former lover, Rosa 
Luxemburg, with a gun. Luxemburg somehow managed to continue 
to work with him. 188 But there was a growing hostility towards him 
in certain underground organisations in Poland itself. Warsaw-based 
social-democrats were especially discontented. The split between 
Lenin and Jogiches widened in November 1911, when Jogiches 
ordered that no Polish social-democrat should any longer serve on 
the board of Social-Democrat. The decision reflected Jogiches's 
impatience with the aggressive policies being pursued by the 
Bolsheviks in calling a schismatic party conference for January 
1912. 189 
But the Warsaw organisation saw Lenin as a protector of their 
interests, and Lenin received news that a complaint had been made 
by it against Jogiches's decision to boycott the Prague Conference. 190 
Previously the objections to Jogiches had been formulated mainly by 
individuals. By the end of 1911, Jogiches's highhandedness had 
 28 
Lenin: A Political Life 
driven A.M. Malecki, Hanecki and Leder to resign from the Polish 
official leadership. Political disputes were also involved. Jogiches, 
unlike Lenin, wanted nothing to do with the legal trade unions 
established after 1905; and, like Lenin, a growing number of Polish 
social-democrats wanted a rapprochement with the left wing segment 
of the Polish Socialist Party. 191 Other talented Poles were also hostile 
to Jogiches: F. E. Dzierzynski, J. Unszlicht and Karl Radek; and 
these, too, hoped for closer relations with the Bolsheviks while 
retaining doubts about Lenin's divisive scheming. 192 Jogiches in 
1911 had not totally despaired of dealing with the Lenin problem 
by seeking an accommodation with Bolshevik Conciliators. A.l. 
Rykov was an obvious choice, and a spirited correspondence ensued 
until the Prague Conference broke off such possibilities. 193 Jogiches 
then moved against his Polish opponents. In May 1912 he and his 
adherents formally declared the Warsaw organisation disbanded. 194 
He also delivered Malecki and Unszlicht up to a 'party court'; and 
Radek, too, suffered this fate on the alleged grounds of stealing party 
funds. 195 
The fissures in the Social-Democracy of the Kingdom of Poland 
and Lithuania brought cheer to Lenin, relieving any lingering 
difficulty in explaining the need for a supposedly unifying Party 
Conference in Prague; they also removed a good deal of respons-
ibility for the party split from his shoulders. They were used as a 
pretext for continued meddling in Polish socialist affairs. Until 1912, 
Jogiches had interfered more in Russian business than Lenin in the 
affairs of Polish organisations. In the remaining years of European 
peace the dissentient figures in the Polish section of the party drew 
closer to Lenin; he frequently advised them on tactics for dealing 
with Jogiches and took their side in the International Socialist 
Bureau. 196 Meanwhile, Dzierzynski, counselling Lenin to leave 
Switzerland, suggested that Krakow in Austrian-ruled Poland would 
afford him a better base for contact with Russia. 197 
The political friendship of Lenin and this handful of leading Polish 
social-democrats helped to deflect attention from the most remark-
able consequence of the Prague Conference: namely the fact that the 
territorial base of the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party- or 
at least the part of it led by Lenin - had diminished. 198 The 'party' 
could no longer properly claim to have organisations in Poland. 
Since neither the Jewish Bund nor the Social-Democracy of the 
Latvian Region had agreed to join Lenin's venture in Prague (and 
Lenin had not given them an invitation in any event!), huge areas in 
 All or Nothing 
29 
the western part of the Romanov lands were similarly uncovered. 
Nor did the Armenian organisations, which had been affiliated to the 
Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party since 1907, attend. 199 
Geographically, therefore, Lenin's claim to authority was more 
restricted to Russia proper than before. Many Bolsheviks them-
selves, of course, were not Russians. Iosif Stalin and Sergo 
Ordzhonikidze were Georgians; Y. M. Sverdlov, G. E. Zinoviev and 
L. B. Kamenev were Jews, and Lenin had allies such as the Poles 
opposed to Jogiches. It must be stressed that he broke his ties with 
the Bund and the Social-Democracy of the Kingdom of Poland and 
Lithuania for reasons quite innocent of chauvinism. Lenin wanted 
freedom to make his own policies, direct his own organisations, run 
his own party, and looked on the concessions made to the various 
national organisations in 1906 as productive of 'federalism of the 
worst sort'.20 Clear-cut centralism in a party definitively under his 
personal control was his objective, and he thought nothing of 
splitting the existing party in order to achieve it. 
The unintended consequences of his actions in Prague, however, 
were at least as important in the longer term as those which he 
planned. Those Poles who stayed as his allies were destined to play a 
role alongside Lenin in the realignment of forces within the European 
socialist left in the First World War. As it happened, Lenin kept most 
of them at arm's length before mid-1914. The alliance was on 
conditional terms. Many of the Poles were critics of the German 
Social-Democratic Party, and Lenin did not abrogate his loyalty to 
Kautsky until then. 201 But it was Hanecki who helped to secure an 
exit visa from Austria-Hungary for Lenin in 1914; it was Radek's 
assistance that meant much to Lenin in the struggle against the 
European 'official' socialist parties in 1915-16,202 and, in 1917, 
Hanecki and Radek were a source of information and possibly of 
funds channelled through to the Bolsheviks from the German 
government. Failure to take account of the longstanding two-way 
links between Lenin and these Polish socialists for years allowed the 
myth to endure that Hanecki and Radek were German spies.203 
LEISURE AND ITS DISCONTENTS 
No longer needing to appease Jogiches, Lenin could write more 
openly on the 'national question'; and, since Radek and Jogiches 
agreed in their hostility to the slogan of Poland's independence, the 
 30 
Lenin: A Political Life 
Lenin-Radek relationship was always tense.204 Lenin, even at his 
most Machiavellian, was also a man of belief. There was a quasi-
religious quality in some of his utterances. Marx, for Lenin, was 
beyond criticism. Lenin evidently needed a rock of certainty in his 
life. This did not prevent him from interpreting Marx with a freedom, 
even a licentiousness, that astounded his Marxist opponents. Yet 
nobody near to him remembered him as having shown an awareness 
of the liberties he frequently took in interpreting Marxian texts; and, 
while Lenin was wrong to claim his analyses as being the only true 
development of Marxism, he was frequently justified in declaring that 
his adversaries had traduced Marx's intentions.205 Each debate has to 
be examined on its merits, but the main point is that Marxism had 
never been a complete, unambiguous and coherent system of 
thought. The extraordinary feature of Lenin's treatment was its 
near-metaphysical lack of doubt in Marx and Engels; no prominent 
Marxist gave so overtly unquestioning a commitment. Despite being 
a militant atheist, he unembarrassedly composed the following 
apophthegm: 'Marx's teaching is omnipotent because it is true.'206 
The words are worth dwelling upon: they are the language of a 
zealot. They have a lapidary naivete; their content and rhythm are 
catechistic. They presume unchallengeability and bring together the 
realm of power with the realm of ideas. They scoff at those wretches, 
the infidels, who fail or refuse to see the light and recognise the 
verities of Marx and Marxism. 
Lenin fought for Marx as his 'teacher', but chose carefully where 
to make a stand. Marxism was under a remarkable intellectual attack 
by a number of German politicians and academics. Robert Michels, 
studying political parties, wrote of the 'iron law of oligarchy'. He 
postulated that democratic regulations in any party could not 
prevent the domination of the rank-and-file membership by its 
central leaders; and he asserted that even socialist leaders would 
become seduced by the attractions of authority and material well-
being and would tacitly drop revolutionary objectives. They would 
undergo embourgeoisement. Michels and his fellow German sociolo-
gist, Max Weber, in addition considered 'bureaucracy' to be intrinsic 
to modern industrial C'4ltures. It was consequently utopian for 
Marxists to think th<ti patterns of government could be drastically 
transformed by political revolution. 207 Michels and Weber were 
impugning the practices and objectives of the German Social-
Democratic Party. In reply, Kautsky did not deny that hierarchical 
administrations and established leaderships were crucial for effective 
 All or Nothing 
31 
large organisations; but he felt that processes of election and 
consultation would curb abuses. 208 Rosa Luxemburg was less 
complacent. She stressed that Marx's optimism was realistic only if 
the 'party masses' impeded the inclination of their leaders towards 
compromise with the status quo in Germany.209 Lenin held back from 
the fray. Perhaps this was just another pragmatic decision; his 
instinct was always to avoid appearing embattled or apologetic.210 
But a thinker's quality is revealed as much by his silences as by his 
statements; and Lenin's failure to address the pertinent questions 
raised by Michels and Weber damages his reputation as a political 
theorist even for his own epoch. 
His efforts on Marx's behalf in the last few years before the First 
World War were mainly in the field of economics. He stood by the 
Marxian theory of 'immiseration'. Quite what Marx meant with his 
ideas on the inevitability of mass impoverishment is still disputed. 
Some have claimed he thought that, under capitalism, workers would 
become ever poorer in absolute terms. This was difficult to square 
with the empirical data on wage rises in many countries.211 Lenin, 
following Kautsky and several other Marxist.rheorisis, regarded him 
as having predicted only that the working class would become 
'relatively' impoverished. Subsequent macroeconomic statistics, 
according to Lenin,-had confirmed the forecast: the proportion of 
Germany's wealth in the hands of workers fell as year succeeded 
year, and an average labourer's wage did not increase as fast as an 
average employer's profits.212 But the comment presumably seemed 
to Lenin, on reflection, too much like a retreat; and he added that 
German wages were not rising in real value and that inflation was 
soaring more steeply?13 This could have constituted a return to the 
first version of Marx's immiseration theory; but Lenin refrained from 
proposing the trend as a general norm. He simply made his remark 
and moved on. 
Marx exhilarated him, and those studies of Lenin which entirely 
deny his Marxist commitment are profoundly erroneous. But he was 
also excited by the latest technological developments. (Curiously, he 
had not paid them much heed before 1905.) He read with enthusiasm 
that a certain William Ramsey had invented a process for extracting 
gas from coal.214 Electricity, too, fascinated Lenin. Living in an age 
when even well-appointed factories were dirty and dangerous, and 
when the drudgery of housework was considerable, he sensed that 
electrical power could do inestimable good in easing the burdens of 
day-to-day existence and in improving standards of hygiene. 
 32 
Lenin: A Political Life 
Mankind, he felt, stood at the dawn of an era. Yet he assumed that 
the popular benefits of electricity, even in advanced industrial 
countries, would not become available until after a socialist 
revolution.215 Lenin did not foresee the mass purchases of electrical 
goods under capitalism. If he proved to be a poor prophet, however, 
we must remember that the marketing of Hoover vacuum cleaners 
was in its infancy at his time of writing. His attitude to electricity was 
in any case paralleled by his notions about other 'bourgeois' 
discoveries and trends. The time-and-motion specialist F. W. Taylor 
was greatly in vogue before the First World War, with followers in 
Russia as well as in the more economically-developed countries. 
Lenin's reaction to Taylor's 'scientific management' was negative 
(and it was only after the Bolsheviks had seized power in the October 
Revolution that he started to perceive Taylorism's advantages). 216 
Taylor, he asserted, simply wished to strengthen capitalist exploita-
tion. Ignore fashion and have faith, have socialist faith: these were 
Lenin's guidelines. 
He and Nadezhda Krupskaya, like most better-off revolutionaries 
from Russia, lived a life that was middle-class in style. Many 
commentators have dealt severely with the paradox. How could a 
man who talked so fervently about the coming of a classless society 
continue to enjoy such an existence? In photographs, Lenin was 
always neatly dressed. It was almost de rigueur for Marxist leaders 
from Russia to wear three-piece suits, and knee-length overcoats 
were usual on cold days. Homburg hats were typical. While pursuing 
revolutionary politics, Lenin did not aspire to what might be called a 
'counter-culture'; and in any case it made sense, if he wanted to avoid 
deportation as a politically undesirable foreigner, to appear as 
conventional and respectable as he could. 
Furthermore, a middle-class ambience covered a range of living 
conditions. For most of his career before the February Revolution of 
1917, Lenin had to live in rented rooms, and fairly cheap rented 
rooms at that. Royalties from his books, his Central Committee 
stipend and emergency subsidies from his mother meant that he 
would never starve. 217 He seems never to have mastered the type-
writer. Perhaps this was yet another sign of his social background: in 
that epoch, typing attracted even worse pay and lower prestige than 
today. Lenin wrote out his articles in longhand, and he must have 
written very fast if the quantity of published output, notes, drafts and 
excerpts copied from library books is any guide. But the final typing 
was done by professionals. The young Bolshevik, V. A. Karpinski 
 All or Nothing 
33 
was among these and, in later years, gratefully recalled how Lenin 
always insisted upon paying him at the going rate. Karpinski knew 
that Lenin, as an economist, divided the Russian peasantry into poor 
peasants, middle peasants and kulaks. Lenin, according to Karpins-
ki's only half-joking memoir, operated like a middle peasant. He 
hired the labour of others but did not exploit them. 218 Not being a 
'poor peasant' who had to toil away over a ramshackle Cyrillic 
typewriter, Lenin nevertheless was not a wealthy kulak-litterateur 
like Georgi Plekhanov. 
Yet Lenin also expected value for money. Everyone from the typist 
to the print-worker learnt that he insisted on a speedy, efficient job. 
His letters bulged with detailed instructions about textual al-
terations.219 Lenin lived in an age when typesetting and copy-editing 
was done to a much higher standard than is characteristic today; and 
since he was dealing with small publishing firms run by fellow 
revolutionaries he could exert some control over the process of 
publication. He justifiably thought of himself as a leading Marxist 
political writer. Asked to supply a list of such authors, he mentioned 
G. E. Zinoviev, L. B. Kamenev, V. V. Vorovski and a certain 'V. Ilin': 
his own nom de plume for his legally-published books.220 Little things 
like his answer say much about him. Nobody who did not already 
know would have guessed that his list contained only Bolsheviks. 
Ever the politician. 
