 3 Ad Extirpanda: 
1914-1915 
THE JULY CRISIS 
The First World War, breaking out in summer 1914, sealed the fate 
of old Russia. Probably there would eventually have been a 
revolution. Having survived his ordeals of 1905-6, the emperor had 
tried to restore his autocratic powers and had been suspicious of his 
premier Petr Stolypin's co-operation with the State Duma. Yet the 
imperial state had lost its ability to repress all opposition at will. The 
monarch's truculence narrowed the ground for political compromise 
and evolution; it also made more likely the ultimate success of the 
more radical among his opponents. The nature of an anti-Romanov 
revolution would very probably have been different if Russia had not 
gone to war. In mid-1914, before the war, there was no economic 
crisis. Agricultural production and the trade in farm products had 
never been greater, and industrial output was expanding. Social 
conflicts were fierce but not uncontrollable. Thus the major catalysts 
for the Bolshevik party to advance to power, as it did in 1917, were 
weak. No doubt the Bolsheviks would have exerted much influence in 
the course of any conceivable revolution even in a Russia which was 
at peace and was economically buoyant; but they surely would not 
have become the monopolistic party of government. It is worth 
recalling that in 1914 they did not intend to initiate a socialist 
revolution, and that Lenin declared that the next stage in the 
country's development would be bourgeois. Perhaps he would have 
changed his mind; the ease with which he did so in 1917 indicates his 
changeability, and the Bolshevik strategy of 1905 for a bourgeois 
revolution had always carried strong traces of a zeal for socialist 
reforms. 1 
But this is all hypothetical. Russia had no revolution, bourgeois or 
socialist, in 1914; but she entered a war in central Europe which 
acquired a near-global character in the following three years. The 
scale of casualties was unprecedented. Millions of people perished in 
67 
 68 
Lenin: A Political Life 
combat or behind the lines; and the epidemic of Spanish influenza, 
which killed further millions after 1918, was all the more deadly in 
consequence of the material and social hardships induced by the 
fighting. Political structures crumbled; the crowned rulers of Russia, 
Germany and Austria-Hungary lost their thrones. Economic deva-
station prevailed throughout Europe. 
Lenin, like every other leader of the Second International, had 
sometimes predicted a continental war; indeed this was the common 
prognosis of most politicians and commentators regardless of 
political orientation. But such predictions were frequently offered 
somewhat casually. Zinoviev was to recall that Lenin had no idea 
that the European war really was fast approaching. 2 Moreover, even 
those commentators who thought war to be near at hand were 
astounded by the actual timing of the outbreak and by the longevity 
and intensity of the subsequent fighting. German Chancellor 
Bethmann Hollweg sensed 'a doom greater than any human power 
hanging over Europe'. But in the fateful summer of 1914 few actors 
in the international drama, whether ministers or diplomats, had a 
sense of the cataclysm awaiting their nations. The revolutionaries 
were no less caught off their guard. Lenin in his articles in July 1914 
anticipated a verbal international conflict among socialists, not a 
military international conflict between two great coalitions of 
European states; he was describing Lilliput and not Brobdingnag. 
His bemusement by the declaration of war was a typical condition 
(even though it must be added that he was extraordinary in taking so 
little notice even of the July diplomatic crisis). Were it not for the 
egregious claims about his perspicacity made by official historians in 
the USSR, the matter would not need to be belaboured. The speed of 
the transformation of a regional diplomatic crisis into continental 
war was staggering; and mobilisation of whole societies and 
economies, and not merely the combatant armies, in pursuit of 
victory was unprecedented in wars among great powers. 
The event that produced the crisis was the Austrian Archduke 
Franz Ferdinand's assassination by a Serbian nationalist in Sarajevo 
on 28 June. On 23 July, Austria-Hungary delivered her ultimatum to 
neighbouring Serbia. Unless the Serbs agreed to humiliating political 
conditions, war would ensue between Serbia and the Austro-
Hungarian empire. The Russian government declared support for 
the Serbs. On 31 July, the German government announced that, 
unless Russia agreed to demobilise her forces, Germany would take 
military action on Austria-Hungary's side. Russia, encouraged by 
 Ad Extirpanda 
69 
intimations of support from Britain and France, held firm. Germany 
declared war on Russia. Britain and France entered the hostilities 
against Germany and Austria-Hungary. By the second week of 
August the mightiest states of Europe were lined up against each 
other. The Allies, including Russia, confronted the Central Powers. 
Russia's relations with Austria-Hungary had deteriorated over the 
previous decade; and Germany's pretensions in both Eastern Europe 
and the Near East had intermittently heightened tension between St 
Petersburg and Berlin. Accommodation was reached about the plan 
for a German-built railway from the Turkish seaboard to Baghdad. 
But the economic competition to be expected from Germany in 
traditional Russian trading areas such as Persia remained a source of 
worry. Russian business in several key industrial sectors was also 
suffering at the hands of German firms in the Russian domestic 
market. In addition, Russian foreign policy from the 1890s moved 
closer towards the embrace of the French. The Paris-raised loan of 
1906 had been crucial to the survival of the Romanov dynasty. Both 
Russian and French politicians opposed the expansion of German 
power in Europe. Germany, at the same time, resented the lack of a 
large overseas empire and felt baulked by the British in her quest to 
wield a worldwide power commensurate with her industrial and 
military strength. Ideas about the nation's honour and vital interests 
affected not only governing and proprietorial groups but also broad 
social classes. Russian fears about Germany were complemented by 
German fears about Russia. German army leaders advised that the 
achievements of Russian industrial development were such that, if 
Germany's security was to be guaranteed, Russian power had to be 
destroyed by a pre-emptive war. 
By 1914, the Russian emperor judged that his country's prestige 
and geopolitical interest in the Balkans were at stake. Russia had 
publicly given way to Austrian threats in the recent past. Austria-
Hungary's annexation of Bosnia and Herzegovina in 1908 had 
evoked protests from Serbia; but Russia had stepped back from 
armed conflict on the Serbian side. Relations with both Austria-
Hungary and Germany never fully recovered. And Britain too, which 
since the mid-nineteenth century had avoided being ensnared in 
Europe's rivalries, was alarmed by Germany: the build-up of the 
German fleet agitated the British government, and in 1904 an entente 
was formed between Britain and France. 
A mystery endures about Lenin's attitude in the pre-war years. To 
be sure, he predicted a continental war. And yet he was little 
 70 
Lenin: A Political Life 
bothered by the vicissitudes of European diplomacy or even regional 
wars in Europe. Only the barest comments were elicited from him 
on the Balkan wars of 1912 and 1913, which were fought by Turkey 
and the successor states to the Ottoman empire in south-eastern 
Europe. Unlike Trotski, who worked as a war correspondent in the 
Balkans in 1912-13 and covered the fighting, he did not recognise-
except in the most cursory fashion - that a military conflict in the 
Balkans might light a holocaust of mutual destruction among the 
Great Powers. 3 It is only halfway towards an explanation to suggest 
that he was absorbed in party-political thoughts and activity; it 
remains to be explained why he allowed such an absorption to take 
place. Obsessive as he was about controlling Bolshevik affairs, he 
seldom let them expunge everything else from his mind. Perhaps, 
like many other Marxists, his belief in the probability of European 
war inhabited a rarified, intellectual plane; he showed little vital 
concern. Before 1914 he had written several anti-militarist articles 
and had lobbied in the Second International at the Stuttgart 
Congress.4 But the articles were brief. And he had left it to L. B. 
Kamenev to put the anti-militarist case at the Basle Congress of the 
Second International in 1912, when the first Balkan war was 
raging. 5 
Consequently, his intellectuality about the prospect of a general 
continental war was shattered only by the outbreak of the First 
World War itself. The armies of the two sides mobilised according to 
long-laid national plans, and Europe's railways were loaded with 
men, weapons, horses and fodder. The German authorities, enter-
taining low expectations of Austria-Hungary as their ally, encour-
aged Turkey to join the Central Powers. This added to Russia's 
difficulties, compelling her to fight simultaneously on two fronts. Yet 
Germany, facing Russia to the east and France and Britain to the 
west, had the same problem to a greater degree. Speedy conquests 
were essential to German strategy: Belgium and Holland were 
invaded, and troops poured into northern France before British 
regiments could cross the English Channel. But the line on the 
Western front steadied and then held firm. Masses of men, rapidly 
trained and equipped, dug themselves into trenches. The no-man's 
land between the two sides was turned into a lunar landscape of 
destruction. To the east, it was the Russians who temporarily held 
the initiative. The armies of the Romanovs swept out from 'Russian' 
Poland through to eastern Prussia. Galicia, where Lenin was living, 
was overrun in autumn 1914. 
 Ad Extirpanda 
71 
ARREST AND RELEASE 
Lenin and Zinoviev unknowingly had chosen to live in what was to 
be the path of the Russian advance. The additional danger for the 
two Bolshevik leaders was that, as Russian subjects, they and their 
wives might come under suspicion in Austrian-ruled Poland as being 
spies. Imprisonment by either Russians or Austrians could happen at 
any time,6 so they planned to leave Habsburg territory as fast as was 
legally possible: war hysteria afflicted all combatant countries; it was 
not unknown for aliens to be lynched. Anti-Russian sentiment was 
rife among local Poles. All Russian emigrants could expect to be 
contacted by the police authorities in Krakow sooner or later and 
Lenin was an obvious object of mistrust. His daily habits were far 
from reassuring to policemen; he owned a Browning pistol. Why did 
someone claiming to have come to Galicia to study agricultural 
conditions have need of such a weapon? He also went climbing 
regularly in the hills near the border: could he be keeping a 
rendezvous with his St Petersburg spy-masters? Lenin, Krupskaya 
and the Zinovievs none the less refused to panic. They saw it was too 
late to make a dash across the vast domains of the Austro-Hungarian 
empire to seek sanctuary in any neutral country: they were a 
thousand kilometres by rail from the Swiss border and almost as 
far from the nearest ferry port to Scandinavia. Lenin conferred with 
Zinoviev, and both of them relied heavily on their acquaintances. 
Bagocki for advice on how to avoid trouble. 
They bore up well. Bagocki was to recall that Lenin was agitated 
less by his personal situation than by the Second International 
leadership's reaction to the war. His worst moment came when he 
read the Krakow newspapers on 5 August. 7 Reports from the 
German Reichstag told that the social-democrats had voted war 
credits to their government. Lenin rightly stated that this implicitly 
breached the assumptions of the Second International's anti-war 
policy.8 To be fair, a minority of the Reichstag social-democratic 
fraction under Hugo Haase had privately objected to the fraction's 
attitude to war credits; and Kautsky, who did not belong to the 
Reichstag, sided with Haase. Both Haase and Kautsky continued to 
seek an end to the fighting without themselves being arrested. But 
such behaviour was not the outright opposition that Lenin deman-
ded. 
According to S. Bagocki, Lenin stated bluntly: 'This is the end of 
the Second International ... From today I shall cease being a social-
 72 
Lenin: A Political Life 
democrat and shall become a communist. '9 There would have been 
ructions in the International even if war had not broken out; and 
Lenin might have been willing to disaffiliate his Bolsheviks from 
membership. He now planned something much more grandiose: the 
construction of an entirely separate 'Third' International. 10 His 
inclination hardened as it became evident that not only the German 
social-democrats but nearly all other socialist parties in Europe 
declined to oppose their respective country's entry into the war. 
Most French and British socialists saw the war as a tragic national 
necessity. Only few brave spirits denounced it. Karl Liebknecht, 
social-democratic deputy in the German Reichstag, took this course 
in 1915 and was arrested; and Pierre Brizon in France had to tread 
warily to escape the same fate. Not all socialist groups were swept up 
by the pro-war and patriotic frenzy. Minority factions in Britain, 
France and Germany took an openly anti-war stand; opposition was 
stronger in Italy and among the Czechs. But generally the French 
Socialist Party and the British Labour Party supported the Allied war 
effort even while retaining objections to their governments and 
speaking up for better treatment of the workers. Lenin renamed 
social-democrats 'social-chauvinists', seeking to emphasise their 
rupture with ideals of internationalism and anti-militarism. 11 
It was among the socialists of the Romanov empire that hostility 
to the war was strongest and most pervasive. The antagonism to the 
monarchy was profound in Russia, and the chasm between socialists 
and the rest of political society was vast. In most other countries 
there were moves by socialists towards an attenuation of social strife 
until the war ended. In the Romanov lands, however, not many 
socialists aspired at a 'civil peace', a 'Burgfrieden' or 'une union 
sacree'. Lenin's instinctive refusal to condone the Russian imperial 
government's engagement in war was paralleled by the reactions of 
many others. 
Most Bolshevik leaders, including those hostile to Lenin, fulmi-
nated against the dynasty and its military objectives; only a few, such 
as G. A. Aleksinski called for a patriotic defence against the 
Germans who were accused of imperialist aggression. And yet the 
will to volunteer to fight for the Allies was not absent even from the 
Paris-based Committee of the Foreign Organisation, which lost 
several members to the French armed forces. Among these it was 
the wish to protect democratic France rather than to defend Russia 
which was the motivation. The Committee of the Foreign Organisa-
tion collapsed in disarray. 12 Among the Mensheviks, there were 
 Ad Extirpanda 
73 
similar divisions. Martov, Dan, and Pavel Akselrod were as 
antagonistic as Lenin to the waging of the war. 13 Even A. N. 
Potresov and Maslov, who called for a war of national defence 
against German militarism, declined to lend overt support to Nikolai 
II; they would defend the country but would lend no succour to the 
government.14 This appeared to be Georgi Plekhanov's standpoint, 
but in practice he suspended his tirades against the monarchy for fear 
of destabilising the war effort. 15 The Mensheviks who took an 
unashamedly 'patriotic' position were a minority of their faction. 
The Socialist Revolutionaries, too, were riven by disputes; but Viktor 
Chernov and most leaders opposed support for the Russian war 
effort. The general desire to hold to an 'internationalist' perspective 
prevailed among most socialist activists regardless of party alle-
giance.16 
And yet the anti-war Russian revolutionaries were initially out of 
step with popular sentiment in the Russian empire. Not only the 
middle and upper classes but, so far as can be judged, all sections of 
the population believed that Germany and Austria-Hungary had to 
be resisted. Workers who had been striking or demonstrating in St 
Petersburg in July were voluntarily back at work in August. Leading 
socialist opponents of the war, if they were in the emigration, chose 
Switzerland, Sweden or the United States of America as their haven 
for the duration of hostilities, but few emigres faced quite the 
dilemmas of Vladimir Ilich Lenin and his colleagues, caught as they 
were on the territory of Russia's military foe. 
On 7 August 1914 Lenin received his first visit from the 
authorities. After a superficial search, his statistical notes on the 
agrarian question were confiscated on suspicion that they might be a 
spy's coded messages. Lenin remarked ruefully that his party 
correspondence was left untouched. He was ordered to present 
himself next day at the railway station and to travel to Nowy Targ 
for the completion of further enquiries. Lenin contacted his Polish 
friends. Jan Hanecki sent a telegram to S. Marek, a social-democratic 
parliamentarian in Austria-Hungary, to seek his intercession on 
Lenin's behalf. Lenin himself telegraphed the Krakow police, asking 
them to confirm to the police in Poronin and Nowy Targ that he was 
an emigre revolutionary who had entered the country legally. 17 Off 
he set for Nowy Targ on 8 August. On the same day Marek 
telegrammed to Nowy Targ police station that 'Lenin-Ulyanov' 
was known to him personally and was 'blameless and trustwor-
thy'.18 This did not prevent Lenin's arrest on arrival in Nowy Targ 
 74 
Lenin: A Political Life 
at eleven o'clock that morning, and he remained in custody until 19 
August. The interrogations, which were facilitated by material sent 
by the police in Krakow, 19 bore out Lenin's testimony. The sole 
untoward aspect of his case, in the eyes of the Nowy Targ invest-
igators, was Lenin's illegal possession of the Browning pistol (which 
was removed from him).20 Visits by Hanecki and Krupskaya were 
allowed; but the Nowy Targ police, despite being convinced that 
Lenin's story was genuine, were unwilling to take responsibility for 
his release. Bureaucratic red-tape was not peculiar to the Romanov 
lands. 
Krupskaya took the initiative. On II August she wrote to the 
Austrian social-democratic leader and parliamentarian Viktor Adler 
in Vienna to request his intervention?' She made the same plea to 
parliamentary deputy G. Diamand on I4 August. 22 Adler and 
Diamand responded helpfully, declaring to the Ministry of Internal 
Affairs in Vienna that the suspected Russian spy Lenin was well-
known throughout Europe for his dedication to the 'struggle against 
Russian tsarism'. 23 Lenin's referees exaggerated his fame, but their 
words had the desired effect. On 19 August the case against Lenin 
was abandoned and the Krakow authorities instructed the Nowy 
Targ police to release him.24 
Lenin returned to Bialy Dunajec. On 20 August, after sending his 
thanks to Adler and Diamand, he made arrangements to leave for 
Switzerland. According to Hanecki, Lenin retained the fear that his 
life might be in danger from the villagers.25 In any case, he desired a 
freedom for his politics that was unavailable to a Russian emigrant in 
Austria-Hungary. The journey required official permission in war-
time, and while waiting, Lenin studied the German socialist press 
with increasing exasperation?6 Herman Greulich, the Swiss social-
democratic leader, contacted Adler to enquire how he could help 
Lenin financially with his travel plans. This was ironical; within a few 
years Greulich would be regarded by Lenin as a deadly betrayer of 
socialism.27 On 16 August, Lenin and Krupskaya received the 
necessary documentation from Krakow to travel to Vienna, and 
they set off in company with Krupskaya's mother,28 but further 
external assistance was needed. Not having a passport,29 Lenin could 
not take a train across the Swiss frontier, but he invoked the name of 
Greulich and left for Switzerland on 2I August. 30 The Ulyanovs 
travelled in the company of Zinoviev and his wife Lilina.31 They 
arrived in Zurich on 23 August. Behind them they left a region of 
Eastern Europe which was to be marched over by the armies of 
 Ad Extirpanda 
75 
Russia, Germany and Austria-Hungary. They also had to abandon 
the largest part of the Bolshevik faction's archive of books, 
pamphlets, manuscripts and letters. 32 
Later, when the Bolsheviks had consolidated their power in 
Russia, a search was made in Nowy Targ for them. Ten hundred-
weights of these materials were discovered. 33 But the temporary loss, 
while hardly being insignificant for a politician and a bibliophile, was 
compensated in Lenin's mind by the knowledge that he could resume 
his struggle against the Romanov dynasty without let or hindrance. 
Lenin wrote to Adler to thank him warmly for his assistance. 34 
ANNOUNCING A POLICY 
Settling again in Switzerland, Lenin was a leader with an even 
smaller following than in the pre-war period. The struggle for 
influence would have to be resumed virtually from scratch. Contact 
with Russia had disappeared and the central emigre apparatus had 
ceased to exist; and the Central Committee was a fiction; Lenin and 
Zinoviev were its only members at liberty; and the Committee of the 
Foreign Organisation was a shambles. The situation with the press 
was disastrous: Pravda had been closed down by the authorities 
shortly before the declaration of war, and the Bolsheviks themselves 
had discontinued the foreign-based Workers' Newspaper in 1912 and 
Social-Democrat in 1913. Krupskaya's address book could not be 
used after the Malinovski affair since the assumption had to be that 
the Okhrana had had access to its contents. Lenin and Zinoviev, 
while still rejecting the case against Malinovski (and even proceeding 
to correspond with him when, as a Russian soldier, he was captured 
and placed in a German prisoner-of-war camp), could not take risks 
with the lives of Bolsheviks in Russia. 35 The restoration of 
communications with the underground party committees had to be 
undertaken with care. The postal services were in any case impeded 
by the Western and Eastern military fronts which stretched from 
north to south across Europe; and even correspondence with 
sympathetic emigres in Britain and France had to be handled 
cautiously in view of the alertness of governments in London and 
Paris to anti-war propaganda. Political conditions had grown more 
difficult even in Switzerland, where the authorities would not allow 
forms of activity likely to compromise its neutrality in wartime. 36 
 76 
Lenin: A Political Life 
Lenin's early need was to rally support in the Swiss emigration, 
beginning with the Geneva 'section' of the Bolshevik Foreign 
Organisation. The section, which had fewer than a dozen members, 
welcomed him and Zinoviev warmly. 37 They had contacts with 
Bolsheviks elsewhere in Switzerland, and the news spread that the 
two most eminent Bolsheviks had arrived safely. All wanted to end 
the uncertainty about party policy. The time had passed when it 
would have been possible to implement the Stuttgart recommenda-
tion that potentially belligerent governments should be held back 
from war by the threat of counter-actions by the massed labour 
movement; the war already raged at full spate. But the question arose 
as to what to do about it now that it had started. Lenin fell back on 
his experience in the underground movement in Samara and St 
Petersburg in the 1890s. He wrote out his ideas and then had them 
typed and circulated as carbon copies to fellow Bolsheviks in 
Switzerland. 
Apparently he had written an 800-word draft of 'Tasks of 
Revolutionary Social-Democracy in the European War', before 
reaching Switzerland, in the last days of August 1914.38 The themes 
were fundamental to all his wartime work. Lenin's readers amounted 
to a few hundred at most, and the overwhelming majority of those 
were emigres.39 But the contents had an historic significance; they 
were pillars in the formation of Lenin's Bolshevism and of the official 
ideology of the early Soviet state. Lenin began and ended by cursing 
the German Social-Democratic Party. Socialism and the revolution, 
he declared, had been betrayed. The German government had 
deluded its country's social-democrats by assuring them that its 
war aims were entirely defensive and non-expansionist; and even 
Kautsky was giving Bethmann Hollweg the benefit of the doubt until 
it could be proved otherwise. But Lenin maintained that neither the 
Central Powers nor the Allies should be analysed so generously. The 
war was not a struggle between the just and the unjust; on both sides 
it was 'a bourgeois, imperialist, dynastic' conflict. 40 Its origins, 
according to Lenin, lay in the international struggle for markets; it 
was also an attempt to divide the international working-class 
movement and to prevent revolution. Socialists ought to respond 
by preparing for a 'revolutionary war'. Workers of each nation 
should be adjured to rise up against their national middle class. 
'Centrists' such as Kautsky who tried to bridge the rift between 
leftists and rightists in European socialist parties would fail; but 
centrism itself was so damaging that its proponents should be refused 
 Ad Extirpanda 
77 
membership of the Socialist International. The working classes of 
Europe had been misled; they had long been 'hostile to opportunism 
and chauvinism', but had been gulled into acquiescing in govern-
mental policies through the connivance of social-democratic party 
leaderships.41 
Among anti-war Bolsheviks such words caused little dissension. To 
them it was self-evident that the Second International's pre-war 
commitments had been abrogated by its most prestigious leaders, and 
that further collaboration, even with Kautskyite centrists, was 
intolerable.42 What caused controversy was Lenin's attitude to 
Russia. He summed up his position: 'From the viewpoint of the 
working class and the toiling masses of all the peoples of Russia, the 
lesser evil would be the defeat of the tsarist monarchy.'43 The 
exceptional character of this sentence cannot be savoured unless we 
momentarily suppress our hindsight about his later career. Here was 
an emigre revolutionary, lacking finances, organisation and person-
nel, declaring to his colleagues that propaganda should be directed at 
telling the largely patriotic population in Russia to welcome the 
country's conquest. No Menshevik or Socialist Revolutionary, 
however opposed to the Russian government and to the war, took 
this line; and few Bolsheviks did either.44 
Like many socialists of the Russian empire, Lenin had advocated 
'defeatism' in the Russo-Japanese war of 1904-5.45 His prediction 
that defeats would induce revolutionary crisis had been correct. He 
repeated it in 1914, but there was a significant difference in the 
circumstances: nobody in 1904 expected the Japanese, if victorious, 
to occupy Russia. German war aims in 1914 were not definitively 
formulated; but political commentators in Russia, from govern-
mental spokesmen through to Marxist theorists, anticipated that 
the German armed forces would dismember the Russian empire and 
reduce the Russian state to a semi-colonial dependency of Germany. 
Secret treaties were, in fact, signed in 1915. The Central Powers 
decided that Austria-Hungary would obtain a sphere of influence in 
south-eastern Europe while Germany would acquire one in Russia; 
Turkey would be rewarded by annexations in Romanov lands 
adjacent to the Ottoman empire. The Allies made agreements which 
were also rapacious. Russia signed a treaty to take over the Straits of 
Dardanelles and the British and French conspired to break up the 
Habsburg empire and to rob Germany of her colonies. Russia's dire 
potential plight after a German victory was eloquently sketched by 
Lenin's adversary Petr Maslov.46 And yet Lenin remained willing to 
 78 
Lenin: A Political Life 
call for Russia's defeat even though he repeatedly asserted, with the 
mechanical reliability of a gramophone, that all belligerent states 
were bent upon territorial expansion and political and economic 
dominion. No wonder Lenin's differential attitude to the Russian 
and German war effort policy was regarded as illogical by Bolshevik 
activists who read his writings or listened to him in Switzerland.47 
Lenin's chance to argue for his eccentric notions came on 6 
September when the Bern section's members had arranged a meet-
ing. There were so few of them that they could easily have met in 
someone's flat; but such was their edginess that, in contrast with their 
pre-war practice in Switzerland, they convened secretly in some 
woods outside the city. It was as if they were in autocratic Russia, 
not democratic and tolerant Switzerland. No advertisement of the 
meeting was made.48 The presence of Bolshevik Duma deputy F. M. 
Samoilov, who had been convalescing abroad and was set to return 
to Russia shortly after the gathering, must also have been a factor; 
the Bern Bolsheviks would not have wished to compromise 
themselves and Samoilov in the eyes of the Swiss authorities by 
holding a session of overtly political character.49 
No definitive decision on policy, of course, could be taken by the 
Bolsheviks of Bern alone; but Samoilov's attendance gave Lenin a 
chance to relay his policies back to Russia. In fact, the other five 
Bolshevik Duma deputies, quite without Lenin's intervention, had 
behaved with commendable adherence to the spirit of Stuttgart and 
Basle by demonstratively walking out of the State Duma session 
which voted war credits to the Russian government on 26 July 
1914.50 Menshevik deputies also had opposed the Russian declara-
tion of war and left the chamber. A joint criticism by Menshevik and 
Bolshevik deputies was read out by the Menshevik, V.I. Khaustov. 
Like the revolutionary emigres, however, the Bolsheviks in Russia 
had to elaborate policy for the duration of the war. Samoilov's return 
to St Petersburg with Lenin's recommendations inevitably caused 
controversy. It was decided that a survey of Bolshevik opinion 
through the enipire was needed. Leading Bolsheviks in the capital 
were known to take an anti-war line. But Lenin's defeatist demands 
were contentious. A meeting of the Duma deputies and other 
Bolshevik leaders, including Kamenev, was held at Ozerki outside 
St Peterburg. But the Okhrana broke up the discussions on 4 
November, found incriminating material (which included Lenin's 
recommendations) and arrested all participants. At the subsequent 
trial, in February 1915, Kamenev disowned Lenin's defeatism. 
 Ad Extirpanda 
79 
Bolshevik Duma deputies such as G.l. Petrovski and M. K. 
Muranov refused to break ranks; and Lenin's regret at their exile 
to Siberia was alleviated at least somewhat by the evidence that 
Bolsheviks in Russia were ready to take a stand on their anti-war 
principles. 51 
In October 1914, Lenin travelled to Geneva and Zurich to talk 
with other Bolsheviks. 52 Plans were made, with the assistance of 
V. A. Karpinski, to revive Social-Democrat. Finances were still tight, 
and only around 2000 copies could be printed: each issue amounted 
to only two sides of a single sheet of paper. Most copies, moreover, 
were sent to addresses in western and central Europe. 53 Communica-
tion with Russia remained hazardous. Even so, a few copies reached 
Petrograd. The first wartime issue of Social-Democrat, no. 33, was 
made on 1 November. The front page included a manifesto on the 
party's attitude to the war. The Bolshevik central emigre apparatus 
had rapidly begun to re-emerge. 
Debate with fellow Bolsheviks in Switzerland induced changes in 
Lenin's stance on the war. Karpinski asked why, if social-democrats 
were 'internationalists' who hated the governments of all belligerent 
countries, did Lenin prefer a German victory over Russia? Karpinski 
also queried Lenin's rhetoric. Was it fair, he asked, to describe the 
Russian armies as 'Black Hundred bands'. Did Lenin really contend 
that all Russian soldiers, conscripted from the peasantry and the 
working class, were like the reactionary antisemitic thugs of the pre-
war Black Hundreds?54 Lenin excised the slur from his statements. 
More importantly, he ceased to advocate 'defeatism' exclusively for 
Russia. He still suggested in Social-Democrat that the Russian regime 
was the worst of Europe's regimes and that Russia's defeat was more 
desirable than that of any other nation. 55 But he also declared that 
socialists of every country should call for their respective govern-
ment's military defeat. 56 Thus Lenin urged multilateral defeatism. 
This exculpated him of the charge that his internationalism was 
belied by anti-Russianism, but it exposed him to the accusation of 
misunderstanding how wars are waged. How could all governments 
be simultaneously defeated? Lenin brushed the question aside. 
Instead he insisted that defeat for any nation was likely to engender 
revolution. The objective, then, was not military defeat for its own 
sake but the creation of conditions for a political upheaval. Socialist 
seizures of power would become possible. 57 
Lenin added that the politics of each belligerent state had become 
inextricably linked to the politics of all the others. Socialism could 
 80 
Lenin: A Political Life 
not be expected 'to complete its victory within the framework of a 
fatherland'. 58 The introduction of socialism had to be conceived in 
terms of Europe as a whole. The struggle would ultimately be fought 
between the Continent's working classes and its middle classes, and 
national borders would mean nothing in such conflicts: class war 
would envelop Europe. Before 1914, Lenin had said that the 
outbreak of conflict among the European powers should be 
countered by socialists who would launch a revolutionary war. He 
had not specified what this would involve. In 1914 his meaning 
became clearer as he proposed a new slogan: European civil war!59 
Plekhanov treated such proposals as the product of a deranged 
mind. He did not deign to examine the practical details, or rather the 
lack of them. For Plekhanov, Lenin had become an insane sloganeer 
instead of a serious politician. But if Plekhanov would not argue with 
Lenin, Lenin relished the chance to debate with Plekhanov, who 
travelled from France on 10 October 1914 to address a Russian 
emigre gathering in Lausanne. Lenin attended, and not wanting 
Plekhanov to withdraw because of his presence, he buried his face in 
some papers at the back of the hall until the proceedings began. 
Plekhanov's speech lasted an hour and a half. At its end, Lenin stood 
up to denounce what he regarded as mere chauvinism and to claim 
that Plekhanov had parted company forever with Marxism.60 The 
significance of the confrontation was considerable. This was the first 
time that Lenin had shown unconditional disrespect to Plekhanov to 
his face and at a public meeting.61 His aggressiveness was not 
confined to Russians. He no longer had the slightest respect for 
any leading Marxist in Europe.62 He lashed out at the German 
Social-Democratic Party, and named names. Kautsky's refusal to 
condemn Kaiser Wilhelm, according to Lenin, was as heinous as 
Plekhanov's argument in favour of Russian national self-defence.63 
Another precedent had been set. For the first time, apart from small 
gatherings of Bolsheviks, Lenin had publicly castigated Karl 
Kautsky. A psychological Rubicon had been crossed. 
It was Lenin's extremism that resulted in his Bolshevik friends 
remaining isolated from other Russian Marxists in emigration who 
equally abhorred Plekhanov's 'defencism'. Martov and Trotski in 
Paris were among these. Lenin declared his opinion frankly: 'It 
would not be a bad thing if the Germans took Riga, Tiflis and 
Helsingfors!'64 They too expected the war to induce Europe's long-
awaited socialist revolution. Lenin did not initially oppose a 
rapprochement. He remarked of Martov: 'This writer is now doing 
 Ad Extirpanda 
81 
what a social-democrat should do.' Praise indeed, by Lenin's stand-
ards. Martov must have pinched himself to check that he was not 
hallucinating. Lenin also dubbed Golos ('The Voice') as the best in 
Europe.65 Again, Martov must have blinked in astonishment. 
But there was a snag. Martov and Trotski rejected any call upon 
workers in Russia and elsewhere to work for the military defeat of 
their respective countries as unrealistic. They urged a more flexible 
policy. Both men saw that the popular desire for peace in Europe 
would strengthen as the rigours of war worsened; and they wanted 
social-democrats to join all movements, socialist or not, that 
expressed this desire.66 Martov in particular had a profounder 
understanding of the barbarism unleashed by the war.67 Lenin's 
almost puerile stridency about 'European civil war' had no echo in 
their statements.68 More particularly, Martov and Trotski did not 
despair of winning over other socialists who did not yet directly 
oppose their governments. Kautsky, for them, was not yet a lost 
soul.69 N. S. Chkheidze, leader of the Menshevik Duma fraction, was 
equally keen to avoid a premature split in the ranks of European 
socialism. The Menshevik Duma deputies, unlike their Bolshevik 
counterparts, were not arrested; and it irritated Lenin that Chkheidze 
retained opportunities for legal propaganda. His heart hardened fast 
against compromise with non-Bolsheviks in the Russian Social-
Democratic Labour Party. The fact that neither Chkheidze nor 
Martov would break organisational ties with straightforward 
'defencists' such as P. P. Maslov confirmed Lenin's inclination to 
reject all thought of negotiating with the Mensheviks. 70 
The Bolsheviks would go it alone among Russian social-demo-
crats. Social-Democrat was designated as the organ of the Central 
Committee. Lenin turned the paucity of surviving Central Committee 
members to his advantage. He tacitly reasoned that he and Zinoviev, 
if only they remained at liberty, were perfectly entitled to set up a 
new central newspaper howsoever they wanted. For the same reason, 
no doubt, he was in no hurry to co-opt new Central Committee 
members. He and Zinoviev could cheerfully continue to call 
themselves the Foreign Bureau of the Central Committee and take 
decisions in the Central Committee's name.71 Lenin also aimed to 
have tight control over the Committee of the Foreign Organisation. 
Its fund-raising and co-ordinating functions would be useful: and 
presumably Lenin did not want it to emerge as a rival Bolshevik 
body. Its collapsed condition made this easier. He therefore planned 
to call a conference of all Bolshevik foreign sections in Bern in 
 82 
Lenin: A Political Life 
February 1915 and secure the re-election of the Committee of the 
Foreign Organisation. 72 
'THE COLLAPSE OF THE SECOND INTERNATIONAL' 
Lenin was signalling, for the first time in his career, that the 
establishment of socialism in Europe's advanced industrial countries 
had become an immediate possibility and objective. He did not say 
why he came to this attitude, and he may well have made up his mind 
before defining what objective circumstances encouraged this optim-
ism. It was to his notebooks, as late as 1916-17, that he confided 
such thoughts. 73 In the meantime, he worked to found a Third 
International and to win socialist allies in Europe. Two major 
pamphlets were written. The first was The Collapse of the Second 
International. Published in early June 1915, it attacked the positions 
of Martov, Trotski and Kautsky. Lenin kept track of Kautsky's 
articles, and incorporated further criticisms as he composed both 
pamphlets. Kautsky had allegedly brought about 'an unheard-of 
prostitution' of Marxism and was a Miidchen fiir alle.74 The second 
pamphlet, Socialism and the War, was co-authored in August 1915 
with Zinoviev. Again, the imagery was florid with sexual innuendo; 
Lenin was not so prim in print as in his outward behaviour. Collapse 
of the Second International stated the formal case that the parties of 
the Second International at Stuttgart in 1907 and at Baste in 1912 
had undertaken to oppose their countries' entry into a continental 
war, and to use any such military conflict for 'the acceleration of the 
fall of capitalism'.75 This commitment, according to Lenin, had been 
infringed. He indicated that the Basle Manifesto had been composed 
with precisely the kind of war which broke out in 1914 in mind. The 
war was not a traditional struggle for national independence or for a 
limited redrawing of territorial boundaries. It was 'imperialist'; it was 
a fight to the death between two armed coalitions of powers bent 
upon global domination. 76 The talk of the Allies about the need to 
liberate Belgium was rhetoric. Germany's communiques about her 
desire to assist Austria-Hungary in her legitimate wish to fend off 
Serbian aggression was eyewash: the war was about worldwide 
political and economic hegemony. 77 
In Lenin's presentation, the Basle Manifesto had predicted that 
the outbreak of a European war would be accompanied by a 
revolutionary situation; and he argued that this had been confirmed 
 Ad Extirpanda 
83 
by events in July-August 1914. Supposedly, revolution in Europe 
had been possible. There had been a 'crisis' in governing circles; there 
had been a sharp worsening of material conditions; there had been a 
'raising of the activism of the masses'. 78 This analysis suffered from 
certain defects. Neither at Stuttgart nor even at Basle had the Second 
International stipulated unconditionally that a declaration of war 
should be met by the immediate organisation of a revolution. 79 
Consequently, Lenin could not nail down his specific charges. But he 
was correct in Jess formal terms: the Basle Manifesto had certainly 
given the impression that the parties belonging to the Second 
International would oppose all governments daring to plunge the 
Continent into war. The voting of war credits was an unmistakable 
infraction of the International's decision. A minority of Europe's 
socialists had sustained the line of International; the majority, as 
Lenin increasingly pointed out, had broken it. 
A second defect lies in Lenin's contention that a European 
revolutionary situation existed. Undoubtedly there was political 
trouble for the Russian imperial authorities, especially in St 
Petersburg, in the month before the declaration of war. But the 
unrest faded rapidly after the emperor declared war on Germany and 
Austria-Hungary. Still less was a revolutionary situation discernible 
in other countries. Neither the Allies nor the Central Powers 
exhibited serious tensions within their ruling elites. Nor was there 
much opposition to the national war effort among the various social 
classes. On the contrary, it was a moment of near-universal 
patriotism in Britain, France and Germany; even Austria-Hungary 
experienced little disturbance apart from among the Czechs and a 
few other national minorities.80 The labour movement across Europe 
had been active before 1914 in strikes and protests; but calls and 
support for revolutionary action were remarkable for their scarcity. 
Lenin also asserted that there had been a drastic deterioration of 
wages and conditions before 1914; but several groups within the 
working class were better off than ever before. In fairness to Lenin, it 
must be acknowledged that other groups were worse off and that 
standards of living differed from country to country. But lower 
wages and poorer conditions do not demonstrate the existence of a 
revolutionary situation. Lenin's assertions were based on inadequate 
sociology and shaky argumentation. 
His commentary on the German Social-Democratic Party, too, was 
unreliable. He did not bother with the ascendant party leaders who 
voted in favour of war credits in the Reichstag; for him, they were 
 84 
Lenin: A Political Life 
beneath contempt. Lenin was instead infuriated with Kautsky, Haase 
and their 'centrist' colleagues who refused to break unequivocally 
with the rest of their party. Kautsky felt that a summons to the 
German workers to take to the streets would fall on deaf ears; he saw 
no point in inviting arrest for an obviously doomed adventure.81 He, 
unlike Lenin, recognised the patriotic mood of the German working 
class. 
In addition, The Collapse of the Second International maintained 
that Kautsky was merely trying to cast the blame on 'the masses'. 
Only the party leaders, according to Lenin, were in a position to act 
with sufficient knowledge and decisiveness in the swiftly-changing 
conditions of pre-war crisis. The masses could not act if firm 
guidance failed to be supplied. The difficulties for the workers 
became greater once war had been declared: censorship was 
imposed; conscription was introduced, and the penalty for disobe-
dience was death.82 Other Russian Marxists, however, believed that 
Lenin and Zinoviev idealised German working-class attitudes. 
According to the right-wing Menshevik, P. P. Maslov, the German 
government could count on most German social-democrats to 
approve of expansionist war policies;83 and his left-wing Menshevik 
colleague A. S. Martynov added that the notion that German 
workers were infused with revolutionary zeal was the result of 
looking at Germany with spectacles tinted with 'Jacobinism' and 
'oriental messianism'. 84 Plekhanov highlighted how isolated the 
German far-left socialists under Karl Liebknecht were in the Ger-
man Social-Democratic Party, and he suggested that German 
socialism's doctrines would quickly be 'revised' in favour of a more 
explicit nationalism in the event of a German victory in the war.85 
Other leaders of the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party, such 
as Trotski and Bukharin, were less scathing about the German 
workers and maintained faith in the imminence of a German 
socialist revolution. 86 Yet they also perceived that patriotic support 
for the war effort was a serious impediment to the achievement of 
that objective. Lenin referred to the problem only glancingly; the 
greater problem, in his view, was constituted by the sins of the party 
leadership.87 
Consequently Lenin's demand for the abandonment of the Second 
International and the establishment of a Third had few supporters 
outside Bolshevik circles. Martynov declared that only political 
'sectarians' would delight in the Second International's permanent 
demise. 88 Plekhanov was nearer to Lenin in washing his hands of the 
 Ad Extirpanda 
85 
Second International; but Lenin could not found a Third Interna-
tional with a Plekhanov, who stoutly defended the necessity for 
Germany to be defeated. 
And so Lenin was compelled to explain why the break with the 
German Social-Democratic Party had to be final. Here he borrowed 
several arguments from Robert Michels, whom he had mocked for 
years. 89 Command over German socialism, according to Lenin, had 
been taken by the party's permanent paid officials; and he claimed 
that these tacitly rejected revolutionary policies and had undergone a 
process of embourgeoisement. He refused to accept Michels's analysis 
in its entirety, and continued to scorn him in public utterances.90 
Lenin denied that all organisations, regardless of political orienta-
tion, eventually give rise to bureaucratic practices in response to the 
technical requirements of fast, informed and co-ordinated decision-
making. It was only the economic side of Michels's work that he 
incorporated; and he did this mainly by borrowing from the 
researches of Grigori Zinoviev (who was less reluctant to acknow-
ledge his intellectual debt to Michels).91 Zinoviev alleged that the 
German Social-Democratic Party's officials were supported mainly 
by the skilled and better-paid workers, who outnumbered the 
unskilled in the party's ranks. Following Michels, Zinoviev added 
that 'petit-bourgeois' recruits to the party, such as innkeepers and 
clerks, were a rising proportion of the membership. This whole 
'labour aristocracy' benefited from the German economy's expansion 
and objectively had a stake in the expansionist foreign policy 
espoused by Bismarck and his successors in Berlin. There was 
therefore a firm social base for the development of the party's 
'opportunism' in 1914.92 
Reproducing the outline of Zinoviev's detailed sketch, Lenin 
suggested that such socioeconomic factors explained the party's 
abandonment of revolutionary commitments and the implicit adop-
tion of a strategy of peaceful and piecemeal reforms. The ascendant 
party leadership called itself social-democratic. It was actually, in 
Lenin's abusive caricature, a congeries of 'social-chauvinists'. It had 
become a 'political detachment of the bourgeoisie'.93 
Where Zinoviev and Lenin marched intellectually, not only 
Michels but also European social-democratic leftists such as Rosa 
Luxemburg and Anton Pannekoek had gone before.94 The rightward 
shift of the German Social-Democratic party was not imaginary. The 
question for sociologists today is whether a mainly economic 
explanation is sufficient, and the answer must surely be no. At last 
 86 
Lenin: A Political Life 
Lenin had shed the complacent optimism about the German Social-
Democratic Party so evident in What Is To Be Done?. In organisa-
tional questions he remained predominantly a practical political 
leader in search of practical solutions; the broader issues of 
contemporary political sociology passed him by. His naivete pre-
vailed for several further years, and in many ways never left him. 
Nor, as regards the particular circumstances of the war, was he ever 
to admit that political constraints bore down heavily upon Kautsky 
and his colleagues in the conditions of state power and popular 
opinion of Wilhelminian Germany. But to expect anything else of 
Lenin is to misunderstand his mood and aims in 1914. He wanted to 
stake out a political ridge to be won. He wanted to construct a 
beacon for guidance to others. He exaggerated and distorted, and his 
zeal led him into simplistic intellectualising. In Socialism and the War 
he made his objective explicit. He wanted 'A Marxist International 
without and against the opportunists' .95 Under such a slogan, no 
non-Marxist would belong. Not even Marx had required a self-
professedly Marxist International, and only Lenin and friends 
suggested the formation of an International which would exclude 
Marxists deemed to have incorrect opinions. 
STRUGGLES AMONG BOLSHEVIKS: 1915 
Lenin, getting his second wind after the shocks of mid-1914, was 
pleased. The first full year of war was nearly catastrophic for Nikolai 
II's government. The Russian armies advancing into East Prussia 
were rebuffed. Catastrophe ensued at the battle of Tannen berg and a 
retreat deep into Romanov territory was undertaken. 'Russian' 
Poland was overrun by German forces; and Galicia, too, was 
returned to the Austrians in summer 1915. Disasters in the field 
were compounded by difficulties in the factories. A shortage of 
munitions was growing. And, after the initial rallying around the 
government after the declaration of war, industrial conflict returned. 
The emperor agreed to permit the establishment of 'war-industry 
committees', which would include representatives of both employers 
and workers. The intention was to surmount the technical impedi-
ments to factory production for the army's requirements, and to 
lessen the tensions which produced strikes. Not only liberal but also 
socialist politicians exploited the committees for their own ends. 
Even so, the government's administratative problems compelled its 
 Ad Extirpanda 
87 
consent to the establishment of a central organ uniting zemstva and 
municipal councils. Hospitals at the front line were set up from 
private charitable funds. Gossip about the empress Aleksandra's 
Germanophile leanings and unfounded rumours about her liaison 
with the 'holy man' Grigori Rasputin spread everywhere. The Kadets 
and other liberals sensed their opportunity and demanded 'a 
government of public confidence'; they especially sought the dis-
missal of the aged and reactionary premier I. L. Goremykin and his 
Cabinet in favour of liberally-inclined ministers.96 
The emperor would not yield so much. He appointed himself 
commander-in-chief in summer 1915, taking full responsibility for 
the war effort. The Eastern front steadied and became almost as 
static as the Western front; trench warfare techniques were employed 
with efficiency. The factories increased production. The Kadets 
talked subversively in private but acted loyally. The war-industry 
committees were shunned by the Bolsheviks; it was mainly the right-
wing exponents of Menshevism, under Kuzma Gvozdev who joined, 
and these were committed to national defence. Industrial conflict 
occurred frequently in the last months of 1915. But the Okhrana 
coped adequately, strike leaders were arrested and Bolshevik party 
groups were hunted down with notable zeal. 
None the less Lenin and his associates felt that the chances of 
revolution in Russia had increased. The problem for them was to 
communicate with their fellow factionalists from abroad. In mid-
October 1914 Lenin had initiated a scheme whereby Aleksandr 
Shlyapnikov, a Petersburg Bolshevik leader, would move to Stock-
holm to operate as courier between Switzerland and Russia. 
Shlyapnikov was an able underground organiser. He also had 
valuable experience of working abroad, having been employed as a 
craftsman in the Hendon aircraft works in north London. Towards 
the end of the year, Shlyapnikov had written to Lenin revealing that 
support for his attitude to the war was growing among Bolsheviks in 
Russia. He made arrangements for the regular dispatch of Social-
Democrat to Petrograd (as St Petersburg was renamed, to avoid its 
Germanic linguistic connotations).97 Shlyapnikov also spoke at the 
Congress of Swedish social--democrats in November. Yet Lenin's 
hopes about Shlyapnikov were soon dashed. Shlyapnikov and his 
colleague and lover, Aleksandra Kollontai, also asked Lenin to move 
to Scandinavia to facilitate better contact with St Petersburg. They 
themselves went to Oslo and left the Bolshevik transport arrange-
ments in ruins. Communication with Russia ceased for weeks.98 At 
 88 
Lenin: A Political Life 
such a distance it was hard for Lenin to dissuade them from being so 
unco-operative (and he was subsequently, when it was too late, to 
recognise the cogency of their request).99 
There were also troubles in the Swiss emigration. The conference 
of all the emigre Bolshevik sections, scheduled for the beginning of 
1915, was delayed by the 'uncooperative' attitude taken by a small 
section living near the village of Baugy outside Lausanne. These 
included young theorists such as Yuri Pyatakov and Nikolai 
Bukharin. While accepting many strategical notions put forward by 
Lenin, they objected to his pre-war writings on national self-
determination and disliked his neglect of the peace movement. 100 
They refused to attend unless Lenin guaranteed to give them the 
floor at the conference to put their case. At last, on 14 February 
1915, the proceedings commenced. 101 
In general, the conference was a victory for Lenin. The war was 
defined as imperialistic; all socialists were called upon to oppose their 
governments; multilateral defeatism was accepted as policy; and the 
idea that a democratic peace was achievable without revolution 
across Europe was rejected. 102 These ideas were, in fact, acceptable 
to the Baugy group; and Lenin agreed to trim his proposals of the 
bits that offended them. Definitive resolution of the disputes between 
them was postponed. 103 Bukharin and Pyatakov continued to argue 
against the right of national self-determination on grounds made 
familiar by Rosa Luxemburg. To their mind, in the age of 
imperialism, there was no possibility of a sealed-off national 
economy; and, in the political sphere, the creation of new nation 
states would only impede the spread of internationalist sentiments 
among Europe's workers. The Baugy Bolsheviks added an inflection 
to Luxemburg's argument which would have annoyed her. If national 
economies were becoming inextricably enmeshed with each other, 
then revolution in any single country would have immediate and 
profound repercussions elsewhere. There was therefore no longer 
much point in Russian social-democrats emphasising the reforms to 
be demanded when the Romanov autocracy should fall. Instead they 
should take a European perspective and stress socialist objectives. 104 
Bukharin came perilously close to repudiating the old Russian 
Marxist premise that Russia's next revolution would be a 'bour-
geois' one. This, as yet, was heresy for Lenin. 105 
Yet Bukharin and Pyatakov did not carry the conference with 
them; and Lenin had pragmatic reasons for not exacerbating or 
advertising his conflict with the Baugy group. Bukharin and 
 Ad Extirpanda 
89 
Pyatakov had independent financial means, and agreed at the 
conference to place them at the Central Committee's disposal. This 
was a powerful incentive to Lenin to dispel fractiousness. In addition, 
Bukharin disowned any aim to drop the demands for reforms 
embodied in the party programme since 1903. 106 Bukharin, in his 
own view, simply desired a switch of the party's focus of work from a 
Russian bourgeois revolution towards a European socialist revolu-
tion; he did not deny that the forthcoming revolution in Russia 
would be bourgeois. Lenin was the sort of theorist who, in the 
Middle Ages, would have become cantankerous about the number of 
angels who could stand on the point of a needle, but for once he saw 
the sense in amicably talking matters over with Bukharin at 
leisure. 107 
Social-Democrat's future was secured. In 1915 it appeared roughly 
once a month. Fourteen issues appeared in 1915, carrying twenty 
four pieces by Lenin; he oversaw all stages of its production. 108 He 
had none of the problems which had plagued him about Pravda. 
There was even sufficient money to found a journal, Kommunist, with 
the assistance of Bukharin and Pyatakov. Indeed it was more their 
project than Lenin's. 109 Kommunist was intended to provide a forum 
of Marxist intellectual discussion and to attract participation from 
left-wing, anti-war socialists from other countries. Articles were 
commissioned from Karl Radek and the Dutchman Anton Panne-
koek. Such collaboration was crucial if Lenin's Bolsheviks were to 
appear as something greater than a tiny Russian sect. Bukharin was 
also willing to help repair the damage done by Shlyapnikov's self-
removal. After the Bern conference of Bolshevik emigres, Bukharin 
moved to Scandinavia. 110 In fact, Shlyapnikov quickly returned to 
his transport duties. Switzerland was so much the centre of 
international socialist debates in the war that Lenin may have seen 
Bukharin's transfer as a mode of ridding himself of a rival. Yet a 
price had to be paid. Scandinavia was bound to remain the main 
clandestine transit point for Bolshevik newspapers and correspon-
dence en route to Russia; the linkmen and couriers for the Bolshevik 
Committee had a marvellous opportunity to manipulate the Bol-
shevik faction's activity. Perhaps Lenin trusted in Bukharin's 
manifest good nature and continuing high regard for him. 
Furthermore, Lenin had other things to preoccupy him. He was 
not alone in seeing the need for a European anti-war initiative; and, 
while he called for action, others acted. The International Socialist 
Bureau was virtually inoperative. Based in Brussels until 1914, it had 
 90 
Lenin: A Political Life 
had to be evacuated to The Hague. The dissensions besetting its 
members discouraged its secretary Camille Huysmans from holding 
meetings. 111 The obvious tactic for Lenin and Pannekoek was to 
create their own international co-ordinating body. But the actual call 
for this came from the Swiss socialist Robert Grimm and the Italian 
Odino Morgari. Martov had similar thoughts. In spring 1915, 
Grimm announced the convoking of an anti-war socialist gather-
ing. 112 The location was to be the Swiss Alpine village of 
Zimmerwald. A march had been stolen on Lenin. It was evident 
that several non-Bolshevik Russian Marxists such as Martov and 
Trotski would also be invited. There was also the likelihood that the 
Socialist Revolutionaries would be present. Lenin's joy at the news 
was not undiluted. 113 
'THE NOTEBOOKS ON PHILOSOPHY' 
Lenin's expressions of pleasure in 1915 were directed at matters more 
arcane. He returned, after a break of half a decade, to his 
philosophical studies. Day after day was spent in the Bern Public 
Library. He had been shocked that several theorists previously 
enjoying his approval had adopted policies on the war which he 
deemed to be inimical to the traditions, commitments and interests of 
the international socialist movement. Foremost among these was 
Plekhanov. When writing Materialism and Empiriocriticism in 1908-
9, Lenin had been intellectually close to Plekhanov. His aim had been 
not only to denigrate Aleksandr Bogdanov as a politician but also to 
indicate the kind of philosophy acceptable to Marxists: and 
Plekhanov's influence on Lenin's chapters had been strong. 114 Now 
Plekhanov represented everything Lenin found politically distasteful. 
Lenin believed that 'correct' policy should stand upon 'correct' 
premises in philosophy, and he was moved to re-examine the 
philosophical issues at stake. His present objective was to discover 
what misinterpretations of Marxian epistemology and ontology had 
provoked the alleged political betrayal made by Kautsky, Plekhanov 
and other leaders of the Second International in 1914. It was in 
character for Lenin to jot this down, even in his private notes, in 
terms of the mistakes of others; at no point did he directly criticise 
his own statements in Materialism and Empiriocriticism. And yet, 
implicitly, the endeavour was also an attempt to see where he himself 
had been mistaken. 
 Ad Extirpanda 
91 
Shortly before the outbreak of war he had signed a contract to 
write a short biographical piece on Karl Marx and already planned 
to include a summary of Marxian philosophy. He began the work, in 
peacetime, in July 1914. 115 The biography was completed by 
November; but Lenin had by then started to fill many new note-
books on philosophy. He continued with this into 1915. The main 
texts he studied were works by Aristotle, G.W.F. Hegel and L.A. 
Feuerbach: all to trace Marxism to its theoretical underpinnings. 
This, obviously, was not casual toil. He was serious enough about 
his labours to read Aristotle's Metaphysics in a German-Greek 
parallel-text edition, checking the original Greek where the German 
translation seemed unconvincing. 116 Lengthy excerpts from Hegel's 
History of Philosophy and The Philosophy of History were also made 
by him. Altogether he filled twenty-three notebooks. Lenin, like most 
leading Russian revolutionary intellectuals, found such tasks of self-
education congenial (although few equalled his multilinguistic 
competence). Both Plekhanov and Martov re-engaged their minds 
with philosophical issues after 1914. 117 The fact that Lenin over-
looked the wartime writings of his adversaries indicates how deeply 
submerged he had become in his own theoretical quest. He was 
behaving like a typical Russian revolutionary intellectual in setting 
himself the objective of achieving a comprehensive 'world-view'; 
politics alone was not enough. But his private delight in reading these 
philosophers was paralleled by a commitment to publish his resultant 
thoughts. Contrary to a widely-held opinion, it is the merest accident 
that the considerations in The Notebooks were published only 
posthumously. In 1915 he had started to draft a forbiddingly 
substantial item, 'Towards the Question of the Dialectic.' 118 Had it 
not been for his other concerns in 1916 and the occurrence of the 
February Revolution in 1917, he would have tried to see it into the 
press. 
Lenin impugned Plekhanov for attacking Kant's epistemology 
'more from the vulgar-materialist than from the dialectical-material-
ist viewpoint'. 119 Plekhanov had done a service, in Lenin's view, by 
attacking Kantianism. In fact, Plekhanov after 1914 came to discern 
healthy sides in Kantianism; he even praised the call for moral 
imperatives in politics, and claimed that Marx's deployment of terms 
such as 'duty' and 'right' had displayed the same attitude. 120 Lenin 
overlooked Plekhanov's startling change of heart. It fell to Martov to 
attack Plekhanov in the press for undermining the 'scientific' 
principles of socialism with its amoral notions of historical inevit-
 92 
Lenin: A Political Life 
ability and impersonal socioeconomic forces. 121 What Lenin held 
against Plekhanov was a mistake of longer standing: namely his 
neglect of the importance of Hegel. Lenin pointed out that Marxists 
in general had attended more to the writings of Feuerbach and G. 
Buchner than to the Hegelian dialectical method espoused by Marx 
himself. 122 
Lenin chuckled at this discovery, making the following remark in 
his notebooks: It is impossible to achieve a complete understanding 
of Marx's Kapita/ and especially its first chapter without first 
thoroughly studying and understanding all of Hegel's Logic. 
Consequently not one Marxist has completely understood Marx in 
the past half-century. 123 These words have often been treated as a 
stupendously arrogant dismissal of other Marxists. 124 Such an 
interpretation is not entirely accurate; for Lenin claimed not that 
everyone had no understanding whatsoever of Marx, but that no one 
had 'complete' understanding. He did not despise previous 
Marxology in its entirety. Nevertheless he certainly hinted that only 
he had the capacity to gain the necessary 'complete' understanding. 
Arrogance enough, perhaps. Even so, he must also be given credit for 
perceiving that leading Marxist theoreticians after Marx and Engels 
had not examined, nor even properly recognised, Hegel's influence 
upon Marx. According to Lenin, their philosophical outlook 
consequently lacked dynamism, supplying a rationale not for 
authentic Marxists but for those who were politically passive. The 
writings of both Plekhanov and Kautsky could therefore be seen as 
avoiding essential questions about how to transform the world. 
Supposedly they merely 'reflected' the world. 
He omitted to specify that these objections could be levelled with 
even greater cogency at Materialism and Empiriocriticism. He was 
seldom lavish in purveying self-criticism, and his Notebooks contain 
no explicit explanation as to how his own views had changed. What, 
then, did he find in Hegel? Very important was Lenin's examination 
of Hegel's ideas about cognition. Lenin altered his reflection theory 
of knowledge. In a striking rupture with Materialism and 
Empiriocriticism, he declared that the mind was not akin to a 
camera: 'Cognition is the reflection of nature by man. But it is not 
a simple, not a direct, complete reflection, but a process of a series of 
abstractions, of the formation, of the construction of concepts, laws, 
etc.; and these concepts, laws, etc. (thinking, science = 'the logical 
idea') also comprehend conditionally, approximately the universal 
pattern of an eternally moving and developing nature.' 125 
 Ad Extirpanda 
93 
This inelegant declaration was an off-the-cuff note not yet refined 
for publication; its galloping style gives a good impression of the 
excitement experienced by Lenin at the time. He wanted to emphasise 
that knowledge cannot be total, but only partial. Our concepts 
therefore have to be 'hewn, chopped, supple, mobile, relative, 
reciprocally-linked, united in opposites in order to embrace the 
world'. 126 This led Lenin to a further modification. In Materialism 
and Empiriocriticism he had written about the brain as an unme-
diated register of external phenomena. In his wartime notebooks, 
however, he accorded a more or less autonomous significance to 
concepts and laws and categories, and dropped his previous analysis 
of human thought as a mere physiological reflex. 127 He stressed that 
cognition should be understood in terms not only of mind and matter 
but also of concepts. Plekhanov had said this all along, and had been 
ridiculed by Lenin's Materialism and Empiriocriticism for doing so. 128 
None the less, Lenin also went beyond Plekhanov in 1915 by 
asserting that the validity of concepts and categories was testable 
only by their usefulness when applied to real situations. Practice' 
was the sole litmus-paper test. This, according to Lenin, was Hegel's 
view; and a rereading of Marx's Theses on Feuerbach convinced him 
that Marx himself had held the same opinion. 129 
An emphasis on practical experimentation was hardly new among 
Russian Marxists; it had been characteristic of Lenin's old philo-
sophical adversary, Aleksandr Bogdanov, in Empiriomonism. 130 The 
closeness of standpoint is still more remarkable when Lenin's 
reconsiderations about ontology are taken into account. Lenin now 
focused on the universe's infinite complexity. Causality was not 
simple: no phenomenon results exclusively from the action of any 
other single phenomenon. Instead the world encompasses innumer-
able interactions in space and time, and the attribution of causal 
influences must therefore be exceedingly intricate. 131 
Bogdanov had elaborated his ideas from a dialogue between 
Marx's Theses on Feuerbach and the neo-Kantianism fashionable 
among many Austrian and Russian Marxists around the turn of the 
century. Lenin's philosophical development had taken a different 
track: through a rereading of Marx alongside a study of the works of 
Hegel which had influenced Marx himself. Nevertheless the resultant 
outlooks are remarkably similar. A further contention of Lenin's 
reinforces this impression. Throughout his notes on Hegel, he 
enthused about what he took to be proof that 'leaps' take place in 
nature. At 0 C, for example, water changes its quality and becomes 
 94 
Lenin: A Political Life 
ice. 132 The idea of 'contradictions' and 'breaks' and 'interruptions of 
gradualness' were brought to the forefront of Lenin's philosophical 
work. 133 They had previously been evident mainly in his political 
practice and his political ideas; but they had been banished from his 
epistemological work. In the war, he brought his philosophy abreast 
of his politics. Bogdanov would no doubt have relished the spectacle 
of his opponent being drawn into a refutation of the very arguments 
aimed at Bogdanov in 1909. But Lenin's work was committed to the 
pages of his notebooks. The rethinking of his epistemology and 
ontology remained unpublished and was unknown to others. 
Yet the shift in Lenin's thought did not occur on all fronts. Those 
accounts postulating a complete revolution in his philosophy after 
1914 are misleading. For Lenin still detested Kant, and still used 
'Kantian' as a term of abuse. 134 He sustained his hatred quite 
without feeling obliged to re-examine Kant's works. Lenin at his 
best was never more than a gifted reader of other philosophers' 
works. He made no contributions of his own; and, as his continued 
casual contempt for Kant indicates, his competence was patchy. 
Important differences between the respective standpoints of Lenin 
and Bogdanov anyway remained. Lenin's publication of a second 
edition of Materialism and Empiriocriticism in 1920 was not 
fortuitous. 135 Several tenets of his earlier book stayed intact in the 
Notebooks on Philosophy. Lenin's jottings reaffirmed the independent 
existence of the external world. They also stated that man's abstract 
conceptions derive from 'a knowledge of the pattern of the objective 
link of the world'. 136 (Let us remember that this infelicitous phrasing 
occurs in work-in-progress notes.) In addition, Lenin repeated that 
philosophy was divided into two principal camps, materialism and 
idealism; 137 Bogdanov thought such affirmations to be neither 
provable nor worthy of discussion. Lenin, moreover, continued to 
categorise Hegel as a philosophical idealist while recognising his 
intuitive 'genius' and stating that Hegel had produced the 'embryos 
of dialectical materialism'. 138 Indeed Lenin declared, albeit to 
himself: 'Intelligent idealism is nearer to intelligent materialism than 
is stupid materialism.' 139 But this was still far from being a 
wholehearted endorsement of Bogdanov's ideas. The old Lenin 
reappeared in his draft philosophical article of 1915, when he 
triumphantly proclaimed the attainability of 'living, fruitful, true, 
powerful, omnipotent, objective, absolute human knowledge'. 140 
When all is said and done, Lenin failed to achieve internal 
coherence in his newer philosophical views. Accretion, rather than 
 Ad Extirpanda 
95 
basic reconstruction, had taken place. The lately-added layers of 
thought display a greater awareness of epistemological subtleties. But 
they are like a new wing built on to a house without thought for the 
architectural strains imposed. 
This matters for the fate of Soviet philosophy in ensuing decades. 
In seeking to maintain the appearance of Marxist 'orthodoxy', 
writers in the USSR through to the mid-1980s had to trace the 
lineage of their notions from Lenin. The fact that his ideas were left 
in such a hotch-potch makes them less restrictive for later Soviet 
philosophers. Lenin's self-contradictions and explorations allow an 
astute scholar to select a wide range of ideas as sources of professed 
influence. 141 This is one principal reason why Soviet philosophical 
discourse has not been devoid of interesting and inventive qualities. 
The Notebooks on Philosophy do not constitute even a minor intrinsic 
contribution to twentieth-century epistemology and ontology. Nor 
do they contain an accurate account of the history of European 
philosophy. 142 In particular, the relationship between Hegel and 
Kant is misrepresented. The two German philosophers, who were 
crucial to Lenin's understanding of the continental tradition, were 
never as distant from each other as he claimed. Nor did he pick up 
the theme of 'alienation', developed by Marx on the basis of Hegel's 
ideas. This brings us back to our point of entry. While exploring, 
Lenin was bent on discovering what would be congenial for him. He 
sought and found a rationale for adaptability in politics. Lenin's 
philosophical cerebrations did not precede and predetermine his 
politics. No doubt there was some mutual influence between the 
politics and the philosophy; but, in the main, it was the politics which 
produced the philosophy, and not vice versa. 
For Lenin, the toil in the Bern Public Library was well worthwhile; 
the abundance of exclamation marks, whether in approval or 
exasperation, are sure signs that he was invigorated by the 
experience. He also gained reassurance. His reading convinced him 
that it was not sensible to expect to make no mistakes as a leader. 
This opinion is offered towards the end of the Notebooks, coming as 
a tangential remark in his commentary on Aristotle's Metaphysics: 
'The approach of mind (man) to a particular thing is ... complex, 
divided, zigzaggish, including within itself the possibility of a flight of 
fantasy from life ... It is stupid to deny the role of fantasy even in 
the strictest science.' 143 This is reminiscent of Lenin's invocation in 
What Is To Be Done?: 'It is necessary to dream.' 144 But he went 
further in 1915. He referred to a statement by the Russian democrat 
 96 
Lenin: A Political Life 
D. A. Pisarev of the mid-nineteenth century that even 'a bad dream 
can have its uses' .145 Pisarev's meaning was that a man's vision, even 
if proved wrong by experience, may have brought about practical 
human benefit before its incorrectness is demonstrated. Here was 
confirmation of the need to take risks, to take a gamble. Here was a 
frame of mind which sustained a lonely politician, far from home and 
distant from power; and which, in 1917, left him uninhibited in 
promoting his party's seizure of the reins of government. 
