 9 The View from 
Petrograd: November to 
December 1917 
NEGOTIATIONS ON POWER 
The 'October Revolution' was not a single act which titanically 
prescribed the entire political process for the rest of the country. 
Russia and its subject regions in 1917 experienced myriads of further 
revolutions after the fall of the Romanov dynasty, in cities, in the 
armed forces, and in the villages. Some preceded, others followed the 
Military-Revolutionary Committee's seizure of power in Petrograd. 
Some of these felt the initial impact of events in the capital more than 
did others; and, indeed, some of them also influenced the Petrograd 
uprising itself. Consequently, the Bolshevik Central Committee, with 
much skill and not a little luck, linked its political revolution in 
Petrograd to the revolutions elsewhere. There was a parallelism of 
intent: the various revolutions shared an antipathy to the policies of 
the Provisional Government and a belief that a radical alternative 
should be sought. Yet the Bolshevik Central Committee appreciated 
that, in the disintegrated and localised condition of politics at the 
time, the Petrograd seizure remained as yet a local revolution. 
Obviously, it was the crucial local revolution; but its impact had 
yet to be realised. 'Soviet power' under the Bolshevik aegis had to be 
disseminated across the country. This undertaking would put the 
strategy of Lenin to its greatest test. The parallel movement of the 
myriads of anti-Kerenski revolutions would inevitably be disrupted 
by an involuted and multilateral geometry of antagonisms among the 
classes and groups whose original commonalty of purpose had been 
the campaign to overturn the policies of the Provisional Government. 
In those first weeks it was unclear whether the Bolshevik-led 
revolution in Petrograd would prove adequate to guide and 
dominate the others. Nor was it even settled that Lenin and Trotski 
272 
 The View from Petrograd 
273 
would succeed in imposing their own particular vision on their 
Central Committee colleagues. The great question of coalition with 
competing socialist parties was unanswered. Russian politics were in 
a state of flux. Such had been the impotence of the Provisional 
Government and the hostility towards it that a socialist government 
of some sort would probably have emerged in late 1917 even if Lenin 
had not returned to Russia across Germany in his sealed train. But 
any socialist government, with or without him, would have con-
fronted similar immense problems in trying to control, reconcile and 
co-ordinate the parallel revolutions of 1917. 
And yet both Lenin and Trotski had returned from emigration, 
and their activity in late October gave them a directing influence over 
the design of the government and its policies which emerged from the 
uprising in Petrograd. With an impudent astuteness, which has been 
largely overlooked by historians, Lenin had succeeded in persuading 
the Bolshevik Central Committee to steer a course towards estab-
lishing a government without debating the same government's 
personal composition. This was like the stereotypical second-hand 
car dealer selling a vehicle without inviting the customer to look 
under the bonnet. In reality, neither Lenin nor Trotski had the 
slightest intention of sharing power with the Mensheviks and the 
Socialist Revolutionaries. The title of Lenin's letter to the Central 
Committee, 'The Bolsheviks Must Seize Power', gave an enormous 
hint about his aims; and his endless criticism and ridiculing of the 
Mensheviks as being a 'petit-bourgeois party' in pursuit of 'social-
chauvinism' was scarcely an attitude conducive to co-operation with 
them. 1 Lenin and Trotski did not make their opinion totally clear-cut 
until after 25 October: namely that they would countenance coalition 
only with the more radical members of the Party of Socialist 
Revolutionaries who had remained at the Second Congress of 
Soviets when their centrist and right-wing fellow members had 
walked out. 2 
Even so, it is mysterious why so many leading Bolsheviks stayed 
blissfully unable to recognise the extent of Lenin's intransigence. 
<;>therwise they might have hearkened more readily to Kamenev's 
and Zinoviev's arguments. But apparently even Kamenev, usually a 
perceptive assessor of Lenin's tactics, failed to discern the restrictive 
basis of his planned future government. 3 It took the October 
Revolution to expose the fact that Lenin and Trotski were political 
literalists. Their unconditional verbal assaults on Menshevism and 
Socialist-Revolutionism were not mere rhetorical gestures.4 
 274 
Lenin: A Political Life 
Lenin and Trotski were not alone in impeding the moves towards 
a wider all-socialist coalition. Dan and Chernov detested Lenin and 
Trotski both politically and personally and the October Revolution 
merely sealed the lid of their hatred. Clashes would have been 
inevitable over policies on the middle classes and their parties; on 
food supplies; on the rights of workers; and, ultimately, on the war. 
Lenin found it hard enough to keep his own Bolsheviks united in the 
winter of 1917-18, and the dispute over the signature of a separate 
peace in March 1918 was to come near to breaking up his party. In a 
governmental coalition with Mensheviks and Socialist Revolutionar-
ies the roles would have been different: he would have been the 
disunifier and the source of disruption. In such a role he had no 
equal in Russian politics. He had also acquired a co-leader in the 
person of Trotski who had the determination to strengthen his case 
in the Bolshevik Central Committee. The same Trotski who had 
once depicted Lenin as an incorrigible non-compromiser had 
emerged as the leader second only to Lenin in his opposition to 
compromise. Nevertheless, Lenin and Trotski had to face certain 
unpleasant realities. Firstly, the Bolsheviks were isolated from every 
other political force in the country; even the Left Socialist 
Revolutionaries refused to join the Council of People's Commissars 
(or Sovnarkom). Secondly, several members of the Bolshevik Central 
Committee had made the October Revolution on the assumption 
that 'soviet power' would be shared among all the various socialist 
parties and would not be a Bolshevik party monopoly. Out of 366 
soviets and army committees represented at the Second Congress of 
Soviets, according to an incomplete but believable questionnaire, 255 
had sent delegates to Petrograd on this basis; and no delegate had 
been dispatched with a mandate to seek the extrusion of non-
Bolsheviks from the new government. 5 
The exodus of the Mensheviks and Socialist Revolutionaries from 
the Congress had eased Lenin's position by permitting the claim that 
they had implicitly repudiated the objective of a general socialist 
coalition. But talk about such a coalition was quickly resumed, not 
only by Mensheviks and Socialist Revolutionaries but also by other 
Bolshevik leaders. Negotiations among all socialist parties were 
inevitable. Lenin's tactics had to be those of a spoiler; he could not 
countermand the inter-party discussions. In addition, it was not yet 
clear that the efforts of ex-premier Kerenski and General Krasnov to 
eject the Bolsheviks from power would prove fruitless. Lenin might 
yet need the help of the Mensheviks and the Socialist Revolutionaries 
 The View from Petrograd 
275 
even as they in their past had needed the Bolsheviks to suppress the 
Kornilov mutiny in August 1917. 
The Military-Revolutionary Committee felt a growing lack of 
confidence in the defensive capacity of the garrison troops. Worse 
still for Lenin was the announcement from the All-Russian Executive 
Committee of the Railwaymen's Union (Vikzhel) that, unless the 
Bolsheviks agreed to negotiations with other socialists, a rail strike 
would commence on 29 October. This encouraged the Menshevik 
Internationalists and leftists in the Jewish Bund to canvass more 
strongly in their parties for the inception of talks designed to produce 
a compromise with the Bolsheviks and an all-socialist coalition 
government.6 The Bolshevik Central Committee convened on 29 
October. Lenin and Trotski did not attend, and their absence remains 
unexplained. They had duties in Sovnarkom; but this was also true of 
others who none the less attended the Central Committee on that 
occasion. 7 Perhaps Lenin and Trotski were engaged in arrangements 
for the defence of the capital against the anticipated return of 
Kerenski in full force. But it is also possible that neither Lenin nor 
Trotski yet wanted to be seen as obvious road blocks in the way of 
inter-socialist harmony; or that they had already determined on 
coalition talks as a delaying tactic until such time as the Bolsheviks 
were in a stronger position. Certainly Lenin, by 1 November, was 
describing the negotiations as merely 'a diplomatic cover for military 
actions'. 8 
He was still taking a risk here. Kamenev was present at the 
Bolshevik Central Committee session on 29 October; and he and 
G. E. Sokolnikov were empowered to attend the talks presided over 
by the Railwaymen's Union.9 Kamenev seized his chance, just as 
Lenin would have done in his place: he participated vigorously in the 
talks and, by the late evening of 30 October, was consenting to the 
replacement of Sovnarkom with a so-called People's Council, with no 
places being kept for Lenin and Trotski. 10 
By then Lenin was feeling less constrained. Kerenski's counter-
coup had collapsed earlier the same day when Krasnov's Cossacks 
were routed by troops and Red Guards loyal to the Soviet 
authorities; and the likelihood of a national rail strike steadily 
receded. 11 Lenin could also complain that Kamenev as a negotiator 
had vastly exceeded his remit from the Central Committee, especially 
when ignoring the injunction that any coalition should be subject 
exclusively to the All-Russian Central Executive Committee of the 
Congress of Soviets. 12 Kamenev had conceded that not only soviets 
 276 
Lenin: A Political Life 
but also city councils and trade unions, including the Menshevik-led 
railwaymen, should control the government. 13 Trotski resumed the 
political offensive in the Bolshevik Central Committee on I 
November, opposing the exclusion of Lenin from any coalition. 
Obviously, he was not keen to see himself dismissed from the 
government either. The Bolsheviks, he exclaimed, had not made a 
revolution merely to negotiate it away. 14 Kamenev, Rykov and 
Zinoviev wanted the coalition negotiations to be pursued to a 
successful conclusion, 15 but Lenin and Trotski would tolerate them 
only as a delaying tactic. The Central Committee, siding with Lenin, 
called for talks to be resumed, but for Bolshevik representatives to 
deliver the ultimatum that the other parties accept the Bolshevik 
party line on peace, land, workers' control, food supplies and the 
struggle with Kaledin and Kerenski. 16 A further resolution made 
plain that the purpose of resuming talks was essentially to bring 
about 'a final cessation of further talks about coalitional power'. 17 
Meanwhile, the Menshevik central leaders were toughening their 
stance. The Decree on the Press led to raids on non-Bolshevik 
newspapers such as the liberal-owned Rech and even Den, which 
was run by the right-wing Menshevik (and one-time collaborator of 
Lenin's) A. N. Potresov. Politicians taken captive by the Military-
Revolutionary Committee had not been released, and fears increased 
for their ultimate safety. The Mensheviks, under Martov's influence, 
demanded on 2 November the liberation of all political prisoners 
along with an end to military actions and to what they referred to as 
the Bolshevik 'terror'. 18 
The terroristic aspects of the new government's rule were still in a 
perinatal condition: no one had presentiments about the scale of the 
Red (or indeed the White) Terror which was to develop when civil 
war raged in full flood. But ominous thresholds were being crossed in 
the first days of the October Revolution, and with reckless abandon. 
The Menshevik negotiating requests were the very least that a self-
respecting Menshevism could have made; but they were also enough 
to smash the hopes of any reconciliation with Bolshevism. By ten 
votes to five, the Bolshevik Central Committee condemned the 
'opposition' within its own midst as being intimidated by the 
bourgeoisie and supported only by 'the tired (and not revolution-
ary) part of the population'. 19 Lenin had outmanoeuvred Kamenev, 
pushing home his advantage with customary impassive ruthlessness. 
The next day, Lenin, while chairing Sovnarkom, announced his total 
opposition to the Vikzhel negotiations. Bolshevik power in Moscow 
 The View from Petrograd 
277 
had been secured; Vikzhel's authority over its own railwaymen was 
successfully challenged by the creation of a new union under 
Bolshevik direction; and food supplies were at last reaching central 
Russia from the Volga.20 The necessity of further pretence, in the 
eyes of Lenin and Trotski, had evaporated. Mensheviks and Socialist 
Revolutionaries could now be faced down, and the discussions with 
them aborted. 
Kamenev, Zinoviev, Rykov, Nogin and Milyutin had to face the 
consequences. Lenin drew up an ultimatum: either they obtained the 
party's approval to form a coalition government, and Lenin would 
feel free to campaign against such a government; or else Lenin would 
obtain the party's sanction and the opposition itself would campaign 
against Sovnarkom. Better an 'honourable and open split' than the 
existing messy unity.21 
No one with the merest acquaintance with Bolshevik history could 
think that Lenin was bluffing; he seemed to live by the motto: 'If in 
doubt, split.' Kamenev and his supporters none the less resolved to 
dig in their heels. They felt that, while Lenin's position had 
strengthened somewhat, their own was far from being hopeless. An 
already isolated Bolshevik government was getting ready to isolate 
itself further from several of the most prominent Bolshevik leaders. 
Kamenev thought that Lenin could not hold out for ever, however 
hard he tried; and Kamenev and his four colleagues resigned their 
places in the Central Committee on 4 November. They reserved the 
right to fight for their ideas in the party at large.22 Sovnarkom, too, 
was affected: Nogin, Rykov and Milyutin simultaneously gave up 
their places in the Council of People's Commissars.Z3 Kamenev 
withdrew from the All-Russian Central Executive Committee of the 
Second Congress of Soviets. In total, five out of fifteen People's 
Commissars refused to continue to work in Sovnarkom because of 
opposition to Lenin's and Trotski's intransigence. These included 
some of the party's most expert politicians. And there were others 
like Aleksandr Shlyapnikov, People's Commissar for Labour, who 
agreed not to leave their posts but made public their disgust with the 
role of Lenin and Trotski in the collapse of coalition talks. 24 
Yet Lenin's nerve held; and Trotski, far from apologising for the 
restrictions on press freedom, gloried in the arguments for repres-
sion. 25 Lenin was not so abrasive in public. He also remained 
imperturbable in tackling issues of broader politics. The Council of 
People's Commissars aspired to rule a country with a majority of 
peasants, and it was vital to reassure the peasantry that Bolshevik 
 278 
Lenin: A Political Life 
intentions were pure. Mariya Spiridonova and the other Left 
Socialist Revolutionaries could not be treated dismissively, even 
though they had refused to join the Soviet government at the 
Congress of Soviets of Workers' and Soldiers' Deputies. The Left 
Socialist Revolutionaries themselves were beginning to recognise that 
the Soviet government might not prove to be so ephemeral as once 
seemed likely. 
Consequently, contacts between Bolsheviks and Left Socialist 
Revolutionaries were never entirely cut. Left Socialist Revolutionar-
ies continued to attend the sessions of the All-Russian Central 
Executive Committee of the Congress of Soviets, badgering the 
Council of People's Commissars with criticisms of its officials' 
conduct.26 In another political context they might have appeared to 
be intent on taking on the role of loyal opposition. The temptation to 
join the Bolsheviks in coalition increased. It galled the Left Socialist 
Revolutionaries that Lenin and not Spiridonova had signed the 
Decree on Land, which Lenin unembarrassedly admitted was a 
decree purloined from Socialist Revolutionaries. With further 
agrarian legislation in prospect, Spiridonova and her associates 
would be in a much stronger position to influence its wording from 
within rather than from outside the Council of People's Commissars. 
For some days after the termination of coalition talks involving the 
Mensheviks and the Socialist Revolutionaries, Spiridonova conti-
nued to hold back. The Left Socialist Revolutionaries retained an all-
socialist coalition as their ideal objective. 27 But opinion was 
gradually shifting. Left Socialist Revolutionaries tended to lay a 
lesser blame on the Bolsheviks than on the anti-Bolsheviks for the 
breakdown of talks. They formed their own separate party in 
November 1917 and openly opposed Chernov at the Second All-
Russian Congress of Soviets of Peasants' Deputies.28 
This Congress, which convened in Petrograd from 26 November to 
10 December, had a majority of Left Socialist Revolutionary 
delegates.29 Chernov's centrist group was eclipsed by the dazzle of 
Spiridonova. With this mandate from peasant Russia in their 
pockets, the Left Socialist Revolutionaries felt able to re-enter 
negotiations with the Bolsheviks. Lenin was a willing interlocutor, 
and on 10 December seven Left Socialist Revolutionaries joined 
Sovnarkom as new People's Commissars. They had a minority of the 
places, and most key Commissariats were withheld from them, apart 
from those of Justice and of Agriculture. Bolsheviks argued that the 
Bolshevik party was entitled to this superiority since the Left 
 The View from Petrograd 
279 
Socialist Revolutionaries had delayed their entrance into govern-
ment until the going was safer. But both parties, for the time being, 
were satisfied by the deal. 30 
THE SPREAD OF SOVIET POWER 
Lenin's energies were large but not infinite. They were consumed by 
the problems of setting up Sovnarkom; of brow-beating his party's 
Central Committee; of cajoling the Left Socialist Revolutionaries 
into office; of overseeing the disposition of military and political 
forces in Petrograd to ensure the final removal of Kerenski and his 
diminishing band of supporters; of writing and elaborating the 
legislation which poured forth from the government's chaotic offices 
in the Smolny Institute. These were responsibilities enough for a 
whole Cabinet. 
He was not a good delegator of duties and functions unless he 
could keep a close eye on those to whom he was delegating. In other 
words, he was adept only at semi-delegation; and this was why his 
working relationship with Krupskaya had operated efficiently. 
However, in November 1917 he had no choice but to entrust 
provincial contacts to Yakov Sverdlov. Lenin's disrespect for him 
had long disappeared. Sverdlov was a brilliant and hard-working 
organiser (even though he suffered even more direly from an inability 
to delegate to others);31 and, as leader of the Central Committee 
Secretariat and chairman of the All-Russian Central Executive 
Committee of the Congress of Soviets, he sent off telegrams in all 
directions. His main difficulty consisted in fending off requests for 
assistance. Shortages of personnel, funds and propaganda material 
were more severe in the provinces than in Petrograd.32 Lenin, Trotski 
and Sverdlov knew that they barely had the capital under control, 
and that Kerenski's defeat might merely be the prelude to a grimmer 
civil war. If they agreed to distribute the Red Guards, Kronstadt 
sailors and Latvian riflemen throughout Russia, the result would be a 
dissipation of the party's metropolitan strength. Lenin repeatedly 
urged the need for local initiative and local efforts and achieve-
ments. 33 Elites could seize power; but the support and participation 
of 'the masses' was assumed to be vital if that power was to be 
maintained. Lenin in his writings continued to speak of the need for 
popular creativity. The ideas of The State and Revolution remained 
dear to him. The workers, soldiers and peasants had nothing to fear 
 280 
Lenin: A Political Life 
except fear itself: the lower social orders of Russia, he declared, had 
to make their own :evolution.34 
The language of his articles remained lofty and abstract. The 
Smolny Institute teemed with people who had come off Petrograd's 
streets and brought news of the dislocation produced by the October 
Revolution; but Lenin, who had had much success in identifying 
himself with the cause of the working class, gave little evidence of 
acquaintance with the concrete circumstances produced by the 
seizure of power. Violent incidents recurred in the capital; and 
administrative confusion abounded as the new structures of author-
ity were constructed and challenged, sometimes by the Bolsheviks 
themselves. There were occasional riots and not a few outbursts of 
drunkenness when wine-cellars were ransacked. While being warm 
and inspiring in face-to-face meetings in the Institute, Lenin 
continued to write the austere prose of the theorist of socialist 
revolution. He had insisted that insurrection was an art and not a 
science; but he left it to others to learn the artistic competence for 
themselves. 
Sverdlov was more down-to-earth but hardly exhaustive in his 
instructions. Asked for advice and assistance by the Berdyansk 
Bolshevik Committee, he responded: 'You understand, comrade, 
that it is difficult to give you instructions any more concrete than 
"All Power To The Soviets". This is apparently all that can be said, 
except to add that it is of supreme importance to take charge of the 
post and telegraph offices and also the railways. '35 Local Bolsheviks 
were simply implored to make their own political arrangements and 
keep an eye on the central party newspaper for general guidance. The 
Central Committee was acting in accordance with the stated 
Bolshevik philosophy of a dual revolution from above and from 
below; but it was equally a reflection of practical possibilities. And 
least of all did Lenin, the father of Bolshevik centralism, believe in 
principle in non-intervention in local affairs. On the contrary, he 
committed loyal forces to crucial armed struggles so long as 
Petrograd's defence was thereby not unduly weakened. Moscow 
was a case in point. The resistance to Bolshevism there was greater 
than in Petrograd. Fighting lasted for several days. 36 Nevertheless, 
the records of Sovnarkom reveal the overwhelming nature of the 
requirements involved in the establishment of a state machine at the 
centre. Not only Moscow but also the town of Vladimir and the 
Donbass region were discussed, but the topics related to nationalisa-
tion and financial assignations rather than to detailed political 
 The View from Petrograd 
281 
guidance and military support; and it had been local Bolshevik and 
soviet organs which had put them on to the agenda. 37 
The flimsy messages and even flimsier guidance issuing forth from 
Sovnarkom and the Bolshevik Central Committee in Petrograd left 
most soviets to their own devices. The transfer of authority was in 
any case easier in most other cities and towns of central Russia than 
in Moscow. A peaceful process was reported in Ivanovo-Voznesensk 
after the arrival of news about the Petrograd insurrection on 27 
October.38 Urban soviets in the region either were already under 
Bolshevik influence or else had a large and growing contingent of 
Bolshevik deputies. 
To the north-west, around Petrograd, it was the same story. Some 
soviets had for months been in the hands of socialists seeking the 
Provisional Government's overthrow. The Petrograd Soviet, despite 
a certain finessing of its relations with Kerenski in order to avoid the 
accusation of overt disobedience, had set such an example. The 
Kronstadt Soviet had been notorious for its virtual independence 
from Kerenski's control since early summer; and there were other 
such rebel soviets elsewhere: Ivanovo-Voznesensk in central Russia 
and the Volga town of Tsaritsyn in the south-east.39 The Urals, too, 
had soviets willing to recognise Sovnarkom. 40 Even in the south-east, 
in the old heartland of the Socialist Revolutionaries by the Volga, the 
Bolsheviks and other left-wing socialists secured their successes. In 
Tambov it took some days of violence before the transfer of power 
was effected, but in Nizhni Novgorod, there was little armed 
conflict;41 and the soldiers in the Kazan garrison were so pro-
Bolshevik that other groups in the population offered no resis-
tance. In Simbirsk, the native town of Vladimir Ilich Ulyanov-
Lenin, fighting broke out but the rapid victory of the pro-Bolshevik 
forces was never in serious doubt. Overall, the process was uneven 
and protracted. What became known as the triumphal march of 
soviet power stretched over the last months of 1917 and into 1918.42 
Lenin, Sverdlov and the various leaders of the Military-Revolu-
tionary Committee were jubilant, but they could still not observe the 
march at first hand; and the reports received by them were frequently 
delayed and inaccurate. Conversations by telephone or by the 
cumbersome Hughes apparatus provided only fitful linkage with 
the provinces.43 Lenin's decrees and proclamations had had an 
undoubted impact. They were characteristically formulated for their 
inspirational effectiveness. This concern to rouse the local soviets, 
trade unions and factory-workshop committees to revolutionary 
 282 
Lenin: A Political Life 
action helps to explain why Lenin, a trained jurist, was vague to the 
point of remissness in framing the legislation. The laws were 
instruments of agitation and propaganda; they displayed a commit-
ment to revolution at all costs which spilled over into legal nihilism.44 
Lenin was accustomed to explaining party policies in greater detail 
through the Bolshevik press, but this was no longer physically 
possible for an overworked politician. He published just one brief 
letter in the central party newspaper in November and December 
1917.45 Visits from provincial Bolsheviks were another channel of 
contact, but neither Lenin nor his visitors could expend many hours 
in verbal exchanges. Sovnarkom's chairman is recorded as having 
received a few dozen visitations from outside Petrograd in November 
and December 1917. Only one activist arrived from the Ukraine, and 
not all towns in Russia were successful in getting anyone through to 
him.46 Nevertheless, even this situation had its bright side for him. A 
large influx of party activists from the provinces could only have 
meant that the Bolsheviks were being forced to flee. In fact they were 
exercised by the tasks of taking and retaining power. And, when 
reportage on local developments reached Petrograd (and it must be 
borne in mind that Sverdlov was meeting more people),47 Sovnarkom 
and the Bolshevik Central Committee were confirmed in their 
optimism. The greatest gap in the daily news, unavoidably, related 
to the countryside. Sovnarkom and the People's Commissariat of 
Agriculture sent 50,000 agitators into the villages in the first six 
months;48 and Lenin, like the Romanov emperors before him, began 
to give personal audiences to peasants travelling to the capital. He 
knew that, unless the villages sided with or at least failed to oppose 
the Bolsheviks, all the political progress in the towns might be 
reversed. 
The news from the front was encouraging. Bolshevik party 
activists had won notable victories in elections to soldiers' commit-
tees on the northern sector of the Eastern front in the autumn; and 
the transfer of power in Petrograd left few generals with the illusion 
that the moment was yet propitious for a counter-revolutionary 
strike at Sovnarkom. Despite Bolshevik fears, there was a widespread 
distaste in the officer corps at all levels for intervening in politics. It 
is true that the Socialist Revolutionaries retained much sympathy 
among soldiers on the southern sector. And yet the chances of 
mobilising regiments against the Bolsheviks were as slim as in the 
north. On both northern and southern sectors, moreover, the Decree 
on Peace and the consequent negotiations for a truce with Germany 
 The View from Petrograd 
283 
and Austria-Germany were taken as a sanction for collective self-
demobilisation. The human material for a right-wing military coup 
was exiguous.49 
The soldiers streamed back in their millions to their villages. Many 
carried with them the first information that an October Revolution 
had occurred and that a leader called Lenin had issued a Decree on 
Land. The expropriation of the gentry's fields, equipment and 
buildings increased in pace and scope. Lenin lent his support in the 
Smolny Institute, listening to peasant complaints and encouraging 
them to push forward with revolutionary measures. 5° But the process 
also had its own dynamic; peasant soviets were increasingly being set 
up in Russia in late 1917.51 Their impact on the rural scene was not 
as substantial as that of their urban counterparts on the towns. The 
peasant land commune emerged ever more prominently as the 
instrument to implement peasant aspirations. The Decree on 
Land's injunction to maintain the larger capitalist estates intact 
was seldom accepted. Peasants who had left the commune under the 
Stolypin reforms of the pre-war period were obliged to rejoin if they 
wished to obtain a portion of the redistributed land.52 From the 
Bolshevik party's viewpoint, it was irritating that communes became 
so important. Lenin had made his name as an economist in the 1890s 
by trying to demonstrate that the communal arrangements of the 
Russian peasantry were a vehicle of rural capitalism. But the 
peasants' surge to take the solution of the agrarian question into 
their own hands pleased a Sovnarkom which depended on their 
acquiescence in the October Revolution. 
SECESSION AND FEDERATION 
The Bolsheviks could not afford to be satisfied with their successes in 
the Russian heartland, and aspired to spreading 'soviet power' to the 
non-Russian segments of the old empire; and Lenin was especially 
keen to embark upon a process of what we nowadays would call 'de-
colonisation'. This has become so widespread a phenomenon since 
the Second World War that it is important to recognise how 
extraordinary it was in 1917. The 'nationalities' were to be courted, 
Russian chauvinism disavowed. Yet Lenin, unlike the members of 
British and French cabinets in the 1950s, did not expect the result to 
 284 
Lenin: A Political Life 
be a large number of new nation-states. In Finland's case, to be sure, 
he encouraged secession. But his prognostication was that the 
granting of Finnish independence would act as a model for other 
subject peoples in Europe to emulate and would hasten the 
inauguration of a pan-European socialist order; he did not seek to 
establish Finland as a permanent nation-state on Russia's borders. 
But, as regards most other peoples of the empire of the Romanovs, 
he supposed that his offer of national self-determination would lead 
them to trust Sovnarkom and welcome a voluntary and non-imperial 
union with Russia. 
The shape of such a union was not defined. Stalin had been asked 
by the Central Committee on 21 October to produce 'theses' on the 
national question for submission to the Congress of Soviets, 53 but, 
distracted by his other commitments, Stalin failed to supply these. 
Only the broadest assumptions of policy were announced, and, in 
fact, these came mainly from the hand of Lenin. The appeal issued to 
'workers, soldiers and peasants' from the Second Congress of Soviets 
on 25 October offered a guarantee of 'the authentic right of self-
determination to all nations inhabiting Russia'. 54 Lenin's Decree on 
Peace, on 26 October, repeated the idea that no nation in Europe 
should be forcibly retained within the confines of a state against its 
will. Such retentions were to be regarded as annexationist. 55 Stalin 
was appointed as People's Commissar for Nationality Affairs and 
instructed to establish practical links and to elaborate policies. This, 
too, could not be effected overnight. In the meantime, on 2 
November, a Declaration of the Rights of the Peoples of Russia 
was accepted by Sovnarkom and issued next day under the signature 
of Stalin and Lenin; it called for 'a voluntary and honourable union of 
the peoples of Russia', abolishing all previous national privileges and 
other discriminations and confirming the right of each nation to 
secession. 56 
Lenin and Stalin remained allies on the national question; and, 
since principal opponents such as Bukharin and Pyatakov were 
outside Petrograd (in Moscow and Kiev), and others such as 
Dzierzynski were busy in the Military-Revolutionary Committee, 
they pushed forward with the official policy as formulated by the 
April Party Conference. Much heat had disappeared from intra-
Bolshevik discussions about the non-Russian nationalities by 
summer 1917,57 and Lenin acted with a stealthy purposiveness. 
Secession was quickly offered to the Finns. By October, Finland 
was in reality self-governing; Kerenski had no more been able to rule 
 The View from Petrograd 
285 
its people than he could impose his authority in Russia. Lenin hoped 
that Finnish independence would be secured by a revolutionary 
socialist administration of Finns. 58 
The policy was fraught with an unanticipated difficulty: the 
Finnish social-democrats, whose left wing under Karl Wiik had 
been expected by Lenin to install a socialist government, failed to 
come to power. Lenin's letters to Finnish social-democrats before the 
October Revolution reveal how badly he misjudged the socialists of 
Finland even though he had spent the summer among them. 59 The 
Finnish social-democrats were reluctant to budge even after the 
October events in Petrograd. Offers of direct military assistance from 
the Bolshevik commanders of the Russian naval garrisons in Finland 
did not dispel Wiik's caution.60 H'! and his colleagues organised a 
general strike in Finland's cities; but they resisted the Bolshevik plea 
to make a revolution because they neither wanted civil war nor were 
convinced that the Soviet government would long survive in 
Russia.61 Without becoming the party of government, moreover, 
the Finnish social-democrats were in no position to declare their 
country's independence: the summer's elections had produced a 
conservative administration in Helsinki under P. Svinhufvud. The 
Bolsheviks made clear that they would grant independence even to 
Svinhufvud's cabinet. But again they had no success. Svinhufvud did 
not want to offend the Allies and wanted to obtain independence 
from the Constituent Assembly in Petrograd. Only gradually were his 
doubts about the practical benefits of secession and about Lenin's 
sincerity dispelled. At last, on 18 December 1917, a bemused official 
delegation from Helsinki to Petrograd obtained on request a 
document confirming the secession of Finland from ties of state 
with Russia.62 
The fiasco of forcing independence down the throats of Finnish 
politicians proved that those contemporaries who felt that Lenin had 
no ideological beliefs and was exclusively an unprincipled power-
seeker had misunderstood him. While he changed some policies, he 
stuck to others. No black-and-white depiction can be accurate for so 
complex a figure; and the diplomatic traffic between Petrograd and 
Helsinki testifies to a substantial initial commitment to his pre-
October policy on the 'national question'. Nevertheless, those 
Bolsheviks who had argued against Lenin's line on secession were 
buoyed up by the fiasco. European socialist revolution was not to be 
the consequence of Finnish independence, and Svinhufvud rather 
than Wiik held sway in Helsinki. 
 286 
Lenin: A Political Life 
The only other subject nation to be guaranteed sovereignty over its 
affairs was Poland. This did not need to come in an official 
declaration by Sovnarkom since the Provisional Government had 
already granted independence to the Poles.63 The German armies had 
overrun all the Polish territory of the Russian empire and prevented 
a Russo-Polish exchange of formal documents. And yet this also 
made it easier for the Bolshevik negotiators to gain support 
throughout the party for the tactic of embarrassing the German 
and Austrian delegations at the peace talks in Brest-Litovsk by 
affirming the need for all peoples to be accorded the right of national 
self-determination. Russians were no longer oppressing Poles; it was 
German military might that governed Poland. 64 Lenin and Stalin co-
operated closely in elaborating policy towards the rest of the former 
empire. Finland and Poland had always been recognised as special 
cases by Lenin; but he had specified that the Ukraine might be the 
next most likely nation to want to secede.65 Neither Finland nor 
Poland were crucial to Russia's internal economic and political well-
being in 1917, but the same was not true of the Ukraine. Lenin and 
Stalin continued to goad the Finnish social-democrats into a seizure 
of power after December. They had an even stronger wish to have a 
socialist administration in Kiev. They began carefully, relying both 
on the attractiveness of their Decrees on Peace and on Land, and on 
the ability of Ukrainian Bolsheviks to seize power for the soviets in 
Kiev, Kharkov and Ekaterinoslav. 
The Ukrainian Rada shared the same reluctance as Svinhufvud's 
Finnish cabinet to declare independence. But on 3 November 1917 it 
announced that, in the absence of a legitimate and effective power for 
the Ukraine, it was assuming power. The prospect of conflict with the 
Soviet authorities in Petrograd was increased by the Rada's demand 
that any future state settlement should involve a federal union 
between Russia and the Ukraine. No Bolshevik leader yet approved 
the principles of federalism. 66 
The Bolsheviks in Kiev avoided a clash with the Rada, but 
prepared for the forthcoming Congress of Soviets in the Ukraine. 
But the Rada steadfastly opposed Sovnarkom and linked up with the 
anti-Bolshevik force among the Don Cossacks. A clash in Kiev was 
inevitable, especially after the arrest of Bolshevik leaders in Kiev in 
late November. Until then the Sovnarkom had declined to intervene 
actively. Apart from disseminating copies of its legislation of 25-26 
October, it had contented itself with appeals to the brotherhood of 
nations and with the restoration of Ukrainian treasures and national 
 The View from Petrograd 
287 
symbols to Kiev as proofs of good intent. 67 On 4 December a formal 
ultimatum was delivered to Kiev. 68 Further discussions followed. A 
difficulty for the Bolsheviks was that the Ukrainian Congress of 
Soviets in Kiev found them in a minority. 69 The Bolsheviks 
adjourned to Kharkov, held their own rival Congress of Soviets 
and - guided now by their left-wing leaders- moved to seize power in 
all major cities. Sovnarkom judged the moment appropriate for 
intervention. Troops were dispatched from Petrograd under the 
leadership of V. A. Antonov-Ovseenko into the Ukraine. Bolstered 
by local Red Guards, they eased the maintenance of soviet power in 
several areas and, on 26 January 1918, entered Kiev. The Ukraine 
was Red at last. 70 
Policy statements took a new turn. Federation, previously a word 
spat out even by Lenin (who was the Bolshevik leader favouring the 
gentlest treatment of the national question), became part of current 
parlance. On 3 December Lenin had drafted a 'Manifesto to the 
Ukrainian People', published in Pravda two days later, which 
announced the hope that a federal agreement could be worked out 
between Russia and the Ukraine.71 The Ukrainian Bolshevik leftists, 
who regarded such suggestions as an undesirable concession to 
nationalism, were displeased. 72 But they needed Petrograd's support 
and succumbed to Lenin's pressure; and the knowledge of their 
electoral weakness in the Ukraine dissuaded them from disobedience 
to the Bolshevik Central Committee. 73 
The idea of federation was generalised in the 'Declaration of 
Rights of the Toiling and Exploited People', written by Lenin for 
presentation to the Constituent Assembly. The Soviet state, he 
declared, should be founded 'on the basis of a free union of free 
nations as a federation of Soviet republics'. 74 This was a declaration, 
not a decree; and the decrees themselves were in any case more 
declarative than decree-like. Practical regulations were undefined. 
None the less, a sea-change in Lenin's attitude had occurred. It was 
among the earliest changes of direction on major policy undertaken 
by him after the October Revolution. Nation-based territorial units 
had been his previous aim, and he had argued for them with an 
intemperate vigour. In conceding the federal principle, he not 
untypically gave no explanation of the reasons; indeed no acknow-
ledgement was given that a concession had been made. The behind-
the-scenes calculations and debates are not yet documented. But the 
result, undoubtedly, was a recognition that the 'national movement' 
was becoming stronger in several places of the old empire. Nor did 
 288 
Lenin: A Political Life 
Bukharin and the Bolshevik left have a practical alternative. Their 
only 'policy' was constituted by the objectives of European socialist 
revolution and a United States of Europe.75 In 1917, this offered no 
recipe for action in the former Romanov lands. But inaction had 
never been a Bolshevik virtue; and Lenin skilfully advocated a 
practical plan which at least had the merit, in the eyes of Bolshevik 
leftists, of seeking the retention of a multinational state. 
The Ukraine had been the key region, but was far from being the 
only region of importance to Sovnarkom's survival. Mensheviks held 
authority in Georgia, and their opposition to the October Revolution 
meant that the Georgian Menshevik leadership acted as if they were 
independent: they would submit themselves only to a legitimately-
elected Constituent Assembly. Bolsheviks came to power in Baku, in 
Azerbaidzhan (as it was coming to be called); but the local Moslem 
parties and influences grew in the surrounding countryside: the 
chances of an anti-Russian alliance was growing. In Armenia, the 
zeal to break with Russia was weaker; but the Bolsheviks held little 
influence and would have only weakened their position if concessions 
to national feeling had not been forthcoming. In Siberia, the Socialist 
Revolutionaries were attempting to set up an autonomous state 
administration. To the north west, Estonian and Lithuanian national 
movements were being roused. Even in Belorussia, where ethnic 
differentiation between Belorussians and Russians was frail and 
where the menace posed by the Germans was the greatest concern 
for the population, the beginnings of a campaign for autonomy were 
noted. 76 
The national surge among Estonians and Latvians was linked to 
support for the Bolsheviks in Russia. In Estonia, the Tallin Soviet 
announced the inception of 'soviet power' in November. The 
Congress of Soviets in Latvia, which was already under partial 
occupation by the Germans, did the same in mid-December 1917.77 
This was a success for Lenin; but it was exceptional, and the broader 
and more optimistic expectations he had described to the April Party 
Conference were being dashed. The set-backs of November and 
December made him less generous in his promises to the non-Russian 
regions. He had never touted secession as an end in itself; it had 
always been his assumption that the offer of secessionist rights would 
sooner or later bring Russians and non-Russians together voluntarily 
in a single multinational state as well as ignite an anti-imperialist 
explosion in the colonies of Germany, France and Britain. His 
disappointments hardened his policy: no plebiscites on national 
 The View from Petrograd 
289 
aspirations would be held on Soviet-governed territory; and the 
idea that the interests of the working class, as distinct from the 
nation as whole, in each non-Russian region should be paramount 
was increasingly used as a device to maintain the borders of the old 
empire. The Romanov lands were not seething with anti-Russianism. 
Social and economic issues, rather than the composition of the Kiev 
administration, continued to preoccupy Ukrainian peasants. Similar 
tendencies were observable elsewhere. Yet nationalist feelings were 
undeniably growing in fervour; and the signs were few that a robust 
pro-Sovietism pervaded the non-Russian regions. Even the goal of 
federation would not be achievable except by means of military 
force. 78 
POLITICAL REPRESSION 
Sovnarkom's main worries of the moment were concentrated on 
Russia. The administration, joined by the Left Socialist Revolutio-
naries, was already involved in acts of political repression. In the last 
two months of 1917, Spiridonova's comrades were the only party 
which did not suffer directly at the hands of the Bolsheviks. Attentive 
observers of Lenin before the October Revolution can hardly have 
been surprised. He had written in favour of dictatorship. He had 
urged the need for a system of civil rights and judicial procedures 
which expressly discriminated against the bourgeoisie; and he had 
described all parties to the right of the Bolsheviks as mere 
appendages of the Kadets and their pro-bourgeois interests. He 
had eulogised force as the midwife of history's successful revolu-
tions.79 
But it was only after the October Revolution that most people who 
supported the Bolsheviks became fully aware of his ferocity. Lenin 
had hitherto adjusted his rhetoric in order to allay any feelings that a 
government under his leadership would produ•.' a national blood-
bath. He had written only rarely about the usefulness of terror as a 
means of consolidating a revolutionary administration; and he had 
often done this without using the word 'terror'.80 Viktor Nogin, on 
resigning his post as People's Commissar of Internal Affairs, 
predicted that the Soviet government would steadily move towards 
tt::rrorist techniques if the Bolsheviks refused to form a broad socialist 
coalition.81 Yet there was no Bolshevik anathema on the application 
 290 
Lenin: A Political Life 
of mass terror. On the contrary, Lenin approved its use by the 
Jacobins in the French Revolution; and, at the Third Party Congress 
in 1905, the Bolsheviks displayed a willingness to resort to it in 
Russia if the need appeared to arise.82 Lenin's approval of mass 
terror was accompanied by a rejection of the populist-terrorist tactic 
of assassinations of individual state officials as a means of bringing 
about a crisis of the Romanov state. He thought such a tactic wasted 
the energies of the revolutionary movement. But his attitude, even to 
'individual terror', was flexible. In 1905, when the Romanov state 
was already enveloped in a deep political crisis, he encouraged the 
killing of individual state officials as heartily as did the Socialist 
Revolutionaries. His previous disapproval of the tactic had been 
based on purely pragmatic considerations. 83 
Even so, he had specifically stated in summer 1917 that he only 
expected to have to arrest '50-lOO' leading industrialists and bank-
ers.84 There is no firm evidence available that Lenin and colleagues 
such as Trotski were hell-bent, before the October Revolution, on 
instigating a campaign of summary arrest and execution of large 
numbers of people who had committed no crime but who happened 
to belong to a social category deemed politically inimical to the 
regime. Lenin made threats on political opponents quickly after the 
seizure of power. But he avoided the blatant advocacy of terror made 
by Trotski as early as l December: 'You wax indignant at the naked 
terror which we are applying against our class enemies, but let me tell 
you that in one month's time at the most it will assume more terrible 
forms, modelled on the terror of the great French revolutionaries. 
Not the fortress but the guillotine will await our enemies.'85 
Systematic summary repression which did not go as far as gross 
physical maltreatment or capital punishment occurred with not only 
the sanction but even the straightforward encouragement of the 
central Soviet authorities in the first month of Soviet power, and 
several weeks before the establishment of the All-Russian Extra-
ordinary Commission for Combating Counter-Revolution, Specula-
tion and Sabotage (or, as it appears in its Russian acronym: the 
Cheka), which is rightly regarded as the forerunner of today's KGB. 
Such repression was undertaken by organs which, at Lenin's 
direction, were kept deliberately unaccountable for their actions. 
The facility of Lenin's resort to terror raises a question about the 
sincerity of his pre-October statements. Had he really believed that 
the dimensions of repression would be low? It cannot be discounted 
that, as a utopian thinker, he had been temporarily convinced that 
 The View from Petrograd 
291 
resistance to Bolshevism would be small and that he would 'need' to 
use little violence. He may well also have failed to consider his future 
administration's methods in practical detail. It is also true that the 
scale of terror was raised only gradually by Lenin. And yet, when all 
is said in his favour, it is striking how easily, quickly and frequently 
he came to conclusions that Sovnarkom had to amplify its repressive 
zeal. The suspicion must be strong that he had always known that he 
would deploy greater violence than he was willing to recognise before 
October 1917. 
Several Bolshevik leaders expected that the People's Commissar-
iats of Internal Affairs and of Justice would preside over law and 
order, but Lenin had other ideas. He admired the Military-
Revolutionary Committee's ruthlessness in rooting out saboteurs, 
speculators and opponents of the regime; and he knew how little 
control over its activities was exercised by the Petrograd Soviet. (It 
was no accident that the Committee contained several Bolsheviks, 
including Felix Dzierzynski, who were to lead the Cheka). At a 
Sovnarkom session under Lenin's chairmanship on 15 November, a 
decision was taken to transfer various matters from the People's 
Commissariat of Internal Affairs to the Military-Revolutionary 
Committee.86 This session just happens to have been documented 
and published. But a series of parallel ad hoc order-enforcement 
agencies- to call them organs of agencies of law-enforcement would 
be a linguistic travesty - sprang up in the first month of Soviet 
power; less is known about their activities, not least because little 
constraint was placed on them in the fulfilment and recording of 
their tasks. Lenin encouraged them and protected them against 
complaints. 87 
Admittedly, the Bolshevik Central Committee and Sovnarkom 
were not hallucinating when they talked of enemies who planned or 
could reasonably be expected to plan armed opposition towards the 
Bolsheviks. The Bolsheviks had seized power; they could scarcely 
anticipate a pat on the back from their foes. There is a 'road to 
Dublin' aspect to this argument; for no one had forced Lenin and 
Trotski to grasp power in the way they did: they could hardly 
demand sympathy for their subsequent dilemmas. Even so, Lenin left 
nothing to chance. He implicitly endorsed Cromwell's dictum that, 
while it is good to strike while the iron is hot, it is better to make it 
hot by striking. Closures of non-Bolshevik newspapers continued. 
Criticisms were directed at the Decree on the Pr~ss - or 'Lenin's 
decree', as it was sometimes called - in the Central Executive 
 292 
Lenin: A Political Life 
Committee of the Congress of Soviets. Lenin brushed them casually 
aside.88 He supported Dzierzynski and the Military-Revolutionary 
Committee in all their actions. The application of restrictions on 
acceptable political discourse was only a part of Dzierzynski's 
business. He and his associates hunted out 'speculators' flouting 
the grain-trade monopoly. Squads were also sent out to round up 
looters and drunkards. 89 Civil servants refusing to co-operate with 
the new regime found themselves in trouble with the Military-
Revolutionary Committee. 90 
The uncontrolled actions of such agencies induced complaints not 
only from other political parties but also from the general public. Yet 
it was military opposition which caused the Bolsheviks the greatest 
anxiety. On 9 November, orders were given for the arrest of the 
Committee for the Salvation of the Motherland and the Revolution. 
Its members included not only liberals but also several Mensheviks 
and Socialist Revolutionaries; all of them sought the forcible 
overthrow of Bolshevism.91 The scope of permissible repression 
widened. On 16 November, Sovnarkom decided, on balance, not to 
incarcerate Milyukov.92 But by 28 November this inhibition had 
disappeared: Lenin signed a Sovnarkom announcement that all 
members of the Kadet party, regardless of their opinions and 
activity as individuals, were to be treated as 'enemies of the people' 
and placed outside the law.93 
The regularising of order-enforcement agencies was becoming a 
practical necessity. On 6 December, Dzierzynski was asked by Lenin 
at Sovnarkom to draft measures for the establishment of a new body. 
With a civil service strike again in prospect, Dzierzynski got down to 
work quickly and his draft was passed by Sovnarkom the following 
day. Dzierzynski made no pretence of an interest in 'justice': Cheka 
was required to conduct an unrelenting struggle without heed of legal 
niceties, or of the number of innocent victims. 94 This momentous 
decision was made almost casually. The Cheka's formation was not 
even dignified by the passing of a Sovnarkom decree; and no 
reference was made to the official legislative body, the Central 
Executive Committee of Congress of Soviets.95 The speed of 
Lenin's turn to repressive measures leaves little doubt that before 
October he had been holding back in public about his intentions. An 
ideological thread linked his 1905 statements on terror with his post-
October practice. The licence he granted to the Military-Revolu-
tionary Committee and, later, to the Cheka does not demonstrate a 
veritable lust for terror. And yet he certainly did not find terror 
 The View from Petrograd 
293 
entirely unpalatable. When other leading Bolsheviks sought to 
restrain Dzierzynski, Lenin freed him to follow his repressive 
instincts. 
GERMANY AND THE ALLIES 
The messages issuing from Sovnarkom and its chairman continued to 
be euphoric, and the elevated mood persisted even while the lurch 
down into repressive measures steepened; there were few Bolsheviks 
remaining inside the party who did not have highly unrealistic 
notions about what could be accomplished in the Russia of 1917. 
Those who had a more realistic judgement, such as Kamenev and 
Zinoviev, had resigned their leading positions; and others were like 
Stalin who, although they had always doubted that Europe was as 
yet truly pregnant with revolution, kept their worries to themselves. 
Yet Lenin, too, was pondering the excessive optimism of the 
Bolshevik left with growing agitation; he was relieved, in early 
December, when Zinoviev resumed his Central Committee seat.96 
His worries were acute about international relations. Even the 
leftists at the Sixth Party Congress had acknowledged that an 
offensive revolutionary war was not feasible; and the creation of a 
People's Commissariat of External Affairs under Trotski indicated 
an awareness that diplomacy retained its usefulness even if Trotski 
predicted that he would be able to 'shut up shop' after publishing the 
secret treaties of Nikolai II. Lenin had never claimed that a German 
socialist revolution was certain to occur literally on the morrow of 
the Russian socialist revolution. He had also been vague about how 
to set about encouraging such a revolution in Germany, short of 
engaging in a revolutionary war. His main specific proposals had 
been for Russian soldiers to fraternise with German soldiers on the 
Eastern front, and for the Soviet government to enter serious 
negotiations for a general 'democratic peace'. On 7 November, 
therefore, Sovnarkom instructed General Dukhonin, Commander-
in-Chief of the Russian armed forces since the Provisional Govern-
ment's last days, to parley with the German High Command with the 
purpose of bringing about an armistice throughout Europe. On 8 
November Trotski informed Western ambassadors in Petrograd 
about the Soviet government's commitment to the achievement of 
such an armistice.97 Dukhonin procrastinated and was replaced by 
 294 
Lenin: A Political Life 
the Bolshevik N. V. Krylenko. Russian troops were encouraged to 
fraternise over the trenches with German troops. Trotski's coup de 
theatre et de guerre was to carry out the promise to publish Nikolai 
II's treaties. At last it was revealed that the Allies, who had 
advertised their democratic intentions in the war, were planning a 
redivision of whole regions of the world in the event of a military 
victory for the Russians, the French and the British.98 
Naturally, there was no positive response from the Allies about the 
armistice proposal; and on 14 November it was agreed by the Soviet 
and German authorities to initiate negotiations for a separate truce 
on the Eastern front. 99 Lenin and Trotski issued a proclamation 
blaming the Allied powers for compelling them to take the step. 100 
The embarrassment of governments in London and Paris was 
matched only by their rage at the run of events. Trotski's 
associate, A. A. Joffe, led the Soviet diplomatic team at the talks 
with the Germans in the border town of Brest-Litovsk. The Ger-
mans, keen to be able to release troops from service on the Eastern 
front for combat on the Western front, were enthusiastic negotiators. 
On 2 December a separate armistice was signed. 101 
The Allied governments perceived that unofficial contact with 
Sovnarkom was vital to inhibit Russia's complete disengagement 
from the War. Trotski met with their various representatives in 
Petrograd 102 Lenin, either because of preoccupation with domestic 
affairs or else because he wished others to be tainted with 
involvement in such unpleasant duties, held himself aloof. The 
separate armistice with the Germans, furthermore, called for the 
inception of talks about a permanent peace. Trotski was already 
pondering aloud whether the Russians could carry on fighting if 
Germany failed to have its expected socialist revolution. He still 
thought a revolutionary war would have to be fought if all else failed; 
but his appreciation of the difficulties was notable. 103 Lenin, mean-
while, persisted in his silence about revolutionary war. 104 He and 
Trotski at least agreed that, for the moment, the talks with the 
Central Powers at Brest-Litovsk should be used as an instrument for 
spreading Soviet propaganda to the workers and soldiers of 
Germany. The ingenuity of the new diplomacy of the Bolsheviks 
was countered by the subtlety of the German and Austrian 
negotiators. Far from being embarrassed by the Soviet demand for 
'national self-determination' as the principle to underlie any general 
peace in Europe, German Foreign Secretary Ricard von Kuhlmann 
employed it to undermine the Bolsheviks' pretensions to sovereignty 
 The View from Petrograd 
295 
over most of the old Russian empire. Consultations of popular 
opinion in the Ukraine and in regions of the Baltic provinces and the 
Transcaucasus would predictably fail to produce pro-Bolshevik 
majorities. 
Nor did the diplomats of the Central Powers have sleepless nights 
about the requirement that they too should offer self-determination 
to regions under their occupation. They could easily demand that the 
Allies should do the same; and they expected that the result would 
thus be that they would avoid giving up any territory. The German 
military command found such scheming to be uncongenially indirect. 
But Kuhlmann and his Austrian counterpart Count Czernin 
persuaded them that there was a likelihood of transferring troops 
from the Eastern to the Western front; and that diplomatic feints 
were necessary for the achievement of this objective. 105 The Brest-
Litovsk peace conference proper opened on 9 December. The Soviet 
delegation was headed by A. A. Joffe, who resembled Trotski 
inasmuch as he was a left-wing Marxist who had joined the 
Bolshevik party only in 1917. Joffe's early optimism was confoun-
ded. The German negotiators revealed that the principle of national 
self-determination would require that Sovnarkom disclaimed sover-
eignty over non-Russian areas in the old Russian empire. 106 
Lenin entered a trough of agitation. The evidence from the 
trenches on the Eastern front moved him profoundly. The Bolshevik 
peace policy called on soldiers to help to end the war by fraternising 
with German soldiers and spreading the revolutionary contagion to 
the enemy armed forces; but Russian peasants-in-uniform preferred 
simply to desert. Soon, not only revolutionary enthusiasm among the 
Russian soldiers would be lacking, but the Russian soldiers too. Joffe 
and the Soviet delegation perceived the virtues in extending the 
conference proceedings. 107 On 18 December, Lenin came to Sovnark-
om with a motion stressing the need to prepare Petrograd's 
defences. 108 On the same day he broke his silence about 'revolu-
tionary war', and still gave the impression of being committed to 
such a war as a contingency policy. 109 Yet his work among delegates 
from the army committees the day before showed that he entertained 
severe doubts. It had been on 17 December that he issued a 
questionnaire to discover the army's combat readiness. Could the 
Germans really be resisted, and for how long? Would a collapse of 
the peace conference be accompanied by mass desertions? Was 
agitation in favour of revolutionary war sensible? Would the army, 
if given a vote, give its approval to a separate peace? The response of 
 296 
Lenin: A Political Life 
the delegates confirmed Lenin's fears, and indeed suggested that he 
might not be pessimistic enough. 110 
The precise time of Lenin's change of heart is unknown. It cannot 
be ruled out that it occurred before October; but proof is unavail-
able.111 Certainly from mid-December, however, he was seriously 
considering whether to pull Russia out of the war by a separate 
peace. Unlike Trotski, he had never made a point of stressing that the 
Russian socialist revolution would be lost if socialist revolutions 
failed to break out in central and western Europe. But he shared the 
assumption that, without revolutions in other major European states, 
Russia's revolutionary project would be crippled. 112 So Lenin's 
mental shift was not lightly undertaken. He knew it to be a potent-
ially catastrophic retreat. There is an unknown factor here: the extent 
of political contacts and 'understandings', if any, between Lenin and 
the Berlin government. The Germans had had an interest in helping 
the Bolsheviks to take power, and rejoiced in the news of the October 
Revolution. But whether the Berlin government stretched out a 
helping hand to Lenin in the last two months of 1917 is undiscover-
able from available documents (although the German diplomats at 
Brest-Litovsk acted as if they were offering little concession, 
monetary or political, to the Bolsheviks). 113 
At any rate, Lenin kept his changing ideas out of the public gaze. 
Trotski argued that as yet the Central Powers had presented no 
ultimatum and that the most appropriate tactic was to prolong 
negotiations in the hope that a German socialist revolution might 
occur. 114 Yet Lenin also wished to plan carefully for the contingency 
that such a revolution would not come to Sovnarkom's rescue and 
that a separate peace might prove necessary. Bolshevik leaders, while 
showing an awareness in summer 1917 of the difficulties of fighting a 
revolutionary war, had never suggested that the alternative option, 
namely a separate peace, was acceptable. 115 They had always 
believed that, if it came to a choice between a separate peace and a 
war of revolutionary defence, no Bolshevik should sign a treaty with 
the Germans. The Left Socialist-Revolutionaries, to a man and 
woman, were implacably opposed to a separate peace. There was 
no substantial party in the country which would accept a deal with 
Berlin and Vienna. The Mensheviks and the Socialist Revolutionaries 
were unappeasably hostile to any separate deal with Germany and 
Austria-Hungary. If Lenin was going to change his party's policy, the 
political campaign would make the struggle for The April Theses 
 The View from Petrograd 
297 
seem child's play. Trotski in the meantime was sent to Brest-Litovsk 
to replace Ioffe, who had not acquitted himself well as a negotiator. 
The fate of the October Revolution hung in the balance. 
On 20 December 1917 the German peace terms were clarified. The 
Soviet government was asked to relinquish claims to sovereignty over 
Poland and the Baltic region and to accept a German military 
occupation of those regions. 116 No date for a reply from Petrograd 
was set, but Lenin foresaw that Trotski's delaying tactics might soon 
prove insufficient. On 24 December 1917, Lenin set out for a few 
days' rest in a sanatorium near the Usikirkka village railway 
station. 117 It could hardly be, and undoubtedly was not, much of a 
holiday. Krupskaya was to recall that he spent most of his time 
thinking and reading about politics. He was plotting how to present 
his volte-face on the idea of a separate peace to his fellow Bolsheviks. 
His notes give a clue to the direction of his thought. Among the 
themes for future articles he wrote: 'In the first place, vanquish the 
bourgeoisie - and then fight the bourgeoisie abroad'. 118 
In such a fashion he would try to sublimate disappointment with 
the failure of international policy to a commitment to take up the 
revolutionary struggle in even greater earnest at home. He eulogised 
civil war, claiming such a war to be 'uniquely legitimate, uniquely 
just and uniquely sanctified'. 119 Trotski firmly opposed such a 
reorientation and secured Lenin's continued support for his pro-
crastinatory tactics with the delegations of Germany and Austria-
Hungary at Brest-Litovsk. On the way from Petrograd, even he had 
viewed the empty trenches with horror. How could a revolutionary 
war be fought without an army? But he kept these worries from 
Kuhlmann and Czernin, and his intellectual brilliance dazzled them 
for several days. Yet the German and Austrian representatives were 
not free agents; they had to answer to Hindenburg and Ludendorff. 
The military ultimatum could not be delayed for ever. But Trotski 
felt that the Bolsheviks and Left Socialist Revolutionaries had no 
option but to prolong the talks and call the bluff of the Central 
Powers, hoping against hope that the German workers would rise 
against the Kaiser or that a debilitating mutiny would occur among 
the German forces on active service; and, for the moment, it was 
Trotski's policy which guided the Soviet negotiators. Lenin, with 
difficulty, bided his time. He had yet to make his decisive impact on 
the issue that had played so great a role in the Bolshevik advance on 
power: the issue of war and peace. 
 298 
Lenin: A Political Life 
DARKENING THOUGHTS 
Intimidating developments at Brest-Litovsk did not dispel the 
optimism of the Bolshevik leaders in either Petrograd or the 
provinces. Lenin continued to call for working-class initiative, to 
welcome factory workers in person to the Smolny Institute and to 
proclaim the ultimate objectives of communism. His domestic 
political strategy in 1917, before the seizure of power, had been a 
combination of the revolution from above with the revolution from 
below. He had never satisfactorily explained precisely how to effect 
such a combination; but his propounding of the general strategy, for 
all its theoretical gaps and subterfuges, did not lack sincerity. 
Strongly-held doctrines were not peculiar to the Bolsheviks among 
Russian political parties in the revolutionary period. They had all of 
them suffered, to a greater or lesser extent, under the Romanov 
monarchy; and their ideas and assumptions were solidified by the 
pressure of years of persecution. The question has been asked why 
Lenin failed to make a more realistic assessment of his party's 
capacities in the first months after the October Revolution. 120 By 
1921, he was willing, through the New Economic Policy, to grant a 
relaxation of the state grain-trade monopoly and allow peasants to 
sell the post-tax surplus after the harvest on the private market. The 
purpose was to facilitate the resurgence of exchange of goods 
between town and countryside. Why did Lenin not attempt this in 
the winter of 1917-18? Would this not have limited the social basis 
for counter-revolution? Would not the pressures for the Bolsheviks 
to become more authoritarian have been smaller? Such questions beg 
several further questions. The number of employed factory workers 
in 1921 had fallen to a third of the number in October 1917; and the 
army in 1921 was being demobilised, whereas in 1917 the outbreak of 
either a protracted civil war or a war against foreign aggressors was a 
strong possibility. Workers in armaments factories and soldiers 
needed to be fed, and had to be fed mainly by the efforts of 
governmental institutions. Lenin and Sovnarkom could scarcely 
forego a large proportion of the tradeable grain surplus in the 
circumstances. 121 
Yet the Bolsheviks did not entertain a second thought (or even a 
first one) about introducing greater latitude for trading on the 
private market. The central party leadership was a collective of 
Marxist believers. They were nearly as averse to commerce based on 
 The View from Petrograd 
299 
principles of personal profit as Moslems and Jews are to the 
consumption of pork; it took years of civil war to break down the 
walls of their ideological inhibition; and even then the walls were 
reconstructed by the end of the 1920s. Moreover, a 'capitalist 
government' had set up the state grain-trade monopoly before the 
Bolsheviks seized power. The Bolsheviks, as far-left socialists, were 
highly unlikely to regard a relaxation of controls on capitalism as 
an immediately desirable priority. The entire project of socialist 
revolution would otherwise seem to them to have a weak 
rationale. 122 
In addition, Lenin was an extremist by the standards of most non-
Bolshevik Russian socialists, but his policies on several socio-
economic issues remained decidedly moderate in comparison with 
those of many colleagues. Nikolai Bukharin, N. Osinski and other 
Bolshevik leftists were elaborating an agrarian policy involving the 
rapid collectivisation of peasant households. 123 Poor Lenin! He it 
had been in the 1890s who had urged upon Russian Marxists that 
capitalism in the countryside had achieved a high level of develop-
ment. Left-wing Bolsheviks concluded that this justified the transfer 
of all agricultural soil into the hands of socialist collective farms run 
by agronomists and wage labourers, and they pushed hard for the 
local party committees to adopt their policy. 124 Pity for Lenin is, 
consequently, scarcely in order. Even in The April Theses he had 
fudged the topic of 'model farms' and allowed Bolsheviks on the left 
to think that he and they were at one about agrarian policy. 125 He 
had been clearer about his attitude to 'workers' control', 126 
suggesting that he did not envisage the ejection of existing managers 
from the factories. Factory-workshop committees, in his opinion, 
should supervise and not replace management. Yet others disagreed. 
Bukharin's supporters sought the transformation of the factory-
workshop committees into managerial bodies. The struggle over 
industrial policy was only just beginning. 127 
The hypothesis that Lenin had sufficient authority to introduce the 
ideas of 1921 in 1917 badly misconstrues the ideological nature of 
Bolshevism after the October Revolution; it also neglects the party's 
organisational disjointedness and localism. The lower-level commit-
tees could not yet be trampled down by the Central Committee. The 
controversy over a separate peace with Germany and Austria-
Hungary in the first three months of 1918 was about to show how 
easy it was for regional, provincial and city party committees to 
ignore the central leadership's demands. 128 
 300 
Lenin: A Political Life 
The revolutionary elan persisted. Streets were painted red; poster 
art flourished. New public buildings, statues and other adornments 
were planned. Workers' educational groups were formed. Painters 
and poets, as well as scholars and literary intellectuals, conducted 
new cultural experiments. A new world where the workers and 
peasants would be masters was being talked about. The notion that 
an authentic social transformation from capitalism into socialism 
involved the promotion and participations of 'the masses' was widely 
held. Local political pride was rampant. The Saratov City Soviet, 
having replaced the agencies of the Provisional. Government, 
declared: 'Our commune is the beginning of the world-wide 
commune. We, as the leaders, assume full responsibility and fear 
nothing.' 129 Party committee members and activists were not immune 
from the euphoria, either. Bolsheviks everywhere swept into the 
soviets, trade unions and factory-workshop committees; the purely 
internal work of the party was neglected. Hierarchical obedience in 
public institutions was rare; the administrative framework of the 
soviets was poorly co-ordinated. Sovnarkom began to dispatch 
'plenipotentiaries' to unplug local bottlenecks or override local 
opposition. But the trend was as yet frail; and the centralism 
advocated by all leading Bolsheviks, including the leftists who 
simultaneously and contradictorily wanted to grant maximum 
power to factory-workshop committees, was not accepted in 
practice. 130 
And yet the huge problems in the economy, in domestic politics 
and international relations, were growing huger. Kamenev, Zinoviev, 
Milyutin and other Bolshevik rightists had warned about the dangers 
of aggravating them; and Lenin, who had scoffed at the rightists' 
warnings in October 1917, began to share their sentiments. On 4 
November 1917 he announced to the Petrograd Soviet: 'Our 
deficiency consists in the fact that our soviet organisation has not 
yet learnt to administer, that we hold too many meetings.' 131 The 
eulogist of mass participatory politics was finding massed gatherings 
increasingly tiresome. He also objected to the internal inefficiencies 
of the soviets and the other public organisations. It would, he 
suggested, no longer be enough to introduce 'account-keeping and 
supervision' into their operations; there would need to be 
'competition in the section of organisational successes'. 132 By this 
he meant that soviets should compete with each other in eradicating 
chaos. Quite how such competition could take place was not spelled 
out. 133 But the proposal, which was not made public, indicated that 
 The View from Petrograd 
301 
his hyper-elevated ideas of the pre-October period were decreasingly 
seen by him to be adequate. 134 
Similarly, he stressed the need not to alienate 'educated people'. 135 
He had believed, before 1917, that the techniques of 'bourgeois 
culture' should be retained in the socialist revolution; his opposition 
to Bogdanov's dismissive attitude and to vague talk about 'proletar-
ian culture' had been deep. 136 In The State and Revolution too he had 
accepted the requirement to retain the services of 'specialists'. 137 Yet 
it had not been a topic of emphasis. 138 Even more impressive are the 
neglected shifts in Lenin's attitude to the working class. He had to be 
cautious with any adverse public comment on the 'proletariat'. Yet 
privately he was exasperated by what he perceived as growing lack of 
co-operation from the groups of labourers. In December 1917 he 
considered that printing workers, by going on strike, were behaving 
'like hooligans': 139 he favoured arresting them if their strikes 
continued. The fact that the print-workers were interested in the 
protection of freedom of expression for non-Bolshevik political 
parties was a strange ground for dubbing them hooligans, but Lenin 
rampantly expanded the category of imprisonable people. He jotted 
down the thought that 'no crook (including those who are simply fed 
up with work) should walk the streets in freedom but should be 
locked up in prison or should be serving out a sentence of forced 
labour of the heaviest kind'. 140 The wording here is so vague that it 
could have included workers as well as the rest of the population. By 
mid-January 1918, as the breakdown in industry continued, he edged 
nearer to publicising his concerns. He openly urged that the factories 
be cleared of 'tramplike and semi-tramplike elements imbued with 
the single desire to "scrounge around" and then move on'; and that 
too many persons in existing enterprises had taken jobs merely to 
avoid conscription. 141 
Yet his most jolting commentary, for those who had discerned only 
the libertarian aspects of his ideas before October, came in his 
statements on labourers in the armaments factories. These he 
designated as 'privileged workers' who were exercised only by their 
sectional interests (which, presumably, involved a continuation of the 
war and therefore were counterposed to Lenin's policy for a separate 
peace). 142 His comments had some basis in reality. But to tar so 
many workers with the same brush, to cast doubts on their motives 
and to do so with such contempt overturned much said by him about 
the working class in the months before the seizure of power. It had 
roots in his horrified and belated recognition of the dimensions and 
 302 
Lenin: A Political Life 
nature of the economic crisis; it was also traceable to the subordinate 
role he had always placed on the workers as a social class whenever 
they acted at variance with his policies. 
His declarations about the peasants were, in contrast, calm and 
benign. He coined a slogan for action. Bolsheviks, he declared, 
should seek 'to help the labouring peasant, avoid offending the 
middle peasant and compel the rich peasant'. 143. He continued to 
assert that there was sufficient food in the country. This was indeed 
true. Yet he also persisted, more dubiously, with his claim that it was 
only capitalism, greed and speculation that caused the food-supplies 
problems. 'Kulaks' were the scapegoat in his speeches and writings; 
he was reverting more and more frankly to the idea, which had been 
held largely in abeyance in summer 1917, that the peasantry should 
be treated as an internally-differentiated social category. Thus Lenin 
made a quick return to the themes of class war and of the attack on 
the richer peasants. He spoke with growing openness about the need 
for stern measures, declaring on 14 January 1918: 'Until we apply 
terror to speculators, shooting them on the spot, nothing will turn 
out right. ' 144 On 28 January he talked of the necessity to squeeze 
money out of the kulaks. 145 He failed to recognise the impact of 
objective general difficulties with trade, transport and finance. Nor 
did he indicate how 'kulaks' were to be categorised. It was more 
difficult even than before to pick them out since land redistribution 
had led to a levelling-out of landholdings. The armed emissaries 
dispatched from certain town soviets to seek out hoarded grain were 
bound to clash with not only the minority of 'rich' households but 
those millions in the middling category. Lenin before October had 
advocated ideas resting on an alliance between workers and peasants. 
A central link in his strategical chain was being torn asunder. 
