 10 The Obscene Peace: 
January to March 1918 
THE CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY 
The October Revolution's repercussions endure in many forms: the 
political map of Europe was lastingly affected. It has been tempting 
to treat the Russian revolutionary events as if they were entirely 
independent of the situation in the rest of the world and as if Russia, 
while having an impact on other countries, did not in her turn 
register their impact. Yet the October Revolution did not take place 
in a void. The Soviet state was created in the midst of the First World 
War, and Russia and her empire had been a major combatant power 
from its beginning. The attempt to put an end to the fighting, 
through the Decree on Peace presented by Lenin on 26 October 1917, 
was not followed by a pan-European socialist revolution. As night 
follows day, it was certain that Russian withdrawal from the conflict 
would attract unpleasant consequences from abroad. The Allies were 
bound to be enraged by Russia's refusal to maintain operations on 
the Eastern front. Germany's rulers, never having been distinguished 
for their international altruism, would predictably exploit the 
weakness of Russian defences to the utmost. If revolutions failed 
to occur in Europe, the chances of Sovnarkom's survival were 
intimately linked to the question of whether any foreign capitalist 
power had the resources and opportunity to intervene militarily in 
Russia. No Russian army in 1917-18 could have repelled the armed 
might of either the Germans or the Allies if such might had been 
turned on them in concerted fashion. 
Thus the absence of revolutionary explosions in Europe, as Lenin 
was to concede, 1 meant that his regime's fortunes depended 
ultimately on a factor beyond its control: the continued mutual 
exhaustion of the Central Powers and the Allies in the War. Should 
the armies of Hindenburg and Ludendorff suddenly collapse on the 
fields of Flanders, there was no military reason why the British, 
303 
 304 
Lenin: A P.Jlitical Life 
French and American forces should not sweep through to the Urals. 
Only their political and economic problems might impede premiers 
Lloyd George, Clemenceau and Wilson. Should, on the other hand, 
Marshal Petain and General Haig prove incapable of resisting further 
German onslaughts on the Western front, there was even less cause 
to suppose that Petrograd and Moscow would not swiftly be 
subjugated to Berlin. 
The victorious progress of Bolshevism before October 1917 could 
not permanently obscure these supreme military issues. The party's 
political triumph in Russia too was being called into question in the 
first winter after the Bolshevik-led revolution. The Constituent 
Assembly results began to become available in late November. 
Lenin's name had been on several successful lists put forward by 
the Bolsheviks; and, in accordance with the then current system of 
proportional representation, he chose to be returned as one of the 
deputies for the Baltic fleet. 2 Seldom has a parliament acquired a 
member so disdainful of his achievement in being elected. Only in the 
pre-October months of 1917 had he ever spoken warmly about a 
Constituent Assembly; and even then it was mainly with the purpose 
of undermining public confidence in the Provisional Government's 
will to convoke the Assembly. 3 He had no abiding fondness for 
institutions elected by universal suffrage. His manipulativeness and 
lack of public candour was so extreme that, while the Second 
Congress of Soviets of Workers' and Soldiers' Deputies was in 
session, he implored his Bolshevik Central Committee colleagues to 
announce a postponement of the Constituent Assembly elections.4 
This was a natural corollary of his admission to the Central 
Committee on 10 October that the Constituent Assembly would 
not side with the Bolsheviks. Yet he had not stated this outside the 
Central Committee's sessions, and his central colleagues overruled 
his proposed tergiversation on 26 October, arguing that it would 
damage the party politically.5 
The Assembly elections had been difficult to arrange, and voting in 
some places had to be spread over several weeks. Even today it is 
impossible to offer a definitive computation of the number of seats 
gained by each respective party. Data are available for 703 Assembly 
deputies, 380 of which, a clear majority, were Socialist Revolutionar-
ies. Only 168, or 22 per cent, were Bolsheviks; they had suffered a 
massive defeat. Their only consolation was the poor showing of the 
Mensheviks, who received only eighteen deputies. The Kadets 
obtained merely fifteen.6 
 The Obscene Peace 
305 
After such a result it might have seemed natural for Viktor 
Chernov and his Party of Socialist Revolutionaries to form the 
government, doubtless in coalition with their Menshevik friends. 
Admittedly, the Socialist Revolutionaries' triumph was not evenly-
distributed across the country. In industrial cities and in places with 
large army garrisons the Bolsheviks held the upper hand; and the 
Boishevik party acquitted itself well also in those rural regions from 
which the peasantry tended to migrate in search of seasonal work in 
nearby factories. But peasant Russian general - and Russia was 
demographically still mainly a backward, agrarian society- voted for 
the Socialist Revolutionaries. The loyalty of the villages to 'their' 
party was unshaken by the months of its association with the 
Provisional Government. And only 39 Left Socialist Revolutionaries 
were elected to the Constituent Assembly. 7 The Bolsheviks had never 
expected to win the election outright: even in his 'optimistic' 
pronouncements on the party's electoral prospects in advance of 
the seizure of power in Petrograd, Lenin had calculated that 
collaboration with the Left Socialist Revolutionaries would be 
necessary.8 And yet no Bolshevik before October is recorded as 
having anticipated the scale of the actual defeat. Lenin's worst fears 
during the Second Congress of Soviets of Workers' and Soldiers' 
Deputies were fulfilled. 
Bolshevik spokesmen argued that the Assembly arrangements had 
been unfair to them. The elections had been held quickly after the 
October Revolution, too quickly for the popularity of Sovnarkom's 
social and economic reforms to be transformed into direct political 
support for the Bolsheviks in the countryside. Lenin and his 
associates also complained that the lists of electoral candidates had 
been drawn up before the split in the Party of Socialist Revolutio-
naries. The consequence was an under-representation of the Left 
Socialist Revolutionaries at the Assembly, since the electorate was 
widely unable to vote specifically for them or even to know who they 
were. Furthermore, it was pointed out that the Party of Socialist 
Revolutionaries, despite having won the Assembly elections, was 
riven by internal disputes. The problem was not confined to the split 
with the Left Socialist Revolutionaries; there were also divisions 
between the Party of Socialist Revolutionaries and its local 
committees in the non-Russian areas. The formation of a workable 
government by such a party would have been exceedingly difficult. 
The dilemma of the Bolsheviks and the Left Socialist Revolutio-
naries remained: what to do about the Constituent Assembly as 
 306 
Lenin: A Political Life 
elected? An alliance of their fractions in the Assembly would not 
produce a majority; and the Sovnarkom coalition partners could not 
form a government by weight of numbers. Nor were there sufficient 
deputies from the other parties who might be persuaded to throw in 
their lot, even at the last minute, with the Soviet authorities. Stalin's 
idea, as explained to Sovnarkom on 19 November, was to postpone 
convocation for as long as possible. 9 But indefinite postponement 
was no more practical than Lenin's original proposal of a prolonged 
delay in holding elections. Sovnarkom moved inexorably towards a 
cruder solution: dispersal of the Assembly when it finally met. On 20 
November, at Stalin's instigation, a press campaign against the 
Assembly was projected. Trotski was to be drawn in as chief 
propagandist. A show of force was planned, and the presence of 
Kronstadt sailors in Petrograd was to be strengthened. 10 The date of 
convocation was finally set for 5 January 1918, but the mode and 
timing of the violent dispersal were left open. Lenin recognised that 
caution had to be exercised with regard to his own party members 
(who were not universally in favour of the Assembly's suppression), 
to some among his Left Socialist Revolutionary allies and to a 
general population which might not take kindly to the infringement 
of its newly-obtained democratic rights. 
Anti-Assembly opinion among Bolsheviks and Left Socialist 
Revolutionaries was already hardening. The idea of being ejected 
from governmental office appealed to few of them, especially in 
Petrograd. On 21 November 1917, it was decreed that all consti-
tuencies should have the right to recall and replace their Assembly 
deputies. 11 On 23 November, the commission charged with organis-
ing the Assembly elections was arrested. 12 On 26 November, 
Sovnarkom announced that the Assembly would not be considered 
quorate until 400 of its members had arrived in Petrograd. On 12 
December, Lenin successfully called for the reselection of the Bureau 
of the Bolshevik fraction in the Assembly on the grounds that a 
sterner attitude towards the Assembly was appropriate: nothing was 
being left to chance. 13 
By I January he was considering measures to deal with the 
expected trouble when the Constituent Assembly convened. It was 
an eventful day. He also met with Bolshevik leaders who had 
returned from the Ukraine; 14 he spoke on the phone with the 
American Ambassador in Petrograd. 15 In addition, Fritz Platten 
had arrived in the capital. Platten's assistance as an intermediary 
between Lenin and the German government in March had put Lenin 
 The Obscene Peace 
307 
permanently in his debt, 16 and Platten was invited to spend the day 
with him as he travelled from meeting to meeting. They attended a 
massed gathering of soldiers, where Lenin also talked to the British 
journalist Albert Rhys Williams. 17 Platten, Lenin and Lenin's sister 
Mariya got back into their chauffeur-driven car to go to supper in 
the Smolny Institute. On the way, at 7.30 pm, a group of right-wing 
officers lay in wait and the car was fired upon. Platten flung himself 
across Lenin's body to save him from injury, and was hit in the hand 
by a bullet. The would-be assassins escaped. Lenin and his sister were 
unharmed and Platten's flesh wound was treated. 18 Yet Lenin refused 
to be deflected from his tasks. At eight o'clock he reported briefly to 
Sovnarkom on his misadventure and proceeded to chair the various 
discussions on military clashes on the Romanian sector of the 
Eastern fr'ont, and on revolutionary tribunals, on the annulment of 
loans contracted by Nikolai Il's government. 19 Resilience under fire! 
Nor did he relent in his aims for the Constituent Assembly. On 3 
January 1918 the announcement was made on Sovnarkom's behalf 
that the Constituent Assembly would be acceptable only if it 
supported 'soviet power'. 20 This was the code for a stipulation that 
Sovnarkom, under Bolshevik and Left Socialist-Revolutionary 
leadership, should be ratified as the legitimate government and that 
the Socialist Revolutionaries and Mensheviks should not demand to 
form a cabinet. The apparent wish for compromise veiled a will to 
crush all opposition entirely? 1 
Sovnarkom's measures had the desired effect of electrifying the 
atmosphere of intimidation. The disposition of troops in the capital, 
together with the banning of street demonstrations, indicated to all 
who had eyes to see that Sovnarkom would dissolve the proceedings. 
Artillery units surrounded the Tauride Palace as the deputies entered 
on the morning of 5 January. 22 A demonstration held by supporters 
of the Assembly, who naively supposed that the Bolsheviks would 
not use force upon fellow socialists, was fired upon. Twelve years 
after Bloody Sunday almost to the day, discontented citizens in 
Russia's capital city were being slaughtered by the authorities for 
having the temerity to exercise what they took to be their rights. 
Scores of demonstrators were killed; the hospitals were crowded with 
the wounded victims. 23 The proceedings in the Tauride Palace were 
delayed until mid-afternoon. Shvetsov, the oldest deputy in the 
Assembly, was chosen to open the session, but he was brusquely 
pushed aside after a few minutes by Sverdlov, who demanded that 
the Assembly should adhere to the policies of Sovnarkom. Uproar 
 308 
Lenin: A Political Life 
broke out. Lenin chirpily intervened to propose the singing of the 
'lnternationale'; and it is a sign of the disorientation of the Socialist 
Revolutionaries that they accepted his proposal instead of pressing 
on with substantive matters of state.24 (It was also a very rare 
example of Lenin using quasi-humorous behaviour to achieve a 
political end.) 
Lenin's jauntiness could not prevent Chernov's election as the 
Assembly's Chairman. Chernov read out his projects on the transfer 
of land to the peasantry and the launching of a peace initiative. The 
Bolshevik Nikolai Bukharin and the Left Socialist Revolutionary 
Izaak Shteinberg, speaking for the Sovnarkom coalition, again 
demanded the Assembly's recognition of soviet power. Tsereteli 
rose to oppose them, and commotion ensued. The Socialist Revolu-
tionary agenda was accepted by a vote on the floor, and the 
Bolsheviks and the Left Socialist Revolutionaries walked out in 
protest. Chernov continued the debates. By late evening he was 
reading out the details of legislation that he now perceived the 
Bolsheviks would stop him implementing. He refused to prorogue the 
proceedings until morning.25 
Meanwhile Lenin, conferring with the Bolshevik fraction, decided 
that there should be no second session of the Assembly.26 Orders 
were issued forbidding the Palace guard to attack the opponents of 
Sovnarkom as they left the building; earlier in the day a Bolshevik 
supporter had pointed his rifle at the unfortunate Shvetsov as he was 
speaking. But parallel instructions were given to close down the first 
session. At around four o'clock in the morning on 6 January 1918, 
sailor A. G. Zheleznyakov announced on behalf of the Tauride 
Palace guard that his comrades were 'fatigued' and were about to 
switch off the lights.27 A forlorn group of anti-Bolshevik Constituent 
Assembly delegates left the Palace, never to return. None were 
molested, to their surprise, since rumours existed that Chernov 
would be assassinated as he left the building. The Bolsheviks had 
won the struggle. Lenin could at last relax. At the Assembly itself on 
5 January he had been nervous; his aide V. D. Bonch-Bruevich later 
recalled: 'Lenin was agitated and was paler than ever before ... He 
clenched his fists and began to scan the entire hall with burning 
eyes. '28 But he had recovered his poise after sensing the weakness of 
the opposition. He affected to be bored while Chernov was addressing 
the gathering. This was not Lenin's characteristic demeanour: he 
usually maintained an attentive posture at public meetings. Evidently 
 The Obscene Peace 
309 
he was out to humiliate as well as to defeat the Socialist Revolutio-
naries and Mensheviks. Perhaps he was getting his own back for the 
derision he had suffered at their hands when, at the First Congress of 
Soviets of Workers' and Soldiers' Deputies in June 1917, he had 
exclaimed that his party was willing to rule Russia alone. 29 
Whatever the explanation, a terrible threshold had been crossed. 
The only freely-contested multi-party elections ever to have been held 
in Russia had been 'invalidated' by force of arms. Lenin's self-
restraint could not disguise the momentousness of the occasion. With 
or without Lenin's actions, there would probably have been civil war 
in Russia after the Provisional Government's demise. But the 
destruction of the Constituent Assembly, which was ratified by a 
decree of Sovnarkom on 6 January, ensured that the anti-Bolshevik 
armies would be stronger than they might otherwise have been. 
Many Socialist Revolutionaries were to fight against the Reds, not 
because they shared the aims of generals from the old imperial 
regiments but in pursuit of rectifying the great wrong done to their 
party at the Tauride Palace. The Bolsheviks had talked increasingly 
about civil war since coming to power, but they claimed that it was 
the Kadets and their allies who were bent on unleashing military 
conflict. Bolsheviks could no longer appear plausible with such talk, 
yet their confidence was strengthened by the feeling that they were 
the makers of a successful revolution. In addition, the ease of the 
Assembly's dispersal inhibited further opposition among Bolsheviks 
to the retention of a coalition of only two socialist parties in 
Sovnarkom. The numerical weakness of Left Socialist Revolutionar-
ies at the Assembly meant that they were even less disposed to mourn 
its passing; and many were like P. P. Proshyan in participating in the 
acts of violence to suppress those who wished to keep the Assembly 
open. No sooner had the dispersal taken place, moreover, than the 
Sovnarkom coalition was swept into tumultuous discussions about 
foreign policy; and the memory of the events of 5-6 January 1918 
quickly faded from the minds of Bolshevik and Left Socialist-
Revolutionary leaders. It burned bright in the minds of Constituent 
Assembly deputies who had come to Petrograd demanding fair 
political treatment and the chance to bring Bolshevik rule peacefully 
to an end. They returned from the Tauride Palace feeling lucky to be 
alive. Their current aim was to establish a government of Assembly 
deputies in the Volga region and to seek the military removal of the 
Bolsheviks from power throughout Russia. 
 310 
Lenin: A Political Life 
SOVNARKOM'S CHAIRMAN 
Yet Lenin had an arsenal of self-confidence. He had sufficient for 
himself, and could share out the remainder among those of his 
associates who vacillated. The scampering ebullience of the man 
takes the breath away. His limited experience as an administrator -
he had not even been a local government official - did not deter him. 
Possibly his practical innocence helps to explain his cockiness. There 
was in any case no respite after the Constituent Assembly. As soon as 
he had achieved his objective, he turned calmly to deal with the 
alliance with the Left Socialist Revolutionaries. Here he operated 
with much deftness. Letters to their leader, M. V. Spiridonova, were 
felinely charming. 30 Negotiations were agreeably undertaken and 
accomplished. Lenin's plan was simple: to lull the Left Socialist 
Revolutionaries into a false sense of security about their weight of 
importance in the coalition.31 
The Third All-Russian Congress of Soviets of Workers', Soldiers' 
and Cossacks' Deputies had been arranged to start in the second 
week of January so that pressure might be exerted upon the 
Constituent Assembly should it remain in session.32 The Bolsheviks 
would predictably dominate it since they held even more town and 
city soviets than in October 1917. The Third Congress of Soviets of 
Peasants' Deputies was scheduled to convene in the same week. In 
fact, the division between Socialist Revolutionaries and Left Socialist 
Revolutionaries had become so deep that two fully separate 
Congresses of Soviets of Peasants' Deputies were held simultan-
eously. Lenin proposed that the Congress called under the auspices 
of the Left Socialist Revolutionaries should fuse itself with the 
Bolshevik-dominated Congress of Soviets of Workers', Soldiers' 
and Cossacks' Deputies and that a joint Central Executive Commit-
tee should be created. The tactical beauty of this, from the Bolshevik 
party's standpoint, was that the overwhelming majority of the 
country's population were peasants and that Sovnarkom would 
therefore come to appear as representative of the lower social classes 
in general and not just the workers and the urban poor. At the same 
time, the Left Socialist Revolutionaries were not going to be 
accorded any greater number of seats in Sovnarkom itself than 
before. Bolshevik hegemony would be preserved. The Left Socialist 
Revolutionaries were as naive about the Bolshevik central leader-
ship's ruthlessness as the Socialist Revolutionaries had been about 
Lenin's disregard for the rights of the Constituent Assembly; but at 
 The Obscene Peace 
311 
the time they thought the deal worth making since the Bolsheviks 
were willing to offer them compromises on the single act of 
legislation, then under preparation, that most interested them: the 
Basic Land Law. Thus Spiridonova felt that she had achieved a fair 
share of the political bargain. 33 
Not that Lenin's planning lacked an idealistic aspect. At times he 
could be carefree, sounding as if he could hardly believe his luck to 
be Premier of the world's first socialist state. When he came to 
address the unified Third All-Russian Congress of Soviets of 
Workers', Soldiers' and Cossacks' Deputies on 11 January 1918, he 
announced that the Soviet republic had good cause for celebration: it 
had already lasted five days longer than the Paris Commune of 1871. 
Amidst all the difficulties of politics and the economy he could still 
find reasons for cheer.34 
But he could and did control his emotions, upbraiding those 
colleagues who would not learn to behave in a business like 
fashion. Governing, for Lenin, was a serious enterprise and duty. 
Latecomers to Sovnarkom sessions were fined. 35 (Was this not 
evidence of his economic determinism? Were there really no other 
ways of establishing punctuality?). He also tried to insist upon a clear 
agenda at meetings, and chose aides such as V. D. Bonch-Bruevich 
and N. P. Gorbunov for their fastidiousness as well as their energy. 
Even so, no aide could match Lenin's energy: very few of them from 
the early days of Sovnarkom remained in post at the time of Lenin's 
death; he had long since worn them out. 36 Lenin had imbibed enough 
of the revolutionary spirit to allow fellow People's Commissars to 
raise subjects not previously tabled for discussion,37 but his instinct 
was to reinforce order and orderliness. He would even refuse to greet 
long-lost friends, such as L. B. Krasin, during sessions. Lenin strove 
to pervade each session of Sovnarkom with an aura of austerity; only 
at the end, sometimes well after midnight, would he allow himself the 
pleasure of social intercourse. 38 His associates had often noticed his 
schoolmasterly techniques as an orator. In Sovnarkom his style of 
command was similarly reminiscent of the schoolroom, and he 
prohibited smoking at the green baize table. 
This appears less extraordinary nowadays, when such bans are 
common in public institutions, than it did then. Few phenomena of 
the October Revolution are more comic than the surreptitiousness of 
Dzierzynski in trying to evade notice while indulging his craving for 
cigarettes. Dzierzynski was a survivor of Siberian penal servitude and 
the head of the Cheka; his name was enough to frighten the enemies 
 312 
Lenin: A Political Life 
of Bolshevism. And yet, at Sovnarkom sessions, he would creep off 
to the stove at the side of the room and puff secretly up the flue. 39 
In the intervals between Bolshevik Central Committee meetings,40 
Sovnarkom was the major centre of power in the country. Lenin tried 
to direct its entire work. This involved detailed supervision of a range 
of activities. Trotski and Stalin were invaluable collaborators, and 
the skills of the Bolshevik ex-undergrounders at central and local 
levels of government ought not to be forgotten. But the butterfly 
attitudes of some of them left much to be desired from an 
organisational standpoint. Yuri Larin's penchant for drawing up 
highly ambitious schemes on paper, which had not the slightest 
chance of realisation, was notorious. A bruising of the sensibilities of 
the dreamier party stalwarts was inevitable. Unlike Trotski and 
Stalin, however, Lenin succeeded in doing this without giving 
lifelong offence. Trotski's past as an anti-Bolshevik and his obvious 
talent (and, worse still, his knowledge of his talent) counted against 
him. Stalin's abrasiveness was to become an issue of intra-party 
significance in 1919. Of the other prominent Bolsheviks, both 
Zinoviev and Kamenev had compromised themselves by their so-
called 'strike-breaking' in October 1917; and younger leaders such as 
Bukharin and Pyatakov, who were taken seriously by Lenin before 
1917 and who were to figure in his 'testament' of 1922, lacked 
Lenin's prestige and authority.41 
As for the other People's Commissars, there were certainly many 
outstanding figures. Sovnarkom was the best-educated or, at least, 
the most intellectually-engaged government in history; it was also 
filled with people of practical initiative. The likes of Rykov, Tomski 
and Shlyapnikov should not be underestimated simply because their 
skills as theorists were frail. Alas, such assumptions are yet another 
example of the blight cast by intellectual snobs like Trotski upon 
accounts of Soviet history. When all is said and done, however, none 
of these practical administrators rivalled Lenin. He could equal them 
all in every department of activity; and he was, in addition, the 
party's founder and outstanding theorist. 
He was now loved by the entire party and its supporters. He had 
the kudos of being the Revolution's successful leader and, after the 
assassination attempt, he wore the crown of the near-martyr. His 
family, as usual, was supportive. Krupskaya, sharing his flat in the 
Smolny Institute, worked ceaselessly in her own right while tending 
to his daily needs. Lenin's sister Anna and her husband, Mark 
Elizarov, were close at hand to give moral support.42 Their rooms 
 The Obscene Peace 
313 
were modest, and both Lenin and Krupskaya took care to avoid 
advertising their relative material comfort to the general population. 
He still visited workers' districts despite the attempt on his life, and 
gave little attention to the special security arrangements made for 
him. He acted like all the other People's Commissars even though, as 
the second shooting in August 1918 showed, he would remain a 
prime target for terrorism: to the horror of his aides, he continued to 
take occasional strolls around Petrograd. The 'normality' of daily life 
was important enough to him to seem worth the risks; and he wanted 
to observe material and social conditions for himself. While on 
holiday in late December, he had stayed with the families of 
colleagues. Sovnarkom's premier relaxed with the children, playing 
hide-and-seek around the house and getting down on his knees to 
hide under the table as part of the fun. 43 
Not that Lenin lived a life that was normal for most inhabitants of 
the Soviet republic. He and Krupskaya had house servants. Lenin 
satisfied his bibliophilia by constructing an extensive private library 
around the walls of his small study. He could order any book he 
wanted from any Russian library.44 Nor does Lenin's liking for 
children demonstrate that he was basically just an 'ordinary person'. 
Most people do not possess his ability to countenance the arrest and 
execution of thousands of individuals without proof of their criminal 
guilt. Lenin, had many likeable personal traits; but he also had some 
exceedingly unpleasant and unusual ones.45 
THE FORMULATION OF POLICIES 
The political symbiosis of Lenin the Bolshevik and Spiridonova the 
Left Socialist Revolutionary laid a premium on the rapid promulga-
tion of a Basic Land Law. Peasants and Bolsheviks had tolerated 
each other in late 1917, and the Decree on Land had been well 
received. But a more solid basis was required. Sovnarkom had taken 
care to avoid giving offence to the peasantry. A system of direct, 
progressive taxation had been a Bolshevik aim in the pre-October 
months and D.P. Bogolepov prepared draft legislation which was 
accepted by Sovnarkom on 24 November.46 1t was quickly recognised 
that any new fiscal system would meet with popular suspicion. The 
Left Socialist Revolutionaries were nervous about peasant feelings 
and on 6 December the new tax law was amended to allow local 
soviets to exempt the poorer sections of the population from all 
 314 
Lenin: A Political Life 
taxation.47 The Basic Land Law had to be approached with similar 
circumspection. Committees, commissions and informal forums of 
discussion sprang up in profusion. The Left Socialist Revolutionary 
A. L. Kolegaev was influential. Bolsheviks and Left Socialist 
Revolutionaries knew they had to reach a compromise loaded in 
favour of the Left Socialist Revolutionaries if there was to be any 
point in the continued coalition. Lenin's indefinite concept of 'model 
farms' was quietly shelved; and, for a while, the Bolshevik leftists 
were induced to refrain from mass collectivisation.48 The Basic Law 
'On The Socialisation Of The Land' was passed on 27 January 
1918.49 
This title signified that nationalisation was no longer a Bolshevik 
short-term aim. The Left Socialist Revolutionaries also successfully 
stipulated that the peasants should receive land according to the 
number of mouths to feed in each household. The Bolsheviks had 
wanted to base transfers of property to a greater extent with an 
increase of productivity in mind; but the need to reconcile their 
partners in Sovnarkom forced them to give way. 50 
They were also taken aback by the effects of land redistribution, 
especially the reduction in the number of wealthier peasants in terms 
of landholdings.51 Lenin had always hoped to keep the middle 
peasants, who had suddenly become an overwhelming majority, on 
the party's side. This meant that Bolshevism also had to forgo an 
insistence on retention of the large estates in integral form; and that 
the agricultural wage labourers, as distinct from poor peasants, were 
not supported as strongly as the Bolsheviks had originally desired. 52 
Lenin won a few minor battles. The Basic Law stated that the local 
soviets should be empowered to oversee the redistribution of the land 
even though it was tacitly conceded that no interference with the 
peasants in any village would be undertaken. He also inserted the 
point that the ultimate objective of the coalition's agrarian policy was 
'the collective system of agriculture'. 53 The difficulty was that the 
peasants did not react to the sanctioning of the land's transfer in a 
spirit of gratitude. Food supplies continued to diminish. In February 
1918, when the Basic Law was issued, the official bread ration in 
Petrograd was dropped to merely two ounces a day. 54 The return to 
their native villages of hundreds of thousands of peasant conscripts, 
whose acquaintance with the Bolshevik programme was closer than 
that of the normal rural population, made little difference. Local 
soviets from January 1918 started to dispatch armed squads into the 
countryside in quest of grain. 55 Sovnarkom desisted from com pre-
 The Obscene Peace 
315 
hensive forcible requisitioning, and Lenin's occasional talk of an anti-
speculator terror was not yet a systematic and lasting policy. A. G. 
Shlikhter was instructed to gather supplies of industrial goods and set 
out for western Siberia by train to exchange the goods for grain. 56 
The Bolshevik inclination towards using violence against the 
peasantry, which is traceable to the manipulative attitude to 
peasants traditional in Bolshevik thought,57 was emerging, but the 
army which would be necessary to suppress peasant discontent, was 
not yet formed. Sovnarkom encouraged demobilisation of several 
regiments in late 1917. The pre-October commitment to demilitaris-
ing industrial production and switching to output for the civilian 
market was also being fulfilled; and Sverdlov engineered the closure 
of Bolshevik party committees in the Russian army on the Eastern 
front. 58 Yet military conflict, in civil war and in foreign anti-
Bolshevik crusades, was expected. From February 1918 a series of 
instructions were issued which led within weeks to the creation of the 
Workers' and Peasants' Red Army. 59 
Measures were passed to exert control over industry and banking. 
On 14 December 1917, Lenin and the People's Commissar of 
Finances, G. Y. Sokolnikov, legislated for the nationalisation of all 
banks.60 Six weeks later, on 21 January 1918, the Soviet authorities 
unilaterally annulled the foreign and domestic loans incurred by 
Nikolai II and the Provisional Government.61 These two steps 
offered a mixture of control and relief. Sovnarkom could in any 
case expect no help or indulgence from the Allies. The snag was that 
industrial production remained on its steeply downward track. The 
total output value in 1918 fell to nearly a half of the value in 1917.62 
Lenin and his colleagues breathed fire about the future fate of 
capitalism and capitalists. The exodus of the middle and upper social 
classes abroad became a torrent. Shutdowns of enterprises continued. 
Thirty-eight per cent of large factories were closed in the first ten 
months of Soviet power.63 A state-managed industrial sector seemed 
to most Bolshevik leaders the cure for this problem. Before October 
1917, Lenin had sketched a process of gradual nationalisation, 64 and 
subsequently convinced associates that caution was needed in the 
winter of 1917-1918 despite the impatience of Bukharin and other 
leftists. Individual large factories were nationalised, not whole 
industries. But Bukharin and Osinski pressed for the creation of a 
general body to co-ordinate the process and obtained Lenin's 
consent. 65 On 5 December 1917 a decree was issued for the creation 
of the Supreme Council of the National Economy.66 
 316 
Lenin: A Political Life 
The Council's ameliorative impact on the industry and trade was 
negligible. Symptoms of desperation entered governmental pronoun-
cements. Unskilled workers were encouraged to return to their 
villages while the economic crisis lasted. 67 Industrial decline was 
tacitly acknowledged as virtually unavoidable. Even Lenin was 
accepting the sober predictions of his associate, V. P. Milyutin, 
before October 1917.68 There were still Bolsheviks who drew up 
plans for a perfectly-functioning system of complete economic 
management, as Lenin irritably noted. The real material plight grew 
ever worse. 
'Workers' control' was not abandoned as a policy; a statute on the 
principle was passed on 14 November 1917.69 Yet the rights of 
factory-workshop committees were vigorously trimmed. Such com-
mittees had their own national hierarchy; but Sovnarkom found the 
trade unions more amenable to government control and, in 1918, 
stealthily provided them with authority over the factory-workshop 
committees. 70 Bolshevik leftists, who combined arch-centralism of 
outlook with demands for uninhibited power for workers' represen-
tatives on the shop floor, denounced this as a betrayal.71 But 
Sovnarkom faced them down. It helped Lenin, perhaps, that 
Bukharin had no answer to the problem of disorder on the rail-
ways. Few Bolsheviks objected when Aleksandr Shlyapnikov was 
appointed commissar with extra-legal powers to restore an opera-
tional network. The railways were militarised, and railwaymen who 
failed to submit to the disciplinary code were liable to the sternest 
punishments.72 There was a long tradition in Bolshevism which held 
that the party should guide rather than automatically follow the 
workers. Working-class moods were not to be lodestars of policy. 
This menacing condescension had been largely, but not wholly, 
submerged in Bolshevik pronouncements before October 1917. It 
returned to prominence as the depth of the economic crisis was 
registered by Sovnarkom and as the hopes of succour from fraternal 
socialist revolutions lessened. The doctrines of What Is To Be Done? 
acquired a new potency; material pressures and ideological inclina-
tions were joined in a powerful compound. 
Nevertheless, funds were given to establish cultural organisations 
which would train workers to take advantage of the opportunities 
available under Sovnarkom's aegis. The Bolshevik leaders did not 
enjoy the compulsion they were applying to the working class; they 
assumed that, in time, the workers would understand the require-
ments of the situation and would support the party. A People's 
 The Obscene Peace 
317 
Commissariat of Enlightenment was installed under A. V. Luna-
charski (who had initially resigned on hearing that the Kremlin 
treasures were being looted in the October seizure of power, but then 
returned to post). 73 Lenin's old adversary, Aleksandr Bogdanov, 
strongly disapproved of what he regarded a a premature attempt at 
the transition to socialism; and the dispersal of the Constituent 
Assembly appalled him. And yet he saw the chances of applying his 
ideas about 'proletarian culture' and secured resources for an 
organisation known by its acronym of Proletkult.74 And skilled 
and literate workers assumed positions in the administration of the 
young Soviet state. 
THE CENTRAL COMMITTEE IN DISPUTE 
Lenin's restlessness with Trotski's tactic of 'neither war nor peace' 
grew sharply in 1918. On 7 January, a day after the Constituent 
Assembly's closure and six days after the assassination attempt, the 
two Bolshevik leaders conferred while Trotski briefly took leave from 
Brest-Litovsk. The terms offered to the Soviet delegation by 
Germany and Austria-Hungary, especially the proposal that the 
armies of the Central Powers would maintain their occupation in 
Poland, Lithuania and the Baltic region, had provoked a furious 
reaction in the local committees of the Bolshevik party. Most 
regional and city party committees felt that the Brest-Litovsk 
negotiations should be broken off and a 'revolutionary war' be 
undertaken. 76 Lenin reluctantly accepted that his proposal for a 
separate peace would not receive favour; and he agreed to what he 
regarded as the second-best tactic: that Trotski should still apply the 
'neither war nor peace' formula in the hope that either a German 
socialist revolution would occur, or the German High Command 
would not carry out its military threats.77 
On 8 January, Lenin could ascertain the strength of the internal 
party opposition when he addressed sixty three leaders of the 
Bolshevik fraction to the Third Congress of Soviets of Workers', 
Soldiers' and Cossacks' Deputies. His 'Theses on the Question of a 
Separate and Annexationist Peace' were considered outrageous. Only 
fifteen voted in favour of Lenin's proposal: a massive defeat. 78 Yet 
Lenin was used to being in a minority, and reminded his opponents 
that he had been execrated by Bolshevik leaders in 1907 when he had 
recommended participation in the State Duma elections. And yet he 
 318 
Lenin: A Political Life 
had eventually won the struggle for participation. 79 It was also a 
comfort to him that only thirty-two out of sixty-three members in the 
fractional gathering of the Third Congress of Soviets, a very narrow 
majority, voted directly for war. Sixteen supported Trotski's tactic. 80 
A wedge existed between two tendencies of opinion hostile to a 
separate peace; and Trotski had confided that, in the event of a 
German invasion, Lenin could count on his vote in favour of a 
separate peace.81 For Lenin, this demonstrated that Trotski was not 
yet ready to face up to reality. But he could perceive opportunities to 
win him over. Lenin regarded a German invasion as a certainty, and 
believed that the possibility existed that the Germans might press 
deeper into Soviet territory than was projected in their peace terms. 
Estonia might well fall under German occupation. 'In any event,' 
Lenin argued with Trotski, 'I stand for the immediate signature of 
peace, it is more secure. '82 
The crucial arena for debate among Bolsheviks was the Central 
Committee. Undeterred by defeat at the Congress of Soviets 
fractional gathering, Lenin restated his case on 11 January. He 
reminded the Central Committee that Bolshevism had never objected 
to defence in absolute terms and that the 'socialist republic' needed 
to be defended. It was indeed an 'obscene peace',83 he conceded, that 
was being proposed with Germany. But it would give time for the 
Bolsheviks to 'strangle' the Russian bourgeoisie and to prepare an 
army for a future revolutionary war- he made no pretence of being a 
pacifist. Meanwhile Germany was 'pregnant' with revolution; the 
signature of a treaty with Ludendorff and Hindenburg would not 
harm the prospects of international revolution. 84 
Bukharin, the left's major theorist, preferred revolutionary war to 
a separate peace. But he had always recognised the practical 
difficulties and wanted, for the moment, to allow Trotski's policy 
of prolonging the negotiations to continue;85 and Moisei Uritski, 
who had worked shoulder to shoulder with Lenin over the 
Constituent Assembly, maintained that Lenin was now guilty of 
the same Russo-centrism in foreign policy that had played him false 
in 1915.86 Lenin was obviously not the only Bolshevik leader who 
could point to another Bolshevik leader's past failings. Dzierzynski 
went further: Lenin was doing in international relations what 
Zinoviev and Kamenev, the so-called revolutionary 'black-legs', 
had done in domestic policy in the October Revolution.87 Only 
Stalin and Zinoviev spoke up strongly on Lenin's side (even though, 
when Stalin said that 'there is no revolutionary movement in the 
 The Obscene Peace 
319 
West', his pess1m1sm was much deeper than Lenin would allow 
himself). 88 On the other hand, the proposal for revolutionary war 
found only two supporters; the more cautious tactical counsel of 
Bukharin prevailed among the leftists.89 The vote in favour of 
procrastinating and hoping for the outbreak of a German socialist 
revolution was passed by twelve against one.90 This attitude was 
confirmed by a joint session of the Bolshevik and Left Socialist-
Revolutionary Central Committees on 13 January.91 
On l February, the Bolshevik Central Committee reconvened. A. 
Lomov, for the left, demanded a Party Conference to settle policy.92 
Conferences, being less authoritative bodies than Congresses, accord-
ing to the party's traditions, could be called more quickly; and since 
the left already held so many local committees it would be easy to 
defeat Lenin. Therefore Zinoviev called instead for a full Party 
Congress, which ought to involve the open election of delegates at 
mass meetings. A Congress was agreed upon.93 But the left managed 
to obtain a Central Committee session with local representatives on 3 
February, and again the policy of dragging out the negotiations was 
approved. Yet signs appeared that Lenin was gaining ground: five 
participants now voted in favour of a separate peace.94 Moreover, 
both Bukharin and Uritski agreed that such a peace was 'permissible' 
if the Germans simply broke off negotiations.95 Their anti-Lenin 
arguments were not as unequivocal as they might have been. There 
was also vacillation in their approach; for simultaneously they 
refused to agree or disagree that such a peace would also be 
'necessary'.96 
At Brest-Litovsk, time was running out for the Soviet delegation. 
The Germans and Austrians indicated on 10 February that their 
patience was exhausted; and Trotski, in a last-ditch effort at calling 
the bluff of the c~ntral Powers and stirring up political trouble 
among their own populations, announced simply that the Soviet 
republic was withdrawing from the war. Sovnarkom, he declared, 
would not sully itself with the signature of a separate peace but 
would not resume the war either.97 On 16 February, after conquering 
their incredulity, the Central Powers announced that an offensive 
would be resumed on the Eastern front on 18 February. Lenin urged 
a rapid reconvening of the peace talks and, if the Germans were still 
willing, the signature of a treaty on the terms specified in December 
1917. The Central Committee met, with Trotski in attendance, on 17 
February. No one, to Lenin's relief, would any longer press the case 
for an immediate declaration of revolutionary war. And yet Trotski 
 320 
Lenin: A Political Life 
adamantly refused to accede to a separate peace until the German 
offensive had happened (and even until it became clear whether the 
working classes of the Central Powers would rise against an invasion 
of the Soviet republic). Trotski's middle course was passed by six 
votes to five. 98 Lenin had come within inches of political victory in 
the Central Committee. Pushing the left into a corner about their 
Marxist assumptions, he cunningly tabled the question whether a 
peace treaty with 'imperialist Germany' was 'acceptable in principle'. 
Everyone agreed that it was acceptable. He also posed the problem as 
to what would happen if the German army attacked and there was no 
revolutionary 'upsurge' in Germany. Trotski, being prised out of his 
'neither war nor peace' position, declared that in such a contingency 
he would favour a separate peace. Lenin won the debate on this 
hypothetical situation, which was shortly to become reality, by six 
out of eleven votes. Only Joffe voted against. Bukharin and his 
friends abstained.99 
Lenin's forensic and philosophical skills were tugging the Central 
Committee closer towards him. But the military timetable of the 
Central Powers cut short his success: on 18 February, Trotski had 
bad news to report to the Central Committee. The German High 
Command, tired of the diplomatic parleying at Brest-Litovsk, had 
broken off negotiations. The Central Committee meeting was 
abruptly terminated in confusion. 100 A second meeting was held on 
the same evening, when Trotski relayed even worse information. The 
town of Dvinsk, only six hundred kilometres from Petrograd, had 
fallen to the Germans. Petrograd was at their mercy. Lenin's 
comment to the leftists was mordant: 'History will say that you 
gave away the revolution.' 101 
The choice between revolutionary war and a separate peace could 
no longer be avoided; the German offensive had brutally destroyed 
the basis of Trotski's tactics. Bukharin chose war even if it were only 
to be a defensive and, inevitably, unsuccessful war. He stuck to 
official Bolshevik policy as expressed before the October Revolution. 
He and his associates asserted that, whereas he had been willing to 
accept a situation of peace on the Eastern front if the Germans 
simply agreed to stop fighting, he could not bring himself to approve 
the formal signature of such a peace. A spontaneous separate peace 
between the soldiers of the two sides was one thing; a treaty was 
entirely another. This fine distinction did not win him the necessary 
support and the voting went against him by seven to five. Lenin had 
achieved his long-pursued majority in the Central Committee. The 
 The Obscene Peace 
321 
decision was made to 'approach the German government with a 
proposal of the immediate conclusion of peace'. 102 Trotski was now 
on Lenin's side. Nerves of steel would still be required; nobody in the 
Bolshevik Central Committee knew whether the Central Powers, 
once their armies had started moving and found the resistance to be 
so feeble, would agree to halt. Information about opinion at the 
German Court and in the High Command was scanty. 
Trotski, meanwhile, was wavering. On 22 February, he reported to 
the Central Committee that military aid was presently being offered 
by representatives of the British and French governments. Trotski 
favoured acceptance, and the vote went in his favour by six to five. 
Bukharin was among his opponents, objecting that Trotski's 
proposal represented collusion with Anglo-French imperialism. 
Having remained in the Central Committee after the vote in favour 
of a separate peace, he chose this occasion to resign his membership 
of it.I03 
And yet the Central Committee's position had to be resolved. The 
respective policies of Lenin and Trotski, mutually contradictory, had 
to be reassessed. The Germans again supplied extreme pressure. 
After the fall of Dvinsk they announced a set of expanded demands. 
The Soviet republic was asked to disclaim sovereignty over the entire 
Ukraine, Belorussia and the Baltic region. This would involve a 
massive loss of demographic, industrial and agricultural resources. 
The republic would be confined to central, northern and south-
eastern Russia and the territory to the east. Russia would also have 
to demobilise, and would be compelled to protect the interests of 
German entrepreneurs. Sverdlov revealed the grim news to the 
Central Committee on 23 February, and Trotski explained that an 
answer to the German ultimatum had to be given by seven o'clock on 
the morning of the next day. 104 This time, he asserted that since a 
divided party could not undertake a concerted war effort, he could 
not vote for revolutionary war. He added that he was unconvinced 
by Lenin's reasoning; but his own self-justification lacks cogency 
since he had agreed conditionally to a separate peace on 18 February. 
Lenin, while suspecting him of posturing, declined to respond. 
Trotski's abstaining vote was what counted. Bukharin continued to 
oppose. Even Stalin vacillated, saying that it might be possible to 
start negotiating again. 105 Lenin was horrified and threatened to 
leave Sovnarkom and the Central Committee: 'These terms must be 
signed. If you don't sign them, you are signing the death warrant for 
Soviet power within three weeks.' 106 Lomov struck back: 'It is 
 322 
Lenin: A Political Life 
necessary to take power without V.I. [Lenin]. It is necessary to go to 
the front and do everything possible.'107 
But Lenin could see he would win. He maximised his support by 
stressing that, whatever he might be compelled to agree to in the 
treaty, he would seek to 'prepare a revolutionary war'. Seven Central 
Committee members against four, with four abstentions, took his 
side. 108 The left-wingers under Bukharin collectively resigned from 
their posts in government and party. 109 Yet Lenin's victory was 
complete in the Central Committee. The obscene peace, the separate 
and annexationist peace, was to be signed. 
PARTY POLEMICIST 
Vital as it was to control the Central Committee, however, Lenin did 
not yet control the entire political system: the various organs of 
power were rivals to each other. Institutional polyarchy persisted. 
The Bolsheviks, wanting results at almost any cost, heeded little 
about the means. Soviets, trade unions, factory-workshop commit-
tees, and party organs: these were infused with Bolshevik personnel 
who were instructed to get on with the job at hand. Wherever 
deficiencies appeared in an institution's activity, moreover, another 
institution was encouraged to retrieve the situation. This sometimes 
involved the creation of entirely new bodies, such as the Cheka and 
the Supreme Council of the National Economy. Functional demarca-
tion was not a priority.110 Such an attitude was operable so long as 
two major conditions were met: firstly, that the Bolsheviks in the 
various public institutions were more or less agreed on policy; and 
second, that the Left Socialist-Revolutionaries were not at variance 
with the Bolsheviks. Neither condition was met from January 1918 
when rifts opened on the issues of war and peace. Naturally this 
pushed leading Bolsheviks back into the central body where they 
could resolve their own disagreements on policy definitively and 
without interference from other parties. The Brest-Litovsk dispute 
was not the first example of this after the October Revolution. The 
argument over coalition with the Mensheviks and Socialist Revolu-
tionaries in November 1917 had involved a similar recourse to the 
Central Committee; but the three months of controversy over the 
proposed separate peace with Germany and Austria-Hungary were 
more intense and set a powerful precedent for subsequent develop-
mentsY1 
 The Obscene Peace 
323 
The party as a whole resumed greater importance when the Brest-
Litovsk negotiations were discussed. While the battle raged in the 
Central Committee, Bolsheviks at lower levels was riven by conflict. 
Lenin recognised that the central party leadership's authority was not 
limitless and that further struggles would be necessary if the party 
was to follow the newly-adopted central policy. He himself had 
threatened to resign from the Central Committee when he was 
making no headway with his struggle for a separate peace; and he 
had been determined to have the freedom to campaign more openly 
among the party's rank-and-file membership. And throughout 
January and February 1918 he had contributed weighty articles to 
Pravda putting the case for the signature of a separate peace 
treaty. 112 
In the Central Committee he had been helped by factors of 
personality. He had always had a psychological edge over Bukharin 
and the left. Bukharin, when finally infuriated by his leader's 
behaviour in 1916, wrote to him timidly expressing regret that bad 
blood had come between them. Lenin had not written such a message 
to Plekhanov in the dispute of 1900. 113 In addition, the leftists had 
nobody of his stature as a dominant revolutionary figure. He had 
instigated the October seizure of power and established the new 
government's policies and institutional arrangements. Only Trotski 
came near to him in prestige as a pre-eminent Soviet statesman; but 
even Trotski could have no claim to recognition as the Bolshevik 
party chief. Lenin also had boundless self-confidence in his own 
judgements, and was supremely articulate in pronouncing them. He 
had a knack of taking a finely-balanced decision and presenting it as 
if no other decision was conceivable for proper-thinking socialists. 
There was much menace in his political style. When he did not get his 
way, he threatened to cause disruption until others fell in line with 
him; and his behaviour in the factional squabbles of the pre-war 
years demonstrated that this was no idle threat. The Left Commun-
ists had no such figure. There was talk among them of dropping 
Lenin from the government and even of imprisoning him if this alone 
would guarantee the retention of a policy hostile to a separate peace. 
This talk, incidentally, was to be used against several of them in 
Stalin's show-trials of the late 1930s. But in 1918 it was just talk. No 
moves were made to implement the intention. 114 
Lenin, by contrast, was someone who could confront a difficult 
situation and take responsibility for the outcome. 'Duty' was a 
frequent word in his vocabulary. This is not to say that Lenin was 
 324 
Lenin: A Political Life 
incapable of being irresponsible; several of his policy proposals in 
1917 were cases in point. But his international policy of 1918 came 
out well in comparison with the suggestions of his Left Communist 
opponents. He constantly derided what he regarded as mere 
'rhetoric', as the politics of the kindergarten. Phrase-mongering, he 
declared (with impressive disregard for his own penchant for utopian 
phrases in the pre-October months), had to be abandoned. 
Lenin also had the advantage of possessing a strong group in the 
central party apparatus. Sverdlov, after an initial inclination towards 
revolutionary war, sided with Lenin. Stasova, too, eventually backed 
him. These two shaped the contents of the Secretariat's correspon-
dence in the direction of acceptance of Lenin's policy. 115 Even the 
preparations for the Seventh Party Congress were dealt with less than 
even-handedly. Lenin and his friends were old hands at manipulating 
lists of delegates. The invitations were sent out at the last moment; 
and there are grounds for thinking that they were aimed mainly, if 
not exclusively, at addresses likely to supply a pro-Lenin delega-
tion. 116 Organisational manipulation was not the only reason for the 
advance of the Leninists before the Party Congress. Another was the 
series of speeches given by Central Committee supporters in the rest 
of the country. 117 Kamenev and, above all,  Zinoviev were tireless 
orators; and Zinoviev had even less compunction than Lenin in 
sinking to nasty innuendoes and defamation in order to win 
debates. 118 His proven skills as a polemicist made Lenin, who had 
always had a soft spot for 'Grisha', forgive everything that had 
happened between them in October 1917. Lenin cannot have been 
wholly displeased when Zinoviev unleashed a furious assault on 
Trotski's vacillatory demeanour in the Brest-Litovsk dispute even 
after Trotski had disowned the proposal for revolutionary war: it was 
important that Trotski was warned not to change his mind yet 
again. 119 
Such attacks served to emphasise Lenin's unique position of 
leadership in the party. A sort of reverence for him was growing 
by 1918. Zinoviev, despite having plenty of party and governmental 
business to occupy him, was collecting material for a short biography 
of Lenin; 120 and it was recorded that at a national soviet gathering, 
as the proceedings drew to a close, a delegate rose to his feet to 
proclaim that 'the entire Russian revolution showed that undoubt-
edly comrade Lenin is the sole person of genius among us.' 121 
Stasova wrote to local party organisations declaring her unbounded 
admiration for his qualities as an orator. 122 Certainly Central 
 The Obscene Peace 
325 
Committee member Artem is known to have switched sides in the 
debates, not because he was particularly swayed by the argument, as 
out of a faith in the man who had led the October Revolution. 123 
Many Bolshevik opponents experienced inhibitions in attacking him. 
For example, G.l. Safarov denied that Lenin's faction were 
describable as 'collaborators' with imperialism. 124 Few critics, after 
the early tirades in the privacy of the Central Committee in January, 
castigated Lenin personally. It was not unknown for Zinoviev to be 
derided as Lenin's 'errand boy'; but Lenin himself was usually left 
alone. 125 
Even without this adulation, however, Lenin would have been in a 
better situation to win the debate in the party as a whole than his 
opponents supposed. Even before the October Revolution the leftists 
perceived that a military offensive against Germany was extremely 
unlikely to be feasible. By 1918 many could see that a defensive war, 
too, would probably not be successful. Their policies embodied 
ideological purity and practical despair. Thus the Urals regional 
party committee condemned the Brest-Litovsk treaty while explicitly 
recognising the futility of hoping to survive a continued war with the 
German army. 126 The sheer impracticality of the Left Communists, 
as they were becoming known, played into Lenin's hands. While 
refusing to advocate a separate peace, some of them were also 
advocating the de-militarisation of factory production. 127 In addi-
tion, there could be no revolutionary war if only the local Bolshevik 
committee members were in favour of fighting it. Left Communists 
were essentially volunteer military commanders without military 
experience and, worse still, without soldiers. In their hearts, they 
knew this only too well. Hence their otherwise odd belief that, when 
it came to a fight with the Germans, the Russian peasants would 
enlist en masse. Left Communists, as Bolshevik radicals, would 
normally have turned first to the workers. But they knew they 
would be rebuffed by 'people who had been spiritually and 
physically tormented in the course of a four-year war' Y 8 Even the 
provision of adequate food to their armed units was beyond the 
capacity of the Left Communists in I vanovo-Voznesensk. 129 
It is against this background that the swing towards Lenin has to 
be assessed. A survey of town and city soviets at the beginning of 
January 1918 revealed an anti-Lenin majority, but in subsequent 
weeks the balance of opinion steadily changed. It is true that, by the 
end of February, many regional and province-level party committees 
- perhaps even a majority - held fast in opposition to the peace 
 326 
Lenin: A Political Life 
treaty. 130 But the frequency of conferences at the local level had 
declined in recent months; and quite possibly the Left Commmunists 
had been reluctant to hold elections in the party for fear of losing 
their numerically predominant position. Their commitment to intra-
party democracy was no firmer than Lenin's. So Lenin's instinctive 
feeling was realistic that his policy had a great chance of acceptance 
if open discussions were held and if those party rank-and-filers who 
were likely candidates for conscription in a revolutionary war were 
made aware of the implications. Without Lenin, the Brest-Litovsk 
treaty would probably not have been signed; and the Germans might 
well have invaded all Russia. But Lenin had a tide of mass opinion 
running his way, and no Russian politician knew better how to 
exploit his advantages. 
THE SEVENTH PARTY CONGRESS 
The Seventh Party Congress met in Petrograd's Tauride Palace from 
6-8 March 1918. Most Central Committee members had to travel 
back to Moscow since the capital had been transferred to there when 
the military emergency became acute. Petrograd was chosen for the 
Party Congress so as to affirm that the Central Committee's mood 
was neither downcast nor defeatist. The proceedings lasted less than 
three full days: the shortest ever held by the party. The number of 
delegates, too, remains the smallest: only thirty-six attended the 
opening session on 6 March (although forty-seven with voting rights 
are reckoned to have been present later in the Congress). 131 Sverdlov 
chaired, and at the preliminary meetings had secured agreement for 
rules of procedure enabling him to direct business vigorously. 132 At 
the opening session there was no time to do more than listen to 
Sverdlov's organisational report on the Central Committee. He 
claimed in particular that the number of party members had reached 
300,000. 133 
The second (and penultimate) day started with Lenin's political 
report. Lenin analysed 'the extraordinary ease' of the party's 
'triumphal procession' to power in 1917. 134 Success, according to 
Lenin, had been possible only because 'international imperialism' 
was temporarily distracted from intervening in Russia. 135 In 1918 the 
Bolsheviks faced not the ineffective 'bands of Kerenski' but the might 
of Germany. Russia had a semi-industrialized economy which had 
been devastated by the war; she lacked even an army. 'A peaceful 
 The Obscene Peace 
327 
domestic pet,' asserted Lenin, 'has been lying side by side with a 
tiger.' 136 Safety for the Soviet republic would come about only 
through 'an all-European revolution'. Meanwhile, the Bolsheviks 
would have to retreat. They might even have to move the capital to 
Vladivostok, on the Pacific coast. Political as well as spatial retreat 
had to be accepted. Just as Lenin's Bolshevik followers had 
swallowed their pride by participating in Stolypin's emasculated 
Third State Duma in 1907, so now they ought to conclude a 
separate peace with Germany and Austria-Hungary. A refusal to 
do so would merely be playing at being 'supermen' and listening to 
'fairy stories'. Bolshevik leftists were like the Polish noblemen of 
former times who died in a beautiful pose, saying: 'Peace is a 
disgrace, war is honour.' 137 Lenin argued that a peace treaty would 
give a 'breathing space'. He did not predict its duration. But he 
promised his opponents that, should circumstances turn in the 
party's favour, he would break the treaty without compunction. 
Thus he conveyed a combative impression even while advocating an 
immediate acceptance of defeat. 138 
Bukharin's co-report justifiably denied that his group had under-
estimated the difficulties that would be faced after the October 
Revolution. 139 He acknowledged that defeats for socialism might 
be at hand, and agreed that no Russian army could crush the 
German forces on the Eastern front. He even declared that he 
would be willing to sign a separate peace if there was a guarantee 
that it would endure and would give the opportunity for the political 
and military preparations in Russia to assist the ultimate 'overthrow 
of international capital'. An aggressive 'revolutionary war' in the 
given circumstances was 'impossible'. What Bukharin had in mind 
was a defensive partisan campaign against the Germans wherever 
their forces invaded. 140 
This meant that Bukharin, contrary to what has usually been 
written about him, 141 put forward a far from confident alternative to 
Lenin's policy. Lenin was lucky to face such opponents. Neverthe-
less, Bukharin's attack on his case inflicted some damaging wounds. 
Lenin was gambling on obtaining a lengthy breathing space, on the 
Germans abiding by their word, on the inability of the two military 
coalitions in the War to come together to strangle the young Soviet 
republic in its cradle. Nothing in the current situation gave assurance 
that his bet would be successful. 142 It was highly unlikely, in 
Bukharin's estimation, that the breathing space would be sufficient 
to facilitate economic reconstruction and military preparedness. So 
 328 
Lenin: A Political Life 
why bend the knee to the German high command at Brest-Litovsk? 
Surely the answer was to train the proletariat for a 'crusade' against 
imperialism. 143 The speeches by Lenin and Bukharin lasted two 
hours, and the ensuing debate was adjourned until the third session 
on the evening of 6 March. M.S. Uritski noted sarcastically that 
Lenin would sign a separate peace even if it was destined to last only 
a couple of days. 144 Like other Bolshevik leftists, Uritski was 
horrified both by the compulsory evacuation of the recently-
conquered Ukraine and by the compulsory demobilisation of the 
Russian army. And yet not even Uritski claimed that victory in a 
revolutionary war was probable; but he expressed a preference for 
military defeat over sheer 'chaos'. 145 
Zinoviev retorted that the leftists spoke more from the emotions 
than from the head, and he reminded the Congress that Bukharin 
was not absolutely opposed to a separate peace. He congratulated the 
leftists on their good fortune that, being the Congress minority, they 
did not have the responsibility of taking onerous decisions. 146 This 
was a different Congress from all previous ones. There had always 
been dangers in the life of an underground revolutionary, but 
Congresses before 1917 had neither increased nor diminished these 
dangers through their decisions. The Seventh Congress proceedings 
were a life-and-death matter from beginning to end. 
A. S. Bubnov stood up for the left, arguing that their case.oftoday 
was simply Lenin's of yesterday. He drew attention to the strikes in 
Austria and Germany; and, like Bukharin, he called only for a 
defensive partisan form of warfare. 147 But the Left Communists were 
hopelessly divided. One of them, I. T. Smilga, denied that the 
necessary peasant support would be forthcoming. 148 But they held 
their heads high in debate: Karl Radek justifiably maintained that 
the Left Communist case had persistently been misrepresented. He 
denied that he thought the German socialist revolution would break 
out within a day or two. 149 He could easily have mentioned that it 
had been Lenin, not Radek, who had claimed that a mere change of 
party leadership in Germany could have brought the workers on to 
the streets for revolutionary action. This was a polemical opportunity 
that would not have been missed by Lenin if the roles had been 
reversed. G. Y. Sokolnikov sided with Radek, but criticised Bukhar-
in's proposal for partisan warfare. 150 The fissures on the party's left 
impeded a unified assault on Lenin; and Sverdlov felt no need to 
ration the contributions from the leftists. 151 Trotski, whose cause was 
already lost, asked for the floor only half-way through the session; he 
 The Obscene Peace 
329 
stoutly defended the activity of the Soviet delegation to the peace 
talks and repeated that he had abstained from voting in the Central 
Committee because he did not believe that a revolutionary war could 
be fought if the party was divided by factionalism. But he 
unexpectedly urged the Congress to vote for a spatial withdrawal 
without the accompaniment of a formal treaty; and he pleaded that, 
if the Congress none the less was intent on a treaty, no peace should 
simultaneously be signed with the Ukrainian Rada. 152 Twisting and 
turning, he added that he was not urging the Congress to refuse to 
ratify the treaty. 153 
Trotski also helped Lenin by declaring contempt for the leftist plan 
for partisan warfare conducted with 'the knives of Pskov peasants' 
instead of rifles and artillery. 154 D. B. Ryazanov was less charitable 
to Lenin's group, accusing Sverdlov of closing down the party's 
organisations in the old army solely in order to make it harder for the 
party to resist the proposal for a separate peace. 155 Sverdlov met this 
with a flat denial (even though Ryazanov was probably right). 156 
T. D. Sapronov complained that provincial delegates had not yet 
been given the floor. 157 Several speakers followed, including the 
prominent leftists N. Osinski and Aleksandra Kollontai; but their 
speeches added little to what had already been said. No one could 
suggest that the left-wing case had been muffled at the Congress 
itself. 158 
At the fourth session, on 8 March, provincial delegates were given 
their say. V. F. Stozhok from the Donbass opposed Lenin's policy; 
0. I. Rozanova from Yaroslavl supported it. Maskov, a Urals 
delegate, came over to Lenin's side despite having been mandated 
to advocate revolutionary war. 159 Sapronov and V. A. Shumailov, 
both leftists, stuck to their mandates. 160 Debate was ended, and 
Bukharin's closing speech predicted that the 'breathing space' would 
not be realised and that Lenin would soon have to adopt the position 
of the Bolshevik left. 161 Lenin replied that, if it had not been for 
Bukharin, the Central Committee would have chosen its current 
sensible policy earlier. Abrasively, he added: 'To declare war on 
Germany now would mean giving in to the provocation of the 
Russian bourgeoisie.' 162 A report from the Congress mandate 
commission ensued. This was a lively affair since the fiddling of 
mandates was a traditional party pastime. The commission's Chair-
man G.l. Boki, noting that the Kronstadt delegate claimed to 
represent 3,500 party members, doubted that even 500 Bolsheviks 
remained in the naval garrison. 163 Thereupon the Congress returned 
 330 
Lenin: A Political Life 
to the discussion of the Brest-Litovsk peace treaty and, as expected, 
confirmed Lenin's pro-peace motion as the basis of its resolution. 164 
The clause-by-clause discussion was boisterous and chaotic. 
Ryazanov intervened to denounce Trotski for having ordered the 
execution of six innocent citizens some days previously. 165 Trotski 
ignored him and proceeded to offer amendments to Lenin's motion. 
He wanted to say that the signature of the peace was 'permissible' 
rather than 'necessary'. And where Lenin had spoken generally about 
a breathing-space before 'the attack of the imperialists', Trotski 
wanted to mention 'the inevitable and imminent attack'. He also 
argued against signing a treaty with the Rada. 166 All his amendments 
were repudiated. 167 
Until then no one had given a thought to possible reactions from 
the German high command. Zinoviev pointed out how vital it was to 
take up the matter. The motion called for 'the most energetic, 
mercilessly decisive and draconian measures to raise the self-
discipline and discipline of the workers and peasants of Russia'; it 
declared that 'a liberationist, patriotic socialist war' was unavoidable, 
and that universal military training should be put in hand. 168 The 
Congress therefore decided to pass Lenin's resolution but to withhold 
it from publication. Instead a short announcement on the ratification 
of the peace would appear in the official Soviet press. 169 Even at this 
stage, however, several delegates tried to reactivate debate on the 
resolution's contents. Trotski's supporter, N. N. Krestinski, com-
plained that the clauses failed to express approval for the negotiating 
policy of the Brest-Litovsk delegation in 1917-18; and Trotski 
defended his abstention in the crucial votes in the Central Commit-
tee.170 Zinoviev, denying that the resolution on war and peace had 
implied criticism of Trotski, offered his own additional motion which 
welcomed the work done at Brest-Litovsk to expose the plans of 'the 
German imperialists'; Krestinski responded with another motion 
asserting that the delegation's tactics had been 'correct'. Both 
motions were passed. 171 Yet Zinoviev and Trotsky became very 
agitated. Zinoviev argued that only his resolution should stand, since 
Krestinski's majority had been the smaller. 172 Trotski, his pride 
dented, proposed a motion actually condemning the Brest-Litovsk 
delegation's tactics as 'mistaken'. By these indirect means he sought 
to get the Congress to give him a vote of approval. To his 
satisfaction, his own motion was rejected; but the flurry of re-
balloting led also to a repudiation of Krestinski's already-accepted 
resolution. 173 
 The Obscene Peace 
331 
This sting in the tail of the main debate showed how tactless and 
imprudent Trotski could be, and how fiercely Zinoviev wished to do 
him down. Lenin held himself aloof from the wrangling. He had won 
what he had come to the Congress to win. That was sufficient for 
him. There was no need to humiliate Trotski. On the contrary, there 
was every reason to keep Trotski in the Central Committee. The 
episode gave further reinforcement to Lenin's position as patriarch of 
his party. 
The fifth and last session began in the evening of 8 March. Lenin 
gave a joint report on two further issues: the revision of the party 
programme and the change of the party's name. His aim was to 
incorporate sections in the programme to highlight the differences 
between the Bolsheviks and most other adherents of the Second 
International. The themes of The State and Revolution were 
rehearsed. Lenin, denouncing 'bourgeois democratism', called for a 
new type of democracy based on the Russian soviets. 174 His difficulty 
came about with the writers of three competing projects: Nikolai 
Bukharin, V. M. Smirnov and G. Y. Sokolnikov. These leftists had 
wanted to scrap all vestiges of the reform proposals in the existing 
party programme on the grounds that they had been formulated in 
1903 with a future bourgeois revolution rather than a socialist 
revolution in mind. Lenin, emphasising that the Bolsheviks were 
stili 'only at the first transitional phase between capitalism and 
socialism', wanted to retain the old proposals. 175 In a nutshell, he 
believed that the programmatic offerings of Bukharin and his 
associates revealed excessive optimism about how much reform had 
already been achieved and how much more could be achieved in the 
near future. He also urged that, since there were contrasting as well 
as common features among European industrial countries, the 
programme should continue to refer to Russian specificities. 176 
Such arguments had their roots in the Lenin-Bukharin dispute of 
1915-16, and Lenin saw that they were irresolvable in this last 
Congress session. He proposed the transference of the revision of 
programme to either a Congress-selected commission or to the 
Central Committee. 177 Bukharin still wanted his say at the Con-
gress. While 'subscribing to Lenin's every word in his characterisa-
tion of the state', he called for a definition of socialism. Lenin's 
vague references to the nationalisation of the means of production 
lacked the necessary concreteness. 178 When debate shifted to the 
question of the party's name, however, Bukharin spoke strongly on 
Lenin's side; and the Congress voted to redesignate the party as the 
 332 
Lenin: A Political Life 
Russian Communist Party (Bolsheviks) in order to distinguish it 
from other Marxist parties in Russia and elsewhere. 179 The Congress 
set up a seven-person commission to compose the party programme 
definitively. It was divided equally between Lenin's and Bukharin's 
supporters, with Trotski holding the balance between them. 180 
The collaborative atmosphere was dispelled by the elections to the 
Central Committee. Sverdlov proposed to cut the membership down 
from twenty-one to fifteen, since a smaller number would make 
decision-making easier. The Congress presidium proposed a list 
including some leftists. Yet M.S. Uritski announced that the leftists 
would not join the Central Committee. 181 Zinoviev asserted that the 
whole course of the Congress had indicated that there was 'no serious 
danger of a split'. Uritski replied that the leftists did not rule out the 
possibility of co-operation in the future, especially when revolu-
tionary war re-entered the agenda. Lenin pleaded with the leftists, 
arguing that diversity of opinions was good for the Central 
Committee. 182 Yet the leftists were adamant. Reluctantly they 
agreed to vote in the election of the Central Committee, but declined 
to accept membership. Lenin and Trotski, with thirty-four votes, had 
most support. Trotski's success signalled his meteoric rise in the 
Bolshevik party. Sverdlov and Zinoviev obtained thirty-three votes. 
But even Bukharin gained thirty-two. 183 His objection to joining the 
Central Committee was the sole matter at the Seventh Party 
Congress where victory failed to go to Lenin. But it was a small 
and only temporary triumph for Bukharin. Perhaps because they 
were bemused by the last-minute flurry in the proceedings, the 
Congress ended at twenty minutes past midnight without the usual 
rendition of the 'Internationale'. 184 
Lenin, despite his brave face, knew that troubles remained in store 
for the Soviet republic. His triumph at the Party Congress had 
damaged relations with the Left Communists, and the Left Socialist 
Revolutionaries were destined to leave Sovnarkom. In broader 
political terms, too, he was threatened. Workers in increasing 
numbers were challenging the party's measures and methods. 
Conflicts between the peasantry and the local soviets were intensi-
fied. State institutions and power, shaken in the February Revolution 
against Emperor Nikolai II and paralysed throughout the Provi-
sional Government's rule, had not recovered its previous control over 
society even though the Bolsheviks had used violence on a vast scale. 
And in south-eastern Russia, the Socialist Revolutionaries were 
mustering to establish an alternative Russian government consisting 
 The Obscene Peace 
333 
of deputies from the dispersed Constituent Assembly. Anti-Bolshevik 
regimes had sprung up in the Transcaucasus and counter-revolu-
tionary armies were being formed in south Russia and Siberia to 
overthrow Sovnarkom. International problems were acute: Germany 
could not be trusted even after the Brest-Litovsk treaty, and the 
Allies, furthermore, were already planning armed intervention in 
Russia. 
If anyone could lead the fight against the regime's enemies it was 
Vladimir Ilich Lenin. Before the February Revolution, he had been a 
factionalist and a theorist. He made virtually no effort to attract 
support among those subjects of the Emperor who were not already 
convinced revolutionaries. Lenin did not push for the foundation of 
popular Marxist newspapers, and he failed to develop the promise he 
had once exhibited as a lively and accessible pamphleteer. He sought 
influence among Marxists. He did not control the Bolshevik faction 
and, in the First World War, his contacts with its members in the 
Russian empire became extremely frail and intermittent. Outside the 
faction, furthermore, he remained a deliberately disruptive politician 
(as socialist leaders in the rest of Europe noted with displeasure). 
Nevertheless, at the level of political philosophy, he markedly 
influenced his own Bolsheviks even though they objected to his 
divisive tirades; and, as often as not, it was Lenin who set the agenda 
for Bolshevik debates even if he did not always win them. Nor should 
it be concluded that his organisational impact was negligible. He had 
the inestimable advantage that the maintenance of a foreign-based 
apparatus was important for Bolsheviks in the Russian empire. Thus 
the Okhrana, by arresting revolutionaries and severely constricting 
the freedoms of the illegal labour movement, made a Lenin possible. 
And so he survived, acquiring the prestige of a veteran and a major 
thinker among Bolsheviks. His anti-tsarist credentials were impec-
cable. Lenin, like his comrades, also found much to detest in the 
whole political and economic order of pre-war Europe, and his rage 
reached a peak of intensity in the First World War. He was in his 
way a visionary, with the fire of an Old Testament prophet. He 
genuinely wanted a better (nay, a perfect) world for mankind; and he 
was convinced that Marxist doctrines provided an unrivalled tool to 
analyse reality, and predict and determine the future. 
No less than Elijah and Isaiah, however, he lacked tolerance. His 
Marxism evinced a fanaticism which was common in varying degrees 
among Bolsheviks - and it was alloyed with non-Marxist doctrines 
and impulses which he did not acknowledge. Bolshevism was not the 
 334 
Lenin: A Political Life 
originator of all ideas of dictatorship. The idea that the oppressive 
tsarist order should be followed immediately by an order which 
foreswore authoritarianism had a long tradition in Russian revolu-
tionary attitudes before the Bolsheviks existed; and it was not 
confined to the Russian empire either. Lenin's framework of Marx-
ism was very elastic. He perennially criticised those Marxists who 
adopted notions developed outside the boundaries of conventional 
European Marxism, but this seldom stopped him from being 
similarly exploratory. On many questions of Russian politics and 
economics, furthermore, he developed ideas which were combatively 
expressed. When he insisted that the Bolsheviks should address the 
national question, he took risks with his own reputation among 
them. There can be no doubts about his high intellectual potential in 
the pre-war period. But his thought in general remained patchy and 
ill-elaborated. To take just two examples: his agrarian theories flew 
in the face of much evidence he chose to ignore; his answer to the 
national question overlooked defects pointed out to him at the time. 
Such debates could have dragged on interminably if the monarchy 
had not suddenly been overthrown in February 1917. It was this 
revolution that made Lenin, for the first time, into a figure in world 
politics. He quickly became not only the leader of a party but also 
master of a government. Lenin, for most of his opponents outside the 
Bolshevik party, was the October Revolution. Yet this was an 
exaggerated image; Russian military defeat and economic collapse 
were not caused by him and his party, and the Provisional 
Government was falling headlong before its dissolution. Neverthe-
less, his towering reputation reflected a real superiority of impact 
over his colleagues and his party: no one matched him in importance. 
Yet he had to handle internal party politics carefully. On some 
occasions he yielded to his Central Committee; on others he was 
expressing an existing widespread mood in his party. Even so, he 
wielded a crucial influence on the fashioning of the party's policies, 
on the hastening of its decision to overthrow Kerenski, and on the 
fixing of the framework of Sovnarkom's decrees. He emerged as a 
skilled public politician. He learned to address mass meetings and to 
adjust ideas in quest of popular acceptance: he also fudged many 
policies. He managed, too, to appeal at last both to sophisticated far-
left socialist intellectuals and to ordinary factory workers. He was an 
inspiring leader. Sections of his analysis were brilliant, but his 
argumentation was marred by poorly elaborated, incoherent and 
reckless projections. Not c.nfy intolerance but also self-deception 
 The Obscene Peace 
335 
drove him on; he shared in the utopian visions of the revolutionary 
era. Nevertheless he, as an intellectual claiming to act from 
considered premises, had little excuse since commentators in other 
parties, and even in his own, predicted the consequences of his 
measures. Civil war was more the making of Lenin than of any other 
single person. Multitudes of revolutions had occurred in the old 
Russian empire in 1917, and Lenin had always said that they were 
easily compatible. Yet the socio-economic requirements of urban 
Russia clashed with what was demanded by the countryside. The 
inter-ethnic rivalries were another source of immense conflict. 
Lenin's policies misjudged the enormity of the old Russian em-
pire's crisis. 
And so a broadly-based socialist government did not take place in 
late 1917. The chances of the prolonged survival of such a regime, 
linking Bolsheviks with Mensheviks and Socialist Revolutionaries, 
had never been large; but Lenin was prominent in preventing the 
attempt from being made. He brushed aside all criticism with the 
declaration that the policies of the Mensheviks and the Socialist 
Revolutionaries had had their opportunity in government before the 
October Revolution, and they had failed. Lenin still hoped against 
hope that Russian workers and peasants would 'from below' make a 
mass participatory system and that European socialist revolution 
would occur. In the meantime, the authoritarian side of his thinking 
won out steadily over the democratic side. He would not take 
opposition lying down. And yet it was far from being obvious in 
March 1918 that Lenin would be able to secure his Soviet state in 
power and live to pursue his plans for socialist revolution in Russia 
and the rest of the world. 
