 162 
Lenin: A Political Life 
their loyalty to their soviets as being primary; troops on the Eastern 
front increasingly exhibited the same attitude. The 'lower social 
classes' everywhere flexed their collective muscles. Rates of pay were 
renegotiated: workers in both private factories and government-
owned plants, such as the Putilov works in Petrograd, secured wage 
rises. Foremen who had behaved unpleasantly were humiliated by the 
workforce; some were tied up in sacks and pushed around the factory 
premises in wheelbarrows. Soldiers demanded a relaxation of 
discipline and the permission to elect their own committees to 
represent their interests; and the Petrograd Soviet issued its 'Order 
No. 1' to encourage them. Occasional lynchings took place. Tensions 
among the nationalities were also noted: requests for limited rights of 
autonomy were voiced in Finland and the Ukraine. The peasantry in 
certain regions refused to await the Constituent Assembly's resolu-
tion of the land question and several gentry estates were seized in 
Penza province in March 191 7. 2 
The Kadets in the Provisional Government tried to tame rather 
than to ride the tiger. Their ideas and rhetoric were similar to 
liberalism elsewhere in Europe; but, sensing the weakness of their 
popular support, they favoured the closest collaboration with the 
industrialists, bankers and the landed gentry. This signalled a retreat 
from their earlier social radicalism (which in 1905 had involved the 
promise to hand over the agricultural land to the peasantry, albeit 
with compensation to the landlords). In 1917 they argued that the 
land could not be handed over to the peasants without disrupting 
agriculture in the short term, diminishing the supply of food to the 
towns and tempting soldiers to desert and return to their native 
villages. Kadets claimed, too, that workers who went on strike or 
demanded steep wage rises damaged the national war effort. The 
Provisional Government never failed to stress the catastrophic 
consequences for Russia; if Germany won the war. 3 Without 
planning it, the Kadets became a catch-all party for large and 
medium-sized proprietorial interests.4 
They were not alone in bowing to circumstantial pressures and in 
shifting their previous stance. The same was done by both the 
Mensheviks and the Socialist Revolutionaries, who had traditionally 
expected that the overthrow of the Romanov monarchy would 
inaugurate the rule of the bourgeoisie. Yet they declined to move 
into outright opposition when the Provisional Government's fragility 
became evident. Thus they had come to offer their 'conditional 
support' to Lvov's cabinet; and, as the difficulties of ministers 
 There Is Such a Party! 
163 
became acute, their assistance was crucial to the regime's survival. 
Continuing to think that socialism in backward Russia was a 
premature project and that national unity was essential in wartime, 
they hoped to constrain the Provisional Government to act within 
the limits of policies based on democratic political liberties and 
territorial defence; and, immediately after the February Revolution, 
most workers, peasants and soldiers felt likewise. Their votes 
provided the Mensheviks and the Socialist Revolutionaries with 
majorities in the soviets. 5 Furthermore, the left wings of the 
Mensheviks and Socialist Revolutionaries proved to be indecisive 
and ill-led; and few of their representatives held the objective of 
forming an all-socialist coalition. Martov, the leading left-wing 
Menshevik, advocated such a goal only from July onwards.6 
Nevertheless the problems of war and economy and politics would 
predictably worsen greatly before they got better, and the appeal of a 
radical programmatic alternative to Menshevism would grow. The 
stimulus for the Bolsheviks, who before 1917 had attacked the 
liberals more aggressively than had the Mensheviks, to fight to 
replace the Provisional Government with a socialist regime would 
increase. The April Theses may have shown intellectual disjointedness 
and question-begging assertiveness; they may also have been based 
on false and over-confident guesswork. Yet in general they were 
working with the grain of the popular grievances in 1917.7 Returning 
to Petrograd, Lenin was adept in expressing popular attitudes which 
had not yet fully developed. His opponents reacted to him with 
horror, not least because the more astute among them recognised the 
potentiality of the theses to attract support.8 
His task was facilitated by the often-overlooked fact that even the 
principal leaders of the Bolshevik right, Kamenev and Stalin, had 
already distanced themselves from the policies of contemporary 
Menshevism.9 At the beginning of April, this pair acted as major 
Bolshevik spokesmen. It was they who were chosen by the Russian 
Bureau of the Central Committee to put the Bolshevik case at the 
assembly of soviet deputies, drawn from all over the country, which 
met in Petrograd from 29 March. Kamenev and Stalin argued for 
organisational links with the Mensheviks (who supplied most 
representatives to the gathering of deputies); they also won over 
the Bolshevik fraction (or caucus) to the policy of conditional 
support for the Provisional Government 'insofar as it follows the 
path of satisfying the demands of the working class and the 
revolutionary peasantry'. 10 Negotiations between the Bolshevik and 
 164 
Lenin: A Political Life 
Menshevik fractions proceeded on this basis. Later accounts have 
portrayed these negotiations as yet another case of Kamenev and 
Stalin behaving cravenly in Lenin's absence. 11 Obviously, Stalin and 
Kamenev were not following Lenin's line. Yet they were not cringing 
before Menshevism either: Stalin made clear his belief that the 
Provisional Government's days were numbered and that sooner or 
later, after 'a break with the bourgeoisie', the soviets would assume 
power; 12 and Kamenev persuaded the Menshevik negotiators to 
criticise even the Petrograd Soviet's foreign policy, to call for a 
publication of secret treaties and to repudiate the principle of 'civil 
peace' _13 Furthermore, other Bolshevik speakers emphasised the 
necessity for a radical series of direct-action measures. 14 
The tentative agreements between the Bolshevik and Menshevik 
fractions did not hold. On 30 March, the Mensheviks and Bundists 
retracted their support from the motion criticising the Petrograd 
Soviet. 15 Kamenev in turn announced the deal with Irakli Tsereteli to 
have been rendered obsolete, and declared: 'Our task is to show that 
the only organ deserving our support is the Soviet of workers' 
deputies. >~ 6 Hardly a declaration likely to endear himself to most 
Mensheviks. Similarly, Stalin on 1 April stated that he favoured 
unity only with those Mensheviks who accepted the Zimmerwald and 
Kienthal Conference decisions. 17 This would have excluded Men-
shevik right-wingers; and, as Stalin must have realised, neither the 
Menshevik centrists nor the Menshevik leftists would have linked up 
with the Bolsheviks on such terms. 
For a few days, Tsereteli's ascendancy over Russian socialists 
seemed unshakeable. Tsereteli carried a motion of support for the 
Petrograd Soviet by 325 votes against 57 when the Bolsheviks and the 
Mensheviks emerged from their respective fractions to debate at the 
national conference of soviets; he even persuaded several Bolsheviks 
to the right of Kamenev, such as V. S. Voitinski, to support him. 18 
Yet Bolshevism itself, as a whole and in its constituent proto-
factional parts, was in flux. Lenin returned home at the moment 
when all Bolsheviks recognised the need for a wide-ranging discus-
sion to formulate the general line of Bolshevik strategy and to put an 
end to all this fluidity. The idea that Kamenev and Stalin would have 
co-operated, or would even have been permitted to co-operate 
contentedly, with the Mensheviks without extracting large conces-
sions on policy if only Lenin had not taken his 'sealed train' through 
Germany is implausible. Kamenev's sympathisers, while not agreeing 
with Lenin, distrusted the Mensheviks; and the position of the 
 There Is Such a Party! 
165 
Bolshevik right was anyway under persistent challenge. The radicals 
in the Russian Bureau of the Central Committee did not cease to 
press for overt opposition to the Provisional Government. Russian 
Bureau member V. M. Molotov and the City Committee member 
N. A. Skrypnik declared that Stalin's hard bargaining with the 
Menshevik faction was nowhere near hard enough. 19 
It was in this unstable situation that Lenin, arriving on 3 April, 
talked into the night with Bolshevik leaders in the party's head-
quarters in the Kshesinskaya Palace (which had simply been 
sequestred by force). 20 At noon next day he was accompanied by 
them to the Tauride Palace where he spoke to about seventy 
Bolsheviks and read out his April Theses. He stunned his audience 
with the audacity of his proposed strategy. Voitinski, disturbed by 
what he had heard, suggested that the debate should be postponed 
and that the audience should adjourn to a joint meeting of 
Bolsheviks and Mensheviks scheduled for the afternoon. 21 
N. S. Chkheidze, as chairman of the afternoon meeting, gave the 
platform to Lenin to expatiate on his theses. He was listened to in 
silence; and his faction's unity lay sundered by the end of his speech. 
V. S. Voitinski and I. P. Goldenberg, despite being Bolsheviks, spoke 
strongly against him. Goldenberg, a Bolshevik who was moving over 
to Menshevism, shouted: 'Lenin has now made himself candidate for 
one European throne vacant for thirty years: the throne of 
Bakunin!'22 Mikhail Bakunin had not only been a founding father 
of anarchism in Russia and Europe in the nineteenth century but had 
also been engaged in virulent disputes with Marx and Engels. Lenin 
was not amused. Aleksandr Bogdanov, still more bluntly, called 
Lenin's theses 'the ravings of a madman'; and Fyodor Dan called 
them 'the party's funeral', adding that the 'bourgeois revolution' was 
incomplete. Y. M. Steklov argued that Lenin underestimated the 
concessions wrung from the Provisional Government. Yet it was 
Tsereteli, the Petrograd Soviet's dominant figure, who offered the 
most sustained criticism. He accused Lenin of overlooking a Marxist 
'class analysis' and of failing to see that not every section of the 
Russian bourgeoisie had an interest in a war for territorial gain. 
Tsereteli repeated Engels's warning about the dangers of a class 
taking power prematurely. The Mensheviks, according to Tsereteli, 
provided practicality while Lenin put up only 'naked slogans'.23 
Even the Bolsheviks at both meetings were stupefied and remained 
as yet unconvinced; apparently, only Aleksandra Kollontai spoke on 
Lenin's behalf. He was unabashed. Tsereteli asserted: 'However 
 166 
Lenin: A Political Life 
irreconcilable Vladimir Ilich may be, I am convinced we'll be 
reconciled.' Such sentiments were immediately brushed aside by 
Lenin, who had by then repaired to a seat in the journalists' box. 
Unable to restrain himself, he rose to his feat and, leaning over the 
balustrade, shouted to a shocked Tsereteli: 'Never!'.24 
On 6 April, Kamenev attacked Lenin's views at the Russian 
Bureau of the Central Committee.25 Further debate was called for, 
and Lenin's theses appeared in Pravda on 7 April.26 Kamenev replied 
in Pravda on 8 April, declaring that Lenin's theses lacked concrete-
ness and failed to specify whether the Provisional Government 
should be overthrown. Kamenev also asked how it was possible to 
talk of a completed bourgeois revolution when land reform had not 
even begun; and he complained about the absence of any reference to 
the Constituent Assembly.27 Initially, Kamenev, using arguments 
deployed by Mensheviks in the Zurich Volkhaus and in Petrograd's 
Tauride Palace, had the upper hand. The Petersburg City Committee 
rejected Lenin's April Theses by thirteen votes to two on 8 April. 28 
Nor, seemingly, did any major local committee immediately come 
over to Lenin's support. 29 Lenin had no choice but to meet and talk 
to as many Bolsheviks as possible. 30 But his words were not 
automatically accepted by Bolsheviks; the history of Bolshevism 
showed this, and Lenin himself knew it. Initially, he gambled on 
making his audacious ideas more audacious. In so far as he 
responded to Kamenev it was to accentuate the differences between 
them. Pravda on 9 April carried Lenin's article 'On Dual Power', 
which addressed the question about the Provisional Government's 
fate: 'It must be overthrown since it is oligarchical, bourgeois and not 
a government of the whole people; it cannot give peace or bread or 
full freedom. ' 31 Not even The April Theses had been so explicit or 
combative. Lenin could not have made it clearer that he was calling 
for a second revolution. 
Several factors were in his favour. Voitinski and those Bolsheviks 
who opposed Kamenev's stand against Tsereteli quickly abandoned 
the Bolsheviks altogether.32 The Bolshevik right wing was severely 
weakened. Furthermore, the Kamenevites who had manipulated 
Pravda and buffeted the Russian Bureau in March did not reflect 
the opinions of all Bolsheviks among lower committees, especially at 
the district level, in Petrograd. The Vyborg District Committee's 
hostility to Kamenev was intense; and other lower party bodies in 
dozens of other towns and cities were equally annoyed. 33 The anti-
Kamenevism was, however, muted and removed from public 
 There Is Such a Party! 
167 
attention so long as the existing town committees remained in 
existence. 
The scheduling of an All-Russian Bolshevik Conference for late 
April opened windows of opportunity for Lenin. Local Bolshevik 
conferences had to be called and party policies had to be openly 
debated. These were attended by elected representatives; and the 
local conferences in turn elected representatives to the All-Russian 
Conference. Only 15 per cent of Bolshevik delegates to the national 
soviet conference in Petrograd from 29 March to 2 April were re-
elected to the Conference which opened three weeks later.34 Many 
reasons explain this turnabout. Some participants in the early 
gathering were pushed aside by the more prestigious leaders, who 
by then had returned from Siberian exile or, like Lenin, from 
emigration. The national soviet conference, moreover, had not 
included representatives from all local committees. Not even the 
Moscow Bolsheviks had dispatched representatives. 35 Almost cer-
tainly the change of composition as between the national gathering 
on 29 March and the Bolshevik April Conference also reflected the 
fact that rank-and-file Bolsheviks, when their opinion was consulted, 
chose leaders who approved of radical alternatives to Kamenev's 
policies. This occurred, moreover, before Lenin had a chance to 
contact Conference delegates except through the medium of his brief 
and patchily-argued articles in Pravda. The balance of opinion 
among the Bolsheviks was swinging his way, and The April Theses 
accelerated the process. 36 
Lenin in person, meanwhile, had success at one local conference, 
and it was the most influential local conference at that. The 
Petrograd Bolsheviks met on 14 April. Lenin addressed its dele-
gates, making his fullest oral advocacy of The April Theses. By then, 
however, shifts of emphasis were noticeable in his presentation. To a 
still greater extent than in his theses, he highlighted the need to win a 
majority of opinion in the soviets. By implication, this would take 
time. He had said this in his Pravda article on 9 April; but now it was 
heavily stressed. Thus his final motion spoke of the need for 'lengthy 
work' in propaganda. 37 
This won over Bolsheviks like Prisedko who, in their own account, 
had originally been frightened off by his ultra-radical talk. 38 Lenin 
also modified his presentation at the Petrograd City Conference 
itself. His original intention had been to specify that, if a general 
peace without annexations and indemnities could not be brought 
about, a new socialist administration should fight a 'revolutionary 
 168 
Lenin: A Political Life 
war' against imperialism. This did not find favour with a gathering 
which wanted to stress the party's ability to bring about peace rather 
than to intensify war; and Lenin, however reluctantly, agreed to omit 
the slogan from the final resolution. Kamenev and his supporters 
were evidently not without impact. 39 In addition, certain other 
participants who did not accept all of The April Theses still 
welcomed many of them. Specific objections were voiced, for 
example, to the notion of a commune-state; evidently not all 
Bolsheviks agreed with Lenin's critique of Kautsky's views on the 
state. Doubts were predictably raised also about land nationalisation 
and its likely reception among the peasantry.40 Still other partici-
pants, while not being convinced of the Marxist authenticity of 
Lenin's definition of the current stage of the revolutionary process, 
endorsed his practical policies.41 Moreover, it actually helped Lenin 
that his April Theses were not a finished product and left much to be 
decided. F. I. Goloshchekin, with a touch of exaggeration, declared: 
'You can sketch in whatever pattern for practical steps you like on 
comrade Lenin's theses.'42 He was at least right that Lenin's policies 
left many options open. Consequently, there was a variety of reasons 
why the City Conference supported the final resolution proposed by 
Lenin, by thirty-three votes to six, with two abstentions.43 The 
ground was being scooped from beneath the feet of Kamenev, 
beaten but not dispirited, whose amendments were rejected over-
whelmingly by the Conference.44 
How representative were the Petrograd Bolsheviks in their move-
ment towards The April Theses is not yet known with precision; but, 
very probably, party committees elsewhere in the country inclined in 
Lenin's favour for similarly mixed motives, and not all of these 
implied total submission to Lenin's will.45 Nor, of course, did the 
Bolsheviks debate strategy in a political vacuum. Events occurred at 
dizzying speed in spring 1917. At the Petro grad City Conference, 
Y. A. Yakovlev noted that the peasants were already taking radical 
direct-action measures without waiting for any political party to 
instigate them to do so.46 Workers and soldiers, as all Bolsheviks 
were aware, were still busily extending their rights; and already there 
were signs that wage settlements would not keep pace with inflation. 
Meanwhile, food supplies declined.47 In such circumstances it was 
hard for Kamenev to win over the Bolsheviks with ideas of even 
conditional support for the Provisional Government. 
And yet it was probably a certain development in international 
relations which improved Lenin's chances most of all. On 19 April it 
 There Is Such a Party! 
169 
became public knowledge that Foreign Minister Pavel Milyukov had 
secretly notified the Allies of his government's desire to implement 
the treaties signed by Nikolai II. The Menshevik and Socialist-
Revolutionary policy of 'conditional support' for the Provisional 
Government had failed its first test. Mensheviks, Socialist Revolu-
tionaries and Bolsheviks took to the streets in protest on 20 April; 
and, in view of the precedent whereby the monarchy had been 
brought low by largely peaceful crowds of demonstrators, the Lvov 
cabinet was severely shaken.48 The Bolshevik Central Committee, at 
Lenin's instigation, had encouraged the protest demonstration and 
suggested that only a seizure of power by 'the revolutionary 
proletariat together with the revolutionary soldiers' could bring 
about 'a truly democratic peace' .49 This was not exactly a summons 
to immediate insurrection. Not exactly; but it did not preclude it, and 
S. Y. Bagdatev and several other leaders of the Petrograd City 
Organisation on 21 April issued a leaflet urging the immediate 
overthrow of the Provisional Government. 50 The cabinet apprecia-
ted the gravity of its position. It was forced to affirm a policy of 
national defence and non-expansionist war aims, and Milyukov and 
Guchkov were obliged to resign. 51 The crowds of demonstrators left 
the streets. For the Bolsheviks, the 'April crisis' had profound 
consequences. Those Bolshevik activists who had wavered between 
Lenin and Kamenev were having their minds made up by the proof 
that the Provisional Government was to be given neither conditional 
support nor even conditional trust. Little could now save Kamenev 
from defeat at the All-Russian Bolshevik Conference. 
THE SEVENTH ALL-RUSSIAN CONFERENCE 
Yet no victory was going to fall into Lenin's lap unless he handled his 
Conference imaginatively. The proceedings, which began on 24 April 
in the main hall of the Kseshinskaya Palace, were a landmark in 
Bolshevism's history. Previous Conferences of Bolsheviks were held 
in Finland or in the emigration. The April Conference was the first 
such Conference held in Russia. It was also the first Conference 
which no one was prevented from attending because of imprisonment 
or exile. But the April Conference's prime importance lay in its 
ploughing up of the virgin soil of the politics of Russia. From April 
 170 
Lenin: A Political Life 
1917 the Bolsheviks followed a clear (if not totally straight) line of 
opposition to the Provisional Government, and sowed and cultivated 
the seeds of a further revolution. 
One hundred and fifty-two delegates attended, from nearly all 
major organisations associated with the Bolsheviks. 52 The hall was 
draped with red and green banners, and the mood was excited. The 
elections to the Conference presidium intimated what lay in store. 
Both Lenin and Zinoviev, but not Kamenev, were selected for the 
five-man body; and, for good measure, the Conference extended its 
greeting to 'the first internationalists Karl Liebknecht and Vladimir 
Lenin' (even though Liebknecht was still in a Berlin prison). 53 Such a 
step confirmed that the party had a European viewpoint on the scope 
of its tasks and that Lenin was regarded as inferior in status to no 
European socialist leader. His esteem among Bolsheviks had reached 
its highest point yet. It was natural for him to be chosen by the 
Central Committee to deliver a report on its behalf 'on the current 
moment'. His stance was criticised by A. S. Bubnov from the 
Bolsheviks' Moscow Regional Bureau, who wanted clauses inserted 
on the need to 'control' the Provisional Government since it had 
become 'counterrevolutionary'. 54 Bubnov was on the party's left; and 
he, no less than Lenin, sought the overthrow of the Provisional 
Government. But Lenin argued that all talk of 'controlling' the 
Kadet ministers in advance of seizing power was 'a most empty 
phrase'. He also declared that Bubnov underestimated the extent of 
the reforms already promulgated since the February events. Lenin 
maintained, in disregard of Kamenev's earlier arguments, that 'the 
bourgeois revolution' had been completed.55 
His own proposed administration would be a socialist 'state of the 
Paris Commune type'; but it would also be a 'dictatorship' which did 
not rely on 'the formal will of the majority'. 56 The soviets would 
embody the new state power. There would be nationalisation of the 
land, the banks and large industrial syndicates.57 • This was as far as 
he was ready to go with legislative details. Lenin reaffirmed that 
'lengthy work' was needed to persuade workers and peasants to 
follow the Bolsheviks; and he acknowledged that it was still unclear 
how successful the party would be with the peasantry.58 But he 
agreed that, so long as the existing civic freedoms remained, it was 
essential to rely on propaganda rather than force. Talk of civil war 
must be abandoned. 59 
Lenin sat down; he had shown, as at the Petrograd City 
Conference just days before, that he could adjust his public posture 
 There Is Such a Party! 
171 
to the requirement of obtaining a mass political following outside the 
party. So he was not averse to compromise after all! At least, not 
averse to certain sorts of compromise. With this in mind, the 
delegates waited to hear what Kamenev would say in his co-report. 
Kamenev, with impeccable Marxist logic, asked yet again how on 
earth could the bourgeois revolution be said to have ended while the 
landed gentry retained their estates. He queried, too, the basis in 
Marxist thought for a socialist administration involving not only 'the 
proletariat' but also the peasantry. What had happened to Marx's 
simple and unadorned dictatorship of the proletariat?60 And what, 
enquired Kamenev, did Lenin offer to the party to fight for in the 
period before the transfer of power to socialists? By scrapping the 
two-stage revolutionary schedule, Lenin had left no short-term 
reforms to be aimed at. 61 Several influential speakers -
V. P. 
Milyutin, P. G. Smidovich, V. P. Nogin, A. I. Rykov and S. Y. 
Bagdatev- took Kamenev's side. Bagdatev was especially mordant, 
stating that it was difficult to discern a completed bourgeois 
revolution when the gentry retained their land and neither a system 
of progressive taxation nor the eight-hour working day had been 
promulgated.62 Even V. V. Kuraev, a sympathiser with Lenin, 
complained about the absence of 'a sketch of the steps to be taken 
towards socialist revolution in The April Theses. 63 
Yet there was less disunity than there appeared to be.64 Like Stalin 
in March, Kamenev argued that a clash between the soviets and the 
Provisional Government was inevitable and vouched that eventually 
'power must belong to the soviets'.65 Bolsheviks since 1905 had urged 
that only mass socialist organisations could ensure the establishment 
of a truly democratic order in Russia, so that Kamenev's call for a 
transfer of governmental authority was not entirely unexpected.66 
But Kamenev also made an announcement on Lenin's motion on the 
war: 'In general I agree with it.' The war, he added, was imperialistic 
and could be ended 'only by worldwide revolution'.67 In conclusion 
he even described Lenin's ideas as 'a magnificent programme of 
development of the revolution'. 68 
Kamenev was also cheered by Lenin's discomfiture at the 
insurrectionary appeal made on 21 April by Bolshevik activists in 
Petrograd: Lenin was forced to disown and criticise it (even though 
his own Central Committee resolution had helped to contribute to its 
composition).69 Perhaps Kamenev thought that Lenin might be 
pulled even closer to his policies in the near future. Kamenev almost 
theatrically welcomed the Central Committee's ban on insurrection-
 172 
Lenin: A Political Life 
ary slogans. 70 Lenin and he could at any rate agree on several 
practicalities while clashing over underlying strategy and Marxist 
definitions. Bubnov stirred things up again by asserting that it was 
inept to squabble over whether the revolution was bourgeois or 
socialist; for him, the situation was more complex, and elements of 
both types of revolution were present. 71 Lenin, while in Switzerland, 
had affirmed the pointlessness of attempts at theoretical classifica-
tion; but he now implicitly rejected such agnosticism. Perhaps he 
found Bubnov's formulation to be too reminiscent of Trotski (who as 
yet remained a figure of suspicion among Bolsheviks). 72 Or perhaps 
Lenin had invested so much intellectual capital in the concept of an 
already completed bourgeois revolution that he could not quickly 
withdraw. The disputants, however, were already becoming exhaus-
ted and peace began to settle upon them. A seven-person drafting 
commission was elected. It neatly balanced Lenin and Zinoviev on 
one side with Kamenev and Nogin on the other; Bubnov had earned 
a place by his interventions; and Stalin (who had edged away from 
Kamenev to occupy an intermediate position in the debate) and I. G. 
Pravdin, were also included. 73 
Nogin then reported on a peace conference of European socialists 
being arranged by the Danish social-democrat F. Borbjerg with the 
German Social-Democratic Party's encouragement. On balance, 
Nogin wanted Bolshevik representatives to attend, if only to contact 
and co-ordinate activities among the European socialist left. 74 Lenin 
and F. E. Dzierzynski, the Polish social-democratic leftist who had 
now joined the Bolsheviks, argued against Nogin that the peace 
conference would be a sham since British and French socialists would 
not be participating.75 Kamenev also spoke against Nogin, urging the 
party to confine its dealings with foreign groups to those which were 
in favour of ·civil war'. The Lenin-Kamenev line carried the day. 76 
The defeated Nogin proceeded to introduce a debate on the party's 
relation to the soviets. His call for greater participation was 
welcomed by a series of speakers who told the Conference about 
the growing power of mass organisations in their respective areas. 
This provoked Lenin to remark that Petrograd and Moscow were 
now lagging behind the provinces in revolutionary achievement. 'The 
dictatorship of the proletariat,' he declared, 'is being realised in the 
small localities.'77 
At the sixth session of the Conference, on 27 April, Lenin 
introduced a motion on the war. The crux of his remarks was that 
the Bolsheviks, on coming to power, should 'openly propose a 
 There Is Such a Party! 
173 
democratic peace to all peoples on the basis of a complete 
renunciation of any annexations whatever'. 78 He asserted that this 
would 'inevitably lead to insurrections of the proletariat'. He 
conceded that others had challenged the validity of his prediction 
but maintained that, if insurrections failed to occur, the party's duty 
would be 'to support those parties and groups abroad which really 
conduct a revolutionary struggle in wartime against their imperialist 
governments and their bourgeoisie.'79 It deserves emphasis here, in 
the light of what was to become Soviet policy in 1918, that this policy 
was far short of advocacy of 'revolutionary war' .80 Be that as it may, 
Lenin's motion was passed nem. con. and with only seven absten-
tions.81 His place on the platform was taken by Zinoviev, who 
introduced a debate on the Provisional Government. His proposed 
clauses were basically the same as those of the Petrograd City 
Conference: he saw the soviets and other mass organisations as the 
likely organs of revolutionary governmental authority. Yet he 
nodded gently in the direction of the Bolshevik right wing, saying 
that the Constituent Assembly might embody the new power.82 
Smidovich urged the restitution of the Assembly as an unconditional 
objective. But this was too much for Lenin and Zinoviev, and 
Zinoviev spoke against. His motion was accepted against only three 
opposition votes, with eight abstentions.83 
In the evening session, Lenin initiated a brief debate on the 
agrarian question. A section of the Conference had already met to 
formulate a motion, and no substantial disagreement had emerged. 
Lenin had successfully revived his land nationalisation scheme of 
1905. As before, he defended it as being 'necessary from a bourgeois-
democratic viewpoint'.84 He did not present it as a socialist measure 
but as a means for removing the feudal obstacles to agricultural 
modernisation within a capitalist economic framework. State owner-
ship of land would not preclude land use for private profit, and the 
exclusion of the gentry would facilitate an enormous rise in 
productivity. For the first time he admitted that this would require 
'a gigantic bureaucratic apparatus'; but he countered that the 
democratic structure of the revolutionary state would prevent 
dangers of abuse. 85 
All this was old hat for those who had listened to Lenin's agrarian 
ideas of the previous decade. Only two aspects were in any fashion 
startling. The first was that nowhere in his speech did he expressly 
contend that an epoch of rural capitalist development lay ahead; he 
merely implied it. The second was that he commented that land 
 174 
Lenin: A Political Life 
nationalisation would 'ineluctably give a push towards wider 
measures'. 86 This strangely indefinite wording surely signifies that 
Lenin was contemplating a faster movement towards the setting up 
of collective farming than he had previously envisaged; and this must 
have been sweet music to the ears of those on the Bolshevik left who 
dreamed that the collectivisation of agriculture could quickly be 
decreed and imposed by a forthcoming socialist administration.87 In 
any event, Lenin's speech was well received. Only one delegate, N. 
Angarski from Moscow, questioned Lenin's arguments at all. 
Angarski's critical point was that the notion of nationalisation 
would offend the peasantry's wish to own property. At least two 
other Bolshevik leaders, Iosif Stalin and M.l. Kalinin had made the 
same case in Pravda;88 but neither was willing to help Angarski at the 
Conference. In fact, Angarski was right in his judgement; but the 
Conference, by a majority, did not think so and Lenin's ideas became 
official party policy. 89 
This drastic reversal of the defeats sustained at the hands of his 
own Bolsheviks in 1905-7 was accomplished with little discussion. 
Nearly all the Conference delegates operated in towns and cities. 
Possibly most of them did not take the agrarian question very 
seriously even though it involved the vast majority of the country's 
inhabitants. It was only after the Conference that wiser heads 
prevailed in relation to Angarski's arguments about nationalisation. 
Yet the deliberations were even briefer on other policies. so one 
imagines that the restricted time available for discussion must have 
been another factor. 90 Zinoviev's motion to oppose the entry of 
socialists into coalition with Kadets was swiftly accepted. So was 
Lenin's on the need to start work on the writing of a new party 
programme. All delegates. particularly those who were only visiting 
Petrograd, wanted to know more about events in the capital. The 
daily press was avidly scanned; and G. F. Fedorov, member of the 
Petersburg City Committee (which refused to change its name to the 
Petrograd Committee as a protest against the government's 'chau-
vinism' in renaming the capital), reported on the progress of the 
Petrograd Soviet debate on the acceptability of a government 
coalition of liberals and socialists. On the Conference's last day, 29 
April, V. V. Shmidt reported on the activities of the Petersburg City 
Party Committee. The proceedings continued with Zinoviev's report 
on the need for the Bolsheviks to unite with all social-democrats 
regarded by them as truly internationalist in orientation. He picked 
out the Interdistricters (Mezhraiontsy) as a prime example. The 
 There Is Such a Party! 
175 
Interdistricters were close in strategy to Trotski; and Zinoviev, 
deliberately or not, was initiating a process which culminated in 
Trotski's entry to the Bolshevik party in July. 
The quiet approval for his suggestion made it seem that the 
Conference was gently drawing to a close. Far from it: the very last 
session produced the stormiest debate. Stalin gave a report on the 
national question, proposing that all peoples oppressed under the 
Romanovs should be given the right of secession. In accordance with 
the pre-war writings of Lenin and Stalin, the report stressed the 
desirability of dissuading non-Russian nationalities from exercising 
that right. He hoped that, for example, the Ukrainians and the 
Transcaucasian peoples would content themselves with 'regional 
autonomy', since the party would guarantee national freedom 'in 
schooling, religious and other questions'. 91 
But the Central Committee had chanced its arm by choosing 
Stalin. Unhappiness with Lenin's attitude to the national question 
had long been widespread among Bolsheviks, and the section 
established by the Conference to formulate a motion refused to 
give approval to Stalin's viewpoint. Instead the section had voted for 
the motion of G. L. Pyatakov;92 and Pyatakov, Lenin's opponent on 
the national question, was not minded to give way to Stalin. He 
repeated his belief that, in a world where national economies had 
become deeply interconnected under capitalism, the demand for 
national independence was 'reactionary'; and he asked what would 
happen if most Poles desired secession while the Polish working class 
wanted to belong to 'a general socialist' state.93 Lenin's ripost was his 
most passionate contribution to the Conference: 'There's no people 
which could be so pervaded by hatred to Russia, there's no people 
which could so terribly not love Russia as the Poles.' Pyatakov, he 
suggested, had woefully underestimated the significance of national 
consciousness. Lenin professed a readiness to contemplate the 
secession of the Ukrainians as well as the Poles and the Finns; but 
he predicted that the Ukraine would in the event be content with a 
'fraternal union' with Russia. Even Lenin, furthermore, added a 
qualification: 'We absolutely do not want the Khivan peasant to live 
under the Khan of Khiva. '94 
He left unsaid both how he would prevent such an outcome if 
Khiva's peasantry wanted a khanate, and what criterion for approval 
of secession he would use. Filip Makharadze leaped on this 
uncertainty, asking why the Tartars should not gain independence 
if the Finns were to obtain it.95 Stalin's final speech dwelt on the 
 176 
Lenin: A Political Life 
usefulness of the national liberation movement as a 'bridge' between 
East and West. Every movement directed against imperialism, he 
concluded, should be supported. Stalin's motion won by 56 votes to 
16 on the Conference floor. 96 
The results of the ballot for the new Central Committee were 
announced. A hundred and nine delegates had stayed to vote. Lenin 
came top of the poll with 104 votes, followed by Zinoviev with 101 
and Stalin with 97. Next came Kamenev with 95.97 There had been 
resistance to Kamenev's standing when the candidatures had been 
discussed in closed session because of his behaviour in the Bolshevik 
court case of 1915, but Lenin came to his rescue, arguing the need to 
let bygones be bygones98. Evidently he felt that there was enough 
common ground between himself and the leader of the Bolshevik 
right to keep him in the Central Committee; and perhaps he already 
valued him as a potential counterweight to leftists who might want to 
force the revolutionary pace even faster than Lenin himself wanted. 
Similar reasons presumably underlay Zinoviev's successful support 
for the election of Milyutin and Nogin (who came in fourth and fifth 
with 82 and 76 votes).99 But Lenin and Zinoviev did not get things all 
their own way. Krupskaya's candidacy failed. So, too, did that of 
E. D. Stasova, whom Lenin wanted to run the Central Committee 
Secretariat; she was dropped in favour of Y. M. Sverdlov, whom 
Lenin neither knew much about nor wanted in the Central 
Committee. 100 In addition, I. D. Teodorovich failed to be elected 
despite a supportive speech from Zinoviev. The two remaining 
members of the nine-person Central Committee were I. T. Smilga 
and G. F. Fedorov. 101 
None of Lenin's colleagues were his stooges, and several were 
hostile to his general strategy. Furthermore, virtually the entire 
Central Committee would be based in Petrograd. Only Nogin would 
be hundreds of miles away, in Moscow. Smilga could shuttle freely 
between Petrograd and nearby Finland. So Lenin would not be able 
to push through his decisions because his colleagues were under 
arrest or dispersed in various countries. Even Zinoviev was willing to 
take him on, urging the Conference to dispatch a representative to 
the socialist peace conference in Stockholm in order to increase 
Bolshevik influence over the European socialist left. Lenin disagreed; 
but the Conference backed Zinoviev. 102 Lenin, however, could feel 
satisfied. As the Conference came to an end, he knew he had won 
most of the policy discussions. Fittingly he gave the closing speech. 
His difficulties were in any case those which anyone would have had 
 There Is Such a Party! 
177 
with a dynamic political organism such as the Bolshevik party. 
Ahead lay the problems of putting the official policies into practice. 
AGAINST DUAL POWER 
The Bolshevik All-Russian Conference's resolution forbidding social-
ists to enter the Provisional Government was passed in a week when 
Lvov was negotiating for Menshevik and Socialist Revolutionaries to 
join his cabinet. Mensheviks and Socialist Revolutionaries, remem-
bering that the Bolshevik prohibition was in line with the Second 
International's policy, 103 regarded the invitation with distaste; and 
Kerenski had had to seek special permission from the Petrograd 
Soviet before becoming Minister of Justice in March. 104 But the 
April crisis over foreign policy showed that the Provisional Govern-
ment would be impotent unless individuals from the Petrograd 
Soviet's leadership were included. Ministers had not been elected 
and lacked legitimacy; and the official local organs of authority 
remained chaotic. Trouble had flared up in April when the Finnish 
Sejm, the regional government, gave official expression to a popular 
demand for greater autonomy. Independence was not the objective, 
but the Provisional Government insisted that only the Constituent 
Assembly could decide the matter. The unofficial organisations 
throughout the rest of the old empire were even more irksome: 
soviets, trade unions and other mass organisations acted practically 
as they wished. The Provisional Government was at loggerheads with 
the Kronstadt Soviet, constituted by the sailors of the Kronstadt 
island's naval base; and delegations from the cabinet travelled out 
there to mollify anti-governmental sentiments. 105 In Petrograd, the 
Vyborg District Soviet was solidly hostile to the cabinet after the 
February Revolution. Most soviets, especially at the city level, 
remained in the hands of the Mensheviks and Socialist Revolutio-
naries. But the lower the level, the stronger the representation of the 
Bolsheviks. The worst omen for the Provisional Government was the 
Bolshevik majority at the First City Conference of Factory-Work-
shop Committees in May 1917, and its acceptance of Lenin's motion 
on measures to deal with 'economic ruin' .106 
Bolsheviks concluded that it was only a matter of time and 
political effort, before the Petrograd Soviet fell to them, and those 
among them who still hankered after a united Russian Social-
 178 
Lenin: A Political Life 
Democratic Labour Party with the Mensheviks diminished. The 
liaison between the Kadet party and the Mensheviks and the 
Socialist Revolutionaries strengthened Bolshevik intransigence. 
Aleksandr Kerenski was promoted to Guchkov's vital post in the 
Ministry of Army and Navy Affairs. Irakli Tsereteli and M.l. 
Skobelev, both Mensheviks, became respectively Minister of Posts 
and Telegraphs, and Minister of Labour; Viktor Chernov, from the 
Socialist Revolutionaries, took charge of the Ministry of Agriculture. 
This first coalition government was not totally without prospects 
of survival. It was left-of-centre and aimed to defend the country and 
rally support across classes. It spoke the language of democracy; it 
contained many who had suffered for their opinions under the 
Romanovs. Yet no minister felt very optimistic. Tsereteli was aware 
that his duties as Minister of Post and Telegraphs prevented him 
from giving due attention to the affairs of the Petrograd Soviet. 107 
The Menshevik and Socialist-Revolutionary ministers set about 
extracting the maximum of concessions from the Kadets short of 
driving them from the Provisional Government. Skobelev insisted on 
measures to protect workers at the site of work, and on taxes to curb 
excesses of war-profiteering among industrialists. Regulations on 
prices of raw materials for manufacturing enterprises were intro-
duced despite the objection of Progressist leader and Minister of 
Trade and Industry, A.l. Konovalov. 108 Chernov was given to 
understand that no agrarian reform would be permitted until the 
Constituent Assembly's convocation. But he, too, managed to snatch 
concessions from his Kadet colleagues. The conscription of millions 
of able-bodied young males to the armed forces had reduced the 
number of mouths to feed in peasant communes and had diminished 
the pressure on peasant families to seek work on the landed gentry's 
estates. Chernov secured assent for such land to be put at the 
disposition of elective rural committees. Kadets thought this to be 
tantamount to offering a cover for peasant land seizures. 109 
But the liberals had the consolation that the Mensheviks and 
Socialist Revolutionaries still wanted them to govern, and that 
Kerenski in particular, as Minister of Army and Navy Affairs, had 
moved closer to their viewpoint; they also retained, in the person of 
M.l. Tereshchenko, control of the Foreign Ministry. This was also, 
however, a source of delight for the Bolsheviks, who could stand up 
at open public meetings and denounce the Mensheviks and Socialist 
Revolutionaries for conniving in the 'bourgeois rule' and the 
prolongation of a worldwide imperialist war. Propaganda and 
 There Is Such a Party! 
179 
organisation were a Bolshevik party priority, and the party activists 
benefited from the spare time unavailable to their rivals who carried 
the burdens of central and local governmental office. For Lenin, it 
was the heyday of his public appearances. He spoke at the First All-
Russian Congress of Peasants' Deputies and the First Petrograd City 
Conference of Factory-Workshop Committees in May, and at the 
First All-Russian Congress of Soviets of Workers' and Soldiers' 
Deputies in June. 110 
Bolshevik Central Committee policies were modified for popular 
consumption. Less was said at open mass meetings, in soviet sessions 
or in Pravda about aspects of their plans which jarred against the 
inclinations of workers, peasants and soldiers. The Central Commit-
tee simplified the April Party Conference's resolutions, which were 
phrased in terms impervious to most non-Marxists, and indeed many 
Bolsheviks. The incentive came with the need to set out a list of the 
party's demands and slogans for the forthcoming election of deputies 
to the Petrograd Soviet. Lenin sketched a draft calling for 'no 
support' for the Provisional Government and for an end to the war 
without annexations and indemnities and with full self-determination 
for all peoples. 111 The draft was unfinished, and the proposal 
published in Pravda on 7 May was issued in the Central Commit-
tee's name. Lenin's popular style had been rendered more popular, 
his ideas more accessible and electorally-appealing. The Pravda 
proposal asserted that the war had been started by kings and 
capitalists and that only a government of workers, peasants and 
soldiers could bring about 'a just peace'. 112 Both Lenin and the 
Central Committee, moreover, avoided mention of the possibility of 
'revolutionary war' or 'European civil war'. These topics continued 
to be addressed among Bolshevik leaders through 1917; but there was 
a recognition that such talk would not gain universal approval on the 
streets. 113 
How much pressure was exerted on Lenin by Central Committee 
colleagues to mollify and fudge his policies is not known. That 
pressure was exerted is scarcely disputable. Certain of his key 
slogans, such as 'land nationalisation' and 'model farms', failed to 
be mentioned in the Central Committee proposal, which simply 
stated that the land should be transferred 'without compensation to 
the peasants'. Nor did the proposal as published in Pravda refer to 
the nationa1isation of banks and large-scale industry. Instead, the 
demand was made, more vaguely, for a transfer of power to the 
soviets, which would exert 'control' over production and distribu-
 180 
Lenin: A Political Life 
tion. 114 Lenin's incomplete draft did not state how the party should 
campaign at the local level. Evidently, however, he himself was 
already backing away from too emphatic or too frequent a 
commitment to 'revolutionary war', 'European civil war' or even 
that cornerstone of his Marxism: 'dictatorship'. The manicuring of 
policies did not always occur against his wishes or without his 
instigation. 115 Before 1917 his policies had been aimed more at 
getting support in his party than at communicating with Russian 
society; he had seldom worried lest his provocative declarations 
might prove unacceptable to workers and peasants. He did not 
entirely change his ways even after the April Conference, but a 
distinct shift towards taking known popular attitudes into account 
certainly occurred. 
The gain in political appeal was not yet matched by clarity about 
the methods whereby the Provisional Government was to be 
removed. Bolsheviks did not believe that a socialist revolution 
would occur by spontaneous self-generation. Political demonstra-
tions had brought down the Romanovs, and it was natural that 
further demonstrations, against Lvov's cabinet and the system of 
'dual power', should have appealed to the activists of the party. 
Lenin failed to offer an opinion: Kamenev's jibe in April that Lenin 
supplied a strategic destination without the route map was more than 
a little apposite. The scheme for an armed march of protest against 
the Provisional Government, coinciding with the convocation of the 
First Congress of Soviets of Workers' and Soldiers' Deputies, was 
instigated by members of the Bolshevik Military Organisation. 
Lenin, without being in constant touch with the Military Organisa-
tion, had a host of admirers among its leading cadre. 116 The Military 
Organisation was formally subject to the Central Committee and was 
empowered to co-ordinate party activity and party groups through 
the Russian armed forces. Its radicalism and willingness to take the 
initiative were already well known, and several of its members felt 
that the Central Committee's response to the April crisis over 
Milyukov had been insufficiently revolutionary. Thus their radical-
ism overspilled the bounds respected by Lenin himself since the All-
Russian April Conference of the Bolshevik party. A mass display of 
strength at the First All-Russian Congress of Soviets of Workers' and 
Soldiers' Deputies, in their view, would gain further support for the 
party and possibly shake the position of the government itself; it 
might even prevent the expected resumption of an offensive on the 
Eastern front. 117 
 There Is Such a Party! 
181 
This was the nearest any Bolshevik had come since the February 
Revolution to stating how the Provisional Government might be 
overthrown. The arguments for and against a demonstration were 
still being debated in the various party committees in the capital 
when the Congress of Soviets began on 3 June. The Mensheviks and 
Socialist Revolutionaries held their expected majority; only lOS out 
of 777 were Bolsheviks. 118 Tsereteli gave a ringing defence of the 
coalition government's policies. It was the high point of the anti-
Bolshevik socialist movement in Russia; and the alliance of Men-
sheviks and Socialist Revolutionaries easily dominated the Central 
Executive Committee of the Congress of Soviets which was elected to 
assume the functions of national soviet leadership. 
On the second day, 4 June, Lenin was given the chance to reply on 
behalf of the Bolsheviks. His speech, which was limited to fifteen 
minutes by the rules of the Congress, restated his party's well-known 
line on the Provisional Government and on the transfer of power to 
the soviets. Among the stabbing comments he directed at Tsereteli 
was one which has entered every history book. He sneered that 'the 
citizen Minister of Posts and Telegraphs' had declared there was no 
political party in Russia which would express its readiness to take 
power entirely into its own hands. Lenin exclaimed: 'I reply: "There 
is! Not a single party can refuse this, and our party does not refuse 
this: at any minute it is ready to take power entirely."' 1 19 Most 
delegates, being supporters of the Mensheviks and Socialist Revolu-
tionaries, laughed him down for the remark - the last recorded 
occasion in his life when he suffered such treatment. But it was 
apparent that the Bolsheviks lacked the support in the country for 
any attempt at the formation of a government. The seriousness of the 
Bolshevik party's intentions about an anti-governmental demonstra-
tion were not yet public knowledge. Not even many Bolshevik 
delegates to the Congress knewY0 A joint meeting of the Central 
Committee, Military Organisation and the Petersburg Committee's 
Executive Commission took place on 6 June while the Congress was 
in session; and, behind closed doors, the case for a demonstration 
was offered by Military Organisation leader N.l. Podvoiski. 121 
Lenin concurred, but the right-wingers in the Central Committee 
spoke against. Kamenev saw the proposal as another example of 
radicalism for its own sake without any specification of attainable 
aims. Not only Nogin but also Zinoviev, in his harshest rupture with 
Lenin to that date, agreed with Kamenev. A clash between Lenin and 
Nogin ensued; and Nogin vehemently expostulated: 'Lenin is 
 182 
Lenin: A Political Life 
proposing a revolution. Can we do this? We are a minority in the 
country.' 122 But Lenin ignored Nogin's interpretation of his inten-
tions. It would indeed seem that Lenin was aspiring not to the 
installation of a Bolshevik government but rather a transfer of power 
to the soviets, which would have resulted in a government of 
Mensheviks and Socialist Revolutionaries. He also thought that 
such a cabinet would be in a position to propose conditions for a 
general peace in Europe. 123 
Lenin had most members of the Central Committee with him, and 
nearly all leaders of the Military Organisation and the Petersburg 
Committee also opposed Kamenev over the next few days. 124 At the 
next joint meeting, on 8 June, the Central Committee resolved firmly 
in favour of a demonstration, on 10 June, to be planned by the 
Military Organisation and the Petersburg Committee. 125 Kamenev 
extracted only a single concession, but a potentially significant one: 
the Central Committee was to stipulate that the demonstrators 
should march unarmed. No overt provocation to the Provisional 
Government was to be given. In practice, however, the organisers let 
the marchers come as they pleased, with or without arms. 126 No one 
knows whether Lenin approved of this infringement of the Central 
Committee's orders. A canny politician, he may even have deliber-
ately steered the Central Committee away from detailed oversight of 
the demonstration precisely so that such an infringement might more 
easily occur; but no decisive evidence is available. The Menshevik 
and Socialist-Revolutionary leaderships were worried by the posters 
pinned up around Petrograd by Bolshevik activists. The First All-
Russian Congress of Workers' and Soldiers' Deputies as a precaution 
banned the holding of any armed demonstration without the 
permission of the Petrograd Soviet. The scene was set for the first 
test of strength between the Bolsheviks and the Provisional Govern-
ment.127 
Lenin panicked. The problem was that he had originally under-
estimated the will of the Mensheviks and Socialist Revolutionaries to 
call his bluff. The banning of a demonstration by the Petrograd 
Soviet had not entered his calculations. He had proved more adept at 
manipulating the levers of the Central Committee than in steering the 
engine of national politics. The Central Committee met in the early 
hours of 10 June. Five members were able to attend despite the short 
notice: Kamenev, Lenin, Nogin, Sverdlov and Zinoviev. Kamenev 
and Nogin had always perceived the dangers of an armed clash; and 
Zinoviev, who had edged towards Kamenev since the April Party 
 There Is Such a Party! 
183 
Conference, supported their proposal to cancel the demonstration. 
Outvoted, Lenin and Sverdlov abstained. 128 Lenin salved his 
revolutionary conscience; but he would have been forced to cancel 
the demonstration if Kamenev had not done it for him. Party 
comrades were dispatched to give instructions to the Military 
Organisation and the Petersburg Committee. Pravda, too, had to 
be warned. Posters had to be torn down and replaced. 129 
The worry for Lenin was the attitude which might be taken by the 
First Congress of Soviets of Workers' and Soldiers' Deputies. 
Tsereteli objected to Lenin's casual temerity in initiating the 
demonstration and treated his activity as part of a conspiracy to 
set up a Bolshevik government. 130 The Central Committee had, in 
fact, wanted power transferred to 'the soviets'; and, if this had 
occurred, Tsereteli would have been a strong candidate for the 
premiership. The minutes of the Central Committee's discussion 
were in any case unavailable to Tsereteli: he was guessing. His 
vehemence, moreover, was opposed even by several non-Bolsheviks. 
Martov spoke against the proposal for the Bolsheviks to be 
physically disarmed. Trotski, not yet a Bolshevik but showing 
sympathy with Lenin, blisteringly denounced the Provisional Gov-
ernment and its socialist ministers. 131 The result, on 12 June, was that 
the Bolsheviks were merely censured for recklessness. 132 Not even 
Tsereteli had much stomach for the repressive measures that Lenin 
and Trotski would have applied to them in similar circumstances. 
The Congress also decided to hold its own peaceful demonstration on 
18 June to display support for its policies on the coalition cabinet 
and on the war. The crisis went off the boil. The Bolsheviks 
participated in the demonstration with the Mensheviks and the 
Socialist Revolutionaries even though there were frictions over the 
Bolshevik party's insistence on marching under its own slogans, 
including 'All Power To The Soviets'. 133 
A LEADER ON CAMPAIGN 
Doubts about Lenin's mettle as a revolutionary leader were 
surfacing. The Petersburg Committee, convening on 11 June, was 
irritated by the fumbling and bungling of the Central Committee. 
The displeasure was intense since it was the Petersburg Committee's 
activists and not Lenin who had the uncongenial task of dissuading 
agitated crowds of anti-governmental workers, soldiers and sailors 
 184 
Lenin: A Political Life 
from undertaking a demonstration which the Central Committee had 
encouraged. Nearly all participants in the debate in the Petersburg 
Committee criticised Lenin's leadership directly or by implication. 134 
He survived their anger mainly because no Bolshevik figure on the 
party's left offered himself as an alternative leader and because he 
handled his defence with firmness and discretion. While not 
pretending that all had gone well with the Central Committee's 
plans for a demonstration, he did not apologise. 135 
He was helped by his status as the whipping boy of the anti-
Bolshevik press. Lenin had become one of a handful of politicians 
known by name to everyone in the country interested in politics. This 
was inevitable once he had declared his policies and had tightened his 
grip on the sole major party unequivocally hostile to the Provisional 
Government. He appeared as the personification of the project for 
socialist revolution. Most onlookers found the similarities rather 
than the differences between the Kadets and the non-Bolshevik 
socialists most impressive. Lenin and his party, by contrast, opposed 
the entire historic compromise between Russian liberalism and 
Russian 'moderate' socialism; and the barrage of invective fired at 
him in national newspapers served to enhance his eminence. The less 
delicate conservative organs portrayed him as an unbridled sexual 
hedonist, and rumours were spread about his supposed affections for 
Aleksandra Kollontai. 136 'Respectable' liberal newspapers confined 
themselves to reviling him as a German agent. Neither the Men-
sheviks nor the Socialist Revolutionaries were as scurrilous, but they 
castigated him relentlessly as a dangerous fanatic. 137 The net effect of 
the vilification, at least until early July, was to disseminate the 
proposals of the Bolsheviks more widely. It is said that mud sticks; 
but mud also has its uses. 138 
Lenin and his associates, however, were perturbed by the smear 
campaign. The party in the provinces expressed its concern, and 
requests were made to the Central Committee to counter the anti-
Bolshevik tirades by publishing information on the real Lenin, his 
background and personality. Lenin began a sketch of his life. He did 
this as if he were filling in a particularly tedious bureaucratic form, 
and never completed the taskY9 But he saw the need for its 
accomplishment; his own diffidence as an autobiographer did not 
prevent him from allowing Krupskaya to prepare a biographical 
article on him and supervising and correcting its contents. 140 
And yet the effort to cleanse the bespattered image of their leader 
was not a true priority for the party. Krupskaya's piece was printed 
 There Is Such a Party! 
185 
not in Pravda but in a Kronstadt newspaper; 141 and another sketch 
by M.S. Olminski, published in Social-Democrat in Moscow, failed 
to be reproduced elsewhere. 142 Bolsheviks were evidently not 
intending to establish a 'cult' around him. They recognised Lenin 
as their party chief with fewer reservations than the Socialist 
Revolutionaries had about Viktor Chernov or even the Kadets 
about Pavel Milyukov; 143 but they held back from adulation. The 
'heartfelt greetings' sent by a 7000-strong meeting of workers in 
Bogorodsko-Glukhovo to 'the respected fighter and leader of the 
working class, comrade Lenin' was more the exception than the 
norm, 144 and Lenin did not pursue exceptional treatment for himself. 
Neither in speeches nor in articles did he try to draw attention to 
himself at the expense of his colleagues or the party as a whole. He 
had often expressed dislike of the term 'Leninist' on the grounds that 
it implied an overestimation of the personal factor in politics. 145 This 
attitude is not incompatible with a tendency to 'back into the 
limelight'; the loud disclaiming of personal merit or influence can 
be an indirect way of inviting praise. But even if this is what he was 
doing, it may well have stemmed from Lenin's instincts rather than 
his conscious choice: his was not a self-inquiring mind. 
And so, whereas the rest of the press presented him as an 
individual politician capable of bringing down the Provisional 
Government, Lenin as ever did not emphasise the word 'I' and 
preferred phrases like 'we, the workers'. This inaccurate self-
description had appeared in his intra-party writings in the past 
and had looked odd to those who knew his background. But it was 
not so embarrassing in the 'mass politics' of 1917. There was also a 
sartorial aspect to his carefully-cultivated political image. He gave 
up his homburg, the conventional headgear of emigre Russian 
revolutionaries, for a workman's peaked cap (which is now so 
much associated with him that it is often called a Lenin cap). Ex-
undergrounders such as Stalin, who had come from humble social 
origins, had always dressed in such a style; but former emigrants like 
Kamenev kept to their previous mode of dress, so Lenin no longer 
looked like most leading politicians of his vintage and background. 
Before his return to Russia he had been likened in appearance to 'a 
schoolteacher from Smaland about to lay into the priest with whom 
he had fallen out'! 146 He did not lose this combativeness, but 
increasingly he looked more like a working-class Bolshevik than a 
middle-class pedagogue; he obviously found the revolutionary 
environment congenial. 
 186 
Lenin: A Political Life 
He proved adept too at mass oratory. Speaking at public meetings 
was among his principal duties on the party's behalf. Photographers 
caught him in characteristic pose, leaning out over the balcony on a 
raised platform, fist raised high and face straining to convey the 
party's programme. May and June 1917 were busy months for him. 
Besides Central Committee sessions and local party occasions in 
Petrograd, Lenin had to address eleven large gatherings. These 
included not only formal speeches to the Petrograd Conference of 
Factory-Workshop Committees, the All Russian Congress of Pea-
sants' Deputies and the All-Russian Congress of Soviets of Workers' 
and Soldiers' Deputies but also five open-air speeches at the gates of 
Petrograd factories. 147 At the Putilov works he was confronted by an 
audience of thousands of labourers, and eyewitnesses concur that he 
was a rousing figure who could improvise brilliantly. 148 Yet his 
words lacked the emotional range of several other orators such as 
Trotski or Zinoviev: he avoided their use of pathos, and rarely 
mentioned the concrete conditions of life and toil of the working 
class; he neither showed pity for workers nor encouraged them to 
pity themselves. The socialist revolution, he implied, would not 
demand material self sacrifice of them. Lenin suggested that 
whatever deprivations needed to be made would be paid for by the 
enemies of the working class. Socialist policies would supposedly 
have been painless for the mass of the population. 149 
This message, with its combination of invocation and reassurance, 
must have contributed to Lenin's advance on power. And yet his 
success came only slowly. After his spectacular and rapturous 
reception at the Finland station on 3 April, he found non-Bolshevik 
audiences less enthusiastic for several weeks. A speech to a massed 
workers' meeting in a factory yard on 21 May was heard 'in the 
silence of a graveyard' and 'there was no stormy applause'. 150 His 
proposals were not yet familiar and acceptable to most factory 
workers. On returning to Russia, furthermore, he had no illusions 
about his inexperience and often fidgeted nervously as he waited his 
turn to speak. Aleksandra Kollontai, who admired him and thought 
him to be as confident as he was competent, was taken aback on one 
occasion when he suggested that she should take the platform in his 
place. She refused to comply. And he, once he had started speaking, 
was calmed by the positive response of listeners; and he soon lost all 
his fear. 151 
None the less, a proper assessment of his influence has to take 
account that only persons who were in his audiences at those eleven 
 There Is Such a Party! 
187 
meetings in May and June 1917 caught sight or sound of him. Such 
people were countable in tens of thousands: a tiny fragment of the 
population. Petrograd was a base from where he ventured only 
rarely. Not once in 1917 did he set foot in Moscow, the country's 
second capital, or in any urban provincial centre. Apart from a 
weekend summerhouse jaunt to the countryside outside Petro grad, he 
had no acquaintance with rural Russia in the first three months after 
his arrival at the Finland Station. 152 He did not visit the Eastern 
front. He did not journey to any of the non-Russian regions of the 
country. For all his down-to-earth reputation among his followers as 
being quite unlike the other 'politickers', he was very much the 
metropolitan leader. It pleased him to comment that the provinces 
were supplying examples of greater radicalism than the capital, and 
that 'the revolution' was welling up 'from below', 'from the 
depths'. 153 But nothing would have induced him to shift his focus 
of work from Petrograd. He knew about the provincial political 
processes only from newspapers and from Bolshevik activists coming 
to Petrograd for meetings, conferences and congresses 
This also meant that direct knowledge of Lenin the man was 
thinly-spread in the rest of the country. Such newsreel film as was 
produced was devoted to ministers of the Provisional Government; 
recordings of Lenin's speeches were not made. Not even his physical 
image, moreover, was widely disseminated. Pravda contained no 
photographs. Kerenski, on entering the Lvov cabinet, had thousands 
of postcards made which portrayed his bust, surrounded by a 
glowing aureole and against a background of the magnificent state 
buildings of Petrograd. This was not, at least not yet, the Bolshevik 
party's style. Bolsheviks printed most pictures of their leaders later in 
the year, after they had seized power. The contemporary anti-
Bolshevik press saw no advantage in publishing photos of Lenin; 
cartoonists had sport with him, but usually provided a passe-partout 
drawing of evil and made no attempt at realistic portraiture. 
Consequently Lenin's impact upon general politics in Russia 
stemmed in large measure from his newspaper articles. The year 
1917 was the golden age of Russian print journalism, and Lenin 
devoted more hours per day to writing for Pravda- he wrote little for 
other Bolshevik outlets- than to any other political function. In May 
1917, he had a total of thirty pieces published in the newspaper's 
twenty-four issues. 154 The print-run was around 85,000-90,000 
copies, 155 and distribution was made to virtually all towns and 
cities. Only the villages, which had hardly any Bolshevik party 
 188 
Lenin: A Political Life 
groups, were left outside the normal distribution network. Thus 
Lenin's opinions were communicated directly to a vastly greater 
number of people outside Petrograd than the few hundred provincial 
activists who heard him speak. Even so, it must be added that nearly 
half the copies were sold in Petro grad and that therefore not even all 
literate Bolshevik rank-and-filers can have read the words of their 
party leader). 156 Most of his Pravda articles, furthermore, were 
pitched below the altitude of abstraction typical of his earlier 
writings in the war. His vocabulary became simpler, his style more 
direct. Everyday contact with workers no doubt attuned him to the 
newspaper's needs. To be sure, he was still not writing in expectation 
of being read by the entire literate working class; but he did at least 
hope to reach out to all members of his party: and three fifths of 
these in 1917, it is reckoned, were labourers of some sort. 157 
Lenin was Pravda's regular columnist on current political issues; 
and in this role he especially aimed to acquire the support of 
Bolshevik committee-men in Petrograd and the localities for his 
strategy. Marxological polemics were not put aside. Certainly, he did 
not cease to attack Kautsky, but no longer did he do this regardless 
of circumstance. He had learned enough about Russian working-
class opinion to confine his assault on 'Kautskyism' to pamphlets 
unintended for mass consumption. 158 In his more popular articles he 
had a quick eye for denigration. Each fresh turn of policy or even 
phrase of Lvov, Kerenski, Tsereteli or Chernov was scanned for its 
worst possible meaning then denounced with relish. He loved to 
group together the Mensheviks, Socialist Revolutionaries and 
Bundists as an undifferentiated, counter-revolutionary mass. Using 
a term invented by the Bolshevik versifier Demyan Bedny, he called 
them 'Liberdans' .159 This was a play on words, referring to the 
Menshevik leader Fyodor Dan and the Bundist leader Mark Liber. 
Sarcasm was the hallmark of his prose. 
And Lenin, like his Central Committee colleagues, carried a heavy 
load of responsibilities on the Bolshevik party's behalf. No single 
leader could do everything, and a degree of functional specialisation 
made practical sense. Lenin and Krupskaya were relieved of the 
business of correspondence with local party committees. 160 Nor did 
he have to greet many activists on their visits to the Central 
Committee. 161 He was not charged with the technical oversight of 
the production of party newspapers. Moreover, it was Kamenev's 
main job to direct the Bolshevik fraction in the Petrograd Soviet 
(whereas Lenin, the great advocate of 'all power to the soviets' in the 
 There Is Such a Party! 
189 
spring, was not elected to the Soviet). Zinoviev was an indefatigable 
speaker dispatchable to any large gathering. Nogin, at his own 
insistence, worked in the Moscow Soviet. 162 Stalin helped with the 
editing of Pravda and took on further tasks as the changing situation 
required. Sverdlov ran the Central Committee Secretariat with a 
small but efficient staff and, like Stalin, was among the less 'visible' 
figures in the Bolshevik leadership. 163 Despite Lenin's doubts about 
him at the April Bolshevik Conference, Sverdlov could hardly have 
been closer to Lenin's policies, and his indefatigable service to the 
Central Committee and its Secretariat freed Lenin to focus on his 
chosen activities. 164 
Nevertheless, Lenin was bothered by Kamenev's persistent sniping 
at his strategy. Zinoviev, too, was emerging as a figure of substance 
on the Bolshevik right. In order to strengthen his hand, Lenin looked 
outside the party in search of prominent Marxists opposed to the 
Provisional Government. He would have liked to work inside the 
same party as Martov if only Martov could have broken with the 
Menshevik leadership, which supported the Lvov cabinet. 165 He was 
ever ready to forgive and forget, especially when it was his own sins 
which were being forgiven and forgotten. Suspicion of him, however, 
remained strong; and the Menshevik leftist leaders in any case 
refused to split from their party. A similar mixture of rancour and 
political calculation held back leading anti-Lenin Bolsheviks from 
the pre-war period, such as Aleksandr Bogdanov. They repudiated 
Lenin's case that the transition to socialism could be begun in 
backward and war-torn Russia. 166 
The one major group to join were the so-called Interdistricters. 
Lenin apparently did not have all the Central Committee on his side 
in opening negotiations even though the April Party Conference had 
given its approval. A Pravda editorial, in a curious hint about his 
problem, reported that the invitation had been made 'in the name of 
comrade Lenin and several Central Committee members' .167 Trotski, 
too, was approached. He reached Petrograd from the emigration 
only in May 1917. Even before the February Revolution, as Lenin 
and Zinoviev noted, he had denounced Chkheidze and the Men-
shevik Duma deputies; 168 and, upon his return to Russia, he agreed 
with the Bolsheviks that a rupture was desirable with the Menshevik 
leaders who condoned the coalition with the Kadets. He felt that 
Lenin, whether he said so or not, had embraced the Trotskyist theory 
of 'permanent revolution' in place of the traditional two-stage 
revolutionary schedule; and indeed, after joining the Bolsheviks, 
 190 
Lenin: A Political Life 
Trotski defended his strategy of 1905-6 with enthusiasm in Bolshevik 
publications. 169 He was not constrained to defer to Lenin, who 
welcomed Trotski's adhesion to the Bolsheviks not only since he was 
an increasingly needed advocate of radicalism but also because of his 
technical and oratorical skills; and he was asked to help with the 
editing of 'a popular organ'; 170 No Bolshevik leader could match his 
record in this respect. The two old adversaries tacitly agreed to forget 
past differences. The development of Lenin as a chairman of 
Bolshevik opinion and as a leader who could coax unlikely partners 
to co-operate had begun. 
THE JULY DAYS 
The First All-Russian Congress of Soviets of Workers' and Soldiers' 
Deputies elected a permanent body to co-ordinate soviet affairs 
across the country. This was the All-Russian Central Executive 
Committee (or VTsiK), and its leading members were Mensheviks 
and Socialist Revolutionaries as well as some Bundists. Its business 
was transacted by an inner group of politicians: Tsereteli, Chkheidze, 
Gots, Dan, Liber and others. All were members of the Petrograd 
Soviet, whose importance declined at the national level. Bolsheviks, 
under Kamenev's leadership, constituted a minority on the All-
Russian Central Executive Committee. 
These Bolsheviks could barely believe that the All-Russian Central 
Executive Committee, which had relations with virtually all soviets in 
cities and on the Eastern front, refused to take power from the 
Kadets. The need for strong government and strong solutions was 
acute. The economy was swiftly collapsing. The labour-force in a few 
enterprises in Petro grad, despairing of a fair deal with the employers, 
established 'workers' control' over management. 171 Closures of 
factories became frequent, and the scourge of unemployment started 
to lacerate workers. Even so, strikes and other conflicts in factories 
which stayed in operation disrupted production. Employers were 
determined to quell opposition; P. P. Ryabushinski suggested that 
only 'the bony hand of hunger' would constrain the workers to 
moderate their demands. Industrial production faltered, and short-
ages of coal and other raw materials grew. Finance tightened; foreign 
investment largely ceased. 172 Peasants were meanwhile becoming 
more restless. Illegal felling of timber and illegal pasturing of animal 
occurred widely. Land hunger persisted. Direct seizures of landed 
 There Is Such a Party! 
191 
estates rose in number from June 1917. The economic ties between 
town and village broke down. Food supplies dwindled as peasants, 
faced with inadequate state-fixed prices and a shortage of marketed 
industrial goods, hoarded their grain. 173 War-weariness was also 
growing, especially among the troops. Desertions from the front were 
still only a trickle, but the trend was growing. 
Yet premier Lvov and his Minister of War, Kerenski, believed that 
the war could be won and that an offensive had to be launched if the 
Provisional Government was to retain credibility in the councils of 
the Allies. 174 The military advice was that the Austro-Hungarian 
sector of the Eastern front, in Galicia, afforded the best chance. The 
attack was initiated on 18 June. An early powerful advance was 
halted when German forces were transferred south to stiffen the 
Austrian defence, and Russian armies were soon pushed back further 
into the Ukraine than before. The Provisional Government was 
humiliated, and the Mensheviks and Socialist Revolutionaries 
incurred criticism for acceding to Kadet militarism. 
An abundance of combustible political material existed to be lit. 
The material was self-igniting because the mass organisations elected 
by the workers, soldiers and peasants were not completely controll-
able by the political elites. The cabinet; the high command; the party 
leaderships: all these were important to prevent 'mass action' on the 
streets. Not surprisingly, Lenin found it difficult to strike the balance 
between enunciating a radical strategy and restraining his adherents 
from its premature application. Addressing a conference of the 
party's bodies in the armed forces from all over the country on 20 
June, he stressed the need to secure fresh victories in the elections to 
the soviets and other mass organisations. 175 Kamenev was well 
pleased. Earlier in the month, Lenin had been able to hide his own 
last-minute uncertainty about holding a demonstration behind the 
cloak of the Central Committee decision, inspired by Kamenev, to 
call off the demonstration. This time, however, such a manoeuvre 
was impossible; Lenin himself had to administer 'a cold shower' of 
discouragement to activists who thought they were pursuing his line 
of action. His agitation was obvious to his audience as he warned 
them against being 'drawn into a provocation'. He added, for the 
benefit of anyone who had not understood his message: 'If we were 
now able to seize power, it is naive to think that having taken it we 
should be able to hold on to it'. 176 The conference fell into heated 
debate, and only with difficulty did the demand of Lenin and the 
Central Committee prevail. 177 
 192 
Lenin: A Political Life 
The Petersburg Committee was also in session on 20 June. A 
resolution was passed condemning isolated revolutionary actions; but 
the Central Committee was disconcerted by an amendment, which 
was successfully proposed by Military Organisation leader, M. Y. 
Latsis, to the effect that 'if it proved impossible to hold back the 
masses, the party should take the movement into its own hands'. 178 
Radicals felt that they had obtained a sanction to continue to do as 
they had always wanted, and the Military Organisation's newspaper 
published inflammatory material despite the Central Committee's 
desire to avoid immediate trouble with the Provisional Govern-
ment.'79 
The political atmosphere was volatile. And yet it was precisely 
now, on 29 June, that Lenin felt able to take a rest for a few days in 
Neivola, a village in the Finnish countryside some four or five hours 
distant from Petrograd by local train. He had been complaining of 
overwork and headaches in April. Perhaps this was an early 
symptom of the cerebral arteriosclerosis which killed him in 1924, 
or possibly he had simply been overworking. In any case he noted 
jocularly that, even when he withdrew from speaking engagements in 
order to recuperate, the enemies of the Bolsheviks nevertheless 
claimed he had turned up and demagogically roused the crowds to 
fury. 180 (Who needs to construct a 'cult' for himself when others will 
do it so much better?). Lenin was always aware that he needed to 
look after himself physically. His instinct for self-care was one of the 
few cracks in his armour as a politician. In 1904 he had gone off on 
an Alpine jaunt, laying himself open to intra-factional attack by V. 
A. Noskov. 181 In midsummer 1917 the political stakes were much 
higher, and yet Lenin unconcernedly departed to stay in Vladimir 
Bonch-Bruevich's rural dacha. 182 Unintentionally, this leader, who 
thought no one equalled his competence in dealing with affairs at the 
apex of the Bolshevik party, was leaving the Central Committee to 
face alone the party's most fiendishly difficult test since the February 
Revolution. 
Among the garrison soldiers, no group was more discontented 
than the First Machine Gun Regiment. Its support for the abortive 
demonstration made it suspect to the Provisional Government; and, 
when orders were issued for the transfer of units and guns to the 
front, the natural assumption was made that an attempt was being 
made to root out anti-governmental trouble-makers. The machine-
gunners reacted by planning a further demonstration against the 
Lvov cabinet. Low-level Bolshevik activists were involved. The All-
 There Is Such a Party! 
193 
Russian Bureau of the Military Organisations had apparently learnt 
of this development by 1 July. The Central Committee was alerted 
next day, and its instructions were short and sharp: the Bureau was 
told to prevent violence and to have nothing to do with the 
demonstration. 183 
The crisis for the Bolshevik Central Committee coincided with a 
crisis in the Provisional Government. After the February Revolution, 
Ukrainians had formed a Central Rada (or Council) in Kiev and, 
demanding greater national autonomy, convoked a Ukrainian 
National Congress. The Provisional Government, apart from grant-
ing permission for the formation of Ukrainian regiments at the front, 
asserted the need to respect the prerogatives of the Constituent 
Assembly. Negotiations followed. On 2 July, Tsereteli proposed that 
the Rada be recognised as a regional government so long as the 
Provisional Government's supreme authority was recognised. Most 
Kadet ministers, having already become disenchanted by the 
coalition with the Mensheviks and the Socialist Revolutionaries, 
rejected the compromise and resigned from the Cabinet. 184 This crisis 
failed to become public knowledge immediately because events on the 
streets suddenly ran out of the control of the authorities. The First 
Machine Gun Regiment met to finalise plans. The postal workers 
went on strike on 3 July. The machine gunners toured the capital, 
calling on other regiments to join them. Workers downed tools at the 
Putilov factory and other enterprises, and sailors from the Kronstadt 
naval garrison began to arrive in Petrograd. 185 Bolsheviks in the 
party's lower echelons did little to restrain the crowds; some of them 
actively fomented trouble. When the news reached the Petrograd 
Bolshevik City Conference, the delegates ignored the Central 
Committee's prohibition and offered to lead the demonstration 'if 
this proved necessary'. 186 
Kamenev, Tomski and Zinoviev tried to restrain the local activists 
from such a course of action. 187 Yet the party was not a machine to 
be stopped and started at will, and the crowds on the streets were not 
instruments at the party's disposal either. A the Kshesinskaya 
Palace, Sverdlov harangued the gathering crowd .. into going home. 
But they would not budge, to the delight of a Bolshevik All-Russian 
Bureau of Military Organisations which announced its readiness to 
guide the demonstration. The affair had its own momentum. But the 
Bolshevik leadership, in the Petersburg Committee and in the All-
Russian Bureau of Military Organisations, were following rather 
than guiding events; and, although most participants hoped that the 
 194 
Lenin: A Political Life 
turmoil would somehow result in the overthrow of the Provisional 
Government, they had no definite set of tactics. 188 
Clashes between demonstrators and pro-government troops oc-
curred before midnight on 3-4 July. The crowds swelled around the 
Tauride Palace where the Petrograd Soviet and the Provisional 
Government were based. 189 Zinoviev too was at the Palace; and, 
yielding to the atmosphere, he appeared alongside Trotski commend-
ing the demands for the transfer of power to the soviets. 190 On 4 July 
the Central Committee's members accepted that the demonstration 
would take place regardless of the party's official recommendation. 
The All-Russian Bureau of Military Organisations took operational 
command. Kamenev still refused to believe that events could not be 
turned back; but his colleagues rejected his advice. 191 The Central 
Committee 'authorised' only a peaceful demonstration. The worry 
persisted that the outcome would not be happy, and the Bolshevik 
central leaders wanted to take as few obviously incriminating steps as 
possible. On the other hand, it was to be a peaceful demonstration 
which also removed the government. Stalin was instructed to draft a 
leaflet in the early hours of the morning of 4 July calling for a 
transfer of power to the soviets. In essence this was Bolshevism 
demanding that the 'Liberdans' should rule. 192 
At last it crossed the minds of the Central Committee's members 
that their convalescent leader might with profit be informed about 
the developing situation, and asked to disrupt his rustic holiday. M. 
A. Savelev was sent out to the dacha in Neivola. He arrived, 
unannounced, at 6 am on 4 July. 193 Lenin and his companions, 
Bonch-Bruevich and his sister Mariya dressed hurriedly. In less than 
three quarters of an hour they had caught the morning train for 
Petrograd, pulling into the Finland station at eleven o'clock. As 
when he had travelled there in April, he was buried in thought the 
whole journey; 194 but this time no crowd awaited him. This must 
have brought him some relief, since a huge agglomeration of people 
would have signified that things had run into even greater trouble 
than he had been led to believe. 
Elsewhere in the capital there were signs of the demonstration in 
the making. Kronstadt's sailors were on their way. They made for the 
Kshesinskaya palace to seek out the Bolshevik leaders. Sverdlov and 
Anatoli Lunacharski addressed them from the balcony; and Lenin, 
who had in the meantime arrived, was asked to come out to say a few 
words. At first he refused, signalling his unhappiness with the march. 
The incongruity continued when he stepped out: a massive ovation 
 There Is Such a Party! 
195 
awaited him. He repeated his slogan of 'all power to the soviets', but 
accompanied this with a plea for self-restraint. 195 M. I. Kalinin, who 
had no warmer desire than Lenin for a demonstration, was to recall 
that Lenin nevertheless spoke with his fellow leaders as if he was still 
not completely convinced that the march would be a fiasco and that 
the Provisional Government would not fail. 196 The sailors moved on 
towards the Tauride Palace, and machine-gunners and striking 
workers converged with them. Clashes in the streets were frequent 
with pro-government troops. At the Tauride Palace, Viktor Chernov 
emerged to address the crowd; he was nearly lynched when he 
affirmed that the Mensheviks and Socialist Revolutionaries were 
standing by the government coalition. A voice from the mob was 
heard: 'Take power, you scoundrel, when it's being given to you!' 197 
The Provisional Government sent for reinforcements to its loyal 
forces at the front; and the Minister of Justice, P. N. Pereverzev, 
contacting troops in the capital who had not declared support for 
either side, released the bits of circumstantial information in the 
hands of the authorities which purported to show that Lenin was a 
German spy. 198 
The Menshevik and Socialist-Revolutionary leadership of the 
Petrograd Soviet, stiffened by Tsereteli's resolve, resisted the 
pressure to take power. Tsereteli was lucky that few people outside 
the Provisional Government knew of the Kadets' resignation. The 
left wing of the Menshevik party was led by Martov, who had 
returned in May but who until early July was not willing to endorse a 
transfer of power to the soviets. But Tsereteli's line held the day. 199 
Towards nightfall, moreover, troops began to arrive outside the 
Tauride Palace who were loyal to Lvov, Kerenski and Tsereteli. 
Military dispositions were made, and the demonstrators started to 
disperse to their garrisons and to their homes. By the early hours of 5 
July, it was clear that the demonstration had been a failure. The 
Bolshevik Central Committee called on the crowds to leave the 
streets. Pravda announced the turnabout in policy on a back page.200 
When Lenin was faced with the angry disappointment of the All-
Russian Bureau of Military Organisation's leaders, he responded 
with a barrage of detailed, operational questions as to what forces 
could be deployed if the demonstration was to be revived. The 
answers failed to satisfy him, exactly as he had expected.201 The 
Bureau's newspaper did not announce its withdrawal; but no action 
on the streets was recommended. 202 By noon on 5 July, the troops of 
the disorganised Provisional Government held sway in the capital. 
 196 
Lenin: A Political Life 
The Bolshevik Central Committee was disrupted and demoralised 
and Pravda's printing press was seized.203 On 6 July, a handful of 
Central Committee members met in a flat in the Vyborg district. 
Lenin declared that the revolutionary process was entering a critical 
phase. The progress of previous months had ended. Political 
'reaction' had set in. Counter-revolution was on the offensive. No 
one could tell, he emphasised, how long it might last. The Bolshevik 
party needed to make tactical adjustments to survive and flourish 
again.204 
ESCAPE TO THE LAKES 
Anti-Bolshevik repression had ensued in Petrograd. The deaths of 
demonstrators ran into the hundreds, and there were many reports of 
violence being meted out to known or suspected Bolsheviks 
encountered on the streets. The expression of anti-semitic sentiments 
was rife. On 6 July, warrants were issued for the arrest of several 
prominent party leaders. Lenin, Kamenev and Zinoviev headed the 
list of those hunted by the authorities. Kollontai's name was added. 
Trotski and Lunacharski, despite not belonging to the Bolshevik 
party, had been involved in negotiations about the demonstration; 
they too were sought by troops loyal to the Provisional Govern-
ment.205 
Nearly all of them surrendered to the authorities and were 
imprisoned. The exceptions were Lenin and Zinoviev. This was odd 
in its way since Lenin was guiltless, unless it was a crime to take a 
holiday when great events were in the making. As regards Zinoviev, 
he retained a reputation as a radical Bolshevik but was by now closer 
to Kamenev than to Lenin, and had opposed the demonstration from 
its conception. The underlying problem for them was the recurrent 
charge that they were German agents. They had consistently 
repudiated the accusation, taking space in Bolshevik newspapers to 
explain their story and to stress that they would have returned via 
France and the North Sea if only the Allied authorities had given 
permission.206 But Pereverzev's official investigations were intensified 
in the period before and after the July demonstration; and, even 
before the enquiry was complete, preliminary indications of its 
findings were being 'leaked' to the press. The principal journalists 
to pick up the story were Vladimir Burtsev and Grigori Aleksinski. 
 There Is Such a Party! 
197 
Burtsev had spent a career exposing police agents in the Russian 
revolutionary movement; Aleksinski was a former Bolshevik whose 
hostility to Lenin had induced him to found a newspaper, Without 
Superfluous Words, dedicated wholly to the exposure of Bolshevik 
misdeeds. 207 
Even so, Lenin and Zinoviev initially thought to deliver themselves 
up to the authorities on condition that the Petrograd Soviet would 
guarantee physical protection and a fair trial. 208 Several Bolsheviks 
advised this. The risk was obvious, but there was a tradition among 
socialists of using trials to denounce the authorities and proclaim 
revolutionary objectives to the widest readership. This had been done 
by Lenin's brother, Aleksandr Ulyanov, at the trial of populist-
terrorists in 1887.209 It was Kamenev's less than totally defiant 
comportment at his trial in 1915 that continued to earn him 
contempt among fellow Bolsheviks after the February Revolu-
tion.210 And yet even Kamenev allowed himself to be imprisoned 
after the July Days although he, together with Trotski, was 
intimidated by the vehemently anti-semitic hysteria being whipped 
up. The additional consideration was that all revolutionary parties, 
including the Bolsheviks, assumed that no single leader's fate should 
be put before the good of the party and the Revolution. 
Abruptly, on 8 July, Lenin and Zinoviev had second thoughts and 
decided to avoid arrest. They resisted pressure from several leading 
figures in the party who argued that their absconding would make it 
harder to make a case in their favour and would bring the party as a 
whole into disrepute. Such leaders included V. Volodarski and D. Z. 
Manuilski, who had contacts with factory workers in Petrograd. 211 
By then, however, several newspapers were baying for Lenin's blood. 
Gruesome cartoons depicted Lenin on a scaffold.212 But Bolshevik 
calls for him to surrender himself to the authorities subsided, and 
Lenin and Zinoviev went into hiding in the capital.213 The next 
twenty-four hours convinced them that Petrograd was too dangerous 
for them. It was the one city in the world where tens of thousands of 
people could recognise their faces. On 9 July the two fugitives 
travelled at night the twenty miles north west of Petrograd to 
Razliv, a village outside Sestroretsk on the Gulf of Finland.214 For 
the next month they stayed with the Bolshevik and factory worker 
Nikolai Emelyanov, who had, like many Russian workers, retained a 
house and some land in the countryside. Lenin and Zinoviev slept in 
the barn-loft. Sestroretsk was a resort town, and summer was a 
period when town-dwellers would swarm out to coastal residences. 
 198 
Lenin: A Political Life 
The two men felt able to stroll around so long as they took 
reasonable care, but scares sometimes happened. On one occasion 
the sight of approaching armed men caused Lenin and Zinoviev to 
dive into a haystack. Lenin whispered to his companion: 'The only 
thing left now is to die decently!' 215 The strangers with the rifles were, 
in fact, out for a day's duck-shooting; and the site itself has become a 
shrine of the Soviet state, containing the world's only haystack which 
is also a national monument. 216 
But time passed, in the main, slowly and tranquilly. Lenin and 
Zinoviev swam; they went on walks, plagued only by the mosquitoes 
that ravage the summers of people seeking repose by the lakes of 
those parts. The Provisional Government's repressive zeal was fading 
somewhat, and Lenin and Zinoviev received secret visits from 
Bolshevik Central Committee members. 217 From 23 July 1917 
Pravda's position as the central party organ was transferred by the 
Central Committee to the Military Organisation's Worker and 
Soldier (which was the new name for Soldier's Pravda). 218 By 26 
July, Lenin's articles were appearing in it. 219 His flight from 
Petrograd gave him a sabbatical for his writing. Retrieving his notes 
on 'Marxism and the State', he resumed the work commenced in 
Switzerland on the 'dictatorship of the proletariat'. The fruit of this 
labour was to be his masterpiece in political theory: The State and 
Revolution. Lenin remarked to Kamenev: 'Entre nous, if they do me 
in, please publish my notebook 'Marxism and the State'.'220 
Yet Lenin and Zinoviev felt insecure even near Sestroretsk. Politics 
in Petrograd remained unstable. The coliective resignation of the 
Kadet leaders in the July governmental crisis had thrown the 
coalition into chaos. Frantic discussions ensued, and a leftward 
shift in the Provisional Government's composition was inevitable. 
Prince Lvov stepped down and Aleksandr Kerenski, the right-wing 
Socialist Revolutionary and Minister of Army and Navy Affairs, was 
appointed as premier on 7 July. Tsereteli also resigned, deciding to 
concentrate on the business of the All-Russian Central Executive 
Committee of the Congress of Soviets. A Socialist Revolutionary, 
N.D. Avksentev, became Minister of Internal Affairs, and the liberal 
M.l. Tereshchenko remained as Foreign Minister. The Mensheviks 
and Socialist Revolutionaries were the majority in the cabinet, but 
the policies remained largely unchanged except that nobody any 
longer contemplated the resumption of an offensive of the Eastern 
front. The idea that no further alienation of Kadet support should 
take place was emphasised. For Kerenski, Lenin was only the tip of 
 There Is Such a Party! 
199 
the iceberg of his problems. The question of law and order in 
Petrograd and other cities lay under the surface; and frequent 
discussions were held between the new premier and General Lavr 
Kornilov, the Commander-in-Chief of Russian armed forces, in 
pursuit of a solution.221 
Lenin desired to put greater distance between Petrograd and 
himself. The Bolshevik party had a warm relationship with. Finnish 
social-democrats, even receiving financial assistance from them. 
Successful overtures were made on Lenin's behalf to obtain 
sanctuary in Finland proper. Finland by then, and much to the 
Provisional Government's annoyance, was practically an indepen-
dent state even though Finnish politicians, however nationalist they 
were, seldom demanded outright independence; and the proximity of 
the Russian naval garrison in Helsingfors (as the Russians called 
Helsinki) ensured that Bolsheviks had ready support among armed 
troops. 
Lenin prepared himself for the journey to Finland with his 
customary attention to detail. He jotted down (for he was a 
compulsive jotter) a list of things he would require. The toothpaste 
had to be white, the sewing-thread black; and he asked for two 
pencils, one red and the other blue, to mark the passages in 
newspapers he wished to use in his writing. A Finnish-and-Swedish 
phrase book also seemed a good idea, and Lenin asked for a do-it-
yourself hairdresser's clipper in case he needed to disguise his 
appearance. 222 Around the first week of August he set off. He was 
dressed as a worker and had documents identifying him as a Mr 
Konstantin Petrovich Ivanov.223 He had shaved off his beard and 
wore a wig. This was sensible since the contemporary newspaper 
cartoons portrayed him as bald and bearded. Lenin had a photo-
graph taken of his self-transformation. This was a rare manifestation 
of vanity, which was all the more remarkable since the photo could 
have fallen into hostile hands.224 Accompanied by Nikolai Emelya-
nov, E. Rahja and A. V. Shotman he made his way to the Russo-
Finnish border railway station of Dubina. They stayed there over-
night, departing next day by train into Finland. This time Lenin 
masqueraded as an engine stoker.225 He arrived in Helsingfors on lO 
August and stayed at various addresses arranged for him by Finnish 
social-democratic leaders G. Rovio and K. Wiik.226 Lenin pressed on 
with his research for The State and Revolution, and continued to 
submit articles to the Bolshevik central newspapers and to write to 
the Bolshevik Central Committee. 227 
 200 
Lenin: A Political Life 
The Finns made Lenin's contacts with the Bolshevik Central 
Committee easier than they had been in Razliv. Krupskaya, taking 
on the appearance of a Sestroretsk woman worker, managed to visit 
him. She, too, had her photograph taken: hardly an indication that 
the whole business was regarded as acutely dangerous. Such was 
Lenin's nonchalance that he accompanied her back nearly as far as 
the railway station itself.228 Understandably, he would vastly have 
preferred to resume his public career in Petrograd. His previous 
sojourn in Finland, in 1906-7, had been followed by a decade in 
emigration in Central and Western Europe. He did not expect the 
same to happen again. Nor did he expect the existing chance of a 
Bolshevik assumption of power to recur: it was now or never! 
 7 The Fire Next Time: 
July to September 1917 
CONSIDERATIONS ON PARTY STRATEGY 
The internal life of parties in revolutionary Russia ran on the basis of 
persuasion and consent. The Bolsheviks were feared for their 
discipline and hierarchy; and yet their party was, by the standards 
of its own rulebook, highly ill-disciplined. Not even the Central 
Committee could enforce its policies on local party bodies if these 
objected. Communications were faulty; administrative staff and 
finances were not plentiful. Indeed, .tensions affected relations at all 
levels of the Bolshevik party's formal hierarchy. Thus the Bolsheviks 
were not so unlike the Mensheviks and Socialist Revolutionaries as 
later mythology contended; 1 and the fact that the Bolshevik party 
was ill co-ordinated allowed its local activists to react dynamically to 
the particularity of local events. The Bolsheviks, furthermore, had 
the inestimable advantage of agreement on certain key ideas: that the 
Provisional Government should be overthrown and a socialist 
administration of some sort established; that urgent moves be made 
to end the war; that the peasants should get the land and that the 
economic rights of the bourgeoisie should be curtailed. Being 
innocent of the co-responsibility for the Provisional Government 
which affected their rivals, Bolsheviks could organise their political 
campaign unfettered. Such disputes as they had did not affect their 
practical activity. The disagreements among the Mensheviks and 
Socialist Revolutionaries led instead to factionalism; both had left 
wings which wanted to break with the Kadets entirely: and the 
Socialist Revolutionaries were to split into two separate parties in 
November 1917. In these conditions it was natural for dissentient 
leftists at lower levels to leave and join the Bolsheviks.2 
, Despite the finessing of policy which had occurred after the 
Seventh Party Conference in April, however, the July Days left the 
party's strategy for taking power uncertain. Lenin aimed to introduce 
both clarity and determination. On 10 July 1917, already on the run, 
he penned, 'The Political Situation (Four Theses)' for submission to 
201 
