CHAPTER I 


HOME IN INDIA 

D o I contradict myself?’ Gandhi asked. ‘Consistency is a 
hobgoblin.’ No ism held him rigid in its grip. No theory 
guided his thoughts or actions. He strove to keep his mind 
open. He reserved the right to differ with himself. 

His life, Gandhi said, was an unending experiment. He 
experimented even in his seventies. There was nothing set 
about him. He was not a conforming Hindu nor a conforming 
nationalist nor a conforming pacifist. 

Gandhi was independent, unfettered, unpredictable, hence 
exciting and difficult. A conversation with him was a voyage of 
discovery: he dared to go anywhere without a chart. 

Under attack, he rarely defended himself. Happily adjusted in 
India, he never condemned anyone. Humble and simple, he did 
not have to pretend dignity. Thus relieved of uncreative mental 
tasks, he was free to be creative. 

Nor did he say or do anything merely to gain popularity or win 
or mollify followers. He upset the applecart frequently. His 
inner need to perform a given act took precedence over its 
possible effects on his supporters. 

Two days before Gandhi, Mrs. Gandhi and Kallenbach 
reached England from South Africa, the first World War broke 
out. Gandhi felt that Indians ought to do their bit for Britain. 
He accordingly volunteered to raise an ambulance corps headed 
by himself. Eighty Indians, most of them university students in 
the United Kingdom, volunteered. Gandhi had no delusions: 
‘Those who confine themselves to attending to the wounded in 
battle cannot be absolved from the guilt of war.’ 

Then how, Gandhi’s friends protested, could he, the man of non¬ 
violence, participate in a war? 

Gandhi answered in effect: I accept the benefits and protection 
of the British Empire; I have not tried to destroy it; why should I 
allow it to be destroyed? 

141 


GANDHI IN INDIA 


A modern nation is only quantitatively less violent in peace-time 
than in war-time and unless one non-collaborates in peace-time one 
is merely salving one’s conscience by non-collaborating in war¬ 
time. Why pay taxes to make the arms which kill? Why obey 
the kind of officials who will make a war? Unless you surrender 
citizenship or go to jail before the war, you belong in the army 
during the war. 

Gandhi’s support of the war was personally painful and politic¬ 
ally harmful. But he preferred truth to comfort. 

While the minor tempest over his pro-war attitude raged 
around Gandhi’s head, his pleurisy, aggravated by too much 
fasting, took a serious turn and the doctor ordered him home to 
India. He arrived in Bombay with Kasturbai on January 9th, 
1915. Kallenbach, being a German, was not permitted to travel 
to India and returned to South Africa. 

Except in his native Gujarat region, in the cities of Bombay and 
Calcutta and in f the Madras area, home of the many Tamil 
indentured labourers in South Africa, Gandhi’s support of the 
war made little impression. He was not well known in India. 
Nor did he know India. 

Professor Gokhale accordingly ‘commanded’ Gandhi to spend 
the first year in India with ‘his ears open but his mouth shut’. 
What he learned in those twelve months about the past and 
present, Gandhi matched against the hopes for the future which 
he had formulated as early as 1909 in his first book, Hind Swaraj 
or Indian Home Rule. He wrote this brief volume in Gujarati, using 
right and left hands to do so, while returning from England to 
South Africa, and had it published in instalments in Indian Opinion 
and then printed as a book in Gujarati and English. He allowed 
it to be republished in India in 1921 without change and, in an 
introduction to still another edition in 1938, he said, ‘I have seen 
nothing to make me alter the views expanded in it.’ The seventy- 
six-page pamphlet, therefore, stands as his social credo. 

Indian Home Rule records discussions Gandhi had with Indians 
in London, one of them an anarchist, some of them terrorists. ‘If 
we act justly,’ Gandhi said to them, ‘India will be free sooner. 
You will see, too, that if we shun every Englishman as an enemy, 
Home Rule will be delayed. But if we are just to them, we shall 
receive their support. . .’ This was prophetic. 

142 


HOME IN INDIA 


Gandhi asked his interlocutors, whom he groups as ‘Reader’, 
how they see the future independence of India. ‘As is Japan,’ 
Reader replies, ‘so must India be. We must own our own navy, 
our army and we must have our own splendour and then will 
India’s voice ring through the world.’ 

In other words, Gandhi comments, you want ‘English rule 
without the Englishman. You want the tiger’s nature without the 
tiger . . . You would make India English . . . This is not the 
Swaraj I want.’ 

Gokhale told Gandhi in South Africa that the booklet was 
‘crude and hastily conceived’. Some parts, notably those on 
British domestic politics, are. On the other hand, Count Leo 
Tolstoy praised its philosophy. It has abiding interest for Gandhi’s 
definition of Swaraj or home-rule. ‘Some Englishmen’, Gandhi 
wrote, ‘state that they took and hold India by the sword. Both 
statements are wrong. The sword is entirely useless for holding 
India. We alone keep them . . . We like their commerce; they 
please us by their subtle methods and get what they want from 
us . . . We further strengthen their hold by quarrelling amongst 
ourselves . . . India is being ground down not under the British 
heel but under that of modern civilization.’ Then he inveighed 
against India’s use of railways and machinery. 

Foreigners, and Indians, frequently challenged Gandhi on his 
hostility to the modern machine. The several editions of Hind 
Swaraj report some of these discussions. In 1924, for instance, 
Gandhi was asked whether he objected to all machinery. 

‘How can I,’ he replied, ‘when I know that even this body 
is a most delicate piece of machinery? The spinning wheel is a 
machine; a little toothpick is a machine. What I object to is the 
craze for machinery, not machinery as such. 

‘Today,’ Gandhi continued, ‘machinery merely helps a few to 
ride on the back of the millions . . . The machine should not tend 
to atrophy the limbs of man. For instance, I would make intellig¬ 
ent exceptions. Take the case of the Singer sewing machine. It 
is one of the few useful things ever invented and there is a romance 
about the device itself.’ He had learned to sew on it. 

And would you not need big factories to produce little devices 
like Singers? 

‘Yes,’ Gandhi agreed. 


143 


GANDHI IN INDIA 


Then, since he liked to close the circle of every argument and 
come back to his starting-point, Gandhi said, ‘Ideally, I would 
rule out all machinery, even as I would reject this very body, 
which is not helpful to salvation and seek the absolute liberation 
of the soul. From that point of view I would reject all machinery, 
but machines would remain because, like the body, they are 
inevitable.’ Thus he upheld the. principle yet admitted the 
contention. 

Gandhi was not anti-machine. He merely realized earlier than 
many others the dangers and horrors of a civilization in which 
the individual is somewhat in the position of a savage who makes 
an idol and then makes sacrifices to appease it. The faster 
machines move the faster man lives and the greater his nervous 
tensions and his cultural and social tributes to speed. Gandhi 
would have had less objection to machinery if it merely served the 
body; he did not want it to invade the mind and maim the spirit. 
He believed that India’s mission was to ‘elevate the moral being’. 
Therefore, ‘if the English become Indianized we can accom¬ 
modate them’. 

Such a thing has never happened, Reader objected. 

‘To believe that what has not occurred in history will not occur 
at all,’ Gandhi replied, ‘is to argue disbelief in the dignity of man.’ 
He had the soul of an Eastern prophet and the spirit of a Western 
pioneer. 

Reader scorned Gandhi’s moral preoccupations. He wanted 
India liberated from the British as Mazzini and Garibaldi had 
liberated Italy from Austria. The analogy enabled Gandhi to 
drive home the central thesis that guided him to greatness before 
and especially after India’s independence: 

‘If you believe that because Italians rule Italy the Italian nation 
is happy you are groping in darkness . . . According to Mazzini 
[freedom] meant the whole of the Italian people, that is, its 
agriculturists. The Italy of Mazzini still remains in a state of 
slavery. . . . 

‘It would be folly to assume,’ Gandhi added, ‘that an Indian 
Rockefeller would be better than an American Rockefeller.’ 

Gandhi saw the flaws in Western culture, but he took much 
from it. His defence of the individual against the community 
and of man against the machine is in tune with Ruskin, Thoreau, 

144 


HOME IN INDIA 


Mazzini and the Utopian (not Marxist) socialists. Ideologically, 
Gandhi stood with one foot in the deep individualistic current of 
the first half of Europe’s nineteenth century and the other in the 
turbulent nationalistic current of the second half of that century; 
the two streams merged in him and he endeavoured to achieve 
the same synthesis in the Indian independence movement. 

Gandhi asked England to quit India, but he did not want India 
to quit England. He cultivated cultural and other ties with 
Britain. In 1936, for instance, he gave an Indian student named 
Kamalnayan Bajaj a letter of introduction to Henry Polak in 
London in which he said, ‘However much we may fight Great 
Britain, London is increasingly our Mecca ... I have advised 
him to take up a course in the London School of Economics.’ His 
nationalism lacked the usual concomitants of nationalism: 
exclusiveness and hostility towards other countries. ‘My patriot¬ 
ism,’ Gandhi declared, ‘is subservient to my religion.’ He was too 
religious to serve one land, one race, one caste, one family, one 
person, or even one religion. His religion was humanity. 

Gandhi planted these ideas as he moved up and down India 
during that probationary first year Gokhale had enjoined upon 
him; he studied and learned, but contrary to orders he talked. 
He talked at banquets celebrating his South African exploits. He 
attended them with the silent Kasturbai whom he lauded as his 
helpful partner. 

At a dinner in April 1915, in Madras, he defended his recruiting 
campaign for the British army; this speech was pro-West. ‘I 
discovered,’ he said, ‘that the British Empire had certain ideals 
with which I have fallen in love and one of those ideals is that 
every subject of the British Empire has the freest scope possible 
for his energy and honour and whatever he thinks is due to his 
conscience. I think that is true of the British government as it is 
true of no other government... I have more than once said that 
that government is best which governs least. I have found that it 
is possible for me to be governed least under the British Empire. 
Hence my loyalty to the British Empire.’ 

He took the unpopular side. 

Gandhi’s speeches were delivered in a weak, unimpressive, 
conversational tone. He had been heralded as the hero of Natal 
and the Transvaal, the person who defeated Smuts. The Indian 

i45 


GANDHI IN INDIA 


nationalists had expected a new giant, a lion of a man who might 
lead them to independence. (Gokhale died in 1915.) They were 
disappointed. Instead of a likely candidate for the succession, they 
saw a thin little figure dressed in a ridiculously large turban and 
flapping loincloth who could scarcely make himself heard (there 
were no loudspeakers) and neither thrilled nor stimulated his 
audience. 

Yet Gandhi would soon remake the entire nationalist movement 
of India. 

Simultaneously with Gandhi’s departure from Phoenix Farm, 
his own family, with other families, also left South Africa for 
India. As the best place for the temporary sojourn of the boys in 
this group Gandhi chose Shantiniketan, a school in Bengal, 
eastern India, maintained by Rabindranath Tagore, India’s 
great novelist and poet laureate who won the Nobel Prize for 
Literature in 1913. 

Gandhi and Tagore were contemporaries and closely linked as 
chief agents of India’s twentieth-century regeneration. But 
Gandhi was the wheat field and Tagore the rose garden, Gandhi 
was the working arm, Tagore the singing voice, Gandhi the 
general, Tagore the herald, Gandhi the emaciated ascetic with 
shaven head and face, Tagore the large, white-maned, white- 
bearded aristocrat-intellectual with a face of classic, patriarchal 
beauty. Gandhi exemplified stark renunciation; Tagore felt ‘the 
embrace of freedom in a thousand bonds of delight’. Yet both 
were united by their love of India and mankind. Tagore wept 
at seeing his India ‘the eternal ragpicker at other people’s dust¬ 
bins’ and prayed for ‘the magnificent harmony of all human races’. 

Tagore believed, with Gandhi, that India’s shackles were self- 
made: 

Prisoner, tell me who was it that wrought this unbreakable 
chain? 

It was I, said the prisoner, who forged this chain very carefully. 

Tagore and Gandhi, the greatest Indians of the first half of the 
twentieth century, revered one another. It was Tagore, appar¬ 
ently, who conferred on Gandhi the title of Mahatma; ‘The Great 
Soul in beggar’s garb,’ Tagore Said. Gandhi called Tagore ‘The 
Great Sentinel’. Sentimentally inseparable, soulmates to the end, 

146 


HOME IN INDIA 


they waged verbal battles, for they were different. Gandhi faced 
the past and out of it made future history; religion, caste, Hindu 
mythology were deeply ingrained in him. Tagore accepted the 
present, with its machines, its Western culture and, despite it, 
made Eastern poetry. Perhaps, since provincial origins are so 
important in India, it was the difference between isolated Gujarat 
and cosmopolitan Bengal. Gandhi was frugal. Tagore was 
prodigal. ‘The suffering millions’, Gandhi wrote to Tagore, ‘ask 
for one poem, invigorating food.’ Tagore gave them music. At 
Shantiniketan, Tagore’s pupils sang and danced, wove garlands 
and made life sweet and beautiful. When Gandhi arrived there, 
shortly after his return to India, to see how his Phoenix Farm boys 
were faring, he turned the place upside down. With the help of 
Charles Freer Andrews and William W. Pearson, his friends in 
South Africa, Gandhi persuaded the entire community of 125 
boys and their teachers to run the kitchen, handle the garbage, 
clean the latrines, sweep the grounds and, in general, forsake the 
muse for the monk. Tagore acquiesced tolerantly and said, ‘The 
experiment contains the key to Swaraj’ or home-rule. But austerity 
was uncongenial and, when Gandhi left to attend Gokhale’s 
funeral, the experiment collapsed. 

Gandhi, however, sought his own hermitage or ashram where 
he, his family and friends and nearest co-workers would make their 
permanent home in an atmosphere of renunciation and service. 
Gandhi’s life now had no room for private law practice or private 
relations with wife and sons. A foreigner once said to Gandhi, 
‘How is your family?’ 

‘All of India is my family,’ Gandhi replied. 

Thus dedicated, Gandhi founded the Satyagraha Ashram first 
at Kochrab and then, permanently, at Sabarmati, across the 
Sabarmati River from the city of Ahmedabad. There, rooted in 
the soil and sand and people of India, Gandhi grew to full stature 
as the leader of his nation. 

Ahmedabad’s textile magnates and Bombay’s shipping barons 
supported financially the inmates of Gandhi’s ashram. The 
Sabarmati Ashram consists of a group of low, whitewashed 
huts in a grove of spreading trees. A mile away stands the 
Sabarmati prison where fighters for India’s freedom were later 
incarcerated. Below the ashram compound is the river in which 

k m.g. 147 


GANDHI IN INDIA 


women wash their laundry, and cows and buffaloes wade. All 
around, the scene is gently pastoral, but not too distant are the 
closely packed houses of Ahmedabad hedged in by ugly factory 
smokestacks. 

Gandhi’s room is about the size of a cell; its one window has 
iron bars. The room opens on to a small terrace where Gandhi 
slept even in the coldest nights and worked during the day. Except 
for intervals in prison, Gandhi occupied that cell for sixteen years. 

On the high bank which slopes down sharply to the river, 
Gandhi held his daily prayer meetings. Near by is the grave of 
Maganlal Gandhi, the Mahatma’s second cousin, who managed 
the ashram and died in 1928. ‘His death has widowed me. M. K. 
Gandhi’, reads the inscription on the stone. 

With the years, new houses were erected to accommodate the 
Indians who wished to be Gandhi’s disciples. Some of the most 
active leaders of the independence movement began their political 
careers at the feet of the Mahatma in Sabarmati. The population 
of the settlement fluctuated from 30 at the start to a maximum of 
230. They tended the fruit trees, planted grain, spun, wove, 
studied and taught in surrounding villages. 

In ancient India, ashrams and religious retreats for monks 
were well-known phenomena. Pilgrimages to four ashrams in 
different parts of the land signified that one’s legs had proved the 
unity of India. Ashramites resigned from the world and, con¬ 
templating themselves inside and out, waited for the end while 
torturing the body to hasten it. Gandhi and his ashram, however, 
remained in closest contact with the world. The ashram, in fact, 
became the navel of India. Contemplating the ashram, Indians 
attached themselves to its first citizen. Nor did Gandhi ever 
purposely hurt his body. He had it massaged; he slept adequately; 
he walked for strength; all his dietetic aberrations, queer to many 
Westerners and even to many Indians, were designed to make him 
a biologically perfect instrument for the attainment of spiritual 
goals. Though he drastically reduced his food consumption he did 
not want to be famished, and in South Africa he always carried 
chocolate-coated almonds to still sudden hunger. He remained, 
until he was killed, a healthy specimen. Who but a very 
healthy man could have fasted as often and as long as he did yet 
reach the age of seventy-eight? 

148 


HOME IN INDIA 


A photograph taken shortly after his return to India shows him 
seated on a platform, legs crossed, nude but for a short loincloth, 
making a speech while around him stand Indian politicians in 
European clothes. He soon told them to shed those garments. 
How could persons in Bond Street suits or Bombay coats and 
trousers win peasant support? 

Peasants? Politicians had nothing to do with peasants. They 
were hoping to persuade the British to withdraw or, at least, to 
ameliorate the imperial regime; to achieve this end you either had 
to shoot well or appear in striped trousers to deliver petitions in 
impeccable English to English bureaucrats. India’s Independence 
Hall, they thought, would be papered with petitions and 
memorials addressed to a most gracious sovereign or the sovereign’s 
satrap. 

But Gandhi told them to get out among the people. To do so 
they would have to drop English and use the native languages of 
India: Hindi, Urdu, Tamil, Telugu, Malayalam, Kannarese, 
Bengali, Punjabi, etc., each spoken by many millions who had 
had no benefit of Western education or perhaps any education. 
Village uplift was Gandhi’s First Freedom. Over 80 per cent of 
India lived in villages. India’s liberation from England would be 
vain, he held, without peasant liberation from poverty, ignorance 
and idleness. The British might go, but would that help the fifty 
to sixty million outcast untouchables, victims of cruel Hindu 
discrimination? Independence must mean more than Indian 
office-holders in the places and palaces of British office-holders. 

Gandhi wanted a new Indian today, not just a new India 
tomorrow. 

Gandhi’s message touched India with a magic wand. Gradu¬ 
ally, a new vision opened. The Indian’s heart aches for the lost 
glory of his country. Gandhi brought it balm. Gandhi in loin¬ 
cloth, imperturbable, prayerful, seated amid trees, not aping the 
British gentleman but resembling a saint of antiquity, reminded 
the nation that India had seen many conquerors and conquered 
them all by remaining true to itself. Gandhi kindled India’s 
pride and faith. His magic wand became a ramrod. 

Gandhi’s message stood the Indian National Congress party on 
its head. 

The Congress, as Indians call it, was born in Bombay on Decern- 

i49 


GANDHI IN INDIA 


ber 28th, 1885. Its father and first general secretary was an 
Englishman, Allan Octavian Hume, who had the blessing of 
Lord Dufferin, the British Viceroy. Hume at first proposed that 
Indian politicians should meet regularly, under the chairmanship 
of British governors, as a grievance court, but the Viceroy 
thought that Indians would speak more freely if one of their 
number presided. Hume placed both proposals before prominent 
Indians and they chose the Viceroy’s variant. This was the origin 
of the Congress. Hume remained secretary, sometimes alone, 
sometimes with Indian colleagues, until 1907. The Congress 
president for 1888 was George Yule, an Englishman; for 1894, 
Alfred Webb, an Irish member of the British Parliament; for 
1904, Sir Henry Cotton, a retired Indian Civil Service official; 
and for 1910, Sir William Wedderburn, former Secretary to the 
Government of Bombay. Gandhi praised Hume and Wedderburn 
for their devotion to India. They and all the Congressmen of this 
early period saw India’s welfare through constitutional reforms 
and administrative measures. 

The Congress was organized to channel popular protest into 
legal moderation. But into the channel flowed the fresh waters of 
national revivalism, spurred, in the second half of the nineteenth 
century, by the Tagore family, Sri Aurobindo, Swami Vive- 
kananda, a dynamic, eloquent disciple of the mystic Ramakrishna, 
Dadabhai Naoroji and Raja Rammohan Roy, the first translator 
of the Upanishads into English. The world theosophist movement, 
which paid permanent tribute to the ancient religious and cultural 
wealth of India, likewise fed that pride in the past which consti¬ 
tuted the foundation of the movement for national regeneration. 

Thanks in part to the unification and orderly administration 
of the country by the British, Indian industrialists, Hindus and 
Parsis in particular, grew rich and began to buy out their British 
partners. The emergence of Indian capitalism and of a new 
Indian middle class gave a powerful impetus to the urge for self- 
government. 

Under these multiple influences, the Congress slowly outgrew 
its collaborationist boyhood and became a demanding youth. 
The ‘prayers’ to British governors were couched in firmer terms, 
though as late as 1921, Tagore complained of their ‘correct 
grammatical whine’. Polite irritations supplanted polite invita- 

150 


HOME IN INDIA 


tions to high imperial officials to attend Congress functions. 
Some speeches and resolutions pressed for ultimate home-rule. 
But only a few ‘extremists’ dreamt of converting the Congress 
into an active agent that would win Indian independence by 
mass action. 

Gandhi too was a collaborationist when he returned to India 
in 1915. Yet there was a revolutionary, anti-collaborationist 
potential in his yearning for an India that was Indian instead of a 
replica of the West in clothing, language, mores and politics. 
Gandhi craved for his country a cultural regeneration and spiritual 
renaissance which would give it inner freedom and hence, inevit¬ 
ably, outer freedom, for if the people acquired individual and 
collective dignity they would insist on their rights and then 
nobody could hold them in bondage. 

The national metamorphosis Gandhi envisaged could not be 
the achievement of a small upper class or the gift of a foreign 
power. This made him conscious and critical of the shortcomings 
of the Congress. Before Gandhi sat securely in the saddle of the 
Congress he was the burr under the saddle, and it got him into 
trouble. 


I5 1 


 

