CHAPTER V 


FIRST FAST 

G andhi would have remained to assist the sharecroppers 
of Champaran in getting schools, health service, etc., 
but unrest among textile workers brought him back to 
Ahmedabad. 

The millhands of Ahmedabad were underpaid and overworked. 
They wanted more money and better conditions. Their case, 
Gandhi said, ‘was strong’. 

Gandhi was a close friend of Ambalal Sarabhai, the biggest 
textile manufacturer of Ahmedabad. Sarabhai was the leader of 
the millowners. 

Having studied the problem, Gandhi urged the factory owners 
to arbitrate the dispute. They rejected arbitration. 

Gandhi accordingly advised the workmen to go on strike. 
They followed his advice. Gandhi directed the strike. He was 
helped actively by Anasuya, sister of Ambalal Sarabhai. 

Gandhi had exacted a solemn pledge from the workmen not 
to return to work until the employers accepted labour’s demands 
or agreed to arbitration. Every day Gandhi met the strikers under 
a spreading banyan tree by the banks of the Sabarmati. Thou¬ 
sands came to hear him. He exhorted them to be peaceful and 
to abide by the pledge. From these meetings, they marched off 
into town carrying banners which read, ek tek (keep the 
pledge) . 

Meanwhile, Gandhi remained in touch with the employers. 
Would they submit to arbitration? They again refused. 

The strike dragged on. The strikers began to weaken. Atten¬ 
dance at meetings dropped, and when Gandhi asked them, as 
he did each day, to reaffirm the pledge, their reply sounded less 
resolute. Scabs had been working in some of the mills. Gandhi 
feared violence. He was also afraid that, pledges notwithstanding, 
the workers might return to the mills. 

To Gandhi it was ‘inconceivable’ that they should return. ‘Was 
it pride,’ he asked, ‘or was it my love of the labourers and my 

174 


FIRST FAST 

passionate regard for truth that was at the back of this feeling — 
who can say?’ 

Whatever the feeling, it overpowered Gandhi, and one morning, 
at the regular strikers’ open-air assembly under the banyan 
branches, he declared that if they did not continue the strike until 
they won T will not touch any food’. 

He had not intended announcing the fast. The words just came 
to him spontaneously without previous thought. He was as sur¬ 
prised as his listeners. Many of them cried. Anasuya Sarabhai 
was beside herself with grief. 

‘We will fast with you,’ some workers exclaimed. No, said 
Gandhi, they need merely stay out on strike. As for himself, he 
would eat nothing until the strike was settled. 

Gandhi had fasted before for religious and personal reasons. 
This was his first fast in a public cause. 

On the first day of the fast, Anasuya and several strike leaders 
fasted too. But Gandhi persuaded them to desist and look after 
the workmen. With the assistance of Vallabhbhai Patel, a 
prosperous Ahmedabad lawyer, and others, temporary employ¬ 
ment was found for some workers. A number of them helped to 
erect new buildings at Gandhi’s Sabarmati Ashram. 

Gandhi saw the dilemma in which the fast placed him. The 
fast was designed to keep the workers loyal to their pledge. But 
it constituted pressure on the millowners. Ambalal Sarabhai was 
a devoted follower of the Mahatma and so was Ambalal’s wife, 
Sarladevi. She, Gandhi wrote, ‘was attached to me with the 
affection of a blood-sister’. 

Gandhi told the millowners who called on him that they must 
not be influenced by his fast; it was not directed against them. He 
said he was a striker and strikers’ representative and should be 
treated as such. But to them he was Mahatma Gandhi. Three 
days after the fast commenced, the millowners accepted arbitra¬ 
tion, and the strike, which had lasted twenty-one days, was 
called off. 

Gandhi thought he fasted to steady the strikers. The failure of 
the strike would cow these and other workers, and he disliked 
cowards. His sympathies were with the poor and downtrodden 
in whom he wished to arouse a dignified, peaceful protest. Yet 
he probably would have fasted against the workers had they 

175 


GANDHI IN INDIA 

opposed arbitration. The principle of arbitration is essential to 
Gandhi’s philosophy; it eliminates violence and the compulsion 
which may be present even in peaceful struggles.^ It teaches 
people tolerance and conciliation. Gandhi fasted not for anybody 
or against anybody, but for a creative idea. 

‘Fasting for the sake of personal gain is nothing short of intimi¬ 
dation,’ Gandhi affirmed. Gandhi obviously had nothing personal 
to gain from the Ahmedabad fast. The employers knew that. Yet 
they were probably intimidated by it. They did not want to be 
the cause of Gandhi’s death. But if it had been the Governor of 
Bombay who was fasting they might have said, ‘Let him die’. ‘I 
fasted to reform those who loved me,’ Gandhi said on a subse¬ 
quent occasion, and he added, ‘You cannot fast against a tyrant.’ 
The millowners were intimidated because they had a deep affec¬ 
tion for Gandhi, and when they saw his selfless sacrifice they may 
have felt ashamed of their own selfishness. A fast for personal 
benefit would not arouse such emotions. 

T can fast against my father to cure him of a vice,’ Gandhi ex¬ 
plained, ‘but I may not in order to get from him an inheritance.’ 
Gandhi fasted not so much to raise wages as to cure the employers 
of their unwarranted objection to a system of arbitration which 
would promote peace in the textile industry. 

The fast, in fact, brought into being a system of arbitration 
which survives to this day; on a visit to Ahmedabad in 1948, I 
found capitalists and trade unions convinced of its efficacy. 
Gandhi had participated in its work as permanent member of the 
panel of arbitrators. 

In September 1936, for instance, the Millowners Association of 
Ahmedabad asked the Textile Labour Association to accept a 20 
per cent cut in wages. Labour refused, and the case went to 
arbitration. The employers appointed an owner named Kastur- 
bhai Lajbhai as their representative and labour appointed 
Mahatma Gandhi; the impartial umpire chairman was Sir 
Govindrao Madgavkar. 

The millowners submitted that their plants, employing approxi¬ 
mately 80,000 hands, were suffering from foreign competition and 
the world economic depression and could not afford to pay existing 

rates. 

Having studied the industry’s books and other pertinent data, 

176 


FIRST FAST 


Gandhi affirmed that ‘no cut should be made till the mills have 
ceased to make any profit and are obliged to fall back upon their 
capital for continuing the industry. There should be no cut till 
the wages have reached the level adequate for maintenance. It 
is possible to conceive a time when the workmen have begun to 
regard the industry as if it were their own property and they 
would then be prepared to help it out of a crisis by taking the barest 
maintenance consisting of a dry crust and working night and day. 
That would be a voluntary arrangement. Such cases are irrelevant 
to the present consideration 5 . 

Moreover, Gandhi wrote, ‘It is vital to the well-being of the 
industry that workmen should be regarded as equals with the 
shareholders and that they have therefore every right to possess 
an accurate knowledge of the transactions of the mills. 5 

Finally, Gandhi suggested a register of all millhands ‘acceptable 
to both parties 5 , after which ‘the eustom of taking labour through 
any agency other than the Textile Labour Association should be 
stopped 5 . This approximates to the modern, Western concept of 
the ‘closed shop 5 . 

The impartial chairman agreed with Gandhi and ruled against 
the wage reduction which, accordingly, was not allowed. 


177 


 

