CHAPTER XIX 


CLIMAX 


ever was deck passenger accorded such a regal welcome; 



‘judging from the warmth, cordiality and affection displayed 


i at the reception, one would think that the Mahatma had re¬ 
turned with Swaraj in the hollow of his hand’, Subhas ChandraBose 
remarked caustically. He had returned with his integrity; he had 
not stepped down from the role of half-naked fakir who parleyed 
as an equal with the mighty British Empire. This was the next 
best thing to freedom, for it reflected the liberation of India’s 
spirit. Since the Salt March, and especially since the Irwin- 
Gandhi Pact, India felt free. Gandhi fed that feeling, and Indians 
were grateful. Moreover, their Mahatma had come back safely 
from the cold world across the sea. 

India’s partial liberation was achieved in 1930-31, thanks to 
Gandhi, Irwin and the British Labour government. But Irwin 
was gone; and in October 1931, Ramsay MacDonald’s Labour 
government had been supplanted by a Cabinet, headed by Mac¬ 
Donald, in which Conservatives predominated. Sir Samuel 
Hoare, ‘an honest and frank-hearted Englishman’, according to 
Gandhi, and an honest and frank Conservative, was Secretary of 
State for India. 

The new British government proceeded to attack India’s new 
sense of freedom. 

A full report was poured into Gandhi’s ear from the moment 
he set foot on the Bombay quay on December 28th. By evening 
he had a detailed picture of the ugly situation and conveyed it to 
the two hundred thousand listeners whom he addressed, with the 
aid of loudspeakers, on the vast Azad Maidan. 

Jawaharlal Nehru and Tasadduq Sherwani, Moslem president 
of the Congress organization of the United Provinces, had been 
arrested two days earlier while travelling to Bombay to greet 
Gandhi. Emergency Powers Ordinances had been promulgated 
early in December in the United Provinces and in the North-west 
Frontier Province and Bengal to deal with a widespread no-rent 


324 




CLIMAX 


movement; they authorized the military to seize buildings, im¬ 
pound bank balances, confiscate wealth} arrest suspects without a 
warrant, suspend court trials, deny bail and habeas corpus, with¬ 
draw mailing privileges from the press, disband political organiza¬ 
tions, and prohibit picketing and boycotting. ‘We are not playing 
a game with artificial rules/ Sir Harry Haig, Home Member 
(Minister of Interior) of the government of India, said in the 
Assembly. ‘The question is whether the Congress is going to 
impose its will on the whole country.’ 

‘All this,’ Gandhi told his Bombay audience, ‘I learned after 
my landing here. I take it these are all Christmas gifts from Lord 
Willingdon, our Christian Viceroy. For is it not a custom during 
Christmas to exchange greetings and gifts? Something had to be 
given me and this is what I have got.’ (He had not yet unwrapped 
all the packages.) 

The same evening he spoke to the Welfare of India League in 
the Hotel Majestic. ‘I am not conscious of a single experience 
throughout my three months’ stay in England and Europe’, he 
asserted, ‘that made me feel that after all East is East and West is 
West. On the contrary, I have been convinced more than ever 
that human nature is much the same, no matter under what clime 
it flourishes, and that if you approached people with trust and 
affection you would have ten-fold trust and thousand-fold 
affection returned to you.’ 

The members of the British government were friendly to him; 
‘we parted as the best of friends . . . But when I come here I find 
a different order of things altogether . . .’ He summarized the 
extraordinary ordinances. ‘The Congress is charged with trying 
to run a parallel government ... I assure you that I shall strain 
every nerve to see if I would not tender co-operation on honour¬ 
able lines to induce the Government to withdraw or revise these 
ordinances.’ 

The Government had no intention of letting Gandhi offer any¬ 
thing. 

The day after his arrival, Gandhi telegraphed the Viceroy 
deploring the ordinances and arrests and suggesting an interview. 
The Viceroy’s secretary replied on the last day of the year; the 
ordinances were justified by the activities of Congress against the 
Government. The Viceroy would be ‘willing to see you and to 

325 


GANDHI IN INDIA 


give you his views as to the way in which you can best exert your 
influence’, the secretary said. ‘But His Excellency feels bound to 
emphasize that he will not be prepared to discuss with you mea¬ 
sures which the Government of India, with the full approval of 
His Majesty’s Government, have found it necessary to adopt in 
Bengal, the United Provinces and the N.W.F.P.’ 

The British raj would no longer parley with the rebel. 

Gandhi’s rejoinder defended Congress and intimated that he 
might have to start a civil disobedience campaign. The Viceroy’s 
secretary answered sharply on January 2nd, 1932. ‘His Excel¬ 
lency and the government’, he wrote, ‘can hardly believe that 
you or the Working Committee [Executive Committee of Con¬ 
gress] contemplate that His Excellency can invite you, with the 
hope of any advantage, to an interview held under the threat of 
the resumption of civil disobedience . . . nor can the Government 
of India accept the position implied in your telegram that its 
policy should be dependent on the judgment of yourself as to the 
necessity of measures which the government has taken. . . .’ 

Willingdon was right. No autocracy can permit a private 
citizen or organization to question its acts. 

Gandhi replied on the same day. He had not threatened; he 
had expressed an opinion. Moreover, he had negotiated with 
Irwin, prior to the Delhi Pact, while civil disobedience was 
actually in progress. He never thought the Government had to 
depend on his judgment, ‘But I do submit,’ Gandhi wired, ‘that 
any popular and constitutional government would always wel¬ 
come and consider sympathetically suggestions made by public 
bodies and their representatives. . . .’ 

The Government ‘has banged the door in my face’, Gandhi 
informed the. nation on January 3rd. The next day, the Govern¬ 
ment banged an iron door in his face: he was arrested — again, 
as after the Salt March, under Regulation XXXV of 1827; again 
he was His Majesty’s guest in Yeravda Jail. A few weeks earlier he 
had been the guest of His and Her Majesty in Buckingham Palace. 

The Government attack on Congress was fierce. Congress 
organizations were closed and almost all leaders imprisoned; in 
January, 14,800 persons were jailed for political reasons; in 
February, 17,800. Winston Churchill declared that the repressive 
measures were more drastic than any since the 1857 Mutiny. 

326 


CLIMAX 


Mahatma Gandhi enjoyed a special regime in prison. In 1930, 
in the same Yeravda Jail, the chief warden came to him and 
asked how many letters he needed to receive from the outside 
each week. 

‘I do not need to receive a single letter,’ Gandhi replied. 

‘How many letters do you wish to write?’ the warden inquired. 

‘Not one,’ Gandhi said. 

He was given unlimited privileges to write and receive corre¬ 
spondence. 

Major Martin, the prison governor, bought furniture, crockery 
and other utensils for Gandhi. ‘For whom have you bought all 
this,’ Gandhi protested. ‘Take it away, please.’ 

Major Martin said he had permission from the central authori¬ 
ties to spend a minimum of three hundred rupees a month on such 
an honoured guest. ‘That is all very well,’ Gandhi declared, ‘but 
this money comes from the Indian treasury, and I do not want to 
increase the burdens of my country. I hope that my boarding 
expenses will not exceed thirty-five rupees a month.* The special 
equipment was removed. 

At Yeravda an official named Quinn asked Gandhi to teach 
him Gujarati and he used to come every day for his lesson. One 
morning, Quinn failed to appear, and on inquiry Gandhi was 
told that the official was busy at a hanging in the prison. ‘I feel 
as though I am going to be sick,’ Gandhi said. 

Vallabhbhai Patel too was arrested and lodged at Yeravda. In 
March, Mahadev Desai was transferred from another jail to 
Yeravda: Gandhi had asked for his companionship. When Maha¬ 
dev arrived he laid his head on Gandhi’s feet, and Gandhi patted 
his head and shoulders affectionately. The three enjoyed numer¬ 
ous conversations together in which other prisoners and British 
wardens and physicians sometimes joined. 

Gandhi read the newspapers more carefully than he did out¬ 
side, washed his own clothes, spun, studied the stars at night, 
and read many books; he liked Upton Sinclair’s The Wet Parade , 
Goethe s Faust , Kingsley’s Westward Ho! and others. He also put 
the finishing touches on a tiny book most of which he had written 
in Yeravda in 1930 in the form of letters to Sabarmati Ashram. 
He entitled it From Yeravda Mandir; ‘mandir’ is a temple; the 
prison was a temple for he worshipped God in it. The booklet, 

327 


GANDHI IN INDIA 


supplemented by occasional articles and pronouncements at other 
times, furnishes a key to Gandhi’s thinking on the nature of God 
and the ideal conduct of a man. 

‘God is,’ Gandhi said. 

The word satya means ‘truth’, and it derives from sat which 
means ‘to be’. Sat also denotes God. Therefore, God is that which 
is. ‘And since’, according to Gandhi, ‘nothing else I see merely 
through the senses can or will persist, He alone is.’ Everything 
else is illusion. God is the only truth. 

Over the years Gandhi tried many times to prove the existence 
of God. ‘There is an indefinable mysterious Power’, he wrote, 
‘which pervades everything. I feel it, though I do not see it. It 
is this unseen Power which makes itself felt and yet defies all proof, 
because it is so unlike all that I perceive through my senses. It 
transcends the senses. 

‘But’, he added optimistically, ‘it is possible to reason out the 
existence of God to a limited extent. . . There is an orderliness in 
the Universe, there is an unalterable law governing everything 
and every being that exists or lives. It is not a blind law, for no 
blind law can govern the conduct of human beings . . . That law 
then which governs all life is God ... I do dimly perceive that 
whilst everything around me is ever changing, ever dying, there 
is underlying all that change a living Power that is changeless, 
that holds all together, that creates, dissolves, and recreates. That 
informing Power or spirit is God ... In the midst of death life 
persists, in the midst of untruth truth persists, in the midst of 
darkness light persists. Hence I gather that God is Life, Truth, 
and Love. He is Love. He is the supreme Good.’ 

After this valiant rational effort, Gandhi says, ‘But He is no 
God who merely satisfies the intellect, if He ever does. God to 
be God must rule the heart and transform it. He must express 
Himself in every smallest act of His votary. This can only be 
done through a definite realization more real than the five senses 
can ever produce. Sense perceptions can be, often are, false and 
deceptive, however real they may appear to us. Where there is 
realization outside the senses it is infallible. It is proved not by 
extraneous evidence but in the transformed conduct and character 
of those who have felt the real presence of God within.’ 

That was another attempt at proof, this time not by logic but 

328 


CLIMAX 


by the palpable testimony of human behaviour. But ‘faith tran¬ 
scends reason’, he confessed; consequently, ‘the safest course is to 
believe in the moral government of the world and therefore in the 
supremacy of the moral law, the law of truth and love ... If we 
could solve all the mysteries of the Universe, we would be co-equal 
with God. Every drop of ocean shares its glory but is not the 
ocean’. Every human being, in other words, partakes of the 
nature of God but is not God and cannot know what He is. Even 
the greatest Hindu sage, Sankara, did not know more than that 
God is ‘Not this’ and ‘Not that’. 

Except as a youth, Gandhi never doubted the existence of God 
as Jains and Buddhists may. ‘I literally believe,’ he said, ‘that not 
a blade of grass grows or moves without His will . . . God is nearer 
to us than fingernails to the flesh ... I can tell you this, that I am 
surer of His existence than of the fact that you and I are sitting in 
this room ... You may pluck out my eyes, but that cannot kill 
me. You may chop off my nose, but that will not kill me. But 
blast my belief in God, and I am dead.’ 

Gandhi, moreover, was convinced of the large and intimate role 
which God played in his work. ‘Whatever striking things I have 
done in life,’ he declared, ‘I have not done prompted by reason 
but prompted by instinct — I would say God. Take the Dandi 
Salt March of 1930. I had not the ghost of a suspicion how the 
breach of the Salt Law would work itself out. Pandit Motilalji 
and other friends were fretting and did not know what I would 
do, and I could tell them nothing as I myself knew nothing about 
it. But like a flash it came, and as you know it was enough to 
shake the country from one end to the other.’ 

‘Do you feel a sense of freedom in your communion with God?’ 
someone asked. 

‘I do,’ Gandhi replied. ‘I have imbibed through and through 
the teaching of the Gita that man is the maker of his own destiny 
in the sense that he has freedom of choice as to the manner in 
which he uses that freedom. But he is no controller of results. 
The moment he thinks he is, he comes to grief. 

‘I have no special revelation of God’s will,’ Gandhi explained. 
‘My firm belief is that He reveals Himself daily to every human 
being, but we shut our ears to the “still small voice” . . . God 
never appears to you in person but in action.’ 

329 


GANDHI IN INDIA 


How did Gandhi worship God? He believed in the efficacy of 
prayer. ‘Prayer is the key of the morning and the bolt of the 
evening ... As food is necessary for the body, prayer is necessary 
for the soul . . . No act of mine is done without prayer ... I am 
not a man of learning, but I humbly claim to be a man of prayer. 
I am indifferent to the form. Every man is a law unto himself 
in that respect.’ But ‘it is better in prayer to have a heart without 
words than words without a heart’. One can pray in the silence 
that has banished words. 

Nevertheless, the highway to God was through action. For ten 
days Gandhi and E. Stanley Jones, an American missionary, 
discussed a variety of topics, chiefly religion. One day Gandhi 
said, ‘If one is to find salvation, he must have as much patience 
as a man who sits by the seaside and with a straw picks up a single 
drop of water, transfers it and thus empties the ocean.’ Salvation, 
according to Gandhi, comes — as Dr. Jones understood it — 
‘through one’s strict, disciplined efforts, a rigid self-mastery’. 

‘But I,’ E. Stanley Jones declares, ‘look on salvation, not as an 
attainment through one’s efforts, but as an obtainment through 
grace. I came to God morally and spiritually bankrupt with 
nothing to offer except my bankruptcy. To my astonishment He 
took me, forgave me, and sent my soul singing its way down the 
years. By grace was I saved through faith, and that not of myself; 
it was the gift of God . . . It was at this poiht that the Christians 
and the Mahatma never got together. 

‘I know,’ Dr. Jones adds, ‘that salvation by grace seems too 
cheap and easy, but it is not cheap; for when you take the gift, 
you belong for ever to the Giver.’ 

Gandhi took the hard road. His doctrine was: By their works 
shall ye know them. His God required him to live for humanity. 
‘If I could persuade myself’, Gandhi wrote, ‘that I should find 
Him in a Himalayan cave I would proceed there immediately. 
But I know I cannot find him apart from humanity ... I claim to 
know my millions. All the hours of the day I am with them. They 
are my first care and last because I recognize no God except that 
God that is to be found in the hearts of the dumb millions.’ 

Gandhi’s relation with God was part of a triangle which 
included his fellow man. On this triangle he based his system of 
ethics and moralitv. 


330 


CLIMAX 


The first duty of the God-worshipper is truth: for truth is God. 
This Gandhi repeated thousands of times: ‘Truth is God.’ 

> ‘There should be Truth in thought, Truth in speech and Truth 
in action,’ Gandhi wrote in From Teravda Mandir. ‘Devotion to 
Truth is the sole justification of our existence.’ This Truth is 
honesty, and also something else: ‘It is impossible for us to realize 
perfect Truth so long as we are imprisoned in this mortal frame 
... if we shatter the chains of egotism, and melt into the ocean of 
humanity, we share its dignity. To feel that we are something is 
to set up a barrier between God and ourselves; to cease feeling 
that we are something is to become one with God. A drop in the 
ocean partakes of the greatness of its parent, although it is un¬ 
conscious of it. But it is dried up as soon as it enters upon an 
existence independent of the ocean.’ 

Truth is identification with God and humanity. From Truth, 
non-violence is born. Truth appears different to different indi¬ 
viduals. ‘There is nothing wrong in every man following Truth 
according to his lights,’ says From Teravda Mandir. Each person 
must be true to his own truth. But if the seeker after Truth 
began to destroy those who saw Truth in their way he would 
recede from the Truth. How can one realize God by killing or 
hurting? Non-violence, however, is more than peacefulness or 
pacifism; it is love, and excludes evil thought, undue haste, lies, 
or hatred. 

First, Truth; second, non-violence or Love; and third, chastity. 
‘If a man gives his love to one woman, or a woman to a man, what 
is there left for all the world besides? It simply means, “We two 
first, and the devil take the rest of them.” . . . Such persons cannot 
rise to the height of Universal Love.’ 

Then are married people lost for ever? No, ‘if the married 
couple can think of each other as brother and sister, they are 
freed for universal service’. This is the maximum programme 
for the monks and nuns of the ashram. For the rank and file of 
humanity ‘Sex urge is a fine and noble thing. There is nothing 
to be ashamed of in it. But it is meant only for the act of creation. 
Any other use of it is a sin against God and humanity . . . Indul¬ 
gence interfered with my work.’ 

The next injunction to the ashramites is ‘Non-stealing’ which 
implies non-possession. ‘Civilization, in the real sense of the term, 

33 1 


GANDHI IN INDIA 


consists not in the multiplication, but in the deliberate and volun¬ 
tary reduction of wants. . . . 

‘Anxiety about the future,’ Gandhi said to a friend, ‘is sheer 
atheism. Why should we fear that our children will be less efficient 
or successful than we are? To save money for the sake of children 
is to show lack of faith in them,’ and in God. Attachment to 
money or possessions is the product of fear. Violence is the result 
of fear. Dishonesty is fear. Fearlessness is the key to Truth, to 
God, to Love; it is the king of virtues. 

The remaining virtues are: the removal of untouchability which 
‘means love for, and service of, the whole world’; ‘bread-labour’ 
or regular productive manual work; tolerance of all religions; 
humility; and, finally, spinning and the encouragement of 
domestic national economy without ‘ill-will towards the foreigner’. 

Few inside or outside the ashram ever lived up to Gandhi’s 
austere code; only he approached his ideal. 

While Gandhi was editing these simple epistles on God and 
ethics in his prison-‘temple’, India moved towards its tensest 
fortnight in modern history. 

It centred around saving Gandhi’s life. 

‘To find a parallel for the anguish of September 1932’, wrote 
Rajagopalachari, ‘we have to go back to Athens twenty-three 
centuries ago when the friends of Socrates surrounded him in 
prison and importuned him to escape from death. Plato has 
recorded the questions and answers. Socrates smiled at the 
suggestion . . . and preached the immortality of the soul.’ 

The ‘Anguish of September 1932’ began for Gandhi early that 
year. He had gathered from the newspapers that the proposed 
new British constitution for India would grant separate electorates 
not only to Hindus and Moslems as in the past but to untouchables, 
or ‘Depressed Classes’. He accordingly wrote a letter on March 
1 ith, 1932, to Sir Samuel Hoare, the Secretary of State for India. 

‘A separate electorate for the Depressed Glasses’, Gandhi wrote, 
‘is harmful for them and for Hinduism ... So far as Hinduism is 
concerned, separate electorates would simply vivisect and disrupt 
it . . . The political aspect, important though it is, dwindles into 
insignificance compared to the moral and religious issue.’ If 
therefore the Government decided to create a separate electorate 

332 


CLIMAX 


for untouchables, ‘I must fast unto death’. That, he knew, would 
embarrass the authorities whose prisoner he was, but ‘for me the 
contemplated step is not a method, it is part of my being’. 

The minister replied to the prisoner on April 13th, saying that 
no decision had yet been taken and that his views would be con¬ 
sidered before it was taken. 

No new developments occurred until August 17th, 1932, when 
Prime Minister Ramsay MacDonald announced Britain’s decision 
in favour of separate electorates. 

‘I have to resist your decision with my life,’ Gandhi wrote to 
Ramsay MacDonald the next day. ‘The only way I can do it is 
by declaring a perpetual fast unto death from food of any kind save 
water with or without salt and soda.’ The fast would commence 
at noon, September 20th. 

In a very long reply, dated 10 Downing Street, September 8th, 
1932, Prime Minister MacDonald said he had received Gandhi’s 
communication ‘with much surprise and, let me add, with very 
sincere regret’. Gandhi had misunderstood; they had con¬ 
sidered his known friendship for the untouchables and his letter 
to Sir Samuel Hoare. ‘We felt it our duty to safeguard what we 
believed to be the right of the Depressed Classes to a fair propor¬ 
tion of representation in the legislatures’ and ‘we were equally 
careful to do nothing that would split off their community from 
the Hindu world.’ 

Then MacDonald cogently defended the Government’s decision: 
‘Under the government scheme the Depressed Classes will remain 
part of the Hindu community and will vote with the Hindu 
electorate on an equal footing.’ That is what Gandhi wanted. 
‘But for the first twenty years, while still remaining part of the 
Hindu community, they will receive through a limited number 
of special constituencies, means of safeguarding their rights and 
interests. . . .’ 

In other words, MacDonald emphasized, the untouchables 
would have one vote in the Hindu electorate, and many of them 
would have a second vote in their special untouchable electorate. 
They will ‘have two votes’, he wrote. Surely Gandhi, their 
champion, could not object. 

The alternative method, ‘reservation of seats’, MacDonald 
declared, had been rejected because, though it would reserve a 

333 


GANDHI IN INDIA 


number of seats for untouchable legislators within the larger 
block of Hindu seats, ‘in practically all cases, such members would 
be elected by a majority consisting of higher caste Hindus’. That 
being the case, the Prime Minister implied, they might be stooges 
of caste Hindus: they would have to keep in the good graces of 
caste Hindus, and might not be ‘in a position to speak for them¬ 
selves 5 . 

So, MacDonald reasoned, ‘you propose to adopt the extreme 
course of starving yourself to death not in order to secure that 
the Depressed Classes should have joint electorates with other 
Hindus, because that is already provided, nor to maintain the 
unity of Hindus, which is also provided, but solely to prevent the 
Depressed Classes, who admittedly suffer from terrible disabilities 
today, from being able to secure a limited number of representa¬ 
tives of their own choosing to speak on their behalf on the legisla¬ 
tures . . .’ Therefore, MacDonald could only think that Gandhi’s 
proposal to fast was based on a misapprehension. The Govern¬ 
ment’s decision would stand. 

Gandhi’s letter of September 9th, from Yeravda Central Prison 
to 10 Downing Street, was typical. 

Without arguing, I affirm that to me this matter is one of pure 
religion. The mere fact of the Depressed Classes having double 
votes does not protect them or Hindu society in general from being 
disrupted. You will please permit me to say that no matter how 
sympathetic you may be, you cannot come to a correct decision 
on a matter of vital and religious importance to the parties con¬ 
cerned. 

I should not be against even over-representation of the De¬ 
pressed Classes. What I am against is their statutory separation, 
even in a limited form, from the Hindu fold, so long as they choose 
to belong to it. Do you realize that if your decision stands and the 
constitution comes into being, you arrest the marvellous growth 
of the work of Hindu reformers who have dedicated themselves 
to their suppressed brethren in every walk of life? 

Gandhi added that he was also opposed to the other separate 
electorates ‘only I do not consider them to be any warrant for 
calling from me such self-immolation as my conscience has 
prompted me in the matter of the Depressed Classes’. 

334 


CLIMAX 


That ended Gandhi’s correspondence with London. 

MacDonald was not alone in his bewilderment. Many Indians, 
some Hindus, were perplexed. Jawaharlal Nehru was in prison 
when he heard Gandhi would fast. T felt angry with him’, he 
writes in his autobiography, c at his religious and sentimental 
approach to a political issue, and his frequent references to God 
in connection with it.’ Nehru ‘felt annoyed with him for choosing 
a side issue for his final sacrifice’. Untouchability was a side issue, 
independence the central issue. For two days, Nehru ‘was in 
darkness’. He thought with sorrow of never seeing Bapu any 
more. 

‘Then a strange thing happened to me,’ Nehru continues. ‘I 
had quite an emotional crisis, and at the end of it I felt calmer, 
and the future seemed not so dark. Bapu had a curious knack of 
doing the right thing at the psychological moment, and it might 
be that his action — impossible as it was from my point of view — 
would lead to great results not only in the narrow field in which 
it was confined, but in the wider aspects of our national struggle 
. . . Then came the news of the tremendous upheaval all over the 
country . . . What a magician, I thought, was this little man sitting 
in Yeravda Prison, and how well he knew how to pull the strings 
that move people’s hearts.’ 

Even Nehru had underestimated Gandhi’s magic and Gandhi’s 
political sagacity. 

The Government’s fierce repressions against the civil resisters 
were breaking the. back of the movement; it was petering out into 
pessimism. Gandhi’s fast rescued nationalist India from the politi¬ 
cal doldrums. But compared with the big result, this was a minor 
by-product. 

All Gandhi’s adult life he had fought against the ‘bar sinister’ 
between caste Hindus and Harijans; even as a boy he laughed at 
his mother’s idea that the touch of an untouchable defiles. Now 
the British Empire was erecting a political reservation for Hari¬ 
jans. With his congenital impulse to assume the best motives, he 
was ready to believe that MacDonald and Hoare were acting in 
the interest, as they saw it, of the Depressed Classes. But he knew 
India better. Legalisms do not make life; Hindus and Harijans 
might form a joint electorate, but the Harijans’ additional 
separate electorate would blot out the good psychological effect of 

335 


GANDHI IN INDIA 

the joint electorate. Given a separate electorate, Harijan candi¬ 
dates and elected representatives would stress what divided them 
from the caste Hindus. A political machine would a'rise with a 
vested interest in perpetuating the rift between Harijans and caste 
Hindus; its political capital would be Hindu injustice. Gandhi 
felt passionately that untouchability was a perversion which would 
kill the soul of Hinduism and, in turn, poison the soul of the 
Harijans. The MacDonald award threatened to give long life to 
India’s worst sin. 

Harmony in diversity, love despite differences, was Gandhi’s 
way of eliminating violence in thought and action. To divide is 
to invite war. Gandhi had fasted for Hindu-Moslem unity; he 
did not want two Indias. Now he was. faced with the prospect of 
three Indias. He regarded Hindu-Moslem enmity as politically 
disastrous. The Hindu-Harijan division was politically disastrous 
and religiously suicidal. Gandhi could not countenance the 
widening of the Hindu-Harijan gulf. 

The fast, Gandhi said, ‘is aimed at a statutory separate elec¬ 
torate, in any shape or form, for the Depressed Glasses. Imme¬ 
diately that threat is removed once for all, my fast will end’. 
He was not fasting against the British, for the Government had 
stated that if Hindus and Harijans agreed on a different and 
mutually satisfactory voting arrangement it would be accepted. 
The fast, Gandhi declared, ‘is intended to sting Hindu conscience 
into right religious action’. 

On September 13th Gandhi announced that he would com¬ 
mence his fast unto death on the 20th. India now witnessed 
something the world had never seen. 

On the 13th, political and religious leaders went into action. 
Mr. M. C. Rajah, an untouchable spokesman in the Legislative 
Assembly, identified himself with Gandhi’s position; Sir Tej 
Bahadur Sapru, the great constitutional leader, petitioned the 
Government to release Gandhi; Yakub Husain, a Moslem leader 
in Madras, urged the Harijans to renounce the separate electorate; 
Rajendra Prasad suggested that Hindus save Gandhi by giving 
Harijans access to their temples, wells, schools and the public 
roads; Pandit Malaviya convoked a conference of leaders for the 
19th; Rajagopalachari asked the country to pray and fast on 
the 2Qth. 


336 


CLIMAX 


Several deputations asked to see Gandhi in jail. The Govern¬ 
ment opened the gates and allowed full consultations with him. 
Devadas Gandhi arrived to act as intermediary with negotiators. 
Journalists also enjoyed unobstructed access to Gandhi. 

Meanwhile Gandhi wrote copious letters to many friends in 
India and abroad. ‘There was no escape from it,’ he said in a 
letter to Miss Slade. ‘It is both a privilege and a duty. It comes 
rarely to someone in a generation or generations.’ He had been 
observing the cat family in the prison, he told Miss Slade in the 
same communication. ‘We have an addition to the family, did I 
tell you? There was a human touch about the mother whilst she 
was in pain and two or three days after delivery. She would caress 
us and insist on being caressed. It was a pathetic sight. The care 
she bestows on the “baby? is very wonderful. Love from us all 
to you all, Bapu.’ 

On the 20th, Gandhi awoke at 2.30 a.m. and wrote a letter to 
Tagore whose approval he craved. ‘This is early morning, 3 
o’clock of Tuesday,’ the Mahatma began. ‘I enter the fiery gates 
at noon. If you can bless the effort I want it. You have been a 
true friend because you have been a candid friend often speaking 
your thoughts aloud . . . Though it can now only be during my 
fast, I will yet prize your criticism, if your heart condemns my 
action. I am not too proud to make an open confession of my 
blunder, whatever the cost of the confession, if I find myself in 
error. If your heart approves of the action I want your blessing. 
It will sustain me. . . .’ 

Just as Gandhi posted this letter he received a telegram from 
Tagore: ‘It is worth sacrificing precious life’, it read, ‘for the sake 
of India’s unity and her social integrity ... I fervently hope that 
we will not callously allow such national tragedy to reach its ex¬ 
treme length stop our sorrowing hearts will follow your sublime 
penance with reverence and love.’ 

Gandhi thanked Tagore for ‘your loving and magnificent wire. 
It will sustain me in the midst of the storm I am about to enter’. 

At 11.30 the same morning, Gandhi took his last meal; it con¬ 
sisted of lemon juice and honey with hot water. Millions of 
Indians fasted for twenty-four hours. Throughout the country 
prayers were sung. 

That day, Rabindranath Tagore, whom India and Gandhi 

337 


GANDHI IN INDIA 


affectionately called ‘The Poet’, addressed his school at Shantini- 
ketan and said, ‘A shadow is darkening today over India like a 
shadow cast by an eclipsed sun. The people of a whole country is 
suffering from a poignant pain of anxiety, the universality of 
which carries in it a great dignity of consolation.' Mahatmaji, 
who through his life of dedication has made India his own in 
truth, has commenced his vow of extreme self-sacrifice. * 

Tagore explained the Mahatma’s fast: 

‘Each country has its own inner geography where her spirit 
dwells and where physical force can never conquer even art inch 
of ground. Those rulers who come from the outside remain out¬ 
side the gate . . . But the great soul . . . continues his dominion 
even when he is physically no longer present . . . The penance 
which Mahatmaji has taken upon himself is not a ritual but a 
message to all India and to the world . . . Let us try to understand 
the meaning of his message . . . No civilized society can thrive 
upqn victims whose humanity has been permanently mutilated 
. . . Those whom we keep down inevitably drag us down ... we 
insult our own humanity by insulting man where he is helpless 
and where he is not of our own kin . . . Mahatmaji has repeatedly 
pointed out the danger of those divisions in our country . . . 
Against that deep-seated moral weakness in our society Mahatmaji 
has pronounced his ultimatum . . . We have observed that the 
English people are puzzled at the step that Mahatmaji has been 
compelled to take. They confess that they fail to understand it. I 
believe that the reason of their failure is mainly owing to the fact 
that the language of Mahatmaji is fundamentally different from 
their own ... I ask them to remember the terrible days of atrocities 
that reddened in blood at their door when dismemberment was 
being forced between Ireland and the rest of Great Britain. Those 
Englishmen, who imagined it to be disastrous to the integrity of 
their empire, did not scruple to kill and be killed, even to tear 
into shreds the decency of civilized codes of honour.’ 

The British, Tagore explained, were ready to indulge in the 
‘Black and Tan’ blood bath in Ireland to prevent dismember¬ 
ment of the Empire. Gandhi was immolating one person, 
himself, to prevent dismemberment of Indian society. This was 
the language of non-violence. Is that why the West could not 
decipher it? 


338 


CLIMAX 


Tagore saw the possibility of losing Gandhi in the fast. The 
very thought sent a shiver through the spine of the nation. If 
nothing were done to save him, every Hindu would be Mahatmaji’s 
murderer. 

Gandhi lay on a white iron cot in the shade of a low mango tree 
in the quiet prison yard. Patel and Mahadev Desai sat near him. 
Mrs. Naidu had been transferred from the women’s ward of 
Yeravda Jail to nurse and guard him from excessive exertion. On 
a stool were some books, writing paper, bottles of water, salt and 
soda bicarbonate. 

Outside, the negotiators in conference were racing with death. 
Hindu leaders gathered in Birla House in Bombay on September 
20th. There were Sapru, Sir Chunilal Mehta, Rajagopalachari, 
the president of Congress for that year, G. D. Birla, a very wealthy 
industrialist and friend of Gandhi, Rajendra Prasad, Jayakar, 
Sir Purshottamdas Thakurdas, a millionaire patron of schools, 
and others. The untouchable delegates were Dr. Solanki and Dr. 
Ambedkar. 

Ambedkar, a distinguished lawyer with international experience 
who had played a big part at the Round Table Conferences in 
London, owned a powerfully built body and strong, stubborn, 
superior intellect. His father and grandfather saw service in the 
British Army. The accumulated bitterness against Hindus that 
rankled for centuries in millions of Harijan breasts found expres¬ 
sion in Ambedkar’s Himalayan hatred. He preferred British raj 
to Hindu raj; he preferred Moslems to Hindus and once thought 
of leading the untouchable community, as a body, into the 
Mohammedan Church. Age-long Hindu cruelty to his unhappy 
brethren filled him with anger, spite and vindictiveness. If any¬ 
body in India could have contemplated with equanimity the 
death of Gandhi, Ambedkar was the man. He called the fast ‘a 
political stunt’. At the conference, he faced the great Hindu 
minds, and he must have derived sweet pleasure watching them 
court him in order to save their beloved Mahatma. 

Gandhi had always wanted one electorate for Hindus and Hari- 
jans, which would jointly elect a solid block of Hindu and Harijan 
members of the legislative councils. He even opposed reserving 
a fixed number of seats in that block for Harijans because it would 
accentuate the cleavage between the two communities. But on 

339 


Y 


M.G. 


GANDHI IN INDIA 


the 19th Gandhi told a deputation — much to its relief — that he 
had become reconciled to reserved seats. 

Ambedkar, however, demurred: the Harijans who would 
occupy the reserved seats in the legislatures would be elected 
jointly by Hindus and Harijans and would, therefore, feel con¬ 
siderable restraint in airing Harijan grievances against Hindus. 
If a Harijan denounced Hindus too fiercely the Hindus might 
defeat him in the next election and elect a more docile un¬ 
touchable. 

To meet this legitimate objection, Sapru had evolved an in¬ 
genious plan which he presented to the conference on September 
20th: all Hindu and Harijan members of the legislatures would 
be elected jointly by Hindu and Harijan voters. A number of the 
Hindu-Harijan seats would be earmarked in advance for Harijans. 
The candidates for a portion of these reserved Harijan seats would 
be nominated in private consultations between Hindus and Hari¬ 
jans. But for the remainder of the reserved seats, Sapru introduced 
something new: primaries in which only Harijans would vote. In 
those primary elections, a panel of three Harijan candidates 
would be chosen for each reserved seat. Then in the final or 
secondary elections, Harijans and Hindus would vote jointly for 
one of those three Harijan candidates. The Hindus would have 
no choice but to vote for one of them. That would enable the 
Harijans to place their bravest and best champions in the legis¬ 
latures while retaining the system of joint electorates. 

Anxiously, the Hindus waited for Ambedkar’s views on the 
scheme. He examined it minutely. He sought the advice of 
friends. Hours drifted by. Finally he accepted, but stated that 
he would draft his own formula to incorporate his own ideas plus 
the Sapru plan. 

Encouraged, but still not quite sure of Ambedkar, the Hindu 
leaders now wondered about Gandhi; would he sanction the 
Sapru innovation? Sapru, Jayakar, Rajagopalachari, Devadas, 
Birla and Prasad took the midnight train and were in Poona the 
next morning. At 7 a.m. they were taken into the prison office. 
Gandhi, already weak after less than twenty-four hours without 
food, came into the office with a laugh, and taking a place at the 
centre of the table, announced cheerfully, T preside’. 

Sapru explained the plan of the primaries. Others amplified. 

340 


CLIMAX 


Gandhi asked some questions. He was non-committal. Half an 
hour passed. Finally Gandhi said, ‘I am prepared to consider 
your plan favourably . . . But I should like to have the whole 
picture before me in writing.’ In addition, he asked to see Ambed- 
kar and Rajah. 

Urgent invitations were sent to Ambedkar and Rajah. A 
memorandum on the Sapru plan was prepared. Rajah, repre¬ 
senting Gandhi’s untouchables following, accepted it. Ambedkar 
promised to come. 

A troubled night passed. The morning of the 22nd Gandhi 
expressed displeasure with the scheme: Why should only some 
candidates for the reserved Harijan seats be elected in the Harijan 
primaries? Why not all? Why create two sets of Harijan candi¬ 
dates, one chosen by Harijans in the primaries, the other selected 
by Hindus and Harijans? He wanted no distinctions between 
Harijans. Nor did he want Harijan legislators to be under any 
political debt to Hindus. 

The negotiators were overjoyed. Gandhi was offering Ambed¬ 
kar more than Ambedkar had already accepted. 

Ambedkar appeared at Gandhi’s cot late that afternoon; he 
did most of the talking. He was ready to help to save the Mahat¬ 
ma’s life, he said. But T want my compensation’. 

Gandhi had already commenced to sink. In previous fasts he 
had taken water regularly, on the hour. Now he was listless and 
drank it irregularly. In previous fasts, massage moderated his 
aches. This time he refused massage. Sharp pains racked his 
wasting body. He had to be moved to the bath on a stretcher. 
The least movement, sometimes even speaking, gave him 
nausea. 

When Ambedkar said, T want my compensation,’ Gandhi 
propped himself up painfully and spoke for many minutes. He 
mentioned his devotion to the Harijans. He discussed the Sapru 
scheme point by point. He did not like it, he said. All Harijans 
should be nominated by Harijans and not just some of them, 
Gandhi declared. Weakened by the effort, the Mahatma subsided 
to his pillow. 

Ambedkar had expected to be put under pressure in the pre¬ 
sence of the dying Mahatma to recede from his position. But now 
Gandhi out-Harijaned the Harijan Ambedkar. 

34i 


GANDHI IN INDIA 


Ambedkar welcomed Gandhi’s amendment. 

That day, Mrs. Gandhi arrived; she had been transferred from 
Sabarmati Prison to Yeravda. As she slowly moved towards her 
husband, she shook her head from side to side reprovingly and 
said, ‘Again, the same story!’ He smiled. Her presence cheered 
him. He submitted to massage by her, and by a professional, 
more for her sake than because he wanted it. 

Friday, September 23rd, the fourth day of the fast, Dr. Gilder, 
Gandhi’s heart specialist, and Dr. Patel came from Bombay, and 
in consultation with prison physicians diagnosed the prisoner’s 
condition as dangerous. Blood pressure was alarmingly high. 
Death was possible at any moment. 

The same day, Ambedkar conferred at length with the Hindu 
leaders and presented his new demands for compensation: Mac¬ 
Donald’s award had given the Depressed Classes 71 seats in the 
provincial legislatures. Ambedkar asked for 197. Sapru had 
suggested a panel of three Harijan candidates. Gandhi suggested 
five; Ambedkar suggested two. There was also the question of a 
referendum of Harijan voters to decide when the reserved seats 
should be abolished and the political distinction thus wiped out 
between Hindus and Harijans; that would be a step towards the 
merger of the two communities in life. Gandhi wanted the 
primaries abolished after five years. Ambedkar held out for fif¬ 
teen. Ambedkar did not believe that untouchability would be 
destroyed in five years. 

Later in the day, Ambedkar came to Gandhi. It was a hot 
sultry day and not a mango leaf stirred in the prison yard. 
Gandhi’s blood pressure was rising. He could hardly speak above 
a whisper. Ambedkar bargained hard. The outcome was 
indecisive. 

Saturday, September 24th, the fifth day, Ambedkar renewed 
his talks with the Hindu leaders. After a morning’s wrangling, 
he visited Gandhi at noon. It had been agreed between Ambed¬ 
kar and the Hindus that the Depressed Classes would have 147 
reserved seats instead of the 197 Ambedkar had demanded and 
the 71 MacDonald ordered. Gandhi accepted the compromise. 
Ambedkar was now ready to abolish the separate primaries after 
ten years. Gandhi insisted on five. ‘Five years or my life,’ Gandhi 
said. Ambedkar refused. 


342 


CLIM A X 

Ambedkar returned to his Harijan colleagues. Later, he 
informed the Hindu leaders that he would not accept the abolition 
of primaries in five years: nothing less than ten. 

Rajagopalachari now did something which probably saved 
Gandhi’s life. Without consulting Gandhi, he and Ambedkar 
agreed that the time of the abolition of the primaries would be 
determined in further discussion. This might make a referendum 
superfluous. 

Rajagopalachari rushed to the jail and explained the new 
arrangement to Gandhi. 

‘Will you repeat it?’ 

Rajagopalachari repeated it. 

‘Excellent,’ Gandhi murmured; he may not have understood 
precisely what Rajagopalachari was saying; he was faint. But he 
had acquiesced. 

That Saturday, the Yeravda Pact, as Indian history knows it, 
was drafted and signed by all the chief Hindu and Harijan 
negotiators except Gandhi. 

On Sunday it was ratified in Bombay at a full conference of the 
negotiators and others. 

But the pact was no pact and Gandhi would not abandon his 
fast unless the British government consented to substitute it for 
the MacDonald Award. Its verbatim text had been telegraphed 
to London where Charles Andrews, Polak and other friends of 
Gandhi laboured to get quick action from the Government. It 
was Sunday and ministers had left town, and Ramsay Mac¬ 
Donald was in Sussex attending a funeral. 

On hearing of the agreement in Poona, MacDonald hurried 
back to io Downing Street; so did Sir Samuel Hoare and Lord 
Lothian who had helped to formulate the MacDonald Award. 
They pored over the text until midnight on Sunday. 

Gandhi’s life was fast ebbing away. He told Kasturbai who 
should get the few personal belongings that lay around his cot. 
Early Monday, Tagore arrived from Calcutta and sang a selection 
of his own songs to the Mahatma. They soothed Gandhi. Friends 
from Poona were admitted to play on musical instruments and 
chant devotional hymns. He thanked them with a nod and a 
faint smile. He could not speak. 

A few hours later, the British government announced simul- 

343 


GANDHI IN INDIA 


♦ 


taneously in London and New Delhi that it had approved the 
Yeravda Pact. Gandhi could break his fast. 

At 5.15 on Monday afternoon, in the presence of Tagore, Patel, 
Mahadev Desai, Mrs. Naidu, the negotiators and journalists, 
Gandhi accepted a glass of orange juice from Kasturbai and broke 
his fast. Tagore sang Bengali hymns. Many eyes were wet. 

Dr. Ambedkar made an interesting speech at the Bombay con¬ 
ference on Sunday, September 25th, which ratified the Yeravda 
Pact or Poona Agreement. Praising Gandhi’s conciliatory atti¬ 
tude, Ambedkar said, T must confess that I was surprised, 
immensely surprised, when I met him, that there was so much 
in common between him and me. In fact whenever any disputes 
were carried to him — and Sir Tej Bahadur Sapru has told you 
that the disputes that were carried to him were of a very crucial 
character — I was astounded to see that the man who held such 
divergent views from mine at the Round Table Conference came 
immediately to my rescue and not to the rescue of the other side. 
I am very grateful to Mahatmaji for having extricated me from 
what might have been a very difficult situation.’ 

This was not only a polite tribute at a moment of relaxation 
after hectic days, but also a correct description of Gandhi’s atti¬ 
tude. Gandhi did favour the Harijan position over the Hindu 
position. Indeed, Gandhi had gone so far in his desire to meet 
the Harijans 100 per cent of the way, that he reversed himself on 
the key issue of reserved seats. ‘My only regret is, 5 Dr. Ambedkar 
stated in that same speech, ‘why did not Mahatmaji take this 
attitude at the Round Table Conference? If he had shown the 
same consideration for my point of view then, it would not have 
been necessary for him to go through this ordeal. However, 5 he 
added generously, ‘these are things of the past. I am glad that I 
am here now to support this resolution 5 of ratification. 

At the Round Table Conference in September-December 1931, 
Gandhi had opposed Harijan reserved seats in the Hindu block 
because it divided the two communities. But on September 13th, 
1932, and again on the 19th, Gandhi had accepted the idea of 
reserved seats as an unavoidable and, he hoped, passing evil. 

He accepted the reservation of seats as something infinitely 
preferable to the segregation that would arise out of the separate 
electorate which MacDonald wanted to introduce. But if Gandhi 

344 


t 


CLIMAX 


had done so at the Round Table Conference or months before 
the fast he might not have carried the orthodox Hindus with him. 
One of the negotiators of the Poona Agreement subsequently told 
me that he had always opposed Gandhi’s policies, but Gandhi 
was God descended to earth and ‘the gates of Heaven were waiting 
to receive him’. The threat of the Mahatma’s death won over 
the Hindu leaders for Gandhi’s policies. 

Suppose, however, that the Hindu leaders had adopted reserva¬ 
tion of seats before the fast. Would the fast have been superfluous? 
Was the Mahatma’s torment unnecessary? 

The answer to this question is crucial to an understanding of 
Gandhi’s role in India’s history. By the criterion of cold logic and 
arid legalisms, Gandhi need not have fasted to reach an agreement 
with Ambedkar. But Gandhi’s relationship with the Indian 
people was not based on logic and legalism. It was a highly 
emotional relationship. For the Hindus, Gandhi was Mahatma, 
The Great Soul, a piece of God. Were they going to kill him? The 
moment the fast began, texts, constitutions, awards, elections, 
etc., lost their significance. Gandhi’s life had to be saved. 

From September 13th, when the fast was announced, to the 
afternoon of September 26th, when Gandhi drank his first orange 
juice, every change in Gandhi’s physical condition, every word 
pronounced by anyone who had seen him, every journey of the 
least of the negotiators was broadcast to every corner of the 
country. A mother hovering over the crib of a tender child during 
a high-temperature crisis could be no more anxious than the India 
that watched the white cot of the sinking Mahatma. No mystic 
himself, Gandhi affected others mystically. They became one 
with him, as one as mother and babe. Reason withdrew; pas¬ 
sionately, frantically, because the end might have come at any 
instant, Hindus were reacting to a single throbbing wish: The 
Mahatma must not die. 

Gandhi had made each Hindu personally responsible for his 
life. On September 15th, in a statement widely disseminated, 
Gandhi said, ‘No patched-up agreement between Caste Hindus 
and rival Depressed Class leaders will answer the purpose. The 
agreement to be valid has to be real. If the Hindu mass mind is 
not yet prepared to banish untouchability root and branch it must 
sacrifice me without the slightest hesitation.’ 

345 


GANDHI IN INDIA 


While the negotiators parleyed, therefore, the Hindu com¬ 
munity — close to a quarter of a billion persons — experienced a 
religious-emotional upheaval. At the very beginning of the fast 
week, the famous Kalighat Temple of Calcutta and the Ram 
Mandir of Benares, citadel of Hindu orthodoxy, were thrown 
open to untouchables. In Delhi, Caste Hindus and Harijans 
demonstratively fraternized in streets and temples. In Bombay, 
a nationalist women’s organization organized a poll in front of 
seven big temples. Ballot boxes, watched by volunteers, were 
placed outside the gates, and worshippers were asked to cast their 
votes on the admission of untouchables. The tally was 24,797 
for, 445 against. As a result, temples in which no Harijan foot 
had ever trod were opened to all. 

The day before the fast started, twelve temples in Allahabad 
were made accessible to Harijans for the first time; on the first 
day of the fast, some of the most sacred temples throughout the 
country opened their doors to untouchables. Every subsequent 
day, until September 26th, and then every day from the 27th to 
October 2nd, Gandhi’s birthday, which was Anti-Untouchability 
Week, scores of holy places lowered the bars against Harijans. 
All temples in the native states of Baroda, Kashmir, Bhor and 
Kolhapur cancelled temple discrimination. The newspapers 
printed the names of the hundreds of temples that lifted the ban 
under the impact of Gandhi’s fast. 

Mrs. Swarup Rani Nehru, Jawaharlal’s very orthodox mother, 
let it be known that she had accepted food from the hand of an 
untouchable. Thousands of prominent Hindu women followed 
her example. At the strictly Hindu Benares University, Principal 
Dhruva, with numerous Brahmans, dined publicly with street 
cleaners, cobblers and scavengers. Similar meals were arranged 
in hundreds of other places. 

In villages, small towns and big cities, congregations, organiza¬ 
tions, citizens’ unions, etc., adopted resolutions promising to stop 
discriminating against untouchables; copies of these resolutions 
formed a man-high heap in Gandhi’s prison yard. 

Villages and small towns allowed untouchables to use water 
wells. Hindu pupils shared benches formerly reserved for un¬ 
touchables. Roads and streets, from which they were previously 
excluded, were opened to Harijans. 

346 


CLIMAX 


A spirit of reform, penance and self-purification swept the land. 
During the six fast days, most Hindus refrained from going to 
cinemas, theatres, or restaurants. Weddings were postponed. 

A cold political agreement between Gandhi and Ambedkar, 
without a fast, would have had no such effect on the nation; it 
might have redressed a legal Harijan grievance, but it would have 
remained a dead letter as far as the Hindu’s personal treatment of 
untouchables was concerned. Most Hindus would never have 
heard of it. The political pact was important only after the 
emotional churning which Gandhi’s fast gave the country. 

The fast could not kill the curse of untouchability, which was 
more than three thousand years old. Access to a temple is not 
access to a good job. The Harijans remained the dregs of Indian 
society. Nor did segregation end when Gandhi slowly drank his 
orange juice. 

But after the fast, untouchability forfeited its public approval; 
the belief in it was destroyed. A practice deeply imbedded in a 
complicated religion full of mystic overtones and undercurrents 
was recognized as morally illegitimate. A taboo hallowed by 
custom, tradition and ritual lost its potency. It had been socially 
improper to consort with Harijans; in many circles now it became 
socially improper not to consort with them. To practise un¬ 
touchability branded one a bigot, a reactionary. Before long, 
marriages were taking place between Harijans and Hindus; 
Gandhi made a point of attending some. 

Gandhi’s ‘Epic Fast’ snapped a long chain that stretched back 
into antiquity and had enslaved tens of millions. Some links of 
the chain remained. Many wounds from the chain remained. 
But nobody would forge new links, nobody would link the links 
together again. The future promised freedom. 

The Yeravda Pact said, ‘No one shall be regarded as untouch¬ 
able by reason of his birth . . Orthodox Hindus, with large 
religious followings, signed that statement. It marked a religious 
reformation, a psychological revolution. Hinduism was purging 
itself of a millennial sickness. The mass purified itself in practice. 
It was good for India’s moral health. The perpetuation of un¬ 
touchability would have poisoned India’s soul just as the retention 
of its economic remnants must hamper India’s progress. 

If Gandhi had done nothing else in his life but shatter the struc- 

347 


GANDHI IN INDIA 


ture of untouchability he would have been a great social reformer. 
In retrospect, the wrestling with Ambedkar over seats, primaries 
and referendums seems like that year’s melted snow on the 
Himalayas. The real reform was religious and social, not political. 

Five days after the end of the fast Gandhi’s weight had gone up 
to ninety-nine and three-quarter pounds, and he was spinning 
and working for many hours. ‘The fast was really nothing com¬ 
pared with the miseries that the outcasts have undergone for 
ages,’ he wrote to Miss Slade. ‘And so’, he added, ‘I continue 
to hum “God is great and merciful”.’ 

He remained in prison. 

Gandhi’s fast touched Hindu India’s heart. Gandhi had a com¬ 
pelling need to communicate with the hearts of men; he had an 
artist’s genius for reaching the heart strings of the inner man. 
But how does one communicate with a hundred or two hundred 
or three hundred million persons most of whom are illiterate and 
only five thousand of whom have radios? Gandhi’s fasts were 
means of communication. The news of the fast was printed in all 
papers. Those who read told those who did not read that ‘The 
Mahatma is fasting’. The cities knew, and peasants marketing 
in the cities knew, and they carried the report to the villages, and 
travellers did likewise. 

‘Why is the Mahatma fasting?’ 

‘So that we Hindus open our temples to the untouchables and 
treat the untouchables better.’ 

India’s ear was listening for more news. 

‘The Mahatma is sinking.’ ‘The Mahatma is dying.’ ‘We must 
hurry.’ 

Gandhi’s agony gave vicarious pain to his adorers who knew 
they must not kill God’s messenger on earth. It was evil to pro¬ 
long his suffering. It was blessed to save him by being good to 
those whom he had called ‘The Children of God’. 


348 


 

