CHAPTER X 


GANDHI’S FAMILIES 

W hen he passed through the prison gates, Gandhi left 
behind him a country full of perplexed politicians and an 
ashram full of two unhappy families: his personal family 
and his adopted family of secretaries, disciples, devotees and hangers- 
on. All of them, including Kasturbai, now called him Father, 
‘Bapu’, or ‘Bapuji’, the ji connoting a Hindu mixture of respect 
and tenderness. He received and gave a great deal of love. 

Love made him indulgent. For himself, he had an extremely 
strict code of conduct. With others he was tolerant. ‘Do not be 
frightened by the wide implications of these views of mine,’ he 
wrote to the women of the ashram. ‘There are always two mean¬ 
ings to everything — one wider and the other narrower. We shall 
not be put out if you understand the wider implications but start 
with the narrower.’ 

From young manhood, he was sweet and kind towards every¬ 
body except his wife and sons. A tension marred his early relations 
with Kasturbai, but gradually it waned and he was able to relax 
with her too. For instance, they frequently joked about their age; 
they were born six months apart but they were not quite certain 
who was younger and he would claim that he was and she that 
she was. Gradually, as lust, in Gandhi’s words, yielded to love, 
they became a model couple, she the acme of service, he a paragon 
of consideration. ‘Ba,’ the Mahatma said, referring to Kasturbai, 
‘takes tea in spite of the fact that she lives with me. She also takes 
coffee. I would even lovingly prepare it for her.’ Tea- and coffee- 
drinking were rather sinful in Gandhi’s eyes. Ba, in other words, 
retained her personality; yet she attained a high degree of self- 
effacement. She never behaved like Mrs. Gandhi, never asked 
privileges for herself, never shirked the hardest work, and never 
seemed to notice the small group of young or middle-aged female 
disciples who interposed themselves between her and her illustrious 
husband. Being herself and being at the same time a shadow of 
the Mahatma made her a remarkable woman, and some who 
p m.g. 227 


GANDHI IN INDIA 


observed them for long years wondered whether she had not come 
nearer the Gita ideal of non-attachment than he. He was too 
passionate to be the perfect yogi. 

As he aged, the passions submitted to more rigid rein, but he 
never quite learned to be a father to his sons. He had an un- 
Gandhian coldness towards them. Perhaps he had an impersonal 
concept of immortality. 'But may not an artist or a poet or a great 
genius 5 , insisted an interviewer, 'leave a legacy of his genius to 
posterity through his own children?’ 

‘Certainly not, 5 Gandhi replied in Young India of November 20th, 
1924. 'He will have more disciples than he can ever have children. 5 

As he was more severe with himself than with anybody else, so 
he was severest with his own boys. He expected Harilal, Manilal, 
Ramdas and Devadas to be chips off the old block, but the block 
did not chip. He was especially critical of his children when he 
encountered a young man who did meet a difficult test. In a letter 
dated Johannesburg, May 27th, 1906, Gandhi wrote to his oldest 
brother Laxmidas. ‘Young Kalyandas Jagmohandas’s son is like 
Prahalad in spirit. He is therefore dearer to me than one who is a 
son because so born. 5 

A popular myth, which, like so many other Hindu myths, was 
tightly woven into Gandhi’s culture pattern, makes Prahalad the 
son of a demon King Hiranya-kashipu. The King hated God, but 
Prince Prahalad loved God. The King ordered tutors to teach 
Prahalad that his father was more powerful than God. When the 
teacher failed to convince the young man, the demon king sub¬ 
jected Prahalad to a series of cruelties: the prince was thrown from 
a high hill and trampled by elephants and horses. Still he pro¬ 
claimed the supremacy of God. Finally, Prahalad was forced to 
embrace a red-hot metal pillar. But when he continued to call 
in His name, God emerged from the pillar in the form of a creature 
half lion, half man, and tore King Hiranya-kashipu to pieces. 

Gandhi regarded Prahalad as the first Satyagrahi, and the 
Indian boy in South Africa who behaved like Prahalad was 
therefore dearer to him than his own sons. 

In the same 1906 letter to his brother, Gandhi wrote, ‘It is well 
if Harilal is married; it is well if he is not. For the present at any 
rate I have ceased to think of him as a son. 5 Harilal, Gandhi’s 
first born, had remained in India in the hope of achieving personal 

228 


GANDHI’S FAMILIES 

independence. At eighteen, he wanted to get married; his father 
thought it was too early and disowned him Tor the present’. 

Six years later, still in South Africa, a young Indian married 
woman successfully assaulted Manilal’s continence. When the 
dereliction was discovered, Gandhi made a public scandal, fasted, 
persuaded the woman to shave her hair, and said he would never 
allow Manilal to marry. He only relented under Ba’s pressure, 
in March 1927, when Manilal was thirty-five. 

Gandhi leaned over backward to give his sons less than he gave 
other men’s sons. The treatment contained an antidote to the 
nepotism nourished by the strong Hindu family sense, but it was 
unfair, and Harilal and Manilal resented it. They felt disgruntled 
because their father, who had a profession, denied them a pro¬ 
fessional education. Gandhi contended that character building 
outranked law and medicine. That was all very well, they thought, 
but then why did Bapu send Maganlal and Chhaganlal, his second 
cousins, and other young men to England to study? 

When Maganlal died, Gandhi wrote in Young India of April 26th, 
1928, ‘He whom I had singled out as heir to my all is no more.’ 
Why this partiality to a second cousin? ‘He closely studied and 
followed my spiritual career,’ Gandhi declared in the same 
obituary, ‘and when I presented to my co-workers brahmacharya 
[continence] as a rule of life even for married men in search of 
Truth, he was the first to perceive the beauty and necessity of the 
practice, and though it cost him to my knowledge a terrific 
struggle, he carried it through to success, taking his wife along 
with him by patient argument instead of imposing his views on 
her . . . He was my hands, my feet and my eyes. 

‘As I am penning these lines,’ Gandhi wrote in a crescendo of 
lament, T hear the sobs of the widow bewailing the death of her 
husband. Little does she realize that I am more widowed than 
she. And but for the living God, I should become a raving maniac 
for the loss of one who was dearer to me than my own sons, who 
never once deceived or failed me. . . .’ 

The Mahatma thought Manilal had deceived him. In 1916, 
Manilal had in his keeping several hundred rupees belonging to 
the ashram, and when he heard that his brother Harilal, who was 
trying to make his way in business in Calcutta, needed money, 
he forwarded the sum to him as a loan. By chance, Harilal’s 

229 


GANDHI IN INDIA 


receipt fell into Gandhi’s hands. The next day, Manilal was 
banished from the ashram and told to go and apprentice himself 
as a hand-spinner and weaver but not to use the Gandhi name. 
‘In addition to this,’ Manilal recounts, ‘father also contemplated 
a fast, but I sat all night entreating him not to do so and in the 
end my prayer was heeded. I left my dear mother and my 
brother Devadas sobbing. Father did not send me away com¬ 
pletely empty-handed. He gave me just sufficient money for my 
train fare and a little extra.’ For two months, Manila! lived 
incognito. Then the Mahatma sent him a letter of introduction 
to G. A. Natesan, the Madras publisher, with whom Manilal 
stayed for seven months. In the letter of introduction, Gandhi 
recommended that Manilal ‘be subjected to discipline and should 
be made to cook his own food and learn spinning’. 

Following this period of penance, Gandhi dispatched Manilal 
to South Africa to edit Indian Opinion. ‘During his lifetime,’ 
Manilal wrote after his father’s assassination, ‘I was able to spend 
a very few years actually with my father. Unlike my other 
brothers I had to live away from him in exile, in South Africa.’ 

Manilal came to India for occasional visits. ‘The longest period 
I was able to spend in India, and most of it with father,’ Manilal 
says, ‘was the whole of 1945 and half of 1946. Those were the 
precious months . . .’ At this time, Manilal noticed that Gandhi’s 
attitude . . . had so vastly changed since the time we were under 
him in our childhood. It seemed to me that he spoilt those near 
him by his extreme love and affection. They had become his 
spoilt children, as it were, and much more so after my mother 
had been called away from his life . . . One of the things that 
struck me was the extreme softness in father’s attitude compared 
with what it was when we four brothers were under him. He was, 
of course, always forgiving though he was a very severe task 
master. But he had grown extremely tolerant, which he was not 
in our time . . . When I saw this, many a time I chafed and said 
to father, “Bapu, you have vastly changed from the time we were 
under you. You never pampered us; I remember how you made 
us do laundry work and chop wood; how you made us to take 
the pick and shovel in the bitterly cold mornings and dig in the 
garden, to cook and to walk miles. And I am surprised to see 
how you now pamper these people around you.” 

230 


GANDHI’S FAMILIES 


‘Bapu would listen and burst out in his usual hearty laughter: 
‘‘Well, children,” he would say, “are you listening to what Manilal 
is saying?” And yet he would love and caress them. 5 

How much sorrow there is in all this for many lost years without 
affection. 

Manilal underwent punishment and banishment yet remained 
a balanced human being. Harilal, however, suffered an inner 
trauma. While his wife lived, he was outwardly normal. But when 
she died in the 1918 influenza epidemic, and when Gandhi 
frowned on his remarriage, Harilal disintegrated completely. He 
took to alcohol and women; he was often seen drunk in public. 
Under the influence of drink, penury and the desire for venge¬ 
ance, he would succumb to the offers of unscrupulous publishers 
and attack his father in print, signing ‘Abdulla 5 , a Moslem name. 
He had become a Moslem. Conversion to Islam, drunkenness 
and profligacy were probably Harilal’s effort to hurt his father. 

Early in the 1920s, Harilal helped to launch a new firm called 
All-India Stores, Limited, and became a director. In 1925, 
Gandhi received a lawyer’s letter on behalf of a client who had 
invested money in the company; it informed the Mahatma that 
correspondence addressed to the company was being returned 
and that the whole thing seemed ‘a bogus affair 5 . The client was 
a Moslem ‘whose respect for Mahatmaji led him to become a 
share-holder 5 . 

Gandhi reproduced the entire letter in Young India of June 18th, 
1925, and appended his reply. 

I do indeed happen to be the father of Harilal M. Gandhi. 
He is my eldest boy, is over thirty-six years old and is father of 
four children, the eldest being nineteen years old. His ideals and 
mine having been discovered over fifteen years ago to be different, 
he has been living separately from me and has not been supported 
by or through me. It has been my invariable rule to regard my 
boys as my friends and equals as soon as they completed their 
sixteen years . . . Harilal . . . was naturally influenced by the 
Western veneer that my life at one time did have. His commercial 
undertakings were totally independent of me. Could I have 
influenced him he would have been associated with me in my 
several public activities and earning at the same time a decent 

231 


GANDHI IN INDIA 


livelihood. But he chose, as he had every right to do, a different 
and independent path. He was and still is ambitious. He wants 
to become rich, and that too, easily. Possibly he has a grievance 
against me that when it was open to me to do so, I did not equip 
him and my other children for careers that lead to wealth and 
fame that wealth brings ... I do not know Harilal’s affairs. He 
meets me occasionally, but I never pry into his affairs. I do not 
know how his affairs stand at present, except that they are in a 
bad way . . . There is much in Harilafs life that I dislike. He 
knows that. But I love him in spite of his faults. The bosom of a 
father will take him in as soon as he seeks entrance . . . Let the 
client’s example be a warning against people being guided by big 
names in their transactions. Men may be good, not necessarily 
their children . . . Caveat emptor. 

Harilal naturally caused his mother endless tortures. Kasturbai 
brought up his four children with a grandmother’s tenderness. In 
the 1930s, she could not control her grief, and wrote Harilal an 
emotional letter; one of his adventures had got into the newspapers. 

My dear son Harilal, I have read that recently in Madras 
policemen found you misbehaving in a state of drunkenness at 
midnight in an open street and took you into custody. Next day 
you were produced before a bench of Magistrates and they fined 
you one rupee. They must have been very good people to treat 
you so leniently. 

Even the Magistrates showed regard for your father in thus 
giving you only nominal punishment. But I have been feeling 
very miserable ever since I heard about this incident. I do not 
know whether you were alone that night or were accompanied by 
some of your friends, but in any case you acted very improperly. 

I do not know what to say to you. I have been pleading with 
you all these long years to hold yourself in check. But yo\i have 
been going from bad to worse. Now you are making my very 
existence impossible. Think of the misery you are causing your 
aged parents in the evening of their lives. 

Your father says nothing to anyone but I know how the shocks 
you are giving him are breaking his heart. You are committing 
a great sin in thus repeatedly hurting our feelings. Though born 
as our son you are indeed behaving like an enemy. 

232 


GANDHI’S FAMILIES 


I am told that in your recent wanderings you have been criti¬ 
cizing and ridiculing your great father. This does not behoove 
such an intelligent boy as you. You little realize that you only 
disgrace yourself by speaking evil of him. He has nothing but 
love in his heart for you. You know that he attaches the greatest 
importance to purity of conduct. But you have never paid any 
heed to advice. Yet he has offered to keep you with him, to feed 
and clothe you and even to nurse you. . . . 

I am a frail old woman unable to stand the anguish you are 
causing. . . . 

You have left no place for me anywhere. For sheer shame, I am 
unable to move about among my friends or strangers. Your 
father always pardons you, but God will not tolerate your 
conduct. . . . 

Every morning I rise with a shudder to think what fresh news of 
disgrace the newspapers will bring. I sometimes wonder where 
you are, where you sleep, what you eat. Perhaps you take for¬ 
bidden food ... I often feel like meeting you. But I do not know 
where to find you. You are my eldest son and nearly fifty years 
old. I am even afraid of approaching you, lest you humiliate me. 
I do not know why you have changed your ancestral religion; 
that is your affair. But I hear that you go about asking innocent 
and ignorant people to follow your example . . . People are liable 
to be led away by the fact that you are your father’s son. You are 
not fit to preach religion. 

Your daughters and son-in-law also bear with increasing diffi¬ 
culty the burden of sorrow your conduct has imposed upon them. 

11 

Gandhi blamed Harilal’s misdeeds on himself. T was a slave of 
my passions when Harilal was conceived’; T led a carnal and 
luxurious life during Harilal’s childhood,’ he would say. But the 
cause of Harilal’s fall could not have been the natural impulses 
which led to his birth and to that of his brothers. Somewhere deep 
in Gandhi’s psyche there was apparently a protest against having 
children. 

Yet Gandhi loved children and was never as happy as when he 
played with them. He took time off to play with the youngsters 
and babies in the ashram. Once, during the week I spent with 
Gandhi at Sevagram in 1942, he led me to a hut used by a patient 

233 


GANDHI IN INDIA 


of his and then to a neighbouring hut which was empty but for a 
red wooden cradle. The mother lifted the baby out of the cradle 
as Gandhi approached. He patted the baby’s cheeks and said, 
‘She is not my patient, she is my relaxation.’ The baby reacted 
gleefully and he smacked and pinched it playfully. 

There is a delightful photograph showing Gandhi rubbing noses 
with a babe in arms. He would amuse the children of the ashram 
by making funny faces at them and directing funny remarks to them. 

Horace Alexander, of the British Society of Friends, who spent 
years in India and much time with Gandhi, records his first view 
of the Mahatma. He arrived at Sabarmati one afternoon in 
March 1928. ‘After a rest,’ Alexander writes, ‘I went to evening 
prayers. When all were assembled, he came walking quickly and 
sat down in the centre and the chanting began. When the prayers 
were over, each member of the ashram gave his or her report on 
the amount of spinning done. This lasted for fifteen or twenty 
minutes and was rather tedious. I noticed that the children ran 
playfully around the Mahatma while this went on and he thrust 
out his hand as if to catch them as they ran past. Some years later, 
one of these children, now a grown-up man, told me how difficult 
he had found it, as he grew up, to realize that the kind old man, 
so simple and friendly, of his childhood days, was the same as the 
Mahatma. . . .’ 

Gandhi believed in the goodness of children. ‘Children are 
innocent, loving and benevolent by nature,’ he wrote in a letter 
to the boys and girls of the ashram. ‘Evil comes in only when they 
become older.’ 

Life at Sabarmati Ashram and, after 1932, at Sevagram in 
central India, was serene, simple, joyous and unconstrained. 
Nobody stood in awe of Gandhi. Until he was too old, he sat in 
the scullery every morning with the ashramites peeling potatoes; 
he did his share of other chores as well. Petty frictions and rival-' 
ries were not absent even in this community of ascetics. There 
was jealousy for the favour of the Mahatma. He usually succeeded 
in being above that battle too, but bulletins of its progress came 
to his attention. In fact, few details of the life and work of the 
inmates remained hidden from his shrewd ken. He soothed, 
smoothed and arbitrated impartially. 

Gandhi met and expected everybody in the ashram to meet 

234 


GANDHI’S FAMILIES 


certain rigid requirements: absolute personal and civic cleanli¬ 
ness, undeviating punctuality and physical labour plus one hour 
or at least thirty minutes a day of spinning. He denounced the 
‘divorce between intelligence and labour’. Manual work was for 
him a means of identification with working India, with the work¬ 
ing world. His compulsion to economize, though instinctive, also 
stemmed from his conscious concern for the hundreds of millions 
who valued a button, a nail and a fraction of a penny. 

Gandhi once wrote out a telegram to G. V. Mavalankar, his 
lawyer, who later became Speaker of the Constituent Assembly. 
But on learning that there was an extra charge per word because 
it was a holiday he posted the telegram. 

Gandhi was famous for his postcards. Whenever the size and 
nature of the communication permitted he put it on a postcard 
instead of into a letter. He frequently wrote letters on the reverse 
side of mimeographed announcements. Any odd piece of scrap 
paper became an ashram-made envelope. His secretaries’ notes 
and his own memoranda were always written on the backs of 
letters received from outside. For a brief note he once wrote 
to New York he had obviously taken a larger bit of stationery than 
necessary and carefully torn off the excess. 

Miss Slade, daughter of Sir Edmund Slade, a British admiral, 
who joined Gandhi’s ashram in 1925 and lived there for many 
years until she founded one of her own on the banks of the sacred 
Ganges, tells how Gandhi lost the little pencil stump he had been 
cherishing. The staff hunted for the lost treasure but in vain. 
Somebody brought him a new pencil. No, he insisted that they 
continue the search for the stump until they recovered it. ‘Bapu 
. . . received it with a beaming smile.’ 

Gandhi’s insistence on economy, cleanliness, punctuality and 
spinning grew greater, if anything, as he grew older. With all his 
strictness about the personal conduct of his co-workers, however, 
he was completely tolerant towards their thinking. Some of his 
most intimate political collaborators and some who stayed long 
in the ashram, did not, to his knowledge, believe in non-violence, 
or in Qod, or in loving the British or the Moslems. Mrdulla 
Sarabhai, for instance, said to him, T am not a Gandhian,’ but he 
laughed and may have smacked her face affectionately. Nobody 
had to toe a Gandhian ‘party line’. There was none. 

235 


GANDHI IN INDIA 


Gandhi accepted people as they were. Aware of his own defects, 
how could he expect perfection in others? He believed in the 
educational and curative value of time and good deeds. 

Gandhi took from a person, a book, a religion and a situation 
that which was congenial to him and discarded the rest. He 
refused to see the bad in people. He often changed human beings 
by regarding them not as what they were but as though they 
were what they wished to be, and as though the good in them 
was all of them. 

His friends knew he forgave them, therefore they frankly con¬ 
fessed. If they hid things from him it was because he would blame 
himself for their shortcomings. He encouraged familiarity; it 
never bred contempt. It fostered love. He enjoyed banter even 
if the point pierced him. A few weeks before Gandhi was arrested 
in March 1922, Rajagopalachari, already in jail, wrote the 
Mahatma a letter. He said he was ‘completely shut out from all 
politics, news and newspapers. What an ideal condition which I 
know you are envying ... It took me till now to get rid of the 
boils. I am now quite free from the trouble. It must horrify you 
to learn that I willingly underwent five injections of vaccine for 
these boils. . . [Gandhi called vaccine ‘filthy 5 .] Your eyes would 
flow with delight if you saw me here in my solitary cell spinning, 
spinning not as a task imposed by a tyrant faddist, but with 
pleasure 5 . The ‘tyrant faddist 5 printed the letter as the first item 
in Young India of February 9th, 1922. 

Sycophancy repelled Gandhi. He respected and befriended his 
fiercest antagonists. Though pleased to make a convert, he was 
hot flattered by loud partisans. He encouraged dissent; he helped 
dissenters. Opponents found comfort in the knowledge that he 
could reverse himself on even the most important political issue 
in order to give the alternative policy a fair trial. 

Such democratic liberalism made it possible for many members 
of his political family, some of whom had joined reluctantly in the 
1921-22 non-c6-operation campaign, to lay plans for co-operation 
when Gandhi was sentenced on March 18th, 1922, to six years 5 
imprisonment. He had prohibited nothing when he entered 
prison. From his cell his only injunction was ‘peace, non-violence, 
suffering 5 . Congress, therefore, was free to flounder and meander 
in confusion. 

236 


 

