CHAPTER IX 


GANDHI ENTERS POLITICS 

M ahatma Gandhi always resisted politics. He 
regarded his South African work as moral and social, 
therefore religious. After his return to India in 1915 he 
attended annual sessions of the Congress, but his public activity 
at such assemblies was usually limited to moving a resolution in 
support of the Indians in South Africa. Moreover, he regarded 
the Congress as the unofficial parliament of India in which all 
political trends and parties were, or could be, represented. 

To join one party dedicated to a political goal meant a separa¬ 
tion from other parties, and Gandhi disliked anything divisive. 
He had strong beliefs but no dogmas. 

Gandhi’s ‘readiness to take up the cudgels on behalf of any 
individual or class whom he regarded as being oppressed’, reads a 
discerning remark in a 1919 British government publication, ‘has 
endeared him to the masses of the country’. He preferred the 
warm bond of human affection to the cold tongue of a party 
programme. 

Yet in 1920 Gandhi joined the All-India Home Rule League 
and became its president. 

Politics can probably be defined as competition for power. It 
implies an effort to weaken, destroy, or assume the power of those 
in power. Gandhi did not wish to weaken, destroy, or supplant 
Smuts in South Africa. But by becoming leader of the All-India 
Home Rule League, Gandhi did accept the goal of Indian self- 
government instead of government by England. The Congress 
did not yet advocate independence. 

Gandhi’s early steps in politics were uncertain. Indeed, he 
remained politically unpredictable throughout life because his 
mind was a battlefield on which caution contended with passion. 
Ready to die fighting for a principle, -he preferred to arbitrate and 
compromise. He was a natural fighter and a born peacemaker. 

Gandhi’s criteria were not the usual criteria of politics. His 
leadership did not depend on victories. He did not have to save 

206 


GANDHI ENTERS POLITICS 

‘face’. In the autobiography, Gandhi tells of incidents that could 
not have been known but for him, how he visited a brothel, ate 
meat in stealth, maltreated his wife, etc. Truth had to be the whole 
truth or it wasn’t true. Indians, whom suffering has made sus¬ 
picious, could not suspect Gandhi because he told them every¬ 
thing; he hated secrets; he was his own harshest critic. He could 
admit blunders, ‘Himalayan 5 and less, because he did not claim 
infallibility or superiority. 

Gandhi’s critics complained that he would withdraw from a 
political battle before all his forces had been brought to bear on 
the enemy and, sometimes, when success appeared imminent. 
But what success? His standards of success were moral and 
religious. They gave his politics the only consistency and con¬ 
tinuity they had. 

The road by which Gandhi arrived at the centre of the Indian 
political world was tortuous. It started at Jallianwalla Bagh; no 
matter where he went the echo of General Dyer’s fusillade pursued 
him. Following the massacre, Gandhi asked permission to visit 
the Punjab. He was rebuffed. He pressed his case. Finally, the 
Viceroy telegraphed him that he could go after October 17th, 
1919. The Mahatma’s reception at Lahore and other cities was 
unprecedented in size and warmth. ‘The seething mass of 
humanity’, he wrote, ‘was delirious with joy.’ He had become a 
symbol of national resistance to the foreign evil. 

In the Punjab, Gandhi assisted Indian leaders, among them 
Motilal Nehru, a veteran Congressman and father of Jawaharlal, 
in the conduct of an independent inquiry into the Jallianwalla 
Bagh massacre. He drafted the report; his colleagues felt he would 
be without bias. 

While thus engaged, Gandhi received an invitation to attend 
a Moslem conference in Delhi. He arrived there November 24th, 
1919. The Armistice which ended the first World War had been 
signed on November 1 ith, 1918. It sealed the defeat of Turkey, a 
Moslem country, and of the Turkish Sultan, who, in addition to 
being a temporal ruler, was the Caliph or religious head of all 
Islam. 

Pan-Islamism has never been a mass movement in India or 
elsewhere. The fate of the Caliph nevertheless agitated the 
Moslems in India. The Moslem leaders, notably Mohamed and 

207 


GANDHI IN INDIA 


Shaukat Ali, the brothers who were interned by the British during 
the war, Jinnah, Asaf Ali and Maulana Abul Kalam Azad had 
hoped that Indian interest in the Caliph would at least induce 
England to moderate the peace terms imposed on Turkey. But 
when it became obvious that the Turks would be shorn of their 
imperial possessions, and that the Sultan himself would be deposed, 
concern for the Caliph, added to distaste for the British, produced 
a powerful Caliphate or, as it is always known in India, Khilafat 
movement. 

The Moslem conference in Delhi, in November 1919, which 
Gandhi attended, was a Khilafat meeting. Many Hindus were 
present. This period was the honeymoon of Hindu-Moslem politi¬ 
cal friendship. The letter of invitation, which reached Gandhi in 
Lahore, said cow protection as well as the Caliph would be dis¬ 
cussed. Gandhi demurred. He told the conference that if, in 
deference to Hindu regard for the cow as a sacred animal, 
Mohammedans wanted to desist from slaughtering it, they should 
do so irrespective of the Hindu attitude towards the Khilafat 
question. Similarly, if Hindus believed they ought to support 
Moslems on behalf of the Caliph they should, but not in the 
expectation of a bargain on cow protection. The cow, therefore, 
was removed from the agenda. 

The conference debated what to do; resolutions condemning 
British harshness towards Turkey were not enough. A boycott 
of British textiles was suggested. But how could buyers distinguish 
British from other foreign textiles, and might not British goods be 
sold as Japanese or Italian or Belgian? Perhaps all imported 
cloth should be boycotted. Could India produce sufficient 
textiles to supply the domestic market? 

Gandhi sat on the platform searching his mind for a plan of 
action. He was looking for a programme and then for a word that 
would be alike a slogan and a perfect summary of that programme. 
Finally, he found it, and when he was called on to speak he said, 
‘Non-co-operation.’ Indians could not simultaneously oppose the 
Government and work with it. To boycott British exports was 
inadequate; they must boycott British schools, British courts, 
British jobs, British honours; they must non-co-operate. 

‘Non-co-operation’ became the name of an epoch in the life of 
India and of Gandhi. Non-co-operation was negative enough to 

208 


GANDHI ENTERS POLITICS 

be peaceful but positive enough to be effective. It entailed denial, 
renunciation and self-discipline. It was training for self-rule. 

Gandhi’s advice to the Moslem conference was contingent on 
the final peace terms dictated to Turkey. If they were as onerous 
as expected and destroyed the status of the Caliph, then India 
would non-co-operate. Thus Gandhi left a loophole for a modifica¬ 
tion of British policy vis-a-vis the Turks. 

The annual session of Congress took place in the last week of 
that year, 1919 — at Amritsar. The fact that the Government 
allowed it to meet near Jallianwalla Bagh and that the Ali brothers 
were released on the eve of the session so that they could come 
straight to it from jail, fed Gandhi’s congenital optimism. 

By design or coincidence, the King-Emperor announced the 
much-heralded Montagu-Chelmsford reforms (‘A new era is 
opening,’ the King declared) the day before Congress met. 
The announcement, Gandhi asserted, ‘was not wholly satisfactory 
even to me and was unsatisfactory to everyone else’; nevertheless, 
he favoured acceptance. In November, in Delhi, he urged non- 
co-operation. In December, in Amritsar, he favoured co¬ 
operation. 

The Montagu-Chelmsford reforms, approved by the British 
House of Commons as ‘The Government of India Act of 1919’ 
became the new Constitution of India on February 9th, 1921. 
The British called the new system ‘Dyarchy’; mon-archy, the 
rule of one — Great Britain — became dy-archy, the rule of two — 
Great Britain and India. Indians, however, had no power in the 
federal government and none was contemplated. In the provinces, 
Indian ministers would administer agriculture, industries, educa¬ 
tion, health, excise, roads, buildings, etc., but the British governor 
retained complete control of finance and police and he could over¬ 
ride any decision of the Indian ministers and of the Indian legis¬ 
lature. Indian participation in the Civil Service was increased 
and promises of further increases were made. But Indians decided 
that, on the whole, dyarchy was still the British monarchy. 

Nevertheless, Gandhi took kindly to the King’s proclamation of 
the impending constitutional changes and wanted the 1919 
Amritsar Congress to accept them. He trusted Britain’s good 
intentions. ‘To trust is a virtue,’ he said. ‘It is weakness that 
begets distrust.’ But when he heard that C. R. Das, the famous 

209 


GANDHI IN INDIA 


Bengal nationalist, Jinnah and Tilak were opposed, he shrank 
from opposing such well-tried and universally revered leaders. ‘I 
tried to run away from the Congress, 5 Gandhi reveals in his 
autobiography. 

Gandhi was prevailed upon to stay, for he had become the rock 
on which Congress rested. The session was attended by 7031 
delegates, an unprecedented number, and many hailed from farms 
and city shops. Gandhi was their idol. They felt closer to him 
than to the renowned lawyers. Only Tilak could still question 
Gandhi’s sway. 

Tilak advocated acceptance of the Montagu-Chelmsford 
reforms with a view to proving their inadequacy. 

This was not the Gandhian way. If you accepted something, 
you had to do so without mental reservations and give it a fair 
trial. If you did not want it, you had to fight it no matter who 
else wanted it. 

The delegates supported Gandhi. But he disliked defeating 
Tilak. In a dramatic moment, Gandhi turned to Tilak who was 
sitting on the platform. Gandhi was wearing a small cap of white 
homespun that resembled an aviator’s cap; it later became known 
as the ‘Gandhi Cap 5 of Indian nationalists. Gandhi dropped his 
cap on the ground as a gesture of obeisance and pleaded with 
Tilak to approve a compromise. Tilak succumbed. 

The compromise thanked Montagu for his part in the reforms 
and undertook to co-operate with the new dyarchy scheme in 
such a manner as to expand it into full parliamentary govern¬ 
ment, but Lord Chelmsford, who had exonerated General Dyer, 
was condemned for mismanaging Indian affairs and his recall was 
demanded. Another resolution denounced British and Indian 
violence in the Punjab. A third asked for the repeal of the 
Rowlatt acts. 

However, the youth and the new elements activized by Gandhi 
had expected much faster post-war progress towards self-govern¬ 
ment; delicately balanced Congress resolutions disappointed them. 
High post-war prices were pressing additional millions down to 
starvation level. The Moslems now knew that there would be no 
amelioration of Turkey’s fate; Montagu had sincerely tried, hence 
the Amritsar Congress tribute to him, but the British Cabinet said 
no. In England, moreover, Dyer had found many friends; some 

210 


GANDHI ENTERS POLITICS 


collected a large purse for him. Gandhi did not want Dyer 
punished but he resented the fact that Dyer kept his pension. 
The Hunter Report fully demonstrated Dyer’s guilt yet recom¬ 
mended no measures against the Dyerism of British rulers in India, 

Three months after Gandhi had approved the Montagu- 
Chelmsford dyarchy reforms at the Amritsar Congress session, 
these developments turned him against them. 

The Amritsar session was merely a temporary triumph of 
Gandhian caution. The unmistakable trend of the country was 
towards non-co-operation. Events moved fast. In April 1920, 
Gandhi was elected president of the Home Rule League. On 
June 30th, guided by Gandhi, the Khilafat movement sanctioned 
the policy of non-co-operation. Gandhi thereupon wrote to the 
Viceroy, T have advised my Moslem friends to withdraw their 
support from Your Excellency’s Government and advised the 
Hindus to join them.’ The Viceroy replied that non-co-operation 
was ‘the most foolish of all foolish schemes’. All Chelmsford’s 
power, however, did not suffice to check it. Gandhi announced 
that non-co-operation would commence on August 1st, 1920, to 
be preceded by fasting and prayer on July 31st. That day Tilak 
died. 

With Tilak gone, Gandhi was the undisputed leader of Congress. 
A special session of Congress, which met at Calcutta between 
September 4th and 9th, 1920, approved the non-co-operation 
movement. The annual convention at Nagpur, central India, in 
December, unanimously confirmed this approval; Gandhi then 
offered a resolution making the goal of Congress Swaraj, or self- 
rule, within the British Empire if possible or outside it if necessary. 
Mr. Jinnah, and others, preferred home-rule within the Empire. 
They lost. Jinnah lost interest in Congress. Gandhi politics were 
Congress politics. 

The Nagpur session adopted a new Congress constitution 
drafted by Gandhi. Congress had been a golden dome without 
underpinnings. Gandhi converted it into a democratic mass 
organization with village units, city district units, provincial 
sections, an All-India Congress Committee (A.I.C.C.) of 350 
members which made policy, and a Working, or Executive, 
Committee of fifteen. 

Twenty thousand people attended the Nagpur session; it passed 


o 


M.G. 


21 I 


GANDHI IN INDIA 


resolutions for the removal of untouchability, the revival of hand¬ 
spinning and hand-weaving, and the collection of a crore (or ten 
million) of rupees as a Tilak Memorial Fund. 

European clothes were less in evidence at Calcutta and Nagpur 
than at any previous Congress meeting. Less English was spoken, 
and more Hindustani. Middle-class delegates predominated. 
India’s poor were there too. The men with great reputations and 
great fortunes no longer monopolized the limelight. Some drifted 
away from Congress, but Gandhi’s magnetism held many of them; 
they realized that he had a power over the people to which they 
never even aspired. 

Gandhi was middle caste and middle class. He entered politics 
just as large numbers of awakened middle-class Indians began to 
yearn for national freedom. He and they entered politics together. 

Everything in Gandhi’s personality and record helped the 
people to identify themselves with him and venerate him. Even 
sceptics were captivated by his courage, indestructible vitality, 
good humour, near-toothless smile, selflessness, self-confidence 
and unlimited faith in people. 

In a nation that was powerless, Gandhi became a symbol of 
strength. In a nation of slaves, he behaved like a free man. Finally, 
he was a man of God. 

His idea of non-co-operation had an instantaneous, mighty 
appeal because it was so simple: You must not reinforce the walls 
of the prison that encloses you, you must not forge the fetters that 
will bind you. He had promised at the Nagpur Congress session 
in December 1920, that if India non-co-operated non-violently, 
self-government would come within twelve months. He carried 
this message to the country. He made non-co-operation so per¬ 
sonal as to give each individual the impression that unless he non- 
co-operated he would delay Swaraj. Gandhi himself returned to 
the Viceroy his two South African war medals and his Kaiser-i- 
Hind gold medal for humanitarian work in South Africa. In the 
accompanying letter, Gandhi said, T can retain neither respect 
nor affection for a government which has been moving from 
wrong to wrong in order to defend its immorality.’ Many Indians 
renounced their British titles and their decorations. Motilal 
Nehru abandoned his lucrative law practice, discontinued the use 
of alcohol and became a total non-co-operator. His son Jawahar- 

212 


GANDHI ENTERS POLITICS 

lal, C. R. Das, the leader of the Calcutta bar, Vallabhbhai Patel, 
and thousands of others likewise left the British courts for ever. 

Thousands of students dropped their professional studies. The 
Tilak Memorial Fund benefited from the frenzy of self-sacrifice 
that seized rich and poor; it was soon oversubscribed. Money was 
available for the establishment of a chain of permanent Indian 
institutions of higher learning. 

Students, teachers and professional men and women left the 
cities to go into the villages and teach literacy and non-co-opera¬ 
tion. For the peasant, non-co-operation meant non-payment of 
taxes and no use of intoxicating liquors from which the govern¬ 
ment derived a large revenue. 

Gandhi toured the country incessantly, indefatigably, in torrid, 
humid weather, addressing mammoth mass meetings of a hundred 
thousand and more persons who, in those pre-microphone days, 
could only hope to be reached by his spirit. For seven months he 
travelled in hot, uncomfortable trains which were besieged at all 
day and night stops by clamouring multitudes who demanded a 
view of the Mahatma. The inhabitants of one backwoods area 
sent word that if Gandhi’s train did not halt at their tiny station 
they would lie down on the tracks and be run over by it. The train 
did stop there at midnight, and when Gandhi, aroused from deep 
sleep, appeared, the crowd, until then boisterous, sank to their 
knees on the railway platform and wept. 

During those seven strenuous months the Mahatma took three 
meals a day; each consisted of sixteen ounces of goat’s milk, three 
slices of toast or bread, two oranges, and a score of grapes or raisins. 

In the provinces of Assam, Bengal and Madras, Gandhi and 
Mohamed Ali, the younger of the Ali brothers, travelled together 
and addressed meetings together. They told every meeting that 
if they wanted India to rule herself they had to give up foreign 
clothing. The audience would burst into applause. At that 
moment, Gandhi would ask the people to take off the foreign 
clothing they were wearing and put it on a heap which he would 
presently set on fire. In some places, men stripped themselves 
naked. The apparel would be passed to a spot near the dais, and 
when all the hats, coats, shirts, trousers, underwear, socks and 
shoes had been heaped high, Gandhi set a match to them. 

As the flames ate their way through the imported goods, Gandhi 

213 


GANDHI IN INDIA 


would tell his audiences that they must not substitute Indian mill 
products for foreign manufactures; they must learn to spin and 
weave. Gandhi took to spinning half an hour a day, usually before 
the midday meal, and required all his associates to do likewise. 
Before long, few Indians dared to come into his presence wearing 
anything but homespun. 

Daily spinning, Gandhi said, was a ‘sacrament’ and would turn 
the spinner’s mind ‘Godward’. Gandhi had a rosary but he never 
used it except perhaps at night when he watched the stars in 
moments of sleeplessness. He found rhythm, instead, in the regular 
hum of the charka and in the steady chanting of ‘Rama, Rama, 
Rama, Rama, Rama (God)’. 

Gandhi’s long propaganda circuit for non-co-operation had all 
the attributes of religious revivalism. Yet wherever he went he 
talked quietly to small groups about the launching of branch Con¬ 
gress organizations. He designed a Congress flag with a charka 
or spinning wheel in the centre. He recruited for the Volunteers 
whose teen-age members, dressed in civilian uniform, kept order 
at meetings. And he regularly wrote several articles for each issue 
of Young India , an English-language weekly, and Navajivan , a 
Gujarati weekly. Founded in 1919, they were Gandhi’s personal 
organs; neither took advertisements; both were published in 
Ahmedabad. 

The year was nearing its close. Gandhi had promised the nation 
Swaraj in 1921. But self-rule was nowhere in sight. 

One afternoon in September, Gandhi and Mohammed Ali were 
walking to a meeting. Two British officers and some soldiers 
stepped up and arrested Mohamed Ali. Shortly thereafter, 
Mohamed’s older brother Shaukat was arrested. Both were sen¬ 
tenced to two years’ imprisonment for trying to dissuade Moslems 
from serving in the British Army. Before his arrest, Mohamed Ali 
had made plans to proceed to the Malabar coast in west India 
where the Moplahs, a Moslem community, had rebelled against 
the Government; the affair had provoked Hindu-Moslem riots. 

Mohamed Ali’s arrest and the outburst of intercommunity 
violence in Malabar upset Gandhi deeply. In his concept, the 
achievement of Swaraj depended primarily on Hindu-Moslem 
friendship. 

His Mohammedan partner gone, Gandhi strained all the more 

214 


GANDHI ENTERS POLITICS 

for results. Spinning became an obsession. He urged it with 
mounting persistence. In September 1921, he emphasized his 
devotion to homespun cotton and to simplicity by discarding, for 
all time, the cap he had worn, the sleeveless jacket or waistcoat, 
and the flowing dhoti or loose trousers, and adopted the loincloth 
as his sole garment. In addition, he carried a homespun bag for 
writing equipment, the rosary and a few necessities, possibly some 
nuts or dried fruit. This was his ‘mendicant’s garb’. 

Thus attired, to the dismay and amusement of some of his 
associates, he arrived in Bombay for decisive consultations with 
the political leaders of the country. On October 5th, the Congress 
Working Committee resolved that ‘it is the duty of every Indian 
solider and civilian to sever his connections with the Government 
and find some other means of livelihood’. This was a summons to 
desertion from the army. Congress thus reiterated the seditious 
statement for which the Ali brothers had been incarcerated. 
Congress leaders were instructed to return to their districts and 
practise individual civil disobedience against the Government. 

Into this tense situation Britain thrust the Prince of Wales, 
subsequently King Edward VIII and the Duke of Windsor. 
India was in no mood for glamour or demonstrations of loyalty. 
Congress boycotted his tour. He moved through deserted city 
streets and amidst signs of hostility. In Bombay, those who came 
out to welcome the Prince were attacked, and bloody riots ensued. 
Gandhi undertook a fast till the disturbances ended. He fasted 
five days. 

The Government now began to round up political leaders and 
their followers. C. R. Das, Motilal Nehru, Lajpat Rai and hundreds 
of other leading Congressmen were arrested. When the annual 
session of Congress convened in Ahmedabad, in December 1921, 
twenty thousand Indians had been jailed for civil disobedience 
and sedition. The session elected Gandhi ‘the sole executive 
authority of the Congress’. 

During December 1921 and January 1922, ten thousand more 
Indians were thrown into prison for political offences. In several 
provinces the peasants spontaneously began no-tax movements. 
Indians in government offices left their jobs. 

The Government responded with increased severity. Citing in¬ 
stances of official action, Gandhi called it ‘worse than martial law’ 

215 


GANDHI IN INDIA 


and characterized the repression as ‘savage, because it is wooden, 
wild, uncultivated, cruel’. Flogging in prison and out was a daily 
occurrence. 

The year 1921 had passed, but no Swaraj. Gandhi was living 
at his ashram in Sabarmati, no doubt wondering what to do. 
He rarely laid long-range plans; he submitted to sudden inspira¬ 
tions. There was dissension in Congress ranks; many ridiculed the 
Mahatma’s emphasis on temperance, homespun and verbal 
defiance of the State. They demanded action. 

Some nationalists yearned for rebellion. But Gandhi believed 
in peace even at the price of defeat, though not at the price of 
cowardice. ‘Where there is only a choice between cowardice and 
violence,’ he had written in Young India of August nth, 1920, ‘I 
would advise violence.’ But there was no cowardice. Non¬ 
violence required more bravery than violence, and ‘forgiveness is 
more manly than punishment’. Indians ‘have better work to do, 
a better mission to deliver to the world’ than the punishment of 
the Dyers. ‘Non-violence,’ he said, ‘is the law of our species as 
violence is the law of the brute. 

‘If India takes up the doctrine of the sword,’ he declared, ‘she 
may gain momentary victory, but then India will cease to be the 
pride of my heart . . . My religion has no geographical limits. If 
I have a living faith in it, it will transcend my love for India her¬ 
self.’ He was not an uncritical my-country-right-or-wrong-my- 
country nationalist. 

Lord Reading, the new Viceroy, had arrived in India on 
April 2nd, 1921. He had absolute power over the police and the 
army. Congress had made Gandhi its dictator. One word from 
the Mahatma would have started a conflagration compared with 
which the 1857 Mutiny would have seemed like a minor affair. 

Reading was a Jew who, after a remarkable career at the 
Bar, became in turn Cabinet Minister, Lord Chief Justice of 
England, Ambassador to Washington, and now Viceroy. Shortly 
after his installation at New Delhi, he indicated a desire to 
talk with Gandhi. ‘Rather exciting days lately,’ Reading wrote 
to his son. ‘... Intermediaries have stepped in and seen me with 
a view to bringing about a meeting with Gandhi.’ 

‘He certainly is a wonderful person,’ Reading said of the rebel 
he had never met. 


216 


GANDHI ENTERS POLITICS 


Gandhi accepted the Viceroy’s invitation. Many Indians ob¬ 
jected: Had he become a co-operator, they asked. ‘We may attack 
measures and systems,’ Gandhi replied. ‘We may not, we must 
not attack men. Imperfect ourselves, we must be tender towards 
others and be slow to impute motives. I therefore gladly seized 
the opportunity of waiting upon His Excellency. . . .’ 

Reading’s eager anticipation to see Gandhi was amply rewarded. 
In the latter part of May, he wrote to his son, he had six talks with 
the Mahatma, ‘the first of four hours and a half, the second of 
three hours, the third of an hour and a half, the fourth of an hour 
and a half, the fifth of an hour and a half, and the sixth of three- 
quarters of an hour; I have had many opportunities of judging 
him. 5 

What did Reading think of Gandhi after thirteen hours of con¬ 
versation? ‘There is nothing striking about his appearance,’ he 
informed his son. ‘He came ... in a white dhoti [loincloth] and 
cap woven on a spinning wheel, with bare feet and legs, and my 
first impression on seeing him ushered into the room was that 
there was nothing to arrest attention in his appearance, and that 
I should have passed him by in the street without a second look 
at him. When he talks, the impression is different. He is direct, 
and expresses himself well in excellent English with a fine appre¬ 
ciation of the value of the words he uses. There is no hesitation 
about him and there is a ring of sincerity in all that he utters, save 
when discussing some political questions. His religious views are, 
I believe, genuinely held, and he is convinced to a point almost 
bordering on fanaticism that non-violence and love will give India 
its independence and enable it to withstand the British govern¬ 
ment. His religious and moral views are admirable and indeed 
are on a remarkably high altitude, though I must confess that I 
find it difficult to understand his practice of them in politics . . . 
Our conversations were of the frankest; he was supremely cour¬ 
teous with manners of distinction . . . He held in every way to his 
word in the various discussions we had.’ 

It is not surprising that Reading failed to understand Gandhi’s 
politics. The Mahatma explained to the Viceroy how he expected 
to defeat Great Britain. ‘Ours’, he said he told Reading, ‘is a 
religious movement designed to purge Indian political life of cor¬ 
ruption, deceit, terrorism and the incubus of white supremacy.’ 

217 


GANDHI IN INDIA 


The major task was to purify India; England’s expulsion would 
come as a by-product. Therefore Indians would non-co-operate 
non-violently. Reading disapproved. 

Many Indians disapproved. To Indians, however, the Mahatma 
was indispensable, and because he was adamant ‘to a point almost 
bordering on fanaticism’, even the Indian champions of violence 
acquiesced in his non-violence. But why not, they demanded, 
launch non-violent civil disobedience campaigns simultaneously 
throughout India? A resolution in support of this measure was 
actually adopted by the All-India Congress Committee meeting 
in Delhi on November 4th, 1921, but Gandhi exacted a promise 
from all leaders not to move without his consent. 

Gandhi preferred to try mass civil disobedience in one area, 
and he chose the county of Bardoli, population 87,000, near 
Bombay, where he could personally supervise the experiment. 
On February 1st, 1922, Gandhi informed Reading of this plan. 

Why did the Mahatma seek to paralyse the British administra¬ 
tion in only one limited territory of 137 tiny villages, thus making 
himself an easy target for repression, when he might have done the 
same thing in all provinces and added to the discomfiture of the 
Government or perhaps even brought it to terms? 

Gandhi did not believe that civil disobedience, properly con¬ 
ducted, could be defeated. What did it matter whether the 
Government was coping with a hundred thousand civil resisters or a 
hundred million? Could it kill the hundred thousand, or jail them? 

Gandhi, moreover, was not contemplating a fight to the finish 
with the British Empire. He knew that such a struggle would be 
violent and prolonged, and on both sides it might lift into com¬ 
manding posts men with the least scruples and the greatest 
capacity for hatred, cruelty, dishonesty and dictatorship. No 
matter who won the contest, both countries and the world would 
have lost. 

At the Ahmedabad Congress session in December 1921, 
Gandhi had appealed to the British government ‘in all humility 5 : 
‘No matter what you do,’ he said, ‘no matter how you repress us, 
we shall one day wring reluctant repentance from you; and we 
ask you to think betimes, and take care what you are doing, and 
see that you do not make the three hundred millions of India your 
eternal enemies. 5 


218 


GANDHI ENTERS POLITICS 


It was because of this spirit that Gandhi chose to work in the 
Bardoli test tube. A united, unrestrained, self-disciplined Bardoli, 
peaceful but not co-operating with British administration, would 
impress on the people of Great Britain the unpardonable horror 
of government by massacre, and might induce them to grant India 
a fuller measure of independence than they now thought Indians 
deserved or could wisely use. Gandhi always endeavoured to win, 
convert and convince the adversary, not wrestle with him in a 
pool of blood. Bardoli was ready for civil disobedience. 

But on February 5th something happened in the United Pro¬ 
vinces, in Chauri Chaura, eight hundred miles from Bardoli. In 
that small town, an Indian mob committed murder. There had 
been a legal procession, Gandhi reported in Young India of Febru¬ 
ary 16th, 1921. ‘But when the procession had passed, the stragglers 
were interfered with and abused by the constables. The former 
cried out for help. The mob returned. The constables opened fire. 
The little ammunition they had was exhausted and they retired 
to the Thana [city hall] for safety. The mob, my informant tells 
me, therefore set fire to the Thana. The self-imprisoned con¬ 
stables had to come out for dear life and as they did so they were 
hacked to pieces and the mangled remains were thrown into the 
raging flames.’ 

The news of this atrocity reached Gandhi in Bardoli on Febru¬ 
ary 8th, and it made him sick and sad. Violence upset him 
physically and psychologically. ‘No provocation,’ he exclaimed, 
‘can possibly justify brutal murder of men who had been rendered 
defenceless and who had virtually thrown themselves on the mercy 
of the mob.’ 

It was a ‘bad augury’. 

‘Suppose,’ he asked, ‘the non-violent disobedience of Bardoli 
was permitted by God to succeed and the Government had abdi¬ 
cated in favour of the victors of Bardoli, who would control the 
unruly elements that must be expected to perpetuate inhumanity 
upon due provocation?’ He was not sure that he could. 

He accordingly suspended the campaign in Bardoli and can¬ 
celled any defiance of the Government anywhere in India. ‘Let 
the opponent glory in our humiliation or so-called defeat,’ he 
exclaimed. ‘It is better to be charged with cowardice and weak¬ 
ness than to be guilty of denial of our oath and to sin against God. 

219 


GANDHI IN INDIA 


It is a million times better to appear untrue before the world than 
to be untrue to ourselves. 5 

Some members of the Congress Working Committee disagreed 
with Gandhi’s move. He saw the justice of their point of view. ‘The 
drastic reversal of practically the whole of the aggressive pro¬ 
gramme may be politically unsound and unwise, 5 he affirmed, 
‘but there is no doubt that it is religiously sound. 5 And when 
Gandhi took a religious stand nobody could shake him. Chauri 
Chaura, he said, ‘shows the way India may easily go, if drastic 
precautions be not taken 5 . Congress would have to educate itself 
and educate the people. As for himself, ‘I must undergo personal 
cleansing. I must become a fitter instrument able to register the 
slightest variation in the moral atmosphere about me. 5 He fasted 
for five days. 

Meanwhile a sharp struggle was taking place behind the British 
scenes. It is described by Lord Reading’s son and biographer who 
had at his disposal his father’s private letters and unpublished 
state papers. Official demands had been made for Gandhi’s 
arrest. ‘The Viceroy 5 , the biography reads, ‘was indeed far from 
dismissing as unfounded the opinion held by many competent 
observers, notably Sir George [later Lord] Lloyd [Governor of 
Bombay], that Mr. Gandhi’s preaching of non-violence was no 
more than a cloak for plans aimed at an ultimate revolution by 
violence. Sir George would have had Mr. Gandhi arrested at 
once, but Lord Reading, as always, opposed arrest for mere 
speech-making, dangerous as the speeches might be, and awaited 
some definite act. “I am quite prepared to face the consequences 
of Gandhi’s arrest if he takes action”, Reading declared.’ 

After an interval, the Secretary of State, Edwin ‘Montagu’, 
the biography continues, ‘instructed Lord Reading to arrest the 
principal leaders of the non-co-operation movement, including 
Mr. Gandhi’. Reading, however, resisted this order. His son, in 
the biography of his father, writes: ‘Lord Reading still preferred to 
wait for some definite move by Mr. Gandhi... It looked as though 
the occasion for the arrest would come soon enough, for Mr. 
Gandhi had announced that he was about to start active civil 
disobedience in the Bardoli tehsil [county] of the Surat district in 
Bombay Presidency, and on January 24th the Government of 
India telegraphed to Sir George Lloyd specifically enjoining him 

220 


GANDHI ENTERS POLITICS 


to wait until Mr. Gandhi openly embarked on the Bardoli 
campaign. . . .’ 

The biography then relates the events in Chauri Chaura and 
records Gandhi’s cancellation of the Bardoli campaign on Febru¬ 
ary 8th, before it had actually started. However, he continues, 
‘opinion in England was restive over Mr. Gandhi’s continued 
freedom, and Mr. Montagu telegraphed early in February saying 
that he was “puzzled” at the delay in making the arrest. A debate 
was due to take place in Parliament on the 14th, and both Lord 
Reading and Mr. Montagu were naturally anxious that, as the 
arrest had to be made, it should be made in time for Parliament to 
be informed of it as a fait accompli. But at this point the Indian 
members of the Viceroy’s Council made the strongest possible 
representations in favour of delay, and Lord Reading, after careful 
thought, decided that the risks of a little delay were on the whole 
less than those of immediate action which would easily be open to 
misrepresentation both in India and abroad.’ 

Reading ‘postponed the arrest’, the biography says, ‘but asked 
the three Presidency Governors, Sir George Lloyd, Lord Willing- 
don of Madras and Lord Ronaldshay of Bengal to come to Delhi 
and talk the matter over with him . . .’ Ronaldshay could not 
leave Calcutta, but ‘Lord Willingdon was only less disturbed than 
Sir George by the apparent intention of the Government of India 
not to proceed at all against Mr. Gandhi. . . .’ 

On March 1st, following these talks with the two most important 
British conservative administrators in India, Reading ordered the 
arrest of Gandhi, and it took place on Friday, March 10th, 1922, 
at 10.30 in the evening. A police officer stopped his car on the 
road, eighty yards from Gandhi’s hut in Sabarmati Ashram, and 
sent polite word by one of his men that the Mahatma should 
consider himself under arrest and come as soon as he was ready. 
Standing surrounded by a dozen or more ashramites, Gandhi 
offered up a prayer and joined in the singing of a hymn. Then, 
in a gay mood, he walked to the car and was taken to Sabarmati 
prison. The next morning, Kasturbai sent clothes, goat’s milk and 
grapes to her husband. 

Lord Reading had at one time asserted that he would arrest 
Gandhi only after some overt act. Gandhi had taken none. The 
Parliamentary debate had come and gone; it did not make the 


221 


GANDHI IN INDIA 


arrest necessary. Reading knew very well what Gandhi had been 
saying in speeches and articles; they did not convince him of the 
wisdom of arresting the Mahatma. How then did Sir George 
Lloyd and Lord Willingdon persuade Reading to act? 

‘I have had no trouble so far arising from Gandhi’s arrest,’ the 
Viceroy wrote in April in a private letter to his son, the biographer. 
Reading was obviously relieved that Gandhi’s arrest had caused 
no public commotion. The provincial governors could have 
predicted this. 

Hard-boiled considerations of ‘law and order’ prevailed over the 
Viceroy’s scruples. Gandhi had disarmed himself by suspending 
the Bardoli civil disobedience; therefore he could be arrested with 
impunity. Reading’s April letter to his son confirms this. Gandhi, 
he wrote, ‘had pretty well run himself into the last ditch as a poli¬ 
tician by his extraordinary manifestations in the last month or six 
weeks before his arrest, when he ran the gamut of open defiance 
of Government with a challenge of all authority fixed for a certain 
day, and when the day arrived he went to the opposite extreme 
and counselled suspension of. the most acute activities. 

‘This of course caused dissension among his followers. . . .’ 

So Gandhi was ‘in the last ditch as a politician . . .’ Gandhi’s 
politicial career was finished. The measure of misunderstanding is 
filled by a remark of the biographer-son: ‘The mere fact that Mr. 
Gandhi had been taken into custody and kept in jail like any other 
ordinary mortal who had run counter to the Law was* in itself a 
real setback to his prestige. . . .’ 

Gandhi had expected arrest and published an article in the 
March 9th issue of Young India entitled ‘If I Am Arrested’. ‘Rivers 
of blood shed by the Government cannot frighten me,’ he wrote, 
‘but I should be deeply pained even if the people did so much as 
abuse the Government for my sake or in my name. It would be 
disgracing me if the people lost their equilibrium on my arrest.’ 
There were no disorders. 

At the preliminary hearings the day after his arrest, Gandhi 
gave his age as fifty-three and his profession ‘farmer and weaver’ 
and pleaded guilty. The charge was writing three seditious 
articles in Young India. Mr. S. G. Banker, the printer of the maga¬ 
zine, was arraigned at the same time. Gandhi was kept in 
prison for trial. 


222 


GANDHI ENTERS POLITICS 


The first of the seditious articles appeared in Young India on 
September 19th, 1921, entitled ‘Tampering with Loyalty’. ‘I 
have no hesitation in saying’, Gandhi wrote, ‘that it is sinful for 
anyone, either soldier or civilian, to serve this government . . . 
sedition has become the creed of Congress . . . Non-co-operation, 
though a religious and strictly moral movement, deliberately aims 
at the overthrow of the government, and is therefore legally 
seditious . . .We ask for no quarter; we expect none from the 
government.’ 

These words made the Government case easy. If there was 
doubt, Gandhi made it even more explicit in a second article, ‘A 
Puzzle and Its Solution’, in Young India of December 15th, 1921. 
‘Lord Reading’, he wrote, ‘must understand that Non-co-opera- 
tors are at war with the government. They have declared 
rebellion against it . . . Lord Reading is entitled therefore to put 
them out of harm’s way.’ 

The third seditious article, ‘Shaking the Manes’, in Young India 
of February 23rd, 1922, cried out in the opening sentence, ‘How 
can there be any compromise whilst the British lion continues to 
shake his gory claws in our faces?’ Then sarcastically he informed 
the British that ‘the rice-eating, puny millions of India seem to 
have resolved upon achieving their own destiny without any 
further tutelage and without arms’. Adding that ‘No empire 
intoxicated with the red wine of power and plunder of weaker 
races has yet lived long in the world’, Gandhi said. ‘The fight 
that was commenced in 1920 is a fight to the finish, whether it 
lasts one month or one year or many months or many years. . . .’ 

Gandhi’s only surprise was that he had not been arrested after 
the first or second of these articles. 

‘The Great Trial’, as it came to be known, was held in Govern¬ 
ment Circuit House at Ahmedabad on March 18th, 1922, before 
Mr. Justice C. N. Broomfield, District and Sessions judge. Sir 
J. T. Strangman, Advocate-General of Bombay, prosecuted. 
Gandhi and Mr. Banker had no lawyers. Heavy military patrols 
guarded the building and nearby streets. The little courtroom 
was crowded. Admission passes were marked: ‘Sessions Case No. 
45 of 1922. Imperator vs (1) Mr. M. K. Gandhi. (2) Mr. S. C. 
Banker.’ 

After the indictment was read and the Advocate-General had 

223 


GANDHI IN INDIA 


stated the case against Gandhi, the judge asked the Mahatma 
whether he wished to make a statement. Gandhi had a written 
statement ready. He introduced it with some oral, extemporan¬ 
eous remarks. The Advocate-General, Gandhi said, ‘was entirely 
fair ... It is very true and I have no desire whatsoever to conceal 
from this court the fact that to preach disaffection towards the 
existing system of government has become almost a passion with 
me’. Indeed, he had preached sedition long before the prosecution 
said he had. T do not ask for mercy. I do not plead any extenuat¬ 
ing act. I am here, therefore, to invite and cheerfully submit to 
the highest penalty that can be inflicted upon me for what in law 
is a deliberate crime and what appears to me to be the highest 
duty of a citizen. The only course open to you, the Judge, is, as 
I am going to say in my statement, either to resign your post, or 
inflict on me the severest penalty if you believe that the system 
and the law you administer are good for the people. I do not 
expect that kind of conversion, but by the time I have finished 
with my statement you will perhaps have a glimpse of what is 
raging within my breast to run this maddest risk that a man can 
run.’ 

Gandhi then read his prepared statement to ‘explain why, from 
a staunch loyalist and co-operator, I have become an uncom¬ 
promising disaffectionist and non-co-operator’. In South Africa, 
he began, his contacts with the British were not happy; ‘I dis¬ 
covered that I had no rights as a man because I was an Indian.’ 
But he thought this ‘was an excrescence upon a system that was 
intrinsically and mainly good’. So, he criticized the Government 
but supported it, and joined in two wars which it fought. In 
India, too, he recruited for the British Army. ‘In all these efforts 
at service,’ he explained, ‘I was actuated by the belief that it was 
possible by such services to gain a status of full equality in the 
Empire for my countrymen.’ 

In 1919, the shocks commenced: The Rowlatt acts, Jallianwalla 
Bagh, the crawling order, the floggings, the injustice to the 
Turkish Caliph. Nevertheless, the Mahatma recalled, ‘I fought 
for co-operation and working the Montagu-Chelmsford reforms’; 
he still hoped. ‘But all that hope was shattered.’ 

‘I came reluctantly to the conclusion,’ he told the court, ‘that 
the British connection had made India more helpless than she 

224 


GANDHI ENTERS POLITICS 


ever was before, politically and economically . . . She has become 
so that she has little power of resisting famines. Before the British 
advent, India spun and wove in her millions of cottages just the 
supplement she needed for adding to her meagre agricultural 
resources. This cottage industry, so vital for India’s existence, 
has been ruined by incredibly heartless and inhuman processes 
as described by English witnesses. Little do town-dwellers know 
how the semi-starved masses of India are slowly sinking to lifeless¬ 
ness . . . No sophistry, no jugglery in figures can explain away the 
evidence that the skeletons in many villages present to the naked 
eye. I have no doubt that both England and the town-dwellers 
of India will have to answer, if there is a God above, for this crime 
against humanity which is perhaps unequalled in history.’ 

Continuing his indictment of the accuser, the prisoner said, T 
am satisfied that many Englishmen and Indian officials honestly 
believe that they are administering one of the best systems devised 
in the world and that India is making steady though slow progress. 
They do not know that a subtle but effective system of terrorism 
and an organized display of force on the one hand, and the de¬ 
privation of all powers of retaliation and self-defence on the other, 
have emasculated the people and induced in them the habit of 
simulation. This awful habit has added to the ignorance and self- 
deception of the administrators. . . . 

T have no personal ill-will against any administrator, 5 Gandhi 
assured the judge, ‘much less have I disaffection towards the 
King’s person. But I hold it an honour to be disaffected towards 
a government which in its totality has done more harm to India 
than any previous system. India is less manly under the British 
rule than she ever was before ... it has been a precious privilege 
for me to be able to write what I have in the various articles 
tendered in evidence against me ... In my opinion, non-co- 
operation with evil is as much a duty as is co-operation with good.’ 

In conclusion, Gandhi again asked for the ‘severest penalty’. 

When Gandhi sat down, Mr. Justice Broomfield bowed to the 
prisoner, and pronounced sentence. ‘The determination of a just 
sentence,’ the judge declared, ‘is perhaps as difficult a proposi¬ 
tion as a judge in this country could have to face. The law is no 
respecter of persons. Nevertheless, it will be impossible to ignore 
the fact that you are in a different category from any person I 

225 


GANDHI IN INDIA 

have ever tried or am likely to have to try. It would be impossible 
to ignore the fact that, in the eyes of millions of your countrymen, 
you are a great patriot and a great leader. Even those who differ 
from you in politics look upon you as a man of high ideals and of 
noble and even saintly life. 5 

The judge then announced that Gandhi must undergo im¬ 
prisonment for six years, and added that if the Government later 
saw fit to reduce the term ‘no one would be better pleased than I\ 
Mr. Banker received one year in jail and a fine of one thousand 
rupees. 

On hearing the sentence, the Mahatma rose and said that the 
sentence ‘is as mild as any judge could inflict on me, and so far 
as the entire proceedings are concerned, I must say that I could 
not have expected greater courtesy’. 

When the court was adjourned, most of the spectators in the 
room fell at Gandhi’s feet. Many wept. Gandhi wore a benign 
smile as he was led away to jail. 

Gandhi had no grievance. He knew when he entered Indian 
politics that it involved going to prison. It meant this for him 
and for others. Whenever he heard of a friend or colleague who 
had been arrested he telegraphed congratulations. Going to 
prison was a basic part of his doctrine of non-co-operation. ‘We 
must widen the prison gates,’ he said, ‘and we must enter them as 
a bridegroom enters the bride’s chamber. Freedom is to be wooed 
only inside prison walls and sometimes on gallows, never in the 
council chambers, courts, or the schoolroom.’ Going to prison 
was essential to arousing the nation for liberation. 

The British obliged and sent him to prison often. But this was 
the last time they tried him. 


226 


 

