CHAPTER III 


‘CHILDREN OF GOD’ 

‘t* ndia,’ Jawaharlal Nehru said, ‘contains, all that is disgusting 
I and all that is noble. 5 Nothing it contains is more disgusting* 
JLthan ‘the hideous system 5 , as Gandhi called it, of untouch- 
ability, the ‘canker eating at the vitals of Hinduism 5 . Orthodox 
Hindus did not share this view, nor did they welcome Gandhi’s 
effort to extirpate the evil. 

In attempting to eradicate untouchability, Gandhi was tugging 
at roots several thousand years long. They originated in the 
prehistoric Aryan invasion of India and grew into the hearts, 
superstitions and social habits of hundreds of millions of people. 
Many Western nations have their ‘untouchables 5 , but the stubborn 
Hindu phenomenon of untouchability stems from peculiar historic 
and economic circumstances which are tied together into an ugly 
bundle by the sanction of religion. 

In the long, unchronicled night before the dawn of history, a 
fair-skinned folk called Aryans inhabited an area north of India. 
Perhaps they hailed from the distant Caucasian isthmus between 
the Caspian and the Black Sea, or from Turkestan, or even from 
the more remote Russian valleys of the Don and the Terek where 
exquisite gold ornaments of the ancient Scythians have been un¬ 
earthed. Nehru notes that Pathan dancing resembles Cossack 
dancing. Six or seven thousand years ago the Aryans began 
pushing south; one tide of the migration swept into India about 
2000 or 3000 b.c., another moved into Iran; a third descended 
into Europe. 

Hence, the ‘Indo-European 5 language family. There is an 
evident bond between the Sanskrit of India and many Western 
tongues: Sanskrit pitri , Latin pater , Greek pater , English father ; 
Sanskrit matri , Latin mater, Greek meter, English mother , Russian 
mat ; Sanskrit duhirti , English daughter , German Tochter , Russian dock. 

Gradually, the Aryans, which means ‘noblemen 5 , conquered 
north-west India. They found there an older civilization related 
to that of Babylon, Assyria and presumably Egypt. 

i57 


GANDHI IN INDIA 


In 1922, at a place called Mohenjo-daro, about two hundred 
miles north of Karachi, an Indian archaeologist, examining the 
ruins of a comparatively new Buddhist temple seventeen hundred 
years old, found, beneath the temple, proof of a much more 
antique city. Scientific excavations at the site brought to light a 
treasure of clay seals, beads, bricks, pots, utensils and ornaments. 
One jar had a Sumero-Babylonian inscription in the hieroglyphic 
writing of Mesopotamia which dated it between 2800 and 2500 b.c. 
Many of the discoveries at Mohenjo-daro and other excavated 
spots in the same area resemble those at Ur of the Chaldees, Kish 
and Tell-Asmar in the region of the Tigris and Euphrates. 
Explorers have since traced the abandoned caravan routes over 
which north-west India and the Biblical Near East exchanged 
goods and culture. 

When the silt, sand and debris were carted away, the town of 
Mohenjo-daro, founded fifty-five hundred years ago and con¬ 
tinuously inhabited for six centuries, was exposed. It covers more 
than 240 acres. One can now see its principal avenue, which was 
thirty-three feet wide, and many broad, straight north-south, 
east-west streets once lined with burnt-brick homes, two or more 
storeys high, that had wells and bathrooms. A sewage system 
using clay pipes helped to keep the city clean. 

In a silver jar found under a floor lay a piece of cotton cloth, 
the oldest in the world. Bronze razors, chairs, spoons, cosmetic 
boxes, silver drinking cups, ivory combs, bracelets, nose studs for 
women, necklaces, bronze statuettes showing that ladies wore 
skirts and girdles, gold beads, gambling dice, and thousands of 
other historic objects have been retrieved from the dust of ages 
in this most exciting unveiling of India’s past. 

Either a flood or an epidemic destroyed this earliest-known 
Indian civilization. The Aryans brought their own gods and 
goods and put a new stamp on the country. They used horses 
and chariots, battle-axes, bows and javelins. 

The Rig-Veda, consisting of 1028 hymns and written in liturgical 
Sanskrit, pictures the life of these conquering Indo-Aryans four 
to five thousand years ago. Said to be the oldest book in the 
world, the Rig-Veda reveals the origin of the Hindu caste system 
and of the untouchable outcasts. 

No caste divisions, as far as can be ascertained, encumbered the 

158 


‘CHILDREN OF GOD’ 


Aryans on their arrival in India. But conquest brought social 
differentiation. Though the subjugated territory was hardly the 
home of barbarians, or blacks, the Rig- Veda speaks of the inhabi¬ 
tants contemptuously as ‘black-skinned’, ‘noseless’ and ‘malignant’, 
who did not know enough to appease the gods with burnt offerings 
of animals. The Aryans employed these ‘inferiors’ to till their 
fields, tend their herds, barter their products and fashion their 
tools and ornaments. The merchants and farmers constituted the 
Vaisya or third caste, the craftsmen the Sudra or fourth caste. 

Power and wealth sowed discord among the Aryans and they 
called upon a raja or king to rule over their several districts. He 
and his courtiers and their fighting men and their families consti¬ 
tuted the master-warrior Kshatriya caste who were served by 
hymn-singing, Veda- writing, ritual-performing, myth-making, 
animal-sacrificing Brahmans or priests. Such was the ascendancy 
of religion and intelligence, however, that the Brahmans became 
the top caste, while the Kshatriyas occupied the next rung down. 

The Aryans, who entered India poor in women, intermarried 
with the local population. This healthy mixing of the blood con¬ 
tinued even after the conquerors penetrated into south India where 
they subdued the Dravidians. These races had evolved an interest¬ 
ing culture of their own, but they were dark-skinned, and the 
colour-conscious Aryans consequently increased the height of their 
caste barriers. Dravidians became Brahmans, Kshatriyas and 
Vaisyas, but a larger percentage than in the north were impressed 
into the Sudra caste, and millions were left outside all castes. 

The Aryan invasion frightened many natives into the hills and 
jungles where they lived by hunting and fishing. In time, they 
timidly approached the Aryan and Sudra villages to sell their 
wicker baskets and other handicraft products. Occasionally, they 
were allowed to settle permanently on the edges of the settlements 
and do menial tasks, such as handling dead animals and men, 
removing refuse, etc. These were the untouchables. 

Since modern times, vocation no longer follows caste. A Brah¬ 
man can be a cab driver, a Kshatriya a bookkeeper, and a Vaisya 
a prince’s prime minister. On the other hand, the ban against 
marriage between castes is observed to this day, and when 
Gandhi appeared on the scene in 1915 few violated it. Indeed, 
the four castes are divided into three to four thousand sub-castes, 

i59 


GANDHI IN INDIA 


some of them resembling craft guilds, others the equivalent of 
blood or provincial groups; and parents preferred to find a wife 
for their son within the sub-castes. Marriage of a caste menjiber 
with an untouchable was, of course, unthinkable. Love marriages 
were considered rather indecent, certainly ill-omened. Marriages 
were arranged by parents; and why would a father demean his 
family by admitting a pariah bride into it? 

Untouchables were confined to tasks which Hindus spurped: 
street-cleaning, scavenging, tanning, etc. In some regions, wheel¬ 
wrights, hunters, weavers and potters are considered untouchables. 
To escape the humiliation, untouchables have adopted Chris¬ 
tianity or Islam. Yet forty or fifty million have chosen to stay in 
the fold even though they are kept outside the pale. Why? 

To perpetuate caste it has been clothed in the sacred formula 
of immutable fate: you are a Brahman or Sudra or untouchable 
because of your conduct in a previous incarnation. Your mis¬ 
behaviour in the present life might result in caste demotion in 
the next. A high-caste Hindu could be reborn an untouchable. 
The soul of a sinner might even be transferred to an animal. An 
untouchable could become a Brahman. 

‘The human birth’, Mahadev Desai writes in his introduction 
to the Gita , ‘is regarded by the Hindu as a piece of evolutionary 
good fortune which should be turned to the best and noblest 
account’; then he quotes an old Indian poem: 

I died as mineral and became a plant, 

I died as plant and rose to animal. 

I died as animal and I was man. 

What should I fear? When was I less by dying? 

A woman might become a man in the next incarnation, and 
vice versa. Some Hindus would like to feel that at rebirth they 
will still be members of the same family though their relationship 
may be altered; a husband and wife may be brother and sister, for 
instance, or sister and brother. Men with feminine propensities 
might turn into women in the coming incarnation; a person who 
is bloodthirsty and vicious may fall to animal status; a spiritual 
merchant may be reborn a Brahman. A greedy Brahman may 
be reborn in the merchant caste. Thus conduct alters inheritance, 
but once caste rank is fixed in any one incarnation it becomes 

160 


‘CHILDREN OF GOD 5 

destiny. According to this doctrine, an untouchable is merely 
doing penance; to interrupt it by raising his status robs him of a 
possible ticket to a high caste in the next incarnation. This pro¬ 
spect reconciles religious untouchables to their current misery. 

An untouchable is exactly that: he must not touch a caste Hindu 
or anything a caste Hindu touches. Obviously, he should not 
enter a Hindu temple, home, or shop. In villages, the untouch¬ 
ables live on the lowest outskirts into which dirty waters drain; 
in cities they inhabit the worst sections of the world’s worst slums. 
If, by mischance, a Hindu should come into contact with an un¬ 
touchable or something touched by an untouchable he must purge 
himself through religiously prescribed ablutions. Indeed, in some 
areas, this is incumbent upon him even if the shadow of an un¬ 
touchable falls on him, for that too pollutes. On the Malabar 
coast, untouchables are warned by a loud noise to quit the road 
and its immediate environs at the approach of a caste Hindu. 

Hindus are expected to bathe once a day, and water for washing 
the hands and private parts is available in the most primitive 
toilets. Hindus also take special pride in the cleanliness of their 
personal pots, pans and drinking vessels. A Hindu will smoke a 
huka water pipe or a cigarette through his fist without letting it 
touch his lips, and he often pours water into his mouth instead of 
sipping it. ‘This sense of cleanliness’, Nehru notes, ‘is not scientific 
and the man who bathes twice a day will unhesitatingly drink 
water that is unclean and full of germs . . . The individual will 
keep his own hut fairly clean but throw all the rubbish in the 
village street in front of his neighbour’s house . . .’ Cleanliness, 
he adds, is a religious rite, not an end in itself. If it were, Hindus 
would be concerned with the cleanliness of others, untouchables 
included. 

Untouchability is segregation gone mad. Theoretically a device 
against contamination, it actually contaminates the country that 
allows it. Mahatma Gandhi knew this and he fought untouch¬ 
ability for the sake of the castes as well as the outcasts, but in 
fighting it he defied a thousand taboos and roused a million fears, 
superstitions, hates and vested interests. Buddhism and many 
Hindu reformers had attacked untouchability; Gandhi said little 
against it until he had taken action against it. 

In his youth, Gandhi played with an untouchable boy. Putlibai 

161 


2 


GANDHI IN INDIA 

forbade it. Though he loved her he disobeyed her, his first re¬ 
bellion against authority. ‘I used to laugh at my dear mother’, 
he wrote to Charles Freer Andrews, Tor making us bathe when we 
brothers touched any pariah.’ In South Africa, too, he associated 
with untouchables. In May 1918, in Bombay, he went to a 
meeting called to improve the lot of untouchables. When he got 
up to deliver his address, he said, Ts there an untouchable here?’ 
No hand was raised. Gandhi refused to speak. 

Now there came to Gandhi’s ashram near Ahmedabad an un¬ 
touchable family and asked to become permanent members. He 
admitted them. 

A tempest broke. 

The presence of the untouchable father, mother and their little 
daughter Lakshmi polluted the entire ashram, and how could 
the wealthy Hindus of Bombay and Ahmedabad finance a defiled 
place? They withdrew their contributions. Maganlal, who kept 
the accounts, reported that he was out of funds and had no pro¬ 
spects for the next month. 

‘Then we shall go to live in the untouchable quarter,’ Gandhi 
quietly replied. • 

One morning a rich man drove up in a car and inquired 
whether the community needed money. ‘Most certainly,’ Gandhi 
replied. Gandhi had met the man only once and that casually. 

The next day the anonymous benefactor put thirteen thousand 
rupees in big bills into Gandhi’s hand and went away. That 
would keep the ashram for a year. 

This did not end Gandhi’s troubles. The women of the ashram 
refused to accept the untouchable woman. Kasturbai, revolted 
at the idea of having Danibehn in the kitchen cooking food and 
washing dishes, complained to her husband. Gandhi heard her 
patiently and appealed to her reason. But belief in untouchability 
resides in some remote nervous recess where, with racial intoler¬ 
ance, dogma and colour prejudice among its neighbours, it eludes 
common sense and humaneness. Gandhi therefore had to meet 
Kasturbai on her own terms: she was a loyal Hindu wife; did she 
wish to leave him and go to live in Porbandar? He was responsible 
for her acts; if he forced her to commit a sin it was his sin not hers 
and she would not be punished. Kasturbai was growing accus¬ 
tomed to her husband’s strange ways. She could never refute his 

162 


‘CHILDREN OF GOD’ 


arguments. He had become a Mahatma; who was she, the 

almost illiterate Gujarat woman, to question the man of God? 

He was now the loving teacher, no longer the lustful spouse. She 

resented him less and listened to him more. Within her nerve 

* 

tissue, to be sure, the hostility to the untouchables continued to 
twitch. But her mind was gradually learning hospitality to his 
ideas. In the worshipful air of India, husband became hero. 

Presently, Gandhi announced that he had adopted Lakshmi as 
his own daughter. Kasturbai thus became the mother of an un¬ 
touchable! It was like bringing a Negro daughter-in-law into the 
pre-Civil War mansion of a Southern lady. 

Gandhi insisted that untouchability was not part of early 
Hinduism. Indeed, his war on the ‘miasma’ of untouchability 
was conducted in terms of Hinduism. ‘I do not want to be re¬ 
born,’ he stated, ‘but if I have to be re-born I should be re-born 
an untouchable so that I may share their sorrows, sufferings and 
the affronts levelled against them in order that I may endeavour 
to free myself and them from their miserable condition.’ 

If this prayer of the Mahatma has been answered he is now an 
untouchable child in India and his devout followers might be 
maltreating him. 

But before being transformed into an untouchable in the next 
incarnation he tried to live like one in this. So he took to cleaning 
the lavatories of the ashram. His disciples voluntarily joined him. 
Nobody was an untouchable because everybody did the untouch¬ 
able’s work without considering themselves contaminated thereby. 

The outcasts were called ‘untouchables’, ‘pariahs’, ‘depressed 
classes’, ‘scheduled classes’. Gandhi understood psychology; he 
began calling them ‘Harijans’ (Children of God), and later named 
his weekly magazine after them. Gradually, ‘harijan’ was hal¬ 
lowed by usage. 

Fanatic Hindus never forgave Gandhi his love of untouchables 
and were responsible for some of the political obstructions he en¬ 
countered during his career. But to vast multitudes he was the 
Mahatma; they asked his blessing; they were happy to touch his 
feet; some kissed his footprints in the dust. They accordingly had 
to overlook, they forgot, that he was as contaminated as an un¬ 
touchable because he did scavenging and lived with untouchables 
and had adopted an untouchable as his daughter. Over the years, 

l m.g. 163 


M.G. 


GANDHI IN INDIA 


thousands of high-caste Hindus came to Gandhi’s ashram to 
interview him, to eat with him, to stay with him. A few un¬ 
doubtedly purged themselves thereafter, but most of them could 
not be such hypocrites. Untouchability lost some of its curse. 
Gandhians began to use untouchables in their households; were 
they better than their saint? He taught by example. 

City life and industrialization have had the same effect of 
weakening the persecution of Harijans. In a village, everybody 
knows everybody else. But the untouchable does not look 
different, and in a trolley or train the caste Hindu might be 
sitting skin-to-skin with a pariah and not realize it. Inescapable 
contact has reconciled Hindus to contact. 

Nevertheless, the poverty of the Harijans remained, and the 
discrimination against them was far from overcome by Gandhi’s 
early actions, gestures and statements in their behalf. He therefore 
continued his efforts unremittingly. 

Why did it fall to Gandhi, rather than to somebody else, to 
lead the movement for the emancipation of untouchables? 

Many of the indentured labourers in South Africa were un¬ 
touchables, and they were the heroes of the final phase of the civil 
disobedience campaign in 1914. Gandhi’s twenty-year struggle 
in South Africa, moreover, was directed against an evil which, 
with all its economic overtones, was at bottom a colour prejudice. 
All men are born with unequal gifts but equal rights, and society 
owes them an equal or at least unimpeded opportunity to develop 
their native abilities and live in liberty. How could Gandhi, fresh 
from his fight for the equality of Indians in South Africa, coun¬ 
tenance a cruel inequality imposed by Indians on other Indians 
in India? 

The foundations of freedom are sapped where anybody is denied 
equal rights because of his religion, the beliefs and deeds of his 
ancestors or relatives, the shape of his nose, the colour of his skin, 
the sound of his name, or the place or estate of his birth. 

Gandhi’s concept of freedom for India excluded Hindu im¬ 
morality as well as British administrators. ‘Swaraj’ or indepen¬ 
dence, he said in Young India on May 25th, 1921, ‘is a meaningless 
term if we desire to keep a fifth of India under perpetual subjec¬ 
tion . . . Inhuman ourselves, we may not plead before the Throne 
for deliverance from the inhumanity of others.’ 

164 


‘CHILDREN OF GOD’ 


The simplest explanation of Gandhi’s attitude towards untouch- 
ability is that he just could not stand it. In fact, he loathed this 
‘inhuman boycott of human beings’ so much that he said ‘if it 
was proved to me that it is an essential part of Hinduism I 
for one would declare myself an open rebel against Hinduism 
itself’. No man who cared more for popularity than principle 
would have made such a public statement in a country over¬ 
whelmingly and conservatively Hindu. But he made it as a Hindu 
in an effort, he said, to purify his religion. He regarded untouch- 
ability as an ‘excrescence’, a perversion of Hinduism. 

In Hinduism, however, an excrescence is difficult to distin¬ 
guish from the essence. Hinduism is more than a doctrine and 
more than a religion. Certainly, it is not a one-day-a-week 
religion. It invades homes, farms, schools and shops. It is a way 
of life which meshes with the mythological prehistory, the history, 
the economy, the geography and the ethnography of India. In 
India, religion is the sum total of the national experience. Islam 
is less absorbent, but Hinduism is a sponge religion, hospitable 
and without fundamentalism. ‘We have no uncontradictable and 
unquestionable documents, no special revelations, and our scrip¬ 
tures are not final . . .’ writes Sir C. P. Ramaswami Aiyar, a 
Hindu philosopher. Hinduism is simultaneously monotheistic and 
idolatrous, because it has, at different periods in history, drawn 
in populations that accepted one or the other. The monotheists 
tolerate idols and the idolaters dance before graven images but 
pray to one God. Some Hindus sacrifice animals in their temples, 
and some hold it a religious duty not to kill a worm or germ. The 
reform movements of Hinduism, like Buddhism and Jainism, have 
never broken away in schisms. They disappear into the general 
bloodstream. Hinduism is flexible, capacious, malleable. So is 
the thinking of many Hindus. So was Gandhi’s. He fought un- 
touchability. He abhorred animal sacrifices; the flow of blood in 
the house of God sickened him. But Hindus who perpetrated 
these wrongs were his brothers and he was theirs. 

India, Nehru has said, is like a palimpsest. A palimpsest is an 
ancient parchment or canvas which has been written on or painted 
on and then varnished over at a later period and written on or 
painted on again and then varnished over and written on or 
painted on a third, fourth and fifth time. This economic use of 

165 


GANDHI IN INDIA 

materials has unintentionally preserved some precious relics of 
the past, and experts now know how to wash off the newer coats 
and reveal the old original inscriptions or drawings. The differ¬ 
ence is that in the case of India, the varnish has, so to speak, dis¬ 
solved, and all the words and figures of the several layers are 
visible at the same time as one intricate jumble. This explains 
the complexity of Indian civilization and of those Indians who are 
permeated by it. ‘The human intellect’, writes Sir Valentine 
Chirol, ‘has indeed seldom soared higher or displayed deeper 
metaphysical subtlety than in the great system of philosophy in 
which many conservative Hindus still seek a peaceful refuge from 
the restlessness and materialism of the modern world.’ No Indian 
can altogether escape this cultural-intellectual heritage. 

At times, however, only one layer of the palimpsest is visible; on 
such occasions a modern, European-educated Hindu may vanish and 
become a worshipper of crude, primeval fetishes, even as a Western 
scientist may accept the irrational abracadabra of a desert cult. 

Hinduism amalgamated Mahavira, the founder of Jainism, and 
Buddha who were regarded as atheists or agnostics. Many 
Hindus accept Jesus and Mohammed as religious guides. Yet in 
insane moments, Hindus, Sikhs and Moslems avidly slaughter one 
another. Then they relax into apathetic tolerance. 

Despite its insatiable hunger for oneness, however, Hinduism’s 
‘Live-and-Let-Live’ only meant, ‘Live separately’. Hinduism has 
fostered endless division into self-contained villages, self-sufficient 
joint families comprising two, three, or even four generations in 
one residence, and self-segregated castes and multitudinous sub¬ 
castes whose members did not, until recent times, intermarry or 
inter-dine. God-fearing Hindus were content to see the ‘children 
of God’ in degrading isolation. 

Yet the Indian ideal of unity in diversity remains. The binding 
factors are the three legs of the subcontinent’s compact triangle, 
the unbroken line of culture from the dim past until today, the links 
of history and the bonds of blood and religion. 

Blood connects Hindus with Moslems and Sikhs. Religion 
weakens the connection. Geography connects; bad communica¬ 
tions divide. The multiplicity of languages divides. 

Out of these elements, Gandhi and his generation undertook to 
forge a nation. 

166 


 

