CHAPTER II 


‘SIT DOWN, GANDHI’ 

U nder the impact of the first World War, the tide of 
protest rose higher in India and even moderate Congress¬ 
men began to ask for home-rule. In September 1915, Mrs. 
Annie Besant, a remarkable Englishwoman who has written her 
name permanently into the history of modern India, announced 
the formation of a Home-Rule League and persuaded the veteran 
Dadabhai to become its president. 

Mrs. Besant was then approaching seventy. Born in 1847, she 
had lived a stormy life as atheist, socialist, women’s rights advocate 
and theosophist. She regarded herself as a reincarnation ofHypathia 
of Alexandria and Giordano Bruno, both of whom met violent 
deaths, and in her autobiography she says she longed to be the 
‘bride of Christ’. Though a foreigner, she was an accepted and 
respected leader of India. An eloquent speaker, trenchant writer 
and brave politician, she edited Indian publications and made 
India her home. She died in 1933. 

In 1892, Mrs. Besant started a school at Benares, the holy city 
on the Ganges, and in 1916 this institution, guided by Pandit 
Malaviya, was expanded into the Hindu University Central 
College. An illustrious gathering of notables attended the three- 
day opening ceremonies in February 1916. The Viceroy was 
there and so were numerous bejewelled maharajas, maharanis, 
rajas and high officials in all their dazzling panoply. 

On February 4th Gandhi addressed the meeting. It broke up 
before he could finish. 

India had never heard such a forthright, unvarnished speech. 
Gandhi spared no one, least of all those present. ‘His Highness, 
the Maharaja, who presided yesterday over our deliberations,’ 
Gandhi said, ‘spoke about the poverty of India. Other speakers 
laid great stress upon it. But what did we witness in the great 
pandal in which the foundation ceremony was performed by the 
Viceroy [Lord Hardinge]? Certainly a most gorgeous show, an 
exhibition of jewellery which made a splendid feast for the eyes of 

*52 


‘SIT DOWN, GANDHI’ 

the greatest jeweller who chose to come from Paris. I compare 
with the richly bedecked noblemen the millions of the poor. And 
I feel like saying to those noblemen: “There is no salvation for 
India unless you strip yourselves of this jewellery and hold it in 
trust for your countrymen in India.” ’ 

‘Hear, hear,’ students in the audience exclaimed. Many 
dissented. Several princes walked out. 

Gandhi was not deterred. ‘Whenever I hear of a great palace 
rising in any great city of India,’ he went on, ‘be it in British 
India or be it in the India ruled by our great chiefs, I become 
jealous at once and say, “Oh, it is the money that has come from 
the agriculturists” ... There cannot be much spirit of self-govern¬ 
ment about us,’ he exclaimed, ‘if we take away or allow others to 
take away from the peasants almost the whole of the results of 
their labour. Our salvation can only come through the farmer. 
Neither the lawyers, nor the doctors, nor the rich landlords are 
going to secure it.’ Congress beware! 

Gandhi* was unfurling his flag before the mighty ones of India. 
It was the flag of the lowly. 

‘If you of the student world to which my remarks are supposed 
to be addressed this evening,’ Gandhi declared, ‘consider for one 
moment that the spiritual life, for which this country is noted and 
for which this country has no rival, can be. transmitted through 
the lip, pray believe me you are wrong. You will never be able 
merely through the lip to give the message that India, I hope, will 
one day deliver to the world ... I venture to suggest t° you that 
we have now reached almost the end of our resources in speech¬ 
making and it is not enough that our ears be feasted, that our 
eyes be feasted, but it is necessary that our hearts have got 
to be touched and that our hands and feet have got to be 
moved. 

‘It is a matter of deep humiliation and shame for us,’ Gandhi 
continued, ‘that I am compelled this evening under the shadow 
of this great college, and in this sacred city, to address my country¬ 
men in a language that is foreign to me. 

‘Suppose,’ Gandhi mused, ‘that we had been receiving educa¬ 
tion during the past fifty years through our vernaculars, what 
should we be today? We should have today a free India, we should 
have our educated men not as if they were foreigners in their own 

i53 


GANDHI IN INDIA 


land, but speaking to the heart of the nation; they would be 
working amongst the poorest of the poor, and whatsoever they 
would have gained during the past fifty years would be a heritage 
of the nation.’ 

This sentiment provoked scattered applause. 

Turning to the essence of his philosophy, Gandhi, using words 
that shocked the assembled aristocrats, said, ‘No paper contribu¬ 
tion will ever give us self-government. No amount of speeches 
will ever make us fit for self-government. It is only our conduct 
that will fit us for it. And how are we trying to govern ourselves? 

. . . If you find me this evening speaking without reserve, pray 
consider that you are only sharing the thoughts of a man who 
allows himself to think audibly, and if you think that I seem to 
transgress the limits that courtesy imposes upon me, pardon me 
for the liberty I may be taking. I visited the Viswanath Temple 
last evening and as I was walking through those lanes these were 
the thoughts that touched me ... I speak feelingly as a Hindu. 
Is it right that the lanes of our sacred temple should be as dirty as 
they are? The houses round about are built anyhow. The lanes 
are narrow and tortuous. If even our temples are not models of 
roominess and cleanliness what can our self-government be? Shall 
our temples be abodes of holiness, cleanliness and peace as soon 
as the British have retired from India . . .?’ 

Gandhi stayed close to earth; even the most delicate ears should 
hear the facts of life. ‘It is not comforting to think,’ he said, ‘that 
people walk about the streets of Indian Bombay under the 
perpetual fear of dwellers in the storeyed buildings spitting upon 
them.’ Many Indian eyebrows were lifted. Was it right for an 
Indian to say this with Englishmen present? And what had spit¬ 
ting to do with the Benares University or independence? 

Gandhi sensed the audience’s antagonism, yet he was relentless. 
He travelled a good deal in third-class railway carriages, he said. 
Conditions were not altogether the fault of the management. 
Indians spat where others had to sleep. Students misbehave in 
the trains. ‘They can speak English,’ he commented sarcastically, 
‘and they have worn Norfolk jackets and therefore claim the right 
to force their way in and command seating accommodation ... I 
am setting my heart bare. Surely we must set these things right 
in our progress towards self-government.’ 

i54 


‘SIT DOWN, GANDHI’ 

The day’s ration of unpalatable thoughts was still incomplete. 
There remained the unmentionable. ‘It is my bounden duty,’ 
Gandhi asserted, ‘to refer to what agitated our minds these last 
two or three days. All of us have had many anxious moments 
while the Viceroy was going through the streets of Benares. 
There were detectives stationed in many places.’ A movement 
went through the invited guests. This was not to be talked about 
in public. It was for Gandhi. ‘We were horrified/ he revealed. 
‘We asked ourselves, “Why this distrust? Is it not better that 
even Lord Hardinge should die than live a living death?” But a 
representative of the mighty Sovereign may not. He might find it 
necessary even to live a living death. But why was it necessary to 
impose these detectives on us?’ 

Gandhi not only asked the unpalatable question. He gave the 
more unpalatable reply. ‘We may foam, we may fret,’ Gandhi 
said about the Indian reaction to the detectives, ‘we may resent, 
but let us not forget that the Jndia of today in her impatience has 
produced an army of anarchists. I am myself an anarchist, but 
of another type . . . Their anarchism ... is a sign of fear. If we 
trust and fear God, we shall have to fear no one, not Maharajas, 
not Viceroys, not the detectives, not even’King George.’ 

The audience was growing unruly and arguments broke out in 
various parts of the assembly. Gandhi uttered a few more 
sentences when Mrs. Besant, who presided, called out to him: 
‘Please stop it.’ 

Gandhi turned around to her and said, ‘I await your orders. If 
you consider that, by my speaking as I am, I am not serving the 
country and the empire I shall certainly stop.’ 

Mrs. Besant, coldly: ‘Please explain your object.’ 

Gandhi: ‘I am explaining my object. I simply . . . ’ He could 
not be heard above the din. 

‘Go on,’ some shouted. 

‘Sit down, Gandhi,’ others shouted. 

Decorum restored, Gandhi defended Mrs. Besant. It is because 
‘she loves India so well and she considers that I am erring in 
thinking audibly before you young men’. But he preferred to 
speak frankly. ‘I am turning the searchlight towards ourselves . . . 
It is well to take the blame sometimes.’ 

At this moment, many dignitaries left the platform, the commo¬ 

ns 


GANDHI IN INDIA 

tion mounted, and Gandhi had to stop. Mrs. Besant adjourned 
the meeting. 

From Benares Gandhi went home to Sabarmati. 

Distances are great in India and communications bad; few 
people can read and fewer possess radios. Therefore the ear of 
India is big and sensitive. In 1916, the ear began to catch the 
voice of a man who was courageous and indiscreet, a little man 
who lived like a poor man and defended the poor to the face of 
the rich, a holy man in an ashram. 

Gandhi was not yet a national figure. The hundreds of millions 
did not know him. But the fame of the new Mahatma was spread¬ 
ing. India stands in awe of power and wealth. But it,loves the 
humble servant of the poor. Possessions, elephants, jewels, armies, 
palaces win India’s obedience. Sacrifice and renunciation win 
its heart. 

Matthew Arnold wrote: 

The East bowed low before the blast 
In patient, deep disdain. 

And it bowed low, with the same disdain, before the East that 
coveted riches and might. 

The Indian, therefore, understands as well as' appreciates re¬ 
nunciation. India has many monks and ascetics. But Gandhi’s 
renunciation caused a larger echo because he opposed renuncia¬ 
tion ‘for the mere sake of renunciation’. ‘A mother’, he observed 
in a letter, ‘would never by choice sleep in a wet bed but she would 
gladly do so in order to spare the dry bed for her child.’ 

Gandhi renounced in order to serve. 


156 


 

