CHAPTER XXII 


WINSTON S. CHURCHILL VERSUS 
MOHANDAS K. GANDHI 

T h e day the second World War started, England took India 
into the war by proclamation without consulting any Indians. 
India resented this additional proof of foreign control. The 
next day, nevertheless, Gandhi boarded the first Delhi train to 
Simla in response to a telegraphic summons from the Viceroy, 
Lord Linlithgow, to come to the summer capital. ‘We Do Not 
Want Any Understanding’, the public at the station chanted as 
the Mahatma walked to the train. It was his day of silence, so he 
smiled and departed. 

The Viceroy and the Mahatma discussed the nature of the 
coming hostilities, ‘and as I was picturing before him the House 
of Parliament and the Westminster Abbey and their possible 
destruction, I broke down. I have become disconsolate. In the 
secret of my heart I am in perpetual quarrel with God that He 
should allow such things to go on’. 

Gandhi had a ‘daily quarrel’ with God; non-violence had failed; 
God had failed. But at the end of each quarrel, the Mahatma 
decided that ‘neither God nor non-violence is impotent. Im¬ 
potence is in men. I must try on without losing faith’. 

Gandhi blamed Hitler for the war. ‘Rightly or wrongly, and 
irrespective of what the other powers have done before under 
similar circumstances,’ he wrote in Harijan of September 16th, 
1939, l have come to the conclusion that Herr Hitler is responsible 
for the war. I do not judge his claim. It is highly probabje that 
his right to incorporate Danzig is beyond question if the Danzig 
Germans desire to give up their independent status. It may be 
that his claim to appropriate the Polish Corridor is a just claim. 
My complaint is that he will not let the claim be examined by an 
independent tribunal.’ 

Critics said he had talked ‘sentimental twaddle’ in the Simla 
interview with the Viceroy. ‘My sympathy for England and 
France,’ Gandhi replied, ‘is not the result of momentary emotion 

378 


WINSTON S. CHURCHILL 

or, in cruder language, of hysteria.’ Equally, ‘My whole heart is 
with the Poles in the unequal struggle in which they are engaged 
for the sake of their freedom.’ 

Hitlerism, Gandhi declared, ‘means naked ruthless force reduced 
to an exact science and worked with scientific precision*. It was 
thoroughly abhorrent to him. 

But what could he do? In addition to his daily debate with 
God, Gandhi was involved in an interminable argument with 
Congress which, he admitted, echoed the views of most articulate 
Indians. With Gandhi non-violence was a creed, with Congress 
it ‘was always a policy’. Congress adopted non-violence for the 
expected gains. Gandhi wanted non-violence irrespective of the 
fruits. 

The day after war’s beginning, Gandhi pledged publicly that 
he would not embarrass the British government. He would also 
lend moral support to England and her allies; even one who dis¬ 
approves of war should distinguish between aggressor and de¬ 
fender. Further than this, however, he could not go; he could not 
participate in the war effort nor would he defend India against 
an aggressor. He did not want India to have an army or to use 
police against Hindu-Moslem rioters. A constabulary to deal 
gently with bandits and professional hooligans was the maximum 
violence he might countenance. 

Congress, on the other hand, was ready to support the war 
effort if specified conditions were satisfied. 

From these different positions, Gandhi and Congress fought a 
friendly but hard battle. 

On September 14th, 1939, the Working or Executive Committee 
of Congress issued a manifesto which condemned Fascist aggres¬ 
sion in Poland yet recalled that the Western democracies had 
condoned or not opposed similar developments in Manchuria, 
Abyssinia, Spain and Czechoslovakia; it said the Western demo¬ 
cracies must shed their own imperialism before they could con¬ 
vincingly contend that they were fighting imperialism and not 
merely rivals. ‘A free democratic India will gladly associate herself 
with other free nations for mutual defence against aggression and 
for economic co-operation. . . .’ 

Gandhi was present, as a guest, during the four days of discus¬ 
sion that fathered this manifesto. After its adoption, he revealed 

379 


GANDHI IN INDIA 


that Jawaharlal Nehru had drafted it. ‘I was sorry, 5 Gandhi 
commented, ‘to find myself alone in thinking that whatever 
support was to be given to the British should be given uncondi¬ 
tionally 5 and non-violently. Gandhi disliked the tit-for-tat offer: 
India will fight if you make India free. Nevertheless, he com¬ 
mended the manifesto to the country: ‘I hope that the state¬ 
ment will receive the unanimous support of all parties among 
Congressmen. 5 

How could he do this, the critics howled; how could he appeal 
for support of a view he had opposed? ‘I would not serve the 
cause of non-violence, 5 he replied, ‘if I deserted my best co¬ 
workers because they could not follow me in an extended applica¬ 
tion of non-violence. I therefore remain with them in the faith 
that their departure from the non-violent method will be confined 
to the narrowest field and will be temporary. 5 

Haven’t you changed your mind since 1918, some chided. 

‘At the time of writing, 5 he retorted, ‘I never think of what I 
have said before. My aim is not to be consistent with my previous 
statements on a given question, but to be consistent with the 
truth as it may present itself to me at a given moment. The result 
is that I have grown from truth to truth. . . .’ 

Gandhi went beyond his plea for support of a manifesto that 
conflicted with his views; he made himself its spokesman in an 
interview with the Viceroy on September 26th. Lord Linlithgow 
replied on October 17th; England could not yet define her war 
aims. He cautioned India against a too rapid advance towards 
self-government. After the war, there would be changes in the 
direction of Dominion Status, he said. 

Five days later, accordingly, the Working Committee voted 
against aiding Britain. It also instructed the Congress ministries of 
the provinces to resign. Gandhi saw Congress coming closer to him. 

Hitler overran Norway, Denmark, Holland and Belgium. 
France was next. Britain’s stock was low in India. ‘Let us strike 
now, 5 many Indians urged. 

Gandhi replied in Harijan on June 1st, 1940: ‘I am of the 
opinion that we should wait till the heat of the battle in the heart 
of the Allied countries subsides and the future is clearer than it is. 
We do not seek our independence out of Britain’s ruin. That is 
not the way of non-violence. 5 

380 


WINSTON S. CHURCHILL 

Time was working for Indian independence. ‘We are nearing 
our goal without having fired a single shot/ Gandhi said. He 
wanted only the right to preach non-violence. 

France surrendered to Hitler. Panic, and in places hope, seized 
India. There were runs on banks. Gandhi called for order. 
Soberly he predicted that ‘Britain will die hard and heroically 
even if she has to. We may hear of reverses, but we will not hear 
of demoralization.’ 

Whenever Congress rejected Gandhi’s pacifism and volunteered 
to aid the British, he did not interfere. Whenever Congress agreed 
with him and wanted to hinder the war effort, he objected. 

The Working Committee met in Wardha to review the war 
crisis. On June 21st, 1940, it plainly stated that it could not ‘go 
to the full length with Gandhi’ on non-violence. ‘So, for the first 
time,’ Nehru wrote in his autobiography, Gandhi ‘went one way 
and the Congress Working Committee another. . . .’ 

‘I am both happy and unhappy over the result,’ Gandhi 
affirmed. ‘Happy because I have been able to bear the strain of 
the break and have been given the strength to stand alone. Un¬ 
happy because my word seemed to lose the power to carry with 
me those whom it was my proud privilege to carry all these many 
years.’ 

The Viceroy summoned the Mahatma for another audience 
on June 29th. Lord Linlithgow recognized Gandhi’s indestruct¬ 
ible influence; he intimated that Britain was ready to grant Indians 
a broader share in the Indian government. 

The Working Committee met in Delhi early in July to weigh 
the offer. Gandhi had no use for it. He encountered the astute 
opposition of Rajagopalachari, the Mahatma’s warm friend. 
Rajagopalachari converted Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel, the 
Mahatma’s loyal lieutenant. Only Ghaffar Khan, the ‘Frontier 
Gandhi’, sided with the Mahatma. 

Gandhi printed a report of the proceedings: Rajagopalachari 
‘thinks that I suffer from obsession owing to too much brooding on 
non-violence. He almost thinks that my vision is blurred. It was 
no use returning the compliment though half-joking I did ... I 
at once saw as clear as daylight that, if my position was not accept¬ 
able, Rajaji’s was the only real alternative. I therefore encouraged 
him to persist in his effort, though all the time I held him to be 

38 1 


GANDHI IN INDIA 

hopelessly in the wrong’. Rajaji, or Rajagopalachari, won a big 
majority; five abstained. 

Gandhi failed to convince Congress of the wisdom of pure paci¬ 
fism in the midst of a war. All acknowledged that he could have 
killed Rajaji’s resolution; indeed, one firm request from the 
Mahatma and Rajaji would probably have withdrawn it. That 
would have been dictation, however, and Gandhi believed too 
much in personal liberty to exploit his power to make men vote 
or act against their will. He preferred to break with Congress 
rather than break its leaders. 

The Rajaji resolution, adopted, despite Gandhi’s disapproval, 
on July 7th, announced that if India were given complete in¬ 
dependence and a central Indian government ‘it will enable 
Congress to throw its full weight in the efforts for the effective 
organization of the defence of the country’; free India would wage 
war as one of the allies. 

Winston Churchill was Prime Minister of Great Britain and 
stirring England to gallant resistance. He had, through the years, 
made numerous statements against Indian independence. He 
now had the power to prevent it. On August 8th, accordingly, 
Linlithgow stated that he would invite a number of Indians to 
join his Executive Council and establish a War Advisory Council 
to meet regularly, but, in the paraphrase of Lord Pethick- 
Lawrence who became Secretary of State for India in 1945, 
‘Britain could not divest herself of the responsibilities which her 
long association with India had imposed on her.’ This fore¬ 
shadowed Churchill’s famous dictum of November 10th, 1942: 
‘I have not become the King’s First Minister in order to preside 
at the liquidation of the British Empire.’ 

Nor, said Linlithgow, could His Majesty’s Government con¬ 
template the transfer of their present responsibilities to any 
Indian government whose authority was directly denied by large 
and powerful elements of the population. This indicated that 
Britain would not allow Congress to rule India without Moslem 
consent. It was the first time Britain, gave the Moslem com¬ 
munity a veto on India’s political future. 

Thoroughly incensed, the Working Committee, according to 
Lord Pethick-Lawrence’s summary of its resolution, ‘accused the 
British government of rejecting their friendly and patriotic offer 

382 


WINSTON S. CHURCHILL 


of co-operation and making the issue of the minorities an insuper¬ 
able barrier to India’s progress’. 

Thanks to Churchill, Congress again came back to Gandhi. 

Gandhi explained the new position in a speech to the All- 
India Congress Committee on September 15th, 1940, in Bombay: 
T do not want England to be defeated or humiliated. It hurts me 
to find St. Paul’s Cathedral damaged ... It is not because I love 
the British nation and hate the German. I do not think the 
Germans as a nation are any worse than the English or the 
Italians. We are all tarred with the same brush; we are all 
members of the vast human family. I decline to draw any distinc¬ 
tions. I cannot claim any superiority for Indians ... I can keep 
India intact and its freedom intact only if I have goodwill to¬ 
wards the whole of the human family and not merely for the 
human family which inhabits this little spot of the earth called 
India.’ 

He would ask to see the Viceroy. T will tell him that this is the 
position to which we have been reduced: We do not want to 
embarrass you and deflect you from your purpose in regard to the 
war effort. We go our way and you go yours . . .’ But Congress 
must have freedom to preach. ‘If we carry the people with us, 
there will be no war effort on the part of our people. If, on the 
other hand, without using any but moral pressure, you find that 
the people help the war effort, we can have no cause for grumb¬ 
ling. If you get assistance from the Princes, from the landlords, 
from anybody high or low, you can have it, but let our voice also 
be heard. If you accept my proposal... it will certainly be a 
feather in your cap. It will be honourable of you, although you 
are engaged in a life and death struggle, that you have given us 
this liberty. . . . 

‘The Viceroy’, Gandhi anticipated, ‘may say, “you are a 
visionary”. I may fail in my mission, but we will not quarrel. 
If he says he is helpless, I will not feel helpless.’ 

The Viceroy said no, orally and in a confirming letter. 

Rebuffed and eager to protest against the war and India’s 
helplessness, Gandhi proposed to fast, but he allowed himself to 
be dissuaded by Mahadev Desai and chose instead the alternative 
of civil disobedience. He did not, however, launch a campaign of 
mass Satyagraha. He adopted a milder symbolic form which 

3&3 


GANDHI IN INDIA 


could not impede the war effort; he called on individuals selected 
by him by name to defy the official ban on propaganda against 
the war. He first pointed to Vinoba Bhave, a quiet, scholarly 
Gandhian. Bhave engaged in anti-war propaganda, was arrested, 
tried and sentenced to three months’ imprisonment. 

Next, Gandhi designated Nehru. He was arrested and tried. 
The judge gave him four years. 

Patel was chosen next; he informed the Government of his 
intention and was arrested before he could make his speech. 

As a Christmas gesture and in order that harassed British offi¬ 
cials might enjoy their holiday without being called out to make 
arrests, Gandhi suspended the civil disobedience from December 
25th, 1940, to January 4th, 1941. In the interval, however, the 
Government seized Maulana Abul Kalam Azad, the president of 
Congress. 

After a while, provincial and local Congress committees started 
submitting to Gandhi lists of potential resisters. In sum, 23,223 
persons were arrested, most of them in Nehru’s United Provinces. 
Gandhi had promised Congress to stay out of jail. 

The person-by-person civil disobedience continued for about a 
year to the end of 1941. It generated little public enthusiasm. 
People were tired of going to jail. 

In December 1941, the British government released those 
members of the Working Committee who had been imprisoned. 
The second World War had taken a menacing turn. 

On December 7th, Japan struck at Pearl Harbour; the next 
day, Japanese forces occupied Shanghai and Siam (Thailand) 
and made a landing in British Malaya. Twenty-four hours later, 
the Tokyo navy sank two British battleships, the Repulse and the 
Prince of Wales , thus crippling England’s naval strength in the 
Pacific. 

The war was moving closer to India. The situation uncovered 
the old split in Congress between the Gandhian non-violent non- 
co-operators and those who would barter support of the war effort 
for an Indian national government. Gandhi, accordingly, with¬ 
drew once more from the Congress leadership. 

Hong Kong fell to the Japanese late in December 1941. The 
great British base of Singapore surrendered to the Japanese in 
February 1942. In March, Japan occupied most of Java, Sum- 

384 


WINSTON S. CHURCHILL 


atra and other islands of the Dutch East Indies. On March gth, 
an imperial Tokyo communique announced that Rangoon, the 
capital of Burma, India’s neighbour, had been seized. 

In North Africa, Nazi General Rommel was moving east to¬ 
wards Egypt. The Arabs of Palestine were preparing a friendly 
welcome for him. Observers talked of a possible German- 
Japanese junction in India. From Cairo to Calcutta gloom 
brooded over the fortunes of the United Nations at; war. 

The American public was disturbed by the low war morale of 
the Indian people; having been a colony of Britain the United 
States understood India’s aspirations despite the propaganda fog. 
President Roosevelt sent Colonel Louis Johnson as his personal 
envoy to India; this was an extraordinary act, for India was not a 
sovereign state, and therefore all the more calculated to impress 
the British government with America’s concern. In London, 
United States Ambassador John G. Winant tried unsuccessfully 
to dissuade Prime Minister Churchill from stating publicly that 
the Atlantic Charter’s self-government clause did not apply to 
India. Face-to-face at the White House and in transatlantic 
telephone conversations, Roosevelt had discussed India with 
Churchill and urged him to make an acceptable offer to the 
Indian people. Churchill never appreciated these prods. 

Chiang Kai-shek, then in a key war position, made direct 
representations to President Roosevelt and to the British govern¬ 
ment in favour of Indian independence. 

The Labour party was in the British war-time coalition govern¬ 
ment. Many of its members were friends of Indian freedom; 
Labour ministers reflected this attitude in Cabinet deliberations. 

Pressed on all sides, Churchill consented to send Sir Stafford 
Cripps to New Delhi with a proposal. But though the British 
Empire and the Dutch had lost valuable outposts, the optimistic, 
resilient British Prime Minister had more faith than ever in ulti¬ 
mate military victory, and for the cogent reason that Russia and 
the United States were now England’s partners. He was neither 
depressed nor defeatist about war prospects when Cripps went out 
to India. 

Tall, thin, austere vegetarian, son of a Labour Lord and nephew 
of Beatrice Webb, the famous Fabian Socialist writer, Stafford 
Cripps attended exclusive schools and became an unorthodox, 

385 


GANDHI IN INDIA 


left-wing Labour Member of Parliament. A brilliant lawyer, he 
gave a large part of his huge professional income to political causes. 

When the second World War opened, Sir Stafford abandoned 
his lucrative law practice and in November 1939 undertook a 
trip around the world to discover what people were thinking. He 
spent eighteen days in India, saw Jinnah, Linlithgow, Tagore, 
Ambedkar, Jawaharlal Nehru and Gandhi. (Cripps was the same 
age as Nehru and twenty years younger than Gandhi.) The 
Mahatma lay ill on the floor of his hut, but as ‘a concession to 
your English bones’ he provided a stool for Cripps. 

Sir Stafford drafted a plan for Indian constitutional changes 
which he presented to Lord Halifax, the former Lord Irwin, now 
British Foreign Secretary, who filed it in the archives. Cripps’s 
interest in India was recalled when crisis clouds darkened the 
horizon of Asia in the winter of 1942. Meanwhile, his prestige had 
risen enormously because he was serving as British Ambassador in 
Moscow when Hitler invaded Russia. He had been appointed to 
the small inner War Cabinet and was often mentioned as 
Churchill’s successor. 

Cripps arrived in New Delhi on March 22nd, 1942, and the same 
day commenced his conferences with British officials. On the 
25th, Maulana Abul Kalam Azad called at 3 Queen Victoria 
Road, where Cripps was staying. Therewith began the negotia¬ 
tions with representative Indians. 

Gandhi was in his ashram. He received a telegram from 
Cripps politely asking him to come to Delhi. T did not wish to 
go,’ Gandhi said to me in June 1942, when I interviewed him at 
Sevagram, ‘but I went because I thought it would do some good.’ 

On March 27th, at 2.15 p.m., Gandhi arrived at 3 Queen 
Victoria Road and remained with Cripps until 4.25 p.m. Sir 
Stafford showed the Mahatma the as-yet-unpublished proposals 
of His Majesty’s Government. ‘After a brief study,’ Gandhi told 
me in Sevagram, ‘I said to Cripps, “Why did you come if this is 
what you have to offer? If this is your entire proposal to India, I 
would advise you to take the next plane home.” ’ 

‘I will consider that,’ Cripps replied. 

Cripps did not go home. He proceeded with the conversations. 
Gandhi went home to Sevagram. After that first talk, he had no 
further contact with Cripps. 


386 


WINSTON S. CHURCHILL 

The deliberations continued until April 9th when Congress 
finally rejected the Cripps offer. Later, the Moslem League, the 
Sikhs, Hindu Mahasabha, the Harijans and Liberals rejected it. 
Nobody accepted it. The Cripps Mission failed. 

On April 12th, Sir Stafford went home. 

The ‘Draft Declaration by His Majesty’s Government’ brought 
to India by Cripps consisted of Articles A, B, C and D which 
dealt with the post-war period and Article E which dealt with 
India’s war effort. The first four articles provided for a full- 
fledged Dominion which, as Cripps explained to a press con¬ 
ference, could vote itself out of the Commonwealth. 

Congress, and Gandhi, would have accepted that. 

An assembly consisting entirely of Indians would, after the war, 
frame a constitution for India; the representatives in that body of 
British India would be elected. But one-third of the constituent 
assembly would be appointed by the princes of India with 
whom the British had considerable influence. 

This did not satisfy Indians who feared that England would seek 
to retain power in India by manipulating the autocratic maharajas. 

Moreover, any province could, if it did not like the future 
constitution, refuse to accede to the Indian Union. ‘With such 
non-acceding Provinces,’ reads the Draft Declaration, ‘should 
they desire, His Majesty’s Government will be prepared to agree 
upon a new constitution, giving them the same full status as the 
Indian Union. . . .’ 

This could have led to the establishment of many Indias, a 
Hindu India, a Moslem India, a Princely India, perhaps a Sikh 
India. But Gandhi had said that the vivisection of India was a sin. 

The Cripps terms of the future post-war settlement violated 
basic Congress and Gandhian principles. That Azad, Nehru and 
Rajagopalachari, the Congress spokesmen, should nevertheless 
have negotiated with Cripps shows how eager they were to come 
to an agreement about the present. 

Article E regarding the immediate war-time arrangement stated: 
‘His Majesty’s Government must inevitably bear the responsibility 
for and retain control and direction of the defence of India as part 
of the total war effort’ but invited the leaders of the Indian people 
to participate in it. 

Gandhi did not wish to fight this war and therefore Article E 

bb m.g. 387 


GANDHI IN INDIA 


was to him unacceptable. Congress did wish to contribute to the 
war effort. But it found Article E vague and restrictive. All 
documents show that throughout the pourparlers with Cripps 
the efforts of Azad, Nehru and Rajagopalaehari were directed to 
expanding the responsibility and activity of Indians in the war 
effort; the British, on the other hand, sought to limit them. It was 
on this point that the talks broke down. 

Official British sources blamed the failure of the Cripps mission 
on Gandhi’s pacifism. Others blamed Cripps and Churchill. 
Nehru said, 'After Gandhiji left Delhi there was no consultation 
with him of any kind and it is entirely wrong to imagine that the 
rejection was due to his pressure. 5 Nehru reiterated this view in 
his book, The Discovery of India , published in 1946, years after the 
heat of the Cripps controversy had died away. 

In 1946, Gandhi said to me, ‘They have asserted that I had 
influenced the negotiations after I left Delhi. But that is a lie. 5 

‘Englishmen have told me, 5 I informed him, ‘that you tele¬ 
phoned from Sevagram to Delhi and instructed Congress to reject 
the Cripps offer. They declare they have a record of that con¬ 
versation. 5 

‘It is all a tissue of lies, 5 he declared. ‘If they have a record of 
the telephone conversation let them produce it. 5 

It is easy to see how Gandhi’s pacifism would mislead people in 
interpreting the collapse of the Cripps talks. Gandhi rejected the 
Cripps offer because of his pacifism and, too, out of devotion to 
the idea of a united India. Since Gandhi could at all times, 
whether or not he actively led Congress, bend it to his will, it 
would be natural to deduce that in rejecting the Cripps proposal, 
Congress obeyed Gandhi. This appears logical but it omits 
Gandhi’s psychology. On numerous occasions before Cripps, and 
on one subsequent occasion which determined the fate of India, 
Gandhi gave Congress a free hand even when he disliked the 
intended act of Congress. That was his non-violence. Non¬ 
violence was more than non-killing to Gandhi, more than non- 
hurting. It was freedom. Had he coerced his followers, he would 
have been a violent dictator. He knew that many Congress 
leaders wished to participate in the conduct of the war. He 
would not interfere. 

Some day the official British and American reports on the Cripps 

388 


WINSTON S. CHURCHILL 


mission (Louis Johnson functioned as intermediary at one stage) 
will be published. Several interesting documents have already 
been published. 

On March ioth, the day before Churchill announced that 
Cripps was going to India, Roosevelt sent a long cable to Churchill 
about India. Dipping into American history between 1783 and 
1789 for an analogy, the President suggested a stopgap govern¬ 
ment that would function for ‘five or six years’. ‘Perhaps’, 
Roosevelt declared, ‘some such method . . . might cause the people 
of India to forget hard feelings and to become more loyal to the 
British Empire. . . .’ 

India, Roosevelt added in the cable to Churchill, is ‘none of my 
business’ and ‘for the love of Heaven do not bring me into this, 
though I do want to be of help’. 

Robert E. Sherwood, who quotes this dispatch in his book 
Roosevelt and Hopkins , declares, ‘It is probable that the only part 
of the cable with which Churchill agreed was Roosevelt’s admis¬ 
sion that it is ‘none of my business’ . . . ‘Hopkins’, Sherwood 
continues, ‘said a long time later that he did not think that any 
suggestions from the President to the Prime Minister in the entire 
war were so wrathfully received as those relating to the solution 
of the Indian problem. As one of Churchill’s closest and most 
affectionate associates has said to me, “The President might have 
known that India was the one subject on which Winston would 
never move a yard”.’ An inch would be more like it. 

On Sunday, April 12th, 1942, Harry Hopkins was at Chequers, 
the Prime Minister’s country residence, when he received a cable 
request from Roosevelt to do everything possible to prevent the 
breakdown of the Cripps negotiations; the President also wired 
Churchill saying, 

I am unable regretfully to agree with the point of view you 
express in your message to me that the American public believes 
the negotiations have failed on general broad lines. The general 
impression here is quite the contrary. The almost universal 
feeling is that the deadlock has been due to the unwillingness of 
the British government to concede the right of self-government to 
the Indian people notwithstanding the Indians’ willingness to 
entrust technical military and naval defence control to the 

389 


GANDHI IN INDIA 

competent British authorities. American public opinion cannot 
understand why, if the British government is willing to permit 
component parts of India to secede from the British Empire after 
the war, it is not willing to permit them during the war to enjoy 
what is tantamount to self-government. 

Roosevelt added, ‘I gather that last Thursday night [April 
gth], agreement was .almost reached.’ 

Gripps had been working eagerly for an agreement, and when the 
British government’s Draft Declaration was rejected he made a 
new offer to Congress. ‘Cripps’, Churchill told Hopkins, ‘had 
presented a new proposal to Nehru without consultation with the 
Governor General [Viceroy].’ 

The new offer brought an understanding measurably near. ‘It 
was perfectly clear,’ Hopkins reported, ‘that the Governor 
General was irritated with the whole business.’ The Viceroy 
telegraphed Churchill. Churchill ordered Cripps to withdraw the 
new unauthorized proposal and return to England. 

Louis Johnson informed Roosevelt. Roosevelt wired Hopkins to 
see Churchill and try to reopen the negotiations. 

Churchill, ‘probably with some vehemence’, Sherwood suspects, 
replied to Roosevelt through Hopkins. The upshot of it was that 
he did not trust Congress. ‘Churchill said that he personally was 
quite ready to retire to private life if that would be any good in 
assuaging American public opinion . . .’ In any case, the negotia¬ 
tions could not be reopened because Cripps had already left 
India. ‘India was one area’, Hopkins felt, ‘where the minds of 
Roosevelt and Churchill would never meet.’ 

Obviously, the minds of Gandhi and Churchill would never meet. 

In 1935, Churchill had declared, ‘Gandhism and all that it 
stands for must ultimately be grappled with and finally crushed.’ 
It stood for India’s independence. For the first time since 1935, 
Churchill was in office. Cripps, the Labour anti-imperialist, was 
the victim of Churchill. He was the envoy of the Churchill 
government, and ‘We mean to hold our own’ was Churchill’s 
policy on India. Churchill regarded India as Britain’s property. 
How could he have authorized Cripps to give it away? Only 
when Churchill was replaced by Cripps’s Labour party did India 
win independence. 


390 


WINSTON S. CHURCHILL 


Churchill and Gandhi were alike in that each gave his life to a 
single cause. A great man is all of one piece like good sculpture. 
Churchill’s absorbing purpose was the preservation of Britain as 
a first-class power. During the war he showed little interest in 
peace aims. He was bound to the past. He was a product of the 
nineteenth century and he loved it. He loved Empire, royalty and 
caste. Lloyd George despised the British upper classes, the 
generals, the nobility. He fought them. Churchill wanted to 
perpetuate them. His attachment was not so much to them as to 
the nineteenth century that made them. The nineteenth century 
was the British century, the century of Pax Britannica after the 
defeat of Napoleonic France and before the rise of the Kaiser’s 
Germany, the century of the flowering of the British Empire 
under Queen Victoria. Britain’s past glory was Churchill’s god. 
The upper classes were synonymous to him with the greatness of 
his country. So was parliamentary democracy. So was India. 

Churchill fought the second World War to preserve the heritage 
of Britain. Would he permit the half-naked fakir to rob her of 
that heritage? If Churchill could help it, Gandhi would not be 
striding up the steps of the Viceroy’s palace to negotiate or parley. 

From the time he became the King’s First Minister in 1940 to 
the day his party went out of office in 1945, Churchill was in con¬ 
flict with Gandhi. It was a contest between the past of England 
and the future of India. 

A British cartoonist once drew Churchill in a loincloth and, in 
the next panel, Gandhi in top hat, frock coat and striped trousers, 
smoking a long cigar and carrying a cane and brief-case. The 
device suggested how different they were under the surface. 

Churchill is the Byronic Napoleon. Political power is poetry to 
him. Gandhi was the sober saint to whom such power was an¬ 
athema. The British aristocrat and the brown plebeian were 
both conservatives, but Gandhi was a non-conformist conserva¬ 
tive. As he grew older Churchill became more Tory, Gandhi 
more revolutionary. Churchill loved social traditions. Gandhi 
smashed social barriers. Churchill mixed with every class, but 
lived in his own. Gandhi lived with everybody. To Gandhi, 
the lowliest Indian was a child of God. To Churchill, all Indians 
were the pedestal for a throne. He would have died to keep 
England free, but was against those who wanted India free. 


39i 


 

