FREE MANDELA!
APART FROM MEMBERS OF HIS FAMILY AND HIS LAWYERS, FEW
OUTSIDERS had been permitted to see Mandela since his imprisonment in
1964. The only regular outsiders he met were officials from the International
Committee of the Red Cross, who in public maintained a discreet silence about
their visits. Other outsiders were allowed visits only if it suited the interests of
the government. A reporter and photographer from the London Daily Telegraph
were admitted to Robben Island in 1964. Photographs taken on this occasion
showing Mandela and Sisulu talking together in the courtyard while prisoners
worked on piles of stones behind them were used in the foreign press time after
time; but in South Africa itself, their publication was banned. A visit by a
representative of the American Bar Association was discussed by prisoners for
many months for the manner in which the American lawyer, perspiring heavily
and somewhat inebriated, began to argue with Mandela about conditions on
Robben Island, comparing them favourably to prison conditions he had observed
in the United States.
In 1970, a former British defence minister, Denis Healey, who had previously
met Mandela during his visit to London in 1962, was given an hour to talk to
him in the presence of prison officials. ‘I was relieved to find that intellectually,
morally and physically, he was fighting fit,’ Healey reported. ‘He wasn’t in any
way cast down by his experiences of the last eight years.’ In 1973, an Australian
journalist, David MacNicoll, described Mandela wearing ‘well-fitting fawn
moleskin coat and trousers, comfortable soft brown leather shoes, and red-andblue striped woollen socks’. His eyes, he noted, were alert and humorous.
Public interest in Mandela’s fate during these years hardly stirred and he
remained a largely forgotten figure. During the early 1970s, he wrote, when
there was no sign of any break in the apartheid system, the Rivonia prisoners had
to force themselves not to give in to despair. But in the wake of the Soweto
uprising and the repression that followed it, as anti-apartheid protest both at

home and abroad gathered momentum, Mandela in prison became a potent
symbol of opposition to the government. In March 1980, the Soweto newspaper
The Post started a campaign demanding his release with the banner headline
FREE MANDELA! Neither his photograph nor his words could be published.
To many people he seemed linked more to a distant past than of any relevance to
the future. But the campaign caught the public imagination, attracting support
from white university students and liberal politicians, as well as a host of black
organisations. A growing number of whites were becoming openly disenchanted
with the apartheid system. They included not just a large part of the Englishspeaking community but the Afrikaner elite—businessmen, academics,
professionals and journalists—more affluent and broad-minded than before, and
more susceptible to foreign opinion about the iniquities of racial discrimination.
At a white election in 1977, the opposition Progressive Federal Party, which
advocated the removal of racial discrimination and an extension of the franchise
to all blacks, had attracted some 17 per cent of the vote. Afrikaans-language
newspapers were as outspoken as English-language newspapers in suggesting
that the government needed to negotiate with radical black leaders as well as
traditional ones.
On the eve of the twentieth anniversary of Sharpeville, in March 1980, Zindzi
Mandela addressed a huge gathering organised by white students at the
University of the Witwatersrand supporting the call for Mandela’s release. ‘I
have not joined you as a daughter calling for the release of her father. I have
joined as part of my generation who have never known what a normal life is,’
she said. ‘I’ve seen the suffering of my people escalating to boiling point. I’ve
seen the thunderous eruption of the Soweto volcano when my generation could
take it no longer.’ Mandela, when he was free, had offered solutions to South
Africa’s problems. ‘The call for Mandela’s release is merely to say there is an
alternative to the inevitable bloodbath.’
The campaign to release Mandela was taken up in one country after another,
making him one of the most famous prisoners in the world. In New York, the
United Nations Security Council said his release was the only way to achieve
‘meaningful discussion of the future of the country’. In London, students
nominated him as a candidate for the post of chancellor at the University of
London; he received some 7,200 votes, losing only to Princess Anne.
Winnie shared in some of the limelight. The story of her banishment to a
remote, impoverished township after so many years of persecution was reported

around the world. Foreign journalists and diplomats regularly made the journey
to Brandfort to talk to her. With characteristic energy, she had set about trying to
make life at Brandfort more tolerable. She organised home improvements,
established a garden and studied for a social science degree by correspondence.
She acquired a companion, a young Rastafarian artist called ‘M. K.’ Malefane,
who was introduced by Zindzi and subsequently moved into her house. Her
grandchildren came to stay with her.
She was also largely successful in overcoming the suspicions and hostility of
township residents, organising a series of welfare projects for the local
community. She started a day-care centre, a soup kitchen, a mobile clinic and a
sewing group, obtaining donations from relief organisations, foreign embassies
and private individuals. As news of her work spread abroad, foreign funds for
her projects flowed in. Letters of support arrived from church organisations,
trade unions and academic institutions.
The attention that Winnie received in Brandfort added to her sense of her own
importance. She enjoyed being known as ‘Mother of the Nation’, a title the press
began to repeat endlessly. Her behaviour became increasingly imperious. She
came to see the struggle against apartheid more and more in personal terms. The
darker side of her character surfaced. She took to drinking heavily, running up
huge accounts at the local liquor store for champagne, Cinzano and spirits. In
some households in the neighbourhood, she was feared for her temper rather
than admired. The mother of a nine-year-old boy complained that Winnie had
assaulted him with her belt buckle. While denying the charge, Winnie asserted
she had the right to discipline children who played on her premises. She was
acquitted. In another incident, she was convicted of assaulting a woman with a
bottle and a shoe. Winnie’s propensity for settling matters through physical force
became more marked.
As the clamour for Mandela’s release continued, the government decided to
move him from Robben Island to a prison on the mainland near Cape Town
called Pollsmoor. Robben Island itself had become a part of the legend the
government was anxious to destroy. Without warning, one night at the end of
March 1982, Mandela was told he was to be transferred immediately from the
island, along with Sisulu, Mhlaba and Mlangeni. Kathrada joined them a few
months later.
Leaving Robben Island after eighteen years was an unsettling experience for

Mandela. He had become accustomed to its routine. It was a place where he felt
comfortable. But above all, it had become a focal point of resistance to
apartheid. All the hardships that had been endured, all the campaigns for
improvements that had been fought, all the efforts made to turn the island into a
university had become part of a powerful tradition which he had helped to shape
and to lead. Prisoners leaving Robben Island often did so with a sense of
achievement rather than of loss. The prison community there was remembered as
a valued part of their lives. The bonds of friendship and loyalty forged were
greater than anything experienced outside. One of Mandela’s companions, Mac
Maharaj, reflecting years later on the decades of struggle against apartheid,
remarked, ‘Paradoxically, some of the happiest times in that whole long struggle
were in the company of my comrades on Robben Island.’
Mandela was now cut off from all this. His abrupt departure meant that he had
no time even to say farewell properly to friends with whom he had shared so
many ordeals. Nor was there the slightest prospect that he would ever be
released. Responding to the campaign for his release, the prime minister, P. W.
Botha, denounced him as an ‘arch-Marxist’ committed to violent revolution who
would have to serve the sentence of life imprisonment imposed on him by a
court of law.

Botha first made a name for himself in politics as a roughneck breaking up his
opponents’ meetings. He climbed through the ranks of the National Party to
reach the post of defence minister, and then emerged unexpectedly as prime
minister in 1978 as the result of a vicious struggle for power between two rival
camps within the party, the verkrampte wing, the name given to its more
narrowminded, reactionary members, and the verligte wing, the name given to
its more openminded, enlightened ones. Like Verwoerd and Vorster, Botha was
an authoritarian figure, singleminded, ruthless and intolerant of opposition. His
commitment to the cause of white supremacy was no less tenacious than theirs,
but he preferred a pragmatic approach to the conduct of government rather than
an ideological one. His objective was to modernise apartheid, to rid it of its more
impractical encumbrances, to make it function more effectively. This was an
objective supported by Afrikaner businessmen, increasingly frustrated by the
costs of apartheid, and by the military establishment, which had become openly
critical about the lack of urgency shown by the government in tackling the
fundamental issues thrown up by the Soweto revolt. As defence minister for

twelve years, Botha was close to the military’s way of thinking. What the
military wanted above all were defensible political goals.
Botha began his term of office by emphasising the need for change. ‘We are
moving in a changing world,’ he said. ‘We must adapt, otherwise we shall die.’
In one speech after another, he repeated the same message across the country: ‘A
white monopoly of power is untenable in the Africa of today. . . . A meaningful
division of power is needed between all race groups. . . . Apartheid is a recipe for
permanent conflict.’
The air was thick with the promises of reform. Botha declared himself to be in
favour of removing ‘hurtful unnecessary discrimination’ and suggested that laws
banning interracial marriage and sex should no longer be regarded as ‘holy
cows’. Petty apartheid, once a key government objective, aimed at keeping
blacks apart from whites in the use of public amenities such as park benches,
post office windows, museums and libraries, began to fray at the edges. White
officials, accustomed to abusing blacks at will, were now told to handle them
with respect.
Proceeding with extreme caution, Botha also initiated moves to improve
conditions in black urban areas. After thirty years of harsh legislation designed
to prevent the African population from putting down roots in white areas, the
government finally recognised their right to live there permanently, according
them property rights. Restrictions on African, Coloured and Indian businessmen
were eased. New housing programmes were started. An electrification project
for Soweto was set in motion. Plans to remove Alexandra, the black ghetto north
of Johannesburg surrounded by affluent white suburbs, which Verwoerd had
condemned as a ‘black spot’ and marked down for destruction, were abandoned.
A similar reprieve was given to the Crossroads squatter settlement outside Cape
Town, whose inhabitants had achieved international fame by defying the
government’s forceful efforts to expel them and raze the settlement to the
ground. Botha made his personal contribution towards trying to establish better
relations with the black community by paying a visit to Soweto, the first prime
minister ever to set foot in a black township, proclaiming as he did so, ‘We are
all South Africans.’
Labour conditions also improved. African workers were permitted to join
registered unions. Most job reservation laws were scrapped. In the field of
education, the government committed itself to the goal of providing equal,

though separate, education for all population groups, while emphasising that ‘the
historical backlog cannot be overcome overnight’. By 1983 only seven times as
much was spent on white children per capita as on African children, compared to
the sixteen times of 1968. The government’s purpose henceforth was to create
stable black urban communities with a vested interest in the free-enterprise
system.
Alongside this programme of reform, Botha began to develop a national
security system designed to overcome any challenge mounted against the
government either internally or externally. He was convinced that South Africa
was the target of an internationally organised communist strategy to overthrow
the government and replace it with a Marxist regime beholden to the Soviet
Union. Botha had a fixed and simple view of world politics, believing that they
revolved around a struggle between communist and anti-communist forces, with
South Africa and its vast mineral resources and maritime facilities the glittering
prize. Whatever ills befell South Africa, whether it was domestic unrest,
international pressure or regional threats, he attributed ultimately to Moscow’s
grand design. Every adversity was seen as part of a ‘total onslaught’ that South
Africa faced. In this scheme of things the ANC was to figure prominently.
In its years of exile since 1960, the ANC had met with mixed fortunes. Oliver
Tambo had travelled the world seeking to build support in as many different
quarters as possible and gaining widespread respect for his skill at diplomacy in
the process. The Soviet Union had given most support, providing funds,
equipment and training. But assistance had also been forthcoming from Sweden,
Denmark, Norway and Holland and a host of political parties, trade unions,
student groups and church organisations across the Western world. At the United
Nations, the ANC had been granted observer status since 1974 and allowed
access to international agencies from which the South African government had
been banned. The number of ANC ‘embassies’ around the world surpassed the
number maintained by the South African government.
But as for its main task of confronting the regime at home, the ANC had little
to show. At a conference in 1969 at its military headquarters in Morogoro in
Tanzania, where guerrilla training camps had been established four years earlier,
the ANC formed a revolutionary council with responsibility for conducting
guerrilla warfare and expressed its strategy for the first time in revolutionary
terms. Among the members of the revolutionary council were Tambo, the
ANC’s president since the death of Chief Luthuli in 1967, Yusuf Dadoo, the

Indian communist leader, and Joe Slovo, still the chief of staff of Umkhonto we
Sizwe. For the first time, too, the ANC opened its membership to whites,
Coloureds and Indians.
Yet for all the enthusiasm shown for revolutionary ideas, the ANC’s years in
exile were marked more by internal dissension and disputes than by any
headway made in implementing them. Located 1,000 miles away from the
borders of South Africa, unable to find a way through the surrounding white
buffer states of Angola, Rhodesia and Mozambique, the guerrillas in Tanzania
succumbed to boredom, frustration and inertia. In the leadership, splits
developed over the decision to allow whites to join the ANC’s ranks and over
the role of members of the Communist Party. Attempts made to infiltrate agents
into South Africa were often amateurish, detected well in advance by Pretoria’s
spies, who penetrated deep into the organisation.
The change in the ANC’s fortunes came when Angola and Mo - zambique
were taken over by nationalist guerrilla movements in 1975 and the Soweto
revolt the following year brought an army of eager recruits. In the wake of the
uprising, some 14,000 youths left South Africa, most of them joining the ANC.
Many went to military camps established in northern Angola under the control of
ANC instructors. The more promising recruits were sent for training in the
Soviet Union and East Germany. The capital of Mozambique, Maputo, less than
fifty miles from the South African border, became a key operational centre, to
where much of Umkhonto’s command structure was transferred. Joe Slovo
moved there in 1977, with his wife, Ruth First. ANC groups were also set up in
Botswana, Swaziland and Lesotho to help establish an internal network and to
supervise the flow of recruits.
From 1977, Umkhonto began a low-level sabotage campaign, selecting targets
mainly with a high propaganda value, intending more to re-establish a political
following among the black population and to raise its morale than to threaten the
economy or white security. Its targets included police stations in black
residential areas, administrative buildings, railway lines and electricity
substations. A number of informers, security policemen and state witnesses were
assassinated. From 1980 more ambitious targets were selected. That year, ANC
guerrillas attacked industrial plants in Sasolburg and Secunda, destroying fuel
storage tanks; in 1981, rockets were fired at the Voortrekkerhoogte military
base; in 1982, bombs exploded in the Koeberg nuclear power station near Cape
Town, damaging one of the reactors and two transformers; in 1983, a car-bomb

attack was made outside a military building in Pretoria, killing sixteen people
and injuring more than 200—the most serious sabotage incident in South
Africa’s history.
The government retaliated against neighbouring states with a combination of
military might and economic coercion intended to force them into submission
and to expel the ANC. Its main target was Mozambique. From bases in the
Transvaal, the South African military trained, armed and directed a rebel group
whose purpose was to create havoc in Mozambique, attacking bridges, railways,
road transport, schools and clinics. Direct military raids were made on ANC
targets in Maputo. In 1982, a parcel bomb sent to the Eduardo Mondlane
University in Maputo killed Ruth First. Mozambique was also subjected to
economic pressure. Similar methods were used against Angola, Lesotho and
Swaziland. Assassination squads were used at home and abroad.
Unable to withstand the pressure, South Africa’s neighbours capitulated, one
by one, to its demands. In 1984, Mozambique expelled some 800 ANC
members, allowing only a mission of ten to remain. Deprived of its most
important forward positions, the ANC was forced to operate from headquarters
in Lusaka, Zambia, hundreds of miles away from the front line.

Botha, meanwhile, proceeded with a plan for constitutional change, which he
confidently expected would become the centrepiece of his reform programme.
He intended to expand the political base of the white population by incorporating
the Coloured and Indian communities into the white political system, providing
them with political rights while ensuring that political power remained securely
in the hands of the whites. The terminology he used for describing this exercise
was ‘a healthy form of power sharing’. Much emphasis was placed on the
importance of ‘group rights’, a term which, according to the government, meant
that each race group was allowed to govern itself without interference or
domination by any other group, but which in practice added up to little more
than the old system of racial separation run by whites. Parliament was to be
divided into three chambers: a House of Assembly for whites, a House of
Representatives for Coloureds and a House of Delegates for Indians. Each
chamber was to be given responsibility for its ‘own’ affairs, such as education,
health and housing, leaving other major portfolios, such as law and order and
finance, in the hands of the government. A new office of state president was to

be established, giving the head of government greatly increased powers. No
representation was accorded to the black population. Botha’s view was that
blacks had been given sufficient political representation through the homelands
system. All that he was prepared to concede to urban blacks were elected local
councils.
Botha’s proposals, as he had expected, caused uproar in the verkrampte wing
of the National Party, which regarded any attempt to tamper with Verwoerd’s
doctrine of total separation as heresy. A group of Nationalist MPs broke away to
form the Conservative Party, advocating a return to absolute apartheid, a
geographical separation of the races, with homelands for Coloureds and Indians
as well as Africans. New extremist groups sprang up competing for the loyalty
of the volk. But Botha was vindicated by the results of a white referendum in
November 1983 in which two-thirds of the white electorate voted in favour of
the new constitution.
What Botha did not anticipate was the extent of opposition to the new
constitution organised by anti-apartheid groups. In August 1983, delegates
representing more than 300 organisations, including trade unions, youth groups,
student bodies and community associations, met in Mitchell’s Plains, a Coloured
township near Cape Town, to launch the United Democratic Front to coordinate
protest against the new constitution in the broadest display of public opposition
to apartheid in nearly thirty years. The UDF was a conscious effort to revive the
style of nationalist politics adopted by the Congress movement of the 1950s. It
functioned as a popular front rather than as a political organisation. It set out
only the broadest aims—to create a united democratic South Africa free from
homelands and group areas and based on the will of the people—leaving its
affiliates to decide their own activities. Its purpose was to draw together as wide
a range of opposition forces as possible, cutting across lines of class and colour.
White organisations, such as the National Union of South African Students, were
welcomed into its fold and soon some 600 organisations were members. Among
the leaders were veterans from the 1950s Congress campaigns, including Archie
Gumede, a Durban lawyer who served as chairman of the Release Mandela
Committee, Helen Joseph, the veteran civil rights activist, and Albertina Sisulu.
Like Winnie Mandela, Albertina Sisulu had endured years of imprisonment,
solitary confinement, house arrest and harassment, and was greatly admired and
respected by anti-apartheid activists. At the time, she was being held in prison, in
solitary confinement, without charge. One of the patrons chosen by the UDF was

Nelson Mandela.

Mandela was kept informed of these events. In his new abode in Pollsmoor
Prison, he was allowed to receive a wide range of newspapers and magazines,
including Time magazine and the Guardian Weekly from London, reading every
edition from cover to cover. He was also able to listen to local radio stations.
Overall, living conditions in Pollsmoor for Mandela and his colleagues were a
considerable improvement on Robben Island. They were allocated a spacious
room on the top floor of a prison wing, with an adjacent section containing
toilets and showers. They were given proper beds with sheets. They were served
meals with meat and vegetables and allowed to buy special provisions each
month. They were provided with two rooms for use as a library and for study
purposes and a wide variety of books and films. They also had access to a large
roof-top terrace for exercise; tennis matches on the roof were taken very
seriously. They were free to get up when they wanted.
Despite these improvements, however, they all hankered for the life on
Robben Island. They missed their comrades there, the openness of the island, the
views across the sea to the mountains on the mainland beyond, the sounds of the
birds, the roar of the surf, the flowers and wildlife. Pollsmoor, by contrast, was a
modern concrete building, where the only view was of the concrete walls which
surrounded them. Their terrace, though half the size of a football pitch, was
covered in black rubberised matting and contained by high concrete walls,
painted white, which during the summer became unbearably hot. The only
glimpse of the outside world they had was a partial sight of the ridges of the
nearby Steenberg mountain; all the rest was sky. As Mandela later told a visitor,
he came to know what Oscar Wilde meant by ‘the little tent of blue that
prisoners call the sky’. They made repeated requests to be transferred back to
Robben Island, but to no avail.
To compensate for their drab surroundings, Mandela constructed a large
garden on the terrace using sixteen oil drums sliced in half and filled with rich,
loamy soil taken from the prison grounds. Mandela’s garden became a centre of
interest not only for his colleagues, who helped with the work, but also for the
prison commander, Brigadier Munro, a gardening enthusiast, and prison staff,
who provided him with seeds and manure. Each morning, after his normal round
of exercises, Mandela put on an old straw hat and gardening gloves and tended

his plants for two hours. The size of the garden steadily grew. At one stage, there
were 900 plants—onions, aubergines, cabbages, cauliflowers, beans, spinach,
carrots, cucumbers, broccoli, beetroots, lettuces, tomatoes, peppers, strawberries
and a variety of herbs. The produce went both to common-law prisoners and to
warders.
The visiting arrangements at Pollsmoor were also much improved. Instead of
the dingy, cramped, box-like compartments on Robben Island, Pollsmoor had
spacious cubicles fitted with large glass partitions through which visitors and
prisoners could see each other clearly from the waist up and with modern
microphones which enabled them to hear properly.
For Mandela, a moment of pure joy came in March 1984 when he was
allowed his first ‘contact’ with Winnie. The government conceded contact visits
only after prolonged pressure from the International Committee of the Red
Cross. For the occasion, Mandela was taken to a room separate from the main
visiting area which his personal warder, James Gregory, had endeavoured to
make more pleasant with some comfortable furniture. Winnie arrived at the
prison in the company of Zindzi and Zindzi’s youngest son, Gadaffi, not
knowing how different this visit would be. Accompanied by Gregory, she was
shown into the room, where Mandela was sitting in a large, easy chair. He stood
up as Winnie rushed across the room towards him, squealing with delight. They
hugged and kissed, laughing with pleasure. It was a moment of which Mandela
had long dreamed, the first time he had touched Winnie in nearly twenty years.
Then he embraced Zindzi, whom he had last held as a baby. For the rest of the
visit, Mandela held Gadaffi in his arms. The following day, Winnie, Zindzi and
Gadaffi returned for a two-hour visit. In two days, Mandela used up his entire
quota of visits for the month.
But, as always with members of his family, trouble was never far away. In
June 1984, Zindzi was attacked by her boyfriend, Patrick Moshidi, the father of
Gadaffi, who punched, kicked and stabbed her in the hand and head, leaving her
for dead unconscious on a hillside. She was found and taken to hospital, where
she spent several days in intensive care. In August 1984, while Winnie was
visiting doctors in Johannesburg, her house in Brandfort and the adjacent clinic
were wrecked by petrol bombs. While waiting for repairs to be completed,
Winnie remained in her house in Orlando West, technically in defiance of her
banning order.

Mandela’s relationship with Makgatho and Makaziwe was also uneasy.
Makgatho stopped visiting his father in 1983, hating the constant goading about
his failure to improve his education. Makaziwe also seemed to disappoint him.
After she had succeeded in obtaining a degree from Fort Hare, Mandela made
clear his view that she should study for a higher degree abroad. When she took a
job as a social worker instead, he wrote her a scathing rebuke, condemning her
lack of ambition. She subsequently went on to study abroad, but became largely
estranged from her father.

Throughout 1984, a mood of tension was spreading among the black population.
An economic recession, more severe than anything South Africa had known for
fifty years, cast thousands into unemployment. The inflation rate climbed,
causing a squeeze on black living standards. Rural areas were hit by a
devastating drought. Student groups were active once more, protesting at low
educational standards. The elections for Coloured and Indian representatives to
the new tricameral parliament in August raised the temperature still further. A
low turn-out of voters—less than one in five Coloureds and Indians thought
there was any point in voting—suggested massive disapproval of the new
constitution. African resentment at being excluded from parliament reached new
heights. The new system of local government for African townships, introduced
in 1983, also provoked widespread opposition. Rent increases imposed to help
finance new councils brought sharp protests. Local councillors, elected in poorly
attended polls, were denounced as ‘stooges’ and ‘collaborators’.
In September, outbreaks of violence began. They were sporadic at first,
ignited by local grievances, flaring up with great intensity, shifting from one area
to the next and gradually drawing in more and more of an urban population that
was alienated and hostile. At the forefront were groups of black youths
—‘comrades’, as they came to be known—determined to destroy ‘the system’
and ready to defy armed police and soldiers in the dusty and decrepit streets of
the townships with stones, catapults and petrol bombs. Many saw themselves as
the shock troops of revolution and believed that it was within their reach.
Students joined the fray, forsaking their classrooms once more. ‘Liberation
before Education’ became their slogan. The townships’ revolt, however, was not
solely a ‘children’s war’, as it had been in 1976. This time the revolt was part of
a popular movement involving entire communities—parents, teachers, workers,
churchmen and women. Nor were the aims of the black activists confined to

resolving particular grievances. This time the objective was to overthrow
apartheid.
Urged on by the ANC in exile to mount ‘a people’s war’ and make the
townships ungovernable, young comrades enforced consumer boycotts,
organised rent strikes, attacked government buildings, set up ‘people’s courts’
and hunted down ‘collaborators’—township councillors, local policemen and
others deemed to support ‘the system’. Their trademark became ‘the necklace’
method of killing—a tyre filled with petrol thrown over a victim and set on fire.
The government responded with a show of military might intended to
demonstrate to the white electorate as well as to the truculent black population
that it was fully in command. A combined force of paramilitary police and
troops moved into the townships around the industrial centres of southern
Transvaal, the epicentre of the first cycle of violence. Opposition groups replied
with their own show of strength, calling for a two-day stay-away, demanding the
withdrawal of the army and the police from the townships. As well as student
groups and local UDF affiliates, labour unions undertook to support the stayaway, lending their weight for the first time to a mass protest over political
grievances. The stay-away was the most successful of its kind in nearly thirtyfive years. Convinced that forceful action would curb the ‘unrest’, the
government ordered the detention of union and community leaders.
White business leaders were appalled both at the mayhem and at the
government’s lack of any clear strategy for dealing with black grievances other
than repression, and joined in open criticism of government policy. Abroad,
there was mounting anti-apartheid activity. From late 1984, the anti-apartheid
movement in the United States gained significant momentum for the first time,
attracting support for campaigns aimed at getting US corporations to withdraw
from South Africa.
Confronted by a rising clamour for major reform at home and abroad, Botha
had only a limited stock of ideas upon which to draw. He was prepared to make
modifications to the apartheid system but only where they did not diminish white
power and privilege. He accepted the need to allow Africans in urban areas
greater status, promised to open central business districts to all races, agreed to
suspend the forced removals policy, repealed laws prohibiting sex and marriage
across the colour line and talked of possible changes to influx controls.
Botha also came up with what he believed was a subtle solution to the

Mandela problem. Demands for Mandela’s release were by now universal.
Western governments saw this as an essential prelude to a negotiated settlement
between the government and the black population. Botha’s plan was to offer to
release Mandela on condition that he publicly renounced the use of violence. If
he refused, then the international community would understand why the
government could not release him and the blame for his imprisonment would
rest with Mandela himself and not the government.
Addressing the House of Assembly on 31 January 1985, Botha declared:
The government is willing to consider Mr Mandela’s release in the Republic of
South Africa on condition that Mr Mandela gives a full commitment that he will
not make himself guilty of planning, instigating or committing acts of violence
for the furtherance of political objectives, but will conduct himself in such a way
that he will not again have to be arrested. It is therefore not the South African
government which now stands in the way of Mr Mandela’s freedom. It is
himself. The choice is his. All that is required of him now is that he should
unconditionally reject violence as a political instrument. This is, after all, a norm
which is respected in all civilized countries of the world.
Mandela’s reply was forthright. It was read out in public by Zindzi on 10
February at a mass rally at a stadium in Soweto called by the UDF to celebrate
the award of the Nobel Peace Prize to the anti-apartheid activist Bishop
Desmond Tutu.
I am surprised at the conditions that the government wants to impose on
me. I am not a violent man. My colleagues and I wrote in 1952 to Malan
asking for a round-table conference to find a solution to the problems of
our country, but that was ignored. When Strijdom was in power, we
made the same offer. Again it was ignored. When Verwoerd was in
power, we asked for a national convention for all the people in South
Africa to decide on their future. This, too, was in vain.
It was only then, when all other forms of resistance were no longer
open to us, that we turned to armed struggle. Let Botha show that he is
different than Malan, Strijdom and Verwoerd. Let him renounce
violence. Let him say that he will dismantle apartheid. Let him unban the
people’s organization, the African National Congress. Let him free all
who have been imprisoned, banished or exiled for their opposition to
apartheid. Let him guarantee free political activity so that people may

decide who will govern them.
I cherish my own freedom dearly, but I care even more for your
freedom. Too many have died since I went to prison. Too many have
suffered for the love of freedom. I owe it to their widows, to their
orphans, to their mothers and to their fathers who have grieved and wept
for them. Not only I have suffered during these long, lonely, wasted
years. I am not less life-loving than you are. But I cannot sell my
birthright, nor am I prepared to sell the birthright of the people to be free.
I am in prison as the representative of the people and of your
organization, the African National Congress, which was banned.
What freedom am I being offered while the organization of the people
remains banned? What freedom am I being offered when I may be
arrested on a pass offence? What freedom am I being offered to live my
life as a family with my dear wife who remains in banishment in
Brandfort? What freedom am I being offered when I need a stamp in my
pass to seek work? What freedom am I being offered when my very
South African citizenship is not respected?
Only free men can negotiate. Prisoners cannot enter into contracts. . . .
I cannot and will not give any undertaking at a time when I and you, the
people, are not free.
These were the first words heard from Mandela in public since his final
address in the Supreme Court in Pretoria more than twenty years before. The
crowd erupted in a wild display of cheering and chanting.