SOWETO
WHITE SOCIETY, DURING THE FOURTEEN YEARS THAT MANDELA
HAD spent in prison, had become increasingly prosperous and secure.
Throughout the 1960s, South Africa experienced one of the highest rates of
economic growth in the world, second only to that of Japan. Foreign trade with
Western countries rose by leaps and bounds. Foreign investors from the United
States, Britain, France and Germany competed vigorously for positions in new
industries. The annual net flow of foreign capital into the country in 1970 rose to
a level six times higher than that of the pre-Sharpeville era. The economic boom
also brought to South Africa a flood of white immigrants, mainly from Europe:
between 1960 and 1970 there was a net gain of some 250,000. All this gave
white South Africans a growing sense of confidence about the future. Black
resistance had been crushed and the security apparatus seemed capable of
meeting any contingency. Many whites believed the apartheid system to be
invincible.
The benefits of National Party rule were noticeable particularly among the
Afrikaner community. With government assistance, a new class of Afrikaner
financiers, businessmen and managers had moved into commanding positions in
industry, commerce and banking, areas once the preserve of English-speaking
whites. State enterprises like railways, harbours, steel production, electric power
generation and heavy engineering were manned at a senior level almost
exclusively by Afrikaners and used as training fields for Afrikaner scientists and
business leaders. Government contracts and concessions were frequently steered
towards Afrikaner companies. The civil service was virtually an Afrikaner
preserve. Afrikaner farmers, consisting of three-quarters of the total number,
also fared well under National Party rule, assisted by subsidies, research funds,
modernisation programmes and favourable prices fixed by state marketing
boards.
The Afrikaner working class prospered as never before. By 1970, more than
80 per cent of the Afrikaner population were living in towns and cities. White

jobs were given whatever protection was needed from black competition.
Almost every skilled trade and craft was reserved for white workers. When
unskilled whites felt threatened by black competition, the government made use
of legislation it had introduced in the 1950s, enabling it to reserve any
occupation for whites only. Some orders applied to entire industries, like
production jobs for the clothing, building, metallurgical and mining industries.
Others affected only small, specific areas protecting a handful of employees, like
the jobs of traffic policemen in Cape Town and passenger-lift operators in
Johannesburg. At a more general level, white workers were protected by two
cardinal principles the government used to determine its labour policy: first, no
white worker could be replaced by a black worker in the same job, and second,
no white worker could work under a black.
The English-speaking community, of course, shared in the prosperity; few
other communities in the world possessed such a high standard of living. The
northern suburbs of Johannesburg, where many English-speakers congregated,
were said to have the greatest concentration of swimming pools outside Beverly
Hills. Whatever reservations English speakers might have held about the nature
of National Party rule, the success it enjoyed made them compliant citizens.
The system seemed strong enough to withstand any shock. When Hendrik
Verwoerd, the driving force behind grand apartheid, was assassinated in the
National Assembly by a deranged parliamentary messenger in 1966, the white
community took the prime minister’s death in its stride. No shift in policy was
considered necessary. Verwoerd’s successor, chosen by the National Party, was
John Vorster, who, as minister of justice, had made such a success of smashing
black opposition. Immediately upon being elected, Vorster declared, ‘My role is
to walk further along the road set by Hendrik Verwoerd.’
The impact of grand apartheid on the African population was felt with
dramatic force during the 1960s as the government worked systematically to
stem the flow of Africans from rural to urban areas and to destroy all notion that
urban Africans could have a permanent place in ‘white’ towns. With remorseless
vigour, the government strove to reduce the urban African population wherever
possible, stripping urban Africans of what few rights they possessed and ridding
white rural areas of vast numbers of blacks. A government circular in 1967
stated: ‘No stone is to be left unturned to achieve the settlement in the
homelands of non-productive Bantu at present residing in the European areas. ’
Among those whom the circular defined as ‘non-productive’ were ‘the aged, the

unfit, widows and women with dependent children’. A government minister
estimated that of 6 million Africans in white areas, 4 million were ‘surplus
appendages’ suitable for deportation to black homelands.
As the policy took effect, the number of prosecutions under pass laws rose
sharply, reaching 700,000 in 1968. Countless thousands found themselves
‘endorsed out’ of urban areas. In the Transvaal and the Orange Free State,
massive urban relocation programmes were carried out. African townships
considered to be within commuting distance of a homeland were ‘deproclaimed’
and their residents moved to new rural townships built in the homelands. In
some cases, the entire African population was moved, as happened at Nelspruit
and Lichtenburg. In other cases, government officials concentrated on removing
the unemployed, the elderly and disabled, women and children, leaving behind
African workers to live in all-male hostels and visit their families on a weekly or
monthly basis.
In place of a stable, urban population, what the government wanted was a
workforce composed principally of migrant labour. With migrant workers
circulating continuously between black homelands and white-owned enterprises
in urban areas, the government saw a means of reconciling the white need for
labour with its own determination to prevent permanent black urbanisation.
African workers could be turned into commuters if they lived in homelands close
enough to urban areas, or weekly migrants if the distance was too far.
Alternatively, African workers could be engaged in the traditional manner on
annual contracts, housed in all-male compounds and released to visit their
families in the homelands at the end of the year. In 1970, it was estimated that
more than 2 million men spent their lives circulating as migrants between their
homes and urban employment. Many of them were deprived of all normal family
and social life, confined for months on end to a bleak and barren existence in
overcrowded barracks that were notorious for high rates of drunkenness and
violence. Others spent hours each day travelling long distances to work in
packed buses and trains, rising before dawn and returning home late into the
night.
Black townships were deliberately kept as unattractive as possible. Few urban
amenities were ever provided. Black businessmen were prevented by
government restrictions from expanding their enterprises there. No African was
allowed to carry on more than one business. Businesses were confined to
providing ‘daily essential necessities’, like wood, coal, milk and vegetables.

There could be no banks or clothing stores or supermarkets. Restrictions were
even placed on dry-cleaners, garages and petrol stations. Nor were Africans
allowed to establish companies or partnerships in urban areas, or to construct
their own buildings. These had to be built and leased from the local authority.
The largest urban area in the country, Johannesburg’s South Western
Townships, which included Mandela’s home district of Orlando, was typical of
the bleak urban landscape enforced by the government. Known from 1963 as
Soweto, it consisted mainly of row upon row of identical four-room brick
‘matchbox’ houses with hardly any public facilities. Only a small proportion of
houses had electricity or adequate plumbing. There were few paved roads or
proper pavements, no modern shopping centres or office blocks, and not a single
pharmacy or bakery. Because of restrictions placed on African trading rights,
three-quarters of the groceries consumed by Sowetans were purchased in white
shops in Johannesburg. More than 1 million people lived there in circumstances
which became increasingly cramped. From the mid-1960s, the construction of
family housing in all urban areas virtually came to a halt. Priority was given
instead to building housing in the homelands and hostels in urban areas for
migrant labour. By 1970, the average number of people living in each house in
Soweto had risen to thirteen. By 1972, the housing backlog was even greater
than it had been in the 1940s.
The effect of apartheid in rural areas was equally severe. Leaving ‘no stone
unturned’ in its drive for racial separation, the government began to excise
scores of African settlements surrounded by white farming areas where Africans
had lived in relative peace and quiet for generations. In the government’s
terminology, these settlements were known as ‘black spots’, small fragments of
land in what was deemed to be ‘white’ South Africa which stood out as irritating
blemishes on the apartheid map. Some land was held by title deed, purchased by
African farmers in the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries; some was
mission land scheduled for African use under the Natives Land Act of 1913,
small African reserves which had survived intact the era of white occupation but
which were now considered to be ‘badly situated’. In all, there were an estimated
300 black spots.
The elimination of black spots began in earnest in the 1960s. Whole
communities were uprooted and forced to leave their homes. Many were dumped
in areas often unsuitable for cultivation, lacking water supplies, far from main
roads and out of reach of hospitals or clinics. Any sign of resistance was dealt

with by armed police. A Franciscan priest, Father Cosmas Desmond, who made
a journey the length and breadth of South Africa to ascertain the full extent of
the forced removals policy in 1969, later described how he found a ‘laby - rinth
of broken communities, broken families and broken lives’. Between 1960 and
1970, nearly 100,000 Africans lost their homes during the elimination of black
spots. Many more were to follow.
In white farming areas, where the white population was constantly
preoccupied with die beswarting van die platteland—the blackening of the white
countryside—the government acted with similar vigour to reduce the black
population. White farmers were encouraged to adopt more mechanised
production methods and to replace permanent black workers with casual
employees and single migrant workers. An estimated half a million full-time
black workers lost their employment on white farms during the 1960s.
Thousands of African labour tenants—‘squatters’—were also turned off white
land. The only Africans whom the government wanted in white farming areas
were hired labourers, preferably migrants.
The impact of all these changes in ‘white’ South Africa on black homelands
was devastating. Already overcrowded and impoverished, homelands had to
cope with an endless flow of displaced Africans—labour tenants, squatters,
redundant farm labourers, urban dwellers—‘superfluous’ people, as they were
described, all scrabbling for survival. During the 1960s, the homeland
population nearly doubled. Once in the homelands, most African men had no
alternative but to offer themselves up to the migrant labour treadmill. The
government, for its part, pronounced itself well pleased with the results of its
policy. ‘The elimination of the redundant non-economically active Bantu’ in
white areas, said a government minister in 1969, was ‘a tremendous
achievement’.

For ten years, while the apartheid system bit ever deeper into the lives of the
African population, little sign of protest emerged. The repression used to crush
Umkhonto we Sizwe had made an impact too deep to be forgotten easily. Even
traditionally militant areas like the townships of the Eastern Cape were cowed
into silence.
But in the early 1970s, a new generation of black activists arose from the
ranks of the student population. It was a generation which drew its inspiration

not from the concept of multiracial struggle that the ANC had championed but
from a sense of black assertiveness more in line with the Africanist tradition of
black politics. The black consciousness movement of the 1970s filled the
vacuum left by the collapse of the ANC and the PAC. It found an articulate
spokesman in Steve Biko, a medical student from the Eastern Cape, who argued
that ‘group power’ would achieve black liberation. Biko was contemptuous of
the cowed and submissive attitude of the black population. ‘The type of black
man we have today has lost his manhood,’ he wrote in a student newsletter in
1970. ‘Reduced to an obliging shell, he looks with awe at the white power
structure and accepts what he regards as the “inevitable position”.’ What was
needed, said Biko, was a massive effort to reverse the negative image that blacks
held of themselves and to replace it with a more positive identity. Black
oppression was first and foremost a psychological problem. It could be
countered by promoting black awareness, black pride, black capabilities and
black achievement. The term ‘black’ was used to include Coloureds and Indians
equally with Africans as victims of racial oppression. No help was wanted from
white liberals or any other white sympathisers. The slogan used was: ‘Black
man, you are on your own.’
As the black consciousness movement gathered momentum, it found outlets in
literature, poetry, music, theology and in local community projects promoting
education, health and welfare. A host of youth clubs, discussion groups and
cultural organisations sprang into existence.
The stirring of black discontent eventually prompted the government to take
reprisals. In 1973 it issued banning orders on Biko and seven other leaders of the
movement. But its actions failed to prevent the spread of black consciousness. A
dramatic boost to black morale occurred in 1974 when Portuguese rule in
Mozambique and Angola collapsed, paving the way for African liberation
movements there to take control. When South African troops were obliged to
withdraw from Angola in early 1976, having failed to prevent a Marxist guerrilla
organisation from gaining power there, black students again celebrated the
defeat of white power.
The issue that finally ignited student anger was the system of Bantu education
designed by Verwoerd to limit African education to the needs of the white
economy. It had produced a legacy of inferior schooling, poorly trained teachers,
overcrowded classrooms and inadequate equipment. Government expenditure
had been kept to a minimum: in the early 1970s it spent sixteen times more on

white education per pupil than on black education. Because of deliberate
restrictions on places in middle and higher schools, hundreds of thousands of
children—‘push-outs’, as they were known—left school with no greater
prospects than menial work or unemployment. Those who managed to complete
secondary school were faced with a whole range of apartheid restrictions
affecting the kind of employment for which they could apply.
Into this potentially explosive atmosphere the government stumbled with yet
another regulation. In 1974, it decided that an old ruling, originally made in
1958, that half of the subjects in secondary schools not taught in the African
vernacular had to be taught in Afrikaans and the other half in English should be
enforced the following year. Because of the practical difficulties involved, the
ruling had hitherto been ignored. African teachers in training college continued
to receive their instructions almost exclusively in English. Many teachers were
unable even to converse in Afrikaans. In one protest after another, teachers’
organisations, school boards, principals and parents sought to persuade the
government to change its mind, but the government remained adamant.
The epicentre of the resistance was Soweto. Students, denouncing Afrikaans
as the language of the ‘oppressor’, began to boycott classes in Afrikaans,
organised school strikes and then planned a mass dem - onstration. On 16 June
1976, a dozen columns of students marched through Soweto carrying placards,
chanting slogans and singing freedom songs. They were met by armed police
who opened fire, killing a thirteen-year-old schoolboy. As news of the shooting
spread, students went on the rampage, attacking government buildings, beer
halls, bottle stores, vehicles and buses. Two whites were killed. For three days,
Soweto was the scene of running battles between groups of students and riot
police in armoured convoys, often firing indiscriminately. Clashes spread to
other townships in the Transvaal. At least 150 people were killed during the first
week of the Soweto revolt, most of them black schoolchildren.
In July, the government retreated on the Afrikaans issue. But by then the
students had set their sights on bringing down the whole Bantu education
system. Some believed that the government itself could be toppled. Time and
again they returned to the streets, showing remarkable resilience in the face of
police firepower and displaying a level of defiance and hatred of the apartheid
system rarely seen before. As soon as one set of student leaders was detained or
dis - appeared into exile, others stepped forward, ready to take their place.

Yet for all the courage shown, the student revolt lacked any sense of direction.
Marches, demonstrations and arson attacks produced little discernible result
other than an endless series of police raids and a high cost in casualties—at least
600 dead and 4,000 wounded. From September onwards the momentum of the
revolt began to ebb. By December it had virtually died out.

The prison population on Robben Island had undergone several changes over the
years. When Mandela was first sent there in 1963 it consisted mainly of
hardened criminals divided into rival gangs which constantly fought each other
for ascendancy. Murder, assault and sodomy were commonplace. There
followed an influx of PAC prisoners, many on short sentences of two or three
years. ANC prisoners, at first a small minority, eventually outnumbered them. In
the early 1970s, the criminal population was steadily reduced. The number of
political prisoners also fell as those on short sentences departed. By the mid1970s, political prisoners numbered only 400, many of them middle-aged or
growing old, long accustomed to a prison routine which they themselves had
done much to shape.
The arrival in 1976 of young, unruly black consciousness activists, as
determined to confront the prison system as they had been to confront the
apartheid system outside, shook the prison to its core. They regarded the settled
habits of the older inmates, in particular their willingness to conform to prison
regulations, with contempt, as being little different from the submissive attitude
to authority shown by their parents and teachers for so many years. Normal rules
like standing up in the presence of prison officers and taking off their caps were
simply ignored.
Such conduct came as a shock to the older generation of prisoners. In his
autobiography, Mandela described an incident he witnessed in which a prison
officer told a newly arrived prisoner to take off his cap. ‘What for?’ retorted the
prisoner. Mandela recalled, ‘I could hardly believe what I had heard.’ The young
militants were prepared neither to submit to prison discipline nor to heed the
advice of old stalwarts on how best to handle the prison authorities. They
considered conditions on Robben Island to be barbaric and cared nothing for
explanations about how much they had improved as a result of the efforts of the
first political prisoners to arrive there.
Most of the 1976 intake were placed in a new part of the prison known as

Section E. But several prominent activists, including two Indians, Strini
Moodley and Saths Cooper, were sent to the isolation section. Mandela made a
point of catching up with the ideas behind black consciousness. But the gulf in
attitude remained. After watching a documentary on an American motorcycle
gang known as Hell’s Angels which depicted them as being reckless and violent,
while portraying the police as being decent and trustworthy, the ANC prisoners
were all harshly critical of the bikers for their lawlessness. But Moodley
compared their rebelliousness to the rebelliousness of the Soweto students and
accused the ANC men of being elderly middle-class intellectuals who favoured
right-wing authority.
Both the ANC and the PAC expended considerable energy in trying to recruit
black-consciousness supporters to their side. The friction this caused lasted for
several years and resulted in serious bouts of violence. In 1977, Mosiuoa Lekota,
a black-consciousness leader who decided to join the ANC, was attacked with a
garden fork by former comrades. After leaving Robben Island, Saths Cooper
observed caustically, ‘When the sordidness of prison behaviour is examined,
there is little difference between common-law and political prisoners generally.
Where the former are often organized into deadly rival gangs, the latter are
organized into often warring political groupings.’ It was a struggle in which the
ANC’s older generation of prisoners was largely successful in winning over
black-consciousness activists.
Meanwhile, the tempo of life on Robben Island changed in other ways. In
1977, the authorities ended hard labour in the quarries, which had been
Mandela’s principal occupation for thirteen years. From 1978, political prisoners
were allowed to listen to censored newscasts broadcast over an intercom system.
From 1980, they could buy newspapers and periodicals, albeit heavily censored
beforehand by prison staff. A tennis court was constructed in the courtyard.
Mandela’s days were now spent largely at leisure. Most of the time he
occupied by reading. ‘He would read for hour after hour in unbroken
concentration,’ recalled Kathrada. Because of the four-year ban on his studies,
the books he read were mainly novels obtained from the prison library. He
subscribed to a wide range of newspapers and periodicals, including Afrikaans
publications. He kept up his correspondence as regularly as he was permitted,
worked diligently on legal briefs for fellow prisoners, played tennis and tended
his garden patch.

For all the new comforts of prison life, Mandela worried that it was leaving
him further and further behind as the outside world moved on. The arrival of the
1976 activists was a reminder not just of how much he was out of touch with
political developments, with new ideas and thinking, but of how much time had
passed. Most of the new prisoners had been mere infants at the time his prison
life had begun.
The departure of close friends added to his sense of being stranded. Fikile
Bam and Neville Alexander had gone in 1974 after serving ten years. Mac
Maharaj left in 1976, taking with him Mandela’s manuscript. Eddie Daniels
went in 1979 and Michael Dingake in 1981. The Rivonia group remained, with
not the slightest sign that they would ever be released.
Each year brought news of the death of old colleagues. Albert Luthuli, in poor
health and with failing eyesight, had died in 1967, struck by a train while taking
a walk near his home in Natal. In 1968, Z. K. Matthews, Mandela’s old
professor, had died in the United States. J. B. Marks died in Moscow in 1972,
Robert Resha in London in 1973, Moses Kotane in Moscow in 1974 and
Michael Harmel in Prague in 1974. Bram Fischer died in 1975, suffering from
cancer and released from Pretoria prison for only the last few weeks of his life.
Robert Sobukwe, who had been released from solitary confinement after six
years on Robben Island, died in Kimberley in 1978. In a letter of condolence to
Robert Resha’s widow, Mandela remarked, ‘It seems that the old and stable
world we knew so well is beginning to crumble down, leaving us with nothing
but painful memories.’

As a resident of Soweto, Winnie was drawn swiftly into the tumult of the student
uprising. She played a leading role in the Black Parents Association, formed by a
group of local leaders to act as intermediaries between the students and the
authorities. The BPA helped organise funerals and raised money for medical and
burial expenses. Winnie herself renewed her reputation for militant behaviour
when she went to a local police station in the company of an African bishop and
ended up by shouting and throwing objects at the police, accusing them of
murder. ‘There was the usual flare-up,’ she said. ‘I don’t think Bishop Buthelezi
had ever seen anything like that in his life. I wanted to restrain myself because of
him but it was difficult.’ One of her BPA colleagues, Dr Nthatho Motlana, a
close friend of the Mandelas who acted as guardian to Zeni and to Zindzi,

recalled how Winnie’s conduct would scare them: ‘Often I would say, you are
bloody foolhardy, you are going to get us all locked up, and when they
threatened to lock her up she just said, “Do it, man!’”
In August 1976, Winnie and ten other women were detained under the
Internal Security Act and taken to the Fort. She remained there, without being
charged, for five months. During the school holidays, Zeni and Zindzi went to
stay in Johannesburg with the banned activist Helen Joseph and visited their
mother each week, taking fruit, clothes and newspapers. Released at Christmas,
Winnie was once more issued with strict banning orders, confining her to her
house in Orlando between 6 p.m. and 6 a.m. each day.
As the first anniversary of the student uprising drew near, the government
devised yet another form of punishment for Winnie: banishment. In May 1977,
without warning, armed police arrived at her home in the early morning, took
her to a local police station and piled all her furniture and belongings into a
truck. She was then driven 300 miles to a barren township on the edge of a small
platteland dorp in the Orange Free State called Brandfort and prohibited from
travelling outside the locality. Zindzi went with her.
The house she was given—no. 802—possessed neither water nor electricity. It
consisted of three tiny rooms, far too small for all her possessions, most of which
had to be taken away to be stored at the local police station. When she arrived,
the floors were covered with mounds of earth left behind by local builders. The
local population had been told that Winnie was a dangerous criminal and
instructed to avoid her. She spoke neither of the two languages used locally,
Sesotho and Afrikaans. Under the terms of her banning order, she was confined
to the house every night and allowed no visitors; during the day, she was
forbidden to be in the company of more than one person at a time. Her
movements were constantly watched. Her neighbours on both sides were
policemen. Every day a security policeman kept her under surveillance, spending
most of his time in a car parked on a low hill nearby and using binoculars.
Friends in Johannesburg were quick to help, driving down to Brandfort with
supplies of groceries, cosmetics and household items. But they too were
subjected to police harassment. After four white women friends were given
prison sentences for refusing to make statements to police about their visits to
Winnie, the number of visitors from Johannesburg declined sharply.
At shops in the white section of Brandfort, Winnie faced open hostility from

staff. Brandfort was a typical rural settlement, with a few shops on either side of
the road, a petrol station, a post office, a railway station, two small hotels, two
churches, two banks, an Afrikaans school and a police station, and had been long
accustomed to a quiet routine and an orderly existence. Blacks who came to shop
in Brandfort were usually dealt with by being served through separate small
windows. When Winnie took Zindzi to a clothes shop to buy her a black
mourning dress to mark the first anniversary of the Soweto revolt in June, she
was confronted by an angry white shop assistant who tried to prevent her from
entering. The common practice was for blacks to stand outside the shop and
point to the clothes that interested them. Winnie’s altercation with the shop
assistant eventually required the police to break it up. At other shops, when staff
complained about her presence or asked her to go to the non-white section, she
exploded, shouting and swearing at them.
The persistent attention of the police affected not only Winnie but Zindzi too.
Friends who visited her were questioned aggressively about their meetings.
Sometimes they were prevented from meeting her at all. Only sixteen years old,
she fell into a deep depression, weeping continuously and unable to sleep. From
Robben Island, Mandela brought an urgent application for an interdict against
the security police to restrain them from intimidating or harassing Zindzi. In a
statement to the court, Zindzi described how the police had burst into the house
while she was in the company of her teenage friends, demanding names and
addresses, issuing threats and evicting everyone present, then calling on them in
their homes and detaining them for questioning. As a result, she said, her friends
were terrified of visiting her. The court ruled that Zindzi was entitled to receive
visitors in peace, even though Winnie was subject to a banning order.
The atmosphere in Brandfort remained grim, but Winnie was loath to let
Zindzi go back to Johannesburg. ‘I literally couldn’t let her out of my clutches,
clinging to perhaps the last semblance of a family unit,’ she said in her
autobiography. When, after two years in Brandfort, Zindzi did return to
Johannesburg, to stay with Helen Joseph, Winnie described in a letter to a friend
how her daughter’s company had helped cushion her from the pain of exile and
spoke of the loneliness that followed her departure: ‘The empty long days drag
on, one like the other. . . . The solitude is deadly.’
Mandela found Winnie’s plight all the more difficult to bear since he knew
nothing about Brandfort or the surroundings in which she found herself. Apart
from brief glimpses through blurred glass in the visitor’s room and letters

carefully written to avoid censorship, his connection with Winnie’s life, which
he cherished so much, was based above all on shared memories of people and
places that were once familiar to him. However bleak the circumstances, he
could always picture Winnie at their house in Orlando, cooking in the kitchen,
reading in the lounge or waking up in the bedroom. But house no. 802, the
Location, Brandfort, was as alien to him as it was to Winnie. It was two years
before he saw a photograph of it.
Amid the gloom about Winnie, there were some more cheerful items of family
news. In 1978 a collection of poetry which Zindzi had written as a young
teenager, long before her days in Brandfort, was published in the United States,
together with photographs by Peter Magubane. Zindzi dedicated the book to her
parents. She also wrote an article for the magazine True Love. Mandela was
highly impressed by her abilities and hoped writing might become her
profession.
But it was Zeni who occasioned one of the most memorable days of
Mandela’s prison life. In 1977, at the age of eighteen and eight months pregnant,
Zeni had married Prince Thumbumuzi, a son of King Sobhuza of Swaziland
whom she had met while at school there. Neither Mandela nor Winnie was in
favour of the marriage at first. Both considered Zeni far too young and wanted
her first to complete her secondary education and preferably to obtain a
university degree before settling down to marriage. Mandela asked George
Bizos, his friend and legal adviser, to interview the prince on his behalf. Bizos
reported favourably and the marriage duly proceeded.
The following year, a few weeks before Mandela’ s sixtieth birthday, Zeni
brought her husband and her baby daughter to Robben Island. Because she was a
member of the royal family of Swaziland, with diplomatic status, she was
accorded the privilege of meeting Mandela in a room usually used for legal
consultations. As Zeni entered the room, she gave the child to her husband and
rushed to Mandela, hugging him tightly. Then Mandela took the baby and sat
holding her for the rest of the visit. It was his first experience of normal human
contact with his family since his imprisonment.

Whatever signs of black discontent there were, the government pressed on with
its policies of grand apartheid as determinedly as before and found willing
accomplices among the black population to make them work. The key figure

was Mandela’s kinsman, Kaizer Ma-tan zima. Since the 1950s, Matanzima had
proved to be apartheid’s most dependable ally, steering the Transkei towards
self-government, overcoming whatever opposition stood in his way and laying
the foundations for a personal dictatorship which ministers in Pretoria were only
too content to support.
The Transkei’s first general election in 1962, in which Matanzima stood as a
champion of separate development while his opponents advocated a multiracial
future both for the Transkei and for South Africa, resulted in a clear rejection of
apartheid. Three out of every four candidates elected favoured a multiracial
solution. But by relying on the support of chiefs, whom he had previously
ensured were entrenched as a permanent majority in the legislative assembly,
Matanzima succeeded in obtaining his own election as chief minister. He then
proceeded to claim that he had a mandate to implement separate development
policies. ‘The people of the Transkei,’ he told the assembly, ‘have, through the
ballot box, expressed their uncompromising rejection of the policy of
multiracialism.’ One of the ministers in his new government was Winnie’s
father, Columbus Madikizela.
After thirteen years of controlling public resources and patronage, using his
chiefly connections and in the last resort locking up his leading opponents,
Matanzima succeeded at his fourth election in 1976 in capturing seventy-one of
seventy-five seats. He then used his election victory to claim that it constituted a
mandate to launch Transkei as an independent state. Independence for the
homelands had become the ultimate goal of apartheid’s architects, the final
solution for the African population. By bestowing independence on all ten
homelands, the government would finally remove all claim that the African
population had to South African citizenship. It would also provide proof to the
international community, so officials in Pretoria believed, that the South African
government had fulfilled its obligations to provide full rights to the African
population.
In October 1976, the Transkei was duly pronounced to be an independent
state. Overnight, 1.6 million Xhosas living there and 1.3 million Xhosas living in
‘white’ areas lost their South African citizenship. Ministers in Pretoria
announced that South Africa was henceforth a country of 22 million people, as
opposed to 26 million beforehand.
Other homelands followed suit. In 1977, Bophuthatswana, the homeland of

the Tswana people, consisting of nineteen major pieces of land spread across
three of South Africa’s provinces, was made independent, despite evident
opposition; in all some 1.8 million Tswana lost their South African citizenship.
In 1979, Venda opted for independence, even though the chief minister had lost
an election on the issue. In 1981, Ciskei’s leader decided to accept Pretoria’s
offer, ignoring the advice of a distinguished panel of experts and an adverse
opinion survey. Foreign governments took the view that independence for the
homelands was nothing more than a device to perpetuate white supremacy and
withheld all recognition. Pretoria was nevertheless jubilant. ‘If our policy is
taken to its full logical conclusion as far as the black people are concerned, there
will not be one black man with South African citizenship,’ declared a
government minister.
For an elite group of African politicians, chiefs, civil servants and traders,
self-government and independence brought substantial rewards. Cabinet
ministers, members of legislative assemblies and civil servants gained
increasingly from high salaries, loans, land and housing, as the South African
authorities sought to establish a prosperous middle class which would underpin
the homelands system.
The Pretoria government tried to entice Mandela into the process. In 1973, the
minister of prisons, James Kruger, arranged to meet Mandela on Robben Island
and offered to remit his life sentence on condition that he recognised the
Transkei authorities and agreed to settle there as a Transkei citizen. Several
subsequent offers were made, but Mandela turned them all down.
Matanzima also made attempts to see Mandela on Robben Island, but his
approaches too were rejected. Yet though they remained political adversaries,
family business continued. Matanzima played a prominent role in the
arrangements leading up to Zeni’s wedding and he was instrumental in
persuading the South African authorities to allow Winnie to attend. He also
helped Mandela’s first wife, Evelyn, take over a trading store in Cofimvaba in
the Transkei from departing whites.
The independence process began to falter when Chief Mangosuthu Buthelezi,
political leader of some 5 million Zulus, the largest ethnic group in the country,
decided to have no truck with it. Buthelezi’s role in the apartheid system was a
complex one. In his youth he was marked down by the authorities as a
troublemaker. While studying at Fort Hare he had joined the ANC’s Youth

League and in his final year he had been expelled for taking part in political
protest; among those whom he openly admired were Chief Luthuli and Mandela.
Buthelezi was nevertheless prepared to work within the apartheid system.
Elected as chief minister of KwaZulu in 1976, he developed the art of opposing
Pretoria’s homelands policy while at the same time playing a leading role in it.
Cooperation was justified, he argued, on pragmatic grounds. The homelands
policy enabled Zulus to acquire vital administrative experience which they
would be able to use to good effect in a multiracial South Africa in the future
and it provided them too with a platform from which to oppose apartheid.
Using his position as a member of the Zulu royal family, Buthelezi built up a
powerful cultural and political movement, Inkatha ye Nkululeko we Sizwe
(Freedom of the Nation), which gained support not only in KwaZulu but in
urban areas as well. Within a few years, In - katha claimed to have 350,000 paidup members, making it the largest black political organisation allowed to
function in South Africa’s history. Buthelezi himself, according to some opinion
polls, was regarded by many Africans as a more important national leader than
Mandela. In 1978, he won the first election in KwaZulu with nearly a clean
sweep of the seats. As head of the KwaZulu government he possessed
considerable powers of patronage and control and used them ruthlessly. In many
respects he resembled a tribal potentate, intolerant of criticism, brooking no
opposition, given to making interminable speeches and constantly reminiscing
about the past exploits of the Zulu people. In sum, he seemed an ideal partner for
the government. But having lent the homelands system greater credibility than
any other homeland leader, he then delivered it a crippling blow by refusing
independence.
The apartheid system was in trouble in other ways. The economic boom of the
1960s, together with the increasing use of advanced production techniques, had
resulted in such a serious shortage of skilled labour that further economic growth
was hampered. The reservoir of white skills had simply run out and white
immigration was not sufficient to fill the gap. White businessmen, for reasons of
self-interest, argued that the only solution was to scrap the job reservation
system giving whites a monopoly of skilled work and to allow blacks to move
upwards in the labour market. They were critical of the government’s vast
system of labour controls which treated millions of workers who passed through
it as ‘an undifferentiated mass’. What they wanted was a black labour force that
was better educated, more highly skilled and stable. They also favoured legal

recognition of black trade unions, which would allow them to conduct industrial
relations on an orderly basis. A rash of strikes in 1973 pointed to the urgent need
for improved labour conditions. The Soweto uprising in 1976 intensified all
these arguments and added new ones. What employers now feared was the
emergence of a new generation of radical activists who, in their hatred of
apartheid, might turn against the free-enterprise system as well.
Foreign criticism of apartheid also flared up in the wake of Soweto. The
spectacle of armed police shooting schoolchildren in the streets brought
worldwide condemnation. International opinion was again outraged the
following year by the death of the black-consciousness leader Steve Biko, in
particular the manner in which he died. After five days of brutal interrogation at
security police headquarters in Port Elizabeth, during which he suffered severe
head injuries, Biko was put naked into the back of a police truck, close to
collapse, provided with nothing more than a blanket and a bottle of water, and
driven for 700 miles to a prison hospital in Pretoria, where he died a few hours
after arriving, lying on a mat on a stone floor. He was the forty-sixth detainee to
die in police custody. News of his death unleashed a new wave of fury and
violence on the streets which the government eventually brought to a halt by
outlawing virtually every black-consciousness organisation in the country and
detaining dozens of black leaders, as well as a number of white critics.
In Washington and Westminster, there were demands for economic boycotts
and sanctions against South Africa. At the United Nations Security Council,
members voted for a mandatory ban on arms sales to South Africa.
Representatives from thirteen Western governments attended Biko’s funeral to
mark their own form of protest. Far more damaging was the reaction of foreign
investors, who no longer looked at South Africa as such a stable or profitable
haven. Foreign capital, which had been a vital factor in helping South Africa to
achieve high rates of economic growth, began to flow out. Several prominent
American and British banks terminated their South African business.
Multinational companies with subsidiaries in South Africa faced intense
criticism from anti-apartheid groups, some demanding their withdrawal. For the
first time, the costs of sustaining apartheid began to affect white interests.
