REINVENTING SOUTH AFRICA
AT THE OFFICIAL LAUNCH OF HIS AUTOBIOGRAPHY IN
JOHANNESBURG in December 1994, seven months after his inauguration as
president, Nelson Mandela joked, in his customary self-deprecating manner, that
such were the rigours of office that he sometimes longed for the relative calm of
prison. The magnitude of the task of transforming South Africa into a fully
fledged democracy after centuries of white-minority rule was indeed daunting.
The entire system that Mandela inherited had been designed largely to serve
white interests. Other than par liament, all the main institutions—the civil
service, the se - curity forces, the business community, the universities, the
media, the stock exchange, the banks and agriculture—were dominated by
whites. As Mandela publicly acknowledged, South Africa’s fortunes still
depended heavily on the skills, expertise and capital of the white community.
Yet while recognising the need to reassure whites about their future under
black rule, he also faced an avalanche of black expectations. In the aftermath of
his election victory, the black electorate was impatient for change. Mandela’s
pledges during the election campaign—of more jobs, more housing, better
education and health services—still reverberated across the country. All at once,
there were so many demands, so many priorities. At the age of seventy-five,
after fifty years as a political activist in the titanic struggle to defeat apartheid,
Mandela confronted yet another challenge as formidable as anything that had
come before. ‘I have discovered the secret that after climbing a great hill, one
only finds that there are many more hills to climb’, he concluded in his
autobiography.
Mandela’s achievement in securing a negotiated revolution in South Africa in
collaboration with its white rulers meant that he inherited an administration both
powerful enough and sufficiently amenable to begin undertaking the ambitious
targets he had set for his government. The old white establishment, comforted by
de Klerk’s presence in the cabinet as a deputy president, Mandela’s constant
efforts to reassure whites about their security and the guarantee on jobs and

pensions given them under the constitution, adapted to the new government with
remarkably few qualms. So peaceful was the transfer of power that it brought
about a swift resurgence of confidence in the future among the white
community.
Yet the scale of change envisaged was immense. South Africa needed not just
a new administration capable of undertaking major programmes of economic
and social development but also a whole new structure of provincial and local
government, involving the incorporation of former homeland territories into 9
new provinces and the redesign of some 800 segregated local authorities into
300 multiracial bodies. The police service, once at the forefront of enforcing
apartheid laws, required a complete overhaul to make it more acceptable to local
communities. The new national defence force required reorganisation to absorb
units from the ANC’s guerrilla army and former homeland armies. The entire
education system, where each race group had previously been segregated,
required restructuring. Whereas white public education offered high standards,
black public education had suffered from decades of deprivation: many buildings
were derelict, one third had no electricity, a quarter had no water, a half had no
sanitation, one third of teachers were unqualified and many more were underqualified.
The legacy of apartheid included a massive disparity in wealth. The average
white income was eight times greater than the average black income. Whites,
making up 13 per cent of the population, earned 61 per cent of total income.
Although the black middle class was growing apace, its share of total income
was still comparatively small. Barely 2 per cent of all private-sector assets were
black owned. According to calculations published in the United Nations Human
Development Report for 1994, if white South Africa was treated as a separate
country, its standard of living would rank 24th in the world, just below Spain’s;
black South Africa on the same basis would rank 123rd, below Lesotho and
Vietnam. Overall, in terms of human development, South Africa ranked only
93rd in the world. Out of a population of 40 million, 22 million lacked adequate
sanitation, including 7.5 million in urban areas; 12 million lacked clean water
supply; 23 million had no access to electricity; and some 2 million children were
without schools. Almost half of all households in South Africa lived below the
poverty line; a quarter lived on an income of less than half of the poverty-line
income; some 8 million were estimated to be ‘completely destitute’. One third of
the population was illiterate.

The assets that South Africa possessed to help it overcome this legacy were
considerable. They included one of the world’s richest stores of minerals, with
44 per cent of world diamond reserves, 82 per cent of manganese reserves and
64 per cent of platinum-group metal reserves. It was the world’s largest producer
of gold, mining a third of world production. Its financial, banking and legal
systems were well established and efficient; the Johannesburg stock exchange
was the tenth largest in the world. Its manufacturing base, though over protected and uncompetitive by world standards, was capable of major
expansion. The infrastructure of roads, railways, ports and airports was well
developed. Telephone and electricity services were reliable. Universities and
technical colleges turned out a ready supply of competent graduates. In statistical
terms, South Africa, with a gross domestic product of $120 billion, ranked as
one of the world’s twenty-five largest economies. In Africa, it stood out as a
giant.
What Mandela discovered on taking office, however, was that South Africa’s
economy was in dire straits. The ANC had expected to inherit an economic
cornucopia; its ambitious development plans were based on that notion. But the
coffers, in fact, were nearly empty. The previous government had run up a
record budget deficit of 8.6 per cent of gross domestic product, and gross foreign
exchange reserves had fallen to less than the equivalent of three weeks of
imports. The government’s domestic debt, moreover, was huge. The cost of debt
service together with current expenditure consumed 92 per cent of government
revenue, leaving only 8 per cent for capital spending. ‘There was simply no
money to do what we had planned’, recalled one of Mandela’s key ministers,
Mac Maharaj. ‘We had to dump our blueprints and start from the beginning’.
The unemployment figures on their own represented a sizeable crisis. Only
about half of the economically active population had formal-sector jobs. Several
million more earned a living in the informal sector—hawkers, small traders,
domestics and backyard businesses. Even so, the official unemployment rate was
calculated as 33 per cent. A high proportion of the estimated 5 million
unemployed possessed no skills or training and had little prospect of ever finding
a job. Of the 450,000 new entrants to the labour market in 1994, only 27,000
were expected to be able to find a job. On average, the formal sector of the
economy could absorb no more than 6 per cent of new entrants to the labour
market. When the new government advertised civil service vacancies for 11,000
managers, clerks and cleaners, more than 1.5 million people applied.

Economic growth in recent years had been dismal. In the longest recession in
its recorded history, South Africa’s GDP had fallen by 0.5 per cent in 1990, by
0.4 per cent in 1991 and by 2.1 per cent in 1992, a drop caused mainly by
drought disrupting agricultural production. Over the four-year period from 1990
to 1993, the aggregate fall in GDP had amounted to 1.8 per cent. Formal
employment between 1989 and 1993 had fallen by more than 350,000. Merely to
absorb the annual number of new entrants into the labour market required an
annual growth rate of 6 per cent. To make any inroads into the rate of
unemployment required a growth rate of between 8 and 10 per cent.
Not only was the economic legacy none too healthy, but, as Mandela
recognised, his ability to make progress on his development objectives depended
heavily on attracting foreign capital. Even with the support of the private sector,
local resources were not sufficient to raise the annual growth rate much above 3
per cent. Yet foreign investors were wary of the ANC’s long history of
advocating nationalisation and state control of the economy and reluctant to
commit themselves until they could see something of the new government’s
track record. Mindful of the need to convince foreign and local investors about
the government’s determination to pursue fiscal discipline and sound economic
management, Mandela stuck to a cautious and conservative approach to
economic policy.
The slow pace of change led to increasing restlessness. Apart from two
measures that Mandela swiftly introduced—free health care for young children
and pregnant mothers and primary school feeding schemes—there was little
tangible evidence of his government de - livering the improvements it had
promised. Fewer houses were built on government initiatives in Mandela’s first
year in office than in de Klerk’s last year. Labour unions, which had helped put
the ANC in power, began to flex their muscles, wanting rewards for their
endeavours. A spate of strikes and threatened strikes suggested that industrial
stability would be difficult to achieve. Within the ANC, too, there was
frustration at the compromises the government was required to make. ‘Are we in
power or just in office?’ asked Tokyo Sexwale, premier of the Gauteng region,
the country’s industrial heartland, in November 1994.
Mandela also had to contend with the legacy of protest politics from the
apartheid era. The culture of protest ran deep. Township residents accustomed to
years of boycotting rent and service charge payments in protest against apartheid
policies showed little inclination to start paying their dues even though a new

government was in power. Outbreaks of lawlessness were commonplace.
Students seized teaching staff as hostages, vandalised buildings and looted
shops. Striking policemen set up roadblocks. Nurses deliberately spread viruses
among their patients. Prison warders allowed dangerous criminals to escape.
Former MK guerrillas in the defence force absconded without leave. Taxi drivers
blockaded central Johannesburg. Squatters invaded vacant houses. Shop workers
went on a looting rampage. Added to all this was an epidemic of violent crime.
Some 200 policemen were killed during 1994.
The scale of disorder was serious enough to prompt Mandela to read the riot
act. Opening the second session of parliament in February 1995, he launched
into a tirade against workers and students who resorted to acts of anarchy and
disruption to secure their demands. ‘Let it be clear to all that the battle against
the forces of anarchy and chaos has been joined. Let no one say that they have
not been warned’, he said. ‘I speak of those who engage in such totally
unacceptable practices as the murder of police officers, the taking of hostages,
riots, looting, the forcible occupation of public highways, vandalisation of public
and private property and so on’. He went on, ‘Some have misread freedom to
mean licence . . . popular participation to mean the ability to impose chaos’. But,
he warned, ‘let me make abundantly clear that the small minority in our midst
which wears the mask of anarchy will meet its match in the government we
lead’.
Mandela was equally blunt about those who demanded immediate benefits
from his government: ‘The government literally does not have the money to
meet the demands that are being advanced. Mass action of any kind will not
create resources that the government does not have. All of us must rid ourselves
of the wrong notion that the government has a big bag full of money. The
government does not have such riches. We must rid ourselves of the culture of
entitlement which leads to the expectation that the government must promptly
deliver whatever it is that we demand’.
It was a sober message to deliver after so much euphoria over the coming of
majority rule. What Mandela was demanding were discipline and belt-tightening
from a population which had been led to expect something different.
Reflecting on the results of his first year in office, Mandela said he was
satisfied with the pace of change. ‘People must be patient’, he said. ‘They must
give us time’. Yet there was a noticeable lack of decisiveness about Mandela’s

administration, a lack of urgency in determining priorities and tackling them, a
tendency to let government business drift. It was as though the sheer size of the
agenda it faced was too daunting. For those hoping for faster results, there was a
growing sense of disillusionment.

The advances that Mandela made in pursuing national reconciliation were far
more immediate. National reconciliation became his personal crusade. From the
moment of his inauguration as president, he strove to establish a new racial
accord, constantly reassuring the white minority of its well-being under majority
rule. Addressing a huge crowd on the lawns below Union Buildings on
inauguration day, he urged a spirit of forgiveness. ‘Wat is verby is verby’, he
said in Afrikaans. ‘What is past is past’.
Towards his old political adversaries, he remained magnanimous. He
described de Klerk as ‘one of the greatest sons of Africa’, praising him for his
contribution to establishing democracy. Mandela had kind words for P. W.
Botha, ‘a first-class gentleman’, he said, ‘the real forerunner, paving the way for
eventual negotiations’. Every year, Mandela made the point of phoning Botha on
his birthday to wish him many happy returns. When asked by a television
interviewer who his hero was, he nominated former prisons minister Kobie
Coetsee, explaining that Coetsee had chosen to meet him at a time when
government enmity towards the ANC was at a peak. Coetsee was duly rewarded
under the new dispensation by being named president of the senate.
Mandela was assiduous in cultivating right-wing politicians, determined to
avert the risk of right-wing resistance. He developed his warm relationship with
General Viljoen, grateful for the role he had played in helping to keep right-wing
extremists inside the political process in the run-up to the election. In parliament,
Viljoen’s small band of Freedom Front members duly became Mandela’s most
loyal opposition. Viljoen spoke of ‘the great mutual trust and regard’ between
himself and Mandela. Mandela also made approaches to the recalcitrant white
Conservative Party, which had boycotted the election, and invited its leader,
Ferdi Hartzenberg, for a series of talks. Even the extremist Afrikaner
Weerstandsbeweging was included in discussions with government ministers.
When the Volkstaat Council began its deliberations soon after the election in
1994, it was accorded due recognition.
The gestures of goodwill he made were manifold. In his opening address to

the new parliament in Cape Town, he recited a moving poem by an Afrikaner
poet, Ingrid Jonker, who had committed suicide in 1965, noting how her dream
of emancipation had now been fulfilled. He spoke again in Afrikaans when
appealing to civil servants to support reforms in government policy. In changing
the name of his official residence in Cape Town from Westbrook, he chose an
Afri - kaans name, Genadendal, meaning ‘Valley of Mercy’. He made the point
of attending a service at the Nederduitse Gereformeerde Kerk in Pretoria, the
church to which Verwoerd and Vorster, Strijdom and Malan had belonged,
surprised by the warmth of his reception from the congregation: ‘If I had gone
there four years ago the security would have had to protect me against assault,
against people who would want to kill me. This time they were there to protect
me from being killed out of love’.
In one particularly memorable event, he organised what he called ‘a
reconciliation lunch’, bringing together the wives and widows of former
apartheid leaders and leading black activists. To his presidential residence in
Pretoria, Mahlamba’ Ndlopfu, came the widows of John Vorster and Hans
Strijdom, of Steve Biko and Moses Kotane. ‘These are the wives of the heroes of
both sides’, said Mandela, introducing his seventeen guests to the press on the
lawn before lunch. ‘We have fought our fights in the past. We have forgotten it
now. We must build a new South Africa. By attending this occasion, each one is
putting an important brick in that new building we are putting up’.
One of the widows he invited, Betsie Verwoerd, replied that at the age of
ninety-four she was too infirm to travel to Pretoria for the occasion, so Mandela
made arrangements instead to pay a courtesy call on her two weeks later at her
home in Orania, a town on the banks of the Orange River in the Northern Cape
province which Afrikaner bittereinders had preserved as a small whites-only
colony.
The burgemeesters of Orania gathered in their Sunday best to greet Mandela
as he arrived in an air force helicopter and conducted him to the nearby
community hall where Betsie Verwoerd, a frail, diminutive figure, was waiting
for him with tea and traditional koeksusters. After tea, she emerged with
Mandela to meet the press, clutching a two-page speech she had written to thank
him for coming. But when she tried to read it without her spectacles, she became
distressed. Peering over her shoulder, Mandela began softly prompting her in
Afrikaans, a half-smile on his lips: ‘I ask the president to consider the volkstaat
with sympathy and also to decide the fate of Afrikaners with wisdom’. When she

had finished, she looked up to him towering above her with a radiant smile of
thanks.
Even more remarkable was the invitation to lunch he sent to Percy Yutar, the
prosecutor in the Rivonia trial who had argued for Mandela to be given the death
sentence and expressed regret when this did not happen. Yutar’s name was still
reviled by liberal lawyers for his conduct of the trial. But Mandela took the view
that Yutar had played only a ‘small part’ in a grand system driven by politicians.
Like others who witnessed Mandela’s efforts at reconciliation, Yutar was struck
by awe at the occasion: ‘I wonder in what other country in the world you would
have the head of the government inviting someone to lunch who prosecuted him
thirty years ago. It shows the great humility of this saintly man’.
So much attention did Mandela devote to reassuring whites that black critics
claimed he was making greater efforts on their behalf than on addressing black
grievances. Mandela brushed aside such criticism: ‘We had to allay the fears of
whites to ensure the transition process took place smoothly. If we had not done
so, the civil war that was threatening would have broken out’. Reassuring
whites, he said, involved no cost. He pointed to opinion polls which showed that
his support among the white community had risen from about 1 per cent before
the election to more than 50 per cent, thus helping to ensure political stability.
The climax to Mandela’s efforts came during the 1995 Rugby World Cup
tournament, which South Africa hosted. This was the largest sporting event in
the nation’s history. Rugby was a sport embraced with almost religious fervour
by Afrikaners. During the apartheid era, when South Africa was expelled from
world rugby, the blow to Afrikaner morale was far greater than was any
economic sanction or oil embargo. The black population generally ignored
rugby, their passion being soccer. Rugby was regarded as a ‘Boer game’, a
symbol of white supremacy. On Robben Island, Mandela used to infuriate
warders by supporting any team that was playing against South Africa’s national
team, the Springboks.
When South Africa won approval to hold the 1995 World Cup, Mandela
began to take a personal interest in the event. Although there was strong pressure
within the ANC to give a new name to the national team, Mandela decided
against any change. He developed a warm relationship with François Pienaar,
the newly appointed Springbok captain, whom he met in Union Buildings in
Pretoria in June 1994. Pienaar confessed to reporters beforehand that he was

nervous about meeting a man of such standing. But he emerged with Mandela
smiling and readily adapted to the role of ambassador for the ‘new South Africa’
that Mandela hoped he would be. Pienaar promised to instruct all members of his
team to learn and sing the words of ‘Nkosi Sikelel’ iAfrika’.
For their team song, the Springboks adopted an old miners’ song in Xhosa,
‘Tshotsholoza’, which was popular with soccer fans and which Mandela and his
fellow prisoners on Robben Island used to sing when working in the lime quarry.
As part of their preparations for the World Cup, team members spent an hour a
day learning the correct pronunciation of the Xhosa words. ‘Tshotsholoza’ soon
became a hit in the white community.
White enthusiasm for the rugby festival was overwhelming. But it was
Mandela who turned it into a national event. He arrived at the Springbok training
ground near Cape Town, gave his personal blessing to the squad, all but one of
them white, and urged blacks to rally behind them: ‘We have adopted these
young men as our boys, as our own children, as our own stars. This country is
fully behind them. I have never been so proud of our boys as I am now and I
hope that that pride we all share’.
In the week leading up to the final match between South Africa and New
Zealand on 24 June, Mandela took to wearing a green rugby supporter’s cap,
adorned with the Springbok emblem. ‘This cap does honour to our boys’, he told
a black crowd. ‘I ask you to stand by them, because they are our kind’. With
boyish enthusiasm, he visited the team at its practice fields and in its dressing
rooms. Pienaar responded by saying he would ‘play his heart out’ for the
president.
As the team took to the field at Ellis Park, Mandela emerged on to the pitch
wearing the green and gold number 6 jersey of the team captain, Pienaar, and a
Springbok cap, sending the overwhelmingly white crowd into a frenzy of
enthusiasm and excitement. The stadium reverberated with chants of ‘Nel-son!
Nel-son!’
The match produced one of the most intense afternoons of physical endeavour
and emotion that any of those present were ever likely to witness. At full time,
the two teams were locked at 9-9, so extra time was necessary. Seven minutes
from the end, a drop goal gave South Africa victory. The crowd went wild.
Presenting Pienaar with the trophy, Mandela said, ‘Thanks for what you have
done for South Africa’. Pienaar replied, ‘Thanks for what you have done to

South Africa’.
The whole of South Africa erupted in celebration, blacks as joyful as whites.
Johannesburg became a giant street party. In the northern suburbs, domestic
workers rushed out on the streets shouting: ‘We’ve done it! We’ve done it!’
Never before had blacks had cause to show such pride in the efforts of their
white countrymen. It was a moment of national fusion that Mandela had done
much to inspire.

The honeymoon period between Mandela and his partners in the government of
national unity, de Klerk and Buthelezi, was memorable but brief. From the
outset, they made strange bedfellows, brought together not so much by common
interest as by a quirk of fate. The antagonisms of the past were too close to allow
for an easy relationship. De Klerk at first loyally played the part allotted to him
as a deputy president, travelling the world, extolling the virtues of the new South
Africa, dutifully maintaining a low profile. But it was a role with which he
became increasingly disgruntled.
Expecting to make a considerable impact on government policy, he found he
had influence but no real power. All his hopes about power-sharing, of making
important decisions in concert with Mandela, were soon confounded. Mandela
listened, but pursued his own agenda. Nor did de Klerk acquire the leverage he
expected to command by acting as the guardian of white interests in the civil
service, the police and the business community. White civil servants rapidly
switched their allegiance to Mandela, accepting him, rather than de Klerk, as the
guarantor of their interests. The police hierarchy, swiftly reshuffled, followed
suit. With the business community, Mandela opened his own direct lines of
communications. As an intermediary representing white interests, de Klerk was
soon redundant.
He also found himself at odds with Mandela in dealing with the past. Mandela
was determined that human rights violations during the apartheid era should be
investigated, not for the purpose of exacting retribution, but with the aim of
providing some form of public accounting and helping purge the injustices of the
past. Unless past crimes were addressed, he said, they would ‘live with us like a
festering sore’. He proposed to establish a truth and reconciliation commission,
empowered to subpoena witnesses and to grant amnesties. Those who came
forward to make a full admission of their crimes would receive pardons.

Otherwise, they risked the possibility of prosecution in the courts. The
commission would then make ‘recommendations on steps to be taken to ensure
that such violations never take place again’. De Klerk said the proposal would
result in ‘a witch-hunt’, focusing attention upon past government abuses while
ignoring ANC crimes. It was likely to ‘tear out the stitches of wounds that are
beginning to heal’. But his rearguard action against it achieved nothing.
Ghosts from the past continued to haunt the new government. A former
policeman testified that the bombing of the Johannesburg headquarters of the
South African Council of Churches in 1988 had been carried out, not by the
ANC, as the government had claimed at the time, but by government agents who
were subsequently congratulated by the minister of law and order, Adriaan Vlok.
Under pressure to prosecute, the police commissioner was obliged to disclose in
January 1995 that two former ministers, Adriaan Vlok and former defence
minister Magnus Malan, together with 3,500 policemen, had secretly been
granted indemnities by de Klerk’s government in its last days in power before
the general election in April 1994.
The disclosure caused outrage. At a cabinet meeting at Union Buildings on 21
January, de Klerk attempted to deny all knowledge of the matter. After a
protracted discussion, the cabinet decided to declare the indemnities invalid. But
just when agreement on the issue appeared to have been reached, Mandela, who
had been sitting quietly listening to the proceedings, launched a ferocious
personal attack on de Klerk, all the old animosity he had felt towards him
resurfacing. What particularly incensed Mandela was not just the covert nature
of the indemnity deal but also the manner in which de Klerk disclaimed any
responsibility for it, just as he had always done with Mandela in past disputes
over government complicity in violence. Mandela came close to calling de Klerk
a liar, rejecting the denial he made, and went on to criticise his conduct in
cabinet, comparing it unfavourably to that of other National Party ministers. In
cabinet, said Mandela, de Klerk spoke in a manner in which ‘white men used to
speak to blacks’. As Mandela continued his attack, de Klerk gathered up his
papers, preparing to walk out, saying he would have to reconsider his position.
Mandela retorted that if de Klerk did withdraw, it ‘would not cause a ripple’.
After the meeting had adjourned, ministers from both sides rallied round,
hoping to find a way to achieve rapprochement. De Klerk declared he had been
‘viciously insulted’. He accused the ANC of becoming increasingly intolerant of
opposition and criticism; its members, he said, ‘tend more and more to become

impatient and to adopt a bully attitude when they are opposed and questioned’.
But he was nevertheless willing to compromise. When Mandela suggested that
they should make ‘a fresh start’, de Klerk accepted. It seemed unlikely, however,
that the coalition would survive its full term. De Klerk was no longer
indispensable.
There were other sources of friction, notably over the conduct of South
Africa’s foreign policy. Despite the overwhelming need to attract Western
investment, Mandela persisted with an approach which emphasised friendship
with countries such as Libya, Cuba and Iran that was likely to deter Western
interest. Foreign policy was frequently an area of confusion and muddle,
determined as much by which governments had made contributions to the ANC
treasury as by other factors. ‘Our foreign policy is largely for hire’, complained
the opposition Democratic Party. ‘If you make a substantial donation to the
ANC, you get special foreign policy consideration’. The foreign minister, Alfred
Nzo, an old friend of Mandela’s, became a figure of public ridicule, universally
criticised for incompetence. Blunders were commonplace. Mandela added to the
toll, describing US aid of $100 million in 1995 as ‘peanuts’. The result was to
squander much of the goodwill for South Africa retained in Western capitals and
to exacerbate tensions with de Klerk.
The final rift with de Klerk came during negotiations over the drafting of the
new constitution in 1996. De Klerk fought hard to secure a clause enshrining the
principle of a forced coalition on a permanent basis. When he failed to get his
way, he decided to withdraw from the government altogether, giving vent to his
frustration at the minor role he had been obliged to play. ‘We felt for some time
now that our influence in the government of national unity has been declining’,
he said in May 1996, after the new constitution had been finalised. ‘The ANC
was acting more and more as if they no longer needed a multiparty government’.
He spoke of the need to provide ‘a strong and vigilant opposition’. Mandela
made it clear that he would have preferred the National Party to remain in the
coalition, but otherwise he accepted de Klerk’s departure with equanimity. As
Mandela had predicted, it caused barely a ripple.

Mandela’s relationship with Buthelezi was far more fractious. Appointed
minister of home affairs in 1994, Buthelezi was constantly at loggerheads with
Mandela over Inkatha’s continuing campaign for greater regional autonomy for

KwaZulu-Natal. The dispute was made more complex by the role of the Zulu
king, Goodwill Zwelethini, whose decision to switch his support to Mandela just
before the election earned him Buthelezi’s lasting enmity. In a spectacular
display of wild behaviour in September 1994, Buthelezi and his bodyguards
barged into a television studio in Johannesburg and during a live discussion
programme began abusing and threatening a Zulu prince speaking on the king’s
behalf.
In the ensuing uproar, rather than force the minister’s resignation, Mandela
subjected Buthelezi to public humiliation, requiring him to apologise to the
cabinet and the nation. As Buthelezi sat alongside him, looking penitent,
Mandela read out a statement he had drawn up after a special session of the
cabinet: ‘The cabinet resolved that this action constituted a serious violation of
the right to freedom of speech and freedom of the press. It also posed a threat to
the safety and security of citizens. It was therefore a direct challenge to the very
constitution which all ministers of the government are sworn to protect and
respect. Accordingly, the cabinet passed a motion of severe censure on Dr
Buthelezi for conduct inimical to good government and the protection of
fundamental human rights’.
Buthelezi duly apologised after explaining that he had not realised the
programme was being broadcast live: ‘I am not such a bumbling fool that I
would go into a live studio and interfere with a programme deliberately’.
For months on end, a row simmered between Mandela and Buthelezi over the
question of international mediation on Inkatha’s demands for greater regional
autonomy in KwaZulu-Natal. Although Mandela had given a commitment
agreeing to international mediation in April 1994 in order to get Buthelezi to
participate in the election, once in power, Mandela failed to honour it, making a
variety of excuses. Hoping to embarrass Mandela over this ‘breach of trust’,
Buthelezi reverted to his favourite tactic of boycott, announcing Inkatha’s
withdrawal from parliament and the constitutional assembly in February 1995.
The boycott had little impact, and two weeks later Buthelezi ended it on the
pretext of allowing more time for negotiation. A month later, when no further
progress had been made in resolving the dispute, he suspended Inkatha’s
participation in the constitutional assembly.
On both sides, the war of words became increasingly reckless, threatening to
re-ignite large-scale violence. In April, Buthelezi called on KwaZulu-Natal to

‘rise and resist’ the central government over its refusal to negotiate greater
regional autonomy. People should be prepared to lay down their lives to
safeguard self-determination against the ANC’s ‘arrogance’ over the issue of
international mediation and the constitution. ‘Let the new struggle for freedom
begin. Let our friends and foes be warned that our march to freedom has begun’,
he said. ‘No amount of intimidation, prevarication and violence can bend into
submission the strength of Inkatha, or undermine our determination to defend
our self-determination, freedom and pluralism’.
Mandela responded in kind, throwing all caution to the wind. At a rally near
Durban, he accused Inkatha of using government funds for KwaZulu-Natal to
foment rebellion there and threatened to cut them off. His remarks were
denounced by opposition groups as being irresponsible, inflammatory and
unconstitutional. When Mandela’s advisers sought to defuse the crisis by
stressing the president would take no action that was unconstitutional, Mandela
weighed in further by saying that if he did not possess the power to cut off funds,
he would acquire it if necessary by amending the constitution.
The crisis blew over a day later when Mandela and Buthelezi met and agreed
to settle their differences in an orderly manner. Appearing in front of the media
afterwards, they smiled and joked for the benefit of the cameras. Mandela
described Buthelezi as ‘my traditional leader, my chief, and my prince’.
Buthelezi declared himself ‘a loyal member of the president’s cabinet’. He
remained in Mandela’s cabinet long after de Klerk had departed.
But the episode raised questions once again about Mandela’s judgement. By
refusing to fulfil his commitment to international mediation, he provided
Buthelezi with a legitimate grievance that he was bound to exploit. The verdict
of the press on the issue was overwhelmingly hostile to Mandela. By then
resorting to the same kind of threats and bluster that Buthelezi habitually used to
further his aims, Mandela risked setting off renewed violence in KwaZulu-Natal
and undermining South Africa’s political stability, upon which so much else
depended. It was an example of impetuous brinkmanship which South Africa
could ill afford.
