CHAPTER 32

PASSING THE BATON
FROM AN EARLY STAGE IN HIS PRESIDENCY, MANDELA BEGAN TO
prepare South Africa for the post-Mandela era. ‘At the end of my term, I’ll be
eighty-one’, he said. ‘I don’t think it’s wise that a robust country like South
Africa should be led by an octogenarian. You need younger men who can shake
and move this country’.
Whatever the faults and failures of his administration, so much confidence, so
much trust, had come to be placed in Mandela that there was deep apprehension
about the prospect of his departure from government. He was seen as not only
the founding father of democracy but also the guarantor of its stability. Rumours
of his ill-health were enough to send the stock exchange and the currency into a
tailspin. For a man in his late seventies, he suffered from relatively few ailments
—an eye affliction, a slight loss of hearing, swollen ankles. His schedule
remained as punishing as ever—early starts, late nights, meetings, speeches,
travel abroad. But any sign of exhaustion or fatigue was greeted with alarm. In
an attempt to quell speculation about his health, Mandela submitted himself to a
three-day ‘executive check-up’ in March 1996 and passed without difficulty. ‘He
has the energy of a man half his age’, a specialist consultant remarked. In a letter
to a Johannesburg newspaper, Mandela wrote: ‘Let me restate the obvious: I
have long passed my teens; and the distance to my final destination is shorter
than the road I have trudged over the years. What nature has decreed should not
generate undue insecurity’. But public concern about a future without him
remained high.
While expressing confidence that he would serve his five-year term as
president in full, Mandela stressed that he had no intention of staying in office
for a second term after 1999, regardless of popular demand. He minimised his
own importance in government, emphasising the talent and ability of his cabinet
colleagues. ‘Many of my colleagues are head and shoulders above me in almost
every respect. Rather than being an asset, I’m more of a decoration’.

Mandela left much of the government’s routine business in the hands of his
key aide, Thabo Mbeki, who served as deputy president beginning in 1994.
Mbeki had been nurtured in the crucible of nationalist politics from an early age.
His father, Govan Mbeki, a hardline communist and ANC stalwart, had
dedicated his life to political struggle and expected Thabo, his eldest son, to
follow suit. A studi - ous, introverted boy who spent much of his spare time
reading his father’s books at the family home in rural Transkei, he joined the
ANC Youth League at the age of fourteen, launched a pro-ANC student
organisation at the age of nineteen, then joined the Communist Party a year later.
In 1962, at the age of twenty, he was sent abroad by the ANC, along with
twenty-six other students, to further his studies, and he did not return until 1990.
In his years in exile, he earned a degree in economics from the University of
Sussex in England, underwent military training in the Soviet Union, became a
member of the Communist Party’s politburo and represented the ANC in a series
of foreign postings.
During the 1980s, when Western leaders such as Britain’s Margaret Thatcher
regarded the ANC as ‘a typical terrorist organisation’, Mbeki came to be seen in
the West as its acceptable face—a soft-spoken, articulate pragmatist who
favoured a negotiated settlement to end apartheid rather than revolutionary
violence. He was particularly skilful in handling contacts with the stream of
white South Africans—businessmen, academics, churchmen and opposition
politicians—who travelled from South Africa to talk to the ANC, in defiance of
the government, seeking a way through the impasse. Dressed in a tweed jacket
and puffing his ubiquitous pipe, Mbeki spoke more the language of the middle
class than the rhetoric expected of revolutionaries. Once back in South Africa, he
performed much the same task, pacifying businessmen alarmed by talk of
nationalisation, right-wing Afrikaners demanding a separate volkstaat and Zulu
nationalists threatening civil war. ‘He can be diplomatic to the point where many
people regard him as weak’, Mandela once observed.
While Mandela presided over South Africa as a benign patriarch, floating
above the political hurly-burly and taking a broad-brush approach to
government, Mbeki immersed himself in detail. Ambitious to succeed Mandela,
he possessed no natural constituency within the ANC and lacked the common
touch, but relied heavily on his skills as a backroom operator to build political
support, making alliances with all and sundry. He was as adept at aligning
himself with populist factions when the occasion arose as with the pragmatic

wing of the party. Whereas Mandela placed the need for reconciliation above all
else, Mbeki put greater emphasis on the need to transform South African society.
‘You cannot find reconciliation between blacks and whites in a situation in
which poverty and prosperity continue to be defined in racial terms’, he said. ‘If
you want reconciliation between black and white, you need to transform society.
If we have an economy that is geared to benefit the whites and disadvantage the
black majority, and you do not address that, you will not have reconciliation’.
He was given particular responsibility for fashioning economic policy, a
subject about which Mandela admitted to knowing little. To widespread dismay,
Mbeki guarded the process closely, relying on no more than a small inner circle
to assist him. Mandela only saw a draft of the plan shortly before its publication.
The outcome was a policy document called Growth, Employment and
Redistribution that endorsed an orthodox free-market strategy. Published in
1996, it advocated strict fiscal discipline, lower government deficits,
privatisation, trade liberalisation and export-driven growth. It won Mbeki the
approval of foreign investors and the business community but infuriated the
ANC’s traditional allies—the trade unions and the Communist Party. He was
accused of betraying the revolution, of selling out to international capital, of
forsaking ‘the soul of the ANC’. Mandela nevertheless pronounced himself
satisfied and rebuked critics at a Communist Party conference. ‘I will ensure that
the government implements what we believe to be good for the country’, he told
them, wagging his finger.
Mbeki’s record as Mandela’s chief executive, however, was none too
impressive. He acquired a reputation for announcing grand plans—for
privatisation of parastatal corporations, for example—but dithering over their
implementation. He was responsible for mishandling a number of assignments
that Mandela gave to him—including the mess over Winnie Mandela’s
resignation, the Boesak scandal, Buthelezi’s demand for international mediation
and foreign policy initiatives, including a bungled attempt to prevent Nigeria’s
military rulers from executing a prominent dissident, Ken Saro Wiwa. He also
displayed abysmal judgement when handling the TRC report.
His critics pointed to other faults. Some bemoaned his penchant for turning up
late for appointments or missing them altogether, for enjoying the good life and
for hobnobbing with populists. Others warned of more sinister traits. He was
portrayed as an arch-manipulator, preferring to operate in secret behind the
scenes, trusting only a small cabal of loyal advisers and acting ruthlessly in

stifling dissent and in disposing of rivals. The press noted how hostile, even
paranoid, he was about criticism and cited his tendency to react to criticism with
accusations of racial malice.
Mandela, too, had misgivings about Mbeki. His personal choice as his
successor had been Cyril Ramaphosa, the trade union leader who had played a
crucial role in negotiating the white handover of power. But the party’s vote
went to Mbeki.
The succession was effectively sealed at the ANC’s national conference in
Mafikeng in December 1997. Having outmanoeuvred other contenders, Mbeki
was elected ANC president unopposed. But the occasion was not the complete
triumph that Mbeki wanted. For Mandela saw the need to issue words of caution,
his remarks prompting applause:
There is a heavy responsibility for a leader elected unopposed. He may use that
powerful position to settle scores with his detractors, to marginalise or get rid of
them [applause] and surround themselves with yes-men and women [applause].
His first duty is to allay the concerns of his colleagues to enable them to discuss
freely without fear within the internal structures of the movement. Any subject
should be discussed from all angles and people should even be able to criticise
the leader without fear or favour.
Mandela’s farewell speech as ANC president was otherwise notable for its
negative tone. It was mainly the handiwork of Mbeki and seemed intended to set
out a new, more aggressive agenda, but Mandela nevertheless dutifully read it
out. He spoke of a ‘counter-revolutionary network’, run largely by Afrikaners,
that was deliberately trying to erode confidence in South Africa, subvert the
economy and use crime to make the country ungovernable. He berated white
businessmen for the slow pace of ‘transformation’ and black empowerment. He
accused the media of perpetuating ‘the legacy of racism’, ignoring black opinion
and conducting a propaganda campaign to discredit the ANC. He claimed nongovernment organisations had set themselves up as independent watchdogs at
the behest of foreign agents. The litany continued for four hours.
None of this accorded with the rainbow-nation optimism for which Mandela
was renowned. It reflected more of Mbeki’s mind-set and the conspiracies he
believed were ranged against him than Mandela’s view of the world. It
squandered much goodwill and signaled the coming of a more fractious era.

The balance sheet of Mandela’s years in office was mixed. Major strides were
made in the provision of housing, sanitation, piped water and electricity. But
however much Mandela tried to focus attention on the poorer sections of society,
the immediate beneficiary of the new South Africa was the black middle class.
In the civil service and parastatal corporations, blacks rapidly gained positions of
status and responsibility from which they had been barred for so long, helped by
a policy of affirmative action that accorded preferential treatment to ‘previously
disadvantaged’ groups. The business sector followed suit, anxious to be seen to
be redressing the legacy of inequality. Only 10 per cent of managerial posts were
held by blacks, despite years of talk about the need for black advancement. The
opportunities for those with skills and qualifications were vast. Yet the reservoir
of trained and experienced blacks was all too small. Out of a total of 14,000
chartered accountants, for example, only 65 were black.
But even though the way was now open for rapid promotion, the new elite still
clamored for a faster overhaul of the old, white institutions. They pointed to how
the National Party, after its 1948 election victory, had ensured the mass
recruitment of Afrikaners across the board, transforming a whole range of
institutions from broadcasting to the army and the railways into Afrikaner
preserves, and demanded that the ANC take similar action. Some wanted to
establish an African version of the Afrikaner Broederbond to promote black
interests.
As well as affirmative action, the government pursued a programme of ‘black
economic empowerment’ that encouraged white-owned corporations to sell off
stakes to black entrepreneurs. Thabo Mbeki was a fervent advocate of the plan.
‘We must strive to create and strengthen a black capitalist class’, he told a
conference of black businessmen. Blacks had no need to be embarrassed about
the emergence of a successful and prosperous black bourgeoisie, he said. It was
part of the process of the ‘deracialisation’ of the economy and society. The
benefits would spread to the poor.
But, again, the pool of black businessmen was so tiny that in one business deal
after another, a small group of well-connected entrepreneurs made all the
running, enriching themselves hugely in the process. One prominent black
businessman made an estimated profit of 70 million rands during an eight-month
period merely by acquiring equity as an empowerment partner and then selling it

to a non-empowerment party. Within a few years, a new class of multimillionaires had emerged. Leading ANC members were quick to seize the same
opportunities, trading political contacts for shareholdings. ‘I did not struggle
[only] to remain poor’, declared one prominent ANC official. ‘Crony capitalism’
began to take root.
What the Mandela years witnessed, in fact, was a significant widening of the
income gap within the black community. The gap had been growing since the
late 1970s. During the 1980s, while the poorest half of the population slid ever
deeper into poverty, the black middle class fared well, with rising incomes
making its members the most upwardly mobile group in the country. During the
1990s, the black elite—politicians, bureaucrats, entrepreneurs, managers,
businessmen—prospered as never before, many acquiring the lifestyle and status
symbols so prized in South Africa: executive cars, swimming pools, domestic
staff, private school education, golf handicaps and foreign holidays. Perhaps 5
per cent of the black community reached middle-class status. But for the
majority, the same struggle against poverty continued.
The growing spectre of corruption added to the sense of a new ruling class
bent above all on self-enrichment, as Mandela ruefully acknowledged at the end
of his five-year term. ‘We came to government with the zeal of a group of
people who were going to eliminate corruption in government’, he said in 1999.
‘It was such a sad disappointment to note that our own people who are there to
wipe out corruption themselves become corrupt’.
There were other setbacks. Instead of a falling unemployment rate,
employment levels in the mining, agricultural and manufacturing sectors all fell;
overall, unemployment figures hovered between 30 and 40 per cent. A fearsome
crime wave blighted communities across the country. But by far the greatest
calamity was the advancing menace of the Aids pandemic and the government’s
failure to deal with it.

Like other African states, South Africa reacted lethargically to the onset of the
Aids crisis. The first significant batch of HIV-positive cases was reported among
migrant mineworkers from Malawi employed on Rand gold mines in 1986. By
1990, the adult HIV infection rate, measured in an ante-natal survey, stood at 0.7
per cent; by 1992, it had trebled to 2.2 per cent. But when the apartheid
government eventually stirred into action, launching Aids education and

prevention programmes, it met considerable resistance. Anti-apartheid activists
claimed the programmes were a government plot to control population growth
by convincing black people to have less sex and produce fewer babies and
thereby check the advance of African liberation; they lampooned the Aids
acronym by saying it stood for ‘Afrikaner Invention to Deprive Us of Sex’.
Others interpreted the epidemic as the product of malevolent individuals
employing witchcraft.
Mandela’s government purported to give the Aids campaign a high priority,
but with so many other causes demanding attention—housing, education, jobs
and wider health problems—it achieved little. Though designating the campaign
a ‘Presidential Lead Project’, Mandela found the topic uncomfortable and failed
to throw his weight behind it. He passed responsibility for Aids to Thabo Mbeki,
who was given an inter-ministerial committee to chair. A national Aids plan was
devised, but it was soon mired in controversy. A large part of the Aids budget
was spent on an expensive musical show, Sarafina II, that was supposed to take
Aids education to the masses but was derided by Aids activists as being a waste
of money and eventually scrapped in midstream after a corruption scandal.
Mandela’s health minister, Nkosasana Dlamini-Zuma, a medical doctor, was
accused by investigators of being ‘reckless’ and ‘negligent’.
The next controversy exposed the government to further ridicule. In 1996, two
Pretoria researchers claimed to have invented a cheap drug that could cure Aids.
The drawback they faced was that the Medicines Control Council (MCC)
condemned their product—Virodene—as ineffective and dangerous and refused
to issue them a licence to manufacture it. Their cause was nevertheless taken up
by Mbeki and Dlamini-Zuma. In 1997, the researchers were invited to address
the cabinet, where they spoke movingly about the miracle properties of
Virodene, paraded eleven patients who were said to have benefited from the
drug and asked for substantial funds to develop it. They claimed that the MCC
had rejected Virodene because the council was acting in collusion with
international pharmaceutical companies which stood to lose huge profits from
their own products once Virodene went on sale. A rank amateur in medical
matters, Mbeki swallowed their argument and authorised Dlamini-Zuma to
arrange fast-track approval for production, riding roughshod over vociferous
objections from the MCC.
The MCC’s chairman was later fired, and the council was stripped of much of
its authority. But an independent review panel led by the South African Medical

Research Council found that, in fact, Virodene was highly toxic: its main
ingredient, dimethylformamide, was an industrial solvent known to cause severe
liver damage. The public reaction was scathing. The Sunday Times jeered that
the cabinet’s ‘combined technical knowledge of the HIV virus would fit on the
back of a postcard’.
Despite the opprobrium, Mbeki and Dlamini-Zuma plunged headlong into
further controversy. In 1998, a new antiretroviral drug, azidothymidine (AZT),
raised hopes of significant progress against Aids; tests showed that it could cut
vertical transmission from infected mothers to babies by 50 per cent. But
Dlamini-Zuma announced—at a time when the government was preparing to
spend vast sums on unwanted armaments—that AZT would not be made
available on the grounds that it was too expensive. When AZT’s manufacturers
offered to cut the drug’s price by two-thirds, Dlamini-Zuma switched to arguing
that AZT was toxic.
Mandela belatedly realised that he had failed to come to grips with the Aids
crisis. By 1999, official estimates of the number of HIV-POSITIVE cases stood
at 4 million people—10 per cent of the population. The number who had already
died of Aids was put at 500,000. Shortly before stepping down, Mandela
formally apologised to Aids activists for neglecting the issue. In retirement, he
was to make the fight against Aids a personal priority. But by then, South Africa
was in the hands of a president descending ever deeper into the realms of
pseudo-science and conspiracy theories.

In a letter from prison to his friend Amina Cachalia, Mandela once wrote, ‘I
have spent all my life dreaming of a golden age in which all problems will be
solved and our wildest hopes fulfilled’. The golden age of which Mandela
dreamed remained a distant prospect. Nevertheless, the transformation of South
Africa from a country riven by racial division and violence to a fledgling
democracy represented one of the supreme triumphs of the late twentieth
century.
Mandela’s role in that transformation was vital to its success. He understood
from an early stage the extent to which white fear lay at the core of the conflict.
No matter what personal hardships he had to endure, he never lost sight of the
goal of non-racial democracy in South Africa, believing that white fear of it
could eventually be overcome. The generosity of spirit he showed after his

prison ordeal had a profound impact on his white adversaries, earning him
measures of trust and confidence which made a political settlement attainable.
As president, he pursued the cause of national reconciliation with the same
tenacity, using his years in office to foster a climate of tolerance in the hope that
it might take root permanently, but knowing of the difficult times that lay ahead.
South Africa, as he departed, faced many hazards. Its crime rate was among
the highest in the world, unemployment and poverty were widespread and racial
tensions were never far below the surface. But the foundations for a new society
which Mandela helped to lay at least enabled South Africa to face the future with
more hope than once seemed possible.
Many expectations, however, were soon to turn sour.