A TRIAL OF ENDURANCE
THE TREASON TRIAL REASSEMBLED IN AUGUST 1958, NOT IN AN
ARMY drill hall but in a disused synagogue, with the Star of David hanging
high above the judges’ rostrum. In order to avoid the spectacle of African
crowds milling about in the court precincts, cheering the accused as they came
and went, the venue had been changed from Johannesburg to the more staid
surroundings of Pretoria, thirty-five miles away, where popular support for the
ANC was muted. The Old Synagogue there, a large ornate and empty building
long since given up by the Jewish community, was one of the few locations
available capable of being converted into a ‘Special Criminal Court’ dealing
with ninety-two accused people.
Since none of the accused lived in Pretoria, the government provided a bus for
the journey from the Johannesburg townships where most of them lived. This
meant that in addition to the hours they spent in court each day, the accused had
to endure four hours of uncomfortable travel to get there and back; on some days
they spent as much time in the bus as in court.
To avoid such lumbering journeys, Mandela often travelled to Pretoria with
Helen Joseph, whose fast French car was capable of reaching there in an hour.
After spending a couple of hours in the early morning working in his law office,
Mandela would meet Joseph on the Pretoria road, leaving his car on the roadside
for his return in the afternoon, when he would drive back to the office to put in a
few more hours of work. For amusement on the way, they picked out houses for
themselves for the day when liberation dawned. Joseph described Mandela’s
choice as ‘unpretentious and on the small side’. Mandela thought that Joseph’s
house, with its well-planned garden and green lawns, was too bourgeois.
The defence team assembled for the trial included some of the most
experienced and distinguished lawyers in South Africa. The team was led by
Israel Maisels, a former major in the South African Air Force and chairman of
the Johannesburg Bar, whose accomplishments as a lawyer were widely admired

by the legal profession. In some respects, Maisels was a curious choice. He was
not a ‘political’ advocate; he undertook to lead the defence case on the condition
that it was conducted on a legal basis, not a political basis. But whatever
misgivings the accused had about his approach were soon overcome. A tall,
bespectacled figure, with dark hair receding from a massive forehead, Maisels
dominated the proceedings from the outset, cutting a swathe through the
prosecution’s case.
His second-in-command was Bram Fischer. Fischer’s position in the trial was
unique. As a member of an eminent Afrikaner family and a distinguished lawyer
in his own right, with clients who included the giant mining companies, he was
accorded the highest respect by the Afrikaner establishment. He was also known
as a staunch friend and ally of the accused, whose home in Beaumont Street was
always open to political dissidents and their families and who worked tirelessly
in the courts on their behalf. His name occasionally cropped up in the
prosecution’s evidence. What was not known, except to a few of the accused,
like Bernstein, Slovo, First and Kotane, was that he was a senior figure in the
underground communist movement. Fischer’s quiet demeanour, his courteous
nature and his boyish, gentle face gave little clue as to the complex life he led. In
court, his manner was equally soft-spoken, almost self-effacing, but he was
invariably effective in achieving the results he wanted.
Other members of the defence team included Sydney Kentridge, Tony
O’Dowd and Vernon Berrangé. Mandela was elected to a twelve-member liaison
committee set up by the accused for consultations with the defence team.
Marshalling them all was Michael Parkington, who was an attorney of
exceptional ability but who also seemed an unlikely choice: a former Royal Air
Force pilot and law lecturer at Cambridge University, he was a renowned
conservative and anti-communist.
From the opening moments of the trial, the defence team adopted an
aggressive strategy. Their first target was the judges sitting on the rostrum. Three
had been appointed: Judge Franz Rumpff, who had been involved in the
Defiance Campaign trial; Judge Joe Ludorf, a former National Party official
famous for his defence of a Nazi supporter, Robey Leibbrandt, tried for treason
during the war; and Judge Alexander Kennedy, a Natal judge who in 1957 had
sentenced twenty-two Africans to death in a mass murder trial arising from
disturbances following a police raid. Rising to his feet, Maisels asked for the
recusal of two of the judges, Rumpff and Ludorf, setting out his reasons why the

accused had cause to doubt that they would receive a fair trial at their hands.
After an adjournment, Ludorf agreed to withdraw, but Rumpff did not. Ludorf ’s
replacement was Judge Simon Bekker.
Their next target was the indictment. The indictment charged that the accused
were guilty of high treason because they had conspired and acted ‘in concert and
with common purpose’ to overthrow the state by violence. It also included two
alternative charges of contravening the Suppression of Communism Act. Maisels
opened with a devastating assault on the indictment lasting nearly ten hours,
arguing that it failed to provide in clear terms exactly what charges the accused
had to meet. Fischer followed with a four-hour attack on the two alternative
counts under the Suppression of Communism Act, making the same point about
the lack of particulars.
The court quashed one of the two alternative charges and ordered the
prosecution to supply additional particulars about the other. The court also
ordered the prosecution to tell each accused how he or she was affected by the
difference between allegations of ‘conspiracy’ and allegations of ‘concert and
common purpose’. The prosecution’s response was to drop the remaining charge
of high treason and to delete the words ‘acting in concert and with common
purpose’, leaving only the allegation of conspiracy. In October, after further
protracted argument, the prosecution abandoned the indictment altogether and
was forced to start anew.
A huge party was held at the Slovos’ house in Roosevelt Park that night to
celebrate the event. Towards midnight the house was surrounded by police, who
swarmed in through the doors and windows, accompanied by journalists from
the Afrikaans press, hoping to find blacks drinking illicit liquor. The blacks were
well versed at this game and not a single one was found with so much as a drop
of liquor in his or her glass. The newspaper Die Burger described the celebration
under the headline ‘Many colours at party’: ‘A party at which whites, natives
and Indians were present was held in a Johannesburg suburb last night. There
were about 200 people present. White and non-white drank, danced, sang and
chatted together. The police appeared at 10.30 p.m. In many of the motor cars
white women rode with natives.’
In November, when a new indictment was issued, the charges against sixtyone of the ninety-one accused were suspended, leaving only thirty defendants to
return to court. This group, the prosecution believed, comprised the most

‘dangerous’. They included Mandela, Sisulu, Robert Resha, Lilian Ngoyi, Helen
Joseph, Kathy Kathrada and Duma Nokwe, a young advocate recently appointed
ANC secretary-general. Those relegated to the ‘second division’ included Joe
Slovo, Ruth First, Rusty Bernstein, Ben Turok, Piet Beyleveld, Moses Kotane,
and Professor Matthews.
Under the new indictment, the focus of the trial was narrowed considerably.
The prosecution’s case was limited to proving the intention of the accused to act
violently. Specifically, what was at issue was whether or not violence was the
policy of the ANC and its allied organisations. At the core of the prosecution’s
case was the Freedom Charter. To achieve its aims, according to the indictment,
‘would necessarily involve the overthrow of the State by violence’.
When the trial reassembled in January 1959, the defence immediately asked
for the new indictment to be dismissed as inadequate. The argument over the
indictment continued for month after month. But this time the court eventually
allowed it to proceed. In May 1959, two and a half years after Mandela and the
other accused were arrested, the minister of justice commented: ‘This trial will
be proceeded with, no matter how many millions of pounds it costs. . . . What
does it matter how long it takes?’

Mandela’s home life, meanwhile, was lived in fragments, as Winnie soon
discovered. Not only were there the relentless demands of the treason trial in
Pretoria and Mandela’s constant struggle to keep his law practice alive in
Johannesburg, but he was constantly involved in political meetings and
discussions. He spent as little time at home with Winnie as he had with Evelyn,
though the enjoyment was far greater. His routine was much the same. He rose
before dawn, went for an early-morning run, welcoming the emptiness of the
streets at that time, and had a quick breakfast of toast and orange juice before
heading for the city. He returned home at night, often in the company of
colleagues. ‘He would come home from court and say, “Darling, I brought my
friends here to taste your lovely cooking,” and he would pitch up with ten people
and we would have one chop in the fridge,’ Winnie recalled. ‘I used to be
reduced to tears and he would laugh and run around looking for a packet of
tinned fish from the local shops.’ Money was always tight and much depended
on Winnie’s earnings as a social worker. Even when they were alone together,
there were frequent interruptions from people seeking advice and help. ‘There

never was any kind of life that I can recall as family life, a young bride’s life,
where you sit with your husband and dream dreams of what life might have
been, even if we knew that it would never be like that.’
Their moments for relaxation were few. Mandela was selective about which
parties he went to: ‘I wouldn’t just go to any party. In fact, I missed most of the
parties that were held in Bram’s house and in Joe Slovo’s house.’ On Sunday
evenings they sometimes went to Uncle Joe’s café in Fordsburg to listen to jazz
musicians like Dollar Brand and Kippie Moeketsi. They would occasionally eat
at Indian restaurants to indulge Mandela’s passion for curry. Mandela also found
time to try to teach Winnie how to drive his car, though, inevitably, it ended in a
row. On Saturday mornings he would take his three children to a cinema in
Fordsburg, leaving them there while he rushed off on another mission.
Life at no. 8115, Orlando West, was nevertheless relatively comfortable. The
house possessed electricity, hot water, an indoor bathroom and a telephone.
Mandela’s small study, partitioned off from the front room and furnished with
three cane chairs, a couch, a bookshelf, a display cabinet and a huge picture of
Lenin, provided a retreat into which he enjoyed settling. To add to the comfort,
Winnie added two rooms, decorated the house in new colours and improved the
small garden.
The interruptions, however, never ended. One night, soon after they were
married, there was a sudden, violent banging on the front door. ‘I was convinced
something terrible must have happened,’ said Winnie. ‘But Nelson, who was
wide awake and out of bed in an instant, told me not to be alarmed—it was only
a police raid. They were banging with their truncheons, flashing bright torches
through the windows, shouting at us to open up and making enough noise to
waken the whole neighbourhood.’
She found the experience repugnant as well as frightening:
There were these coarse Boer policemen thumbing through our personal
belongings, pulling books off shelves, turning drawers of clothing upside down,
reading our letters, rough-handling our possessions and all the time passing
derogatory and derisory remarks about kaffirs. And it was all for nothing. They
couldn’t find anything incriminating. After they had gone we tidied up the mess
and I made coffee before we went back to bed. Nelson warned me I would have
to get used to raids like that.
On 4 February 1959, their first daughter, Zenani, was born in Baragwanath

Hospital. Mandela was away in Pretoria at the time, attending the treason trial.

In August 1959, the real trial began. The accused were able for the first time to
plead not guilty. The chief prosecutor, Oswald Pirow, then set out his case. The
essence of the crime of high treason, he said, was ‘hostile intent’. Such intent
was evident in the demands of the accused for full equality. They knew that to
achieve the demands of the Freedom Charter ‘in their lifetime’ would ‘inevitably
result in a violent collision with the state resulting in its subversion’. The
Congress alliance, he said, was part of an international communist-inspired
movement which was ‘pledged to overthrow by violence all governments in
non-communist countries where sections of the population did not have equal
political and economic rights’. The essential element of hostility was to be found
in all the facts: ‘Insistence upon violence runs through the case in an unbroken
thread.’ The speeches made by the accused ‘bristle with references to the spilling
of blood’.
For the next two months, the prosecution, repeating the tedious process
adopted at the preparatory examination, submitted more than 4,000 documents—
books, pamphlets, magazines, newspapers, letters, bulletins and circulars—
seized during the course of 1,000 police raids. Some were read into the record in
full, some in part, while the accused sat in a half-doze. Once again, Special
Branch detectives gave their evidence and, once again, the defence team pointed
out its inaccuracies and unreliability. In all, 150 police witnesses took the stand.
The accused complained that they could not properly hear much of the
proceedings and used to joke that they could all be hanged ‘for what we didn’t
say, for what we didn’t do—and now for what we can’t hear!’
Once again, the prosecution produced its expert witness on communism,
Professor Andrew Murray, undeterred by the humiliation he had received at the
preparatory examination. Murray spent days analysing speeches and documents
written by defendants, concluding that they were communist-inspired. But under
relentless cross-examination by Maisels, he was eventually obliged to admit that
the accused were motivated not by communism but by grievances over
apartheid.
MAISELS: It is clear, is it not, Professor, to summarize this position, that
the laws of the white man—and I use that not meaning of this
government but of successive South African governments —all these

laws in which the black man has, and has had, no say, are such that for a
Native and, to a somewhat lesser extent, the Indian and the Coloured—
they prescribe, and just listen to this catalogue, where he may live.
Correct?
MURRAY: Yes.
MAISELS: Where he may work?
MURRAY: Yes.
MAISELS: What work he may do?
MURRAY: Yes.
MAISELS: What he is to get paid?
MURRAY: Yes.
MAISELS: What schools he may go to?
MURRAY: Yes.
MAISELS: Where he may travel to in South Africa, in his own country?
MURRAY: Yes.
MAISELS: In these circumstances, do you not think that the Native may
well regard himself as oppressed and exploited by the white man?
MURRAY: I think in certain spheres of life, yes.
Murray finally agreed that the Freedom Charter was not a ‘communist’
document but a natural and understandable reaction to the injustices of white
supremacy. Maisels concluded, ‘We know, of course, as a fact that no single act
of violence was committed over the whole period of this indictment by any [of
the accused], notwithstanding all the grievances and the exploitation of
grievances. You know that, don’t you, Professor?’
‘Yes,’ Murray replied.

There was, however, one piece of evidence not so easy for the defence team to
handle. In January 1960, the prosecution produced a tape-recording of the
speech made by Robert Resha to a group of ‘freedom volunteers’ at a closed
meeting at ANC headquarters in Johannesburg, recorded by a microphone

hidden in the ceiling, thirteen days before the accused were arrested in
December 1956. ‘When you are disciplined and you are told by the organization
not to be violent, you must not be violent,’ Resha had said, but ‘if you are a true
volunteer and you are called upon to be violent, you must be absolutely violent,
you must murder! Murder! That is all.’ Here, said the prosecution, was the true
and secret face of the ANC, unmasked of its public pretence of non-violence.
On 10 March 1960, the prosecution closed its case. On 14 March 1960, the
defence case began. But the defence team had hardly got into their stride when a
sudden upheaval occurred that brought the trial proceedings to a halt and shook
the country to its core.

The name of Sharpeville was to leave an indelible stain on South Africa. What
took place there on 21 March 1960 became a permanent symbol of the brutality
of the apartheid regime. The impact was felt around the world. Never before had
South Africa faced such universal condemnation.
The events of that day centred not on the ANC but on a rival organisation, the
Pan-Africanist Congress, which had been launched the previous year by a
splinter group of dissident Africanists. Its leader, Robert Sobukwe, a thirty-fiveyear-old instructor in African languages at the University of the Witwatersrand,
was convinced that he would gain a mass following by promising African rule.
He rejected the idea of white participation in government, derided
‘multiracialism’ as a device to keep blacks in subjection and denounced
communism and communist influence. He placed great faith in the idea of heroic
leadership. Once the masses were given bold, decisive leadership, he believed,
then the fires of rebellion could soon be lit. With mass support, African rule, he
claimed, could be attained in four years.
Though Mandela had once shared many of the views held by Africanists, he
now regarded that as an adolescent phase in his political life. He dismissed PAC
policies as ‘immature’ and ‘naïve’ and abhorred the crude racist statements made
by its more extreme officials. The freedom struggle, he said, required
compromise and discipline, not empty rhetoric which ignored the complex
realities of South Africa.
Sisulu launched a ferocious public attack on the Africanists, describing their
‘inverted racialism’ as akin to that of the ruling National Party. But while

scorning them as ‘armchair revolutionaries’, Sisulu was nevertheless mindful of
the effect they might have. ‘There are men and women amongst them who
genuinely believe that the salvation of our people lies in a fanatical African
racialism and denunciation of everything that is not African,’ he said. ‘And such
a policy is not without its potential mass appeal.’
From the outset, the PAC, like the ANC, possessed no coherent strategy. It
was poorly organised, short of funds and trained leaders and relied on little more
than the notion that the time was ripe for militant action. But determined to force
the pace and establish the PAC’s credentials as the leading nationalist group,
Sobukwe devised plans for a campaign of mass protest against the pass laws.
The slogans chosen were ‘Leaders in Front’ and ‘No Bail, No Defence, No
Fine’. By swamping the prison system, they would make the pass laws
unworkable. The campaign, he believed, would disrupt the economy and
eventually inspire a popular uprising.
Though few preparations had been made, Sobukwe announced that the
campaign would begin on 21 March. On that date, PAC supporters would
present themselves at police stations for arrest. They would say, ‘We do not have
passes. We will not carry passes again. Millions of our people have been arrested
under pass laws, so you had better arrest us all now.’ They would not return to
work until their demands were met. This would be the first step to freedom in
1963.

The PAC’s campaign that day was largely a failure. In the early morning, after
putting his papers in order and making last-minute arrangements for the welfare
of his family, Sobukwe began the three-mile walk from his home to Orlando
police station, being joined along the way by small groups of PAC supporters. In
all, about 170 volunteers presented themselves for arrest in Johannesburg, an
insignificant number. At Pretoria’s Hercules police station, six men arrived
expecting arrest, only to have their names taken and to be sent away. In Durban,
Port Elizabeth and East London there were no demonstrations at all.
But in Sharpeville, a township in southern Transvaal, the response was much
greater. From early in the morning, PAC pickets were active on the streets,
telling residents they should not go to work. By mid-morning, a crowd of several
thousand Africans had gathered outside the police station. Their mood,
according to most accounts, was relaxed and amiable. But they showed no signs

of dispersing. Police reinforcements were called in. At 1.15 p.m., by which time
nearly 300 police were facing a crowd of some 5,000 Africans, a scuffle broke
out near one of the gates to the police compound. A police officer was pushed
over. The crowd surged forward to see what was happening. According to police
witnesses, stones were thrown at them. No order was given to shoot. No warning
shots were fired. In a moment of panic, the police opened fire indiscriminately
into the crowd. The crowd turned and fled. But still the firing continued. Sixtyseven Africans were killed and 186 wounded. Most were shot in the back.
Later in the day, a similar incident, though on a smaller scale, occurred in
Langa, a black township outside Cape Town occupied mainly by migrant
workers. Confronted by a crowd of 6,000 Africans, police mounted baton
charges to break it up. The crowd retaliated by throwing stones. The police
opened fire, killing two Africans and injuring forty-nine others. That night
rioting broke out in the township. The Langa protest then turned into a major
confrontation with the authorities in Cape Town. A strike which began that day
eventually spread until almost all African workers in Cape Town joined it,
bringing industry to a standstill.

At the treason trial in Pretoria that day, Chief Luthuli was on the witness stand,
giving evidence for the defence about the ANC’s policy of non-violence. His
banning order restricting him to his home district in Natal had been lifted to
enable him to travel to Pretoria, where he was staying at the home of white
friends. But he was suffering from high blood pressure and the state of his health
was a cause of constant concern.
As the full extent of the shooting at Sharpeville and Langa became clear, a
small group consisting of Mandela, Sisulu, Slovo and Duma Nokwe held an allnight meeting in Johannesburg to plan what response to make. There was
considerable anger at the PAC’s precipitate action in launching its campaign
without proper preparation. ‘It was a blatant case of opportunism,’ said Mandela.
‘Their actions were motivated more by a desire to eclipse the ANC than to defeat
the enemy.’ In just one day, the PAC, hitherto an insignificant splinter group,
had captured national and international attention. Yet it had neither the means
nor the ability to make any further moves, or manage the surge of black anger
that now followed.
The leadership of the crisis thus fell to the ANC. Mandela’s group decided to

call for a national stay-away on 28 March, to mark it as a day of mourning and to
initiate a campaign of pass-burning. Duma Nokwe was sent to Pretoria to gain
Luthuli’s approval. On 26 March, Luthuli duly announced a day of mourning on
28 March and publicly burned his pass, calling on others to do the same.
Mandela burned his pass in Orlando before a crowd of press photographers and
several hundred onlookers. The response to the strike call two days later in many
large towns was overwhelming. In demonstrations across the country, thousands
of Africans burned their pass books. Violence broke out in Johannesburg’s black
suburbs. In Langa, police brutality in trying to break the week-long strike
provoked a mass march by some 30,000 Africans into the centre of Cape Town.
Many blacks believed that they were on the verge of liberation.
To much of the white population, it seemed that South Africa had indeed
reached a critical turning point. The sight of massed ranks of blacks marching on
the centre of a white city suggested that black patience had finally snapped. As
fear and alarm about the defiant mood of the black population spread, whites
rushed to gunshops in the Transvaal and in Cape Town, clearing out their stocks.
House prices and the stock market slumped. Foreign embassies were inundated
with inquiries about immigration. Liberal whites were convinced that the
government would now have no alternative but to change its policies.
An outburst of international protest against the Sharpeville killings added to
the atmosphere of crisis. Photographs of the shooting, published by newspapers
around the world, made a sharp impact on millions of people who saw them. In
the following days, as reports of demonstrations, marches and police brutality
accumulated, the impression gained abroad was of an evil regime in the throes of
crisis so severe that it might not survive. Western attitudes towards South Africa
became markedly more hostile. A United Nations Security Council resolution
blamed South Africa’s racial policies for causing ‘international friction’. In a
General Assembly debate, British delegates, who had previously stuck to the
argument that South Africa’s racial policies were its own internal affair, now
openly attacked apartheid. The United States added its own condemnation. For
the first time, the General Assembly approved a resolution not just expressing
abhorrence of South African policies but asking for action to be taken. Foreign
investors, meanwhile, fearing imminent upheaval, took their own action. A sharp
outflow of capital hit the value of the currency and halved its foreign exchange
reserves.
To all criticism, both domestic and foreign, Verwoerd remained impervious.

Nothing was to shake his faith in apartheid. The British prime minister, Harold
Macmillan, who paid a visit to South Africa shortly before Sharpeville in
February 1960, held long private discussions with Verwoerd, endeavouring to
explain the consequences of ‘the wind of change’ blowing through Africa but
making no headway. As he recalled in his memoirs:
It was only during these days that I began to realize to the full extent the degree
of obstinacy, amounting really to fanaticism, which Dr Verwoerd brought to the
consideration of his policies. . . . I had the unusual experience of soon noticing
that nothing one could say or put forward would have the smallest effect upon
the views of this determined man.
Far from being willing to make concessions, Verwoerd ordered a massive
crackdown on his opponents. In parliament on 28 March, the government
introduced new security legislation, the Unlawful Organizations Act,
empowering it to proscribe the ANC, the PAC and any other organisations
attempting to further their aims. Government spokesmen claimed that the
nationalist parties were determined on the violent overthrow of the government.
‘Their aim,’ said the minister of justice, François Erasmus, on 29 March, ‘is to
bring to its knees any white government in South Africa which stands for white
supremacy and for white leadership. . . . [They] do not want peace and order . . .
what they want is our country.’ Armed with this new legislation, said Erasmus,
the government would be able to protect innocent Africans and bring an end to
the ANC-PAC ‘reign of terror’.
On 30 March, the government declared a state of emergency and began to
round up hundreds of anti-apartheid dissidents. Officials were empowered to
arrest suspects without warrants and to detain them indefinitely. Large-scale
police raids were conducted in one township after another. In Langa, police units
threw a cordon around the township, cut off water and electricity supplies, then
staged house-to-house raids, dragging men and women on to the streets and
assaulting them with clubs and whips. Four days of continuous brutality
eventually broke the strike.
The knock on Mandela’s door at no. 8115, Orlando West, came at 1.30 in the
morning on 30 March. A posse of armed Special Branch policemen ransacked
the house, searching for papers and confiscating everything they found,
including transcripts Mandela had recently made of his mother’s recollections of
family history which he was never to see again. The police possessed no warrant

for his arrest, gave him no opportunity to contact a lawyer and refused to tell
Winnie where he was being taken. ‘I simply nodded at Winnie; it was no time
for words of comfort.’
At Newlands police station, close to the old site of Sophiatown, Mandela
found a number of colleagues also under arrest, including Sisulu, Resha and
Nokwe. A group of about forty men in all were packed into a small, open yard
and left standing for the rest of the night without food or blankets. In the
morning they were moved into a small cell where the only toilet facility was a
single drainage hole in the floor which soon became blocked. The stench was
overpowering. Still they were given no food or water.
When the cell door was next opened, the prisoners surged through it into an
adjacent courtyard and refused to move until they had been fed. The station
commander, called to the scene, berated Mandela for standing with his hands in
his pockets. At 3 p.m., food finally arrived. At 6 p.m., prisoners were given
sleeping mats and blankets encrusted with dried vomit and ridden with lice, the
stench of which was so foul that the prisoners retched in disgust.
The next morning, when the station commander accused him of being
‘cheeky’, Mandela nearly came to blows with him. ‘I was still raving mad with
temper when in came Special Branch detective Sergeant Helberg and says,
“Hello, Nelson!” in a pleasant way. “I am not Nelson to you, I am Mr Mandela!”
I shouted.’ By this time tempers all round were running high. Before matters
degenerated further, Mandela was told he was to be taken to Pretoria to attend
the treason trial. ‘Fortunately we were told to get into a truck,’ he said.
One week later, the ANC and the PAC were declared illegal organisations. As
the government sought to crush all resistance, wave after wave of arrests took
place. Few dissidents escaped the dragnet. Oliver Tambo was driven across the
border into Bechuanaland (later Botswana) to establish external links for the
ANC. The Indian communist leader, Yusuf Dadoo, also went into exile. Ruth
First, disguised in a red wig, escaped with her children to Swaziland. A small
Communist Party committee, including Michael Harmel, Moses Kotane and Ben
Turok, continued to operate underground in Johannesburg, moving from one
hide-out to another, evading arrest. But scores of other prominent activists, even
Liberal Party members, were incarcerated. The PAC’s headquarters in
Johannesburg were left in the hands of a student who previously had been
working as an office manager. By the beginning of May, the total number of

arrests had reached more than 18,000.
But for the shooting at Sharpeville, the day might have marked no more than
another abortive episode in the annals of African protest. The poor response to
the PAC’s call for mass civil disobedience showed how few were ready to seek
the confrontation with white power that Sobukwe told them would result in the
government’s downfall. Not only did Sobukwe misjudge popular reaction to his
campaign; he also entirely underestimated the government’s real strength and its
powers of repression. Though the government was pitched into a political crisis
of unprecedented magnitude, it was never in danger of losing control.
But this was not the conclusion that prominent opponents of the government
reached. They saw the Sharpeville crisis, the dramatic fall it produced in white
confidence and the torrent of condemnation emanating from around the world as
evidence of a regime that was vulnerable at home and abroad. ‘The type of
despotism we still endure in the Union in this age,’ wrote Michael Harmel, the
leading theoretician of the Congress alliance, ‘is a kind of freak, an anachronism
which cannot hope much longer to survive.’ With so few avenues left open for
political action, Congress activists now began to think in terms of revolutionary
strategy to hasten its end.

In the wake of the Sharpeville shooting, the treason trial acquired a new
significance. The government maintained that the demonstrations and disorder
were all part of a communist-inspired conspiracy to overthrow the state with
which the trial was directly linked, even though the indictment related to events
before December 1956. The accused took a simpler view of the matter. ‘This
trial,’ said Duma Nokwe, ‘is out of date.’
On the day that the state of emergency was declared, the proceedings opened
in some confusion. Mandela and seventeen other accused were absent. Those
who did attend had yet to be arrested. Also missing from the witness box was
Chief Luthuli, who had been in the middle of giving his evidence. When Judge
Rumpff asked for an explanation for his absence, he was told that Luthuli had
been arrested in the early hours of the morning. Rumpff retorted irritably that he
did not see why the state of emergency should stand in the way of the trial and
ordered Luthuli to be brought to court.
When Luthuli duly appeared, in frail health, it transpired that he had been

assaulted by a white policeman in Pretoria Central police station. ‘As we were
being marched to our cells in the dim light of early morning,’ he recalled, ‘I was
obliged to slow down to negotiate a flight of steps. I was instantly slapped hard
across the face from behind. I stooped to gather my hat, and I was hit again.’ He
added, ‘I was angered, but not surprised. Among Africans, the South African
police have long been notorious for this sort of thing.’
The trial soon came to a standstill. The following day, with Mandela and the
missing accused now present, Maisels asked the court to adjourn on the grounds
that the government, by declaring a state of emergency, had effectively made a
judgement on the case. Moreover, defence witnesses would be fearful of giving
testimony which might now lead to their prosecution under the terms of the
emergency regulations. He questioned the propriety of continuing with the trial.
The court was adjourned until 26 April while the judges considered the matter.
Outside the court, as the accused milled about being rearrested, one of them,
Wilton Mkwayi, became separated from the others. When he tried to rejoin
them, a policeman ordered him to leave. When he pointed out he was one of the
accused, he was called a liar, threatened with arrest and once again ordered to
leave. Mkwayi shrugged his shoulders, walked away and went underground.
Meanwhile, the twenty-nine accused were taken to different prisons in Pretoria.
Mandela’s new home, for the next five months, was Pretoria Local. The
conditions there were initially as bad as those at Newlands. The prisoners were
crammed five to a cell six feet by twelve feet, with a single toilet bucket that was
emptied twice a day. The air was foul, the blankets and mats were ridden with
lice and bugs and the food, cold and stale, was doled out on rusty dishes. For the
first ten days, the prisoners were allowed no exercise; nor did they get a chance
to shower.
Mandela became their spokesman, engaged in a constant struggle for
improvements. When he first asked for a separate room so that the accused could
read and study trial documents in quiet, a senior prison officer retorted,
‘Government regulations don’t require you prisoners to read books.’ But slowly,
he gained concessions. The cells were painted and fumigated, new blankets and
toilet buckets were issued, exercise periods were allowed and a large cell was
provided for consultations and legal books. Over the issue of food, Mandela took
the complaint to the court. ‘Speaking with the greatest moderation,’ he said,
addressing Judge Rumpff, ‘it is no exaggeration to say that the food which is

furnished to us in jail, My Lord, with due respect, is completely unfit for human
consumption.’ The standard of food duly improved.
When the trial resumed on 26 April, the judges, accepting assurances from the
minister of justice of an indemnity for the witnesses, decided that the case could
proceed. The accused, however, had agreed on other tactics. To make clear their
protest against the conditions under which the trial was being held during the
state of emergency, Nokwe announced that they would dispense with their
defence law - yers. Maisels duly rose to address the court: ‘We have no further
mandate and we will consequently not trouble Your Lordships any further.’ All
the defence lawyers then walked out. For a moment, the court seemed stunned.
But Judge Rumpff soon carried on as though nothing had happened. The
accused, henceforth, were left to conduct their own defence, with Nokwe acting
as advocate and Mandela as attorney.
Luthuli returned to the witness box, looking tired and weary but nevertheless
resolute under cross-examination. Because of his poor health, his appearance
was limited to two hours a day. After giving testimony, he was taken back each
time to the prison hospital, where he lived. His ordeal did not stop there,
however, as he was himself charged on 104 counts for burning his pass and
inciting others to do the same and faced his own trial. At the treason trial, Judge
Rumpff treated him with great consideration, anxious to avoid any undue strain,
but the prosecutors gave him no quarter, attacking his honesty and integrity. In
all, he appeared in court on twenty-six days and did not finally step down from
the witness box until June.
Luthuli spoke of his belief that moral persuasion and economic pressure
would eventually lead whites to change their policies. There still remained, he
said, goodwill towards the whites, though it was diminishing with each year that
passed. He emphasised the ANC’s policy of non-violence, pointing out that it
could be changed only at a national conference. ‘I have heard no suggestion to
change that policy, not a whisper,’ he said. He would have opposed such a
suggestion, firstly on personal grounds and secondly because it would be
contrary to the interests of the liberation movement: ‘It is not a practical thing.’
As the trial dragged on, week after week, Mandela felt keenly his separation
from Winnie, who was pregnant again, and from Zenani, then a year old. He
made the most of what few visits they were allowed to make to see him, holding
and kissing Zenani if the guards permitted him to do so, but the moments of their

departure were always hard to bear. ‘As Winnie was saying goodbye, and the
guards were ushering them out,’ he wrote, ‘Zeni would often motion for me to
come with them, and I could see from her small puzzled face that she did not
understand why I could not.’
Mandela also managed to arrange a few illicit meetings with Winnie during
visits to Johannesburg he was permitted to make at weekends to help wind up
the affairs of Mandela and Tambo. Accompanied by a Special Branch detective,
he would leave Pretoria once the court proceedings had ended, work in his office
during the day and spend his nights in a Marshall Square police cell, before
returning to Pretoria Local on Sunday. The Special Branch detective, an
accommodating man, allowed him to buy items from a nearby café on his own
and discreetly turned away when Winnie made an appearance. ‘We had a kind of
gentleman’s code between us: I would not escape and thereby get him into
trouble, while he permitted me a degree of freedom.’
On 3 August, with defence lawyers back in court as a result of a relaxation of
the emergency regulations, Mandela finally took the witness stand. Winnie was
present to watch him. Under the guidance of Sydney Kentridge, he was asked to
explain at length about the history of the ANC and its policies, about the Youth
League, the Defiance Campaign, the ‘M’ Plan, the Congress of the People and
the Freedom Charter. He was also questioned about his views on communism,
capitalism and imperialism, about speeches he had given, articles he had written
and books found in his possession. Kentridge’s aim was to concentrate on issues
that he knew the prosecutors would subsequently try to exploit in their efforts to
establish the involvement of the ANC in violence and hence to pre-empt them.
Once Mandela had stated his case, the burden would be on the prosecution to
prove otherwise. His evidence took up 441 pages of the official record.
Kentridge began by examining Mandela on the Youth League, drawing
attention to its anti-communist stand to demonstrate that the ANC’s outlook was
rooted not in communism but in a broader spectrum of views. Mandela related
his own reasons for supporting a resolution to expel communists from the ANC:
. . . from the little knowledge I had at the time about communists I
regarded them as people who were hostile to African nationalism, which
I regarded as being extremely important from the point of view of
mobilizing the African people as such. I was also under the view, My
Lord, that the communists opposed organizations like the ANC and that

they would work to subvert both its policies and its campaigns.
He went on to explain his change of attitude: ‘I came to work with them and I
discovered that the views I held about communists in the ANC were not
justified, both by the outlook and attitude of those persons with whom I worked,
as well as by their devotion and loyalty to the policy of the ANC.’ Asked if he
ever became a communist, he said, ‘I don’t know if I did become a communist.
If by communist you mean a member of the Communist Party and a person who
believes in the theory of Marx, Engels, Lenin and Stalin and who adheres strictly
to the discipline of the party, I did not become a communist.’
Mandela was in the course of explaining the impact of the Defiance Campaign
when Judge Bekker intervened, asking, ‘Well, as a matter of fact, isn’t your
freedom a direct threat to the Europeans?’ Mandela replied:
No, it is not a direct threat to the Europeans, as Europeans. We are not antiwhite; we are against white supremacy and in struggling against white
supremacy we have the support of some sections of the European population. . .
As a matter of fact, My Lord, I think that we in the Congress must take credit for
the fact that there is a movement in this country for racial peace. I think in
numerous speeches which have been made by leading members of the ANC,
some of which have been placed before this court, it is quite clear that the
Congress has consistently preached a policy of racial harmony and we have
condemned racialism no matter by whom it is professed.
Mandela denied that the Freedom Charter meant eliminating private
enterprise.
MANDELA: Apart from those industries [mines and banks] the Freedom
Charter does not call for socialism in this country.
KENTRIDGE: Have you made any study of socialism?
MANDELA: I have read some books . . . pro and against.
KENTRIDGE: And are you interested in socialism?
MANDELA: I am very much attracted to it.
KENTRIDGE: Have you read anything about the system in the Soviet
Union?
MANDELA: Very little, My Lords, but I have.

KENTRIDGE: Do you find that system interesting?
MANDELA: I find it very interesting.
KENTRIDGE: As far as you know what the situation is, is there anything
about the Soviet Union that impresses you?
MANDELA: Yes. I am impressed by the entire absence of the colour bar.
. . Secondly, I am impressed by the fact that the Soviet Union has no
colonies in Africa and as far as I know in any other part of the world. I
am also impressed by the stand which the Soviet Union has taken on the
question of imperialism . . .
KENTRIDGE: Do you hope to introduce the system in the Soviet Union
in South Africa?
MANDELA: No, My Lords. All that impresses me is the ideal of a
socialist society, but I have no intention of copying anything that has
been done in any other country.
Mandela was asked by Kentridge to explain what he meant when, in an article
in Liberation, he described the Freedom Charter as ‘a revolutionary document’
which envisaged changes that could not be won ‘without breaking up the
economic and political set-up of present South Africa’. In reply, Mandela said,
‘It doesn’t mean that we would do away with parliamentary institutions; they
would remain, but the composition would be so radically different that it would
be appropriate to say that the political structure has been broken up.’
Judge Bekker asked him to expand on this point.
I accept that the authorities will not of their own free will legislate that
we should be given these rights. There will have to be a tremendous
amount of pressure put up by the Congress movement. . . . We will have
to launch defiance campaigns, stay-at-homes, a combination of these, and
it will be because of that pressure that we expect the government either to
give in to our demands and to say that we have come to the conclusion
that we can no longer continue with the present set-up. We will repeal all
laws which discriminate against non-Europeans. Either that, or the voters
would say that we can’t have this mass defiance of the laws, we can’t
have this situation of uncertainty and insecurity. We call upon the
government to resign, and to make way for a government which is going
to meet the demands. That is what I have in mind, My Lords, when I say

that these demands cannot be attained without breaking up the political
and economic set-up in the country. I do visualize the exertion of
pressure on a tremen - dous scale.
In their cross-examination of Mandela, the prosecutors tried time and again to
get him to confess on the matter of violence. Phrases like ‘revolutionary
eruption’, ‘seizure of power’ and ‘people’s democracy’, which he had used in
articles and speeches and which other activists had also used, were turned over
again and again in the search for violent meaning. The nub of the prosecutor’s
attack was that in order to achieve the aims of the Freedom Charter the ANC
would have to resort to the violent overthrow of the government.
MANDELA: My own view is that it is not necessary in this country to
employ force and violence in order to bring about either the demands set
out in the Freedom Charter, or even to bring about socialism. I don’t
think it’s necessary at all to do so. . . .
PROSECUTOR: Do you think it’s possible to achieve a transformation
to a communist state in this country peacefully?
MANDELA: You keep on talking about a communist state; I talk about a
socialist state . . .
PROSECUTOR: Is there a possibility that the application of pressure by
the Congress movement might result in strong counterpressure by the
government, the ruling class, and that there would be violence?
MANDELA: That possibility is always there . . . but we believe that our
policy will bring down the government in spite of its intentions. . . . In
this country there is a large body of voters who are hostile to the policy
of the government, and we believe that because of pressure, both
externally and internally . . . the government will be brought to realize
that its policy is futile.
Mandela explained that the kind of state he envisaged could not be achieved
by ‘small concessions’ from the government, like having whites representing
black interests in parliament: ‘You will create that state if the vote is extended to
all sections of the population.’
PROSECUTOR: Do you think that your people’s democracy could be
achieved by a process of gradual reforms? Suppose, as a result of
pressure, the ruling class were to agree next month to a qualified

franchise for the Africans, an educational test perhaps—not a stringent
one—and next year, as a result of further pressure, a more important
concession is made in1962, and so on over a period of ten or twenty
years—do you think that the people’s democracy could be achieved in
that fashion?
MANDELA: . . . In my own view I would say, ‘Yes, let us talk,’ and the
government would say, ‘We think that the Europeans at present are not
ready for a type of government where there might be domination by nonEuropeans. We think we should give you sixty seats. The African
population to elect sixty Africans to represent them in Parliament. We
will leave the matter over for five years and we will review it at the end
of five years.’ In my view, that would be a victory, My Lords; we would
have taken a significant step towards the attainment of universal adult
suffrage for Africans, and we would then for the five years say, we will
suspend civil disobedience; we won’t have any stay-at-homes, and we
will then devote the intervening period for the purposes of educating the
country, the Europeans, to see that these changes can be brought about
and that it would bring about better racial understanding, better harmony
in the country. I’d say we should accept it, but, of course, I would not
abandon the demands for the extension of the franchise to all Africans.
That’s how I see it, My Lords.
Then, at the end of the five-year period, we will have discussions, and
if the government says, ‘We will give you again forty more seats,’ I
might say that that is quite sufficient. Let’s accept it, and still demand
that the franchise should be extended, but for the agreed period we
should suspend civil disobedience, no stay-at-homes. In that way we
would eventually be able to get everything we want; we shall have our
people’s democracy, My Lords . . .
JUDGE KENNEDY: Mandela, assuming you were wrong in your
beliefs, do you visualize any future action on behalf of the government,
by the government? Because I think the evidence suggests that you could
not expect the government to soften in its views. Have you any future
plans in that event?
MANDELA: No, My Lords, I don’t think that the Congress has ever
believed that its policy of pressure would ultimately fail. The Congress,

of course, does not expect that one single push to coerce the government
to change its policy will succeed; the Congress expects that over a
period, as a result of a repetition of these pressures, together with world
opinion, that the government, notwithstanding its attitude of ruling
Africans with an iron hand, that notwithstanding that, the methods which
we are using will bring about a realization of our aspirations.
Mandela said the ANC believed that it would be possible to achieve its aims
through numerical superiority, without resorting to violence.
We had in mind that in the foreseeable future it will be possible for us to
achieve these demands, and we worked on the basis that Europeans
themselves, in spite of the wall of prejudice and hostility which we
encountered, that they can never remain indifferent indefinitely to our
demands, because we are hitting them in the stomach with our policy of
economic pressure. It is a method which is well organized. The
Europeans dare not look at it with indifference. They would have to
respond to it and, indeed, My Lords, they are responding to it.
Mandela’s performance under cross-examination allowed the prosecution to
make no headway in trying to expose the ANC on the question of violence. But
there remained the prosecution’s key piece of evidence, the tape-recording of
Robert Resha addressing volunteers in ANC headquarters. ‘A volunteer is a
person who is disciplined,’ he had said. ‘This is the key of the volunteer—
discipline. When you are disciplined and you are told by the organization not to
be violent, you must not be violent. If you are a true volunteer and you are called
upon to be violent, you must be absolutely violent, you must murder! Murder!
That is all!’
Both Luthuli and Mandela were asked to comment on Resha’s remarks.
Luthuli replied that if a general in the army was at fault, it did not imply he
represented a whole policy. ‘If Resha as a general departs, he departs as Resha.
It has nothing to do with the policy of the African National Congress, definitely.’
Mandela’s view was similarly straightforward.
MANDELA: I understand it to mean that when a volunteer is called upon
to perform a certain task, he must perform that task, but obviously if that
task is contrary to the policy of Congress, we don’t expect any volunteer
to carry out that task.
PROSECUTOR: As far as you are concerned, there is nothing in that

speech which you find inconsistent with the policy of the ANC?
MANDELA: If the speech advocates violence, of course it is totally
contrary to the policy of Congress.
Resha himself spent days in the witness box under examination and crossexamination. Asked by Bram Fischer how he could reconcile his speech with
ANC policy, he replied simply, ‘The example I used in that speech cannot be
reconciled with the policy of the African National Congress.’
Professor Matthews, the concluding witness for the defence, was also asked
about Resha’s speech. ‘Just words,’ said the professor. ‘You know,’ said the
prosecutor, Gustav Hoexter, ‘I think you’re right.’

In the four years that the treason trial had lasted, Mandela had grown
considerably in stature. His skill in handling the defence of the accused, along
with Duma Nokwe, when their lawyers withdrew from the proceedings, added to
his standing as a lawyer. He appeared confident and at ease in the witness box,
holding his own against the attack of the prosecutors, displaying a depth of
knowledge and understanding which even they found impressive. As the
spokesman for the prisoners in Pretoria, he had shown equal determination in
fighting the smaller battles against white authority. He responded instinctively to
challenge. When confronted with difficulties, he tackled them undaunted, giving
a lead to others, always mindful of the need to keep up their spirits. He had
acquired a wider sense of responsibility since his days as a gadfly. Prominent
white activists who had once considered him a ‘lightweight’ came to regard him
as ‘a man ripe for the moment’. His old mentor, Walter Sisulu, the anchor of the
ANC throughout the 1950s, remained as great an influence on him as before.
Mandela’s first reflex in considering many a problem was to ask, ‘What does
Walter think?’ According to Rusty Bernstein, ‘Mandela had good judgement as
an arbitrator and a conciliator. He was not so good on individual judgements, but
usually he consulted and listened, and usually he consulted Walter.’
That habit would continue for years to come, but by 1960 Mandela had
emerged as a leader in his own right.

The state of emergency was lifted on 31 August 1960, enabling Mandela to go

home for the first time in five months. ‘After one has been in prison,’ he wrote,
‘it is the small things that one appreciates: being able to take a walk whenever
one wants, going into a shop and buying a newspaper, speaking or choosing to
remain silent. The simple act of being able to control one’s person.’
The problem remained about what to do next. In prison there had been much
talk about the use of violence. The banning of the ANC had closed off the
possibility of conventional opposition. Agitation for action against the
government was growing among youth groups. The ANC’s leaders, however,
considered the use of violence to be neither a feasible nor a desirable course of
action, on both practical and political grounds. A major concern was the position
of Luthuli, who would never have countenanced the idea. But equally important
was the ANC’s continuing hope that mass action might still shake the
government. As Mandela had explained in his testimony at the treason trial, the
nationalists believed that they could mount sufficient ‘pressure’ on the
government and on the economy to cause a change of mind among the white
population. Though there was scant evidence to support it, they clung to the
notion that such a change was already under way. What was decided, therefore,
at a secret meeting of the ANC’s national executive in September was to
reorganise the ANC on an underground basis, resurrecting the old ‘M’ Plan. A
new working committee in Johannesburg was given responsibility for the task; it
included Mandela, Sisulu, Nokwe, Marks and Kotane.
While the ANC uneasily pondered its next moves, the communists had no
such qualms. Nurtured on theories of revolutionary violence, they read from the
trend of events in South Africa a new revolutionary potential and leapt publicly
into the fray. On 14 July 1960, after seven years of secret underground activity,
the Communist Party distributed leaflets announcing its existence and calling on
workers to rally in the struggle against the government. From his hide-outs in
Johannesburg, moving between ten different houses in five months, Harmel
produced a paper arguing that it was necessary to abandon non-violence as the
sole means of struggle and move to armed methods. Harmel’s view was, ‘No
further progress is possible along the traditional paths or by adhering strictly to
the non-violence slogan in a situation where every democratic demand or
criticism is treated as an act of rebellion or treason.’ Such was the respect in
which Harmel was held that the idea gained immediate credibility. Some
communists, like Ben Turok, regarded him as the ‘Lenin of the movement’.
Among those influenced by Harmel was Bram Fischer. Fischer’s role in the

resistance was becoming ever more extraordinary. During the state of
emergency, his wife, Molly, was imprisoned, leaving him on his own to care for
his children, one of whom, Paul, suffered from permanent poor health and
sometimes hovered close to death. At the treason trial, meanwhile, Fischer’s
responsibilities included handling Robert Resha, the most difficult of all the
accused. At the same time, not only was he providing an important link between
the accused and the outside world, even managing to smuggle a radio into
Pretoria Central for them, but he was also one of the principal links between the
underground party committee, led by Harmel and Kotane, and the outside world,
having to avoid police surveillance all the while. On top of all this, he was
constantly preoccupied with helping the wives and families of detainees. ‘During
the emergency,’ recalled Bernstein, ‘Bram was undertaking everyone else’s
problems.’
Fischer became a reluctant convert to the idea of armed struggle. He had
doubts as to whether an underground movement could mount a campaign of
violence as well as survive the repression that would inevitably follow. He was
also anxious about taking steps from which there could be no retreat. But
ultimately he conceded that every other alternative had been tried, to no avail.
Other leading communists, notably Kotane, were also sceptical. Kotane was
worried that the resort to violence would undermine the ability of an
underground movement to continue with non-violent political work.
The enthusiasts, however, carried the day. They saw themselves in the
tradition of Marxist-Leninist revolutionaries determined to strike against a
brutal, decaying regime. The armed struggle, they believed, would receive
massive support from the oppressed African population. At the forefront of this
group was Joe Slovo, a hardline Stalinist with romantic notions about
revolutionary warfare. At a secret meeting in December 1960 at a private house
in Victoria, a white suburb of Johannesburg, the communists took the decision to
establish an armed force consisting of small squads of saboteurs as a prelude to
engaging in guerrilla warfare.
Mandela was fully informed of these developments. But though he was as
keen as the communists to retaliate against the government, he acknowledged
that the ANC, with its broad constituency of interests, was in no position to
follow suit. Neither was he himself able to offer any leadership on the matter.
For not only was he still preoccupied with the treason trial in Pretoria but he was
also subject to a banning order restricting his movements.

His time was also taken up with endeavours to earn a living as a lawyer.
Though the firm of Mandela and Tambo had closed down, Mandela was
operating on a freelance basis from Kholvad House in the flat in which Ismail
Meer had once lived but which had since been taken over by Kathy Kathrada.
He was not short of clients. The lounge and the passage outside the flat were
often crammed with clients.
All this left Mandela with little enough time to enjoy any kind of family life.
Winnie, heavily pregnant, rarely saw him. Even on the birth of their second
daughter, Zindziswa, in December 1960, Mandela was diverted from attending
by another small crisis. Learning that his son, Makgatho, was ill in the Transkei,
where he attended school, Mandela drove through the night to reach him,
violating his banning order, bringing him back to Johannesburg for surgery, only
to find he had missed the birth.
The treason trial, meanwhile, lumbered on into its concluding stages. The
prosecution’s closing argument, begun on 7 November 1960, finally ended, after
several adjournments, on 6 March 1961. The defence’s closing argument
followed, with Maisels beginning by refuting all charges of violence. ‘We admit
that there is a question of non-cooperation and passive resistance,’ he said. ‘We
shall say quite frankly that if non-cooperation and passive resistance constitute
high treason, then we are guilty. But these are plainly not encompassed in the
law of treason.’
The defence lawyers had expected their closing argument to take up to three
months, so complex were many of the issues involved. But after only two weeks,
while Bram Fischer was engaged in a lengthy analysis of ANC policies, the
judges made a series of interruptions directing him to focus on specific issues.
Finally, on 23 March, in a further dramatic intervention, they adjourned the court
until 29 March to consider whether they could forgo hearing certain aspects of
the defence argument, in the interests of shortening the trial. The clear
implication was that they had already made up their minds in favour of acquittal.
This sudden and unexpected turn of events had an immediate impact on
Mandela’s decisions about his future. His banning order, in place for five years,
was due to expire two days hence, on 25 March. He had planned to use the
opportunity to travel to Pietermaritzburg at the weekend to address a conference
of Congress supporters, called the ‘All-in Conference’, before returning to
Pretoria to resume his place at the treason trial. The purpose of this conference

was to issue demands for a national convention for all South Africans to draw up
a non-racial constitution.
At a hastily convened meeting of the ANC’s working committee in
Johannesburg, it was agreed that if on 29 March the accused were acquitted,
Mandela should immediately go underground to organise support for the
national convention, avoiding any further restrictions on him the government
might seek to impose and surfacing in public on carefully planned occasions to
achieve a maximum of publicity: ‘It was not a proposal that came as a surprise to
me, nor was it one I particularly relished, but it was something I knew I had to
do.’
Accompanied by Sisulu, Nokwe and one of his new lieutenants, Joe Modise, a
tough street-fighter from Alexandra, Mandela went to his house in Orlando to
tell Winnie what would now happen. They had never previously discussed the
possibility that he might leave home; nor was she even aware that his banning
order was due to expire, or that he planned to travel to Pietermaritzburg that
weekend. Mandela never confided in Winnie. She was simply told what to do.
She recalled:
They all stood outside in the driveway of the garage and he sent a child to call
me. On my arrival he simply said, ‘Darling, just pack some of my clothes in a
suitcase with my toiletries. I will be going away for a long time. You’re not to
worry, my friends here will look after you. They’ll give you news of me from
time to time. Look well after the children. I know you’ll have the strength and
courage to do so without me. I know you are capable of that.’
I quickly packed his clothes. I was in tears but I had been conditioned in the
few months we had together not to ask any questions. I only wished him well
before we parted and asked that the gods of Africa take care of him wherever he
would be, and that he would have a chance to spare the children and me a few
minutes sometime. He scolded me for reminding him of his duties.
Mandela did not enter the house. By the time Winnie had finished packing his
bag, he had gone. An hour later, Joe Modise returned to collect it.
Mandela’s sudden appearance at the All-in Conference in an Indian hall in
Pietermaritzburg on 25 March had an electrifying effect on the delegates. He had
not been seen on a public platform since 1952. He was duly elected to head a
National Action Council charged with the task of organising the campaign for a
national convention. The first phase of the campaign was to take the form of a

three-day national stay-away, to be carried out if the government failed to
respond by 31 May to the demand for a national convention, as everyone
expected it to do. Some 1,400 delegates joined enthusiastically in the
proceedings, not knowing that this was to be the last large conference organised
by African leaders in South Africa for many years. It was also Mandela’s last
public appearance. Having made a successful impact, he drove back to Pretoria
to hear the verdict of the treason trial.

It took Judge Rumpff forty minutes in the Old Synagogue in Pretoria on 29
March 1961 to deliver the court’s findings. He reviewed a number of
conclusions which the three judges had reached unanimously. The court found,
he said, that the ANC and its allies had been working ‘to replace the present
form of state with a radically and fundamentally different form of state’; that the
Programme of Action ‘envisaged the use of illegal means’ and that illegal means
were used during the Defiance Campaign; that some ANC leaders ‘made
themselves guilty of sporadic speeches of violence which in our opinion
amounted to an incitement to violence’; that ‘a strong left-wing tendency
manifested itself’in the ANC during the indictment period between 1952 and
1956; and that the ANC frequently revealed ‘anti-imperialist, anti-West and proSoviet’ attitudes.
But although there had been some violent speeches by ANC members—‘a
minute percentage of the total number of speeches made’—there was no proof of
an ANC policy of violent revolution. There was also no proof that the ANC was
a communist organisation or that it had been infiltrated by communists, or that
the Freedom Charter envisaged a communist state.
‘The cornerstone of the case’, said Rumpff, was the ANC’s alleged policy of
incitement to violence. The prosecution’s failure to prove this policy ‘inevitably
meant a collapse of the whole case’:
On all the evidence presented to this court and on our findings of fact, it is
impossible for this court to come to the conclusion that the African National
Congress had acquired or adopted a policy to overthrow the state by violence,
that is, in the sense that the masses had to be prepared or conditioned to commit
direct acts of violence against the state.
In the crowded courtroom, there was not a movement, not a murmur, as

Rumpff delivered his final words: ‘The accused are accordingly found not guilty
and are discharged.’
Once the judges in their scarlet robes had filed out, the spectators’ gallery
erupted in cheers and the accused hugged one another and waved to the
onlookers. In the courtyard outside, Mandela embraced Winnie. As the accused
celebrated their release amid a throng of friends and family, laughing, weeping
and singing, Maisels and Fischer were hoisted high above their shoulders.
Each of the three judges at the treason trial handed down separate reasons for
the conclusions they reached in their joint judgement. In his reasons for
judgement, which ran to 168 pages, Rumpff referred to the evidence given both
by Luthuli and by Mandela to support his findings that communism had not been
adopted by the ANC. In the case of Luthuli, it was because of his openly anticommunist Christian stance; in the case of Mandela, it was because in 1956 he
‘foresaw a non-European bourgeois advance under the Freedom Charter’.
Rumpff was not convinced, he said, ‘that the African National Congress had
acquired a policy which caused it to cross the dividing line between noncommunism and communism in the spectrum of socialist belief’.
Bekker, giving his reasons for judgement, took issue with the prosecution’s
contention that the accused planned to set up a communist system of government
in South Africa: ‘I share the view expressed by Mandela that in order to achieve
this state (as envisaged in the Freedom Charter) the present economic and
political set-up in South Africa will have to be broken.’ But, he went on, he
disagreed with the proposition that the only form of state envisaged by the
Freedom Charter was a communist one:
This definition does not in my opinion necessarily imply a one-party system as
being put forward since in the classes which remain after the exclusion of the
‘few exploiters’ as defined, there may very well be room, for instance, for a
communist party on the one hand and a socialist party on the other. . . . I am
accordingly unable to agree that the one and only inference to be drawn from the
document is that a dictatorship of the proletariat was being advocated.
The court record of the treason trial ran to nearly 10 million words bound in
180 volumes of 200 pages each. Yet no single act of conspiracy or any act of
violence was ever alleged by the prosecution, and many of the claims it made
about the ‘explosive’ nature of the racial situation in South Africa in 1956 and
about speeches ‘bristling with references to the spilling of blood’ it never

managed to substantiate. As an attempt to demonstrate that opposition to the
government was due principally to the work of communists, the trial was clearly
a failure.
The government drew its own conclusions from this outcome. One of the
spectators who went to watch the trial when it was still in its early stages was
John Vorster, an advocate and former Nazi sympathiser who had been
imprisoned without trial during the Second World War for pro-German
activities. Appointed by Verwoerd as his new minister of justice a few months
after the treason trial verdict, with instructions to root out all resistance, Vorster
resolved that if the government’s opponents could not be crushed by the law,
then the law would have to be changed and evidence obtained by other means.
Recalling the meeting on the day in August 1961 that Verwoerd appointed him,
he said, ‘I remember saying to Dr Verwoerd that he should let me deal with the
threat of subversion and revolution in my own way. I told him that you could not
fight communism with the Queensbury rules, because if you did then you would
lose. He agreed with me and said that he would leave me free to do what I had to
do—within reason.’
Vorster appointed a new head of the security police, Hendrik van den Bergh,
who had been interned with him during the war and who shared his views about
how to tackle the problem. As van den Bergh recalled, ‘For me the choice was
between revolution, violence and a bloodbath and the so-called rule of law,
about which there was all the noise. I looked at my children and those of others
and said, “To the devil with the rule of law.’”

On the night that the accused were discharged, Bram Fischer gave a party at
Beaumont Street to celebrate. As the guests arrived, they were watched by
Special Branch detectives waiting in two cars in the street outside. Mandela did
not join them. Nor did he go home. He spent the night in a safe house in
Johannesburg, growing accustomed to a life in the underground.
