CHAPTER 19
BOTHA’S TEA PARTY
AS THE FURORE OVER MANDELA UNITED SUBSIDED, MANDELA
concentrated his attention on preparing for the meeting he sought with Botha. To
clarify the issues, he drew up a ten-page memorandum which he sent in March
1989, after Botha had recovered from his stroke. ‘The deepening political crisis
in our country has been a matter of grave concern to me for quite some time,’ he
began, ‘and I now consider it necessary in the national interest for the African
National Congress and the government to meet urgently to negotiate an effective
political settlement.’
His task, he said, was a limited one—namely, to bring the country’s two major
political bodies to the negotiating table. An early meeting between the
government and the ANC would constitute the first major step towards lasting
peace.
Two central issues will have to be addressed at such a meeting: firstly,
the demand for majority rule in a unitary state; secondly, the concern of
white South Africa over this demand, as well as the insistence of whites
on structural guarantees that majority rule will not mean domination of
the white minority by blacks. The most crucial task which will face the
government and the ANC will be to reconcile these two positions.
Mandela addressed the obstacles that stood in the way of talks, in particular
the government’s demands, elaborated by the secret committee, that the ANC
should first renounce violence, break its alliance with the Communist Party and
abandon its demand for majority rule.
The position of the ANC on the question of violence is very simple. The
organization has no vested interest in violence. It abhors any action
which may cause loss of life, destruction of property and misery to the
people. It has worked long and patiently for a South Africa of common
values and for an undivided and peaceful nonracial state. But we consider
the armed struggle a legitimate form of self-defence against a morally

repugnant system of government which will not allow even peaceful
forms of protest. . .
It is perfectly clear on the facts that the refusal of the ANC to renounce
violence is not the real problem facing the government. The truth is that
the government is not yet ready for negotiation and for the sharing of
political power with blacks. It is still committed to white domination and,
for that reason, it will only tolerate those blacks who are willing to serve
on its apartheid structures. Its policy is to remove from the political scene
blacks who refuse to conform, who reject white supremacy and its
apartheid structures and who insist on equal rights with whites. This is
the real reason for the government’s refusal to talk to us, and for its
demand that we should disarm ourselves, while it continues to use
violence against our people.
As he had done countless times with members of the secret committee,
Mandela defended the ANC’s alliance with the Communist Party:
Cooperation between the ANC and the South African Communist Party goes
back to the early twenties and has always been, and still is, strictly limited to the
struggle against racial oppression and for a just society. At no time has the
organization ever adopted or cooperated with communism itself. Apart from the
question of cooperation between the two organizations, members of the SACP
have always been free to join the ANC. But once they do, they become fully
bound by the policy of the organization set out in the Freedom Charter. As
members of the ANC engaged in the anti-apartheid struggle, their Marxist
ideology is not directly relevant. The SACP has throughout the years accepted
the leading role of the ANC, a position which is respected by the SACP
members who join the ANC.
He firmly dismissed any suggestion for an end to the alliance:
No self-respecting freedom fighter will take orders from the government on how
to wage the freedom struggle against that same government and on who his
allies in the freedom struggle should be. . . . No dedicated ANC member will
ever heed a call to break with the SACP. We regard such a demand as a purely
divisive government strategy.
It is in fact a call on us to commit suicide. Which man of honour will ever
desert a lifelong friend at the insistence of a common opponent and still retain a
measure of credibility among his people? Which opponent will ever trust such a

treacherous freedom fighter? Yet this is what the government is, in effect, asking
us to do—to desert our faithful allies. We will not fall into that trap.
Mandela was equally dismissive of the government’s rejection of majority
rule. The principle of majority rule was a pillar of democracy around the world.
It was a principle which was fully accepted in the white politics of South Africa.
It was a principle that would have to be accepted in the future if a peaceful
settlement was to be reached:
Majority rule and internal peace are like the two sides of a single coin, and white
South Africa simply has to accept that there will never be peace and stability in
this country until the principle is fully applied. It is precisely because of its
denial that the government has become the enemy of practically every black
man. It is that denial that has sparked off the current civil strife.
Mandela concluded by saying that the move he had taken in approaching the
government provided Botha with an opportunity to overcome the political
deadlock in South Africa.
I hope you will seize it without delay. I believe that the overwhelming
majority of South Africans, black and white, hope to see the ANC and
the government working closely together to lay the foundations for a new
era in our country, in which racial discrimination and prejudice, coercion
and confrontation, death and destruction, will be forgotten.
While waiting for the date of the meeting to be fixed, Mandela invited many
old friends to visit him at Victor Verster. His memory for detail with regard to
people and places from the distant past was astonishing. He was assiduous in
bringing himself up to date with all that had happened to his visitors, with births
and marriages and divorces and deaths, remembering the details long into the
future. He made a particular effort to track down his old employer Lazar
Sidelsky, who had helped him forty years before in starting his career as a
lawyer. They joked about the suit that Sidelsky had given him. Mandela said
later that it was one of the most memorable visits in prison he had ever had. A
steady stream of political activists also came to Victor Verster and to them
Mandela paid the same courteous attention. Though Winnie was told she could
remain at Mandela’s cottage whenever she wished, she never stayed overnight,
claiming that it would not be appropriate while other ANC people languished in
prison cells.
The meeting with Botha was finally set for 5 July 1989. Mandela was

provided with a new suit, tie, shirt and shoes. His blood group was checked in
case of emergency. He prepared himself by reading every newspaper and
magazine he could lay his hands on, reviewed his memorandum and checked his
notes. The officials who went with him were anxious that he should make a good
impression; one of them retied his tie for him before he set out from Victor
Verster.
Mandela approached the meeting with some trepidation. Since Botha’s stroke
in January, his temper was said to be even more ferocious than before. His own
colleagues found him increasingly irascible; he refused to listen to advice and
harboured resentments against them. Mandela resolved that if Botha resorted to
his finger-wagging habit, he would interrupt to say he found Botha’s behaviour
unacceptable and leave.
Arrangements for the meeting were carried out in the utmost secrecy. Mandela
was driven to a basement garage beneath Tuynhuys, the Cape Dutch mansion
alongside parliament in the centre of Cape Town which served as the president’s
official residence. Accompanied by prison officials, he took a lift to the ground
floor and stepped out into a wood-panelled lobby in front of the president’s
office, where he met Coetsee and Barnard. Both were worried that Botha’s
temper might erupt during the encounter. Barnard noticed that Mandela’s
shoelaces were not properly tied and quickly knelt down to retie them. ‘I realized
just how nervous they were,’ said Mandela, ‘and that did not make me any
calmer.’
As Mandela entered the president’s office, Botha walked towards him from
the opposite side of the room, his hand outstretched, smiling broadly. Instead of
the grim, cantankerous figure he had expected to meet, Mandela found Botha ‘a
charming man indeed’, unfailingly courteous and friendly: ‘The thing that
impressed was that he poured the tea.’
Their conversation amounted to little more than a polite discourse on South
African history and culture. Mandela mentioned that he had recently read an
article in an Afrikaans magazine about the 1914 Afrikaner rebellion and drew
parallels between their rival nationalisms. The African nationalist struggle, he
said, was not unlike the 1914 Afrikaner rebellion: the one pitted Afrikaner
brother against brother; the other was a struggle ‘between brothers who
happened to be different colours’. No policy matters were discussed and no
negotiations took place. Towards the end of the half-hour meeting, Mandela

asked for the unconditional release of all political prisoners. Botha replied that
he was afraid he could not do that. They parted amicably, Botha saying what a
pleasure the meeting had been and Mandela concurring.
When news of the meeting leaked out a few days later, the meeting was
described, fairly accurately, as ‘a courtesy call’. The symbolic importance of
Botha sitting down with a prisoner whom he had hitherto denounced as a
‘communist terrorist’ was real enough. But Botha was still no nearer to
addressing the central issue of political reform that Mandela had raised in his
memorandum. It was a matter he never seriously contemplated.
Six weeks later, on 14 August, after months of friction with his cabinet
colleagues, Botha announced his resignation as president in a long, rambling
television address. The man who succeeded him, Frederik Willem de Klerk, was
chosen because of his solid conservative credentials.
