THE GRAVY TRAIN
AS PRESIDENT, MANDELA MAINTAINED A FRUGAL LIFESTYLE. HE
had the use of two grand state mansions, Genadendal in Cape Town and
Mahlamba’ Ndlopfu, formerly Libertas, in Pretoria, but whenever possible he
preferred to stay at his comfortable suburban house in Houghton, where three of
his grandchildren and a young relative lived with him. He liked to get away from
the formality of official residences; at home, he could relax. His income as
president was substantial. He had an annual salary of 552,000 rands with large
additional allowances, but he donated a third of his salary to a children’s charity
he set up. Much of his other income—royalties from his autobiography and
money from the Nobel Peace Prize—was also given to charity or to the ANC.
Accustomed to a life of austerity, Mandela wanted to set a new style of
leadership, free from the greed and corruption for which National Party rule had
been renowned. The political ‘gravy train’, he had said during the election
campaign, would come to an end: ‘We are not going to live as fat cats’.
The new dispensation, however, offered opportunities for the black elite,
which they seized with alacrity. One of the first acts of the new parliament was
to vote for huge increases in the salaries and allowances of ministers, members
of parliament and the president. Ministers’ monthly salaries were raised to a
level which was three times more than the average worker earned in a year. The
increases had been recommended by a commission set up by the apartheid
government, thereby enabling ministers to claim they were not responsible for
the additional money. Even with the recommended increases, members of
parliament continued to argue in favour of yet higher allowances, insisting that
they found it difficult to make ends meet.
The public reaction was distinctly sour. The black Sunday newspaper City
Press published a cartoon showing two senior ministers in the dining car of the
Gravy Train, with one telling the other: ‘That’s enough gravy. Bring on the
champagne’.

The most damning comment came from Anglican leader Archbishop
Desmond Tutu. After raising the issue of government salaries with Mandela in
private, Tutu decided to make his concern public. ‘The government stopped the
gravy train only long enough to get on it’, he remarked.
The public row that broke out between Mandela and Tutu showed Mandela at
his most evasive. Instead of confronting the issue, he chose to make a personal
attack on Tutu. Addressing an audience in Stellenbosch, he criticised Tutu for
siding with Mandela’s populist critics. ‘A respected leader was unable to resist
the temptation to jump on the bandwagon’, said Mandela. ‘I considered it an act
of irresponsibility on his part’. Mandela went on to chastise Tutu for failing to
raise the issue before going public.
Tutu’s response was first to rebuke Mandela for failing to observe the Ninth
Commandment: thou shalt not bear false witness. ‘What is . . . distressing’, he
said, ‘is the impression the president gives that I did not speak to him personally
about the issue’. Then he added: ‘But it is very distressing that the president
should behave like an ordinary politician, by not answering whether a particular
argument or criticism is true but instead impugning my integrity. It is beneath his
stature’.
When asked why he thought Mandela had reacted so intemperately, Tutu
replied: ‘Yes, it was so unlike him. At no point does he normally denigrate
anybody, which is why this attack on me is so odd. Why? I don’t know . . . but,
well, it’s good to know he’s human’.
Mandela’s belated reaction, several months later, was to announce a cut in the
pay of ministers and of the president. But by then the damage to parliament’s
reputation was severe. MPs found themselves the constant butt of remarks about
their ‘gravy-train mentality’. Mandela’s reputation also suffered from his
handling of the salary issue and a number of other incidents. Despite his stern
pronouncements about the need for belt-tightening and a new moral footing, he
was seen to be ‘soft’ on greed, as lenient with his colleagues as he had been with
Winnie, showing them the same kind of perverse loyalty.
One notorious example concerned the Reverend Allan Boesak, an antiapartheid activist from the Western Cape who had helped found the UDF in the
1980s. Once a leader of the Coloured branch of the Dutch Reformed Church and
head of the World Council of Reformed Churches, Boesak had fallen into
disgrace by 1990 as the result of affairs which led to the break-up of his

marriage and his resignation from all his church posts. Despite local opposition,
Mandela intervened to appoint Boesak as the ANC’s leader in the Western Cape
in the hope that he would bring in the Coloured vote. The Western Cape
subsequently was the only province won by the National Party in the election.
Boesak was replaced as party leader there, but Mandela compensated him with
an appointment as ambassador to the United Nations in Geneva.
A few weeks before he was due to leave for Geneva, the first hint of
corruption surfaced. Investigations into the use of aid money donated by foreign
organisations to a charity known as the Foundation for Peace and Justice, which
Boesak had set up in Cape Town to assist the poor and destitute, suggested that
nearly 3 million rands had gone astray. Determined to establish what had
happened to its funds, the Danish agency Danchurch Aid asked a Johannesburg
law firm to make a thorough inquiry. For six weeks Boesak held out while the
scandal was aired in the press. Only when the Office for Serious Economic
Offences began its own investigation was he finally persuaded to resign from the
foreign ministry.
A further complaint was made by Archbishop Tutu, who called in police to
investigate what had happened to a donation of 423,000 rands made by the
American singer Paul Simon, which Tutu had passed on to Boesak’s foundation.
‘We are distressed and angry’, he said in a statement, ‘that money . . . set aside
for child victims of apartheid cannot be accounted for immediately’.
After a three-month investigation, the Johannesburg law firm issued a 600page report damning of Boesak’s conduct. Boesak, the report said, had ‘enriched
himself substantially’ by diverting funds to buy a luxury house and to pay for an
inflated salary, vacations, his second wedding and his new wife’s business debts.
Only a quarter of the foundation’s income had gone to projects intended by
Scandinavian donors to help apartheid victims. Boesak’s response was to deny
all responsibility, to blame his staff and to claim that he was a victim of racism.
‘I have spent most of my life fighting for the liberation of the people’, he said. ‘I
have found that the justice I have fought for is not for me’.
Meanwhile, the government had asked one of its own legal advisers to
investigate. The adviser produced a three-page report which attempted to pick
holes in the law firm’s report and went on to clear Boesak of misconduct. The
response of the Johannesburg law firm was to describe the government report as
‘preposterous’ and ‘absurd’ and to issue an eighteen-page rebuttal, rejecting it

point by point.
But without waiting to weigh up the evidence and ignoring the work in
progress by the Office for Serious Economic Offences, Mandela duly
proclaimed Boesak innocent. ‘The government has investigated the allegations
against Dr Boesak and found they were baseless’, he declared. He went on to
praise Boesak as ‘one of the most gifted young men in the country’ who
deserved a ‘high diplomatic post’. Boesak pronounced himself vindicated,
demanded a public apology from Danchurch Aid and offered his services to the
government.
In the resulting public furore, Mandela and the government were accused of
covering up corruption, engaging in political cronyism and undermining the
course of justice. The outcry eventually died down, and Boesak did not get a
government job, but the episode showed Mandela again capable of gross
misjudgement in handling public business.
Mandela rode to the rescue of other colleagues caught in dubious
circumstances. When the health minister, Dr Nkosazana Zuma, was pilloried for
using 14 million rands of European Union funds to sponsor an anti-Aids drama
by a local playwright, neglecting to inform European Union officials, Mandela
used his influence with parliament’s health committee, which was set for a
showdown over the issue, to stifle its criticisms. ‘The result’, noted one
parliamentary reporter, ‘was a demonstration of pliant foot-shuffling that
astounded observers’. Though the public protector found that Zuma had misled
parliament, Mandela continued to support her. When journalists pursued the
matter, he accused ‘the white-owned media’ of victimising her, making a racial
issue of it for good measure.
Another colleague whom Mandela protected was the public enterprises
minister, Stella Sigcau, who became ensnared in a controversy over bribery
started by a fellow minister, Bantu Holomisa. The two ministers were old rivals:
Sigcau, a former premier of the ‘independent’ Transkei, had been overthrown in
1987 by a military coup led by Holomisa. In May 1996, Holomisa caused a
storm when he claimed that ten years previously Sigcau had received a cut from
a substantial bribe paid by casino tycoon Sol Kerzner to Transkei ministers to
help him secure exclusive gambling rights in the Transkei. Kerzner had
subsequently been charged with bribery by the Transkei authorities but insisted
the payment was extortion; Sigcau admitted receiving the money but said it was

a gift.
Mandela’s wrath at these exposures was directed not at Sigcau but at
Holomisa for washing the party’s dirty linen in public. Dismissed from the
government, Holomisa retaliated by making ever more sweeping allegations of
corruption within the ANC hierarchy, going so far as to claim that Mandela
himself had agreed to consider ways to have the Transkei bribery charges against
Kerzner dropped in return for a 2 million rand donation to ANC party funds. The
ANC denounced this claim as ‘blatant lies’, but to everyone’s astonishment
Mandela then admitted having received the money on behalf of the ANC. Both
he and Kerzner denied that it had anything to do with the bribery charges,
describing it as merely a private contribution to party funds. Holomisa was later
expelled for bringing the party into disrepute.
The whole affair suggested that Mandela and the ANC were far less interested
in accountability and open government than they professed. What counted more
was party loyalty. Press criticism of Mandela reached unprecedented levels. He
was accused of stifling dissent, acting dictatorially and fostering a personality
cult. ‘He makes much of his commitment to collective leadership but rules his
organization with an iron fist, with people who do not agree with him falling out
of favour’, wrote Kaizer Nyatsumba in the Johannesburg Star. ‘There is allpervasive fear among ANC office-bearers at the moment, with nobody wanting
to be seen to be holding heretical views or differing from the omniscient
leadership’.
Mandela reacted with a display of just the kind of intolerance his critics
accused him of. He singled out black journalists for abuse, claiming that they
were doing the ‘dirty work’ of white newspaper owners. He summoned one
newspaper editor, Khulu Sibiya, of Johannesburg’s City Press, who had
criticised Mandela’s interference with the selection of a new chief justice, for a
dressing-down. ‘I have never seen him so furious’, said Sibiya. ‘The handling of
recent political controversies and the hostility to the press do not augur well’.
The final outcome of the Kerzner case was that in April 1997 charges against
Kerzner were dropped by the Transkei authorities.

It was on Mandela’s watch, just when the government was supposed to be
focused on delivering ‘a better life for all’, that key ministers embarked on a
massive arms procurement programme—submarines, frigates and fighter jets—

that not only impaired plans for improved social services but also dragged the
ANC into a morass of corruption. The case for some measure of defence
modernisation was clear enough. Sanctions during the apartheid era had left the
air force and the navy with obsolete equipment. But what occurred was a $5
billion spending spree designed as much to provide opportunities for kickbacks
to ANC officials as to improve South Africa’s defence capability.
The ANC had come to power in 1994 determined to keep defence spending to
a minimum. South Africa faced no international threat of any kind. Indeed, some
ANC politicians argued that there was no need for a navy at all, only a national
coast guard equipped to protect fisheries from foreign trawlers; as for the air
force, they suggested that its existing fleet of jet fighters was adequate to deal
with any foreseeable circumstances. Joe Slovo was among several cabinet
ministers vehemently opposed to increased defence spending. ‘South Africa’s
greatest defence will be a satisfied population’, said Slovo. ‘We need to ensure
we can deliver better housing, health care and education, because then we can be
secure in the knowledge that any aggressor trying anything in South Africa will
be unsuccessful’.
However, a defence review, set in motion in 1996, gave a cabal of defence
hawks the chance to lobby hard for new arms acquisitions. At the forefront was
Joe Modise, a former township gangster who had risen to become Umkhonto’s
commander in exile and whom Mandela appointed as minister of defence.
Modise made the campaign for an expanded defence force his priority, paying
attention to little else. He was joined by Ronnie Kasrils, the former Umkhonto
intelligence chief, well known for his exploits as a revolutionary enthusiast, who
had been appointed deputy minister of defence. Stressing the need for a reequipped navy, Kasrils argued:
Our trade is totally dependent on imports and exports; 80 per cent in terms of
value and 95 per cent in terms of volume goes through the ports. So we’re an
island economy. . . . For our wealth, our economy, we have to understand how
dependent we are on the sea. If our ports were mined or blockaded, we’d have a
major economic crisis. . . . There’s no war threat around the corner, but in three
years’ time, if the situation turns ugly, we’ll pay through the nose and have a
battle against time to make up capability. War doesn’t wait for you to get
yourself organised.
Hoping for lucrative contracts, foreign arms companies—from Britain,

France, Germany, Italy and Spain—competed vigorously to support the
campaign, offering a variety of incentives such as ‘offset’ deals or ‘industrial
participation schemes’ they said would boost local employment and promote
local technology. In practice, ‘offset’ deals were generally considered to be of
little real value: arms companies tended to inflate the price of their products to
cover the extra cost and rarely fulfilled their obligations. But the promises of
industrial development on offer were sufficient to win over Mandela’s deputy,
Thabo Mbeki. Mbeki envisaged that with an enhanced defence force, South
Africa would be able to project its power and influence across a troubled
continent and help keep the peace.
By the time the first phase of the defence review had been completed in 1997,
the hawks had gained ascendancy. The review argued that there was an urgent
need for new acquisitions for the navy and the air force, including four corvettes,
four submarines, four maritime helicopters, twenty-eight fighter aircraft, forty
utility helicopters and fifty-four battle tanks. The first phase was duly approved
by the cabinet. The cost was estimated to be 12 billion rands—by far the largest
arms package in South Africa’s history. In parliament, Kasrils stressed the
‘offset’ benefits. ‘Far from being a drain on our resources, it will provide a
tremendous boost for our economy and Treasury’.
A cabinet sub-committee headed by Mbeki was placed in charge of selecting
contractors. Air force generals made clear their preference for the purchase of
trainer aircraft from the Italian Aeromacchi company: not only did the aircraft
score the highest in terms of technical suitability, but they were the most costeffective option available. But Modise fought tenaciously for a much more
elaborate package from British Aerospace that included the purchase of Hawk
trainers and Gripen combat aircraft.
The generals wanted neither the Hawks nor the Gripens. In the evaluation
process, the Hawks fared badly, scoring less than half the points awarded to the
Italian aircraft. Similarly, the Gripens were shown to be neither the cheapest nor
the technically preferred option of the combat aircraft on offer. So worried were
the generals about the British proposals that they wrote directly to Mandela
warning him against them.
Modise ploughed on relentlessly. At a meeting in April 1998, he instructed the
evaluation committee to draw up two evaluation reports: one that evaluated all
the aircraft with the cost included and another without the cost included. Even

without the cost included, the Hawk proposal still did not come out on top.
When the secretary of defence, Pierre Steyn, a former air force commander, tried
to block the non-costed option from being considered, Modise overruled him.
The Hawk proposal was subsequently presented to the cabinet in November
1998 as the preferred choice of the air force and the arms acquisition team. Steyn
resigned in protest shortly afterwards.
The final outcome was that in 1999 South Africa placed orders for four
corvettes, three submarines, twenty-eight Gripen combat aircraft, twenty-four
Hawk trainers and thirty helicopters, with a total price tag of 30 billion rands.
Because of the decline of the rand, the real cost eventually rose to 60 billion—
about $5 billion.
There were immediate suspicions that the arms deal had been contaminated by
bribery and corruption. But no evidence surfaced until the post-Mandela era was
under way. The scandal that then erupted was compounded by Mbeki’s
determination to organise a cover-up. Within a few brief years of the advent of
democracy, the ANC so beloved by Mandela was shown to have become just
another grubby political party on the make.