THE ‘M’ PLAN
ALONGSIDE THESE POLITICAL DRAMAS, MANDELA’S CAREER AS A
lawyer was slowly taking shape. Although he had abandoned his studies for a
law degree, his intention to qualify as an attorney held firm. After working for
Terblanche and Brigish for about one year, he joined another liberal firm,
Helman and Michel, passing his qualifying exam in 1952. Needing a testimonial
to join the Transvaal Law Society, Mandela went to see Lazar Sidelsky, his old
employer, with whom he had served his articles. Sidelsky took the opportunity to
warn him to stay out of politics. ‘“You’ll end up in jail sooner or later,” I said.
Mandela replied, “For the benefit of my people I must carry on.” I retorted,
“You’ll do more for your people if you set an example to them. Let your people
become educated. Don’t worry about politics.”’ Sidelsky recalled with humour,
‘I felt inclined not to give him that testimonial.’
Mandela’s next employer, Hyman Basner, the first to hire him as a qualified
lawyer, was more accustomed than Sidelsky to the political hurly-burly in which
radical lawyers became involved. A former communist who had served as a
Natives’ representative in the Senate, he was well known for his passionate
support of African rights. ‘A strike, a boycott, a clash between Africans and the
police—where such a thing happened, there would Basner arrive at speed
prepared to speak and, as a lawyer, to defend Africans in court,’ Eddie Roux,
another former communist, wrote of him. It was at the offices of H. M. Basner
that Mandela was arrested on charges under the Suppression of Communism
Act. Unlike Sidelsky, Basner made no objections to Mandela’s political
activities, as long as his work for the law firm was handled properly.
He embarked on his first case in court, armed with a battery of legal books
and brimming with confidence. The magistrate duly found his client not guilty.
‘I started to swell with pride. Then the magistrate said, “Mr Mandela, I have
found your client not guilty, not because of you, but in spite of you.” He said all
the books I had brought had nothing to do with the case, adding, “I hope that,

one day, when another poor accused comes to you, you will at least know what
books to bring.”’
After several months working for Basner, Mandela felt ready to set up his own
law practice, opening an office in August 1952. He then persuaded Oliver
Tambo, who had given up his teaching post at St. Peter’s to take up law five
years before and who had also just qualified as an attorney, to join him in a
partnership.
As partners, as well as political colleagues, they made an interesting contrast.
Tambo was by nature quiet and thoughtful, with a cool, logical mind; deeply
religious, he was still contemplating the possibility of ordination. At St. Peter’s,
he had been immensely popular with his students, and among staff he was highly
respected for his principled approach, arguing resolutely against those who
criticised his involvement as a teacher in politics. ‘Where men cannot help
themselves, they must be helped by others who are able,’ he said. ‘I want to help
lead the struggle for African liberation. How can you claim this is not the role of
the teacher? I refuse to be diverted from it.’
Mandela was altogether more assertive, more combative and more emotional,
quicker to anger and with a liking for action. At the law firm of Kovalsky and
Tuch, where Tambo worked before joining Mandela, a white secretary, Betty
Shein, accustomed to Tambo’s modest demeanour, noticed the contrast with
Mandela, who often came round at lunchtime to discuss ANC business with him.
Mandela, she recalled, would stride into the reception area, glancing around to
see whether anyone was going to greet him; if he encountered only sullen stares,
as was customary when blacks entered a white office, he would call out, ‘Mr
Tambo, please,’ and make a point of sitting in a whites-only chair, causing a
considerable stir, not least because nobody in the office addressed Tambo as
‘Mr’.
Mandela made the same point in magistrates’ court, ignoring the segregation
rules which applied there, choosing the whites-only entrance and always ready
with an answer when challenged. Once, when a supposedly white clerk, whose
features clearly suggested mixed parentage, shouted at him, ‘What are you doing
in here?’ Mandela leaned over the counter towards him, staring straight into his
eyes, and said quietly, ‘What are you doing in here?’
The firm of Mandela and Tambo opened for business in December 1952 in
Chancellor House, Fox Street, a shabby building across the road from the

magistrates’ courts, owned by Indians who were prepared to take on African
tenants. They were soon inundated with clients. Each morning, queues of
Africans crowded into the small waiting room, stretching back into the corridors
and down the stairs. Many of them were victims of the apartheid system, caught
in the web of pass laws, curfew laws, liquor laws, residence laws and
employment laws which made criminals of ordinary people. From Mandela and
Tambo they received a sympathetic hearing and a willingness to act.
Mandela was in and out of court all day, using the courts as an opportunity to
challenge white authority and gaining a reputation as a bold courtroom
performer. In some courts he was treated by officials with courtesy; in others
with resentment and hostility. White witnesses often refused to answer his
questions directly, speaking only to the magistrate. Police witnesses regarded
him with contempt.
One white magistrate in Kempton Park, a village east of Johannesburg, so
resented the appearance of Mandela before him that he did his utmost to prevent
him from proceeding in court. Acting on behalf of an African clerk accused of
fraud, Mandela rose to introduce himself to the magistrate, Willem Dormehl.
MANDELA: I appear for the accused, Your Worship.
MAGISTRATE: And who are you?
MANDELA: My name is Nelson Mandela, Your Worship. I appear for
the accused.
MAGISTRATE: How can you appear for the accused? Are you an
attorney?
MANDELA: Yes, of course, Your Worship.
MAGISTRATE: Where is your certificate?
MANDELA: I don’t usually walk around with my certificate, Your
Worship.
MAGISTRATE: How then am I supposed to know that you are an
attorney?
MANDELA: I suggest you telephone the registrar of the court in
Johannesburg or Pretoria and ask him whether or not my name is still on
the roll of attorneys. . . .

MAGISTRATE: I am not prepared to do that. This case will be
postponed and you can come again with your Certificate of Admission as
an attorney.
MANDELA: May I suggest that we proceed with the case? The accused
faces a number of charges. The case will not finish today. I can produce
my certificate on the subsequent day on which the hearing of the case
will be resumed.
MAGISTRATE: It will be quite irregular to do it that way. The case will
be postponed. Mr Prosecutor, what date do you suggest?
PROSECUTOR: The 22nd, Your Worship.
MANDELA : (in an aside to the prosecutor, but within earshot of the
magistrate) I am not available on the 22nd. Can you make it either the
21st or the 23rd?
PROSECUTOR: I would suggest the 23rd, Your Worship.
MAGISTRATE: Mr Prosecutor, you have already suggested the 22nd. I
have written it down. I am not going to scratch it out or amend my
record. You don’t have to agree to a date suggested by a person who has
not satisfied me that he is entitled to appear in my court. The case will be
postponed to the 22nd.
MANDELA: But. . . !
MAGISTRATE: I have already postponed the matter. I will not hear
another word that you have to say in my court. Call the next case, Mr
Prosecutor.
Mandela sought the assistance of a young white colleague, George Bizos, a
former law student at the University of the Witwatersrand who had recently
qualified as an advocate. Born in a rural village in Greece, Bizos had been forced
to flee at the age of thirteen, along with his father, to escape the German advance
and had arrived in Johannesburg in 1941, the same year as Mandela. They were
to form a lifelong friendship. Bizos agreed to take on Mandela’s previously
arranged case, leaving him free to return to Kempton Park to confront Dormehl.
Mandela duly presented his certificate and the case was allowed to proceed. But
no sooner had Mandela begun a cross-examination of the first witness than the
magistrate made a series of interruptions.

MAGISTRATE: You cannot ask that. The question is not clear to me.
The witness doesn’t have to answer that question.
MANDELA: Would Your Worship record my question and your ruling
that it is not admissible?
MAGISTRATE: You are not here to tell me how to run my court. I will
record that which I consider relevant.
MANDELA : The record must be a fair reflection of what transpires in
court. If you disallow questions, you are supposed to note the question
and the fact that you disallowed it.
MAGISTRATE: I am warning you that you are not here to teach me my
job. Ask your next question.
After some fifteen minutes of interruptions, Mandela’s patience was wearing
thin.
MANDELA: Your Worship makes it very difficult for me . . .
MAGISTRATE: Just one moment. I want to write something down.
(Having done so, Dormehl turned to the accused.) Your attorney has
withdrawn from these proceedings. You have the right to continue . . .
MANDELA: Your Worship . . .
MAGISTRATE: You sit down and keep quiet. (To the accused) You
have the right to conduct your own defence as a result of your attorney’s
withdrawal . . .
MANDELA: Your Worship . . .
MAGISTRATE: Sit down or I will commit you for contempt. (To the
accused) Or you may ask for a postponement in order to get a new
attorney to represent you.
MANDELA: I have not withdrawn from this case. I want it recorded that
I have not withdrawn. I want it recorded that I merely said that you are
making it difficult for me to continue my cross-examination.
MAGISTRATE: I have told you to sit down and keep quiet. You no
longer have locus standi in my court.
MANDELA: I protest. I am still appearing for the accused.

MAGISTRATE: I will count to three and if you have not sat down by
then, I will commit you for contempt and ask the court orderly to take
you to the cells. I order you to sit down.
Mandela remained standing while Dormehl counted slowly to three. The
magistrate then ordered Mandela to be removed from court. The court orderly, a
young constable, moved in his direction. ‘You had better not touch me if you
don’t want any trouble,’ Mandela warned. The constable hesitated. Mandela
picked up his files and walked out of court with the words ‘I’ll be back.’
After discussing with Bizos what course of action to take, Mandela decided to
get his client to petition the Supreme Court, asking Dormehl to recuse himself on
the grounds that he had objected to the client being defended by a black attorney.
When the matter came before Judge Quartus de Wet, Dormehl was given short
shrift. ‘This is the sort of thing that brings the administration of justice into
disrepute in our country,’ de Wet told Dormehl’s lawyer. ‘Tell your client that
the quicker he recuses himself from this case, the better for all concerned.’

Mandela throve on the racial tension in court, determined to show that blacks did
not have to buckle to white pressure. He relished subjecting police witnesses to
relentless cross-examination and taking issue with hostile magistrates like
Dormehl. One of his articled clerks, Godfrey Pitje, recalled, ‘Nelson would walk
into court as if it was his own. He sent shivers through some of the officials.’
His court appearances gained a popular following. Hearing of an impending
Mandela court case, township residents would fill the public gallery, applauding
loudly on occasion, to the fury of court officials. Mandela’s showmanship in
court duly became part of his reputation. He was fond of telling the story of his
defence of an African servant accused of stealing clothes belonging to her
‘madam’. Beginning his cross-examination of the ‘madam’, Mandela walked
over to a table where the stolen clothes were on display, studied them and then,
with the tip of his pencil, picked up a pair of panties. Turning slowly to the
witness box, he asked, ‘Madam, are these . . . yours?’ Too embarrassed to admit
that they were, she replied, ‘No.’ The case was dismissed.
Outside the courtroom, Mandela’s performance was not always so effective.
Among the advocates briefed by Mandela was Harold Wolpe, a communist
lawyer who had studied with him at the University of the Witwatersrand. Wolpe

described Mandela’s briefings as ‘none too meticulous’. In the office, it was
Tambo, with his prodigious capacity for work, who shouldered most of the
burden. A young student from St Peter’s, Fikile Barn, who went to the offices of
Mandela and Tambo on Saturdays, the busiest day of the week, to learn how a
law office functioned, noticed how ‘Mandela would dash in for two hours then
dash out again, while Tambo put in full hours’. Political activity was Mandela’s
favourite occupation.
The law practice of Mandela and Tambo, however, was not secure from the
tentacles of apartheid. Under the terms of the Urban Areas Act, Africans were
not permitted to occupy business premises in the city without ministerial
consent. When they applied for consent, it was never granted. Instead they were
given a temporary permit under the Group Areas Act. When that expired, the
authorities would refuse to renew it, insisting that they should leave the city and
practise in an African township miles away from where their clients could reach
them during working hours. ‘This was tantamount to asking us to abandon our
legal practice,’ Mandela recalled. So they continued to remain in Chancellor
House, but illegally and with the threat of prosecution and eviction hanging over
their heads.
A more serious threat came from the Transvaal Law Society, which in April
1954 petitioned the Supreme Court to have Mandela struck off the role of
accredited attorneys on the grounds that his political activities, for which he had
been convicted under the Suppression of Communism Act, constituted
unprofessional and dishonourable conduct. With Bram Fischer’s help, Mandela
secured the services of a distinguished advocate, Walter Pollack, chairman of the
Johannesburg Bar Council, who agreed to appear pro amico for Mandela. Judge
Ramsbottom, who heard the case, upheld Mandela’s position, finding that there
was nothing dishonourable in an attorney campaigning for his political beliefs,
even if his activities infringed the law.
Despite these hazards, the firm of Mandela and Tambo prospered. For the first
time in his life, Mandela became relatively affluent. He purchased a large
Oldsmobile, indulged his taste for fine clothes and cut a dashing figure across
Johannesburg society, equally at ease at multiracial parties as the back alleys of
black townships. His physical presence was striking—he was six feet two inches
tall and broad-shouldered—and he exuded confidence and energy. When he first
set foot in the Observatory home of two communist friends, Rusty and Hilda
Bernstein, one of their children ran into the kitchen shouting excitedly: ‘There’s

a giant in the front room!’ After that he was known in the Bernstein family as
‘the giant’.
He was able to afford suits from Alfred Kahn, a fashionable tailor favoured by
members of the prestigious Rand Club in Loveday Street nearby. George Bizos
came across him there on one of his errands as a lawyer’s clerk, collecting a list
of customers late with their payments; Mandela was there for a final fitting. He
frequented Kapitan’s, a smart Indian restaurant on Kort Street, as well as cheaper
haunts like Moretsele’s, a café on Pritchard Street, where the proprietor, Elias
Moretsele, a staunch ANC supporter, allowed friends to eat on credit. He was
wealthy enough to return favours to people who had once helped him. Lazar
Sidelsky remembered how one wet, windy night, as he waited on the street for a
bus to take him home, ruing a business failure which had left him financially
crippled, Mandela drew up in his Oldsmobile, offered him a lift home and, on
the way, mentioned that he had not yet repaid a loan of £75—a substantial sum.
Sidelsky brushed the matter aside, saying it was of no account, and Mandela did
not pursue the matter then, but a few days later Sidelsky received in the post a
cheque for £75.
Mandela was also a familiar figure in boxing circles. On most weekday
evenings, he would drop by for an hour or two of training at a boxing club at an
Orlando community centre which he joined in 1950. Like all the other boxing
clubs which flourished in Orlando, it was poorly equipped. There was no ring;
boxers trained on a cement floor. The club, consisting of both amateur and
professional boxers, nevertheless managed to produce several champions.
Boxing was the most popular sport among Africans at the time and boxing
champions were accorded high status. The greatest hero of all was Jake Tuli, an
Orlando boy who became the British Empire flyweight boxing champion. His
triumph abroad was all the more significant since at home African boxers were
not allowed to box white opponents. Mandela was in the heavyweight division.
He enjoyed the tactics of boxing rather than the physical confrontation and his
main interest was in the training sessions, which served as an outlet for stress
and tension. But it all added to his reputation as a dynamic young leader.
Mandela’s political standing, as a result of the Defiance Campaign and his
subsequent trial, had never been higher. Before his six-month ban in December
1952, he had become a well-known figure on the platform at public meetings at
Freedom Square in Fordsburg, in Alexandra, in Sophiatown and in Orlando. In
October 1952, when the Transvaal ANC was searching for a new president to

replace Marks, who had been banned from membership of the ANC for life,
Mandela was chosen for the post. His colleagues sometimes noticed about him a
certain imperiousness, particularly when giving orders. Both Walter and
Albertina Sisulu tried to persuade him to adopt a less lofty manner in public.
‘But,’ Albertina recalled, ‘he was a Xhosa aristocrat and his training from
childhood had made him the way he was, aloof and sometimes a bit arrogant. It
didn’t matter, because the people liked to look up to a leader who was regal and
maybe even a bit distant.’
His family life suffered grievously from all this activity. So little time did
Mandela spend at home during the 1950 protests that his son, Thembi, then five
years old, asked his mother, ‘Where does Daddy live?’ A second son, Makgatho,
was born at this time. Mandela managed to get to the hospital for the birth, but,
as he later observed, ‘it was only a brief respite’. When the banning order was
placed on Mandela’s political activities, Evelyn secretly welcomed it.
The marriage soon ran into serious difficulties. Because Evelyn’s earnings as
a nurse were no longer essential to keep the family afloat, she decided in 1952 to
enroll for a course on midwifery at King Edward VII hospital in Durban. While
she was away, the two children were cared for in Orlando by Mandela’s mother
and sister. She returned at the end of 1953 to find Mandela in the thick of an
affair with a secretary he employed at his office. To Evelyn’s fury, she made free
use of the family home, even following Mandela into the bedroom and the
bathroom. When Evelyn objected to her presence, Mandela became enraged.
Only when Evelyn threatened to throw boiling water over her did the visits to the
house stop. But the affair continued.
Another friendship that Mandela made at this time was also the subject of
much rumour. Lilian Ngoyi was a vivacious and energetic woman from poor
origins who had for years worked as a machinist in a clothing factory in
Johannesburg, until the Defiance Campaign inspired her, at the age of forty-one,
to throw herself tirelessly into political activity. She rose quickly to become the
most prominent woman in the ANC in the 1950s. Her talent as a public speaker,
with a direct, emotional style, was admired by all who heard her.
‘When she spoke from a platform,’ wrote her friend Helen Joseph, ‘she could
do as she wished with her audience; they laughed with her, wept with her.’ In
conversation, her face was alive with expression, her hands constantly on the
move. Mandela, among many others, found her immensely attractive. Living in

Orlando, she often visited Mandela’s house, and her work for the ANC, as
president of the Women’s League, regularly brought them together. Mandela
always denied that they were lovers, but the rumours persisted for many years.
Mandela’s frequent absences from home became a constant source of
argument. Evelyn, knowing of the rumours about his involvement with other
women, took to questioning him about his movements, eventually provoking
Mandela to respond, ‘No policeman asks questions like you.’ Evelyn never
understood Mandela’s deep commitment to political activity, believing his
interest to be no more than a youthful aberration which would in time fade away.
Nor did she become reconciled to the idea of living permanently in
Johannesburg, expecting that they would eventually return to the Transkei to
play a prominent role in the community there, as Mandela himself had once
talked of doing.
Another source of dispute between them developed soon after the birth of a
daughter, Makaziwe, in 1954. Since the death of their first daughter, Evelyn had
prayed fervently for another girl. The arrival of Makaziwe she took to be a sign
from God. ‘It was then that I began my return to my Christian faith,’ she said.
She became a devout Jehovah’s Witness, even attempting to convert Mandela to
her belief, arguing that her religious faith was a higher cause than his politics. A
tussle between religion and politics soon engulfed the Mandela household,
centering on the children. Evelyn would take them to church at every
opportunity, read them Watchtower literature and get them to distribute
Watchtower pamphlets in Orlando; Mandela would instruct them in politics,
earnestly explaining the significance of pictures he had hung on the wall of
Churchill, Stalin, Roosevelt, Gandhi and the storming of the Winter Palace in St.
Petersburg in 1917.
The marriage sank to the level of sullen silence. Mandela became increasingly
cold and distant, spending even more time away from home.

From 1952, Mandela was never free from the attention of the police Special
Branch. His movements, his contacts, his speeches, like those of other prominent
political activists, were all recorded in police dos - siers. Informers and police
agents infiltrated deep into the hierarchy of the ANC as well as the rank and file,
creating an atmosphere of suspicion and mistrust. The sudden increase in ANC
membership, prompted by the Defiance Campaign, made it especially vulnerable

to police infiltration, leading Mandela to warn of ‘many shady characters’ within
its ranks—saboteurs, agents provocateurs, informers, splitters and place-seekers:
‘Outside appearances are highly deceptive, and we cannot classify these men by
looking at their faces or listening to their sweet tongues, or by their vehement
speeches demanding immediate action.’
Police raids on ANC offices and the homes of officials became a constant
hazard. ‘The raids began in the early 1950s,’ recalled Sisulu. ‘Raids on our
homes, raids on the offices. It became impossible to keep any proper records
from that time on. You couldn’t keep a diary, you couldn’t keep minutes, and
not having proper records was very frustrating. There was a lot of harassment,
which made my job as secretary-general very difficult.’
The Special Branch in time acquired more and more powers, acting without
restraint, indifferent to any notion of legal rights and answerable only to
ministers. It had started out as a small unit in 1935 in Marshall Square, keeping
track of illicit gold and diamond dealings, but had developed a political role
during the war, monitoring anti-government organisations like the Broederbond,
before switching its attention in post-war years to the Communist Party. The
Nationalist government had turned it into a political arm, separate from the rest
of the police force, giving it licence to act as it saw fit in dealing with political
dissidents. Special Branch detectives regularly invaded political meetings,
recording speeches, photographing members of the audience, noting car number
plates outside. An attempt to prevent them attending private meetings initially
succeeded. A Supreme Court judge ruled that the police were not entitled as of
right to be present. ‘This is not yet a police state,’ he declared. But the
government soon overcame this by amending the law, enabling the police to sit
in on any meeting they wanted to. The Special Branch tapped phone calls,
intercepted mail, bugged meetings, kept activists under constant surveillance and
used threats and intimidation with their employers and families. It was directly
responsible for making recommendations about banning orders, about
banishment to internal exile and other methods of putting dissidents ‘out of
action’. Its dossiers were never closed.
The activists delighted in trying to outwit Special Branch detectives, regarding
most of them as being inept and incompetent. Between the two sides there were
many cases of cautious familiarity. Special Branch men tended to address ANC
activists by their first names. Occasionally, at the end of the day, the head of the
Johannesburg Special Branch, Major At Spengler, a heavy, thick-set Afrikaner

detective, would call in at a shebeen in a printing works in Market Street, used
by the ANC to produce pamphlets, for a quiet drink with leading activists and
black journalists who congregated there.
Compared to the era of torture, solitary confinement, indefinite detention
without trial and murder which followed, the 1950s were a relatively benign
decade in the annals of the security police. Assaults on political prisoners were
extremely rare, lawyers could gain access to arrested activists without difficulty
and house searches still required a magisterial warrant. When Head Constable
Carl Johannes Dirker, a lugubrious figure who dogged the lives of many activists
year after year, once arrived at Michael Harmel’s house, he was asked whether
he had a warrant. He sheepishly replied that, being in a hurry, he had taken the
wrong file, so Harmel’s warrant was still in his office. ‘What, then, are you
looking for?’ asked Harmel. ‘Politics, man, politics,’ he replied.
However inefficient the Special Branch may have been, government
repression exacted a heavy toll. Banning orders preventing activists from
attending meetings, restricting their movements to specific districts, prohibiting
their involvement in political organisations and trade unions had a debilitating
effect. Mandela recalled in his autobiography:
Banning not only confines one physically, it imprisons one’s spirit. It induces a
kind of psychological claustrophobia that makes one yearn for not only freedom
of movement but spiritual escape. Banning was a dangerous game, for one was
not shackled or chained behind bars; the bars were laws and regulations that
could easily be violated and often were. One could slip away unseen for short
periods of time and have the temporary illusion of freedom. The insidious effect
of bans was that at a certain point one began to think that the oppressor was not
without but within.
The ANC itself suffered from a similar paralysis. Its attempts to hold public
meetings were frequently blocked by the authorities, printers refused to handle
ANC pamphlets for fear of prosecution and most newspapers declined to publish
ANC statements. ‘The old methods of bringing about mass action through public
mass meetings, press statements and leaflets calling upon people to go into
action have become extremely dangerous and difficult to use effectively, ’
Mandela warned an ANC meeting in the Transvaal, held in the aftermath of the
Defiance Campaign. In an endeavour to circumvent police harassment and to
prepare the ANC for the possibility of an outright ban, as had happened to the

Communist Party, Mandela drew up a new plan for political action, advocating a
radical departure from the methods previously adopted by the ANC.
It was popularly known as the ‘M’ Plan, named after Mandela but not given
his full name to avoid implicating him in ANC activity at a time when he was
supposed to be banned. It involved splitting the entire movement into small units
—‘cells’ at street level, ‘zones’ and ‘wards’ covering larger areas of townships
—providing a means of communication throughout the organisation without the
need to call public meetings and issue statements and enabling it to survive
government repression. Part of the plan required branch leaders and other
officials to organise political lectures for the benefit of local members. The
lecturers were often banned members. Mandela himself, despite being banned,
frequently gave lectures in the evening to groups in Orlando.
The ‘M’ Plan, to which the ANC’s national executive attached ‘the highest
importance’, according to Mandela, was implemented in only a few places,
mostly in towns in the Eastern Cape. It placed a huge burden of work on local
officials, far beyond their capacity to carry it out. There were no funds to pay
party workers; everything depended on volunteers working in their spare time.
‘Most people were so busy with their ordinary work that they could not find time
for Congress duties,’ a Natal ANC official reported. The plan also ran into
resistance from branch leaders with strong local bases opposed to changes which
undermined their own influence.
Mandela’s frustration at being hemmed in by the government began to boil
over into reckless talk about the use of violence. Shortly after his six-month ban
expired in June 1953, he addressed a public meeting in Freedom Square in
Sophiatown, telling the crowd that the time for passive resistance had ended, that
non-violence would never defeat a white minority government bent on retaining
power at any cost and that the only weapon that would destroy apartheid was
violence, which Africans would have to use in the near future. With the crowd
clapping and cheering, Mandela went on to sing a freedom song with the words
‘There are the enemies, let us take our weapons and attack them.’ The crowd
joined in. When it was over, Mandela pointed to the police clustered around the
perimeter of Freedom Square and shouted, ‘There, there are our enemies.’ The
crowd cheered and made aggressive gestures at the police. The police looked
nervous, Mandela recalled in his autobiography: ‘A number of them pointed
back at me as if to say, “Mandela, we will get you for this.”’

In secret with Walter Sisulu, Mandela went further. Through the assistance of
communist friends, Sisulu had received an invitation to attend a student festival
in Bucharest in 1953 and he had arranged to extend his journey abroad with
visits to China and the Soviet Union. Before leaving, he agreed with Mandela to
approach the Chinese about the possibility of their supplying weapons for an
armed struggle. The Chinese expressed support for the ANC’s political efforts,
but warned against armed struggle. The idea was premature, they felt. Sisulu was
told, ‘Don’t play about with it.’ On his return, neither of them took the matter
further, nor did they disclose to their ANC colleagues what had occurred.
Loose talk about the use of violence appalled other senior figures in the
ANC’s leadership, in particular its new president, Albert Luthuli, who had been
chosen to replace the discredited Dr Moroka at the annual conference in
December 1952. Luthuli was a man of great moral authority and dignity who
during the 1950s came to personify the ideals of non-racialism and non-violence
espoused by the ANC. Unlike his two predecessors, Xuma and Moroka, he was
at home in the world of popular politics and mass action, having a genuine
insight into the concerns and problems of ordinary people. He also conformed to
the image many whites held of the ‘Good Native’: he was a devout Christian, a
Methodist lay preacher and a tribal chief, with a slow and courteous demeanour.
For fifteen years he had taught at Adams College in Natal, an American mission
high school, and for seventeen years he had served as chief of the Umvoti
Mission Reserve in Zululand. But drawn into the world of African politics in the
1940s, he displayed an unexpected determination to fight for African rights. As
president of the ANC’s Natal region, he had no hesitation in supporting the
Defiance Campaign, nor did he see any conflict in doing so with his role as
chief.
The government thought otherwise. In October 1952, Luthuli was summoned
to Pretoria and given an ultimatum: he was to resign from either the ANC or the
chieftaincy. Luthuli refused to make that choice and was duly dismissed as chief.
In a personal statement about his dismissal, entitled ‘The Road to Freedom is
via the Cross’, Luthuli explained his sense of disillusionment about ‘the path of
moderation’ he had followed hitherto:
Who will deny that thirty years of my life have been spent knocking in vain,
patiently, moderately at a closed and barred door? What have been the fruits of
my many years of moderation? Has there been any reciprocal tolerance or

moderation from the Government, be it Nationalist or United Party? No! On the
contrary, the past thirty years have seen the greatest number of laws restricting
our rights and progress until today we have reached a stage where we have
almost no rights at all . . . in short, we have witnessed in these years an
intensification of our subjection to ensure and protect white supremacy.
He went on:
This stand of mine . . . might seem foolish and disappointing to some liberal and
moderate Europeans and non-Europeans with whom I have worked these many
years and with whom I still hope to work. This is no parting of the ways but ‘a
launching further into the deep’ . . . I have embraced the non-violent passiveresistance technique in fighting for freedom because I am convinced it is the
only non-revolutionary, legitimate and humane way that could be used by people
denied, as we are, effective and constitutional means to further aspirations.
Luthuli went to great lengths to try to reassure whites about African political
intentions. He spoke of the future in terms of African ‘partnership’ in
government rather than absolute control of it, accepting ‘the fact of the
multiracial nature of the country’. The ANC’s goal, he wrote in his
autobiography, ‘is not that Congress shall rule South Africa, but that all Africans
shall participate in ownership and government’.
He placed great faith in the moral impact on whites of the African struggle
and possessed an abiding optimism that whites would sooner or later be
compelled to change heart and accept a shared society. It was such thinking
which set the tone of ANC policy throughout the 1950s.
Mandela’s remarks in Sophiatown about the use of violence consequently
earned him a severe reprimand from the ANC’s national executive. The Special
Branch also exacted its revenge. In September 1953, Mandela was served with
an order under the Suppression of Communism Act requiring him to resign from
the ANC, restricting him to the Johannesburg district and prohibiting him from
attending meetings or gatherings for two years. At the age of thirty-five,
Mandela’s career as a leading ANC activist was brought abruptly to a halt.
Henceforth, his involvement had to be conducted in a clandestine manner. From
being at the centre of political activity, Mandela was forced to remain on the
sidelines, able to exert little influence over the direction the ANC took.
Other setbacks were to follow.

Sophiatown was one of the most vibrant African communities in South Africa. It
was the home of writers, musicians, journalists and politicians like the former
ANC leader Dr Xuma. In its narrow, crowded streets were schools, churches,
cinemas, shops and night-clubs and the only swimming pool for African children
in the whole of Johannesburg. It was famous for its gangsters and its shebeen
queens, for its nightly toll of murders and knife fights, and for its passion for
jazz and dance parties. Drinking establishments like the Back of the Moon and
the Thirty-nine Steps attracted the African elite in business, sports and
entertainment from all over Johannesburg. On Sunday afternoons the Odin
cinema was a regular venue for well-organised ‘jam sessions’, featuring popular
vocal groups like the Manhattan Brothers quartet and their lead singer, Miriam
Makeba, and bringing together white as well as black musicians. Sophiatown
produced its own stars, including Wilson Silgee’s Jazz Maniacs and Dolly
Rathebe, the blues singer who starred in the 1949 film Jim Comes to Joburg and
became one of the most sought-after women of the 1950s. It also boasted an allAfrican female band, the Sophiatown Scottish, who dressed in tartan kilts and
white gloves and paraded through the streets on Sundays to the accompaniment
of drums and trumpets. Its racy, hard-drinking, exuberant style, influenced by
American jazz and gangster movies, set the pace for the rest of black urban
South Africa. Black youths referred to it proudly as ‘the centre of the
metropolis’. The sense of drama and excitement it generated was captured
regularly on the pages of the popular monthly magazine Drum, whose writers,
like Sophiatown’s Can Themba, were at the forefront of a new wave of
investigative journalism, satire, commentary, fiction and musical criticism and
whose readers, as its young English editor, Anthony Sampson, noted, ‘thought
and spoke in jazz and exclamation marks’. Drum used Sophiatown as the
yardstick of what readers wanted to read about. Sophiatown’s resident
community of 60,000 was predominantly African but included substantial
minorities of Coloureds, Indians, Chinese and even some whites attracted to its
bohemian lifestyle.
As famous as Sophiatown’s musicians and writers were its gangs. Two
effectively divided Sophiatown into rival zones: the Berliners controlled the
territory between Ray Street and Johannes Road, while the Americans held sway
between Toby Street and Meyer Street. The Berliners tended to engage in smallscale crime, in particular payroll robberies. The Americans specialised in

stealing goods from city shops and railway delivery trucks, recycling them in
Sophiatown. ‘Sophiatown creaked with stolen property,’ recalled Michael
Dingake, a former resident. Food, liquor, clothes, cutlery, household appliances
and furniture items all sold at a fast pace at give-away prices. Gang leaders liked
to see themselves as folk heroes, courageous and clever enough to become
wealthy at the expense of whites. They dressed in flashy ‘American’ clothes,
drove American-made cars and copied the style of American cinema gangsters,
like Richard Widmark in the film Street with No Name. A motto they favoured
was taken from Willard Motley’s novel about a young American gangster,
Knock on Any Door, which was popular locally: ‘Live fast, die young, and leave
a good-looking corpse.’
Amid the noise and bustle of this urban maze stood an Anglican mission,
whose church, Christ the King, dominated the skyline. Its priest-in-charge,
Trevor Huddleston, was a familiar figure on the dusty streets of Sophiatown,
dressed in a white flowing cassock and large black hat and usually surrounded
by crowds of grubby urchins calling out ‘Fader’. Because of his close-cropped,
German-style hair-cut, he was often referred to in the adult community as ‘die
Jerry’. Huddleston had arrived in Sophiatown in 1943 at the age of twenty-nine
after training in a Yorkshire monastery for a monastic order in the Church of
England called the Community of the Resurrection. Like Michael Scott, he had
become a political activist, but at a much slower pace. Scott complained, during
the Tobruk crisis, that Huddleston had failed to come to his aid; and Huddleston
later admitted that it had taken him a long time to ‘wake up’ to the realities of
South Africa. But once aroused, his commitment to the African cause became
unshakeable. With immense energy, moral zeal and a flair for publicity, he
tackled the authorities over one issue after another, campaigning tirelessly with
diplomats, businessmen and officials for support in improving African urban
life. With the same gusto, he threw himself into the nationalist fray, developing
close friendships with Oliver Tambo and Yusuf Cachalia and earning himself the
enmity of the government. ‘In the Middle Ages,’ said one government minister,
Jan de Klerk, ‘people like Michael Scott and Huddleston would have been
burned at the stake.’ After six years in Sophiatown, Huddleston moved to the
south side of Johannesburg to take up the post of superintendent of St. Peter’s
School in Rosettenville. But his heart remained in Sophiatown. As prominent
churchman Charles Hooper once noted, ‘Made in Sophiatown’ was branded
upon his personality. And it was over Sophiatown that Huddleston was to
engage in his most dogged campaign against the government.

What enabled Sophiatown to develop such a distinctive character was no more
than an accident of history. In 1897 a speculator called Herman Tobiansky
bought 237 acres of land on the slopes of a rocky ridge four miles west of
Johannesburg, intending to establish a new white suburb there. He named it after
his wife, Sophia, and pegged out streets with the names of his children: Edith,
Gerty, Bertha, Toby and Sol. But his plans went awry when the council decided
first to establish a sewerage-disposal site nearby and then a municipal location
for Africans called Western Native Township next door. Unable to attract a
sufficient number of white buyers, Tobiansky resorted to selling his plots to
Africans, Coloureds and Indians, as he was then entitled to do. Sophiatown,
along with its two adjoining districts of Martindale and Newclare, thus
developed as a ‘freehold’ township, its houses of all shapes and sizes lining steep
streets which climbed the hillside. Unlike municipal locations, there was no
fence surrounding it, no superintendent to allocate houses, no policeman to
examine permits at the gate and no restrictions on who came and went. ‘The
streets of Sophiatown were never deserted, they were always full. There was
always life, people going up and down like ants,’ recalled one former resident.
‘Sophiatown had variety, Sophiatown had difference.’
In reality, much of Sophiatown had degenerated into a slum. Though some
impressive houses remained, like Dr Xuma’s, most buildings were decaying and
decrepit, their yards packed tightly with shacks and hovels in which whole
families struggled to survive. Landlords crammed as many tenants as possible
into one property, often charging them exorbitant rents; as many as eighty
people lived on one stand, sharing a single water tap and a single toilet. Much of
the area was a health hazard. Yet despite the squalor, Sophiatown retained a
strong sense of community. ‘Whatever else Sophiatown was, it was home,’
wrote Bloke Modisane. ‘We made the desert bloom; made alterations; converted
half-verandas into kitchens, decorated the houses and filled them with music.
We were house-proud. We took the ugliness of life in a slum and wove a kind of
beauty.’
With the growth of Johannesburg, however, Sophiatown became encircled by
white suburbs. Only a narrow stretch of open veld separated it from the prim
white suburb of Westdene. The residents there soon began to agitate for the
removal of this ‘black spot’. Bowing to white pressure, in 1944 the
Johannesburg municipality approved a scheme for its removal, but then took no
action. The Nationalist government, however, saw an opportunity for enforcing

its apartheid policy and in June 1953 announced plans to move the entire
population to a new site under municipal control called Meadowlands, nine
miles from Johannesburg, close to the existing township of Orlando. It cited the
need for slum clearance in Sophiatown as the reason, although elsewhere in
Johannesburg there were slums under municipal control where conditions were
far worse. No freehold ownership was to be allowed in Meadowlands.
The plan ran into a storm of protest. Father Huddleston formed one protest
committee and Dr Xuma another. The ANC, stirring itself for the first time since
the end of the Defiance Campaign, decided in conjunction with the Indian
Congress to organise a joint protest at the Odin cinema. Among the speakers
invited were Huddleston, Yusuf Cachalia and Mandela, whose six-month
banning order had just expired.
The Odin cinema on that Sunday morning in June 1953 was packed with some
1,200 residents. Huddleston arrived, hotfoot from conducting mass at the Church
of Christ the King, and immediately fell into an altercation with Special Branch
detectives, questioning their right to attend; the Special Branch men grudgingly
withdrew. Shortly after Huddleston had finished his speech, a group of armed
police strode in, marched on to the stage and arrested the next speaker, Yusuf
Cachalia, dragging him towards the exit. The crowd rose to their feet, shouting
and booing. Mandela, fearing an ugly turn of events, jumped on to the stage and
began singing a well-known protest song, getting the crowd to join in.
Huddleston, pursuing Cachalia through the exit, found himself confronting 100
armed police on the street outside. He remonstrated with the officer in charge
and eventually the police withdrew, allowing the meeting to continue. Cachalia
was later released without being charged. ‘I had seen and felt, in those moments,
the terrifying spectre of the police state,’ Huddleston wrote in his book Naught
for Your Comfort. ‘There was the fierce breath of totalitarianism and tyranny in
every attitude, every movement of the police.’
Protest meetings in Freedom Square in the centre of Sophiatown and in other
locations continued week after week. With Special Branch detectives recording
every word in their notebooks, speakers vied with each other to impress the
crowds with their bravado and fearlessness in denouncing the government.
Bloke Modisane recorded, ‘Every Sunday morning we assembled at Freedom
Square, Morris and Victoria Road, to be stampeded into orgiastic reverberations
of resounding slogans by thumb-raising politicians trading on mob passions, and
one after another they mounted the platform almost in an effort to outdo the

other by the sheer volume of noise.’ The crowds responded in kind with shouts
of ‘Asihambi’—‘We will not move!’
Mandela addressed many such meetings, depicting Sophiatown as ‘the battle
between reactionary forces and the forces of liberation’ and raising the spectre of
violent opposition, before being silenced by his second banning order in
September 1953. His involvement in the campaign nevertheless continued. He
was a frequent visitor to the So - phiatown home of Robert Resha, the local ANC
leader well known for his militant views. He was also able to act there in his
professional capacity as a lawyer, advising and defending residents.
The ANC placed great store on the success of its Sophiatown campaign,
believing that it was an issue that would galvanize popular resistance to
apartheid elsewhere. Chief Luthuli called for it to become the ‘Waterloo of
Apartheid’. Resha recruited some 500 volunteers in Sophiatown ready to come
to the assistance of any residents threatened with eviction.
Yet the campaign was marked by confusion and disputes. The ANC entirely
underestimated the willingness of a large number of tenants to escape their slum
conditions and move to better housing at cheaper rents in a new township. Local
organisers found themselves accused of acting simply to defend the interests of
landlords. When Resha’s volunteers appeared in uniform on the streets for the
first time, the black newspaper The World reported sourly that ‘many of the
volunteers were the sons and relatives of property owners’. Moreover, neither
the volunteers nor the residents wishing to stay were given any clear idea from
the ANC about how they should resist or for how long. While urging residents
not to move from an area where their homes were to be bulldozed, the ANC was
unable to organise anything but temporary accommodation elsewhere.
Even as the day of reckoning approached, there was still no sign of a coherent
plan, as Bloke Modisane recorded:
It began to be rumoured around the protest meetings, in and about Sophiatown,
that we would resist, by force if necessary, the will of the government; a
campaign with a top-secret plan was whispered in the wind, the hush-hush Mplan which would be implemented on the night of the day before the first
removals; the top-secret plan was of such priority in secrecy that there was found
no one who knew any details about it, except that it would spring into effective
action on the night before removal day.
The first group of 150 families were warned in December 1954 that they

would have to leave their homes by 12 February 1955. Without making any
contingency plans, the ANC assumed that the government would not act until 12
February. When the government abruptly announced on 8 February that the
removals would take place the following morning, therefore, the ANC was
caught unprepared.
A group of young activists meeting that night were in favour of erecting
barricades and defying the police with whatever weapons came to hand. But the
ANC’s leaders, including Mandela, ordered them to stand down, believing that
violence would have disastrous consequences.
At dawn on 9 February, a large convoy of trucks and armed police moved into
Sophiatown, taking control of every street corner and cordoning off two streets
scheduled for removal. Within a few hours, the trucks were on their way, with
tenants sitting atop stacks of furniture, stoves and bedding. Some were singing,
‘To Meadowlands we will go . . . ’ Once they had gone, the demolition squads
moved in.
There was no resistance, no demonstration, no disruption, just slogans on the
walls saying ‘We Won’t Move!’ The ANC had chosen the ground on which to
stand and had suffered abject failure. Its campaign had been little more than a
propaganda exercise.
Mandela admitted the ANC’s shortcomings, but drew other conclusions. ‘The
lesson I took away from the campaign was that, in the end, we had no alternative
to armed and violent resistance,’ he wrote in his autobiography. ‘Over and over
again, we had used all the non-violent weapons in our arsenal—speeches,
deputations, threats, marches, strikes, stay-aways, voluntary imprisonment all to
no avail, for whatever we did was met by an iron hand.’

The destruction of Sophiatown was but the first of a series of forced removals
which tore apart long-established communities in South Africa’s towns. Tens of
thousands of families were uprooted from their homes under the Group Areas
Act, on the pretext of preserving racial harmony. The Indian communities in
Johannesburg’s western districts of Pageview, Vrededorp and Fordsburg, where
they had lived for seventy years, building substantial houses, temples, mosques,
schools, clinics, cinemas, libraries, businesses and restaurants, were ordered to
quit and move to Lenasia, a ‘group area’ for Indians twenty miles south-west of

the city which the government insisted was to become the sole location for
Johannesburg’s Indians. Pageview was declared a white area in 1956, even
though no whites were living there. A similar fate befell the Indian community
in Durban, which once owned a quarter of the total area of the city. In the
Transvaal, hundreds of Indian businessmen and traders were expelled from
central business districts, to the considerable advantage of white shopkeepers. In
Cape Town, District Six, an area close to the city centre occupied by Coloureds
since 1834, was razed to the ground, its residents forced to move to a bleak tract
of land ten miles away. Compensation was paid to families ordered to leave but
usually at derisory rates. White property speculators were able to amass fortunes
out of the forced sale of houses. In Sophiatown, the new white suburb which
arose from the rubble was named Triomf.

Year by year, the apartheid machine gathered increasing momentum. The
driving force behind it was a Dutch-born ideological fanatic, Hendrik Verwoerd,
who aspired to create in South Africa a new racial order. Appointed as Minister
of Native Affairs in 1950, he had already played a prominent role in shaping
Nationalist doctrine and theories both as a professor of sociology at the
University of Stellenbosch and as editor of the Nationalist paper Die Transvaler.
Verwoerd believed that his own rise to prominence was as much a matter of
divine inspiration as of the policies he propounded and he allowed nothing to
deflect him from his purpose. ‘I do not have the nagging doubt of ever
wondering whether perhaps I am wrong,’ he said.
In 1953, Verwoerd turned his attention to the system of African education. For
more than 100 years it had remained largely in the hands of church missions.
About 90 per cent of all schools were mission schools, administered by some
forty mission bodies. Most were heavily dependent on state assistance for the
payment of teachers’ salaries and school equipment. In many cases they suffered
from low teaching standards, inadequate equipment and overcrowded classes.
There was always a shortage of funds. Less than half of all African children of
school age attended any school at all. But however poor the education offered,
the schools provided a vital lifeline into the world of employment and the chance
of an income. The start of each school year was marked by desperate struggles
by mothers trying to get their children into schools.
Verwoerd decided that control of African education should be wrested from

the churches, explaining his reasons in the long, didactic speeches he was fond
of making.
Racial relations cannot improve if the wrong type of education is given to
Natives. They cannot improve if the result of Native education is the
creation of a frustrated people who . . . have expectations in life which
circumstances in South Africa do not allow to be fulfilled. . . . Above all,
good racial relations cannot exist when the education is given under the
control of people who create wrong expectations on the part of the Native
himself, if such people believe in a policy of equality. People who
believe in equality are not desirable teachers for Natives. Education must
train and teach people in accordance with their opportunities in life,
according to the sphere in which they live.
Bantu education should stand with both feet in the reserves and have
its roots in the spirit and being of Bantu society. . . . There is no place for
him in the European community above the level of certain forms of
labour. . . . Until now he has been subject to a school system which drew
him away from his own community and misled him by showing him the
green pastures of European society in which he is not allowed to graze. . .
. What is the use of teaching a Bantu child mathematics when it cannot
use it in practice? That is absurd.
Under the terms of the Bantu Education Act, which Verwoerd introduced in
1953, church missions were given the choice of turning their schools over to the
government or continuing with them as private schools with gradually
diminishing subsidies. All schools, whatever their status, would have to be
registered by the government. No private schools would be allowed to exist
without government approval. Control of schools would pass not to the
Department of Education but to the Department of Native Affairs. Introducing
the new legislation before parliament, Verwoerd was forthright about its
purpose: ‘Natives will be taught from childhood to realize that equality with
Europeans is not for them.’
Opposition to the Bantu Education Act was widespread, both among churches
and within the African community. Verwoerd’s blunt explanations left little
room for doubt that what was intended, as Mandela noted at the time, was ‘an
inferior type of education, designed to relegate Africans to a position of
perpetual servitude’. The issue was recognised as being of the utmost

importance; the whole outlook of African children for generations to come
would be affected.
But deciding the best course of action to take caused deep dis - sension. Some
churchmen decided to close their schools rather than submit to the government.
The Anglican Bishop of Johannesburg, Ambrose Reeves, shut down all his
schools, which had a total enrolment of 10,000 children. Father Huddleston
decided to close down St Peter’s School. In an article explaining the effect of the
act, he wrote:
There is only one path open to the African: it is the path back to tribal culture
and tradition; to ethnic groups; to the reserves; to anywhere other than the
privileged places habited by the master race. It is because we cannot accept such
principles that we are closing St Peter’s. . . . It has been a decision made in
anguish and only after the most careful thought and prayer. For it means the end
of forty years of labour and devotion.
Other churchmen argued that however harmful the system of Bantu education
might be, the cost of school closures, leaving thousands of children on the streets
without any kind of instruction and throwing hundreds of teachers out of work,
would be too great to bear. ‘A rotten system of education,’ said Archbishop
Clayton of Cape Town, would be ‘better than none’. With the exception of the
Johannesburg diocese, the Anglican Church followed his lead, agreeing to hand
over its schools to the government. Every other missionary body, except the
Roman Catholics and Seventh-Day Adventists, took the same line. Whatever
opportunity there was for the churches to take a united stand against the
government was lost.
The response of the ANC was far more confused. When members of the
national executive committee, including Mandela, met to decide what strategy to
adopt, two options were considered: one was to call for an indefinite boycott of
schools in an attempt to destroy the Bantu Education Act before it could take
root; the other was to call for a temporary boycott. Those in favour of an
indefinite boycott argued that popular resentment against the act was so strong
that their supporters would not be satisfied with a mere protest. Those in favour
of limited action pointed out that the ANC did not have the means to sustain a
permanent boycott; it had neither resources nor time enough to organise an
alternative to government schools and realistically could offer the public next to
nothing in terms of support. Despite his reputation as a firebrand, Mandela spoke

in favour of a pragmatic approach. At the end of a heated session, the national
executive committee recommended a week’s boycott starting on 1 April 1955,
the date on which the transfer of schools into government hands was scheduled
to take place.
The issue was then put to the ANC’s national conference in December 1954.
The dilemma facing the African community was summed up by Chief Luthuli:
‘The choice before parents is an almost impossible one—they do not want Bantu
education and they do not want their children on the streets. They have to choose
between two evils and no rule of thumb which is the greater.’
Ignoring the national executive committee’s recommendation, the conference
voted in favour of an indefinite boycott. Strong doubts remained, however, about
the wisdom of the move. ‘To imagine that the ANC has the power to bring about
such a boycott in a few months would be totally unreal,’ declared the left-wing
journal Fighting Talk. Verwoerd raised the stakes by threatening to ban children
involved in boycotts permanently from school education and to close down their
schools. In March 1955, the national executive committee, worried by the lack
of preparation, announced that the boycott would be deferred.
But some ANC branches, notably those on the East Rand, were determined to
carry on the campaign, regardless of the views of the national executive
committee. Scattered boycotts began in April. Attempts were made to provide
alternative education at improvised schools known as ‘cultural clubs’. But the
clubs lacked equipment, qualified teachers and money and were frequently the
target of police raids. Father Huddleston described one such cultural club set up
in an empty cinema in Benoni: ‘Seated at the table was a young African woman
trying to demonstrate some game, trying to keep fifty, a hundred children
interested, or at least quiet. . . . There was no blackboard; there were no school
books; there were no benches. . . . Such things as would equip a school would
make it illegal.’ An African reporter who visited the same club noted how ‘the
children were unruly and unmanageable’.
The campaign soon collapsed in bitterness and recrimination. Only a small
fraction of parents and schoolchildren were ever involved in the boycott. The
ANC itself admitted that it had amounted to little more than ‘sporadic, unrelated
and ineffectual small incidents in various parts of the country’. Critics, like Dr
Xuma, claimed that ANC leaders had acted ‘for propaganda reasons’ and
‘aroused vain hopes’, in much the same way as had occurred with the

Sophiatown campaign. But whereas Sophiatown had been a local issue, African
education was a national issue of paramount importance to the African
community. By falling at this hurdle, the ANC suffered a far more grievous blow
to its reputation.
As the government’s opponents had feared, Verwoerd soon moved to reshape
African education to his liking. In 1956, new syllabuses were introduced for
primary schools, emphasising obedience, tribal loyalty, rural traditions and use
of the vernacular. Vernacular instruction was made compulsory in all African
primary schools and later extended to the first class of secondary schools.
More was to come. In 1957, the government introduced legislation to
segregate universities. Hitherto, South African universities had been free to
choose whom they accepted as students. African students had been allowed to
enrol for degree courses at the ‘open’ universities of Cape Town and the
Witwatersrand. They had been admitted to the same lectures and the same
student societies as whites. Now separate colleges were to be provided for
Coloureds, for Indians and for Africans. In the case of Africans, they were to be
tribal in character, sited in isolated rural areas—one in Natal for Zulu students,
one in the Transvaal for Sotho, Tsonga and Venda-speaking students, one in
Cape Province for Xhosa students. The university college of Fort Hare, which
had achieved such a distinguished record in producing graduates since the 1920s,
was to be reduced to the status of a Xhosa tribal college.
In an article in Liberation, a left-wing journal run under the auspices of
Michael Harmel, Mandela condemned the legislation as ‘a step to extend Bantu
education to the field of higher education’. Tribal colleges, he said, would be
used by the government to enforce its political ideology at a university level:
‘They will bear no resemblance whatsoever to modern universities. Not free
inquiry but indoctrination is their purpose, and the education they will give will
not be directed towards the unleashing of the creative potentialities of the people
but towards preparing them for perpetual mental and spiritual servitude to the
whites.’
What was needed to fight the government, he said, was not a campaign
conducted on the basis of isolated struggles, but ‘a broad united front of all the
genuine opponents of the racial policies of the government’.