OPERATION MAYIBUYE
FAR FROM BEING DAUNTED BY THE GOVERNMENT’S INCREASING
USE of repression, the conspirators were keen to develop more ambitious plans.
Revolutionary enthusiasts like Slovo argued that the phase of limited sabotage
had effectively run its course and that the only remaining option was to commit
Umkhonto to revolutionary violence. Since the first recruits had been sent out of
the country for military training in China in September 1961, some 300 others
had followed for training elsewhere in Africa and in Eastern Europe, providing a
trained core of activists ready for guerrilla operations. Arthur Goldreich had
travelled to China, the Soviet Union and East Germany, seeking military aid for
Umkhonto and obtaining information on the manufacture of arms.
Slovo found a powerful ally for his arguments in Govan Mbeki, a talented
political organiser from Port Elizabeth who had joined the MK high command at
Lilliesleaf Farm after going underground in 1962 to avoid house arrest. A writer
and journalist, employed by New Age as its Port Elizabeth editor, he had been
part of the group in the 1950s which had turned Port Elizabeth and other towns
in the Eastern Cape into one of the most successful areas of ANC activity.
Detained for five months during the state of emergency in 1960, he had
subsequently recruited and run a sabotage unit based in Port Elizabeth until
arrested in 1962 under the Explosives Act on a charge of having instructed men
in the manufacture of homemade bombs. While being held in prison for five
months, three of them in solitary confinement, he had managed to continue work
on his study of the Transkei, which was later published as The Peasants’ Revolt.
Unlike other MK activists, he was a staunch believer in the power of the
peasantry to change South African society and in the importance of rural areas as
the main theatre of resistance. Acquitted of the explosives charge, he was served
with a house-arrest order, but went underground and based himself at Lilliesleaf.
At the age of fifty-two, eight years older than Mandela, Mbeki was a veteran
communist activist, having first been attracted by communism during his days as
a student at Fort Hare in the 1930s. He was a close friend and collaborator of

Ruth First, Slovo’s wife. And like Slovo, he was a hardline, narrow ideologue,
unshakeable in his convictions and certainties.
Slovo and Mbeki began work on a new MK strategy which they completed by
April 1963 and which was given the codename Operation Mayibuye. The
proposals they put forward in their six-page memorandum were on a scale that
no one had previously contemplated. ‘The time for small thinking is over,’ they
declared.
Part 1 encapsulated their argument for proceeding to guerrilla warfare:
The white state has thrown overboard every pretence of rule by democratic
process. Armed to the teeth, it has presented the people with only one choice and
that is its overthrow by force and violence. It can now be truly said that very
little, if any, scope exists for the smashing of white supremacy other than by
means of mass revolutionary action, the main content of which is armed
resistance leading to victory by military means.
The political events which have occurred in the last few years have convinced
the overwhelming majority of the people that no mass struggle which is not
backed up by armed resistance and military offensive operations can hope to
make a real impact. This can be seen from the general mood of the people and
their readiness to undertake even desperate and suicidal violent campaigns of the
Leballo type. It can also be gauged by their reluctance to participate in orthodox
political struggles in which they expose themselves to massive retaliation
without a prospect of hitting back. . . . We are confident that the masses will
respond in overwhelming numbers to a lead which holds out a real possibility of
successful armed struggle. . . .
The objective military conditions in which the movement finds itself make the
possibility of a general uprising leading to direct military struggle an unlikely
one. Rather, as in Cuba, the general uprising must be sparked off by organized
and well-prepared guerrilla operations during the course of which the masses of
the people will be drawn in and armed.
After disposing of the arguments against military action, Slovo and Mbeki
turned to drawing up detailed plans of operation. Hundreds more activists would
leave South Africa for guerrilla training. They would return by sea and by air in
trained groups, thirty-strong, armed and equipped to be self-sufficient for at least
a month while they linked up with local guerrilla bands: ‘Our target is that on
arrival the external force should find at least 7,000 men in the four main areas to

join the guerrilla army in the initial onslaught.’ Lists of targets were drawn up.
‘We are convinced that this plan is capable of fulfilment, ’ they said. ‘But only if
the whole apparatus of the movement both here and abroad is mobilized for its
implementation and if every member now prepares to make unlimited sacrifice
for the achievement of our goal.’
Plans were also drawn up to manufacture hand grenades, bombs and other
armaments inside South Africa. A new property near Krugersdorp named
Travallyn was purchased for use as an arsenal. The man given responsibility for
arms manufacture at Travallyn was Denis Goldberg, a thirty-year-old engineer
from a well-known communist family, previously president of the Congress of
Democrats. The scale of the operation envisaged at Travallyn was considerable.
‘Production requirements’ were estimated at 48,000 land mines, 210,000 hand
grenades and 1,500 time devices for bombs. Goldberg opened negotiations for
production equipment from factory owners, wholesale distributors and
machinery merchants, using a string of pseudonyms, and obtained quotations for
iron castings which matched designs for a hand grenade made by Goldreich. He
also approached two firms of timber merchants for wood for 48,000 boxes in
which to store all the armaments.
The contents of Operation Mayibuye were debated at length again and again
at Lilliesleaf. The revolutionary enthusiasts—Slovo, Mbeki, Goldreich and
military figures like Wilton Mkwayi and Joe Gqabi, who had returned from
training in China and had joined the high command—wanted its immediate
adoption. But others had deep misgivings. ‘These people were so involved they
lost all objectivity,’ recalled Kathrada. ‘They were in a hurry, very impatient to
get things going. To my mind, it was just impossible.’
Sisulu believed that the plan was ‘unrealistic’. Bram Fischer subsequently
referred to it as ‘an entirely unrealistic brainchild of some youthful and
adventurous imagination’. The exact status of Operation Mayibuye was a matter
of dispute for years to come. Slovo and Mbeki insisted that the document had
been properly approved as official policy. Others denied that. In early June,
Slovo left South Africa to apprise Oliver Tambo and the ANC’s external mission
of Operation Mayibuye and to set in motion arrangements for seeking support
for it from African governments.
The comings and goings at Lilliesleaf Farm were so frequent as to make it
resemble more a business enterprise than the secret headquarters of a

revolutionary movement. Slovo often went there, driving from his office in Innes
Chambers in town, as many as three times a day; so did Fischer, Bernstein and
other leading conspirators. Living there were not only Goldreich and his family,
but at times Sisulu, Kathrada and Mbeki, when they needed temporary quarters.
Goldberg often drove across from Travallyn. Meetings of the MK high
command and of the central committee of the Communist Party took place there.
A variety of MK personnel passed through. There were even social events. The
farming activities at Lilliesleaf provided some form of cover. But the farm
workers themselves were amazed at how careless the conspirators seemed. ‘You
people are asking for prison if you carry on like this,’ the black foreman told
Kathrada. Kathrada raised the security issue over and over again. Bernstein was
also worried. ‘I began to sense that, in the top MK echelons, there was a growing
gung-ho spirit of recklessness—though in their cloak and dagger operations they
would probably have called it necessary boldness. It was not shared by those of
us who still lived and moved about in fear in the real world outside the fence.’
Though it was generally agreed that further meetings should take place
elsewhere, still the conspirators kept coming back to Lilliesleaf and still they
took few precautions.
Yet the risks were becoming manifestly greater by the day. A major police
raid on 24 June caught several figures who knew the whereabouts of Lilliesleaf.
They included Bartholomew Hlapane, a member of the Communist Party central
committee, and Patrick Mthembu, a member of MK’s high command, who had
been part of the first group trained in China and had since become boastful about
his exploits. Another supporter arrested at the same time was Brian Somana, a
journalist friendly with Winnie Mandela who had been one of the drivers used to
take her to Lilliesleaf.
Two days later the conspirators staged an exercise in bravado with
consequences they did not foresee. Using a house in Parktown belonging to
Goldreich, they erected a radio transmitter to make an ‘Inaugural Broadcast by
Radio Liberation’. The taped broadcast was introduced by Mbeki:
This is the radio of the African National Congress, calling you from
underground in South Africa. Our radio talks to you for the first time today, 26
June, but not for the last time. . . .
The government imposed a twenty-four-hour house arrest order on Walter
Sisulu. We could not accept this. . . . Our Congress decided that Walter Sisulu

should leave his home. . . . Today he continues to lead our organization and the
people. . . . Here is Walter Sisulu to speak to you from the African National
Congress underground headquarters.
A recording from Sisulu followed:
I speak to you from somewhere in South Africa. I have not left the country. I do
not plan to leave. Many of our leaders of the African National Congress have
gone underground. This is to keep our organization in action; to preserve the
leadership; to keep the freedom fight going. Never has the country, and our
people, needed leadership as they do now, in this hour of crisis. . . .
Whether anyone other than the conspirators and their friends heard the
broadcast was difficult to discover. But a copy of the text was delivered to a
South African news agency in the hope of gaining some publicity. The copy
quickly found its way into the hands of the security police. They saw it not as an
irritating stunt but as a breakthrough in their search for the conspirators. Since 20
April the whereabouts of Sisulu had remained a mystery to them. Some believed
he had left the country. Sisulu’s broadcast gave them a new target. In
questioning detainees in prison, the priority became to locate Sisulu’s base.

After spending nearly six months of his five-year sentence in Pretoria Local,
Mandela was suddenly ordered one night in late May 1963 to pack his
belongings. Taken to the prison’s reception office, he found three other prisoners
waiting there. The prison commander, Colonel Aucamp, told them curtly that
they were to be transferred to another prison. When they asked where, he
replied, ‘Die Eiland.’
The journey was 1,000 miles. The prisoners were shackled together and put
into the back of a closed van with a single toilet bucket for use on the way. Not
until they reached Cape Town on the following afternoon were they allowed out
of the vehicle. At the dockyard, still chained together, they boarded the Robben
Island ferry, clambering down a steep, narrow ladder into the hold used to
accommodate prisoners for the hour-long passage. Mandela caught his first sight
of the island from the harbour at Murray’s Bay, when he was led back on deck
as the light was fading. ‘Green and beautiful, it looked at first more like a resort
than a prison,’ he wrote.
Lying six miles north of Green Point and three miles west of Bloubergstrand,

guarding the entrance to Table Bay, Robben Island possessed a reputation as a
desolate and forbidding place. Roughly oval in shape, less than three miles long
and one mile wide, it was surrounded by the icy currents of the Atlantic Ocean,
providing an effective barrier to escape. In summer months, the view of Table
Mountain to the south, however magnificent, was a constant reminder to
prisoners of another, different world from which they were barred. In winter,
northwesterly winds drove dark rain clouds across the mountain, obscuring the
view, and kept the island damp and cold. The flat landscape of the island offered
little protection against these winter winds and winters there were always colder
than on the mainland.
The history of Robben Island had been marked over three centuries largely by
misery and misfortune. Named by Dutch mariners after the thousands of seals
—robbe—that once lived there, it had been used by successive generations as a
dumping ground for the miscreants and misfits of society—convicts, political
prisoners, lepers, lunatics and paupers. Its quarries had provided the mainland
with stone and lime since the seventeenth century. In 1841, convicts had built a
small Anglican church there. In 1864, a lighthouse had been constructed on
Minto’s Hill, the highest point on the island, rising seventy feet above sea level.
During the Second World War, the military had taken possession, installing a
new harbour at Murray’s Bay, on the northeastern side of the island, an airstrip
at its northern end, and gun emplacements, observation towers and residential
quarters for its garrison of some 3,000 people. During the 1950s the island was
used as a training centre by the South African navy. Then, in 1961, it had been
handed over to the prisons department to be used once more as a penal colony
for the first time in 100 years.
The prison administration set out deliberately to create an establishment
feared for its harsh and brutal regime. Prison life for Africans in South Africa
was generally grim, but Robben Island attained special notoriety for its violent
and vindictive treatment of prisoners. White warders there were given free rein
to beat and bully inmates into submission. The daily fare they meted out
included assaults, arbitrary punishment and a range of other abuses. Individual
warders, like the Kleynhans brothers, became infamous for their cruel and
sadistic conduct.
The first groups of prisoners to be sent to Robben Island were hardened
criminals, some of whom were considered to be too dangerous to be kept in
maximum-security prisons on the mainland, men accustomed to leading lives of

violence. ‘Most of the prisoners were disfigured,’ an ANC arrival recorded,
‘their shaven heads covered with scars, their eyes bloodshot, their noses askew,
their teeth knocked out, and their bodies full of tattoos, often obscene.’ The
convicts operated in gangs, which warders used to their own advantage,
patronising some with privileges and employing them to keep others under
control. Convicts served warders as enforcers and informers. Murders, assaults
and rapes among prisoners were commonplace. When more general forms of
discipline were needed, warders organised what was called a ‘carry-on’, during
which they encircled groups of prisoners and continued to beat them with
batons, pick-handles and rubber pipes, forcing them to get up once they had
fallen so that they could be knocked down once more. ‘After about half an hour
the command came to stop,’ an ANC witness said, describing a carry-on. ‘The
prisoners staggered away to assemble across the yard and about 200 formed up
in front of us. Blood was pouring from their heads; their clothing was torn to
ribbons; their faces were unrecognizable. They were barely able to walk; unable
to move their arms; moaning; crying.’
The first groups of political prisoners sent to Robben Island were PAC
members, many of them arrested as a result of the abortive Poqo uprising in
April 1963. Regarded as terrorists and murderers of whites by white warders,
political prisoners were treated with an extra measure of contempt. They were
mixed in with common-law prisoners. Younger prisoners were often forced to
become ‘wyfies’ to convicts, with the active encouragement of warders as a
means of humiliation. The small number of ANC members initially imprisoned
on the island had to contend with not only persecution from warders and
convicts but open hostility from PAC members, who denounced them as sellouts to whites and communists. Only a handful were there when Mandela
arrived.
On the quayside as Mandela disembarked from the ferry stood a group of
white warders shouting taunts that were familiar to all new arrivals, ‘Dis die
Eiland!’—‘This is the Island!’—‘Hier julle gaan vrek!’—‘Here you will die!’
The prisoners were told to line up in pairs and jog along the path to the prison
compound as their guards screamed, ‘Haak! Haak!’, an Afrikaans term used for
driving cattle. Determined not to give in to any intimidation, Mandela took the
lead with Stephen Tefu, a Communist Party trade unionist, signalling that they
should walk slowly and deliberately, not run as commanded. A white warder,
one of the Kleynhans brothers, shouted at them, ‘This is not Johannesburg, this

is not Pretoria, this is Robben Island, and we will not tolerate any
insubordination here. Haak! Haak!’ Mandela and Tefu continued to walk at a
leisurely pace. Kleynhans ordered them to halt. ‘Look, man, we will kill you, we
are not fooling around, your wives and children and mothers and fathers will
never know what happened to you. This is the last warning. Haak! Haak!’
Mandela replied, ‘You have your duty and we have ours.’
At the prison compound, the prisoners were told to strip. Each item of
clothing was searched and then flung on a wet floor. By the time they put them
back on, their clothes were soaking. A belligerent prison officer arrived and
started to berate one of the prisoners about the length of his hair. Mandela
attempted to intervene. The officer cut him off. ‘Never talk to me that way, boy!’
he shouted and advanced threateningly, ready to strike. Though frightened,
Mandela managed to stand his ground: ‘If you so much as lay a hand on me, I
will take you to the highest court in the land and when I finish with you, you will
be as poor as a church mouse.’ Mandela was as surprised by his own bravado as
the officer was. The officer asked for his ticket. ‘Five years! You are in for five
years and you are so arrogant! Do you know what it means to serve five years?’
Mandela replied, ‘That is my business. I am ready to serve five years but I am
not prepared to be bullied. You must act within the law.’
After this initial confrontation, Mandela settled down to a routine which, by
Robben Island standards, was relatively benign. He and his three colleagues
were given a spacious cell with large windows and its own toilets and showers.
The cell, remarked Mandela, was one of the best he had ever seen. Coloured
warders stationed on the island at the time were cooperative in supplying them
with extra food, tobacco and news. They were kept isolated from all other
prisoners. But the manual tasks they were given were far less arduous than the
gruelling work in the quarries other prisoners had to undertake.
In July, Mandela was permitted a visit by Winnie, the first time he had seen
her since starting his prison sentence eight months before. Their meeting took
place in a building at the harbour. They were separated by two sections of wire
mesh, about a yard apart, reaching up to the roof, which prevented them from
seeing each other properly. There was nowhere for them to sit. To make
themselves heard, they had to shout to each other, while white warders stood
alongside listening to every word, ready to terminate the meeting if they touched
on any forbidden subject. After thirty minutes, their brief encounter was over. ‘It
was horrible,’ Winnie recalled. ‘I was so depressed when I came away, but at

least I had seen Nelson and he appeared pleased and relieved to see me.’
Mandela’s stay on Robben Island ended as abruptly as it had begun. Later in
July, without warning, he was transferred back to Pretoria Local and held in
solitary confinement. He was given no explanation for the move, but from some
fleeting glimpses he had of other prisoners being held there, he began to discern
that something had gone seriously wrong.

The meeting of conspirators at Lilliesleaf Farm on 11 July 1963 was intended to
be the last time they gathered there for business. The risk of discovery was
considered to be too great. Too many people knew of its existence and some of
them were currently in the hands of the security police. Bernstein went there
only with the greatest reluctance, persuaded to go ‘just this once more’. So
strong was his sense of foreboding that at the last minute, having at first set out
from his home in Observatory carrying a critique he had written of Operation
Mayibuye, which was due to be discussed that afternoon, he returned home and
hid it instead in his garage. Others arrived there in disguise. Goldberg brought
Sisulu, Mbeki and Mhlaba from Travallyn in his Volkswagen Combi. Sisulu had
acquired a lighter complexion, a Chaplinesque moustache and darker hair.
Mbeki wore a blue boiler suit and a balaclava, dressed ostensibly as a farm
labourer. Goldberg had grown a beard and moustache. Kathrada, who had been
staying overnight at Lilliesleaf preparing a radio broadcast, had dyed his hair
red, passing himself off as a Portuguese with the name of Pedro Perreira. They
were joined by the lawyer Bob Hepple, who came on secretariat business.
Goldreich was expected to arrive later in the afternoon for the discussion on
Operation Mayibuye.
Even though the conspirators acknowledged the extent of the danger at
Lilliesleaf, the old habits of life there died hard. Needing dental treatment, Sisulu
had arranged for a white dentist to visit him at Lilliesleaf half an hour before the
meeting was due to start at 3 p.m. The dentist duly came and went.
The security police, meanwhile, had begun to move in. The information they
had obtained pointed to a house in extensive grounds in the Rivonia area. For
several nights, Lieutenant van Wyk drove up and down tracks and byroads in
Rivonia, taking with him an informer, searching for landmarks. On the third
night they identified Lilliesleaf Farm.

At the Grays, a task force for the raid was assembled, led by van Wyk with
Warrant Officer Dirker as second-in-command. The raid was set for 1 p.m., but a
senior officer recently seconded to the security police, discovering that no search
warrant had been issued, ordered van Wyk to obtain one. So the raid had to be
postponed for two hours, to 3 p.m.
As the conspirators settled down around the table in the thatched cottage at
Lilliesleaf, a dry-cleaning van belonging to a well-known Johannesburg firm
moved slowly down the approach road. In front were two men in white
dustcoats; inside were ten more men and a police Alsatian. A farm employee
stopped the vehicle, saying there was no one at home. Van Wyk ordered the raid
to begin.
They found Sisulu, Mbeki, Kathrada, Bernstein, Hepple and Mhlaba in the
thatched cottage. Three of them—Sisulu, Mbeki and Kathrada—tried to escape
through a window but were quickly caught outside. They found Goldberg in the
main house. Goldreich was captured when he returned to Lilliesleaf later in the
day. Subsequently, three more conspirators were arrested: the lawyer Harold
Wolpe; a member of the Johannesburg high command, Andrew Mlangeni; and
another communist activist, Elias Motsoaledi.
The importance of the Rivonia raid, however, went far beyond the capture of
leading conspirators. For during their search of the premises at Lilliesleaf and
later at Travallyn, the police acquired a massive haul of incriminating documents
revealing the full extent of the conspiracy and its international connections. The
most significant document was Operation Mayibuye, with its grandiose plans for
guerrilla warfare, a copy of which had been found hidden in a heating stove
standing in a corner of the thatched cottage. But there was a host of other
documents relating to revolutionary methods, arms production, guerrilla
recruitment and training, and contacts with China, the Soviet Union and East
European governments. The Lilliesleaf haul included 106 maps indicating
targets like police stations, post offices, government offices, railway lines,
telephone lines and power pylons. At Travallyn, the police also found bombmaking equipment and sketches and diagrams for the production of hand
grenades.
Mandela was implicated in all this. More than ten documents were in his
handwriting. They included his notes on basic and advanced military training
and warfare; his diary covering the period from January to June 1962, containing

details of his tour of Africa, his discussions with Algerian officials and his
military training course in Ethiopia; and monographs he had copied out on such
subjects as ‘How to be a Good Communist’ and ‘Dialectical Materialism’. Other
items found belonging to Mandela were copies of his press releases and
statements, his library of books on warfare, his passport in the name of David
Motsamayi, and correspondence and photos. Among them were letters from
Winnie beginning ‘My dearest love’ and a photograph he liked to keep of her.
Nothing illustrated more the amateurism of Mandela’s revolutionaries than
that one year after his arrest on relatively minor charges they should be caught in
a hide-out they knew to be unsafe in possession of useless documents
implicating him in offences that could have led to his death by hanging.