
THE BITTER END
IN SELECTING MINISTERS FOR HIS NEW GOVERNMENT, MANDELA
made one decision which he swiftly came to regret. The appointment of Winnie
Mandela as deputy minister for arts, culture, science and technology caused
immediate controversy. Her record as a common criminal, her involvement in
the criminal activities of the Mandela Football Club, her reputation as ‘a
deliberate and unblushing liar’, as confirmed by a High Court judge, and the
allegations of fraud made against her by an internal ANC commission of inquiry
all served to make her a perverse choice for a government anxious to establish its
international credentials for probity. Mandela’s reasoning was that at a time of
reconciliation, when South Africans were being urged to move on from the past,
there was no reason that Winnie should be excluded. The new coalition
government, he said, with its mixture of ANC, National Party and Inkatha
representatives, contained a number of people ‘whose hands were dripping with
blood’. Moreover, so the reasoning went, Winnie was likely to do less damage
inside the government than outside it. This was a serious error of judgement.
Winnie’s link to the murder of Stompie Moeketsi Seipei would not go away.
Within days of assuming office, she was obliged to take legal action to silence
her fellow convict Xoliswa Falati, who emerged from prison, after serving eight
months of her two-year sentence, seeking revenge and announcing she would
reveal details of ‘atrocities’ she claimed Winnie had perpetrated. In parliament,
the liberal opposition Democratic Party launched a ferocious attack on Winnie,
producing a list of ‘unsolved crimes’ with which it alleged Winnie was
associated.
Winnie’s response was to blame the apartheid regime and to exonerate herself.
She had been ‘criminalised’ by an apartheid court, she said, ‘a court which
studiously ignored the black perspective, black culture, black values and judged
everyone by white standards’.
She denied any personal responsibility for what had happened to Stompie:

My deepest regret is that I failed Stompie, that I was unable to protect him from
the anarchy of those times and he was taken from my house and killed, adding
his life to hundreds, perhaps thousands, who fell victim to the terror of
intolerance and the injustice of the kangaroo courts. . . .
I lived in the terror of those times and was repeatedly burnt by its fires. I did
not flinch. I did not run away. . . . And there are men in this gathering who, in
the calm safety of their Houghtons, literally fiddled and mounted the steps of
power, while our town - ships burned, who today dare to question my
membership of this august House. I say to them, examine your lives and
compare it with mine and then tell me, in all sincerity, who is more fit for this
House.
As well as old scandals, new ones surfaced. Hoping to make money out of a
diamond deal, Winnie hired an executive jet and dispatched her son-in-law
Prince Musi Dhlamini, Zenani’s husband, to Angola, to collect a package of
diamonds from President Eduardo dos Santos. In court, Prince Dhlamini testified
that he took orders from ‘Mummy’ unquestioningly. The deal fell through when
dos Santos said he knew nothing of it, leaving Winnie with a bill for a charter
flight which she refused to pay until ordered by a court to do so.
Winnie’s other money-making activities also aroused controversy. Using the
name of the ANC’s Women’s League, she linked up with a foreign film star,
Omar Sharif, to establish a tourist venture called Road to Freedom Tours, aimed
at encouraging black Americans to visit South Africa’s ‘sites of struggle’, such
as Mandela’s birthplace and his prison cell on Robben Island. Other officials of
the Women’s
League were furious when they learned of what had happened without their
knowledge. Eleven of them, including treasurer Adelaide Tambo, the widow of
Oliver Tambo, resigned in February 1995 in protest against Winnie’s ‘bad
leadership, undemocratic practices and unaccountability’. They presented a
memorandum to the ANC listing her ‘offences’ and accusing her of ‘using her
position as president of the Women’s League to further her own financial and
political aims’.
Another public row resulted from Winnie’s blatant use of her office as an arts
minister to promote a private business venture between her daughter Zindzi and
American concert promoters. When faced with criticism from the local
entertainment industry, Winnie responded by accusing both the media and the

local entertainment industry of being racist. Her ministry, she said, took a ‘dim
view’ of the pop group the Rolling Stones for using a white promoter for a
forthcoming tour of South Africa rather than a black one, suggesting that they,
too, were motivated by racial prejudice.
Winnie also used her ministerial position in an attempt to influence the
outcome of a legal dispute between a local government agency, the Pretoria
regional services council, and an electrical contractor, Costa Livanos, who was
claiming 22 million rands in damages for breach of contract. Writing on
ministerial notepaper, she criticised the regional services council, reminded its
chairman that she was ‘a minister in the government that employs you’ and
suggested that he should settle the matter out of court. In arbitration proceedings,
the regional services council won its case.
Other scandals involved a charitable agency called Coordinated Anti-Poverty
Programmes (Capp), which Winnie had set up in 1992 after being forced to
resign from her ANC posts. Ostensibly, Capp’s purpose was to help destitute
communities, but critics claimed it was no more than a vehicle for Winnie’s selfpromotion. Capp obtained contributions from local businesses and foreign
embassies, but was lax about keeping proper accounts. The focus of its attention
was several squatter communities near Johannesburg, in particular Phola Park, a
fractious and often violent camp on the eastern outskirts of the city. Winnie’s
style was to pay regular visits to Phola Park, gaining huge popularity as the
result of the promises she made. When improvements in Phola Park occurred—a
new school, a larger clinic, a sewerage system—Winnie took the credit for them.
But local leaders and developers claimed her role was a sham. The
improvements there were due not to Winnie, they said, but to the efforts of other
organisers. ‘The only thing she has brought to Phola Park is promises’, said one
local leader. According to one of its employees, the only project Capp actually
undertook was to distribute tents donated by local businesses to residents of
Phola Park.
In February 1995, Capp was cited by the Registrar of Companies for failing to
file financial statements as required by law. A subsequent examination of the
accounts showed that Winnie, as chief executive officer, had made huge expense
claims on the organisation, including an item of 67,200 rands for repairs and
maintenance for six cars.
Even though Mandela had pledged ‘to put the country on a new moral

footing’, he seemed paralysed by Winnie’s antics. One by one, the news items
mounted up: a controversy over huge expense claims she made for her
bodyguards; a questionable friendship with a convicted illegal diamond trader
who lent her a house in Cape Town; a raid she made on the offices of a
traditional leaders’ organisation, seizing furniture and equipment; reports of her
disruptive conduct in the ministry of arts, culture, science and technology. When
the Canadian government refused her permission to enter Canada because of her
criminal record, she resorted to publicly attacking it. Through everything,
Mandela dithered. ‘He seemed to be so tired of the issue’, said a member of a
Women’s League deputation who went to see him to complain about Winnie’s
activities.
Only when Winnie turned to criticising his government was Mandela
provoked into action. Addressing a crowd at a funeral for a black police officer
in Soweto on 5 February, Winnie accused the government of doing more to
appease whites than to redress the racial in - iquities of apartheid. She described
the ANC’s ‘overindulgence’ in reconciliation as a weakness, and she challenged
ANC leaders to demonstrate whether ‘we are in power or just in government’.
Stung by the criticism, Mandela ordered her to retract her remarks or face
dismissal.
Winnie’s initial response was to issue not so much an apology as an
explanation. In a letter submitted to Mandela on 13 February, she wrote:
In this note I will try to clarify my motives and intentions in making the said
comments. First and foremost, I must make it abundantly clear that it was not my
intention to insult the President or to embarrass the Government of National
Unity. I was merely trying to assure the masses that the Government and the
ANC were aware of and concerned about the flaws that the Government must
deal with.
The impression of the people is that we neither care nor know about these
things. I was trying to correct that perception. If in doing so I created a different
impression, that was not my intention. I have always been an honest and
forthright member of the ANC.
I have tried to be equally faithful to the Government, and I mean to remain so.
Mandela swiftly rejected Winnie’s ‘explanation’ and demanded a proper
apology. Another letter was drafted that day, which she was then obliged to sign:

I would like to apologize most sincerely for the impression the speech caused
that I sought to condemn the Government of National Unity.
If such criticism of the Government were intended, I could not have excluded
myself as a member of the Government.
Indeed, I am aware that the GNU is concerned to end racism in our society, is
determined to address this matter vigorously and has instituted programmes in
pursuit of this objective.
I would also like to reaffirm my commitment to the concept and practice of
collective responsibility on the part of Cabinet ministers and deputy ministers
and, on this basis, am prepared to serve the Government loyally, working with
all the members of the Government.
I sincerely regret any embarrassment that the speech might have caused the
President and the Government as a whole and therefore accept this censure
which the delivery of the speech at the funeral occasioned.
But having signed the apology, Winnie then made her real feelings clear in
another letter to Mandela written on 15 February, in which she objected to being
‘made to sign, under duress’:
As you will know, when you were forcibly prevented from exercising your
inalienable right to free speech, I and the children, with others, spoke up for
humanity.
Circumstances forced me into becoming a political activist. The children and I
suffered for refusing to succumb to the oppression of the apartheid regime. We
were banned and banished and were also jailed and physically manhandled.
I continue the long tradition of speaking without fear on matters that are vital
to all the people of South Africa.
As it happened, in a recent speech, I did not realize—as I have since been
advised—that in certain respects I no longer have the right of free speech. I have
made amends for not fully appreciating the consequences of that, and realize that
in some respects, my public statements must be limited.
She then stated her objections to signing the apology: ‘I fail to see how I am
supposed to tolerate such continuing violation of my constitutional and
fundamental rights.’

One week later, defying Mandela’s specific instructions that she should not
travel abroad, Winnie set off for a tour of West Africa. While she was away, yet
another scandal broke. On 1 March, fraud squad officers, backed up by armed
police, raided Winnie’s mansion in Soweto and the offices of Capp in
Johannesburg, seizing documents, letters and bank statements. Winnie was
accused of accepting payments of 72,000 rands from a private building firm in
exchange for using her influence to secure housing contracts. Returning from
West Africa the following day, Winnie immediately launched into legal action,
challenging the validity of the police search warrants. She claimed she was the
victim of a ‘diabolical’ vendetta by ‘charlatans and cowards’ and ‘the forces of
reaction’. The police, she said, merely wanted to discredit her: ‘I feel betrayed.
This has been the ultimate humiliation by my own people. This is not the South
Africa I ruined my life for. . . . I am embittered and annoyed by the secret
manoeuvrings in our movement. The last three weeks have been the most
traumatic period of my political life. As a family, we have never felt so helpless,
so unprotected’.
The range of charges against Winnie was extraordinary. They included open
defiance of the president, use of her public office for personal advantage,
misappropriation of funds and receipt of kickbacks. Yet still Mandela
prevaricated. When a court ruled on 22 March that the police search warrants
used to raid her house were defective and ordered the return of Winnie’s
documents, she returned to the fray with a vengeance, openly challenging
Mandela: ‘I owe my allegiance to the people of South Africa. It is only they who
will determine my political future. No man has the capacity to undermine that
will—no matter who that individual might be’.
Addressing a meeting of the ANC’s Women’s League in Port Elizabeth on 25
March, she resumed her attack on Mandela’s government, accusing it of being
indifferent to the plight of the poor: ‘Nothing has changed. In fact, your struggle
seems much worse than before, when the fight was against the Boers’. She also
criticised government expenditure in connection with a state visit by Britain’s
Queen Elizabeth, an event in which Mandela took particular pride.
On 27 March, Mandela finally sacked his estranged wife from the
government. He gave no reason other than to say that the decision had been
taken ‘in the interests of good government and to ensure the highest standards of
discipline’. He suggested, politely, that Winnie might like ‘to review, and to seek
to improve on, her own conduct in positions of responsibility’.

But Winnie was not yet finished. In a final act of revenge, she challenged her
dismissal in the courts, claiming that proper procedures had not been followed
and enlisting the support of Chief Buthelezi, the minister of home affairs, a man
only too willing to help embarrass the ANC. Rather than face legal proceedings,
Mandela was obliged to reinstate her briefly, before sacking her for a second
time. It was an episode which left Mandela’s government looking weak,
indecisive and incompetent.

Mandela now proceeded with plans to divorce Winnie, hoping that the matter
could be settled in private. He sent several emissaries to her. ‘I asked her to
settle it amicably and not to wash our dirty linen in public’, he said. But Winnie
fought on relentlessly, opposing divorce to the last. Mandela’s case was that his
marriage had irretrievably broken down as a result of Winnie’s ‘brazen public
conduct and infidelity’. Winnie argued that reconciliation was still possible.
The hearing came before the Rand Supreme Court in Johannesburg in March
1996. Mandela arrived there, grim-faced, wearing a grey three-piece suit, ready
to take the witness stand for the first time since the Rivonia trial in 1964.
Winnie, elegantly attired in a gold and black dress, still attractive at the age of
sixty-one, sat at a long wooden table only ten feet away. Apart from a curt
handshake, they avoided looking at each other.
Called as the first witness, Mandela confirmed that when announcing his
separation from Winnie in 1992, he had issued a statement expressing affection
and respect for his wife. He explained: ‘This is my wife, with whom I had in the
past shared some of the happiest moments in our lives. I wanted to make the
parting as painless as possible, especially because of the children. I knew it
would be a terrible experience for them and therefore I expressed affection for
her. And respect, because I respect her very highly’.
Later that year, amid gossip about Winnie’s affair with lawyer Dali Mpofu, a
local newspaper editor had brought Mandela a copy of a love letter written by
Winnie to Mpofu which the paper was about to publish. ‘The contents of the
letter, My Lord, were incompatible with a marriage relationship and even if there
was a possibility of reconciliation, it confirmed my decision never to reconcile
with the defendant’.
They had not talked to each other ‘for years’, except for ‘the exchange of

pleasantries’. Winnie’s avowals of affection for him at political rallies were
‘cosmetic and hypocritical’. The marriage existed ‘only on paper’. He said he
had delayed divorce proceedings because he did not want it to be thought that
they were connected with Winnie’s trial over the Stompie affair, in which he
believed she was innocent.
He was asked by his lawyer, Wim Trengove, about an affidavit Winnie had
obtained as part of her defence from his kinsman Kaizer Matanzima, the former
ruler of the Transkei, who had been his close friend for many years and who had
once tried to woo Winnie. According to Matanzima, writing in his capacity as
paramount chief of Western Thembuland, under customary law the divorce
could not proceed until mediation had been attempted by tribal elders. Members
of the Thembu royal house had tried to intervene, but Mandela had refused to
meet them and had failed to accord them ‘proper respect’.
Trengove told the court that it was ‘inappropriate’ for Matanzima to ‘meddle’
in the Mandela relationship. His status as paramount chief had been accorded
him by the apartheid regime. Mandela regarded him ‘as a sell-out—in the proper
sense of the word’, said Trengove. Moreover, Matanzima had once competed for
Winnie’s affections before her marriage, ‘but lost out to the plaintiff ’. Trengove
nevertheless wanted to ascertain Mandela’s view on the issue of tribal mediation
in matrimonial disputes.
‘I respect custom but I am not a tribalist’, said Mandela. ‘I fought as an
African nationalist and I have no commitment to the custom of any particular
tribe’. Custom was not ‘moribund’, he added. ‘It is a social phenomenon which
develops and changes. For example, my father was a polygamist. In Thembu
custom, you normally have a customary marriage and one of the methods of
observing them is for a man who wants to get married to waylay a girl as she
goes to the river to fetch water and take her home. And the parents will follow. I
am not committed to that kind of custom’.
He expressed ‘shock’ at Winnie’s action in obtaining an affidavit from
Matanzima: ‘Several times he wanted to visit me in jail and I refused, because I
did not want to be tainted by his reputation’.
‘Is there any way that an intervention by him would save your relationship? ’
asked Trengove.
‘Can I put it simply, My Lord? If the entire universe tried to persuade me to
reconcile with the defendant, I would not. And least of all from Matanzima. . . . I

am determined to get rid of this marriage’.
Mandela continued: ‘Ever since I came back from jail, not once has the
defendant ever entered the bedroom whilst I was awake. I kept on saying to her:
“Look, men and wives usually discuss the most intimate problems in the
bedroom. I have been in jail a long time. There are so many issues, almost all of
them very sensitive, I would like to have the opportunity to discuss with you”.
Not once has she ever responded. . . . I was the loneliest man during the period I
stayed with her’.
Listening to Mandela’s testimony, Winnie never looked up, but stared into her
lap or scribbled notes.
In his cross-examination, Winnie’s lawyer, Ismail Semenya, sought to portray
Winnie as a woman who had suffered greatly at the hands of the apartheid
authorities and sacrificed everything for their marriage. Mandela conceded that
Winnie had suffered ‘gross persecution’ and ‘brutal treatment’ at the hands of
the security police, but added that she was not alone. ‘There were many women
who suffered more than she did’, he said, citing as an example Albertina Sisulu.
‘I am saying this not to underestimate the role she played. Just so long as this
does not create the impression that she was all alone in the struggle. . . . She was
no exception’.
When Semenya continued to blame apartheid, Mandela became irritated,
declaring that there were ‘even more serious reasons why I left home’. Three
times he begged Semenya not to force him to divulge any more painful details: ‘I
would like you to know I am not keen to wash our dirty linen in public. I appeal
to you not to put any questions which might compel me to reveal facts which
could damage the image of the defendant and bring a great deal of pain to our
children and grandchildren’.
Having finished his cross-examination, Semenya then asked the court for an
adjournment for several days to allow him time to assemble witnesses. When the
judge, Frikkie Eloff, rejected his request, Winnie intervened with a last
melodramatic flourish, fired her lawyer and asked the court for an adjournment
while she found another. Trengove sprang to his feet to denounce ‘the oldest
trick in the book’. Mrs Mandela, he said, ‘should not be allowed to get away
with a ploy as obvious as that’. Judge Eloff asked Winnie either to call witnesses
or to take the stand herself. With tears in her eyes and a shaky voice, she said she
could not take the stand and needed legal guidance: ‘I am an ordinary person, a

layman. I do not want to be heard. I do not know what to do. I am assuring Your
Lordship that it is not a ploy on my part’. The judge was unmoved, and after a
further offer to Winnie to take the stand, he declared the defence case closed.
While waiting for Eloff ’s verdict during a final adjournment, Mandela sat
slumped in his chair, gazing into the middle distance, his face etched with
misery. The judge returned to grant Mandela a divorce. It was the end of thirtyeight years of marriage—a marriage which, during his long years of
imprisonment, he had cherished above all else.
