CHAPTER 14

A DOUBLE ORDEAL
HOWEVER MUCH MANDELA LOOKED FORWARD TO VISITS FROM
HIS family, they were occasions tinged as much by sadness as by joy. In 1968, a
family group of four visited him: his mother, Nosekeni, his son Makgatho, his
daughter Makaziwe and his favourite sister, Mabel. He had not seen the children
for more than five years; they were now teenagers and had grown up without
him. His mother he had last seen across the courtroom in Pretoria on the day in
1964 that he was sentenced to life imprisonment. Because they had all travelled
such a distance, his mother coming from the Transkei, the prison authorities
extended the visiting time allowed from thirty to forty-five minutes.
His oldest son, Thembi, did not join them, even though he was living nearby
in Cape Town at the time. Thembi never visited his father on Robben Island. The
bitterness that he felt at the break-up of his parents’ marriage never left him. As
a boy of ten, he had become withdrawn and silent. Sisulu, who took an
avuncular interest in him, once remarked to Mandela, ‘Man, that chap is quiet.’
At school in Swaziland, he had fallen in love with a young girl, Thoko, who
became pregnant and was obliged to return to her home in Cape Town. Thembi
followed her there, finding a job as a clerk. Their first child, a daughter, was
followed by a second daughter—Mandela’s first grandchildren. But though
Robben Island could be seen across the water from Cape Town, Thembi made
no effort to go there.
Mandela’s mother appeared to him to have aged considerably. She had lost
much weight. ‘When she left I looked at her walking out and I had the feeling I
had seen her for the last time,’ he recalled. Several weeks later, after he had
returned from a gruelling day in the lime quarry, a warder with whom he had
become friendly, James Gregory, handed him a telegram. It was from Makgatho,
telling him that his mother had died of a heart attack. He sought permission from
the authorities to attend her funeral in the Transkei, but was refused.
In the following months, he pondered much over the life of his mother, an

unschooled woman, widowed at an early age and bewildered by his commitment
to politics rather than his family. He felt troubled by how little he had done to
help her. ‘Her difficulties, her poverty, made me question once again whether I
had taken the right path,’ he wrote in his autobiography. ‘That was always the
conundrum: had I made the right choice in putting the people’s welfare even
before that of my own family?’
An even more painful blow came the following year when another telegram
arrived from Makgatho, this time saying that Thembi had been killed in a car
accident. The news was again conveyed by James Gregory, who recalled the
moment in his autobiography:
In his eyes I could see the sternness I was to recognize when he struggled to
maintain self-control. It was a distancing from me and from others, and in some
ways his face receded into a fixed expression, tight lines around his mouth.
Those lines always went deeper the more worried, sad or angry he became. At
that time, he simply said, ‘Thank you, Mr Gregory,’ and walked away.
Mandela was devastated. He returned to his cell and stood before the barred
window looking out. He did not emerge for dinner. Eventually Sisulu went to
see him, and stayed with him, holding his hand. A night warder reported that
throughout the night he stood before the window, staring out, not moving. The
next morning, he wrote a request asking to be allowed to attend the funeral. His
request was denied.
Mandela’s anguish over the persecution of Winnie also intensified at this time.
In May 1969, in the middle of the night, the security police arrested Winnie at
her home in Orlando, detaining her under the new Terrorism Act, which enabled
them to imprison her without charge and without any access to legal
representation, in solitary confinement, indefinitely.
The two Mandela daughters, Zenani, aged ten, and Zindzi, aged nine, were at
home at the time, on holiday from school in Swaziland, and watched as their
mother was taken away. They were sent to stay with one of Winnie’s sisters. On
Robben Island, the prison authorities made sure that Mandela knew of Winnie’s
arrest by leaving newspaper cuttings in his cell.
Winnie’s arrest was part of a round-up of several hundred dissidents whom
the security police wanted out of the way. In an amateurish fashion, Winnie had
tried her hand at underground political activity, exposing both herself and others
to considerable risk. She acquired a duplicating machine on which to run off

ANC pamphlets and news-letters sent from abroad and accepted an offer from
her friend Maude Katzellenbogen to keep it in a room in her house, safe from
police raids, not suspecting Katzellenbogen’s motives. She also used
Katzellenbogen’s address as a mail drop for letters from abroad sent to cover
names. She was later to discover that the police had detailed information about
the pamphlets and the cover names.
Winnie also became increasingly involved with an employee of the United
States Information Agency, Mohale Mahanyele, asking him first to act as her
driver, then introducing him to clandestine ANC meetings and eventually
persuading him to allow her to use USIA offices for reproducing ANC
pamphlets on duplicating machines at weekends and as an address for overseas
mail. She talked to Mahanyele endlessly about the need for black liberation, but
whenever he asked what steps needed to be taken, her reply was always the
same: force, she would say, the overthrow of the government. So much time did
Mahanyele spend with Winnie that his irate wife threatened to tell everything to
the police. Meanwhile, Mahanyele’s employers had become suspicious about the
amount of foreign mail he was receiving.
Winnie’s imprisonment had a marked effect on her character. She was taken
to Pretoria Central Prison and placed in a solitary confinement cell, five feet
wide and ten feet long. The bedding she was given consisted of a sisal mat and
three blankets filthy from months of use without being washed. The only other
items she was allowed were a toilet bucket, a plastic bottle of water and a mug.
The smell from the toilet bucket was terrible. A single light bulb burned all night
long. The only time she was allowed out of the cell was for brief exercise
periods. She had no access to a bath or shower.
After two weeks, she was taken to be interrogated. Her chief interrogator was
Swanepoel, now a major, notorious for his brutal methods. For five days and
nights she was questioned over and over again, one interrogator following
another. Their purpose was not so much to find out what she knew, for, as
Winnie soon realised, they were already well informed about her meetings, her
pamphlets and her address lists. What they wanted to do was to break her spirit,
to turn her into a collaborator. They presented her with statements from men
who said they had slept with her. They told her of how other prisoners under
interrogation had betrayed her. They offered to release her if she cooperated. On
the sixth day, utterly exhausted and suffering from fainting fits and heart
palpitations, she capitulated, confessing to everything her interrogators

demanded.
Back in her cell, Winnie was then subjected to months of solitary
confinement. The only contact she had was with white warders, who treated her
maliciously. Every day she was required to strip off her clothes for inspection.
She was given a Bible to read, but otherwise there was nothing to occupy her.
She started to talk to herself. She spent hours unthreading a blanket, then
weaving it into threads. The food she was given was so foul she began to suffer
from malnutrition. Two months after her arrest, Swanepoel walked into her cell
and asked her who Thembi Mandela was. When she replied that he was her
stepson, Swanepoel told her curtly, ‘Well, he is dead. He was killed in a car
accident’, and then left. Winnie broke down and wept. There were times in
solitary confinement when she hovered on the borders of insanity.
It was not until after she had spent nearly six months in prison that the
government produced any charges against her. In October 1969, she was one of
a group of twenty-two defendants accused of offences under the Suppression of
Communism Act. The others included four women who had also been held in
solitary confinement, one of whom, Rita Nzanga, had been savagely assaulted
during interrogation.
On the first day of their appearance in the Pretoria magistrates’ court, there
was some confusion about who was to act as their legal representative. When
Winnie was arrested in May, her relatives had turned for help to Joel Carlson, a
civil rights lawyer well known to Mandela and highly respected by political
activists. But for several months, the security police had been engaged in an
elaborate ploy to ensure that Winnie was not represented by Carlson. Maude
Katzellenbogen was used to spread rumours discrediting him. Her partner,
Moosa Dinath, who had been involved in the scheme to free Mandela from
Johannesburg’s Fort prison, was sent to Robben Island in July to try to persuade
Mandela to let another lawyer, Mendel Levin, represent Winnie instead of
Carlson. Mandela turned down the suggestion. But Winnie, in solitary
confinement, fell for it, agreeing not only to give Levin a power of attorney but
to write a letter to political colleagues in London saying that Carlson was not to
be trusted.
Both Levin and Carlson appeared in court, Levin announcing that he was
acting as Winnie’s legal representative, Carlson admitting that he was not clear
of his status but determined if possible not to let the security police win the day.

The matter was decided when the magistrate agreed to adjourn the case to give
the defendants an opportunity to consult with their relatives. Winnie’s sisters,
who were in court, had received a message from Mandela on Robben Island
insisting that no one other than Carlson should be allowed to represent Winnie
and were now able to advise her of the fact. Levin was duly obliged to withdraw.
The indictments against Winnie and the other accused, several of them trade
unionists, were largely of a minor nature. They were accused of attempting to
revive the ANC by organising meetings, distributing banned literature, recruiting
members and staging funeral rallies. Mohale Mahanyele was produced as a chief
witness. The government had hoped to portray their activities as part of a
dangerous communist conspiracy against the state and, with the help of a
compliant defence lawyer, gain a notable victory in court. But the defence team
assembled by Carlson, which included George Bizos and Arthur Chaskalson,
soon turned the trial to their own advantage by winkling out the fact that no less
than five state witnesses had agreed to give evidence only after they had been
subjected to police torture. To avoid further embarrassment, the government
abruptly announced in February 1970 that it was withdrawing the charges.
Winnie’s ordeal, however, was not over. Along with other defendants, she
was immediately re-detained and taken back into solitary confinement, in the
hands once again of vengeful white warders. In June, the government brought
new charges against her and the others, this time under the Terrorism Act.
Winnie did not attend the court hearing, as she was in the prison hospital
suffering from malnutrition. When the trial opened in September, their defence
counsel, Sydney Kentridge, called for an acquittal, pointing out that the charges
the accused faced under the Terrorism Act were virtually identical to the ones
they had faced under the Suppression of Communism Act which had resulted in
their acquittal. The judge duly acquitted them.
After 491 days in prison, Winnie was finally free to go home. But within two
weeks, she was served with a new five-year banning order, restricting her to
Orlando West, prohibiting her from receiving visitors at home and placing her
under house arrest each night and during weekends. The restriction order was
lifted briefly in November, when she was allowed to visit Mandela on Robben
Island for the first time in two years—for thirty minutes.
Mandela had been tormented by Winnie’s imprisonment. He later described it
as a desperately distressing experience, more difficult to contend with than

anything else he had known in prison. He spent sleepless nights worrying about
her plight, worrying too about who was looking after his daughters, who was
paying the bills at home.
The impact on Winnie herself, by the time she emerged from prison, was
indelible. Recalling the experience some twenty years later, she remarked, ‘It is
in fact what changed me; what brutalised me so much that I knew what it is to
hate.’

The atmosphere on Robben Island deteriorated markedly in 1970. A new prison
commander, Colonel Piet Badenhorst, was appointed at the end of the year to
enforce a tougher regime and to stamp out all signs of prisoner resistance. He
had a reputation for being one of the most ruthless and authoritarian officers in
the prison service, feared alike by prisoners and by warders. Renowned for his
incessant use of foul and abusive language, he brought with him a team of handpicked warders eager to do his bidding, one of whom became known as ‘The
Devil’. Badenhorst himself was given the name Kid Ruction.
Mandela had made a practice of asking for an interview with all new prison
commanders, but Badenhorst ignored him. Two weeks after he arrived on the
island, Badenhorst put in an appearance at the lime quarry to find little work
under way there. A group of koeloekoetz men were standing about trying to
explain to one of the new warders the work norms that prevailed at the quarry.
Badenhorst singled out Mandela: ‘Mandela, jy moet jou vinger uit jou gat trek,’
he shouted—‘Mandela, pull your finger out of your arse.’ Then he drove away.
Within minutes, a truck was sent to pick up the prisoners. They were taken
back to the isolation section and paraded before Badenhorst. Swearing profusely,
he accused sixteen prisoners of refusing to work and summarily demoted all of
them to the next lowest grade of classification, so that those who had reached C
grade and gained study privileges were demoted to D grade and instantly lost
their ability to study. The effect on prisoners was devastating, but their protests
were to no avail.
The prison’s legal procedures, which prisoners had been able to exploit to
their advantage, were suspended. Every decision, every punishment, now came
at the whim of warders without explanation or recourse to prison courts. ‘For
every imaginable triviality, real or pretended, the prisoner would be marched off

to the office by a warder who would give a verbal “report”, duly distorted or
invented, and the prisoner would be marched back to his cell, usually without
being asked to explain his “conduct” or to comment on the “report”,’ re - corded
Neville Alexander. This arbitrary system of dispensing punishments caused
massive resentment. ‘Except for the brutality of assaults,’ wrote Alexander, ‘no
other facet of life and experience on Robben Island caused so much bitterness.’
Some prisoners were sent to the ‘segregation section’—in effect, into solitary
confinement—for periods lasting as long as six months.
Cell raids and body searches in the cells became more frequent and more
aggressive. Increasingly rigorous censorship was applied to reading material and
to letters. Outgoing letters were confiscated, recreation facilities were drastically
curtailed and food rations were cut.
In May 1971, in response to a hunger strike started by some Namibian
prisoners which other prisoners joined, Badenhorst let loose his warders on a
night rampage through the prison. Several Namibians were savagely beaten. The
isolation section was raided by warders armed with batons, screaming and
shouting. On a bitterly cold winter’s night, prisoners were kept standing naked
for an hour while their cells were searched. ‘They stripped me and told me to put
my hands against the wall,’ recalled Sisulu. ‘I was worried because I had flu. I
thought that their plan might be that I become ill and eventually die.’ Mbeki,
who was also ill, suffered severe chest pains and collapsed. All complaints were
ignored.
The following year, when three judges made a tour of Robben Island,
accompanied both by the commissioner of prisons, General Steyn, and by
Badenhorst, Mandela was asked to act as a spokesman for the prisoners. The
judges suggested that he might prefer to speak to them in private, but Mandela
replied that he would rather speak in front of the prison officials so that they
could have an opportunity to respond to his criticisms. He related the incident of
the beatings that had taken place in the general section and how the matter had
sub - sequently been covered up. When he had finished, Badenhorst intervened
to ask aggressively whether he had witnessed the beatings. Mandela replied that
he had not, but trusted the account that had been given to him. Wagging his
finger in Mandela’s face, Badenhorst retorted, ‘Be careful, Mandela. If you talk
about things you haven’t seen, you will get yourself into trouble. You know
what I mean?’

Ignoring Badenhorst, Mandela turned to the judges and said, ‘Gentlemen, you
can see for yourself the type of man we are dealing with as commanding officer.
If he can threaten me here, in your presence, you can imagine what he does
when you are not here.’
Three months later, Badenhorst was transferred from Robben Island.

A more benign regime followed Badenhorst’s departure. In 1973, prisoners
regained the right to legal representation. By court order, they could no longer be
arbitrarily demoted or deprived of meals or placed in solitary confinement. Study
privileges were restored, though many obstacles to study remained. Their living
conditions also improved. From 1973, prisoners’ bedding consisted of two sisal
mats, a felt mat and five blankets. They were entitled to two sets of clothing and
given underwear for the first time. Hot water was provided. Political prisoners
gained access to the kitchens for the first time, ensuring a fairer distribution of
food. Though food for African prisoners was still graded differently, prisoners
were allowed to pool their food. Medical treatment improved. Prisoners were
permitted to travel to the mainland for dental visits or for specialist hospital
treatment. The numbers of letters and visitors allowed to prisoners were
increased. Category D prisoners, restricted to one letter and one visit every six
months in 1964, were now permitted one letter and one visit every month.
Photos of family members and friends, once banned, were now allowed. Both
letters and photos were shared with fellow prisoners and often circulated for
several months before being returned to their owners. The censors, however, still
acted with a heavy hand, sometimes reducing a letter to a mere greeting
—‘Darling husband’—and sometimes withholding it altogether. Photos were
subject to censorship. Mandela asked Winnie to send him a photo of Oliver
Tambo, but it was prohibited.
Recreational facilities were extended. Tennis courts were built for prisoners in
the general section. In the isolation section, part of the courtyard was turned into
a volleyball court. Table tennis was the most popular pastime in prison. Indoor
games, like draughts, chess and bridge, also flourished. Films were shown once a
fortnight. Musical instruments were allowed. Records were played over the
intercom system for three hours every morning and at weekends. In the general
section, prisoners formed a band, consisting of saxophone, trumpet, clarinet,
flutes, harmonicas, guitars and penny whistles. Choral singing was performed to

such a high standard that even warders were known to listen.
At Christmas time, the prison authorities allowed prisoners to stage a concert
and a play and to hold competitions. The food remained the same, but prisoners
were given an extra mug of coffee for supper and entitled to purchase a small
quantity of sweets. It was the one day of the year, said Mandela, when the prison
authorities showed any goodwill towards men.

Mandela’s routine, after ten years of his life sentence, was as disciplined and
purposeful as he could make it. He woke early, often long before the first bell
was sounded at 5:30 a.m. He started the day with a burst of physical exercise,
running on the spot for up to forty-five minutes and performing as many as 100
fingertip push-ups, 200 sit-ups and fifty deep knee-bends. Once his cell door was
opened at 6:45 a.m. and he had dispensed with the tasks of tidying his cell and
cleaning his toilet bucket, he jogged around the cement courtyard, clad in shorts,
T-shirt and running shoes, before heading to an exercise hall for some skipping
and shadow-boxing. He also took his turn scrubbing and polishing the floors and
cleaning the toilets of B Section along with everyone else. Vigorous exercise he
always found helpful to reduce tension. When a flu epidemic hit the isolation
section in 1974, Mandela, who was spared the outbreak, made the rounds each
morning collecting the toilet buckets of his sick colleagues, emptying them,
cleaning them and then returning them to the cells.
After breakfast, eaten sitting at a long communal bench with other prisoners,
he fell in for the journey to the lime quarry, passing through the prison gates,
taking off his cap at each one on the order to do so. The regime at the quarry was
relatively lenient. Much of Mandela’s time was spent in giving lectures,
participating in debates and listening to the discussions of fellow inmates.
Though he was sometimes harsh and dogmatic in debate, he was also
acknowledged to be a good listener, always eager to draw his colleagues into
discussion and quick to understand the points they were making. He preferred to
examine issues by hearing differing viewpoints, then reaching a conclusion, in a
manner that he had first witnessed as a boy at the Great Place at Mqhekezweni.
His grasp of detail and his memory for it were put to good use. ‘His capacity to
retain what he hears made him an excellent reporter after interviews with
authorities,’ wrote Dingake. ‘He could be detailed not only in the substance of
the point made, but in reporting expressions and innuendoes of the participants.’

The lime quarry routine was changed in 1973 when the koeloekoetz group
were given alternative work occasionally collecting seaweed, wading into the
sea, lining it up in strips on the beach and loading it into the back of a truck for
use eventually as fertilizer. In winter, it was bitterly cold work, but Mandela
much preferred it. From the shore, he could see the skyscrapers of Cape Town in
the distance and watch the shipping move to and fro from the harbour. Seaweed
duties also gave prisoners the opportunity to cook themselves delicious seafood
stews for lunch and to collect shells and pieces of coral to decorate their cells.
Returning to the prison at 4 p.m. for a shower and supper, Mandela was
locked up in his cell for the rest of the night by 5 p.m. He used the time for study
and writing letters. He also surreptitiously undertook legal work for prisoners in
the general section who wanted help preparing judicial appeals. As an A-grade
prisoner, he was entitled to three outgoing and three incoming letters each
month, as well as two half-hour visits of two people at a time each month.
His cell, seven feet square, had taken on a more homely appearance. As a
result of high blood pressure, from which he had suffered for more than ten
years, in 1973 Mandela was provided with a bed; and because of back problems,
he was given a chair instead of a bench. On a bookshelf stood a picture of
Winnie which he would dust affectionately each day, rubbing his nose against
hers.
Weekends were spent either in the confines of the courtyard or in the cells.
Mandela devoted considerable time to trying to improve relations between the
ANC and the PAC, seeking out PAC leaders in the isolation section, believing
that if the two organisations could settle their differences on Robben Island, that
might provide a basis for national reconciliation. Both the ANC and PAC
participated in a prisoners’ committee known as Ulundi which represented all
groups in the isolation section. But every other attempt at producing a united
front proved fruitless.
On Sundays, Mandela attended church services of whatever denomination had
been chosen for the day, listening with equal attention to the sermons by
Catholic, Hindu, Muslim and Dutch Reformed Church priests who visited the
island. Though brought up in the Methodist Church and still regarding himself as
a staunch member, he favoured a broad attitude towards religion. The priest
whom Mandela most appreciated and who always gained the largest
congregation was an Anglican minister named Father Hughes, a burly

Welshman who endeavoured to lace his sermons with titbits of news and words
of encouragement. One of his favourite quotations was: ‘I groused and groused
because I had no shoes until I saw a man who had no feet.’ Father Hughes
brought with him a portable organ with which he accompanied the prisoners,
praising them for their singing. During Kid Ruction’s regime, the portable organ
was prohibited. Mandela took holy communion on a regular basis: ‘The
sacrament gave me a sense of inner quiet and calm.’ But he spoke of himself as
not being particularly religious or spiritual: ‘I am just an ordinary person
interested in trying to make sense of the mysteries of life.’
For relaxation, Mandela enjoyed playing draughts, competing each year in the
draughts competition and occasionally winning it. His style of play was slow and
deliberate, with each move considered carefully. Once a fortnight he watched a
film show in the isolation section, though he tended to become bored with the
mediocre selection of films on offer.
His favourite occupation, though, was gardening. He had acquired a love of
gardening and growing vegetables during his schooldays at Clarkebury, working
in the garden belonging to the principal, Reverend Harris. Soon after arriving on
Robben Island, he had asked the authorities for permission to start a garden in
the courtyard, but it had taken years for them to agree. Given a narrow patch of
earth alongside a perimeter wall, he worked assiduously to nurture plants in the
dry, stony soil, studying horticultural techniques from library books, and he took
immense satisfaction in the resulting tomatoes and onions he produced.
The highlight of Mandela’s routine was the arrival of a letter or a visitor from
his family, especially Winnie. She was the focus of his emotions. Without a
letter from Winnie, he said, he felt as dry as the desert. A letter from her was like
the coming of the summer rains. His own letters in return were full of love and
affection and a deep longing for her presence. He constantly referred to
memories of their time together, of touching her hand, hugging her, tasting the
delicious dishes she cooked, and of the hours they had spent in the bedroom.
On the occasions when they met in the visiting room, separated by a panel of
thick glass, Winnie was always careful to dress with flair, knowing that he
would cherish the details for weeks to come. Each time, he said, he felt like
lingering in the room after she had gone to savour the moment a little longer but
forced himself to leave lest emotion overtook him. His next letter would be full
of compliments about her dress and about the effect her beauty had on him.

Winnie was also the focus of his main concern. There seemed to be no respite
from the harassment the security police meted out to her, nor to her propensity
for becoming entangled with police informers and other dubious characters. In
1970, she was charged with violating her banning order when her sister, Beauty,
came to her house with her husband, two children and brother-in-law to pick up
a shopping list. She was sentenced to six months’ imprisonment, but on appeal
the sentence was suspended and the conviction was eventually overturned. In
1971, she was again charged with violating her banning order, this time after a
family friend, the photographer Peter Magubane, also a banned person, was
found by police hiding under her bed. She was sentenced to twelve months’
imprisonment, but once again on appeal the sentence and conviction were set
aside. Interspersed with all this, Winnie faced random police raids, some
mysterious gunshots and a night when she awoke to find three intruders in her
house.
Then, in 1973, she was again accused of violating her banning order, this time
when Peter Magubane brought her daughters, Zeni and Zindzi, who were on
holiday from school in Swaziland, to meet her for lunch near her place of work.
Sentenced to one year’s imprisonment, she appealed but won only a reduction in
her sentence to six months. In September 1974, therefore, she was back in
prison, serving her time in Kroonstad in the company of two other political
prisoners.
News about Winnie that reached Mandela on Robben Island always seemed to
involve controversy and trouble. In 1975, one month after her last visit to
Robben Island, Winnie sent Mandela a message saying that her request for
another visit had been turned down on the grounds that Mandela himself did not
want to see her. Mandela immediately made an appointment to see the head of
prison, Lieutenant Prins, to lodge a protest. After Mandela had explained the
matter, Prins responded rudely, ‘Ag, Mandela, your wife is only seeking
publicity.’ He then went on to make a remark so offensive about Winnie that
Mandela lost his temper, shook his fists and let loose a torrent of abuse. It was
one of the rare occasions on Robben Island when Mandela lost his self-control.
When charges were brought against him, Mandela prepared counter-charges.
The case was subsequently dropped.
Mandela was also concerned about his children. Makgatho had turned into a
feckless character. Expelled from school for involvement in a student strike, he
had left without passing matriculation and failed subsequent attempts to do so.

He had since married and fathered a son. Once or twice a year he went to
Robben Island to see Mandela, on one occasion arriving there drunk. Mandela
constantly urged him to return to his studies and Makgatho made promises, but
he never fulfilled them.
Makaziwe had shown greater aptitude at school, becoming the first of
Mandela’s children to pass matriculation, but to his deep disappointment, instead
of proceeding to university, she had decided to get married. Mandela tried to
persuade her to postpone marriage until after she graduated, but she would not
listen. She had two children in quick succession, then the marriage failed.
Mandela’s other two daughters, Zeni and Zindzi, had been tossed about in the
turmoil of Winnie’s own life. Both had been deeply affected by the succession of
raids, arrests, imprisonments and dark dramas that beset their mother. Only
school in Swaziland and the help of good friends in Johannesburg had provided
a source of stability. Of the two, Zindzi had adapted most readily to the hurlyburly surrounding Winnie. At the age of twelve, after witnessing police break
down the door of their house in Orlando West during the 1972 Christmas
holidays, she wrote an appeal to the United Nations Special Committee on
Apartheid, asking for help in providing protection for Winnie:
Hardly a month goes by without the newspapers reporting some incident
concerning Mummy, and her friends and family feel that the public is being
conditioned to expect something terrible to happen to her. I know my father,
who is imprisoned for life on Robben Island, is extremely concerned about my
mother’s safety, and has done everything in his power to appeal to the
government to give her protection, but without success.
Because of prison regulations, Mandela never set eyes on either of his
daughters until 1975, when Zeni was sixteen and Zindzi was fifteen. He was by
then virtually unknown to them, a man familiar only through old photographs.
For their first visits, he took particular care with his appearance, anxious to
create a favourable impression. It was a nervous moment for all of them. Trying
to put the girls at ease, Mandela gestured towards the warders surrounding him
in the cubicle, saying, ‘Have you met my guard of honour?’
Zindzi recalled:
I had heard so much about my father that I was rather apprehensive about seeing
him for the first time. He was more a great figure than a father. But when we
met, even through the glass partition and speaking on telephones, I found it very

easy. He is so versatile and charismatic that in just a few minutes he seemed to
change the whole atmosphere. The warders were breathing down our necks all
the time, but he put me at my ease at once, recalling little incidents from the time
when I was a baby.
That same year, Mandela embarked upon the writing of his memoirs, hoping
that they might be published to coincide with his sixtieth birthday in 1978. He
worked mainly at night, sleeping during the day, having informed the prison
authorities that he was unwell and would not be going to the quarry. Each bit of
work was passed on to Sisulu and Kathrada for comments, which they jotted
down in the margins. The manuscript was then handed to another colleague,
Laloo Chiba, who produced a copy of it in microscopic shorthand. The plan was
for Mac Maharaj to smuggle the copy out of prison when his twelve-year
sentence came to an end in 1976. The original manuscript, meanwhile, would be
buried at a spot in the courtyard, to be dug up and destroyed once Maharaj’s
copy was safely out of the country.
In four months, Mandela completed 500 pages. Because it was too bulky to
bury in one spot, the manuscript was divided into three, each part wrapped in
plastic, placed in a tin container and then hidden in a separate hole in the ground
at one end of the courtyard.
But the plan went awry a few weeks later when, unexpectedly, a team of
prison labourers arrived in the isolation section to dig a trench for the
foundations for a new wall in the same area of the courtyard. Mandela managed
to retrieve two of the packages and to destroy them, but the third was discovered.
The punishment for Mandela, and for Sisulu and Kathrada, whose handwriting
was also on the manuscript, was severe. All three were stripped of their study
privileges for four years.
The routine on Robben Island, meanwhile, continued relentlessly, week after
week, month after month. Then, in June 1976, the atmosphere deteriorated
dramatically. Returning to the prison compound, tired and dirty after a day
collecting seaweed in bitterly cold conditions, the prisoners rushed to the
showers to find that there was no hot water. On following days, even when the
rain and the cold made work almost impossible, they were forced outside again.
Attempts to negotiate with the authorities proved fruitless. There was a rare
disagreement between Mandela and Sisulu about what form their response
should take. What neither knew at the time was that an eruption of political

violence had occurred in South Africa, sending tremors across the country, with
effects that reached even the sequestered world of Robben Island.
