CHAPTER 31

DEALING WITH THE PAST
THE JOURNEY BACK INTO THE DEEP RECESSES OF SOUTH AFRICA’S
violent past—a journey that Mandela insisted should be undertaken—began in
the city hall in East London in April 1996. As members of the newly established
Truth and Reconciliation Commission listened attentively, steeling themselves
for the tales of torture, kidnapping and murder that were to become their daily
fare, the first witnesses came forward to testify—widows anxious to tell of their
ordeals and asking for help in finding out what had happened to their husbands,
how they had died, where their remains were buried.
Amid the grim testimony, the TRC chairman, Archbishop Desmond Tutu,
head of the Anglican Church, sought to imbue the proceedings with a Christian
sense of mission. In his opening remarks, he spoke ardently of the need for
cleansing, for bearing witness, for joining hands, for forgiving. ‘We are charged
to unearth the truth about our dark past and to lay the ghosts of that past so that
they will not return to haunt us’, he told the audience. But Tutu soon discovered
that the task of what he called ‘looking the beast in the eye’ was to prove almost
too gruelling. At the end of the second day, he laid his head on the table and
wept openly. ‘I don’t know if I’m the right person to chair the commission’, he
said later, ‘because I’m weak. I thought I was tough. Until today’.
No other episode during Mandela’s presidency aroused so much controversy
as the TRC. Mandela and de Klerk argued over its terms of reference for months
on end. A large proportion of the white community, like de Klerk, opposed the
whole process, maintaining that the only result would be to open old wounds and
revive old animosities still close to the surface. A common theme in the
Afrikaans-language press was ‘Atrocities were committed on both sides, so let
us just forgive and forget’.
On the ANC side, some argued in favour of Nuremberg-style trials, claiming
that apartheid was ‘a form of genocide’ equivalent to Nazi atrocities during the
Second World War, atrocities for which Nazi leaders were subsequently

prosecuted. Some demanded reparations from the white community on the
grounds that they had been the main beneficiaries of the apartheid system.
There were conflicting views about what the central purpose of a truth
commission should be. Some argued that the overriding imperative was a need
to achieve justice and to bring to account those guilty of gross human rights
violations. Others maintained that truth was at least as important as justice and
that knowledge of the truth alone would contribute significantly to the cause of
peace and stability; avoiding trials would also reduce the risk of a backlash from
security forces, still largely under the control of whites. Mandela himself once
remarked privately that if he were to announce a series of criminal trials, he
could well wake up the following morning to find his home ringed by tanks.
The outcome was a compromise that limited the TRC’s remit to the
investigation of gross violations of human rights—murder, abduction and the use
of torture—in the thirty-four-year period beginning with the massacre at
Sharpeville in 1960. Thus, the wider injustices of the apartheid system—such as
the forced removal of some 3 million people from their homes, the imprisonment
of millions for pass-law offences and the widespread use of detention without
trial—would not be addressed. Only the extremes of apartheid would be
examined, not the system’s normality.
The TRC was given powers of subpoena and of search and seizure, and it was
supported by its own investigative unit. It was required to pay as much attention
to violations committed by liberation movements as by the security police. But
the TRC was not a judicial body or a court of law. It could not carry out
prosecutions or hand out punishment. Its aim was not so much to reach a
judgement about culpability as to establish a process of disclosure. In exchange
for telling the truth, perpetrators who came forward were to be granted amnesty
from prosecution on an individual basis provided the commission was satisfied
that they had made full disclosure of their crimes and that their actions had been
carried out with a political objective. If they failed to come forward, they would
remain at risk of prosecution.
Few people at the time believed that the TRC would establish either truth or
reconciliation, let alone help solve murders and disappearances that had occurred
as far back as ten or twenty years before. The old security police network, the
prime suspect in most cases, had long since covered its tracks and was
determined to thwart any investigation. There was no shortage of victims or

members of their families willing to testify to what they knew, but little solid
evidence about the identity of the culprits or of those who had given the orders.
TRC officials expected few perpetrators to take advantage of the offer of
amnesty.
Against all odds, however, the commission eventually succeeded in breaking
through the barriers of silence. In October 1996, five former members of a police
death squad based in northern Transvaal, fearful of prosecution as investigators
closed in, asked for amnesty for a tally of sixty murders. Their actions, they said,
had all been carried out for political reasons—namely, ‘to uphold the National
Party government and apartheid, to fight communism and to resist liberation’.
Members of other death squads followed suit. Stage by stage, the secret world of
the security police was exposed, and many of the killers and torturers were
forced out into the open.
What was even more unexpected was that once the security police network
began to unravel, the TRC found it possible to probe higher and higher up the
chain of command, reaching the highest levels of government. At the apex of the
security establishment was the State Security Council, where senior generals and
key politicians met regularly to decide what action to take to crush opposition
both at home and abroad. It was here that Botha’s policy in the 1980s of ‘total
strategy’ was fashioned. Summoned to appear before the commission, the
generals and politicians of the apartheid era struggled to explain away
documents obtained by TRC investigators authorising the ‘elimination’,
‘neutralisation’ and ‘removing from society’ of targets they selected. When
Botha himself, a former chairman of the State Security Council for twelve years,
was issued with a subpoena by the TRC, he adamantly refused to attend.
De Klerk made three appearances before the TRC. As the most prominent
Afrikaner leader of the time, he was presented with an opportunity to shoulder
responsibility for past crimes on behalf of his community. But he turned out to
be a small-minded politician, concerned mainly with trying to absolve himself
from personal blame. Although he offered a fulsome apology for all the hardship
and suffering caused by apartheid, he rejected all notion of responsibility for
security force abuses, blaming ‘rogue elements’ for taking ‘unauthorised action’
and ‘lower ranks’ for ‘misinterpreting’ government policy.
The ANC’s appearances before the commission were of even greater
significance, for how it accounted for its own involvement in murder, bombing

and torture had an immediate bearing on its fitness for government. The ANC
was called upon to answer for the activities not just of its combatants but also of
supporters who had carried out ‘necklace’ murders and other human rights
violations. It also had to account for its role in the internecine conflict with
Inkatha, in which thousands had died.
The position the ANC adopted from the outset was that there was little for
which it had to answer. In his first submission to the commission, Thabo Mbeki,
Mandela’s deputy, argued that the ANC had been engaged in a ‘just war’ against
an evil system of government. It would be ‘morally wrong and legally incorrect’,
he said, to equate resistance to apartheid with defence of it. The ANC had
resorted to violence as a ‘last resort’, only after the apartheid regime had blocked
all possibilities of non-violent resistance. It had set out to avoid civilian
casualties, but the brutal activities of the security forces in the mid-1980s had
inevitably led the ANC to broaden its range of targets. Some actions might have
occurred ‘outside the established norms’, but they had to be understood in the
context of irregular warfare.
The ANC’s penchant for self-exoneration caused the TRC serious difficulty.
When senior ANC officials declared that ANC members need not seek amnesty
for bombings and killings on the grounds that their fight against apartheid had
been part of a ‘just war’, Tutu threatened to resign. ‘If parties are able to grant
themselves amnesty, what is the point of having a truth commission?’ The
legislation setting up the TRC was quite clear, he said. It made no provision for a
moral distinction between gross violations of human rights. ‘A gross violation is
a gross violation, whoever commits it and for whatever reason. There is thus
legal equivalence between all perpetrators. Their political affiliation is
irrelevant’.
In its second submission, the ANC was more forthcoming about details of its
armed operations but remained ambivalent about issues such as ‘necklace’
murders, by which at least 400 people had died. When it came to dealing with
internecine warfare with Inkatha, the ANC evaded virtually all responsibility.
Mbeki delivered a long, rambling explanation notable for its misleading answers.
Indeed, many of the answers Mbeki gave were as self-serving as those given by
de Klerk.

There was one episode from the past from which the ANC had struggled to

escape but that had returned to haunt it again and again: the scandal of Winnie
Mandela’s involvement in the criminal activities of the Mandela United Football
Club. Though several of her former associates in the club were serving long
prison sentences for murder, assault, arson and abduction, the only penalty
Winnie had paid was a 15,000 rand fine for ordering the kidnapping of Stompie
Moeketsi. Despite an avalanche of allegations against her, Winnie had otherwise
survived unscathed. She seemed untouchable.
The issue surfaced again during TRC hearings held in Soweto in 1996. In an
endeavour to gain a clearer picture of what had happened, the TRC decided to
hold a separate hearing in 1997. The official title of the hearing was ‘A Human
Rights Violation Hearing into the Activities of the Mandela United Football
Club’, but it was known popularly as ‘the Winnie hearing’.
Fear of Winnie still prevailed. As the hearing commenced, a Johannesburg
newspaper reported that in Orlando, the area of Soweto where the football club
used to operate and where Winnie still lived, witnesses it had interviewed wept
and trembled as they recalled the terrible events of those times. No one was
willing to testify before the commission. ‘Soweto is still a haunted community’,
reported the Sunday Times, ‘where many who were involved live in fear of the
resurrection of past deeds’.
During its own investigation, the TRC had compiled a dossier of eighteen
crimes, including eight murders, about which it wanted to cross-examine
Winnie. Allegations it had heard cast her as a cruel, violent and sadistic bully.
One official said the subpoena summoning her before the commission read like
‘a script from a horror movie’.
What added particular significance to the hearing was Winnie’s relentless
drive for high office. Despite her divorce from Nelson Mandela in 1996 and her
ignominious dismissal as a junior minister from his government the year before,
she had recently launched a campaign to win the post of deputy president of the
ANC in elections due to be held later in the year. If she succeeded, she would
become a leading contender for the job of deputy president in the post-Mandela
era in 1999 and thus only a heartbeat away from the presidency itself.
Winnie’s response to the barrage of accusations was to deny everything and to
assert that it was all part of a campaign by her political enemies to destroy her
reputation before the ANC elections and to eliminate her from the political
arena. She insisted that her testimony be given in public, not behind closed doors

as the commission had initially intended, believing that it would help clear her
name.
Accompanied by bodyguards, she arrived at the Johannesburg recreation hall
hired by the commission for the occasion wearing a stylish white and blue twopiece suit, three strings of pearls, her customary bejewelled glasses and an
assortment of rings and bangles. At the age of sixty-three, she remained an
imposing figure, tall and physically attractive, with an aura of menace. She
brought along her two daughters, Zenani and Zindzi, who smiled their way
through days of gruesome testimony, passing sweets along their row as though
they were watching a movie. Zindzi herself had been fully involved in the club’s
activities.
The commission’s nine days of hearings opened in dramatic fashion. In
previous accounts of the club’s activities, Winnie’s own involvement in the
beatings that went on at her Orlando home had always been a matter of dispute.
But now a new witness came forward with a personal account that left little
room for doubt.
Phumzile Dlamini, a single mother from Soweto, described how, when she
was three months pregnant, she had been beaten savagely by Winnie and
members of the football club. Her child had subsequently been born with
apparent brain damage. The reason for the beating, she said, was that Winnie had
taken a liking to her boyfriend, Shakes, a club member. Shakes had told her how
‘Winnie had come to him in the middle of the night and got under the blanket
with him’, and he had warned Phumzile that if Winnie found out about their own
relationship, there would trouble. When Winnie did find out, she launched a
series of beatings, one lasting five hours. ‘I wanted to lay a charge, but my
brother said the football team will burn our house’.
A string of other witnesses followed implicating Winnie in torture and
murder. The club coach, Jerry Richardson, was brought to the hearing from
prison, where he was serving a life sentence for the murder of Stompie
Moeketsi. Invariably referring to Winnie as ‘Mummy’, he told the commission
that he had once idolised her and had been willing to do anything to please her.
But in prison he had changed his mind. ‘She never came to visit. I have woken
up’.
He admitted that he had been a police informer and that he had betrayed the
two ANC insurgents killed in his house in November 1988. After being detained

by the police for two weeks after the gunfight, he had been released. Even
though this aroused much suspicion within the football club, Winnie allowed
him to stay at her house. There he had seen two youths, Lolo Sono and Siboniso
Tshabalala, both badly beaten and tied hand and foot, whom Winnie had accused
of being police spies. There was a discussion about what to do with them, said
Richardson. A decision was made to ‘dump’ them. ‘Mummy was the one who
gave the go-ahead or the green light for anything to happen’, said Richardson.
‘Mummy was the main decision-maker’. With other members of the football
club, Richardson took the two youths to a wasteland, where they were
‘slaughtered like goats’, and then he returned to give ‘Mummy’ a ‘report-back’.
The following month, said Richardson, Winnie had complained to him about a
twenty-three-year-old activist, Kuki Zwane, a close friend of Winnie’s daughter
Zindzi, who had been spending much time at the Mandela household in the
company of club members. According to Richardson, Winnie said to him,
‘Richardson, Kuki is disturbing me, she’s bothering me’. Winnie claimed she
was a police informer. Richardson duly made a plan to get rid of Kuki. With
other club members, he took her to a stretch of wasteland near a school, then
stabbed her and slit her throat. ‘I reported to Mummy: “Mummy, I have now
carried out your orders. I have killed Kuki”’.
Richardson also gave details about the torture and murder of Stompie
Moeketsi. ‘I think we threw Stompie about seven times in the air and he fell to
the ground. He was tortured so severely that at some stage I could see that he
would ultimately die’. Winnie, he said, joined in the assaults with sjambok and
fists, but she also sat and watched. Eventually, Stompie confessed to being a
‘sell-out’, pleaded for mercy and asked to be taken home. When it became
obvious that Stompie was dying, Winnie ordered Richardson to finish him off.
Taking a pair of garden shears from Winnie’s garage, Richardson and another
gang member dragged Stompie to a piece of wasteland near a railway line and
‘slaughtered him like a goat’. Then they returned to ‘Mummy’s house’ and put
the shears back in the garage. ‘I killed Stompie under the instructions of
Mummy’, said Richardson. ‘Mummy never killed anyone but used us to kill a lot
of people. She does not even visit us in prison! She used us!’
Other witnesses placed Winnie at the centre of the assaults on Stompie. ‘The
first person who started assaulting was Winnie Mandela’, her driver, John
Morgan, told the commission. It was Winnie, he said, who had singled out
Stompie. Katiza Cebekhulu also claimed that Winnie had been the first to start

whipping Stompie with a sjambok. ‘She had a heavy whip in her right hand
which she was hitting him with again and again’. The assaults lasted for about
forty-five minutes, he said, by which time Stompie’s head had ‘gone soft’. Two
kidnap victims—Thabiso Mono and Pelo Mekgwe—confirmed her involvement
in the beatings.
Not a single witness testifying before the commission supported the alibi that
Winnie had invented during her trial about being in Brandfort at the time—the
one factor that had enabled her to escape a prison sentence during her appeal. A
former police captain told the commission that transcripts of her telephone calls
showed that, in fact, she had been in Soweto all along. The wiretap evidence had
been withheld during Winnie’s trial, he said, because it had been ‘too sensitive
to use’.
After eight days of damaging testimony, Winnie took the stand. Her strategy
was to deny everything. She maintained she had no knowledge of what went on
in her backyard. She claimed she had disbanded the football club in 1987 after
Nelson Mandela told her to do so. She knew of no reason that her house had
been burned down in 1988. She denied being present during the assaults on
Stompie and the other kidnap victims. She denied all involvement in murder.
Every piece of evidence implicating her she dismissed as the work of her
opponents and adversaries. Her accusers were either lunatics or liars or pawns of
the security police. ‘Such fabrications are absolutely unbelievable. I do not know
what you are talking about. None of these things took place whatsoever. . . .
Really, for me to have [to] sit here and answer those ridiculous allegations, it is a
source of great pain to me’.
One of the commissioners, Yasmin Sooka, observed caustically, ‘If we
believe your evidence, everyone is lying’.
‘Yes’, replied Winnie, ‘it’s true’.
But when lawyers pursued her relentlessly over her Brandfort alibi, she began
to flounder. Time and again she was questioned about the medical record
showing she had been in Soweto, but she could offer no plausible explanation.
LAWYER: Your alibi is false, is that not so?
MANDELA: That is ludicrous
LAWYER: What I want to put to you is that if you look at the evidence

that is presented before the commission, that the truth, in your hands, is
putty, which you can simply mould to suit your own ends.
MANDELA: That is preposterous. I beg you not to talk to me like that.
At this crucial juncture, as Winnie began to look vulnerable, Archbishop Tutu
intervened. As the lawyers looked on in exasperation, he suddenly invited
Winnie’s victims and members of their families, including Stompie’s mother, to
come forward for reconciliation.
In a grotesque climax to the hearing, Mrs. Seipei came forward to be
embraced by Winnie. The gesture was hollow, a fake event made only for the
cameras, and it reduced the hearing to a charade. Winnie beamed triumphantly.
Mrs Seipei returned to her seat, looking lost and alone. The rest of the
questioning that followed was devoid of all purpose.
The hearing ended in further ignominy. In an emotional summary, Tutu
praised Winnie as ‘a tremendous stalwart of our struggle, an icon of liberation’:
‘We can never forget her outstanding contribution to the struggle and her
indomitable spirit. . . . She was an incredible inspiration. Many, many love you.
Many, many say you should have been where you ought to be, the first lady of
this country’.
Seeing only the need to get the sinner to repent, Tutu pleaded with her to give
some sign of contrition:
There are people out there who want to embrace you. I still embrace you because
I love you, and I love you very deeply. There are many out there who would
have wanted to do so if you were able to bring yourself to say something went
wrong. . . .
I beg you, I beg you, I beg you, please. I have not made any particular finding
from what has happened here. I speak as someone who has lived in this
community. You are a great person, and you don’t know how your greatness
would be enhanced if you were to say: “Sorry, things went wrong, forgive me. I
beg you”.
Winnie’s reply was terse: ‘I will take this opportunity to say to the family of
Dr Asvat how deeply sorry I am. To Stompie’s mother, how deeply sorry I am. I
have said so to her before a few years back, when the heat was very hot. I am
saying it is true, things went horribly wrong. I fully agree with that and for that
part of those painful years when things went horribly wrong . . . for that I am

deeply sorry’.
On that false note, the hearing ended. Outside the hall, Caroline Sono, Lolo’s
mother, shouted: ‘She’s the woman who murdered our children! I will not rest
until I find my son’s remains!’ Nomsa Tshabalala, Siboniso’s mother, described
the hearing as ‘a complete sham’. Winnie meanwhile stood amid a crowd of
supporters, laughing heartily until a motorcade whisked her away.

After two and a half years of endeavour, the TRC completed its journey into the
past. It had travelled further than it had once thought possible, traversing a
landscape littered with shattered lives, reaching hidden areas of the past it never
knew existed. From every corner of the country, it had heard tales of murder,
torture and brutality on a scale it never expected to find. In a relentless repetition
of horror, some 21,000 victims had come forward to testify about their own
ordeals or about the plight of others. Many more tales were never told.
The TRC had listened to politicians and generals, bombers and torturers, spies
and saboteurs. It had heard testimony from every part of the political spectrum,
from extremist Afrikaners, on one hand, to extremist Africanists, on the other. It
had searched through reams of government records, launched investigations into
secret burial grounds and chemical and biological warfare projects and examined
everything from the activities of vigilante groups to necklacing. Even so, the
TRC acknowledged that the picture it had gained was far from complete. In
some places it had barely scratched at the surface. Much more remained buried
than had been exhumed.
Its report, completed in 1998, delivered some damning verdicts. It concluded
that it was Botha’s government in the late 1970s that had entered ‘the realm of
criminal misconduct’. Whereas previous governments had ruled by repression,
Botha’s government had adopted a policy of killing its opponents. It was also
responsible for the widespread use of torture, abduction, arson and sabotage.
Botha, said the report, by virtue of his position as head of state and chairman of
the State Security Council, had ‘contributed to and facilitated a climate in which
. . . gross violations of human rights could and did occur’.
The ‘realm of criminal misconduct’, the report continued, extended into de
Klerk’s period in office. It criticised de Klerk for failing to tackle the activities of
the ‘third force’—the network of security force members and right-wing groups

seeking to wreck any transition that would lead to an ANC government. It also
accused him of failing to make a full disclosure to the commission of gross
human rights violations committed by senior members of his government and
senior police officers. ‘His failure to do so constitutes a material nondisclosure,
thus rendering him an accessory to the commission of gross human rights’.
The TRC was no less forthright in dealing with the ANC. During its armed
struggle, said the report, the ANC had engaged in bombing and land-mine
campaigns resulting in civilian casualties. In fact, the TRC pointed out, the
ANC’s armed actions had ‘ended up killing fewer security force members than
civilians’. While accepting that targeting civilians had not been ANC policy, the
TRC concluded, ‘Whatever the justification given by the ANC for such acts . . .
the people who were killed or injured by such explosions are all victims of gross
violations of human rights perpetrated by the ANC’. The commission also
censured the ANC for regarding state informers and state witnesses as legitimate
targets for assassination. Their killing, it said, constituted gross violations of
human rights. Furthermore, the ANC was held ‘morally and politically
accountable’ for creating a climate during the armed struggle that allowed its
supporters to regard violence against opponents—urban councillors, rural
headmen, members of Inkatha and others perceived to be collaborators of the
system or enemies of the ANC—as a legitimate part of a ‘people’s war’. During
the period from 1990 to 1994, it added, the ANC was responsible for the death
and injury of hundreds of its opponents. It had also contributed to the spiral of
violence by creating and arming ‘self-defence units’ that ‘took the law into their
own hands’ and committed atrocities.
The TRC’s verdict on Winnie Mandela was blunt. She was found to be the
central figure in the Mandela United Football Club, and she was held personally
responsible for the outbreak of killing, torture, assaults and arson in Soweto
during the late 1980s. Though started with good intentions, the club had
developed into her private vigilante unit. Club members had been involved in at
least eighteen murders. Many of the club’s operations leading to the killings had
been launched from her home. Winnie not only had sanctioned the club’s
criminal activities but in some cases had participated in them. Those who
opposed her and the club had been branded as informers, hunted down and
killed.
The TRC delivered judgements on several of the crimes in which Winnie had
been implicated. It found that she had participated in the abduction of Lolo Sono

and Siboniso Tshabalala, both of whom were subsequently assumed to have
been murdered. It said she had been involved in and was responsible for the
attempted murder of Lerotodi Ikaneng.
Of particular significance, the TRC found that Winnie had initiated the
assaults on Stompie Seipei and three other youths abducted from the Methodist
manse on her orders. It dismissed the alibi she had produced during her trial,
namely, that she had been in Brandfort and not at home when the assaults took
place. ‘In all probability’, said the TRC, ‘she was aware of Seipei’s condition’—
that he was close to death after being severely injured during the assaults at her
house. ‘The commission finds . . . that she failed to act responsibly in taking the
necessary action required to avert his death’.

Two months before its report was due to be published in October 1998, the TRC,
in accordance with its statutory obligations, sent summaries of its findings to
some 200 individuals and organisations that it had named in connection with
human rights abuses. Their reaction was uniformly hostile. De Klerk was livid
that he had been named ‘an accessory to human rights violations’ and applied to
the High Court for an interdict preventing publication of a thirty-line passage
referring to him.
Far more of a shock was the ANC’s reaction. Outraged that it had been
roundly condemned for war crimes, the ANC insisted on a meeting with the
TRC, intending to get it to rewrite its findings. The TRC invited the ANC to
make a written submission but refused a meeting. The ANC retaliated by
accusing the TRC of ‘criminalising’ the anti-apartheid struggle. Its findings were
‘capricious and arbitrary’. The TRC had ‘grossly misdirected itself ’.
In an astonishing lapse of judgement, Thabo Mbeki went to the High Court,
just like de Klerk, to apply for an urgent interdict to block publication of the
report. Unable to conceal his anger and frustration, Archbishop Tutu conducted a
series of media interviews warning of the dangers of a new tyranny in South
Africa. ‘We can’t assume that yesterday’s oppressed will not become
tomorrow’s oppressors. We have seen it happen all over the world, and we
shouldn’t be surprised if it happens here’. He urged all South Africans to be on
their guard against government abuse and corruption.
Though nothing came of Mbeki’s ill-fated attempt to muzzle the commission,

it caused severe damage to the ANC’s reputation. When the TRC finally
presented its report to Mandela in October 1998, it was a sombre occasion,
overshadowed by the ANC’s wrecking manoeuvre. Mandela himself made clear
his support for the TRC and its work. ‘We are confident that it has contributed to
the work in progress of laying the foundation of the edifice of reconciliation’.
But there was a cacophony of contrary voices. Mbeki continued to insist that the
TRC was ‘wrong and misguided’. De Klerk accused the TRC of seeking
vengeance, not reconciliation.
In answering criticism levelled at the TRC, Tutu argued that the truth often
turned out to be divisive. ‘Reconciliation is not about being cosy; it is not about
pretending that things were other than they were. Reconciliation based on
falsehood, on not facing up to reality, is not true reconciliation and will not last’.
Though truth might not always lead to reconciliation, he said, there could be no
genuine reconciliation without truth.