CHAPTER 24
WINNIE’S DOWNFALL
THE DOWNFALL OF WINNIE BEGAN NOT AS A RESULT OF HER
CRIMINAL activities but because of her affair with the young lawyer Dali
Mpofu. When they met, Winnie was fifty-five and Mpofu was twenty-five. An
articled clerk for the law firm representing members of Mandela United, he was
intelligent, charming and had a liking for older women. While a law student at
the University of the Witwatersrand, he had struck up a relationship with a white
lecturer ten years his senior, Terry Oakley-Smith, the daughter of a retired
British diplomat. She became pregnant, but soon after the birth of their son in
1989, Winnie lured Mpofu away. When Oakley-Smith confronted Winnie about
their involvement one night outside Mpofu’s flat, pointing out that Winnie was a
grandmother, she was given a foretaste of the kind of threats Winnie habitually
used against her adversaries. ‘Winnie’s reply was something along the lines of,
“Listen, my girl, you’ll be sorry for this. You don’t know who you’re dealing
with,”’ recalled Oakley-Smith, who then received a barrage of threatening phone
calls from Winnie, often late at night when she was drunk, telling her in a slurred
voice to keep away from Mpofu. She was so worried by the threats that she
made a statement to her lawyers in case she came to harm.
When Mandela in prison learned that Mpofu had moved in with Winnie, he
sent her a letter telling her to get ‘that boy’ out of the house. Mpofu left, but the
affair continued. From the moment that Mandela returned home to Johannesburg
in February 1990, Winnie showed no interest in sharing his bed. The pain and
humiliation for Mandela were some of the worst experiences he had known.
They made him, he later recalled, ‘the loneliest man’.
While the affair remained relatively discreet, Mandela bore it with fortitude,
enjoying what he could of Winnie’s company, but Winnie soon began to flaunt
her lover in public. In March 1991, she appointed Mpofu as her deputy in the
ANC’s department of social welfare, even though he had no qualifications for
the job. The department which was responsible for the welfare of thousands of

returning exiles, former political prisoners and the victims of political violence
became notorious for its chaos under Winnie’s rule. When Ramaphosa took over
as secretary-general in July 1991, two months after Winnie’s conviction for
kidnapping and assault, he quickly set about reorganising the ANC’s
administration, trying to turn it into a more professional organisation and to rid it
of embarrassing encumbrances like Winnie. But initially he ran straight into
opposition from Mandela, who regarded his plans for reorganisation as much a
threat to his own authority as to Winnie’s position.
Winnie, however, soon overstepped the mark. In October 1991, she took
Mpofu with her on a spending spree to the United States. Ostensibly, they went
to raise money and recruit artistes for a ‘Children of Africa Concert’, scheduled
to be held in Nigeria later in the year. But they raised no funds, signed up no
artistes, and instead drew considerable attention to their extravagant lifestyle.
Mandela was outraged when he learned of what had happened. But Winnie
ignored him and made plans for another trip to the United States with Mpofu,
without informing him.
After two years of forlorn hope of re-establishing a family life, he moved out
of Winnie’s ‘palace’ in Soweto. He lived for a time at the opulent mansion of
one of South Africa’s wealthiest Afrikaners, Douw Steyn, an insurance magnate,
in the northern suburbs of Johannesburg, before purchasing a comfortable twostorey house in Houghton which he came to regard as home. He rarely spoke to
Winnie after that.
The Winnie saga was still to cause him endless embarrassment though. In
March 1992, just weeks before her appeal was due to be heard, she became
embroiled in an ugly wrangle with her co-defendant, Xoliswa Falati. Falati,
whose appeal was due to be heard at the same time, had been told by her lawyer
that there were no funds to pay for the costs of her appeal and that therefore she
would have no option but to serve her sentence of six years’ imprisonment. The
news came as a severe shock to Falati, who had hitherto assumed that the
Mandelas would see that she was properly represented. Her lawyer suggested
that she contact Mandela and, when she did, Mandela reassured her that he
would take care of the problem.
The following day, 28 March, Falati received a telephone call from Winnie
telling her to get out of the room at the back of the garage at Mandela’s old
house in Orlando, where she had been allowed to stay. Falati called Mandela for

help again. He told her to ignore Winnie and to stay in the room.
That night, after a few drinks, Winnie burst into Falati’s room, brandishing a
small pistol and shouting at her to get out. ‘She came at me like a mad woman,’
Falati said later. ‘I saw her pistol and just pushed her and ran.’ Winnie’s driver
stopped her at the gate. ‘For a moment I thought I was going to be shot. Winnie
was drunk and screaming at me that I was going to prison.’ After throwing
Falati’s clothes out into the street, Winnie locked the room and stormed off.
When she had gone, Falati made two telephone calls, one to Mandela and one
to the local newspaper, The Sowetan, telling them what had happened. The
Sowetan immediately sent a reporter and a photographer to the scene. When they
arrived, Falati began telling them how she had ‘protected’ Winnie and how
Winnie was ‘dumping me now that I have served my purpose’. Shortly
afterwards, Mandela arrived, clearly embarrassed by the whole business, asked
Falati not to talk to the press and urged the reporter not to write the story. He
later telephoned The Sowetan’s editor three times to inquire about the paper’s
intentions. When the editor and the reporter called on Mandela to discuss the
incident, he pleaded with them to play it down. It could ruin Winnie’s chances of
a successful appeal, he said. Mandela’s intervention, however, made The
Sowetan all the more determined to publish the story and it duly appeared on 30
March.
Winnie’s petty act of vengeance against Falati reignited the whole controversy
over the murders of both Stompie Moeketsi Seipei and Dr Asvat. Fearing for her
life, Falati agreed to tell ANC officials all that she knew. Falati now claimed that
she had lied at her trial to try to save Winnie from being convicted; that Winnie
had been involved in the torture of Stompie and had ordered the murder of Asvat
because he had seen Stompie in her house shortly before his death; that she had
ordered other deaths, including the murder of a senior journalist on The Sowetan
who had been investigating her criminal activities; and that only four months
before she had drawn up a list of five other people whom she wanted
assassinated, including Cyril Rama - phosa. Falati’s allegations duly appeared in
the press. She said she was not prepared to go to prison for ‘an ungrateful
woman’.
Still more damaging evidence against Winnie surfaced. Her driver, John
Morgan, who had received a one-year’s suspended sentence for his role in the
kidnapping, now claimed, like Falati, that he had lied in court to ‘protect’

Winnie. In a press interview published on 12 April, he said that Winnie was not
only present at the house during Stompie’s beating but led the assault. He
described how, pointing to Stompie’s prostrate body, she told him ‘to pick up the
dog and dump him’—which, he said, he refused to do. ‘I knew he was dead
because he had already been stabbed and had blood on his neck.’ Morgan made
the same allegations on national television.
Press investigations now added further details. From Lusaka, the missing
witness, Katiza Cebekhulu, told a lawyer acting on behalf of the Christian
Science Monitor that Winnie had ordered Dr Asvat’s murder because he could
have given evidence of her part in Stompie’s death. In Johannesburg, Dr Asvat’s
family now demanded that the case of his murder be reopened.
Mandela was left with no option other than to distance himself publicly from
Winnie. He still felt personally responsible for what had happened to her, but the
extent of the damage both to the ANC and to his own reputation could now be
contained only by an announcement of their separation. The media was already
critical of his role in trying to suppress The Sowetan’s story about Winnie.
Ramaphosa and Sisulu went to see him to press him to reach a decision.
For a man as intensely private as Mandela, with such a strong dislike of
discussing his personal affairs and difficulties even with friends, the ordeal of
having to announce the end of the marriage which he had cherished so deeply
before the massed ranks of the world’s media required all the discipline he could
muster. He accomplished it with great dignity, but with barely disguised anguish.
Flanked by his old friends Walter Sisulu and Oliver Tambo, in a room at the
ANC’s headquarters in Johannesburg, he made a statement to journalists on 13
April notable for its generosity, paying tribute to ‘Comrade Nomzamo’, as he
called Winnie, for her devotion to him and to the anti-apartheid struggle:
Owing to the pressures of our shared commitment to the ANC and the struggle
to end apartheid, we were unable to enjoy a normal family life. Despite these
pressures our love for each other and our devotion to our marriage grew and
intensified. . . .
During the two decades I spent on Robben Island, she was an indispensable
pillar of support and comfort to myself personally. . . . Comrade Nomzamo
accepted the onerous burden of raising our children on her own. She endured the
persecution heaped upon her by the government with exemplary fortitude and
never wavered from her commitment to the freedom struggle. Her tenacity

reinforced my personal respect, love and growing affection. It also attracted the
admiration of the world at large. My love for her remains undiminished.
However, in view of the tensions that have arisen owing to differences
between ourselves on a number of issues in recent months, we have mutually
agreed that a separation would be best for each of us. My action was not
prompted by the current allegations being made against her in the media. . . .
Comrade Nomzamo has and can continue to rely on my unstinting support
during these trying moments in her life.
I shall personally never regret the life Comrade Nomzamo and I tried to share
together. Circumstances beyond our control, however, dictated it should be
otherwise. I part from my wife with no recriminations. I embrace her with all the
love and affection I have nursed for her inside and outside prison from the
moment I first met her.
Reading the statement had left Mandela drained and exhausted. Rising from
his seat, he appealed to the press: ‘Ladies and gentlemen, I hope you appreciate
the pain I have gone through.’ Then, in silence, he walked stiffly from the room.
Behind the scenes, Ramaphosa now went to work to force Winnie’s
‘retirement from politics’. He wanted her resignation both from her position as
head of the social welfare department and from membership of the ANC’s
national executive committee. But Winnie fought back tenaciously. All that she
agreed to do was to resign as head of the social welfare department.
On 15 April, at a press conference announcing her resignation from the
department, she remained defiant, protesting her innocence of any crimes and
blaming her predicament on those who wished to destroy her and discredit the
ANC:
The step I am taking is not because of the false allegations being made against
me but because of the devotion that I have for the ANC and my family. Over the
years, many have tried to divide and weaken the ANC. They have failed, and
they will fail again. I have taken this step because I consider it to be in the best
interest of the ANC, whose cause and policies I will support until the end of my
life.
Winnie lost no time strengthening her popularity with radical youth groups
and squatter communities, determined to present herself as the champion of the
poor and dispossessed, with a powerful constituency of her own. Within days,

she appeared at one scene of township violence after another, berating the
government and Inkatha and fulminating against the negotiations process. ‘We
are certainly not going to keep on talking to a government that is killing our
people,’ she said. On national television, she declared, ‘As far as I am
concerned, my political career goes on as if nothing had happened.’
She used her position as leader of the ANC’s Women’s League in the
Johannesburg region to instigate a march demanding her reinstatement as head
of the social welfare department, an action that created turmoil in the Women’s
League. One attempt after another was made to dislodge her, but she clung on
with a vengeance.
The end, however, was nigh. In May 1992, ANC officials announced that they
were conducting an investigation into charges that Winnie and her dismissed
deputy, Dali Mpofu, had been responsible for the disappearance of 400,000
rands from the department of social welfare. While the investigation was
proceeding, they came into possession of a letter Winnie had written to Mpofu
on 17 March 1992, one month before her resignation as head of the department.
The letter was leaked to South African newspapers and appeared in print on 6
September 1992, making her position untenable.
It was four pages long, written by hand, mostly in English but with occasional
phrases in Xhosa, and blazed with anger and venom about Mpofu’s affairs with
other women. Winnie admitted that she had agreed to Mpofu having another
relationship ‘as a cover to defuse our problem’, even though she ‘shuddered at
the thought of you lying and pretending to love this other woman’. But that did
not mean Mpofu could go ‘running around fucking at the slightest emotional
excuse’. She accused him of deceiving her and complained about his ‘shabby
treatment’ of her: ‘You have hurt and humiliated me as a woman.’ She grumbled
about his indifference to how ‘the situation is deteriorating at home’—she had
not been speaking to Mandela for five months. Yet Mpofu had not bothered
because he was out every night satisfying himself with another woman.
Amid this tirade were references to bank accounts which proved fatal. Winnie
berated Mpofu over his lack of concern about her financial problems, mentioned
how much money she had spent on him and spoke of her fears about the
investigation into the accounts of the social welfare department. ‘I tell you I’m in
trouble with the Simmons Street a/c which reflects over R160,000 drawn over a
period for you,’ she wrote. ‘You don’t even bother to check how we can

overcome this.’ Mandela, she said, had ordered an inquiry into her account. Her
secretary at the department of social welfare, Ntombi, was talking to the
investigators: ‘I tell you Ntombi is gossiping about the cheques we used to ask
her to cash for in the name of the Dpt and how I gave you all that money.’
Mandela was shown a copy of the letter before it was published in the press.
He recognised the handwriting and the style and knew that certain details, such
as Winnie’s assertion that they had not spoken for five months, were accurate.
He decided to ask George Bizos to take a copy to Winnie to check its
authenticity. According to Mandela, ‘she broke down and wept’.
Four days later, Winnie resigned from all her remaining posts in the ANC,
from the national executive committee and the Women’s League, with an
emotional outburst against her ‘enemies’ inside and outside the organisation and
displaying deep-rooted delusions about her own importance. In a rambling
statement to a press conference, she gave no clear explanation of why she had
decided to resign other than to say it was ‘primarily in the interest of my dear
husband and my beloved family’.
Addressing herself to her family ‘and to all my people in South Africa, in our
squatter camps, in our villages, in the violence-torn and poverty-stricken areas’,
she said, ‘There is no reason to be overwhelmed by a sense of isolation and
abandonment. I have only been a mere servant to you and I will always be.’
However, Winnie’s ambition was not so easily thwarted.

In October 1992, a glittering wedding reception, attended by 800 guests, was
held in the ballroom of the Carlton Hotel in Johannesburg to celebrate the
wedding of Zindzi Mandela and Zwelibansi Hlongwane, a shop-owner several
years her junior. Zindzi’s life had been marked by personal dramas as much as
her mother’s. She had borne four children from four different fathers, one of
whom savagely assaulted her, leaving her for dead, and another of whom, a
Mandela United gangster, committed suicide. Beneath the glamour of the
occasion, there were turbulent undercurrents. Mandela treated Winnie as if she
did not exist, not addressing a word to her. He appeared so grim at times that an
old friend, Helen Suzman, passed up a note to him: ‘Smile, Nelson! You look
like John Vorster used to in parliament! ’ He read the note, burst into a radiant
smile briefly, then lapsed again into a sphinx-like stare.

In his speech to the guests, he reflected on the plight of his family: ‘We
watched our children growing without our guidance and when we did come out
[of prison], my children, for example, said, “We thought we had a father and one
day he’d come back. But to our dismay, our father comes back and he leaves us
alone almost daily because he has now become the father of the nation.”’
Mandela said he had often pondered on whether the struggle had been worth the
loss of a normal family life but had always concluded, ‘It was, it is, the correct
decision that we should commit ourselves.’
