THE THIRD MAN
IN THE EARLY DAYS, BUTHELEZI REMAINED ON GOOD TERMS
WITH THE exiled leaders of the ANC. When he launched the Inkatha
movement in 1975, they regarded it as a useful ally in the anti-apartheid
campaign. They also approved his election in 1976 as KwaZulu’s chief minister,
confident that he would prove to be a stumbling block to the government’s drive
to establish ‘independent’ homelands. But the relationship turned sour in 1979,
after Buthelezi met Oliver Tambo in London, with the ANC accusing Buthelezi
of building Inkatha into ‘a personal power base’ and Buthelezi accusing the
ANC of trying to hijack Inkatha for its own ends.
During the 1980s, the feud became increasingly acrimonious. From the
government’s standpoint, Buthelezi was no moderate. His demands for the
release of Mandela and other political prisoners, for the lifting of the ban on the
ANC, for the abolition of all apartheid measures and for negotiations for a new
constitution were no different from those made by radical groups like the UDF.
But, to the fury of radical activists, he vociferously opposed the armed struggle,
sanctions and disinvestment and praised the free enterprise system. The ANC
and UDF dismissed him as a traitor to the nationalist cause. Buthelezi, for his
part, resented any challenge to his authority. In a letter to Oliver Tambo in 1984,
he wrote: ‘In this part of South Africa, we come from warrior stock and there is
a resilient determination in KwaZulu and in Inkatha which even the full might of
the state will never be able to flatten. Do your colleagues really think they can
flatten us on the way to their envisaged victory?’ As the townships’ revolt got
under way, the level of rhetoric reached new heights. From Lusaka, the ANC
denounced Buthelezi as ‘a counter-revolutionary’, ‘a puppet’, and ‘a snake
poisoning the people of South Africa [which] needs to be hit on the head’.
Once regarded as the most popular African politician in the country, Buthelezi
showed signs of losing his support. One opinion poll concluded that between
1977 and 1988 Inkatha’s support in the Witwatersrand region, the industrial
heartland of South Africa, declined from more than 30 to less than 5 per cent.

Even more serious for Buthelezi, there were clear indications that Inkatha’s
support in its home base of KwaZulu-Natal was rapidly eroding, notably among
urban blacks. Pro-ANC youth groups and trade unions were becoming
increasingly active. In 1987, Inkatha embarked on a recruitment drive.
The ugly contest that followed engulfed KwaZulu and Natal in spasms of
violence for years to come. Buthelezi possessed considerable advantages. Since
the 1970s, he had run KwaZulu from his capital at Ulundi as a one-party state,
controlling its parliament, its police and its civil service. As a member of the
Zulu royal family, he could rely on the support of a powerful network of Zulu
traditional chiefs—amakhosi—whom he in turn rewarded with power and
privilege. The Zulu system of loyalty and obedience to its hierarchy assured
Buthelezi of bedrock support among more traditionally minded communities,
particularly those in the deep rural areas of KwaZulu. Migrant workers on the
Witwatersrand, coming from those rural areas, bore him the same allegiance. His
party, Inkatha, was a well-organised political movement with a clear hierarchy
and chain of command, able to hold regular meetings and rallies. It drew support
from the Zulu establishment, from chiefs, councillors, legislative assembly
members, indunas, businessmen, civil servants and other government employees.
In 1985, it established a trade union wing, the United Workers’ Union of South
Africa, Uwusa, in an endeavour to compete with the pro-ANC Congress of
South African Trade Unions, Cosatu. Above all, it could count on the support of
the KwaZulu police, which had been established in 1980 and which Buthelezi, as
minister of police, had turned into a formidable paramilitary force. In addition to
regular policemen, special kitkonstabels were recruited, mainly from the ranks of
Inkatha, some with criminal records. They were given limited training, then sent
back to their communities, armed with pump-action shotguns. ‘We must prepare
ourselves not only to defend property and life, but to go beyond that and prepare
ourselves to hit back with devastating force at those who destroy our property
and kill us,’ Buthelezi told the KwaZulu legislative assembly in 1984. The
following year, Inkatha’s central committee resolved that the whole of KwaZulu
and Natal should be turned into a ‘no-go area’ for the UDF ‘regardless of
consequence’.
In meeting the challenge posed by pro-ANC activists in the 1980s, Buthelezi
and the government found themselves making common cause. Buthelezi was
given every encouragement to deal forcefully with the threat. In 1986, he
secretly arranged for army training in the Caprivi Strip for a covert paramilitary

force of 200 men able to undertake offensive operations against pro-ANC
activists. When pro-ANC groups began to make headway in the Natal Midlands
in 1987, heavy police reinforcements were deployed to help curb them. At a
police ceremony in the provincial capital, Pietermaritzburg, in 1988, the minister
of law and order, Adriaan Vlok, declared, ‘The police intend to face the future
with moderates and fight against radical groups. . . . Radicals, who are trying to
destroy South Africa, will not be tolerated. We will fight them. We have put our
foot in that direction, and we will eventually win the Pietermaritzburg area.’
Buthelezi’s strategy was to appeal to Zulu pride and sense of martial tradition,
and to assert the notion that the Zulu people and Inkatha were synonymous.
Zulus, he said, were a ‘mighty nation’ with a ‘glorious heritage’ who needed to
stand together in the face of enemies who did not want ‘the Zulu nation to unite’.
He liked to recount how he had learned politics at his mother’s knee, listening to
tales of Zulu resistance to British settlers in the nineteenth century and how his
great-grandfather, Cetshwayo, had routed the British army at the battle of
Isandhlwana in 1879. In public, he frequently appeared in traditional Zulu dress,
draping a leopard skin across his shoulders and holding a shield, a stick and a
gleaming spear in his hand.
His opponents in Natal were Zulus from the ranks of urban blacks, from
community groups, the landless, the unemployed and, above all, the youth, all
struggling for survival in crowded shack settlements and townships and resentful
of the power and patronage enjoyed by the Zulu establishment. The numbers of
this constituency were forever swelling. Between 1979 and 1989, the population
of greater Durban more than trebled from under 1 million to 3 million.
The ANC’s main organiser in this Zulu civil war was its Natal Midlands boss,
Harry Gwala, a modern-day Stalinist and former Robben Island prisoner who
had clashed with Mandela there. A diminutive man in his late sixties and
suffering from motor neurone disease, which left him partially paralysed, with
arms hanging limply from his sides, he was driven by a hatred for Buthelezi and
all that he stood for. Gwala wanted a military victory over Buthelezi and
harboured dreams of marching on Ulundi to occupy his headquarters. His
uncompromising militancy made him the hero of the ANC’s youth in the region.
The conflict became essentially territorial. Inkatha leaders, usually known as
‘warlords’, formed armed groups—‘impis’—to drive out their opponents.
Radical pro-ANC groups responded in kind. Gwala publicly declared that

Inkatha warlords should be killed. Hit squads operating in his area, some of them
belonging to Umkhonto, succeeded in wiping out scores of middle-ranking
Inkatha officials. Police were frequently accused of collusion in Inkatha attacks,
of harassing radical groups but failing to deal with the activities of warlords and
known killers and of standing by while the impis went to work. Attackers were
sometimes transported, heavily armed, in buses in broad daylight. Assassinations
were commonplace; massacres were carried out. Many areas became ‘no-go’
areas for one side or the other. Mixed in with this political rivalry were the
activities of criminal gangs and violent disputes over land, water and housing.
By 1990, more than 3,000 people had been killed.
In prison, Mandela had been confident of being able to settle the conflict once
he was set free. He knew of Buthelezi’s difficult nature. Everyone who had had
dealings with Buthelezi found him to be a prickly personality, volatile,
unpredictable, hyper-sensitive and at times paranoid. But Mandela believed that
a personal meeting would enable them to resolve their differences. He was
careful to keep in touch with him, writing respectful letters. When he left prison,
Bu - thelezi was one of the first people whom he phoned, to thank him for his
long campaign to secure his release. At his first press conference, he steered
clear of the usual ANC rhetoric:
We have differences with Dr Buthelezi. Firstly, on the question of violence.
Secondly, on the attitude towards government structures. And thirdly, on the
question of sanctions. These are fundamental differences, but nevertheless, he is
a figure with a following. It may not be as big and may not command as much
resources as we command, but he has a following and it seems to me correct to
try and settle problems in which he is involved amicably.
Within days of his release, Mandela proposed that they should meet. But he
ran straight into vehement opposition from the ANC’s national executive
committee. Mandela said he thought they would ‘throttle’ him for suggesting it.
Determined to make contact nevertheless, Mandela urged Walter Sisulu to
take up an invitation to visit the Zulu king, Goodwill Zwelethini, who was also
Buthelezi’s nephew. ‘Mandela believed that we needed Buthelezi, we needed the
king, we needed the Zulus,’ Sisulu recalled. But an immediate dispute broke out
over the venue of the meeting. Zwelethini had invited Sisulu to meet him at
Ulundi, but the ANC was wary of according any hint of recognition to the
KwaZulu homeland by visiting the capital. Sisulu proposed instead a meeting at

the king’s palace at Nongoma, but Zwelethini saw no reason to agree to the
change. And so another opportunity for peace was lost. Sisulu subsequently
conceded that it had probably been a mistake for him to refuse to go to Ulundi.
Buthelezi’s supporters, meanwhile, considered that the king had been snubbed,
resulting in another bout of violence.
Mandela’s efforts at exerting leadership over the crisis came to nothing. Two
weeks after his release, he addressed a huge rally of ANC supporters in Durban,
urging an end to the fighting. South Africa, he said, stood on the threshold of a
new era but Natal was in flames, ‘brother fighting brother in wars of vengeance
and retaliation’. He made a dramatic appeal to all Zulus to lay down their arms:
‘Take your guns, your knives and your pangas [machetes] and throw them into
the sea. Close down the death factories. End this war.’
But no one paid much attention. Gwala argued publicly that the quickest way
to establish peace throughout Natal was to win the war against Inkatha. He cited
as examples of a ‘peaceful solution’ several Midlands areas that had become
totally peaceful after his supporters had killed or chased away all Inkatha
members.
After another round of slaughter in March, Mandela and Buthelezi agreed to
meet outside Pietermaritzburg at a rural settlement called Taylor’s Halt, an
Inkatha stronghold in the KwaZulu homeland. Announcing his decision,
Mandela said that when people were dying there was no time to stand on
ceremony. ‘We must unite,’ he said. But Gwala and other ANC leaders in Natal
were enraged by the announcement, all the more so as they had not been
consulted beforehand. Early the next morning, they confronted Mandela at his
Soweto home, warning him that if he went ahead with the Taylor’s Halt meeting,
it would result only in boosting Buthelezi’s prestige and in convincing him that
violence paid political dividends. Mandela made his planned trip to
Pietermaritzburg, but never went to Taylor’s Halt and never met Buthelezi.
Instead, Gwala’s men took him to a local township to see the charred remains of
an ANC supporter and to meet distraught families of the latest victims.
The snub to Buthelezi was fatal. ‘It was important for Buthelezi to feel
welcomed, embraced and part of the process,’ reflected Jacob Zuma, the ANC’s
intelligence chief, himself a Zulu. If Mandela had embraced him right at the
beginning, he believed, the conflict could have been overcome. By allowing
Gwala to dictate terms, Mandela lost a crucial opportunity for reconciliation.

Buthelezi drew his own conclusions. ‘They think they are going to marginalise
me,’ he said. ‘They say Inkatha must be smashed and finished. . . . It is not
possible.’
The conflict now spread beyond Natal. In protest against the continuing
violence in the region, the ANC and its trade union ally, Cosatu, organised an
‘isolate Buthelezi’ campaign which, on 2 July, brought 3 million workers out on
a ‘stay-away’, closing most factories in Natal. Inkatha was proclaimed ‘an
enemy of the people’. In the Transvaal townships, the houses of many Inkatha
officials, notably township councillors, were petrol-bombed.
On 14 July, Buthelezi took the initiative. He turned Inkatha into a fully
fledged political party, the Inkatha Freedom Party, opened its membership to all
races and launched a recruitment campaign in the Transvaal, concentrating on
township hostels along the Reef. What followed became known as the Reef
township war, which brought a level of violence to South Africa that had never
been witnessed before.
The hostels were a natural recruiting ground for Inkatha. More than fifty
hostels in townships in the East Rand and West Rand were occupied mainly by
Zulu-speaking workers from rural areas of Kwa - Zulu and Natal who had come
to the Reef in search of work. The conditions in which they lived were appalling.
The hostels were generally overcrowded, squalid and insanitary blocks providing
only rudimentary facilities. Township residents tended to sneer at people who
lived there. But for the occupants they offered a vital base from which to earn a
living. Coming mostly from a traditional rural background, they tended to resent
the undisciplined behaviour of township youths. They were notably hostile to the
coercive tactics used by radical groups in the townships to enforce boycotts,
stay-aways and other forms of anti-apartheid protest. The only reason hostel
dwellers endured such grim places was to work and earn money for their
families in rural areas, for most homesteads in rural Zululand were dependent on
remittances from migrants in Johannesburg. Their fears about the ANC were
aggravated by demands made by local ANC leaders at public rallies that hostel
dwellers should vacate hostels to make way for returning exiles who needed a
home, and by suggestions that hostels should be upgraded to family units, which
might also have led to single migrants being thrown out. Inkatha officials
exploited these fears, warning hostel residents that they were in danger of losing
their ‘homes’ as a means of gaining support. To complicate matters further, there
was the ethnic factor. For years, permanent residents and hostel dwellers,

whether of Zulu, Xhosa or mixed origin, had lived together peaceably. But
Inkatha now used Zulu allegiance as the basis of its recruitment campaign. Its
adversaries in the squatter settlements surrounding hostels were often Xhosas
supporting the ANC. Ethnic tensions rapidly mounted. Rumours abounded of
imminent attack by Zulu or by Xhosa fighters.
On 22 July, the Reef township war broke out. It started in Sebokeng, a
township thirty-five miles south of Johannesburg, in a battle between residents
and hostel dwellers which flared up shortly after an Inkatha rally was held there.
The ANC had forewarning that Inkatha attacks were planned. ANC lawyers had
written both to the minister of law and order, Adriaan Vlok, and to local police
commanders, urging them to ban the rally, but to no avail. In the morning,
busloads of Inkatha supporters arrived from Johannesburg hostels armed with
what were known as ‘traditional weapons’—spears, clubs, axes and iron bars. In
the violence that followed, some thirty people were killed, mostly ANC
supporters.
The next day, Mandela went to the Sebokeng morgue and then visited the
hospital to express his solidarity with the survivors. His anger about what had
happened was directed not so much against Inkatha and Buthelezi as against de
Klerk. At a meeting with the president on 24 July, Mandela demanded an
explanation: ‘I said, “You were warned beforehand. You did nothing about it.
Why? Why is it there have been no arrests? In any other country, where thirtytwo people had been slaughtered in this way, the head of state would come out
condemning the matter and giving his sympathies to the next of kin. Why have
you not done so?”’ According to Mandela, de Klerk could offer no proper
response, nor did he provide him with any explanation.
The violence spread rapidly from one township to another as hostel dwellers
launched attacks on nearby squatter settlements and residential areas, setting off
endless cycles of revenge and retaliation. Within days several hundred were
dead. Zulu hostel dwellers expelled Xhosa-speakers and other non-Zulus from
hostels, turning them into Zulu fortresses. Zulu families in surrounding areas,
facing persecution, sought protection there. As communities split, Zulus came to
be identified as Inkatha supporters and Xhosas as ANC supporters, regardless of
their real allegiances. Many Zulu-speakers living near hostels were forced to
align themselves with hostel dwellers as their only means of defence against
revenge attacks by township residents. Thousands abandoned their shacks and
homes to escape the violence. Some townships became divided into rival

territories, with large ‘nogo’ areas of wrecked and deserted houses separating
them. In August, 500 people died over an eleven-day period.
The role of the police, as in Natal, became increasingly controversial. Police
refused to disarm Zulu impis of their spears, axes, knives, sticks and iron bars,
on the grounds that these were traditional weapons that Zulus were entitled to
carry. They were also accused of standing by while hostel dwellers launched
their murderous raids into surrounding territory or of actually assisting them.
There had been a long history of brutal conflict between police and radical
groups in the townships. The two sides had, in effect, been at war since the
Soweto revolt of 1976. To many in the police, the ANC was still ‘the enemy’
and a justifiable target for Inkatha supporters.
But the suspicion soon grew that something more sinister was happening. In
September, twenty-six people died and more than 100 were injured when a sixman gang ran through a Johannesburg commuter train shooting passengers at
random; a second gang, lying in wait on a station platform, attacked survivors
trying to escape from the train. The attack had all the hallmarks of the kind of
terrorist activity carried out for years in Mozambique by rebels trained and
supported by South African military intelligence.
All this coincided with a wave of public disclosures about dirty-tricks
operations conducted by police and army units in the 1970s and 1980s in their
campaign against the ANC and other government opponents. In October 1989, a
black policeman, under sentence of death for the murder of a white farmer,
earned a stay of execution by claiming that he had been a member of a security
police assassination squad set up to eliminate government opponents. He
identified its commander as Captain Dirk Coetzee. The following month,
Coetzee, having fled the country, admitted his involvement with assassination
squads during the 1970s and 1980s. He had commanded a special counterinsurgency unit based at a secluded police farm called Vlakplaas, west of
Pretoria, where hit squads comprised of ANC defectors and Mozambique rebels
were trained and used in neighbouring states and inside South Africa for
clandestine operations, including murder, abduction and bomb attacks. He
claimed that assassination squads were still at work. In March 1990, an official
inquiry into the conduct of the security forces, the Harms Commission, which de
Klerk eventually agreed to set up with limited terms of reference, was told of
similar activities at home and abroad carried out by a defence force covert unit
known as the Civil Cooperation Bureau, established during the 1980s. The unit

was still active, with an annual budget of 28 million rands. The verdict of the
inquiry was that the CCB operated as a law unto itself and had its own political
agenda. Its actions had ‘contaminated the whole security arm of the state’. In
July 1990, the government announced that the unit would be disbanded.
With all this evidence of security force involvement in murder and dirty tricks
at hand, it seemed all the more plausible, in the wake of several train massacres
and attacks on squatter settlements, to suspect a conspiracy of right-wing
elements in the military and the police bent on wrecking the negotiation process.
Mandela raised the question of a ‘third force’ with de Klerk in private in August.
In September, he voiced his concern publicly, suggesting that renegades in the
security forces were trying to disrupt negotiations.
De Klerk’s predicament was considerable. He was an outsider to the security
establishment. During the decade of total strategy, when defence and security
officials were given a free hand to run guerrilla operations in Mozambique and
Angola and mount whatever dirty tricks they considered necessary inside South
Africa, de Klerk was preoccupied with domestic issues like education. When he
became president, he had never held a security portfolio. Unlike Botha, he had
no inside knowledge of how the security establishment worked, nor did he share
the sense of camaraderie that prevailed there. Along with a large section of the
National Party, he disliked the way in which the security establishment had
tended to usurp the role of parliament and the National Party itself. Soon after
taking office, he had dispensed with the elaborate system of national security
management which Botha had constructed as part of his total strategy. But key
personnel wedded to that strategy were still in place, not only within the security
establishment but also within his own cabinet, including the minister of defence,
Magnus Malan, and the minister of law and order, Adriaan Vlok. They believed
the ‘enemy’ was still the ANC and its communist allies and acted accordingly.
Security bosses had also become ac - customed to operating autonomously. As
the Harms inquiry noted, the CCB had ignored requests from the president, the
minister of defence and the chief of the defence force: ‘Requests by parliament,
the auditor-general and the commission were treated with contempt.’ At cabinet
meetings, when de Klerk raised questions about the third force, Malan and Vlok
were quick to dismiss it as propaganda. De Klerk had no interest in pursuing the
matter. He depended heavily on the security establishment to keep tight control
of the turbulence churned up by his reforms and feared antagonising them. All
he was prepared to admit was that ‘a few rogue individuals’ might be involved.

Otherwise, he stuck to the standard government explanation for the violence that
it was all caused by ‘black-on-black’ rivalry.
Mandela was unable to believe that de Klerk did not possess the power to
clean up the security forces and to put a stop to the violence.
But initially he was willing to attribute his failure to do so to de Klerk’s
‘problems with his own constituency’. In November 1990, after a massive
Inkatha attack on a squatter camp known as Zonkizizwe, outside Germiston on
the East Rand, which resulted in a rout of all residents and its occupation by
Inkatha supporters, Mandela went to see de Klerk and Vlok to ask why the
police had taken no action to restore the shacks to their original owners. De
Klerk, according to Mandela, seemed totally unaware of the incident. But Vlok’s
response was to ask rudely, ‘Who owned the land anyway on which your people
were living? ’ The land, in fact, belonged to the local authority, which had made
it available for squatters generally. De Klerk promised to investigate the matter,
but though Mandela repeatedly brought up the issue of Zonkizizwe with de
Klerk in the following months, he never received any response.
Their relationship nevertheless remained in good working order. In a press
interview in December 1990, Mandela said:
I still regard de Klerk as a man of integrity, and I think he feels the same about
me. We have developed enormous respect for each other. I can call him at any
time. I can get him out of bed or out of cabinet meetings. I believe he and
perhaps the majority of his cabinet are still as committed to the peace process as
we are. But he has problems with elements inside his government—especially
his security establishment, which is riddled with right-wingers who are not with
him at all—and he is not being frank with me about that.
For month after month the clashes continued, with varying degrees of intensity.
Police action to stamp out the violence merely curbed it temporarily. Not only
had it become endemic but there were signs that it was escalating out of control.
Since the 1970s, a culture of violence had developed among successive
generations of black youths. They had been at the forefront of the Soweto
uprising of the 1970s and the township revolt of the 1980s. At each stage the use
of violence had become more widespread and more extreme. For over a decade
their schooling had been disrupted by boycotts, protests and street battles. They
had become known as ‘the lost generation’. But they were also a generation
which had experienced raw power.

Now, in the political struggles of the 1990s, the same atmosphere of
revolutionary violence prevailed. Mandela himself had helped stoke up the mood
of defiance, declaring, in his first public address after his release from prison, the
need for the armed struggle to continue. For months on end, as the ANC
endeavoured to bolster its standing in confronting the government, it flaunted the
rhetoric of armed struggle, giving township activists licence to pursue opponents
at will. Their targets were often township councillors supporting Inkatha and
local police. In the first seven months of 1990, more than 400 attacks on black
councillors and police were recorded. Necklace executions once again became
commonplace. Guns, in particular AK-47s, were now readily available,
smuggled in mainly from Mozambique and Angola. The townships were hit not
just by political violence but by a soaring crime rate.
The Reef war added a new dimension. In response to the ferocious attacks
organised by hostel dwellers, young comrades in surrounding residential areas
and squatter camps set up self-defence units with the help of Umkhonto. Some
SDUs succeeded in offering protection for local communities, but others waged
an often indiscriminate war of retribution on hostel dwellers, widening the cycle
of violence. Some broke up into factions and engaged in their own form of
territorial warfare; others were taken over by criminal gangs, becoming
notorious for extortion, rape and murder, and adding to the soaring level of
violent crime. All lacked political control. At the base of this anarchic activity
was a vast underclass of youths roaming the streets—unskilled, unemployed,
undisciplined, fed on revolutionary slogans, but now angry and resentful of how
little the revolution had brought them.
Mandela endeavoured to address some of these issues at his public rallies. ‘I
must make it clear that the level of crime in our country must be eliminated,’ he
said on his homecoming to Soweto. ‘All students must return to school and
learn.’ But such simple exhortations were lost in the maelstrom.
Mandela’s belated efforts to reach an accommodation with Buthelezi were no
more successful. After hundreds of deaths, the ANC’s national executive
committee agreed in September 1990 to a summit meeting between Mandela and
Buthelezi. But it was not until the end of January 1991, after hundreds more
deaths, that it finally took place, at Durban’s Royal Hotel.
Buthelezi was in a truculent mood. Before arriving in Durban, he had
collected together statements made by ANC officials vilifying him from the

previous five years and he proceeded to read them out, page by page, to the
assembled delegates and the media. He then catalogued all the political
differences separating Inkatha and the ANC.
Mandela chose not to respond in kind. In his own speech, he went out of his
way to appease Buthelezi, thanking him for his efforts to secure his release from
prison and emphasising the common goals of their two organisations. The
summit ended with the signing of what was supposed to be a peace agreement
setting out a code of conduct for dealing with each other. But neither side
possessed the will to make it work. Within weeks, hundreds more had died.
The government blamed the ANC and Inkatha. The ANC blamed the
government. Inkatha and the ANC each blamed the police for supporting the
opposing faction. The police still refused to disarm Zulus carrying traditional
weapons. And so the killing went on.
But Mandela’s attitude towards de Klerk changed. He began to suspect that de
Klerk was pursuing a ‘double agenda’—talking to the ANC while at the same
time supporting the violent activities of its opponents. Every plea he made to de
Klerk for help in protecting ANC victims, like the Zonkizizwe squatters, failed
to get any response. Time and again, de Klerk would promise to ‘investigate’ but
did nothing. Mandela’s own standing among his supporters was being
undermined as a result. He began to fear that he had put too much trust in de
Klerk, as his critics in the ANC had argued all along.
In March 1991, Inkatha launched attacks in Alexandra township, north of
Johannesburg, and succeeded in gaining control of the Madala Hostel, a massive
building standing on a hill overlooking the township, which had formerly been
occupied by migrant workers from mixed ethnic groups. In three days of
fighting, forty-five people were killed. The government belatedly sent in police
and army reinforcements and declared Alexandra to be an ‘unrest area’ subject
to emergency control. Despite this, one week later, Inkatha was allowed to hold
a political rally there. Busloads of supporters, many armed with traditional
weapons, arrived from other areas. Six more people died that day. One week
later, at Daveytown, east of Johannesburg, police opened fire on an ANC
demonstration, causing at least twelve deaths.
The ANC was besieged with pleas for help, yet still Mandela could not get a
response from de Klerk. At a private symposium in Cape Town on 3 April
organised for visiting members of the United States Congress, Mandela launched

into a tirade against de Klerk, accusing him of connivance in the violence. He
had betrayed his trust, he said, and ignored his requests for help. The following
day, at a meeting of the ANC’s national executive committee, Mandela
apologised for the misjudgement he said he had made of de Klerk. His critics, he
said, had been right all along.
Mandela never regained his trust of de Klerk. Their personal relationship
henceforth was marked more by abrasive encounters than signs of cooperation.
Mandela now joined others on the national executive committee in advocating a
tougher line. In an open letter to the government, the ANC warned that talks
would be suspended in May unless the government agreed to seven demands.
These included the dismissal of Malan and Vlok; the dismantling of all army
counter-insurgency units; the banning of the carrying of traditional weapons in
public; the phasing out of migrant-worker hostels; and the appointment of an
independent commission to investigate complaints of police misconduct.
De Klerk’s response was to call a multiparty conference on violence in May.
But the ANC boycotted it on the grounds that the government already knew
what to do to bring the violence to an end. De Klerk in turn accused the ANC of
‘playing politics’ while parts of the country were left ‘ankle-deep in blood’.
The evidence of security force involvement in the mayhem, meanwhile,
steadily mounted. Press investigations revealed the fact that 200 Inkatha hit-men
had been trained secretly by South African military intelligence in the Caprivi
Strip in 1986, before being deployed in Natal and the Transvaal. Buthelezi
confirmed the training, but said the men had been attached to KwaZulu officials
to act as bodyguards. A former army sergeant alleged that a special forces unit
had been involved in train massacres and a string of other incidents. In June
1991, a former military intelligence officer claimed that the army was fully
involved in the funding and supply of weapons to Inkatha with the aim of
fanning violence. A defence force spokesman dismissed the allegations as
‘ridiculous’, but in July 1991, in what became known as Inkathagate, the
government was forced to admit that it had secretly channelled funds to Inkatha
and its affiliated trade union, Uwusa. Government funding for Uwusa had been
going on since its establishment six years previously. In the case of Inkatha, the
security police had given funds to help it organise two political rallies, one in
November 1989 and the other in March 1990, to shore up support for Buthelezi.
In an internal police memorandum, Major Louis Botha, head of the Durban
security police, reported that Buthelezi had thanked him profusely for the funds

and signed a receipt for them.
De Klerk’s reputation at home and abroad was irreparably damaged by the
disclosures. No longer did his denials that he was pursuing a ‘double agenda’
carry much weight. The worldwide acclaim he had received for launching his
reforms now seemed to belong to another era.
Buthelezi’s reputation suffered as well. For all his claims of independent
leadership, he was shown up to be dependent on hand-outs from Pretoria.
Inkatha, claimed Mandela, had ‘permitted itself to become an extension of the
Pretoria regime, its instrument and surrogate’.
For Mandela too, the disclosures caused considerable embarrassment,
providing ammunition for radical critics who questioned his judgement. He was
deeply shocked by the cavalier way in which de Klerk tried to gloss over the
scandal and continued to dismiss his complaints about security force
involvement in ‘third force’ activity. ‘We believed,’ he said, ‘that President de
Klerk was a man of integrity. But subsequent events have shown that perhaps we
were hasty and that there was a little bit of naïvety on our part because he has
turned out to be a totally different man from what he was initially.’

