CHAPTER 20

A STEP TO FREEDOM
DE KLERK HAD BEEN A DEDICATED DISCIPLE OF THE APARTHEID
system throughout his political career. He came from a prominent Afrikaner
family at the heart of the political establishment which had ruled South Africa
since 1948. His father, Jan, had served as a cabinet minister under three prime
ministers, including Verwoerd. His uncle by marriage, Hans Strijdom, was a
former prime minister outspoken in his support of white supremacy. His
grandfather, a friend of Paul Kruger, leader of the old Transvaal republic, had
also made his mark as an activist in the Afrikaner cause. The household in which
the young de Klerk grew up, therefore, was steeped in the traditions of Afrikaner
politics and history.
His own rise within the National Party was rapid. After establishing a
successful law practice in the Transvaal town of Vereeniging, he entered
parliament in 1972 and in 1978, at the age of forty-two, became the youngest
member of John Vorster’s cabinet. What was notable about his political record,
in seventeen years as a member of parliament and cabinet minister, was his rigid
loyalty to the National Party and all that it stood for. He conformed faithfully to
every party policy of the time. Over the years, he had spoken out adamantly
against integrated sport, mixed marriages, trade union rights for blacks and black
demands for permanent residence in white South Africa. Above all, he was a
forceful proponent of the National Party’s commitment to ‘group rights’—
keeping apart, wherever possible, South Africa’s four main racial groups. In
Botha’s government, he was given control of the white ‘own affairs’ portfolio
and distinguished himself as a zealous advocate of white interests. Whites, he
said in 1989, must be guaranteed a ‘community life, their own living areas,
schools, institutions and systems’. Each group should have its own power base,
he said, and make its own decisions about community issues.
In cabinet, de Klerk was noted for constantly throwing up obstacles to reform.
As minister of education, he fought to keep blacks out of white universities. He
also sponsored a bill that would have enabled him to use financial pressure to

force universities to crack down on anti-apartheid agitators on campus—a
measure that the Supreme Court subsequently ruled to be invalid. At a public
meeting in 1987, he urged whites to report people of other racial groups living in
segregated white areas, even though the authorities by then tended to ignore
informal integration. When the verligte foreign minister, Pik Botha, suggested in
1986 that South Africa might one day have a black president, it was de Klerk,
rather than P. W. Botha, who insisted that he should publicly retract his
statement. In his eleven years in cabinet, there was not a single piece of reform
with which de Klerk had been associated.
When the time came to choose a new head of the National Party after Botha’s
sudden and unexpected resignation from the post in February 1989, de Klerk
was the favoured candidate of the verkrampte camp, which wanted to stand fast
against further reform and believed that he was the man to do it. The verligte
camp, meanwhile, put forward three candidates, split the vote and enabled de
Klerk to be elected. As head of the National Party, he was in line to succeed
Botha as president.
Examining his record, the press considered it unlikely that de Klerk would get
to grips with the fundamental issues facing South Africa any more than Botha
had. De Klerk had never shown any particular flair or talent. He was amiable,
shrewd and polished but without charisma or vision. Above all else, he was a
party man. His main difference from Botha was that he appeared to be more
open and communicative. It was noted that his wife, Marike, was an archconservative. In a speech she gave at an old-age home, she had referred
contemptuously to Coloureds as ‘a negative group of ‘non-persons’ who were
South Africa’s historic ‘leftovers’.
His older brother, a prominent verligte and newspaper editor, had no great
expectations of him. ‘He is too strongly convinced that racial grouping is the
only truth, way and life,’ Willem de Klerk wrote in a magazine article published
in March 1989. ‘He is too dismissive of a more radical style.’ He predicted that
his brother would follow a cautious, centrist path, holding ‘the middle ground by
means of clever footwork, small compromises, drawn-out studies and planned
processes, effective diplomacy and growing authority through balanced
leadership and control’. That, Willem wrote, ‘is his style, his nature, his talent
and his conviction’. So, there would be no leap of faith in a liberal direction.
From the vantage point of the president’s office, however, de Klerk began a

reassessment of South Africa’s prospects. Forty years of National Party rule had
left the white population powerful and prosperous; the Afrikaner community, in
particular, had fared well, fulfilling their long-held ambition of acquiring wealth,
skills and economic strength. The government’s ability to defend the apartheid
system was still formidable. Its powers of repression had hardly been tested. Its
security forces were more than a match for any threat from either township
activists or trained guerrillas. It possessed enough allies within the black
community—homeland leaders, urban politicians, vigilante groups—to make the
system work. At a regional level, its hegemony over southern Africa remained
unchallenged. At an international level, despite the world-wide opprobrium that
South Africa aroused, it faced no serious threat; sanctions were a costly rather
than a damaging imposition.
What struck de Klerk, in assessing the government’s options, was the lack of
any viable political strategy. The whole emphasis of Botha’s policy in recent
years had been security management. South Africa was, in effect, being ruled by
security managers with enormous powers at their disposal. All Botha’s efforts to
lure ‘moderate’ African leaders into a dialogue with the government, offering
them a ‘national forum’ in which to make their views known, had come to
naught. Not a single reputable African politician had stepped forward to support
it. Even conservative leaders like KwaZulu’s Chief Buthelezi demanded far
more from Botha, including the release of Mandela and the lifting of the ban on
the ANC, before they were willing to enter negotiations.
De Klerk had long been mindful of the need to find a political accommodation
with the black population. While acting zealously to protect white interests, he
acknowledged that blacks too had an equal right to run their own institutions.
‘We must provide for urban blacks own political institutions, own political
power bases, own legislatures, own executives, so that they can get the same
degree of self-determination as the “homeland” blacks, as the whites have within
the House of Assembly and as the Coloureds have in their own Chamber,’ he
said in 1987. ‘When that is attained, every South African will elect leaders with
important and visible powers.’
The advice he received in 1989 from several quarters, from senior figures in
the Broederbond, from the National Intelligence Service, from verligte
politicians in the cabinet and from other prominent Afrikaner intellectuals and
journalists, was that the modernised form of apartheid he envisaged would no
longer work. If the whites were to preserve the power and privileges they had

enjoyed for so long, a more fundamental change was needed. While the
government faced no immediate difficulty, the longer political reform was
delayed, the weaker its position would become. Without reform, the cycle of
black opposition would become increasingly widespread and violent. The fate of
neighbouring Rhodesia, where the white-minority leader, Ian Smith, had turned
down one favourable deal after another, only to find himself embroiled in a
seven-year long guerrilla war and negotiating a belated settlement which led to
the advent of a Marxist government, provided a potent example. ‘When the
opportunity was there for real constructive negotiations, it was not grasped,’
concluded de Klerk. ‘We must not make that mistake.’ A phrase that Pieter de
Lange, the Broederbond chairman, used in a memorandum advocating reform
became embedded in de Klerk’s thinking: ‘The greatest risk is not to take any
risk.’ De Klerk later remarked, ‘We had to escape from a corner where
everything stagnated into confrontation.’
De Klerk’s dilemma, however, once he had accepted the argument that a new
political dispensation was necessary, was that there was no way of embarking on
negotiations for one without the inclusion of the ANC. No credible African
leader would participate until Mandela had been released and the ban on the
ANC was lifted. But the risks for de Klerk in doing so were considerable. The
government had devoted years of propaganda to telling South Africa’s whites
that the ANC was a bunch of communist terrorists. It had repeatedly committed
itself not to negotiate with any leader or organisation engaged in violence. By
abandoning this position, it would be conceding a significant victory to the
ANC. The result might be further violence as black radicals took to the streets to
push the revolution forwards. Moreover, any concession to the ANC was bound
to undermine his support within the white community and boost the threat from
his right-wing opponents which he constantly feared.
On the other hand, the timing for a new initiative seemed propitious. The
collapse of socialist governments in Eastern Europe in 1989 not only deprived
the ANC of one of its main sources of financial, logistical and military support
but also undermined its sense of ideological direction. The Soviet Union,
meanwhile, had made clear its intention of disentangling itself from regional
conflicts. A deal in 1989 over the independence of neighbouring Namibia, which
South Africa controlled, required the withdrawal of Cuban troops from Angola,
once seen as part of the communist threat to South Africa. In a matter of months,
the spectre of ‘total onslaught’ which had dominated government thinking

during the Botha era, receded. The fear that the ANC could be used as ‘a Trojan
horse’ by the Soviet Union fell away. De Klerk’s principal strategist, Gerrit
Viljoen, a former head of the Broederbond, recalled, ‘We recognised it as a
unique opportunity in the course of history, a God-given opportunity—we
thought of it very much in Christian terms—to ensure that conflict in South
Africa could be resolved.’
De Klerk quickly grasped the importance of these strategic openings. He was
not a man driven by any sense of moral imperative about the need to bring
apartheid to an end. The church to which he belonged, the Gereformeerde Kerk,
the strictest of the Dutch Reformed Churches, had spent decades justifying the
apartheid system on biblical and moral grounds. De Klerk himself believed
firmly that apartheid had been an ‘honourable’ attempt to assist the separate
development of black tribal groups as well as whites. It was only ‘wrong’, he
once said, because it had become ‘unworkable’. He also carried with him none
of the ideological baggage which had so influenced previous National Party
leaders. He was essentially a pragmatist, determined above all else to protect
Afrikaner interests. Group rights remained his lodestar and he was confident of
securing them in any new political dispensation.
De Klerk found that considerable preparatory work had already been
undertaken. Mandela’s persistent efforts since 1986 to establish a dialogue with
the government had done much to foster a climate conducive to negotiations.
Both Kobie Coetsee and Niel Barnard were convinced that Mandela was a man
with whom the government could do business. By inviting Mandela to tea at
Tuynhuys, whatever his motives, Botha had already accorded him a measure of
respectability that belied years of government propaganda.
Other reports that de Klerk received were also promising. A group of
prominent Afrikaners regularly meeting ANC officials in secret in England were
impressed by the ANC’s willingness to enter realistic discussions. Among the
group was Willem de Klerk, who, after each meeting he attended, wrote a frank
assessment of ANC intentions which he passed on to his brother. He spoke of
the meetings as ‘a bridge-building exercise’ notable for producing a degree of
understanding between the two asides.
In August 1989, the ANC set out publicly for the first time its proposals on
how to proceed towards a negotiated settlement. ‘A conjuncture of
circumstances exists which, if there is a demonstrable readiness on the part of

the Pretoria regime to engage in negotiations genuinely and seriously, could
create the possibility to end apartheid through negotiation, ’ said the ANC’s
Harare Declaration. It listed five preconditions for negotiation: lifting the state of
emergency; ending restrictions on political activity; legalising all political
organisations; releasing all political prisoners; and stopping all armed violence,
enabling constitutional negotiations to proceed.
On his journeys abroad, de Klerk was readily assured by Western
governments of support if he changed course. From one capital to the next, the
advice he was given was the same: lift the ban on the ANC, release political
prisoners and start talks. He was left in no doubt that any initiative he took which
excluded the ANC would be dismissed by Western governments as worthless.
The mood of much of the white population favoured change. A new
generation of white South Africans disliked being treated as pariahs by the rest
of the world, subjected to sports boycotts, travel bans, trade sanctions and hostile
comments. Businessmen were adamant about the need for a more stable political
system that would encourage economic growth and rid South Africa of the cost
of sanctions. Economic prosperity was becoming more important to white South
Africa than racial division.
A general election in September 1989 provided some clue as to where the
white population stood. De Klerk, fearing the threat from extreme right-wing
parties vehemently opposed to reform, campaigned on a right-wing platform,
denouncing as traitors white liberal opponents who had been in contact with the
ANC and standing firm in defence of group rights. He made no mention of any
political initiative. The result gave the National Party a thin margin of victory.
Only 48 per cent of 2.2 million whites voted for the National Party, the first time
in thirty years it had received less than an absolute majority. The extreme rightwing Conservative Party gained about 30 per cent of the vote. The liberal
Democratic Party took 21 per cent. In the months ahead, de Klerk was to argue
that two-thirds of the white electorate—the National Party vote plus the
Democratic Party vote—had given him a mandate for reform.
The first sign of change came one week after the election when de Klerk,
against the advice of his own security managers, gave permission for a
demonstration against police brutality to proceed through the streets of Cape
Town, an event that during the Botha era would have resulted in outright
repression. The shock for many whites of seeing on the television news the

spectacle of tens of thousands of anti-apartheid demonstrators swarming through
Cape Town was considerable. De Klerk reasoned that if he did not permit
orderly demonstrations, then he would soon face disorderly ones.
His next step signalled far more radical change ahead. In October, Walter
Sisulu, Ahmed Kathrada and four other ANC life prisoners were set free after
twenty-five years’ imprisonment. Sisulu was dropped off at his small, redbricked house in Soweto in a police van. His homecoming, at the age of seventyseven, was marked by one of the greatest celebrations that Soweto had ever
experienced. At home to welcome him was his beloved Albertina, whose own
ordeal during his years in prison had matched that of Winnie Mandela. As well
as her own spells of imprisonment, solitary confinement and house arrest, one of
Albertina’s sons had been banned and detained, another had served a prison
sentence for resistance activity and yet another son and daughter had gone into
exile. Yet through it all, Albertina had been a rock of stability. The Sisulus
settled down to a ‘second’ marriage better, they said, than the first: this time
there were no restrictions, no banning orders, no police raids, no prison.
Mandela was the last of the Rivonia group to remain in prison. Mbeki had left
in 1987 and now the others had gone. Mandela had negotiated their release
during the secret sessions of Coetsee’s committee and he expected his own to
follow soon. His discussions with the committee, meanwhile, continued to range
widely over political issues, taking on greater significance with the addition of
Gerrit Viljoen, de Klerk’s principal strategist, to the team.
On 12 December, Mandela was taken to the president’s office in Cape Town,
to the same room where he had sipped tea with Botha. The encounter was
amicable and businesslike. ‘He met me on the basis of equality and discussed
issues objectively,’ Mandela recalled. Mandela was impressed by de Klerk’s
willingness to listen. Mandela made clear his opposition to the idea of ‘group
rights’, which he saw as a means of perpetuating white domination. De Klerk
replied that group rights were intended to deal with the problem of white fears of
black domination, an issue which Mandela himself acknowledged needed to be
addressed. Mandela’s response was that the idea of group rights did more to
increase black suspicions than to allay white fears, at which de Klerk rejoined,
‘We will have to change it, then.’
Mandela raised the question of his own release. There was no point in his
leaving prison unless the ban on the ANC was also lifted, since he would then be

working for an illegal organisation and face arrest once more. The best way
forward, he said, was to unban all illegal organisations, release all political
prisoners and lift the state of emergency, as the ANC had demanded. De Klerk
listened carefully. By the end of the meeting, Mandela had concluded that de
Klerk was a man with whom he could do business.
De Klerk had yet to decide how far to take his reforms. The issues were
thrashed out at a special bush conference, or bosberaad, in northwestern
Transvaal in December, attended by the entire cabinet and some fifty officials
and advisers. There was heated debate about the lifting of the ban on political
organisations, in particular the Communist Party. The defence minister, Magnus
Malan, a leading figure in the ‘total onslaught’ school, argued vehemently
against unbanning the Communist Party. Others pointed out that if any
opposition group remained unbanned, its allies would launch vociferous
campaigns in its support, undermining the credit the government would
otherwise gain.
De Klerk believed that there would be considerable advantage in seizing the
initiative and capturing the ‘moral high ground’. The government was acting
from a position of strength and would continue to do so. Its ability to remain
firmly in control was not in doubt. The chances were that the ANC, poorly
organised and ill-prepared for peace, would fall into disarray, leaving the
government to forge ahead in a new alliance with conservative black leaders like
Buthelezi and moderate black organisations.
Only a handful of trusted advisers were privy in advance to the decisions de
Klerk announced in parliament in Cape Town on 2 February 1990. He did not
inform the National Party’s parliamentary caucus. He did not even tell his wife.
No one expected such sweeping measures.
In a calm, confident manner, de Klerk announced that he was lifting the ban
on the whole spectrum of liberation organisations: the African National
Congress, Umkhonto we Sizwe, the South African Communist Party and the
Pan-Africanist Congress. He further announced that emergency regulations
would be eased; media restrictions would be abolished; political prisoners would
be released; exiles would be allowed to return home; capital punishment would
be suspended; and apartheid laws like the Separate Amenities Act would be
repealed. ‘It is time for us to break out of the cycle of violence and break
through to peace and reconciliation,’ he declared, outlining new aims towards

which the government would work. These included a new democratic
constitution, universal franchise and the protection of minorities as well as of
individual rights. He asked black leaders to join him. ‘Walk through the door
and take your place at the negotiating table together with the government,’ he
said. ‘The time for negotiations has come.’
De Klerk left his announcement about Mandela’s release for his grande finale.
Mandela, he said, ‘could play an important part’ in negotiations for a peaceful
settlement. He would be released ‘unconditionally’ and ‘without delay’.
The boldness of de Klerk’s reforms set South Africa on an entirely new
course. In effect, he had pronounced the death sentence of apartheid. The central
issue had always been political power. None of the reforms hitherto
implemented by National Party leaders had come close to addressing that issue.
Now, in a stroke, de Klerk had conceded one-person one-vote and opened the
way for its attainment. But the route there was to be marked by greater turmoil
than anything South Africa had previously experienced.

The arrangement for Mandela’s release were soon enmeshed in argument. On 9
February, seven days after de Klerk’s announcement, Mandela was taken to
Tuynhuys, where de Klerk informed him that he would be released in
Johannesburg the following day. Mandela was intensely annoyed at de Klerk’s
decision to free him without consultation and without warning. He told de Klerk
that he needed a week’s notice so that proper preparations could be made both
by his family and by party officials; otherwise the results would be chaos. He
wanted to be able to walk out of the gates of Victor Verster to visit nearby Paarl
to thank the people there for their kindness during his stay there, and then to
address a public meeting in Cape Town. Cape Town had been his home for
nearly three decades. He would make his own way back to Johannesburg in his
own time, he said.
Negotiations over the exact time and place of his release continued for five
hours. Mandela remembered the experience as ‘a conflict between my blood and
my brains’, wanting to leave prison as soon as possible but recognising the risks
in doing so. The difficulty for de Klerk was that the government had already told
the foreign press of Mandela’s imminent release and could not afford delay. The
compromise eventually reached was that Mandela would be released from Victor
Verster prison at precisely 3 p.m. on Sunday 11 February. De Klerk poured

glasses of whisky to mark the occasion. Mandela, disliking strong spirits,
pretended to drink. He left the meeting in a thoroughly bad mood.
On the morning of 11 February, Mandela rose at dawn and went through a
shortened version of his exercise routine. The prison doctor called by to give him
a brief examination. Mandela joked, ‘It’s a bit late to find something wrong.’
Members of his reception committee arrived to discuss the day’s schedule. They
dismissed Mandela’s idea of making his first speech to the citizens of Paarl.
They wanted him instead to drive, as planned, straight to the Grand Parade in
Cape Town to address a mass rally of supporters from the balcony of City Hall.
A crowd of thousands had been gathering there since the early morning. The
details of Mandela’s speech had been worked over for hours. Many ANC
officials were worried by the rumours circulating about his secret talks with
government officials which had created the suspicion that he had done a deal
with them. They felt it important that Mandela should make clear his loyalty to
the ANC and to the party line.
The house was soon full of dozens of people. Amid all the excitement and
activity, Mandela took time to say warm farewells to the prison staff who had
become his friends. To Warrant Officer Gregory, who had known him for
twenty-three years, he wrote a short note: ‘The wonderful hours we spent
together during the last two decades end today. But you will always be in my
thoughts.’ The two men shook hands and embraced. ‘We will see each other
again,’ said Mandela.
The schedule for his release soon began to go awry. Winnie’s party, flying in
from Johannesburg, arrived late. The final meal was delayed. It was 4 p.m.
before the cavalcade of cars taking him to Cape Town was ready to leave. As
Mandela was driven through the prison grounds, the families of prison guards,
all of them white, stood in their gardens and waved goodbye.
Within sight of the prison gates, Mandela alighted and, with a slightly fragile
air, walked the last few yards, hand-in-hand with Winnie, towards a waiting
crowd of supporters and the ranks of the world’s media.
The size of the crowd, plus the hundreds of photographers, television crews
and reporters gathered to witness the occasion, astounded him. He had expected
no more than a few dozen people. ‘Only when I saw the crowd did I realize that I
had not thought carefully enough about the events of the day,’ he said later. As
everyone pressed to get nearer, Mandela and Winnie were hustled back into their

car and driven away through the throng.
On his way to Cape Town, passing through the vineyards and orchards of
some of the richest Afrikaner farms in the country, Mandela remarked on the
number of whites he saw standing by the side of the road to catch a glimpse of
him. Some even saluted as he drove by. He was to mention it again and again
over the next few days. The numbers were, in fact, relatively small, but that they
were there at all impressed him. At one point, he stopped the car to thank a white
family for their support.
The mood of the crowds awaiting Mandela in Grand Parade had meanwhile
become increasingly restless. By mid-afternoon, some 50,000 people had
assembled in front of the City Hall, where a huge banner had been draped over
the upper balcony saying ‘Nelson Mandela, the nation welcomes you home’. On
the edge of the square, groups of youths began breaking into shops and looting
them. The police retaliated with shotguns and pistols. An emergency aid post
was soon filled with scores of wounded victims. When ANC officials appealed
for calm and discipline, they were rewarded with jeers, whistles and slow
handclaps. Skirmishes between youths and police continued for hours while the
crowd waited for Mandela’s arrival. Much of the blame for the disorder on
Grand Parade that day was attributed to the ANC’s poor organisation.
When Mandela’s car eventually reached Grand Parade, the driver, instead of
taking him to the rear of the City Hall as planned, tried to find a way through the
crowd at the front. The car was soon engulfed by a sea of people pressing close,
hammering on the windows, the bonnet, the boot. For more than an hour,
Mandela was trapped by his own supporters while ANC officials struggled to
secure an exit route for the car. Once freed, the driver, instead of heading for the
rear entrance, sped away from City Hall just to avoid the crowds. To calm him
down, Mandela gave him directions to the house of his attorney, Dullah Omar.
He had been there for only a few minutes when an agitated telephone call came
through from Archbishop Desmond Tutu at the City Hall telling him that unless
he arrived soon there might be serious disturbances.
By the time Mandela finally reached City Hall, it was almost dark. Most of the
crowd had dispersed and the 10,000 or so who remained found it difficult to see
him. Mandela also discovered at the last moment, as he reached for his speech,
that he had left his reading spectacles behind at Victor Verster. Fortunately, he
was able to use a pair belonging to Winnie, but they were ill-fitting and kept

slipping from his nose.
The speech that Mandela made that evening, the first public speech he had
made since the Rivonia trial, was broadcast around the world. It was a crude,
partisan speech, reflecting the narrow, parochial interests of ANC officials who
had had a hand in drafting it at Victor Verster. There was no sense of vision or
wider purpose, no call for national reconciliation. It consisted mainly of
messages that party officials wanted to transmit to their own constituency.
Mandela went to great lengths to allay suspicions that he had done a secret
deal with the government. He was, he said, ‘a loyal and disciplined’ member of
the ANC. ‘My talks with the government have been aimed at normalising the
political situation in the country,’ he said. ‘I wish to stress that I myself have at
no time entered into negotiations about the future of the country, except to insist
on a meeting between the ANC and the government . . . Negotiations cannot take
place above the heads or behind the backs of our people.’
The armed struggle would continue, he said, until the conditions were right for
negotiations to start. The government had yet to fulfil the ANC’s demands for
lifting the state of emergency and releasing political prisoners. This was not the
time for the ANC to relax its efforts: ‘Now is the time to intensify the struggle
on all fronts.’
He paid tribute to a long list of organisations for their contribution to the
struggle and made the point of singling out for special praise his old friend Joe
Slovo, the Communist Party’s general secretary—‘one of our finest patriots’.
Mixed in with the party rhetoric were a few conciliatory remarks: ‘We express
the hope that a climate conducive to a negotiated settlement would be created
soon so that there may no longer be the need for the armed struggle.’ De Klerk,
he said, had gone further than any other National Party leader in taking ‘real
steps to normalise the situation’. In words that would come to haunt him, he
described de Klerk as ‘a man of integrity’. But the overall tone was
uncompromising.
It was a speech which raised doubts about the quality of Mandela’s leadership.
Was he a man who would inspire his people to make peace and achieve national
reconciliation or would he stir up anew black militancy against whites? To
whites, his speech seemed needlessly militant. To many blacks, it seemed
ambiguous, calling them to arms at one moment and suggesting negotiations the
next.

Mandela spent his first night of freedom at Bishopscourt, the elegant residence
of the Anglican archbishop, Desmond Tutu, in an affluent suburb on the slopes
of Devil’s Peak. Tutu himself had long been a prominent anti-apartheid activist,
receiving the Nobel Peace Prize in 1984.
The next morning, in the garden at Bishopscourt, Mandela faced the world’s
media, presenting a very different image from the night before. He exuded an
inner calm and confidence, displaying a spirit of generosity entirely missing
from his Grand Parade address. His charm of manner captivated journalists. He
answered questions with an agility and ease that they found all the more
remarkable because of his years of isolation from the modern world. He
graciously paid tribute to the press for remembering him and his colleagues
during their long ordeal, and when he recognised the names of questioners
familiar to him from his endless reading of newspapers, he greeted them in
personal terms. Most remarkable of all was the absence of any trace of bitterness
about his long years of imprisonment.
His message now was full of hope and conciliation. He recognised, he said,
that whites were concerned about the demand for one-person one-vote and
wanted structural guarantees to ensure that they were not dominated by blacks:
‘We understand that fear. The whites are fellow South Africans. We want them
to feel safe.’ He appealed to them to help build a new South Africa: ‘We
appreciate the contribution they made towards the development of this country.’
He referred again to de Klerk as ‘a man of integrity’. In his discussions with
him, de Klerk had proved to be very flexible:
As an organisation, of course, we are concerned not so much with the personal
virtues of an individual. Our policy and strategies are determined by the harsh
reality of the fact that the National Party has a policy which is not progressive.
And that is what determines our attitude. But I am confident that, if Mr de Klerk
is able to carry the National Party with him in the new line he has taken, he
himself wants to normalise the situation as soon as possible. Therefore I think
that very soon obstacles to negotiation will be removed and it will be possible
for us to sit down and talk.
It was a masterly performance. At the end of the conference, the journalists
present, some 300 in all, broke all professional rules and burst into applause,
something most of them had never done before. The press that morning had been
highly critical of the previous day’s mayhem on Grand Parade and of the tenor

of his speech from the balcony. In a matter of fifty minutes, Mandela had won
them over.
From Cape Town, Mandela and Winnie then flew to Johannesburg. Mandela
was determined to live in their house in Orlando West, no. 8115, which held so
many memories for him, even though it was now too small for his needs. Since
the fire in 1988, it had been solidly rebuilt, but it still consisted of only four
rooms. He rejected suggestions that he should move to Winnie’s mansion in
Beverly Hills, considering it both too ostentatious and too remote from the
community. But on arriving in Johannesburg, he was told that the house in
Orlando was surrounded by a throng of supporters, so he was obliged to stay at a
friend’s in the northern suburbs.
The following day, he was given a tumultuous welcome at a football stadium
in Soweto packed to capacity and surrounded by even greater crowds outside. It
was only then, after the rally had ended, that Mandela finally returned home,
after twenty-seven years.

Mandela was asked once how different was the man who emerged from prison
after twenty-seven years from the one who went in. He replied, with
characteristic brevity, ‘I came out mature.’ Mandela disliked talking about
himself and allowed few glimpses of his personal thoughts or emotions. The
years of his imprisonment had turned him into a intensely private person. Even
with his closest friends, his true feelings remained hidden. He was anxious never
to betray the slightest sign of weakness either to them or to prison staff,
determined to stifle the anger that lay within. Self-control became an abiding
habit. On his release, he was articulate and fluent in discussing political matters,
but uneasy and reticent when asked to describe his emotions as he came out of
prison. ‘I must confess that I am unable to describe my emotions,’ he replied. ‘I
was completely overwhelmed by the enthusiasm. It is something I did not
expect. I would be merely rationalising if I told you that I am able to describe
my own feelings. It was breathtaking, that’s all I can say.’ His close friend
Amina Cachalia, who had known him for forty years, observed,’ He had to learn
how to communicate again.’
He preferred to discuss his role as a member of a team of colleagues than his
position as an individual. ‘I find it difficult to personalise the collective
experience of prison.’ The comradeship of his fellow prisoners, their strength in

adversity, was one of his favourite themes.
But there were other themes that were unexpected. Mandela did not regard his
years in prison as wasted. ‘One of the advantages was the ability to sit down and
to think,’ he said. ‘We had the opportunity of reflecting on past mistakes and
planning how we would handle problems when we were released from prison. It
was a rewarding experience.’
Not once did Mandela express bitterness towards the white community for his
ordeal, only against the system they imposed. The cause of non-racial
democracy, he knew, could only be impeded by hatred and resentment of the
white community. It was the knowledge that the cause for which he had been
imprisoned was morally right that had done so much to fortify him there. ‘It was
not so much the inner strength of any individual that enabled us to go through
some of the harshest experiences you can imagine, but that we stood for a good
cause.’ That cause would only be undermined by any expression of racial
animosity.
He often felt anger about whites, he said, but not hatred. His hatred was
directed at the system. His anger was directed at individuals, never against
whites as a group. ‘I have felt anger, especially at the police, who have subjected
my wife and family to harassment while I was in prison. But anger is a
temporary feeling. You soon forget it, particularly if you are involved in positive
activities and attitudes.’
Though warders in prison were part of a repressive system, he judged them
individually and formed friendships with some. ‘We had many friends among
warders who tried as much as possible to make our conditions as comfortable as
possible.’ He cited the example of James Gregory: ‘Even though Gregory was a
warder and had to carry out unpopular and even repressive policies, as an
individual he was a gentleman and we became great friends.’ It was the attitude
of such men that ‘wiped out any bitterness which a man could have’ about losing
twenty-seven years of his life.
While the outside world had expected Mandela to dwell on the suffering he
and his colleagues had endured in prison, he himself was more interested in
explaining what they had learned there, the understanding they had gained, the
reasons for their lack of bitterness, the strength of their commitment to
democracy which had sustained them. The example he set was of profound
importance. For, if after twenty-seven years in prison, Mandela could emerge

insisting on reconciliation, it undermined the demands of those seeking revenge
and retribution.
Only on one issue, the persecution of Winnie and their two daughters, was
Mandela forthcoming about his own personal feelings. He spoke of the pain and
guilt he felt at knowing that his family was exposed to harassment and insecurity
without him there to protect them: ‘It is not a nice feeling for a man to see his
family struggling, without security, without the dignity of the head of the
family.’ Their suffering, he said, was greater than his own. Mandela made it
clear that he felt he owed Winnie a huge debt for what she had endured on his
behalf. It was a debt, he said, that he intended to pay off now that he was free. In
the coming months Winnie was to exploit to the full his sense of guilt for her
own benefit.
Old friends remarked on how much his appearance and his manner had
changed. Hilda Bernstein, whose family used to know him as ‘the giant’, noted,
after her first meeting with him:
Nelson has changed a lot. He is still so upright, bearing himself with dignity, but
he is thin, his face, once round and full-cheeked, has narrowed; his eyes, the
voice, the smile are the same, but the prison years have robbed him of his air of
fun and gaiety. He is sober, immensely dignified, conscious of the expectations
arising from the role into which he has been cast.
Reporters watching him descend the stone steps in the gardens at
Bishopscourt observed how he walked with the stiff gait of an elderly
gentleman. Despite his aristocratic bearing, he seemed at times almost frail.
There was much speculation about the state of his health, about whether, at the
age of seventy-one, he would stand up to the stresses and strains of leadership in
the days that lay ahead. The years in prison had taken their toll. He had suffered
from high blood pressure, from tuberculosis and from back pains. He was also
afflicted by an eye ailment acquired as a result of working in the lime quarry; his
eyes were sensitive to sharp light. Mandela himself admitted ‘there are signs of
old age, wear and tear, which we must expect’. But he described his health as
‘reasonably good’ and pointed out that each day he continued with the same set
of rigorous exercises he had carried out in prison over the years. Concern about
his health was to mount in coming months as he put himself through a punishing
schedule of rallies, meetings, press conference, interviews and long trips abroad.
In prison, Mandela’s dream of what he would do when he was set free was to

take a leisurely drive to the Transkei, to visit the village of Qunu where he grew
up and to wander in the hills and valleys where he had played as a boy. Yet so
great were the demands upon him that it was to be several months before he
managed to get to Qunu.
What he craved for most of all was to resume the settled family life that he
had forsaken when he went underground in 1961. Yet that too was to be denied
him. For Winnie, the focus of all his longing in prison, showed no interest in
sharing the intimacies of married life with him. She had found a new lover, half
her age, and she made it clear that she had no intention of giving him up.
Thus Mandela’s homecoming did not bring the joy and happiness for which
had yearned so long. But as with all the other suffering he had endured, he hid
the pain and humiliation behind the mask which he had become accustomed to
wearing.

The task facing Mandela was daunting. The ANC had been plunged into deep
disarray by the unexpected change in government policy. Its entire strategy for
more than twenty years had been based on plans for a revolutionary seizure of
power, not on the possibility of peaceful negotiations. Trained guerrillas,
brought up on songs about how Um - khonto would march across the Limpopo
to take Pretoria by storm, hankered for action. Many activists in the townships
were equally reluctant to forgo the prospect of revolution. Distrust of the
government’s intentions was intense. Many were convinced that de Klerk’s
reforms were no more than a device to subvert the armed struggle. Within the
ANC’s hierarchy in exile, there had long been disagreement between a small
group amenable to the idea of negotiations and a far larger group committed to
armed struggle outright. The Harare Declaration in August 1989 setting out a
host of preconditions to negotiation had aroused fierce controversy which
remained unresolved. This division between those who wanted to seize power
and those who had advocated a negotiated compromise was to afflict the ANC
for years to come.
Mandela himself was distrusted. Rumours of his involvement in secret talks
with the government had led many to conclude that he had gone soft. ‘The word
was,’ said Mac Maharaj, ‘that Madiba was wearing a three-piece suit, drinking
wine, you name it, he was a sell-out.’ Prominent activists inside South Africa
questioned his right to leadership and pointedly referred to him as ‘an ordinary

ANC member’.
The disarray within the ANC was compounded by the illness of Oliver
Tambo. In August 1989, after presiding over the drafting of the Harare
Declaration, he had suffered a stroke, leaving him partially paralysed and
depriving the ANC of a guiding hand at a critical time. The vacuum in
leadership still had to be filled.
New tensions emerged between the external wing of the ANC and its internal
surrogate, the United Democratic Front. In exile, the ANC had been used to
acting as a secretive, autocratic organisation. Decisions had been taken by a
revolutionary council and passed down the chain of command. The covert nature
of operations meant that there had been little room for dissent. Those who
opposed the party were more than likely to be accused of being collaborators. Its
headquarters were a cramped, single-storey building off an alleyway in
downtown Lusaka, where it had gained a reputation for chronic inefficiency. Its
guerrilla army was notably unsuccessful. The casualty rate for MK guerrillas
entering South Africa was high; many of those who were captured were turned
into informers and used to assassinate colleagues. A senior defence force
official, General Constand Viljoen, described MK as ‘the weakest of enemies’,
while an internal ANC document produced in early 1990 admitted, ‘We do not
have the capacity within our country to intensify the armed struggle in a
meaningful way.’ Yet the idea of revolution, of being a revolutionary
organisation, still held immense appeal. The standing of Umkhonto within the
liberation movement remained high. And the secretive, tightly-knit clique which
had made all the ANC’s decisions for more than twenty years had no intention of
letting their authority slip away.
However, the internal leaders of the UDF, which had borne the brunt of the
struggle against the government during the 1980s, were as determined as the
ANC’s ‘old guard’ to maintain their own spheres of influence. As a coalition of
more than 600 groups, community organisations, youth groups and trade union
affiliates, the UDF had evolved a tradition of politics that was highly democratic
and decentralised, based on constant contact and discussion between officials
and supporters and collective decision-making—a style that was entirely alien to
the Lusaka exiles. Scores of local and regional leaders were used to operating
from independent power bases of their own and were hostile to the idea of taking
orders from a national executive.

There were tensions too as different generations of leadership asserted
themselves: the elderly veterans of the 1950s, like Mandela, emerging from
years of imprisonment; the Soweto generation of the 1970s, who in exile had
served as guerrilla commissars; and the radical young leaders of the 1980s’
internal revolt, with their trade union allies, who had provided much of the
backbone of anti-government protest.
Mandela’s task, after first re-establishing his own leadership credentials, was
to weld this massive, disorganised and restless constituency into a coherent
political force capable of negotiating a transfer of power from a government
possessing huge advantages and determined to secure for itself all the power it
felt was needed to protect white interests.
Two weeks after his release, Mandela flew to Lusaka to give the ANC’s
hierarchy a full account of his dealings with the government and to convince
them that the time was right to pursue negotiations. There remained strong
distrust of the government’s intentions, but Mandela succeeded in removing
doubts about his own role and in overcoming some of the resistance to the idea
of negotiations. Of crucial importance, Mandela managed to win over
Umkhonto’s chief of staff, Chris Hani, a hardline guerrilla commander well
known for supporting attacks on white civilian targets. ‘I think we’re going to
learn from him that we need to be better South Africans,’ said Hani, ‘to forgive
and forget and to look forward to building a new South Africa.’
Mandela quickly became close to the ANC’s old guard. He was nominated to
join the thirty-five members of the national executive committee based in
Lusaka and given the rank of deputy president. He felt more at ease in their
company than in the rumbustious world of the UDF, where his freedom of
leadership was constantly challenged. He possessed a strong authoritarian streak
and a preference for taking action on his own responsibility, for dealing directly
with other leaders rather than waiting for consultations to be completed. His
independent style of leadership frequently brought him into conflict with party
officials inside South Africa, who insisted upon consultation and set out to curb
his autonomy of action. Outwardly, at press conference and public rallies,
Mandela appeared to speak with undisputed authority. In reality, he had to
struggle to assert his authority and was often outmanoeuvred.
Among the intrigues surrounding Mandela’s leadership, Winnie was hard at
work with her own agenda, seeking to control access to her husband. She swiftly

took revenge on the group of prominent activists who had publicly condemned
her involvement in the criminal activities of the Mandela Football Club,
endeavouring to exclude them from the inner circle. Several people received
threatening telephone calls. ‘Stay away from Mandela,’ Winnie told one
prominent activist, Azhur Cachalia. ‘If you don’t, you’ll see what will happen.’
Winnie also enlisted Mandela’s help to further her own ambitions for high
office within the ANC. Her drive for party posts was unrelenting. She began by
seeking election as head of the ANC branch and the Women’s League in
Orlando West to give her a local power base. Mandela dutifully went from door
to door, calling on residents to vote for her. She then set her sights on regional
and national posts. Mandela indulged her, seemingly oblivious of her true nature
and also of the risks to his own reputation in doing so. The full horror of
Mandela United was soon to be played out in public during the trials of its
members for murder.
Mandela also succumbed to pressure to move out of his ‘matchbox’ house in
Orlando into Winnie’s fifteen-room mansion in Diepkloof Extension which had
hitherto remained empty. It was more appropriate to his needs, but he felt uneasy
there and it was never a place he came to regard as home.
Much of the time during his first months of freedom he travelled the world, to
Africa, Europe and North America, urging foreign governments to maintain the
pressure of sanctions, seeking funds for the ANC and thanking anti-apartheid
groups for their support over the years. Everywhere he went he was acclaimed a
popular hero. In an age largely bereft of political morality, he was seen as a man
of great moral authority, whose quarter-century of imprisonment for defying an
evil system of government and for holding firm to the principles of democracy
gave him a status no other politician could match. Western leaders—President
Bush in Washington, Prime Minister Thatcher in London, President Mitterrand
in Paris, Chancellor Kohl in Bonn, the Pope in Rome—all accorded him a warm
welcome. He became the first private black citizen to address a joint session of
the United States Congress. Politicians and show-business personalities alike
vied to be seen in his company. Special events were organised to celebrate his
visits—a ticket tape parade in New York, a pop concert in London, a grand
ceremony on the terrasse of the Trocadéro in Paris.
The only time Mandela stumbled on his triumphal progress was when he
decided to air his views on international affairs. In the United States, he spoke

admiringly of the Cuban leader, Fidel Castro, and the Libyan leader, Colonel
Gaddafi, the foremost bogeymen of the United States administration. Both ran
dictatorial regimes notable for human rights abuses, but both had given support
to the ANC, so Mandela singled them out for praise: ‘There is no reason
whatsoever why we should have any hesitation hailing their commitment to
human rights.’ When questioned on television about the morality of ignoring
human rights violations in countries like Cuba and Libya, he replied, ‘We are a
liberation movement, which is fully involved in a struggle to emancipate our
people from one of the worst racist tyrannies the world has seen. We have no
time to be looking into the internal affairs of other countries.’ The effect of these
remarks on Mandela’s reputation was instantaneous. ‘You could positively hear
his Q-factor—the attractiveness quotient with which America rates its celebrities
—crashing through the floor,’ reported one correspondent.
The controversy soon passed, but it showed Mandela to be both naïve and
perverse. His principal purpose in visiting the United States was to gain the
support of the Bush administration in maintaining sanctions against South
Africa, an issue which was of crucial importance to the ANC in its confrontation
with de Klerk’s government. In speech after speech he stressed the need for
sanctions to remain in place. But he swiftly undercut his own efforts by praising
regimes regarded by the United States administration as its enemies and
damaged his moral authority by implying that human rights abuses in countries
which supported him were none of his concern.
His travels also took him, finally, to Qunu. It had remained much as it had
always been, a scattered collection of circular thatched huts on a hillside close to
the main road leading to Umtata. There was still no electricity, no shops, no
roads, just grass tracks linking the homesteads, and a cemetery where many of
Mandela’s relatives were buried. Most of the inhabitants were old men, women
and children, just as they had been during Mandela’s childhood. But the poor
soil had since eroded and there was an unkempt air about the village.
Mandela had not seen it for thirty-four years. Many of his relatives there had
never set eyes on him or only dimly remembered him as a child. He arrived with
Winnie in a black Mercedes, dressed impeccably in a dark blue suit, blue shirt
and blue and yellow tie. The villagers lined up to greet him in their threadbare
Sunday suits, old-fashioned dresses and battered, mud-caked shoes. Before
taking part in a traditional homecoming feast, Mandela visited the simple grave
of his mother, marked only by upturned bricks and stones in an open field below

the site where the family rondavel had once stood. It had been demolished after
the death of his mother in 1969, as there had been no one to pay for its upkeep.
Mandela was struck by the poverty of the village: ‘The poverty that was here
when I last visited this place, that poverty is still there. My heart is very sore
indeed on account of the poverty staring me in the face.’
In the hope that one day he might come and live among them, the village
community awarded him a plot of land. Mandela welcomed the invitation and
duly built a country house based on the design of his prison cottage at Victor
Verster. When friends expressed surprise, Mandela explained that the Victor
Verster house was the first spacious and comfortable house in which he had
lived, he had liked it and had become accustomed to it.

Meanwhile, preparations for a preliminary meeting between the ANC and the
government made hesitant progress. Each side was distrustful of the other. When
the ANC presented its list of delegates to the meeting, de Klerk was horrified to
find that it included Joe Slovo, general secretary of the Communist Party, whom
the government had regarded for years as the evil genius behind the ANC’s
terror campaign. In the government’s eyes, he was ‘Moscow’s man’, the chief
link between the Soviet Union and the ANC, the gatekeeper for Soviet arms,
money and training. De Klerk insisted that Slovo should be excluded. Mandela
refused to give way, adamant that government would have no say in determining
the ANC’s representatives.
But when in May 1990 the two sides finally sat down together at Groote
Schuur, the gabled mansion at the foot of Table Mountain in Cape Town which
South Africa’s prime ministers and presidents used as their official residence, the
atmosphere was unexpectedly cordial. The government’s delegation consisted
entirely of Afrikaners. The ANC’s delegation comprised seven blacks, two
whites, one Coloured and one Indian; among them was Slovo, silver-haired,
portly and looking more like a benign grandfather than a terrorist mastermind.
‘Within a matter of minutes,’ said a senior ANC official, ‘everybody understood
that there was nobody in the room with horns.’ Much was made of the personal
‘chemistry’ between de Klerk and Mandela. Though they came from different
backgrounds and different generations—Mandela was seventy-one, de Klerk
was fifty-three—Mandela respected de Klerk’s credentials as an Afrikaner
leader: de Klerk came from a powerful lineage, a matter to which Mandela

attached considerable importance. ‘I find him to be an honest person, very
capable and a strong leader,’ remarked Mandela about de Klerk. ‘He is sincere in
his efforts to bring about fundamental political changes in the country.’
It was a promising beginning. Both sides emerged with a clear understanding
of the obstacles that lay in the way of negotiations. The ANC wanted the
government first to lift the state of emergency, to allow political exiles to return
home and to release all political prisoners. The government wanted the ANC to
declare an end to its armed struggle.
In June, de Klerk lifted the state of emergency. But further progress was
impeded by disputes over the return of exiles and the release of prisoners and by
the discovery by security police of an underground MK operation named
Operation Vula, which had been kept secret from Mandela. When Mandela
returned from an overseas trip in July, he was determined to push the peace
process forward. Political violence was on the increase; right-wing extremists
were gathering momentum. There was a clear danger of the process faltering
altogether.
Slovo had reached a similar conclusion. Though he was known more as a
revolutionary enthusiast than a pragmatic thinker, after long years in exile he had
come to recognise the advantage of using compromise to attain his objectives.
He believed that in order to create the right climate for negotiations, it was
necessary for the ANC to suspend the armed struggle unilaterally. De Klerk, he
reasoned, needed to demonstrate some benefits from his reforms to appease his
critics, otherwise he would stall.
When Slovo approached Mandela with the idea of suspending the armed
struggle, Mandela’s first reaction was negative. But he soon realised that it
would provide him with the opportunity of seizing the initiative from de Klerk.
If the proposal came from Slovo it would carry far greater authority with the
ANC than if it came from him. He was already under suspicion of having ‘gone
soft’, but Slovo’s revolutionary credentials were beyond reproach and he would
carry the day.
At a meeting of the ANC’s national executive committee in July, Slovo made
his proposal and Mandela supported him. There were fierce objections, but after
several hours their view prevailed. On 6 August, at a meeting in Pretoria, the
ANC signed an agreement suspending the armed struggle launched nearly thirty
years before.

The practical effect of the Pretoria Minute, as it was known, was negligible.
Umkhonto had long since halted guerrilla operations. But the rhetoric of
revolution was deeply rooted among the mass of ANC supporters. Many looked
upon themselves as soldiers of the revolution. By abandoning the armed
struggle, Mandela provoked a furore within the movement. Slovo calculated that
90 per cent of ANC supporters considered the decision to be a ‘sell-out’.
Militants attacked Mandela’s liking for ‘personal diplomacy’ with de Klerk and
set out to curb his room for manoeuvre.
But even as the row was underway, it was overshadowed by a far greater
crisis emerging from the green rolling hills of Natal, where a vicious struggle for
power had developed centred on the controversial leader of the KwaZulu
homeland, Mangosuthu Buthelezi.

20. Zindzi participating in the campaign to release Mandela and other political
prisoners in 1985

21. A moment of liberation experienced around the world: Mandela, with
Winnie, on his release from Victor Verster prison in February 1990

22. After the first round of official talks between the ANC and the government at
Groote Schuur in May 1990, Mandela and de Klerk address the press
23. Mandela with Joe Slovo, a key adviser during negotiations, pictured in June
1991

24. Mandela with Slovo in May 1990

25. Election fever: Mandela on the campaign trail in KwaZulu-Natal in April
1994

26. Casting his vote in South Africa’s first general election

27. Flanked by Thabo Mbeki and his daughter Zenani, Mandela at his
inauguration as president in Pretoria in May 1994

28. With Betsie Verwoerd, the widow of Hendrik Verwoerd, the architect of
grand apartheid, in Orania, 1995

29. With Percy Yutar, the Rivonia prosecutor, whom he invited to lunch

30. Madiba magic: wearing a Springbok cap and jersey, Mandela celebrating

with rugby captain François Pienaar after South Africa’s victory in the 1995
Rugby World Cup

31. With Queen Elizabeth during a state visit to Britain in July 1996

32. A new lease of life: Mandela with Graca Machel

33. & 34. Revisiting Robben Island: hard labour in the lime quarry; his prison
cell for eighteen years

35 & 36. Odd bedfellows: Mandela and de Klerk clashed frequently, but
attending de Klerk’s seventieth birthday celebrations in 2006, Mandela paid him
a warm tribute

37. Passing the baton: Mandela with Thabo Mbeki, pictured in 2003