CAPTURE
MANDELA CROSSED THE BORDER FROM BECHUANALAND AT
NIGHT in an Austin car belonging to a prominent white activist, the theatre
producer and playwright Cecil Williams. Williams, a debonair figure, always
immaculately dressed, had played a leading role in the establishment of the
Congress of Democrats and had been incarcerated in Pretoria prison during the
state of emergency. It was thought safe for him to collect Mandela from
Bechuanaland since his car had only recently been purchased and would
therefore not be familiar to security police. The guise in which they travelled,
Mandela the chauffeur driving his boss home to Johannesburg, was spoilt
slightly by Mandela’s determination to wear the khaki training uniform he had
been using in Ethiopia.
They reached Lilliesleaf at dawn and the following night Mandela held a long
meeting with other members of the ANC’s working committee, including Sisulu,
Kotane, Marks and Nokwe, briefing them on the results of his travels. A major
concern was the criticism Mandela had encountered throughout Africa of the
ANC’s links with communists and its cooperation with whites and Indians.
Mandela was convinced that, to circumvent foreign hostility, the ANC needed to
distance itself from its Congress allies and assume a leading role of its own,
publicly re-establishing its African credentials. He proposed that he should visit
Luthuli at his home in Natal to ascertain his views. The working committee
approved the idea.
But Kathrada’s support committee thought the risks were far too high. ‘We
worked on the assumption that the police knew he was back in the country,’ said
Kathrada. ‘We thought we should be extra careful, much more careful than we
had been before his departure to Africa. We thought we should first send an
advance party.’ Kathrada himself volunteered to do the advance work, but
Mandela opposed the idea. He wanted to leave for Natal as soon as possible. He
suggested that he drive down to Durban with Cecil Williams in the Austin car.
Kathrada again voiced his objections to the plan—‘Cecil Williams was a marked

man’—but he was overruled. Kathrada could not even persuade Mandela to
shave off his Guevara-type beard to alter the appearance by which he had
become familiar from press photographs; Mandela relished the image it gave
him of being a revolutionary leader.
Before leaving, Mandela arranged to meet Winnie. It was, Winnie recalled, ‘a
hurried meeting . . . our last private moments together’. In Mandela’s absence,
Winnie had become the target of constant police harassment. She told a
newspaper reporter in June:
The police have been making visits and searched at my house every night for
almost three weeks. Whenever my children and I are about to sleep, Security
Branch police arrive. They ask me where my husband is and sometimes search
the house. Sometimes they joke and at other times they are aggressive, which
frightens the children. There are rumours that Nelson is back, but I have not seen
or heard from him.
In the company of Williams, Mandela sped off to Durban to sound out two
Indian friends, Monty Naicker, the Indian Congress leader, and Ismail Meer,
before travelling on to Groutville to meet Luthuli. Both Naicker and Meer were
close friends of the chief and Mandela wanted to be able to tell Luthuli that he
had already spoken to them about his proposal. Both opposed any move that
would unravel the Congress alliance.
In Groutville, Mandela met Luthuli in an Indian-owned house. Luthuli was in
the fourth year of a five-year banning order restricting him to his home in the
Umvoti Mission Reserve. As president of the banned ANC, known to be in
touch with ANC envoys and couriers who visited him from time to time, he was
under frequent surveillance by the police. Luthuli listened to Mandela’s
argument and agreed to think about what he had said.
Mandela returned to Durban for further secret meetings and also found time
for a quick rendezvous with one of Winnie’s sisters, a nurse. At an Indian house
in Reservoir Hills, he met members of the MK regional command, briefing them
on his trip abroad and listening to their complaints about the lack of finance and
transport. He assured them that help would be forthcoming. One of the members
present was Bruno Mtolo, a trade unionist trained in sabotage activity by Jack
Hodgson. ‘We left Mandela feeling very much heartened and ready to continue
the struggle,’ he said.
Later that evening, Mandela was given a ‘welcome home’ party at the home

of a photo-journalist, G. R. Naidoo, with whom he was staying. Among the
friends who came were the Meers, the Singhs and Monty Naicker. ‘Nelson cut a
large military figure in khaki, his laugh booming the familiar welcome as he
embraced each friend,’ wrote Fatima Meer, in her account of the party. ‘They
drank and ate and discussed politics. They laughed a lot, excited by their
intrigue. The police were looking for Nelson and here they were partying with
him, virtually under their noses.’
The next afternoon, 5 August, Mandela rejoined Cecil Williams for the
journey back to Johannesburg. Along the way, they discussed sabotage plans.
Mandela noticed that the main Durban-Johannesburg railway ran parallel to the
road for some distance, making it a suitable target for sabotage. As was his habit,
he made a note of the idea in a small notebook he invariably carried with him. In
the notebook were jottings of ideas he had heard and conversations he had had in
the last few days, implicating people whom he had met. Mandela was also
carrying a loaded revolver.
At the small town of Cedara near Howick, their car, with Williams at the
wheel and Mandela in the passenger seat, was overtaken and stopped by police
cars. For a brief moment, Mandela thought of trying to escape up a wooded bank
to his left, but decided against it. He quickly hid the gun and the notebook in the
gap between the two front seats. A police officer came directly to the window by
the passenger’s seat and asked who he was. ‘David Motsamayi,’ replied
Mandela, using his alias. The officer asked him other questions about where he
was going and where he had come from. Mandela gave him a few perfunctory
answers, but the officer soon lost patience: ‘Ag, you’re Nelson Mandela, and this
is Cecil Williams, and you are under arrest!’ Mandela and Williams were taken
to Pietermaritzburg. The hidden notebook and the revolver were never
discovered by the police.
Mandela’s arrest caused turmoil among the conspirators. ‘There was a great
deal of panic,’ recalled Sisulu. Wolfie Kodesh was deputed to find Winnie at the
offices of the Child Welfare Society in Fox Street in central Johannesburg,
where she worked. He came across her as she was about to leave the building.
Winnie recalled:
The way this man looked! He was white like a ghost, his hair was standing on
end. I noticed he hadn’t shaved and was wearing a dirty shirt and trousers as if
he’d just jumped out of bed; you could see something drastic had happened. This

was one of the men who used to be along the line when I was taken to see
Nelson underground.
‘Winnie could see by the expression on my face that something terrible had
happened,’ said Kodesh. ‘She asked, “Is it Nelson?” I said, “Yes. We think he’ll
be appearing in the Johannesburg court tomorrow.”’
Everyone was convinced that Mandela had been betrayed. Suspicion about
who the culprit was ran wild. Even Sisulu was suspected in some quarters, for it
was he who had insisted that Mandela should return to South Africa.
There were persistent rumours that the United States Central Intelligence
Agency was involved. Mandela’s links with communists had made him a target
for US officials embroiled with the Soviet Union in a murky struggle for
influence in a number of newly independent African states and obsessed with the
need to contain communist encroachment in Africa. The CIA was active
throughout southern Africa, keeping track of the activities of liberation
movements there, determined to prevent what it saw as communist-supported
armed intervention ‘under the guise of African liberation’. It found an ally in the
South African government, which was only too willing to collaborate.
Intelligence information was exchanged on a regular basis.
The CIA covert-operations section in Johannesburg had expended
considerable energy penetrating the ANC. Its chief undercover agent, Millard
Shirley, the son of American missionaries who had been born in South Africa,
had cultivated contacts at all levels of the organisation. A stocky, balding figure,
with a reputation as a heavy drinker and a womaniser, he passed himself off as a
reporter for an American television news network, readily gaining access to
dissident groups. He was known by South African intelligence to possess a highranking ‘deep throat’—a Durban-based Indian in the ranks of the Communist
Party there.
Two pieces of evidence subsequently came to light linking the CIA to
Mandela’s arrest. The first concerned the local CIA agent in Durban at the time,
Don Rickard, a consular officer who, at the end of his tour in South Africa, was
heard boasting at a diplomatic party of the role that he had played in Mandela’s
arrest. The second concerned Paul Eckel, the CIA station chief based at the U.S.
Embassy in Pretoria. Eckel, who died in 1986, confided what had happened to
another U.S. official, and in 1990 that official, then retired, told an American
journalist, Joseph Albright, what Eckel had said: ‘We turned Mandela over to the

South African Security Branch. We gave them every detail, what he would be
wearing, the time of day, just where he would be. They picked him up. It was
one of our greatest coups.’
Given Mandela’s amateurish conduct in the days before his arrest, it was
equally possible that the South African police already knew of his whereabouts
from their own efforts. Mandela had been carried away by romantic notions of
his role as ‘Commander-in-Chief ’, the showman of the law courts now wanting
to become the showman of the battlefield, wearing army fatigues and khaki,
carrying a gun, though never intending to use it, flaunting his presence at
gatherings of the faithful. These were dangerous pretensions at such a time. In
all, Mandela survived in the field in South Africa as head of Umkhonto since its
launching in December 1961 for no more than five weeks. And in that time, as a
result of keeping notebooks, he came close to incriminating a considerable
number of other people.
He chastised himself for his own foolhardy behaviour. ‘In truth, I had been
imprudent about maintaining the secrecy of my movements,’ he wrote. ‘In
retrospect, I realized the authorities could have had a myriad of ways of locating
me on my trip to Durban. It was a wonder in fact that I wasn’t captured sooner.’
When asked in later years about evidence of the CIA’s involvement in his arrest,
his response was, ‘Let bygones be bygones. Let’s forget about that, whether it is
true or not.’

Whatever suspicions the security police had about Mandela, they possessed no
evidence linking him to the sabotage campaign. When he appeared in the
magistrates’ court in Johannesburg on 8 August, he was charged on two counts:
first, inciting workers in essential occupations to act illegally; and second,
leaving the country without a valid travel permit. Mandela decided to represent
himself, as this gave him the opportunity to turn the trial into an attack on the
government, and chose Slovo as his legal adviser.
While Mandela was held in the Fort awaiting trial, Slovo used his access to
him as his legal adviser to plot his escape. The conspirators at Rivonia spent
hours floating schemes to smuggle him out of the Fort. In the end they decided
that the Fort was impregnable, but that the Johannesburg magistrates’ court
offered better possibilities.

During the lunch break, when court proceedings were adjourned, the accused
were taken down steps leading to a basement, where they were locked in
individual cells. All that was needed to spring Mandela was a key enabling him
to leave the basement, climb the steps to the deserted courtroom above and from
there reach the street outside, where a getaway car would be waiting. To ensure
that Mandela was not recognised, a disguise would be smuggled in to him—a
wig, moustache and beard. Slovo was given the task of obtaining measurements
for the disguise during his frequent visits to the Fort. As he and Mandela sat in
an interview room, attended by a prison warder, they exchanged written notes
and bits of cotton until eventually, after several weeks, all the measurements
were gathered. The disguise was duly made by a professional wigmaker and
smuggled to Mandela by Winnie sewn in the shoulder padding of his finest suit.
He was also given the vital key. Wolfie Kodesh was briefed to provide the
getaway car.
Mandela, however, changed his mind about the feasibility of the escape plan,
concluding that if it failed it would do fatal damage to the ANC. In a note to
Slovo passed across the desk in the interview room, he explained his views,
adding at the end, ‘Please destroy this after you have finished reading it.’ But
Slovo decided that the note was interesting enough to be saved as a historical
document and it was to reappear in unfortunate circumstances. As it happened,
two days before the trial was due to open on 15 October in Johannesburg, the
authorities decided to switch the venue to Pretoria.
Congress supporters had meanwhile set up a Free Mandela Committee and
organised a series of rallies under the slogan ‘Free Mandela’. To prevent further
demonstrations, the government prohibited ‘any gathering related to Mandela in
any place in the Republic of South Africa’ for two days at the beginning of his
trial. On 20 October, it banned all gatherings in protest at the arrest or trial of
anyone for any offence for a period of six months.
Mandela’s appearance in court at the Old Synagogue on 15 October caused a
sensation. He entered wearing a traditional Xhosa leopard-skin kaross instead of
a suit and tie. In the spectators’ gallery, the crowd of his supporters rose to their
feet with shouts of ‘Amandla!’—‘Power!’—and ‘Ngawethu!’—‘It is ours!’
Winnie was among them, wearing a traditional beaded headdress and a long,
embroidered Xhosa skirt. Mandela saluted in acknowledgement, with a clenched
first raised high, and turned to smile at Winnie.

On each day that Mandela appeared in court he wore the same kaross. When
the prison authorities tried to confiscate it from him, he retorted that they had no
jurisdiction over his attire in court and threatened to take the matter as far as the
Supreme Court if they interfered. All they managed to do was to prevent him
from wearing it on his way to the court from prison and back.
Right from the start, Mandela sought to place the government and its system
of justice on trial rather than himself. Given permission to address the court
before he was asked to plead, he immediately asked for the recusal of the
magistrate, J. van Heerden, on the grounds that he did not consider himself
legally or morally bound to obey laws made by a parliament in which he had no
representation. Nor did he believe he would receive a fair and proper trial:
In a political trial such as this one, which involves a clash of the aspirations of
the African people and those of whites, the country’s courts, as presently
constituted, cannot be impartial and fair. In such cases, whites are interested
parties. To have a white judicial officer presiding, however high his esteem, and
however strong his sense of fairness and justice, is to make whites judges in their
own case. It is improper and against the elementary principles of justice to
entrust whites with cases involving the denial by them of basic human rights to
the African people . . .
No African, he said, enjoyed equality before the law.
The white man makes all the laws, he drags us before his courts and
accuses us, and he sits in judgement over us.
It is fit and proper to raise the question sharply, what is this rigid
colour bar in the administration of justice? Why is it in this courtroom I
face a white magistrate, am confronted by a white prosecutor and
escorted in to the dock by a white orderly? Can anyone honestly and
seriously suggest that in this type of atmosphere the scales of justice are
evenly balanced?
Why is it that no African in the history of this country has ever had the
honour of being tried by his own kith and kin, by his own flesh and
blood?
I will tell Your Worship why: the real purpose of this rigid colour bar
is to ensure that the justice dispensed by the courts should conform to the
policy of the country, however much that policy might be in conflict with

the norms of justice accepted in judiciaries throughout the civilized world
...
I hate discrimination most intensely and in all its manifestations. I
have fought it all during my life; I fight it now, and will do so until the
end of my days. Even although I now happen to be tried by one whose
opinion I hold in high esteem, I detest most violently the set-up that
surrounds me here. It makes me feel that I am a black man in a white
man’s court. This should not be.
Mandela concluded by explaining that he had decided to speak frankly
because the injustice to which he had referred contained the seeds of ‘an
extremely dangerous situation for our country and our people’. ‘I make no threat
when I say that unless these wrongs are remedied without delay, we might well
find that even plain talk before the country’s courts is too timid a method to
draw the attention of the country to air political demands.’ His application for
the recusal of the magistrate was refused.
The prosecution proceeded to produce some sixty witnesses—policemen,
journalists, township superintendents and printers—who gave evidence about the
preparations for the three-day strike in May 1961.
On the third day of the trial, Mandela made a surprise application once again
for the recusal of the magistrate, van Heerden. His legal adviser, Bob Hepple,
who had replaced Slovo after the government refused to lift the banning order
restricting Slovo to Johannesburg, had noticed during the previous day’s lunch
break that van Heerden had left the courtroom in the company of Warrant
Officer Dirker of the Special Branch. Dirker had given evidence on the first day
of the trial and was due to be cross-examined by Mandela at a later stage.
Together with another member of the Special Branch who had been present
throughout the trial, assisting the prosecution, they climbed into a blue
Volkswagen car and sped off for lunch. It was this incident which prompted
Mandela to ask for the magistrate’s recusal. But before doing so, in a gesture of
remarkable cordiality, he sent van Heerden a private note advising him in
advance of the action he was about to take and explaining that there was nothing
personal about the matter.
Confronting him in court, Mandela said that the incident had created the
impression that the court had associated itself with the state’s case: ‘I am left
with the substantial fear that justice is being administered in a secret manner. It

is an elementary rule of justice that a judicial officer should not communicate or
associate in any manner whatsoever with a party to these proceedings. I submit
that Your Worship should not have acted in this fashion.’
Van Heerden’s reply was brief: ‘I can only say this, that it is not for me to
give you reasons. I can assure you, as I here now do, that I did not communicate
with these two gentlemen, and your application is refused.’
On the fourth day of the trial, the prosecution closed its case and Mandela rose
to present his defence. He had given the court the impression that he would call a
large number of witnesses. But he had long since decided to call none. He knew
that the charges were accurate and he had already made the statement about the
unfairness of the political and legal system that he wanted to make. Instead of
calling witnesses, he said simply, ‘Your Worship, I submit that I am guilty of no
crimes.’
There was a considerable pause, then the magistrate, clearly taken aback,
asked, ‘Is that all you have to say?’
‘Your Worship, with respect, if I had something more to say, I would have
said it.’
The court was adjourned until 7 November, when, in accordance with court
procedure, Mandela was to be allowed to address the court with a plea in
mitigation before the magistrate gave his sentence.
On 7 November, before the court was called into session, Mandela and Hepple
were conferring in an office in the Old Synagogue when the prosecutor, P. J.
Bosch, came in and asked for a private meeting with Mandela. He apologised for
having to ask the court to send him to prison and reached out to shake his hand.
When Bosch walked out of the room, Hepple noticed that he was in tears.
The court was packed again with spectators. Winnie was present, in Xhosa
dress, as well as a number of Mandela’s relatives from the Transkei. As Mandela
took his place in the dock, he turned to the gallery, raising his arm in a clenchedfist salute, and called out ‘Amandla!’ The crowd rose and responded:
‘Ngawethu!’
The magistrate read out his judgement. Mandela, he said, was ‘the leader,
instigator, figurehead, main mouthpiece and the brain’ behind the organisation
which had called the 1961 strike. ‘To incite people to commit a crime by forcing
them to protest a law was the same as committing the crime itself,’ he continued.

Mandela had shown no remorse but seemed proud of his achievements and had
stated in no uncertain terms that he would continue his activities whatever the
sentence passed on him. ‘We are living under abnormal and trying conditions,’
the magistrate said, and if law and order were not maintained, anarchy would
reign; the court was not concerned with politics but with the maintenance of law
and order.
Mandela followed with an hour-long address to the court intended not as a
plea in mitigation but as a political testament explaining why he had taken the
action which had led to his trial and why he would do it again if necessary:
The whole life of any thinking African in this country drives him continuously to
a conflict between his conscience on the one hand and the law on the other. . . .
The law as it is applied, the law as it has been developed over a long period of
history and especially the law as it is written and designed by the Nationalist
government is a law which, in our view, is immoral, unjust and intolerable. Our
consciences dictate that we must protest against it, that we must oppose it and
that we must attempt to alter it . . .
Throughout its fifty-year existence the ANC had done everything possible to
bring its demands to the attention of successive South African governments. It
had sought at all times peaceful solutions for the country’s ills and problems.
Every attempt had been treated with contempt and met by force. In 1961, as
secretary of the Action Council, he had approached the prime minister seeking to
gain support for a national convention. But he had not even been treated with the
courtesy of an acknowledgement. Instead,
the government . . . set out, from the beginning of this campaign, not to treat
with us, not to heed us, nor to talk to us, but rather to present us as wild,
dangerous revolutionaries, intent on disorder and riot, incapable of being dealt
with in any way save by mustering an overwhelming force against us and the
implementation of every possible forcible means, legal and illegal, to suppress
us. The government behaved in a way no civilized government should dare
behave when faced with a peaceful, disciplined, sensible and democratic
expression of the views of its own population. It ordered the mobilization of its
armed forces to attempt to cow and terrorize our peaceful protest. It arrested
people known to be active in African politics and in support of African demands
for democratic rights, passed special laws enabling it to hold them without trial
for twelve days. . . . If there was a danger during this period that violence would

result from the situation in the country, then the possibility was of the
government’s making. They set the scene for violence by relying exclusively on
violence with which to answer our people and their demands . . .
He warned of the danger of further violence to come:
Government violence can do only one thing and that is to breed counterviolence. We have warned repeatedly that the government, by resorting
continually to violence, will breed, in this country, counter-violence amongst the
people, till ultimately, if there is no dawning of sanity on the part of the
government—ultimately, the dispute between the government and my people
will finish up by being settled in violence and by force. Already there are
indications in this country that people, my people, Africans, are turning to
deliberate acts of violence and of force against the government in order to
persuade the government, in the only language which this government shows by
its own behaviour, that it understands. . . .
Perhaps the court will say that despite our human rights to protest, to object, to
make ourselves heard, we should stay within the letter of the law. I would say,
sir, that it is the government, its administration of the law, which brings the law
into such contempt and disrepute that one is no longer concerned in this country
to stay within the letter of the law.
His own experience illustrated this: ‘The government has used the process of
law to handicap me, in my personal life, in my career and in my political work in
a way which is calculated, in my opinion, to bring about a contempt for the
law’—by restricting him, banning him, harassing him.
By order of the government, in the name of the law, I found myself
restricted and isolated from my fellow men, from people who think like
me and believe like me. I found myself trailed by officers of the Security
Branch of the police force wherever I went. In short I found myself
treated as a criminal—an unconvicted criminal. I was not allowed to pick
my company, to frequent the company of men, to participate in their
political activities, to join their organizations. I was not free from
constant police surveillance. I was made, by the law, a criminal, not
because of what I had done, but because of what I stood for, because of
what I thought, because of my conscience.
Can it be any wonder to anybody that such conditions make a man an
outlaw of society? Can it be wondered that such a man, having been

outlawed by the government, should be prepared to lead the life of an
outlaw, as I have led for some months, according to the evidence before
this court?
It has not been easy for me during that past period to separate myself
from my wife and children, to say goodbye to the good old days when, at
the end of a strenuous day at an office, I could look forward to joining
my family at the dinner table, and instead to take up the life of a man
hunted continuously by the police, living separated from those who are
closest to me, in my own country, facing continually the hazards of
detection and arrest. This has been a life infinitely more difficult than
serving a prison sentence. No man in his right senses would voluntarily
choose such a life in preference to the one of normal, family, social life
which exists in every civilized community.
But there comes a time, as it came in my life, when a man is denied the
right to live a normal life, when he can only live the life of an outlaw
because the government has so decreed to use the law to impose a state
of outlawry upon him.
Mandela concluded with a passionate denunciation of racial discrimination
and the system of minority rule in South Africa that went with it:
I hate the practice of racial discrimination, and in my hatred I am sustained by
the fact that the overwhelming majority of mankind hate it equally. . . .
Nothing that this court can do to me will change in any way that hatred in me,
which can only be removed by the removal of the injustice and the inhumanity
which I have sought to remove from the political, social and economic life of
this country.
Whatever sentence Your Worship sees fit to impose upon me for the crime for
which I have been convicted before this court, may it rest assured that when my
sentence has been completed, I will still be moved, as men are always moved, by
their consciences; I will still be moved by my dislike of the race discrimination
against my people when I come out from serving my sentence, to take up again,
as best I can, the struggle for the removal of those injustices until they are finally
abolished once and for all.
Mandela’s articulate defence of African rights, his manner and bearing before
the court, his skill in dealing with court officials and witnesses alike, marked

him out as a leader of distinction. No courtroom in South Africa had ever heard
such a powerful indictment of the government. However, the import of his words
was largely lost in South Africa at the time. Van Heerden took no more than a
ten-minute adjournment after Mandela had finished his address before
pronouncing sentence. The press coverage was limited. Mandela was on the list
of persons whose statements could not be published and although the
government had decreed that reporting of judicial proceedings was permissible
‘as long as it is not abused by creating a forum for such persons’, newspapers
were unsure of the consequences. One of Johannesburg’s major newspapers, The
Star, quoted only a few sentences from his address.
But Mandela’s performance, while making little impact in South Africa, had
gained worldwide attention. His 1962 trial marked the start of his international
reputation. The pleas that he had made for human rights in South Africa were
fully understood in Western countries, even if governments there felt little
inclination at the time to respond. In the short term, none of this was to make any
difference. Mandela’s fate was to be sentenced to three years’ imprisonment for
incitement and two years’ imprisonment for travelling abroad without valid
documents, five years in all, with no possibility of parole. In the long term,
however, the words that Mandela spoke in the Old Synagogue and the reputation
he gained there were to be remembered far beyond any term of imprisonment.

The net was meanwhile closing in on other conspirators. Walter Sisulu was
arrested two days after Mandela on similar charges of incitement for his role in
organising the May 1961 strike. He was granted bail by the court, but then
placed under twelve-hour house arrest, confined to his house in Orlando between
6.30 p.m. and 6.30 a.m. every day, all weekends and public holidays, required to
report to a police station every day and prohibited from receiving any visitors at
home. Two weeks later, Sisulu’s mother, who lived with him and whom
Mandela cherished as much as his own, died in the house. When friends and
relatives came to mourn, Albertina tried to explain that Sisulu could not speak to
them. He made an urgent application to the chief magistrate in Johannesburg for
permission to receive mourners in his home but was turned down. Later that
evening, when the visitors had left and the house was in darkness, with the body
awaiting removal for the funeral the next day, the police raided the house and
arrested Sisulu on charges of violating his house arrest. The charges were later
withdrawn.

Like Mandela, Sisulu was found guilty of incitement but the sentence he was
given was more severe: six years’ imprisonment rather than three. Sisulu decided
to appeal and, as the law then required, he was granted bail, pending an appeal.
The government responded by placing him under twenty-four-hour house arrest,
prohibiting him from setting foot outside at any time. A few weeks later, Sisulu
disappeared underground. Albertina was subsequently arrested and held in
solitary confinement for three months.
Mandela’s bomb-maker, Jack Hodgson, was placed under twenty-four-hour
house arrest in his Hillbrow flat for five years and his wife, Rica, under twelvehour house arrest. As both were banned persons, they needed special ministerial
dispensation to communicate with each other. The Hodgsons were eventually to
flee the country. Michael Harmel and Moses Kotane were placed under twentyfour-hour house arrest; Kathy Kathrada, Rusty Bernstein and Cecil Williams
were placed under twelve-hour house arrest. So too was the civil rights
campaigner Helen Joseph. Several leading figures, including Harmel and
Kotane, made plans to leave. Others, like Kathrada, went underground.
One by one, the remnants of radical opposition were obliterated. The
Congress of Democrats was outlawed in September 1962. All public gatherings
on the Johannesburg City Hall steps, a traditional venue for dissidents, were
banned, except for divine services. The radical newspaper New Age was banned
in November 1962. It reappeared the following week under the name Spark, but
Spark was soon forced to close as a result of bans imposed on its editorial staff.
Another radical journal, Fighting Talk, in which Bernstein had played a
prominent role, was closed down three months later. A clause in the Sabotage
Act made it illegal to possess any copies of banned news - papers, with a penalty
of three years’ imprisonment.

Under Verwoerd’s rule, white society became increasingly insular and inbred. It
was a society which expected conformity and so regarded dissent, however
trivial, as a form of treachery. ‘Opposing apartheid,’ observed a prominent
Afrikaner critic, ‘is worse than murder to some Afrikaners. You endanger the
nation by refusing to conform.’
The national radio network was turned into a propaganda arm of the National
Party. Each commentary, each news bulletin conveyed the government’s view of
the world. Independent views were rarely heard. ‘No useful purpose can be

served by causing the public distrust of our leaders’ policies,’ remarked one
director-general of the South African Broadcasting Corporation. All attempts to
introduce television were blocked because of the ‘negative’ effects it might have.
The press was exempted from direct controls, but otherwise forced to steer its
way through a minefield of legislation. Often unsure of what they could print,
editors resorted more and more to self-censorship. Outright attacks on apartheid
were rare. The English-language press continued to expose the worst excesses of
government policy, but the costs both for newspaper proprietors and for editors
and reporters were usually high. Under constant official pressure, they slowly
gave way rather than face statutory controls.
An equally tight grip was kept on literature and entertainment. In March 1963,
Verwoerd’s government set up a Publications Control Board with power to ban
any publication, film, record or art show, including the work of South African
writers, artists and sculptors. Besides the usual test for obscenity and blasphemy,
a publication could be banned if it brought the country into ridicule or contempt;
or if it was prejudicial to the safety of the state, the general welfare or peace and
good order. Thousands of works were subsequently banned, including those by
prominent South African and Western writers. In defending the frequent use of
censorship laws, government ministers were given to explain that behind many
prohibited works lurked the menace of communism. ‘When we think of
literature containing filth, then we must think of the communist tactic behind it,’
said the minister of education, arts and science, Jan de Klerk, introducing the
Publications and Entertainment Bill in 1963. ‘It is known to the government that
it is a communist tactic throughout the world to use filth to break the backbone
of the nation; to use filth to attack a nation on the cultural and social front, to
paralyse people and make them an easy prey for communism.’
Through rigorous control of the media, Verwoerd had little difficulty in
convincing most whites that the coalition of forces ranged against South Africa
—communist states, the Afro-Asian bloc, ‘leftists’ and ‘liberals’ in Western
countries and revolutionaries from within—was sufficiently threatening to
warrant any action the government took to protect the nation. Each new piece of
legislation strengthening the government’s hand, each inroad made into civil
liberties, evoked less and less protest from within the white community. Those
advocating concessions or conciliation were simply accused of endangering
white survival. Though government action was often taken in the name of
defending Western civilisation, there was never any doubt about what the

ultimate purpose was. ‘Our motto,’ declared Verwoerd, ‘is to maintain white
supremacy for all time to come over our own people and our own country, by
force if necessary.’

Pretoria Local, a large red-brick building behind a crenellated wall on the
western side of the main road leading to Johannesburg, was a familiar place to
Mandela. It had been his home for five months during the 1960 state of
emergency and also during his trial for incitement. But when he returned there
from the Old Synagogue on 7 November, it was to a different regime: he was no
longer a prisoner awaiting trial but a convicted criminal, and he was treated
accordingly.
Still in a fighting mood, he tried to take on the prison authorities in his
customary fashion. Issued with the standard prison uniform for Africans—a pair
of short trousers, a khaki shirt, a calico jacket and rubber sandals—Mandela
refused to wear the short trousers. When dinner arrived—cold, stiff porridge—he
refused to eat it and demanded better food. The solution devised for him by the
prison commander, Colonel Jacobs, was to allow him to wear long trousers and
to receive better food but to separate him from other prisoners, in solitary
confinement. Mandela replied that he had no difficulty with that.
He soon learned differently:
An hour was like a year. I was locked up in the bare cell, literally with nothing,
nothing to read, nothing to write, nothing to do, and no one to talk or turn to. I
was guarded by two warders during exercise time. The one was an African. I
tried to talk to him. He spurned me, afraid no doubt of his white colleague. I
suffered the isolation for two months and finally concluded that nothing was
more dehumanizing than isolation from human companionship.
So Mandela exchanged his long trousers and improved rations for the
company of fellow prisoners. He was assigned to a small group of political
prisoners, a trade unionist, a reporter for New Age and several PAC members,
including Robert Sobukwe.
Sobukwe by now considered himself a veteran of the prison system.
Convicted of incitement for his role in the anti-pass demonstrations of March
1960, he had been moved through a series of prisons—Pretoria Central,
Boksburg, Stofberg and Witbank—before reaching Pretoria Local in 1961. He

was due for release in May 1963.
Despite their political rivalry, the two men struck up a cordial relationship in
prison, choosing to sit next to each other while sewing old mailbags on a
concrete ledge in the prison courtyard and addressing each other respectfully by
their clan names. Sobukwe advised caution and patience in dealing with the
prison system. ‘You’ve got to pull through five years,’ he told Mandela. ‘There
is no point in putting their backs up against you. They can be very vicious.’
The conditions in Pretoria Local were primitive. Mandela was given his own
cell, measuring about six by seven feet, complete with toilet bucket. The cold at
night was intense. He slept on a thin sisal mat on a cement floor with only two
thin blankets for cover. The food was bad and discipline strict. When Mandela
and Sobukwe went together to see Colonel Jacobs to complain about conditions,
Jacobs dismissed them curtly. Mandela began to argue, but Sobukwe restrained
him: ‘Nel, Nel, don’t be rash. You’ve got to live here.’

While Mandela and Sobukwe were sewing mailbags in Pretoria and arguing
about whether Shakespeare or George Bernard Shaw was the greatest English
writer, South Africa faced a new phenomenon: the underground PAC movement
known as Poqo initiated an insurrection against the government which included
the murder of whites among its aims. ‘The white people shall suffer, the black
people will rule,’ said a Poqo pamphlet. ‘Freedom comes after bloodshed.’
Poqo was poorly organised but inspired a large following, notably in the
Western Cape, with visions of an imminent black uprising. Its attacks were
random and haphazard, but they created widespread alarm. Poqo supporters were
responsible for the killing of African policemen and informers, for an uprising in
Paarl in November 1962 in which a mob of 250 men attacked a police station
and rampaged through the town killing two whites, and for the murder of five
whites, including a woman and two young girls, sleeping at a roadside camp
near the Bashee River bridge in the Transkei in February 1963.
In March 1963, plans for a more general uprising were prepared by a group of
PAC leaders based in exile in Maseru, the capital of Basutoland, then a British
protectorate. Instructions were sent to Poqo supporters to manufacture their own
weapons with whatever materials were to hand and to collect food and clothing.
On a given date, they were to launch simultaneous attacks on strategic points

such as police stations and power installations before turning their attention to
massacring whites indiscriminately.
The plan began to go wrong when Potlake Leballo, a volatile figure who had
inherited the PAC’s leadership from Sobukwe, gave warning of the uprising two
weeks before it was due to start at a press conference in Maseru, claiming that
100,000 armed followers were waiting for his signal. As a result of Leballo’s
impetuous announcement, the colonial authorities in Maseru raided the PAC’s
premises, seized lists of 10,000 names, arrested PAC officials and closed down
their office. In South Africa, police began to round up hundreds of PAC
supporters. The date set for the uprising passed by with only a few incidents
reported.
The Poqo campaign, together with the sporadic sabotage attacks from
Umkhonto, gave Verwoerd’s justice minister, John Vorster, the opportunity he
needed to acquire virtually unlimited security powers. The General Law
Amendment Act introduced on 1 May 1963 empowered the police to arrest
without warrant and detain any person suspected of having committed sabotage,
or any offences under the Suppression of Communism Act or the Unlawful
Organizations Act, and any person suspected of possessing information about
such offences. Detainees could be held in solitary confinement, without access to
lawyers and family, until they had replied ‘satisfactorily’ to all questions put by
police interrogators. The initial period for which they could be held was ninety
days. But the police were entitled to renew the order again and again ‘until this
side of eternity’, according to Vorster. The act expressly prohibited the courts
from ordering the release of a detainee. Scores of men and women now vanished
into jails, to be subjected to solitary confinement and prolonged interrogation.
A new breed of police interrogators moved on to the seventh floor of the
Grays, an oblong concrete block on Von Weilligh Street used by the security
police as their headquarters. They were men prepared to use any method
necessary to obtain information from detainees. The most notorious of all was
Lieutenant Theunis Swanepoel, a former sergeant previously known for beating
confessions out of prisoners, whose ugliness stood out at first sight. A broadshouldered, heavy-set man with close-cropped ginger hair, he had a bullfrog-like
head, tiny eyes and a face that was pockmarked and blotched—features that
were to become all too familiar to detainees.
The interrogators soon began to produce results. A favourite method was

‘statue’ torture. Detainees were forced to stand in a small chalk square for
periods which ranged from six hours to sixty hours. If they tried to sit down,
they were jerked to their feet again; and if they fainted or lost consciousness,
they were revived and forced to stand again. A communist activist, Ivan
Schermbrucker, described in a note smuggled out of prison how he was made to
stand until exhaustion brought him to the ground after twenty-eight hours of
standing: ‘I fell twice, had cold water thrown over me and was pulled to my feet.
. . . I nearly committed bloody suicide by jumping out of the window. This is
torture . . . they threatened to keep me standing for four days and nights and even
longer.’ Other methods included electric shocks and physical assaults.
The General Law Amendment Act of 1963 effectively marked South Africa’s
transformation into a police state. As the legislation passed through parliament, a
lone MP, Helen Suzman, voted against it. One of its first victims was Robert
Sobukwe. Due for release on 3 May, having completed his three-year sentence in
full, Sobukwe was held under a clause of the act which enabled the minister of
justice to keep in prison indefinitely anyone convicted under security laws, even
after they had served their sentence.
Sobukwe was taken from Pretoria Local to serve his time on Robben Island.
Mandela was soon to follow him there.

1. Nelson Mandela at nineteen, in Umtata, Transkei

2. Mandela’s first wife, Evelyn Mase, was devoted to religion

3. Walter Sisulu, Mandela’s mentor and life-long friend

4. At the newly opened offices of Mandela and Tambo in Chancellor House, Fox
Street, Johannesburg

5. Boxing in the heavyweight division

6. Mandela outside court in Pretoria, during the treason trial, 1958

7. After a whirlwind romance, Mandela married Winnie Madikizela in June
1958

8. Addressing the Pietermaritzburg All-in Conference, March 1961, Mandela’s
last public appearance before going underground

9. Wearing a beaded Thembu necklace, Mandela posed for this photograph
while on the run from the police in 1961

10. Mandela with Ruth First, a communist activist

11. Communist comrades: Ruth First, Bram Fischer (standing), Joe Slovo and
Rusty Bernstein on the podium at a Communist Party meeting in the late 1940s

12. With Moses Kotane, secretary-general of the underground Communist Party,
during the treason trial in 1958

13. With Oliver Tambo in Addis Ababa, 1962

14. Outside Westminster Abbey during his ten-day visit to London, 1962

15. Crushing stones in the prison yard at Robben Island

16. With Walter Sisulu in the prison yard at Robben Island, 1964

17. Winnie with Zindzi, September 1962

18. Winnie with Zindzi and Zenani at the start of the Rivonia trial, December,
1963

19. Winnie visits Mandela in the police cells a few days after his arrest in August
1962