‘THE FABULOUS DECADE’
WHEN MANDELA WAS RELEASED ON BAIL FROM THE FORT IN
December 1956, a few days before Christmas, he returned home to Orlando to
find that Evelyn had finally moved out. Her leaving did not surprise him. What
he found most distressing, in fact, was that she had taken the curtains with her.
The marriage had seemed irreparable for some time. The long sullen silences
they endured were broken only by fierce rows. According to Evelyn, after one
particular argument, ‘Nelson grabbed me by the throat and shook me and
shouted at me. Some elderly neighbours heard the noise and came in to break it
up.’ She went to live at her brother’s house in Orlando East for a time but
Mandela suggested she should return home: ‘I was desperate to save the
marriage, even if it meant clutching at a straw,’ she said. ‘But there was no
thawing of the freeze.’ She confided in Albertina and Walter Sisulu, both of
whom were anxious to help achieve a reconciliation. But when Walter
approached Mandela, he was told curtly it was none of his business. The only
result was to increase Mandela’s anger. ‘I don’t think Nelson ever forgave me
for that,’ said Evelyn. He came home less and less, took his laundry to a cousin
and started sleeping elsewhere.
The rift between them became common knowledge. In a final attempt to
prevent a breakdown, Evelyn asked first her brother and then Kaizer Matanzima
to intervene. Mandela’s response to both of them was that he no longer loved
Evelyn. According to Mandela, he was also presented with an ultimatum from
Evelyn: he had to choose between her and the ANC. There was no doubt in his
mind where his priorities lay. After yet another terrible argument, Evelyn left the
house to stay in nurses’ quarters, hoping that Mandela would come to realise he
needed her to keep the family together. But this time Mandela never went to see
her, nor did he send any messages. When he was arrested on charges of treason
and taken to the Fort, Evelyn visited him only once. It was one of their last
meetings. By the time he returned, she had moved in with her brother in Orlando

East.
Their children—Thembi, then aged ten years, Makgatho, aged five, and
Makaziwe, aged two—were all adversely affected by the collapse of the
marriage, but the most deeply wounded was Thembi. According to Evelyn, he
‘suffered intensely’. Mandela had taken as much interest in Thembi as he had
time to spare. They regularly went jogging together and to the boxing gym. He
taught him to drive his Oldsmobile. Mandela was affectionate, but also a strict
disciplinarian. A visitor who stayed at the Mandela household, Robert Matji, was
shocked by Mandela’s severity in dealing with Thembi over an incident
involving a school textbook. ‘He set about cross-examining his son as if he was
standing trial in the Supreme Court,’ Matji recalled. ‘If we did anything wrong,’
said Makgatho, ‘we would get a lesson from him that was worse than a beating.’
As the marriage disintegrated, Thembi tended to take his mother’s side. He lost
interest in schoolwork and became quiet and withdrawn. Mandela rarely
managed to brighten him up. In time, Thembi would become increasingly
alienated from his father.

Mandela first caught sight of Winnie Madikizela several months later during a
recess in the preparatory examination at the Drill Hall. Driving past
Baragwanath Hospital, the main black hospital south of Johannesburg, he
noticed a young woman waiting at a bus stop and was immediately struck by her
beauty.
It was perhaps inevitable that they should have met. Winnie, a social worker
at Baragwanath, was a close friend of Adelaide Tsukudu, a nurse at the hospital
who was engaged to Oliver Tambo; they both lived at Helping Hand Hostel in
Jeppe Street. Winnie had already met Tambo and discovered that they came
from the district of Bizana in the Transkei. Several weeks after that first glimpse,
Mandela was buying food in a Greek delicatessen in Bree Street in Johannesburg
when Tambo arrived with Adelaide and Winnie in tow. Tambo introduced them:
‘Winnie from Bizana’, he called her. The next day, Mandela telephoned Winnie
at the hospital, inviting her to lunch. ‘I cannot say for certain if there is such a
thing as love at first sight,’ wrote Mandela in his autobiography, ‘but I do know
that the moment I first glimpsed Winnie Nomzamo, I knew that I wanted her as
my wife.’
Winnie had arrived in Johannesburg four years before, a shy, unsophisticated

country girl, to enrol at the Jan Hofmeyr School of Social Work, a college for
black social workers founded during the war years. Her childhood in Bizana had
been marked by rebelliousness, harsh discipline and family discord. Her father,
Columbus Madikizela, was a Methodist mission school teacher, a successful
farmer and businessman, whose authoritarian manner and fierce temper kept his
children in fear of him. When he entered the room, they were made to stand to
attention and allowed to sit only with his permission. He showed them no
physical affection, never touching or hugging them. The only physical contact he
had, in fact, was to beat them for transgressions.
Her mother, Gertrude, was also a teacher, with similar views on the need for
discipline. Winnie once described her as a ‘religious fanatic’. An ardent
Methodist, she made her children pray at least twice a day in a special private
corner of a field. Winnie was regularly locked into a room with her mother and
forced to pray aloud. Gertrude was also obsessed with physical hygiene and
maintained rigid standards of cleanliness and order in the house. Each evening
the children lined up for an inspection to ensure that they had washed properly.
They had to clean their teeth with ash until the gums bled.
Gertrude’s physical appearance, her light complexion, long hair and blue eyes,
was a frequent source of family comment. In South African terminology, she
was a ‘Coloured’, of mixed ancestry. Columbus’s mother, Seyina, never
concealed her dislike of Gertrude for that reason, referring to her disparagingly
in front of the children as a mlungu, a white person. Columbus sometimes joined
in with his own ‘teasing’.
Winnie’s rebelliousness was evident from an early age. Tall and strong as a
child, she preferred the company of boys and took up boyish pursuits. She was
often embroiled in fights and gained a reputation among other children as a
bully. Arguments usually began when Winnie failed to get her own way. In one
memorable quarrel with an older sister, Winnie pulled out a weapon she had
fashioned from a baking-powder tin with a nail driven through it and slashed at
her sister’s face, ripping her lip and tearing into the flesh of her mouth. The
beating that Gertrude subsequently gave Winnie she remembered for the rest of
her life. Gertrude regarded Winnie as the most wilful and troublesome of her
five daughters and regularly beat her.
Gertrude died when Winnie was ten years old, leaving behind a family of nine
children. Drawn into caring for the younger children, Winnie began to exhibit a

gentler side to her nature. At boarding schools at Emfundisweni and Shawbury,
Methodist mission schools, she lost some of her aggression and showed promise
as a student. In 1952, at the age of eighteen, she passed her matriculation and
gained entrance to the Jan Hofmeyr School of Social Work, arriving there in
January 1953. Her home for the next five years was the Helping Hand Hostel.
By the time she graduated in December 1955, Winnie had acquired the
outward sophistication of a city girl. Tall and slender, with large, dark, luminous
eyes, she possessed a beauty that men found alluring. At college, she proved
herself a cheerful and competent student, and was well regarded for her
enthusiastic nature and willingness to help others. She took up sporting activities
with the same energy, earning herself nicknames like ‘The Amazon Queen’ and
‘Lady Tar - zan’. ‘I solved problems the simple way, using physical force, as I
had done way back in my childhood days,’ she explained.
When she was appointed as a social worker at Baragwanath, the popular
African press—Bantu World and Drum—made much of the story of the once
barefoot girl from Pondoland who, with brains, beauty and determination, had
made her mark in the city of gold. At Baragwanath, she gained a reputation as an
effective and dedicated social worker. A young African doctor, Nthatho
Motlana, recalled, ‘She was an outgoing personality, laughing a great deal, very
cheerful and intensely concerned about other people’s welfare.’
She was courted for a while by Mandela’s kinsman Kaizer Matanzima, who
met her while making an official visit to Baragwanath as a chief from
Thembuland. By coincidence, Matanzima arranged to use Mandela’s house in
Orlando and his car to take Winnie for a candlelit dinner. On his return to the
Transkei, he wrote passionate letters to her and she replied. But Matanzima
appeared to want her for his second wife and Winnie lost interest.
She had known of Nelson Mandela by name for some time, not only because
of his political activities but because he was a patron of the Jan Hofmeyr School.
She had once seen him in a Johannesburg magistrate’s court, representing a
colleague of hers who had been assaulted by the police. But her own interest in
political activity had been negligible; she took a far greater interest in clothes
than in politics. When Mandela telephoned her at Baragwanath asking for help
in raising money for the Treason Trial Defence Fund from the Jan Hofmeyr
School and suggesting they discuss the matter over lunch, she was overawed. ‘I
was petrified,’ she said. ‘I couldn’t work for the rest of the day.’

Mandela was thirty-eight years old at the time, sixteen years older than
Winnie. He had recently been served with a new banning order, restricting him
to Johannesburg for five years and prohibiting him from attending all meetings.
He was on trial for treason, a charge which carried the death penalty. His law
practice was falling apart. He was in serious financial difficulty. His family life
was disintegrating. He rarely had enough time to see his children. To conduct a
whirlwind romance with a twenty-two-year-old girl in those circumstances was
something of an indulgence.
Their first date set the pattern for their future relationship. It was a Sunday.
Mandela was at work in his office. He sent a friend to collect Winnie and
together they walked round the corner to an Indian restaurant. Their lunch was
constantly interrupted by a stream of people wanting to talk to Mandela. On the
street outside, yet others sought his attention. ‘Nelson couldn’t walk from here to
there without having consultations,’ she remarked later. They drove south of
Johannesburg to a stretch of open veld. Walking through the long grass, Mandela
told her of the difficulties he faced with the treason trial and his hopes for the
future. On their way back to the car, the strap on Winnie’s sandal broke. ‘I was
walking with difficulty barefoot,’ she said, ‘so he held my hand as my father
would hold a little girl’s hand.’ When they reached the car, he said, ‘It was a
lovely day,’ and turned and kissed her.
Winnie fitted in to Mandela’s activities as best she could: ‘He did not even
pretend that I would have some special claim to his time.’ When he wanted to
see her, he would send a car for her or telephone her, telling her to be ready at a
certain time. He introduced her to his friends, took her to meetings and arranged
for her to meet his colleagues at the Drill Hall. In an aside to Mandela, Moses
Kotane remarked, ‘Such intimidating and seductive beauty does not go with a
revolutionary!’
A striking couple, they delighted in each other’s company, holding hands and
sitting together intimately whenever they could. Their relationship was
extremely physical. On many occasions, Mandela found it difficult to tear
himself away. But always there were other demands. Mandela took it for granted
that Winnie would follow whatever he decided and rarely consulted her about
his intentions. He never mentioned the matter of his divorce from Evelyn. Nor
did he discuss it with Evelyn. He merely placed a notice in a newspaper stating
that he intended to institute divorce proceedings. Until then, Evelyn had believed
that, though she and Mandela had separated, their marriage would remain

nominally in place. ‘I had heard that Nelson was going out with a social worker
from Baragwanath Hospital,’ she said. ‘It was just one more woman, I had
thought. He would discard her like he had the others.’ The children, meanwhile,
had commuted amicably between her house in Orlando East and his house in
Orlando West, on the occasions that he was there. The news of his intention to
divorce her came as a shock not only to Evelyn but to the children and to many
of their friends. Winnie was sometimes unfairly accused of breaking up the
marriage. Thembi was never reconciled to the divorce.
Averse to any discussion of his private life, Mandela kept the details of his
divorce proceedings to himself. Winnie had no idea that the divorce had been
finalised until one day he suddenly suggested that she should visit a friend, Ray
Harmel, the wife of Michael Harmel, who would make her a wedding dress.
‘How many bridesmaids would you like to have?’ he inquired, by way of
proposing. When Winnie travelled to Bizana to tell her father, Columbus, of the
planned marriage, he exclaimed, ‘But you are marrying a jailbird!’
The wedding took place in Bizana on 14 June 1958, a year after they had first
met. Mandela had to obtain special permission to leave Johannesburg for six
days. The ceremony was held at a local church, with Winnie wearing a wedding
gown of white satin, made for her by Ray Harmel. At a reception at the Bizana
Town Hall, Columbus spoke of his love for his daughter and of Mandela’s
dangerous career as a politician. He expressed deep foreboding for the future:
‘This marriage will be no bed of roses; it is threatened from all sides and only
the deepest love will preserve it.’ He advised his daughter, ‘Be like your
husband, become like his people and as one with them. If they be witches,
become one with them.’
After all the feasts and dancing at Bizana, there was no time for Mandela and
Winnie to travel on to his ancestral home in Thembuland to continue with the
celebrations, as custom required. So Winnie wrapped up a piece of the wedding
cake and took it back to no. 8115, Orlando West, intending that she and her
husband would share it with his family on a later visit when his restrictions were
lifted. It was a journey they never made.

The juggernaut of apartheid, meanwhile, rolled on relentlessly. Race laws by
now covered every facet of life—housing, education, hospitals, employment,
public transport, marriage and sex. In public buildings, on trams and buses, at

airports and railway stations, in restaurants, hotels, cinemas and theatres, on the
beaches and even in the graveyard ‘non-whites’, as they were commonly termed,
were kept separate wherever possible from the white caste. Signs declaring
‘Blanke’ and ‘Nie-Blanke ’ proliferated on park benches, in elevators, in
libraries, in liquor stores and in taxis. New laws were added whenever a gap
could be closed. In 1957, legislation was introduced making it a criminal offence
for Africans to attend church services in white areas without government
permission.
Nothing was allowed to get in the government’s way, neither the courts nor
the constitution. Thwarted in its initial attempts to remove the right of Coloureds
in the Cape to vote by an Appeal Court ruling declaring the legislation invalid,
the government introduced a new bill making parliament a High Court, higher in
authority than the Appeal Court, with power to give the final judgement on
constitutional matters. When the Appeal Court then ruled that the High Court of
Parliament itself was invalid, the government changed the Appeal Court—‘six
old men in Bloemfontein’, as one minister disparagingly described it—by adding
five more judges and by passing regulations requiring a full quorum of eleven
judges to hear constitutional appeals. It also proceeded to enlarge the Senate
from forty-eight to eighty-nine members, elected on a basis which ensured that
the government could obtain the two-thirds majority in a joint session of
parliament needed to pass constitutional legislation. With the Senate duly packed
with its own supporters, in 1956 the government finally succeeded in obtaining
legislation removing the Coloured vote and the Appeal Court, filled with new
government appointments, formally gave its endorsement.
New regulations were introduced to curb still further African entry into
‘white’ areas. Under the dreaded Section 10 of the Urban Areas Act of 1952, the
only Africans entitled to remain longer than seventy-two hours in a white area
were those who could prove either continuous residence in the area since birth or
continuous work in the area for the same employer for ten years or continuous
lawful residence in the area for at least fifteen years. If an African failed to prove
his right to be present in a white area, he was ‘endorsed out’—ordered to return
to a reserve. In 1956, the pass laws were extended for the first time to women,
provoking protests in towns across the country. A crowd of 20,000 women, led
by Lilian Ngoyi and Helen Joseph, marched to the prime minister’s office in
Union Buildings in Pretoria in August 1956 to demonstrate their opposition,
singing a song specially rehearsed for the occasion: ‘Now you have touched the

women, you have struck a rock.’ As her initiation into the world of political
protest, Winnie Mandela spent two weeks in the Fort in October 1958 after
participating in a street protest against the pass laws and consequently lost her
job as a social worker at Baragwanath Hospital. None of the protests had any
effect on the government.
All this was dwarfed by the scheme that Hendrik Verwoerd had in mind.
Elected prime minister by his National Party colleagues in September 1958, after
the death of Hans Strijdom, Verwoerd cast himself in the role of a leader chosen
by God and proceeded to act accordingly. ‘I believe that the will of God was
revealed in the ballot,’ he said on the day of his election.
Verwoerd’s ultimate objective, as he explained it, was total territorial
separation between white and black. He acknowledged that this ‘ideal’ could not
be reached for many years. The journey there would be arduous, but it was
essential that the goal should be clearly stated. Unless white and black were
separated as far as possible, the future would hold nothing but ‘rivalry and
clashes’ between them. The solution lay in giving each race ‘mastery’ over its
own area. Thus the Native reserves would become the homelands of the blacks
—or Bantu, as Verwoerd insisted upon calling them—where they would enjoy
full social and political rights under a system of government suited to their own
tribal background. Those blacks living in white areas would be accorded rights
in the homelands too, which was where their real roots lay, and otherwise treated
as ‘visitors’ and assigned separate locations. For a period of twenty years or so,
according to Verwoerd’s calculations, the flow of Africans to urban areas would
continue to increase. But in the meantime, the reserves would be properly
developed, and in white areas the government would endeavour to separate
white and black in every sphere of life. The time would then come when the
flow would be reversed. At the end of this grand design, Verwoerd confidently
expected, South Africa would consist of flourishing black homelands living side
by side in peace with an ever-prosperous white territory.
Verwoerd’s plans for separate development were far removed from the
previous Nationalist strategy of white baaskap, but his purpose was essentially
the same: to relegate the African population to a permanently inferior status. The
key to his policy was tribalism. By reviving tribal authority and by placing
greater powers in the hands of tribal chiefs beholden to the government, he
intended to establish a new administrative structure for the reserves which could
restore traditional customs and practices and keep African advancement in line

with what the reserves themselves required. For most of the century, the system
of government in the reserves had largely bypassed the chiefs, whose status had
long since declined. Verwoerd’s objective henceforth was to use the chiefs as the
allies of white government, creating small centres of tribally based power on the
periphery of South Africa. By emphasising tribal loyalties, he would keep the
black population divided. A central part of Verwoerd’s strategy became division
of the blacks, which would counter the challenge mounted by African
nationalists, destroy the notion of black majority rule and guarantee the
supremacy of the whites.
Verwoerd had laid the groundwork for his grand scheme when, as Minister of
Native Affairs in 1951, he introduced the Bantu Authorities Act, which was
intended to replace the existing European model of administration in the reserves
with a structure of tribal authorities staffed by African chiefs and officials
appointed and paid by the government. No provision was made for any form of
elected representatives. In the case of the Transkei, tribal authorities were
installed in place of a partly elected district council system. Chiefs were made
responsible for the maintenance of law and order and the implementation of
government measures. Those who refused to cooperate were deposed.
The Transkei was crucial to the success of Verwoerd’s strategy. Covering an
area of 16,000 square miles, it was the only African reserve constituting a
coherent piece of territory. Its black population of 1.5 million was enough to
give it credibility as a separate entity. What was also important was that
Verwoerd had found there a local ally in the business of apartheid: Kaizer
Matanzima.
Matanzima saw in apartheid a means both of restoring hegemony for the
Xhosa-speaking people of the Transkei and of satisfying his own aspirations for
power. Like Verwoerd, he believed in the rule of chiefs. He liked to describe
himself as a ‘Xhosa nationalist’ and was more than willing to forfeit claims in
white South Africa if it meant regaining autonomy for Xhosas at home. Mandela
spent hours arguing with Ma - tanzima, trying to persuade him to oppose the
implementation of the Bantu Authorities Act, but to no avail. In 1955,
Matanzima played a vital role in getting the old General Council, or Bunga, in
the Transkei, to vote itself out of existence and accept the new system. He was
duly rewarded. In 1958, he was appointed Regional Chief of Emigrant
Thembuland and was led to expect further promotion. Mandela recalled,
‘Something snapped inside me when he went over to the Nats.’

In 1959, consulting only a handful of his closest advisers, Verwoerd unveiled
his master plan. South Africa, he announced, would be turned into a ‘multinational state’ by fragmenting the African population into separate ethnic
groups. The Promotion of Bantu Self-Government Bill provided for the
establishment of eight black ‘homelands’, one for each of the major ethnic
groups: North Sotho, South Sotho, Swazi, Tsonga, Tswana, Venda, Xhosa, and
Zulu.
No previous attempt had ever been made to implement territorial segregation
on this tribal basis. Hitherto the whole emphasis of government policy had been
simply to segregate black from white. Now Verwoerd decreed that the African
people were not homogeneous but a collection of separate national groups
divided by language and culture. Their roots lay in separate homelands; there
they would be accorded ‘separate freedoms’. This principle applied not only to
rural but to urban blacks, regardless of how many generations they had lived in
towns; they were all deemed citizens of the new homelands.
Verwoerd’s ‘new vision’, as it was called, was hailed by the National Party as
providing a lasting solution for South Africa. The advantages to whites seemed
conclusive. The whites maintained unfettered control over their own areas, while
claiming to permit blacks equivalent rights in the homelands. The blacks,
meanwhile, were divided into separate ethnic groups, inhibiting their ability to
act as a single community against outnumbered whites. Because each national
group was a minority of the whole, no one ‘nation’ could claim rights on the
basis of numerical strength. Thus the demands for majority rule by African
nationalists were irrelevant. The problem of urban blacks was solved by denying
them any permanent place in towns. In the long term there was the prospect,
according to Verwoerd, that the number of urban Africans might be reduced. On
the basis of Verwoerd’s calculations, the reverse flow back to the homelands
would begin by 1978. All this was to be set in motion in the name of racial
harmony, peace and security. ‘The development of South Africa on the basis of
this bill,’ said Verwoerd, ‘will create so much friendship, so much gratitude, so
many mutual interests. . . that there will arise what I will call a commonwealth,
founded on common interests.’
Mandela took a different view. Writing in Liberation in its May 1959 issue, he
described the bill as ‘nothing but a crude, empty fraud’ to bluff people that the
aim was self-government. ‘The Bantustans are not intended to voice aspirations
of the African people; they are instruments for their subjection. Under the

pretext of giving them self-government the African people are being split up into
tribal units in order to retard their growth and development into full nationhood.’
The burden would fall on millions of Africans, born and living in urban areas,
who had never seen the reserves, who had no desire to go there and who would
now be ‘treated as outcasts’. He contrasted the government’s aims with the
message of the Freedom Charter, which declared that ‘South Africa belongs to
all who live in it, black and white.’
The new system of administration caused deep dissension in the reserves,
splitting apart communities and even families. There was prolonged violence in
the Hurutshe Reserve in western Tranvaal, in Sekhukhuneland, and in
Pondoland. Chiefs and councillors resisting government authority were deposed
and deported. Armoured units and aircraft had to be deployed to crush the
Pondoland revolt.
The Mandela household was directly affected by these events. Not only did
Matanzima throw in his lot with the government but so did Winnie’s father,
Columbus Madikizela, accepting an appointment to serve on Matanzima’s
council in the Transkei. Both became the target of attack. Madikizela’s house
was burned down, his store was burgled and his mother was assaulted. On one
occasion, he only narrowly escaped his attackers by climbing through a small
back window. ANC supporters were involved in the attacks. To have her father
and her husband entrenched in two opposing camps was a difficult experience
for Winnie. But life with Mandela was to bring far greater complications.

It was remarkable, in the circumstances, how much optimism about the future
survived. Since 1948 the Nationalist government had never shown anything but
ruthless determination in pursuit of white supremacy, riding roughshod over all
opponents who stood in the way. The white electorate, meanwhile, had
demonstrated its appreciation by rewarding the National Party with three
successive election victories, with an ever-increasing majority. Yet ANC leaders,
convinced that the handful of whites who supported them represented something
more than a fringe of white politics, still placed inordinate hope in the notion
that eventually enough whites would have a change of heart about apartheid to
bring about the downfall of the government.
The optimists included Walter Sisulu, who, despite being forced to resign as
secretary-general of the ANC and being subjected to a series of banning orders,

managed to play a central role behind the scenes. Writing in the journal Africa
South in 1957, Sisulu reached this conclusion:
As far as the Nationalist Party is concerned, any serious analysis will reveal that
it has reached its high-water mark. There is no possibility of the Nationalists
growing stronger than they are at present. . . . Already there are signs that the
edge of the Nationalist blitzkrieg is blunted in the face of the determined and
growing resistance of the people. . . . In particular, the Europeans of the country
are gradually beginning to see that South Africa has no choice but to follow the
road to a multiracial society.
These views were commonly held among the African elite. In his essay on the
1950s which he called ‘The Fabulous Decade’, the Johannesburg journalist
Lewis Nkosi wrote of how the cause of racial justice and intellectual freedom
seemed to be gathering strength: ‘It was a time of infinite hope and possibility; it
seemed not extravagant in the least to predict then that the Nationalist
government would soon collapse, if not from the pressure of extra-parliamentary
opposition, certainly from the growing volume of unenforceable laws.’
The treason trial had its own effect. Not only was the presence of so many
whites on trial seen by many blacks as evidence that whites too were beginning
to turn against the government but the swift reaction of white liberals in
organising a defence fund for them suggested a wider concern about government
policy. ‘The trial has been an inestimable blessing because it forged together
diverse men and women of goodwill of all races who rallied to the support of the
Treason Trial Fund and to keeping up the morale of the accused,’ wrote Chief
Luthuli. ‘In all humility I can say that if there is one thing which helped push our
movement along non-racial lines, away from narrow, separative racialism, it is
the treason trial, which showed the depth of the sincerity and the devotion to a
noble cause on the white side of the colour line.’
Among the accused themselves, sitting side by side, month after month, there
developed an intense camaraderie. It helped that the accused were seated in
alphabetical order and not in racial groups. ‘The only place in South Africa
where there was absolutely no colour bar was in the treason trial,’ remarked
Bernstein. ‘It produced a core at the centre of people who really thought of
themselves as a united group. I mean, the treason trial was a sort of family of
their own.’ Luthuli observed, ‘By the time the preparatory examination had
drawn to its close, the sense of common purpose among those who reject

apartheid was immeasurably deepened.’
It became fashionable during the treason trial for some of the more
adventurous white liberals in Johannesburg to invite one or two of the more
respectable ANC leaders like Luthuli and Matthews to the northern suburbs for
tea or dinner. Bram Fischer was assiduous in organising dinner parties at
Beaumont Street to introduce the ANC leaders on trial to white politicians and
businessmen, most of whom had never met Africans on a social basis. On one
occasion at Beaumont Street, Mandela encountered the judges who were
presiding at his trial. ‘We never discussed the trial,’ said Mandela, ‘but it helped
to introduce a particular respect by the judges afterwards.’ Luthuli recalled a
meeting with the mining magnate Harry Oppenheimer at which he took the ANC
to task for the ‘extremism’ of its demands, such as the demand for votes, which
made it difficult for him, he said, to persuade ‘liberal-minded people’ of the
justice of its demands. Luthuli replied that it was better for white South Africa to
know the full extent of African demands rather than be introduced to them
installment by installment and taken by surprise. Mandela met Oppenheimer on
another occasion. There was little common ground, but that such meetings took
place at all was seen as an example of the rising importance of the ANC in white
eyes.
Once he was freed from the treason trial, Luthuli went on a speaking tour of
major cities, including Johannesburg and Cape Town, to talk to white audiences,
whom he found notably sympathetic. He even received an invitation to address
an Afrikaner study group in Pretoria on the subject of African aspirations. The
meeting in the Cathedral Hall was interrupted by a group of thirty white thugs,
who assaulted Luthuli and began beating up the audience. Lying on the floor of
the stage with a chair protecting his head, Luthuli was asked by a concerned
white supporter, ‘Are you hurt?’ ‘Oh, I’m used to this,’ he replied, scrambling to
his feet. Though his head was bruised and his jaw painfully swollen, he
continued with his address. ‘It was a good and encouraging meeting,’ he said.
Shortly afterwards, Luthuli received a banning order restricting him to his home
district in Natal for five years and prohibiting him from attending all meetings.
There were encouraging signs from other quarters. The Liberal Party,
adopting a more radical posture, came out in favour of universal adult suffrage
and endorsed the use of tactics like boycotts. On university campuses in
Johannesburg and Cape Town, white students demonstrated against new curbs
placed on African entrants. Among avant-garde whites, multiracial parties were

much in vogue; the more daring went in for illicit affairs.
In the world of music, a new African jazz style known as kwela gained a huge
following among white teenagers. Played originally on the penny whistle, a
cheap, six-hole metal flageolet favoured by African youths in the townships,
kwela-jazz was developed by African musicians into a fast, colourful and
distinctive idiom which became internationally famous. A multiracial Union of
Southern African Artists was formed to assist black performers. At Dorkay
House in Johannesburg, it initiated a series of talent contests which grew first
into small ‘festivals’ and then into township jazz concerts which attracted
enthusiastic white audiences. A performance at City Hall in Johannesburg in
1957 was packed out. The climax of these efforts came in 1959 with the
production of King Kong, a jazz opera on the life of the heavyweight boxing
champion Ezekiel ‘King Kong’ Dhlamini. With a score by Todd Matshikiza,
featuring singers like the Manhattan Brothers and Miriam Makeba and produced
and directed by whites, King Kong was a success from its opening night in
Johannesburg. As Lewis Nkosi wrote:
The resounding welcome accorded the musical at the University Great Hall that
night was not so much for the jazz opera as a finished artistic product as it was
applause for an Idea which had been achieved by pooling together resources
from both black and white artists in the face of impossible odds. For so long
black and white artists had worked in watertight compartments, in complete
isolation, with very little contact or cross-fertilization of ideas. Johannesburg
seemed at the time to be on the verge of creating a new and exciting Bohemia. . .
. There was a surge of optimism, very difficult to prove founded or unfounded,
that art might yet crack the wall of apartheid.
There was a similar sense of exhilaration about the advance of African
nationalists elsewhere in Africa. Ghana’s independence from Britain in 1957
signalled the beginning of the retreat from Africa of Europe’s colonial powers
and the emergence of new black-run states. As the number of African and Asian
members of the United Nations multiplied, so the volume of condemnation of
South Africa’s racial policies rose. Western governments were also becoming
more critical. Foreign support for the anti-apartheid movement was seen to be an
increasingly important factor. ‘World attention,’ said Luthuli, ‘is something
which we of the resistance need and desire.’
All this seemed to enhance the moral advantage that African nationalists in

South Africa perceived they had in their confrontation with the government.
Writing in Africa South in 1959, Walter Sisulu observed:
Nothing has brought greater credit to the ANC in the eyes of Africa and the
world than its steadfast refusal to respond to the vicious persecution of the
Nationalists and their predecessors in the Union Government by a blind and
irrational ‘anti-Whiteism’. It has shown the African people to be larger-minded
than, and morally superior to, their oppressors; it strikingly refutes the ridiculous
claims of ‘white South Africa’ about alleged African ‘immaturity’ and
‘unreadiness for self-government’.
Luthuli also emphasised the moral strength of the ANC’s position:
How easy it would have been in South Africa for the natural feelings of
resentment at white domination to have been turned into feelings of hatred and a
desire for revenge against the white community. Here, when every day in every
aspect of life, every non-white comes up against the ubiquitous sign ‘Europeans
Only’, and the equally ubiquitous policeman to enforce it—here it could well be
expected that a racialism equal to that of their oppressors would flourish to
counter the white arrogance towards black. That it has not done so is no
accident. It is because, deliberately and advisedly, African leadership for the past
fifty years, with the inspiration of the African National Congress . . . has set
itself steadfastly against racial vaingloriousness. We knew that in doing so we
passed up opportunities for an easy demagogic appeal to the natural passions of
a people denied freedom and liberty; we discarded the chance of an easy and
expedient emotional appeal. Our vision has always been that of a non-racial
democratic South Africa which upholds the rights of all who live in our country
to remain as full citizens with equal rights and responsibilities with all others.
The singular achievement of the ANC and its white allies in the 1950s was
that they established a multiracial tradition in politics strong enough to withstand
all attempts by the government to obliterate it. In the long term this was to have
the most profound consequences for South Africa. But at the time, the white
audience they reached was minimal and the signs of change they detected were
misleading. In power was a government determined to enforce its rule whatever
the cost. ‘Alas,’ Nkosi wrote of the 1950s, ‘we didn’t realize how small and
powerless we were.’
