CHAPTER 33
L’ENVOI
AFTER THE YEARS OF HEARTACHE AND TURMOIL OVER WINNIE,
Mandela in retirement revelled in the pleasures of a happy married life. During
his time as president, his affection for Graca Machel had steadily deepened. At
first reticent about the affair, he spoke openly about it in a television interview in
February 1998. ‘I’m in love with a remarkable lady’, he said. ‘I don’t regret the
reverses and setbacks because late in my life I am blooming like a flower,
because of the love and support she has given me’.
Mandela tried to persuade her into marriage, but initially Graca held back.
After the death of her husband, Samora Machel, Mozambique’s president, in a
plane crash in 1986, she had resolved never to marry again. In Mozambique, she
was still regarded as the First Lady. And she was also heavily committed to her
work on child welfare, both at home and abroad.
From an early age, she had shown exceptional ability and a strong
independent streak. Born in Mozambique’s southern Gaza province in 1945 to a
Methodist family, Graca Simbine had excelled at school and had gained a
scholarship to Lisbon University, where she studied German philology and
joined a clandestine unit of Frelimo, the main Mozambique liberation movement
fighting to overthrow Portuguese rule. After taking her degree, she underwent
military training with Frelimo in Tanzania, becoming a close friend of Frelimo’s
leader Samora Machel, whose wife had died in 1971. At independence in 1975,
Graca was appointed minister of education, and shortly afterwards she married
Machel. Though devoted to him, she remained fiercely independent. At a
woman’s conference in Mozambique in 1984, she publicly rebuked him for
interfering with the proceedings. His sudden death left her devastated, with two
young children and five step-children to look after. ‘I thought my life was
completely over’, she recalled. She mourned him in black for four years.
It was Machel’s death that brought her into contact with Mandela for the first
time. From his prison cell, he wrote her a letter of condolence. Graca wrote back,

thanking him for bringing ‘a ray of light in my hour of darkness’. They met for
the first time in 1990 when Mandela paid a visit to Mozambique. They met again
in 1992, shortly after Mandela had announced his separation from Winnie, when
Graca went to receive an honorary doctorate from the University of the Western
Cape. They developed a warm friendship. ‘We were both very, very lonely’, she
said. ‘We both wanted someone you could talk to; someone who’d understand’.
The following year, after Oliver Tambo died, Mandela took over from him
responsibility for acting as guardian of Graca’s children. Her daughter, Josina,
moved into Mandela’s house while studying at the University of Cape Town. ‘It
wasn’t love at first sight’, said Graca. ‘For me, things don’t happen like that. For
me, falling in love is like a spark connecting two people. With Samora, I was
with him for some time and only later did I feel this spark. It was the same with
Nelson’.
For his part, Mandela was captivated by Graca’s warmth, grace and
intelligence. He telephoned her every day and began spending weekends at her
home in Maputo. But when he formally proposed marriage, she felt that her
obligation to her family and to Mozambique had to come first. ‘I belong to
Mozambique’, she insisted. ‘I will always be the wife of Samora Machel’.
The compromise they accepted for a while was that Graca would spend two
weeks of every month with him in Johannesburg. But this arrangement prompted
criticism from Archbishop Tutu, who complained that they were setting a bad
example to young people and urged Mandela ‘to make an honest woman of her’.
Graca, however, was content enough. ‘I think we are OK like this. . . . We are
two grown-up people who love each other’. She would have preferred to wait
until his term as president had ended. But after further gentle pressure, she
relented.
Mandela wanted a huge party to celebrate the occasion, but Graca asked only
for a quiet family ceremony. Amid a swirl of rumours, they were married
privately at Mandela’s home in Houghton in Johan - nesburg on his eightieth
birthday—18 July 1998. ‘It was my birthday present to him’, said Graca. As they
had both been brought up as Methodists, the service was conducted by a
Methodist bishop, with blessings given by Muslim, Hindu and Jewish elders.
Among the handful of friends present were the Sisulus, Ahmed Kathrada and a
former warder from Robben Island, Christo Brand. The following day, Mandela
and Graca made their first public appearance as husband and wife at a glittering
birthday banquet attended by 2,000 people, including pop stars and foreign

dignitaries. Later in the year, when Graca presented her new husband to
journalists at a press conference in Maputo, she made clear she had no intention
of changing her name. ‘I’m not going to change mine either’, joked Mandela,
alongside her.

When Mandela stepped down as president, he claimed he wanted a quiet life. He
would be content, he said, to spend much of his time with his family in his house
at Qunu in the Transkei countryside. During his prison years, he had often
dreamed of settling down there. ‘I want to live in obscurity’, he told a farewell
press gathering. ‘I would like to retire to my village and be able to walk around
the village and little hills and streams where I grew up’.
Yet he was still too addicted to life on the public stage to leave it behind. ‘If
there’s anything that would kill me it is to wake up in the morning not knowing
what to do’. Graca tried to make him relax, but she soon changed her mind. ‘I
realised I was making a mistake’, she said. ‘He needs to be very busy. He is
quite clear that if he slows down he will feel depressed. He’ll feel he’s not
needed any more’.
Mandela particularly enjoyed taking foreign trips, hobnobbing with world
leaders, show-business stars, sporting heroes and rich businessmen, all keen to
be seen in his company. ‘I often feel he’s reliving his own youth in
Johannesburg in the 1950s, when he was not only a politician, but a township
hero’, remarked Anthony Sampson, his authorised biographer, who knew him
during those years. A global icon, Mandela was able to raise huge sums for his
charities. He also tried his hand at peace-making in Burundi.
On domestic issues, Mandela was careful at first to avoid any comment on
Mbeki’s handling of government business, conscious of how much Mbeki
resented having to operate in the shadow of his own reputation. Mbeki himself
was awkward in dealing with the matter, trying to make light of it with jokes.
‘Madiba’, said Mbeki, when accepting the mantle of ANC president at the
party’s conference in December 1997, ‘members of the press have been asking
me how it feels to step into your shoes. I’ve been saying I would never be seen
dead in such shoes. You wear such ugly shoes!’ He continued: ‘If you don’t see
tears in my eyes, Madiba, it does not mean I am not happy. . . . I will always
seek to ask your help, even if it is for you to carry my briefcase so that I can
walk around with my hands in my pockets!’ On another occasion, he burst out in

exasperation: ‘Yes, indeed. Mandela has much larger feet. I guess I could go
back twenty-seven years, and try going to jail, and then come out and wear
funny shirts’.
When Mbeki spoke at the banquet celebrating Mandela’s eightieth birthday in
1998, he chose, by way of tribute, to quote from Shakespeare’s King Lear, a play
about a senile ruler in retreat from the world. ‘As Lear wished for himself and
his offspring’, he said to Mandela, ‘we too urge you to live, and pray, and sing,
and tell old tales, and laugh at the gilded butterflies which will continue to come
to you to tell you all manner of idle gossip’. In other words: enjoy your dotage
and leave governing to me.
Yet for all the outward show of confidence Mbeki displayed, he was beset by
a deep sense of insecurity that was to have a profound effect on his handling of
power. His biographer, Mark Gevisser, contrasted the assurance with which
Mandela arrived in office, borne on a wave of good wishes from friend and foe
alike, to Mbeki’s constant anxiety about how secure his position was. ‘He
carried that anxiety, that heaviness, with him into power—a hunched, sceptical
counterweight to the inspirational “free at last” optimism of Mandela—and
would never really be able to release it’.
Unlike Mandela, Mbeki disliked the press. During his term as deputy
president, he became increasingly convinced that the press was bent on
portraying Mandela as ‘the one good native’ and raising alarm about what would
happen when he left the stage. The issue came to the fore during a turbulent
period in 1996 when the rand crashed as the result of rumours that Mandela was
ill. An editorial in the Johannesburg Sunday Times drew attention to how much
South Africa’s welfare depended on Mandela’s well-being. Mbeki, said the
newspaper, was just not up to the job of maintaining Mandela’s legacy. ‘He
simply does not inspire confidence. . . . Where Mr Mandela projects warmth of
spirit and generosity, Mr Mbeki appears manipulative and calculating. . . .
Where Mr Mandela inspires affection, even love, Mr Mbeki evokes uncertainty
and fear’.
Infuriated by such disparaging remarks, Mbeki insisted that Mandela issue a
riposte in his own name. Drafted by one of Mbeki’s aides and duly approved by
Mbeki, it appeared under Mandela’s by-line with the headline in the Sunday
Times ‘Don’t praise me to damn the rest’: ‘It is particularly unacceptable that
this strain of hero-worshipping should be coupled with a systematic campaign to

denigrate deputy president Thabo Mbeki—a campaign that is beyond any
civilised norms of discourse, let alone objectivity. . . . The exaltation of the
president and denigration of other ANC leaders constitutes praise which I do not
accept’. Such efforts were to no avail in improving Mbeki’s image.
Mbeki’s standing amongst the white community also deteriorated. During the
1999 election campaign, he complained that white attitudes had hardly changed
over the previous five years. ‘When one walks around this country, one finds
that the legacy of apartheid still sits on our shoulders’, he said. ‘The memory of
apartheid is fading and perhaps there is too much forgiveness. I think we should
be angry about apartheid’. In conversation with Mark Gevisser, Mbeki took
Mandela to task for giving priority to achieving reconciliation rather than to
effecting a transformation of South African society. South Africa, he said, could
not ‘sustain a view of national reconciliation of the kind of which the media
approved’ and with which ‘Madiba cooperated’. Gevisser remarked, ‘I have
seldom seen Mbeki as exercised, or as impassioned, as when he spoke about
this’. ‘You just couldn’t do it!’ Mbeki told him. ‘It was wrong! Just wrong!’
Instead of the multiracial approach that Mandela favoured, Mbeki threw his
weight exclusively behind black advancement. Affirmative action was used
aggressively to give places to blacks in the civil service, local government and
parastatal organisations, such as railways, ports and power generation, regardless
of merit and qualification. Thousands of skilled whites were cleared out of
government service and parastatal posts. A group of ‘racial populists’ within the
ANC demanded ever faster action. The state bureaucracy became, in effect, an
arm of the ANC. Many whites decided to leave South Africa altogether for
opportunities abroad, citing affirmative action, high crime rates and deteriorating
public services as reasons for going. In all, an estimated 750,000 whites
emigrated over a ten-year period, seriously depleting the reservoir of skilled
personnel.
Parliament’s role too went into decline. Whereas Mandela had accorded
parliament due respect, regarding it as one of the main pillars of democracy,
Mbeki sought to emasculate it. For the first five years of democracy, both ANC
members and opposition members had spoken freely. ‘During the Mandela
years’, recalled an ANC MP, Andrew Feinstein, ‘the caucus room had resonated
with sharp debate and discussion, passionate argument and profound polemic’.
In dealing with opposition parties, Mandela was sometimes infuriated by their
criticism. He once referred to opposition parties as ‘Mickey Mouse

organisations’, prompting Democratic Party leader Tony Leon to retort that
Mandela ran a ‘Goofy’ government. But Mandela nevertheless endeavoured to
maintain cordial contact with opposition leaders. On learning that Leon had gone
to hospital for heart surgery, Mandela decided to pay him an unannounced visit,
alerting him to his presence outside the door to his room by saying loudly:
‘Hello Mickey Mouse, this is Goofy. Can I come in?’
By contrast, Mbeki expected ANC members to follow his diktat. ‘The caucus
reflected a more disciplined, choreographed and constrained party’, wrote
Feinstein, ‘a party fearful of its leader, conscious of his power to make or break
careers, conscious of his demand for loyalty, for conformity of thinking’. As
Mbeki began to pursue a more ‘Africanist’ agenda, several prominent white
ANC members found their presence less welcome. ‘It was a change of
temperature’, said Carl Niehaus. ‘People felt alienated, and it pushed them
away’. As for opposition parties, Mbeki treated them with contempt. He rarely
appeared in the assembly to answer questions. ‘A lot of Parliament,’ Leon
observed, ‘has been reduced to a branch office of ANC’s headquarters’. In due
course, parliament became little more than a rubber stamp.
In private, Mandela occasionally felt the need to pick up the phone to chide
Mbeki over a policy issue, but he soon found himself fobbed off by Mbeki’s
aides, who claimed the president was ‘too busy’ to take Mandela’s calls or have
a meeting with him. Mbeki resented criticism of any kind and surrounded
himself with a clique of weak personalities only too willing to agree to all he
said. What Mbeki wanted above all was loyalty; it mattered far more to him than
competence. Government jobs were handed out on that basis. Party committees
and conferences were tightly controlled. Critics of any kind were subjected to
tirades of abuse from loyal party hacks. Anyone deemed to challenge Mbeki was
quickly eviscerated. Mbeki himself was more than ready to spread smears about
rivals in order to discredit them.
With growing paranoia, Mbeki imagined plots against him at every turn. In
one ludicrous episode in 2001, Mbeki caused a public uproar by authorising a
police investigation into allegations made by a serial fraudster that three senior
ANC figures, including Cyril Ramaphosa, were involved in a plot to overthrow
him. Mbeki’s police minister went on television to claim that Mbeki might
actually be in ‘physical danger’. The uproar completely overshadowed an event
in London’s Trafalgar Square that Mandela attended to mark the start of an
international marketing campaign to ‘Celebrate South Africa’, making the

country look more like a banana republic than a progressive democracy. Mbeki
was later obliged to admit that there had been no plot.
Even though Mandela’s misgivings about Mbeki were mounting, he refrained
from making any public intervention until provoked by Mbeki’s increasingly
bizarre conduct over the Aids crisis. Trying to make amends for his own neglect
of the crisis during his term as president, Mandela in retirement threw himself
into the campaign against Aids, prompted in large part by Graca Machel, who
had long understood its full dimensions. But Mandela found Mbeki blocking the
way to meaningful progress.

In his presidential eyrie, spending the midnight hours surfing the internet, Mbeki
became obsessed with the view of a small group of maverick scientists who
questioned whether HIV existed at all or, if it did, whether it was not simply a
harmless ‘passenger’ virus. They challenged the orthodox view of the causes of
Aids, accepted by the vast majority of the world’s medical establishment,
claiming it was part of a conspiracy by large pharmaceutical companies to profit
from the misery of Africa’s poor. Antiretroviral drugs, they argued, were not
only expensive, but they were also toxic, more lethal than the disease they were
supposed to be treating. Aids was not contagious; it was the result of poverty
aggravating old disease patterns.
Early in 2000, Mbeki decided to set up a ‘presidential international panel of
scientists on HIV/AIDS in Africa’ to establish what he called ‘the facts’,
suggesting that the orthodox view of the causes of Aids was no more than a
‘thesis’. To the outrage of the scientific and medical fraternity, he invited a
number of well-known ‘dissidents’ to take part, even though their theories had
long since been discounted. In a letter sent in April 2000 to world leaders,
including UN secretary general Kofi Annan, US president Bill Clinton and
British prime minister Tony Blair, Mbeki explained that he had included the
dissidents because he believed all opinions needed to be considered in the search
for a response to the epidemic. He then went on to make an alarmingly
intemperate defence of the dissidents’ position, portraying them as victims of
intimidation similar to that which had occurred during the apartheid era. ‘Not
long ago in our country people were killed, tortured and imprisoned because the
authorities believed that their views were dangerous’, he wrote. ‘We are now
being asked to do the same thing that the racist apartheid tyranny did, because

there is a scientific view against which dissent is prohibited’.
In Washington, the White House was so astonished at this piece of chicanery
that officials checked to see whether the letter was a hoax. In South Africa, the
president of the Medical Research Council, Professor Malegapuru Makgoba, a
renowned immunologist, complained of the ‘lengthening list of politicallydriven decisions regarding the South African AIDS crisis’ and warned that the
country was ‘rapidly becoming a fertile breeding ground for the types of pseudoscience embraced by politicians’.
Apart from the confusion and paralysis the controversy caused in South
Africa, it took on a worldwide significance. In July 2000, South Africa was due
to host an international Aids conference. Hoping to keep the atmosphere calm,
the conference chairman, Professor Hoosen Coovadia of the University of Natal,
urged Mbeki to steer clear of scientific debates. Mbeki’s response, however, was
to authorise his ministers to make personal attacks on Coovadia and other critics,
questioning their academic credentials and suggesting they were operating as
‘frontline troops of the pharmaceutical industry’. When 5,000 scientists,
including Nobel Prize winners and directors of leading research institutions and
medical societies, signed a declaration, in advance of the conference, stating that
HIV was the direct cause of Aids, Mbeki’s health minister, Manto TshabalalaMsimang, dismissed it as an ‘elitist document’ signed only by health scientists.
‘You can’t have a certain exclusive group of people saying this is what we
believe about HIV and Aids’. Mbeki’s spokesman, Parks Mankahlana, warned
that if the drafters of the declaration gave it to the president or the government, it
would find ‘its comfortable place among the dustbins of the office’.
Opening the conference in Durban, Mbeki made no attempt to pull back into
the mainstream. He reiterated his doubts about the gravity of the epidemic and
dwelt on the findings of a 1995 World Health Organization report which argued
that the world’s biggest killer was extreme poverty—a theme favoured by the
dissidents. In a modest rebuke during his closing address to the conference,
Mandela argued for a different perspective: the dispute over the cause of Aids,
he said, was ‘distracting from the real life-and-death issues we are confronted
with’.
But Mbeki paid no heed. Following the conference, he retreated further into
semantics, conspiracy theories and pseudo-science, continuing to ridicule the
link between HIV and Aids. ‘Aids is Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome’,

he told parliament. ‘I don’t believe it’s a sensible thing to ask: “Does a virus
cause a syndrome?” It can’t. A virus will cause a disease.’ His office issued a
statement accusing Aids activists who wanted the government to provide
antiretroviral drugs in public hospitals of trying to poison black people. ‘Our
people are being used as guinea-pigs and conned into using dangerous and toxic
drugs’, said the statement; it likened this to ‘the biological warfare of the
apartheid era’. He told the ANC’s parliamentary caucus that criticism of his Aids
policies was a plot by the CIA acting in alliance with drug companies to
discredit him as the leader of efforts by the developing world to obtain a better
deal in the international economic system. Interviewed by a Cape Town
television station, he said he was not prepared to set an example by taking a
public HIV test because it would send a message that he supported a particular
scientific viewpoint—the dominant medical ‘paradigm’. In a lecture he gave at
Fort Hare University, he suggested that medical scientists and Aids activists
engaged in public campaigns had racial motives. ‘It does happen that others who
consider themselves to be our leaders take to the streets carrying their placards to
demand that because we are germ carriers and human beings of a lower order
that cannot subject its passions to reason, we must perforce adopt strange
options, to save a depraved and diseased people from perishing from selfinflicted disease’. In other words, the explanations of the causes of the epidemic
as set out by Mbeki’s critics were part of a racial conspiracy against Africans.
The effect of Mbeki’s embrace of dissident arguments was to increase public
resistance to Aids education.
Whatever contorted reasoning Mbeki tried to use, the evidence of catastrophe
continued to mount. The UN Aids agency estimated that 250,000 people in
South Africa died of Aids in 2000. The World Health Organization estimated
that one in five South African adults in 2000 was HIV positive. The South
African paediatric association estimated that 70,000 babies were born with HIV
in 2000. In 2001, Health Department surveys showed that one quarter of all
South African women receiving support from public ante-natal clinics were HIV
positive. A study by the Medical Research Council concluded that in the period
from 1999 to mid-2001, Aids had become the leading cause of death. In 2000,
40 per cent of deaths among those aged fifteen to forty-nine and 25 per cent of
total deaths, including children, were from Aids-related illnesses. The MRC
warned that if the epidemic went unchecked, it would claim between 5 and 7
million South Africans by 2010, 2 million children would be left as orphans, life
expectancy would have plunged from a pre-epidemic high of sixty-five years to

forty-one years and the annual death toll from Aids would have reached 800,000.
But still Mbeki adamantly rejected pleas for the government to provide
antiretroviral drugs through the public health system and frustrated attempts by
private welfare groups to use them in their own projects. In August 2001, an
activist organisation, the Treatment Action Campaign, which had spent four
years trying to persuade Mbeki to change course, started legal proceedings
aimed at forcing the government to provide a new antiretroviral drug called
nevirapine to help reduce mother-to-baby transmission. Mbeki’s response was to
argue that the courts had no right to make policy decisions.
Exasperated by Mbeki’s obduracy, Mandela decided on personal intervention.
In December 2001, he telephoned Edwin Cameron, an appeals court judge and
Aids activist, asking him to call at his house in Houghton. Cameron had been the
first public official in South Africa to disclose he was living with Aids. In his
book Witness to AIDS, Cameron described their meeting:
In his living room he took his seat in a large armchair and gestured to me to sit
on his right, where he could hear best. Apart from two little boys who bustled in
to say goodnight to their grandfather, we were alone. Madiba wanted to talk
about AIDS, and about ways in which he could help ensure a response that
would save lives in our country. Though the former president spoke with tactful
allusiveness, two things seemed very clear to me: he would do nothing to impair
or impugn the authority and standing of his successor; but he would play an
unequivocal part in asserting the vital significance of securing antiretroviral
treatment as part of the remedy for the growing numbers of those dying from
AIDS in South Africa.
As Cameron was leaving, Mandela asked him for a personal statement about
the way in which Aids had affected his life. The following day, Mandela called
in Professor Makgoba, one of Mbeki’s fiercest critics, who had warned that,
unless Mbeki changed course, he would be implicated in ‘the greatest genocide
of our time’.
Mandela’s own public condemnation soon followed. Visiting a treatment
centre on World Aids Day in December, he accused Mbeki of dereliction of duty
for not leading the fight against Aids. In a further attack, Mandela lambasted the
government for resisting the introduction of antiretroviral drugs. ‘We are in a
war’, he told a newspaper. ‘It has killed more people than has been the case in all
previous wars. We must not continue to be debating, to be arguing, when people

are dying’.
Mandela’s coup de grâce came in February 2002 when he awarded the Nelson
Mandela Prize for Health and Human Rights to two researchers from the
University of the Witwatersrand, Professor James McIntyre and Dr Glenda Gray,
for their pioneering work on perinatal HIV transmission strategies. Intending to
create the maximum impact, Mandela scheduled the award ceremony to take
place at the Mount Nelson Hotel in Cape Town the day before Mbeki was due to
give his annual ‘state of the nation’ address to parliament a few hundred yards
away. After drawing attention to the plight of mothers and babies with HIV,
Mandela spoke of his personal experience of the benefits of medical science,
explaining how doctors had succeeded in dealing with his own bout of prostate
cancer. Losing his place in the speech and stumbling for a moment, he looked up
and said, ‘At least I am willing to admit when I have made a mistake’.
Mbeki’s response was characteristically vindictive. At a meeting of the
ANC’s national executive committee in March 2002, with Mandela present,
Mbeki ensured he was humiliated. As Mbeki looked on silently, one member
after another stood up to abuse Mandela for breaking party discipline, vying with
each other to deride him in order to curry favour with Mbeki. According to one
witness, Ngoako Ramatlhodi, they were like ‘a pack of wild dogs tearing their
prey’—‘wild, aggressive and merciless’. Only two members defended
Mandela’s right to speak out. ‘After his vicious mauling’, said Ramatlhodi,
‘Madiba looked twice his age, old and ashen’. The NEC went on to decide not to
provide antiretroviral drugs to pregnant women, rape victims or health workers
because these drugs ‘remained unproven’.
Mandela left the meeting appalled at how Mbeki had stifled the culture of
debate and dissent within the ANC and, even worse, how ANC colleagues had
slavishly followed a policy condemning thousands to an early death simply out
of fear of him. It made Mandela all the more determined to continue his own
campaign.
At the 2002 UN Aids conference in Barcelona, Mandela urged world leaders
to do more to reduce the stigma of HIV/Aids. Then on his return to South Africa,
he decided to pay a visit to Zackie Achmat, the founder of the Treatment Action
Campaign, at his home in Muizenberg. Though weakened by Aids, Achmat had
thrown his energies into contesting in the courts Mbeki’s refusal to provide
government support for antiretroviral treatment and pledged not to take any

antiretroviral drugs himself until they were made freely available to those in
need.
Before setting out for Muizenberg, Mandela called round to Mbeki’s
residence to ask him whether he might like to come along, pointing out how
much South Africa’s reputation would suffer if Achmat died. Describing the
incident to Achmat, Mandela told him, ‘I don’t want to tell you how quickly I
had to leave’.
Towards the end of his visit, Mandela donned a T-shirt emblazoned with the
slogan ‘HIV-POSITIVE’ that Achmat had designed and that had been worn by
thousands of Aids activists. The photograph of Mandela wearing it was widely
published. ‘His smiling famous features atop the white cotton HIV POSITIVE
T-shirt may have marked a turning point in our national struggle about the
meaning of AIDS’, wrote Edwin Cameron. ‘Perhaps it was his intervening moral
voice that made the change in the government’s resistance to antiretroviral drugs
inevitable’.
Even though Mbeki came under intense pressure to back down, ridiculed and
vilified at home and abroad, he remained as obstinate as ever. ‘We will not be
intimidated, terrorised, bludgeoned, manipulated, stampeded, or in any other
way forced to adopt policies and programmes inimical to the health of our
people’, he wrote in an online letter in April 2002. ‘That we are poor and black
does not mean that we cannot think for ourselves and determine what is good for
us. Neither does it mean that we are available to be bought, whatever the prices’.
He accused his critics, such as the Treatment Action Campaign, of conducting
‘an extremely harmful and unacceptable campaign to deny our people all
information and knowledge about the incidence of diseases of poverty in our
country. . . . Despite the propaganda offensive, the reality is that the predominant
feature of illnesses that cause disease and death among the black people in our
country is poverty’.
The courts, however, sided with the Treatment Action Campaign. After a
series of court hearings, in July 2002 the Constitutional Court ordered the
government to provide nevirapine to all HIV-positive pregnant mothers at all
public hospitals free of charge, ‘without delay’.
Even then, Mbeki continued to drag his feet. His health minister, Manto
Tshabalala-Msimang, a crony from exile days, recommended quack remedies
such as eating garlic, beetroot or olive oil, which she claimed had produced

‘astounding results’. Only when further court action was threatened did the
government finally respond with an Aids drugs programme. By then, 1 million
people had died from Aids, the number of people infected by HIV had reached
5.3 million, an estimated 2,000 were infected with HIV every twenty-four hours
and some 600 people were dying from Aids each day.
Yet still Mbeki continued to wield what Edwin Cameron in 2003 called ‘the
dead hand of denialism’, producing further confusion about government policy.
In 2003, when asked by the Washington Post if he had personal experience of
the Aids epidemic, Mbeki responded by saying that ‘personally, I don’t know
anyone who has died of Aids’, implying that Aids victims had in fact died from
other causes. Even when close colleagues and members of his staff were struck
down, he remained in the same state of denial. Offers of foreign assistance were
similarly spurned. When former US president Bill Clinton offered to set up a
team of twenty experts to help South Africa draw up a national treatment plan,
Mbeki initially agreed to the idea, but then failed to extend an invitation once the
team was ready to leave for South Africa.
Despite the universal ridicule that Tshabalala-Msimang had endured as health
minister, Mbeki re-appointed her to the post after the 2004 general election and
allowed her to continue peddling her vegetable remedies and warning of the
dangers of using antiretroviral treatment. At the 2006 UN Aids conference in
Toronto, to the derision of other delegates, she set up a stall stocked with garlic,
lemons and beetroot, promoting them as a suitable treatment. In an angry
outburst, the UN special envoy on Aids, Stephen Lewis, described her and
Mbeki as ‘obtuse, dilatory and negligent’. South Africa, he said, was ‘the only
state in Africa whose government continues to propound theories more worthy
of a lunatic fringe than of a concerned and compassionate state’. He added, ‘The
government has a lot to atone for. I am of the opinion that they can never
achieve redemption’. A study by the Harvard School of Public Health published
in 2008 estimated that by denying antiretroviral drugs to Aids patients and to
pregnant women, Mbeki had caused the premature death of 365,000 people,
including 35,000 babies.

Alongside Mbeki’s infamous handling of the Aids crisis came mounting public
anger over government corruption and his attempts to cover it up. In September
1999, an opposition politician, Patricia de Lille, told parliament that she had

come into possession of a ten-page memorandum signed by ‘concerned ANC
MPs’ claiming high-level corruption in the arms deal. ‘South African companies,
interested groups, senior government officials and members of parliament who
are involved in the Arms Deal are corrupting the democratic process in South
Africa’, said the memorandum. The Auditor-General’s Office took up the case
and issued a preliminary report in August 2000 that identified a litany of
irregularities in the awarding of contracts. The report questioned why the
government had violated its own procurement procedures by deciding to exclude
cost as a criterion, leading to the purchase of the most expensive equipment on
offer. It pointed to several apparent conflicts of interest among key decisionmakers. One was the former minister of defence, Joe Modise, who, within weeks
of leaving office in 1999, had joined a private defence company in which he had
previously acquired a substantial stake and which had successfully bid for subcontract work. Another was Chippy Shaik, the head of procurement at the
Department of Defence, whose brother, Schabir Shaik, was director of another
private company also awarded valuable sub-contract work. Alarmed by evidence
of corruption, the auditor-general, Shauket Fakie, recommended further
investigation.
The preliminary report of the Auditor-General’s Office was taken up by
members of the Standing Committee on Public Accounts (Scopa), a
parliamentary watchdog committee headed by an opposition po - litician, Gavin
Woods. The leader of the ANC members of Scopa was Andrew Feinstein, a
young political activist who threw himself into the fray with idealistic zeal. After
collecting its own evidence of bribery and malpractice, Scopa issued a report in
October 2000 urging the government to mount a major investigation by a joint
team, including an anti-corruption unit with wide-ranging powers, led by Judge
Willem Heath.
Mbeki’s reaction was swift. ‘We soon started to receive reports of the
President’s apoplexy’, wrote Feinstein. ANC members of Scopa were hauled
before the party’s ‘Governance Committee’ and subjected to tirades of abuse.
Pointing aggressively at Feinstein, Mbeki’s chief enforcer, Essop Pahad,
shouted, ‘Who the fuck do you think you are, questioning the integrity of the
government, the Ministers and the President?’ After the meeting, Laloo Chiba,
an ANC veteran who had spent years on Robben Island with Mandela, remarked
to Feinstein, ‘You know, comrade, many years on the Island couldn’t break me,
but I think Thabo’s ANC might.’

In private, several senior ANC figures tried quietly to persuade Feinstein to
give up the chase. One of them explained that he was never going to ‘win this
thing’.
‘Why not?’ asked Feinstein.
‘Because we received money from the same winning companies. How do you
think we funded the 1999 election?’
Still intent on pursuing the scandal, Feinstein and Woods were subsequently
taken by an investigator working for a government agency to a Pretoria
basement where they were shown reams of documents—a paper trail of at least
10 million rands’ worth of improper payments made directly to Modise.
Fearing further exposure, Mbeki instituted a full-scale cover-up. A cabal of
cabinet ministers was wheeled out to attack not only Scopa but also the auditorgeneral; they rejected ‘with contempt’ any insinuation of corruption and argued
that there was no need for an investigation. In a paranoid speech on television,
Mbeki resorted to his habit of blaming the hubbub over corruption on the work
of conspirators. ‘Various entities’, he said, had been hired to mount a sustained
campaign to discredit the government by making ‘unfounded and
unsubstantiated allegations of corruption’. He adamantly refused to allow
Heath’s anti-corruption unit to get involved.
He also moved swiftly to force parliament into line. The speaker of
parliament, Frene Ginwala, who had hitherto supported Scopa’s work and
assured its members of her protection, now deserted them and joined the attack.
Feinstein was removed as the head of Scopa’s ANC members. The ANC’s chief
whip, Tony Yengeni, explained: ‘Some people have the notion that the public
accounts committee members should act in a non-partisan manner. But, in our
system, no ANC member has a free vote’. The ANC proceeded to use its
majority to prevent Scopa from ever acting independently again, prompting
Feinstein to quit parliament in protest.
An official report, written mainly by the Auditor-General’s Office but with
contributions from the National Prosecuting Authority and the Public Protector,
was presented to parliament in November 2001. The report exonerated the
government of any wrongdoing: ‘no evidence was found of any improper or
unlawful conduct by the Government’. But subsequent court action revealed that
a draft of the report had been sent to Mbeki and other members of the
government in advance of publication and that significant alterations had been

made. The alterations included the addition of the key phrase exonerating the
government. Thus, in his determination to cover up the scandal, Mbeki had
contaminated the reputation of three major agencies of the state set up to guard
the public interest.
The extent of corruption became clear in subsequent years as the result of
investigations carried out in Britain, France and Germany that revealed that at
least $300 million had been paid out by foreign defence contractors in bribes and
‘commissions’ to politicians, officials, middlemen and the ANC. Among the
discoveries was that Mbeki himself had held secret discussions in France with a
defence contractor which had subsequently been awarded a contract worth 2
billion rands to supply the navy with four ships. Mbeki claimed, implausibly,
that he did not recall the occasion.
‘The Arms Deal and its cover-up’, wrote Feinstein, ‘were the moment at
which the ANC and the South African government lost their moral compass,
when the country’s political leadership was prepared to undermine the
institutions of our democracy—for which they and many others had fought—to
protect themselves and the party’.

Mbeki’s presidency descended further into ignominy over his handling of the
crisis in neighbouring Zimbabwe, where Robert Mugabe, facing growing
opposition to his corrupt and autocratic regime, launched a sustained campaign
of terror to keep himself in power. Defeated in a referendum in 2000, Mugabe
turned first against white farmers, sending gangs of armed youths to drive them
off their properties, hoping this would help restore his popularity He then set out
to destroy the opposition, sanctioning murder, torture and lawlessness of every
kind. ‘No matter what force you have, this is my territory and that which is mine
I cling [to] unto death’, he said in 2001. Year after year, he concentrated
government resources on maintaining his grip in Zimbabwe—rigging elections,
violating the courts, subverting the judiciary, suppressing the independent press
and licensing the police and security forces to enforce repression at will. The
result was catastrophic. Zimbabwe was reduced to a bankrupt and impoverished
state, with a worthless currency. Commercial agriculture collapsed, leaving the
country dependent on foreign food aid to prevent mass starvation. Education and
health services disintegrated. Unemployment soared to 90 per cent. Several
million people—about a quarter of the population—fled across the border to

South Africa in order to survive.
How to deal with the tyrant living next door became a major preoccupation in
South Africa. South Africa possessed a unique ability to bring pressure to bear
on its landlocked northern neighbour. It provided transport links, electricity
supplies and other services vital for Zimbabwe’s welfare. In the 1970s, the South
African government, for reasons of self-interest, had used these means to force
Ian Smith to concede black majority rule. At an early stage in the crisis, Mandela
spoke out against Mugabe. ‘We have to be ruthless in denouncing such leaders’,
he said in May 2000. Western governments piled in with a torrent of
condemnation and eventually a package of sanctions directed personally at
Mugabe and his cronies.
But Mbeki chose what he termed ‘quiet diplomacy’ to deal with Mugabe,
arguing that discreet persuasion offered a better prospect. His efforts, however,
failed again and again. Mugabe repeatedly promised Mbeki that he would
negotiate a settlement with the opposition but never made any attempt to do so.
Despite being humiliated by one example after another of Mugabe’s perfidy,
Mbeki held fast to the idea that quiet diplomacy would produce results. Not once
did he speak out in defence of human rights in Zimbabwe. Indeed, he began to
parrot Mugabe’s own propaganda. The only reason that such a fuss had been
made about Zimbabwe, he said, was ‘because white people died and white
people were deprived of their property’. The fact that Mugabe’s tyranny had
inflicted violence, hardship and misery on millions of blacks did not seem to
Mbeki sufficient cause to protest. As the lawlessness continued, Mbeki, far from
becoming more critical of Mugabe, acted to shield him against the onslaught of
Western outrage. He endorsed all of Mugabe’s rigged elections and vigorously
opposed sanctions against him. In the West, Mbeki lost all credibility.
Mbeki’s determination to back a brutal African dictator, rather than stand up
for human rights, followed a long tradition by leaders in Africa of turning a blind
eye to the nefarious activities of their peers for the sake of group solidarity. It
won him support in Africanist circles in South Africa that celebrated
Zimbabwe’s example of giving the whites a good kicking and hoped for
something similar in South Africa. But it caused alarm among foreign investors
and nervousness among the white population and aroused further misgivings
about Mbeki’s commitment to democratic values. Moreover, Mbeki’s backing of
Mugabe sullied the reputation of the ANC, which had received so much help in
its own struggle for human rights and now remained indifferent to the struggle

that others in the neighbourhood faced. In a thinly veiled rebuke, Archbishop
Tutu, forever the voice of conscience in South Africa, pronounced himself
‘baffled’ by African leaders who supported dictators like Mugabe. ‘Human
rights are human rights and they are of universal validity or they are nothing’, he
said.

As the ailments of old age took their toll, Mandela retreated from the public
arena. His main public activity became his involvement in the Aids campaign. In
2003, he hosted a star-studded charity concert in Cape Town, called the 46664
concert after his Robben Island prison number, to raise awareness of Aids issues.
Subsequent 46664 concerts were held elsewhere in South Africa and in Spain,
Norway and England. When his own son, Makgatho, died from Aids at the age
of fifty-four in January 2005, Mandela made a public announcement about the
cause of his death: ‘Let us give publicity to HIV/AIDS and not hide it’, he said,
surrounded by family members, ‘because [that is] the only way to make it appear
like a normal illness’.
But otherwise he made few public pronouncements. In the aftermath of his
bruising confrontation over Aids, disenchanted with the turn of events, his
appetite for political engagement dwindled. Nevertheless, he was not averse to
making clear his dislike of Mbeki’s presidential style. At a wedding banquet in
2003, filmed by a television crew, Mandela became increasingly angry at
Mbeki’s late arrival, which was holding up the proceedings. When Mbeki finally
arrived forty-five minutes late, Mandela snapped at him, ‘We are hungry’.
Without bothering to apologise, Mbeki retorted churlishly, ‘I’m sure you are’.
To Mbeki’s evident exasperation, Mandela took up the matter in his address to
the gathering. ‘In the late thirties [1930s]’, he said, ‘there used to be a president
of the ANC who used to say, “I am the black prime minister. I cannot come early
to meetings. I must come late, and all of you must see what a black prime
minister in this country looks like”. I think my president here has taken after that
president’.
In 2004, at the age of eighty-five, his body now frail, his hair turned white, he
decided to withdraw altogether and announced his retirement from public life. ‘I
am confident that nobody . . . will accuse me of selfishness if I ask to spend
time, while I am still in good health, with my family, my friends and also with
myself ’.

His appearances in public became increasingly rare. One of the most
memorable occurred in 2006 when he turned up as a ‘surprise’ guest of honour
at a glittering celebration of F. W. de Klerk’s seventieth birthday held at Cape
Town’s venerable Mount Nelson Hotel. The two men had frequently clashed. In
his autobiography published in 1998, de Klerk made clear his resentment of
Mandela’s ‘bitter and unfounded attacks’ on him. Mandela’s purpose now was to
effect a personal reconciliation.
Before an array of distinguished guests—ANC politicians, former apartheidera ministers and prominent businessmen—Mandela opened his remarks in
Afrikaans, ‘Dis goed om te sien hoe ons saam oud word’—‘It’s good to see us
growing old together’. He spoke lightheartedly of how they had both become
‘retired and almost forgotten’ men, ageing gently. ‘You may gloat that you are
twenty years behind me in this process. But remember I spent thirty years idly
relaxing on islands and in other resorts while you were battling it out with the
maddening crowd. So in reality we are of equal age’. But his main point was
more serious. He wanted, he said, to give de Klerk due credit for the shared
moments in history which ‘in all humility on our parts, might have helped shape
our country, our continent, and, in modest ways, the world’.

To Mandela’s dismay, in his twilight years the ANC was torn apart by
internecine strife. As Mbeki tried to enforce his personal control of the party
with ever greater determination, a vicious feud broke out between his faction of
loyal supporters and a rival faction led by Jacob Zuma, once a close friend.
Mbeki had appointed Zuma as deputy president in 1999 because he seemed to
represent no threat to Mbeki’s own position. A polygamous politician with no
formal schooling and no administrative ability, Zuma was not considered to be
presidential material. The son of a domestic servant and a rural policeman, he
had learned to read and write in English only as an adult while serving a ten-year
prison sentence on Robben Island. Subsequently, in exile, he befriended Mbeki
and rose to become the ANC’s chief of intelligence. On his return to South
Africa, Zuma developed a strong following in his home base in KwaZulu-Natal.
A pragmatic man, he was as much at ease with Zulu traditionalists as with
radical activists and played a significant role in helping to ease tensions with
Buthelezi’s Inkatha party. He also drew support from trade unionists, left-wing
enthusiasts in the ANC and the Communist Party, all infuriated by Mbeki’s freemarket economic policies.

As disillusionment with Mbeki’s leadership gathered momentum—over Aids,
Zimbabwe, economic policy and his dictatorial habits—there was growing talk
in ANC circles about the possibility of replacing Mbeki with Zuma. Alert to the
danger, Mbeki required Zuma to declare publicly that he had no interest in
becoming president and began a campaign to force him out of the deputy
presidency of both the ANC and the state. But whereas Mbeki’s previous rivals
for leadership had preferred to withdraw rather than see their reputations trashed,
Zuma decided to fight back. For a period of five years, South Africa was
dragged through a morass of intrigue and infighting that threatened to undermine
its young democracy.
At the centre of this sordid struggle was the issue of high-level corruption
emanating from the arms deal which had spread through the ANC like a poison.
The name most often mentioned as the main culprit was former defence minister
Joe Modise, but after his death in 2001 Mbeki blocked any investigation into
Modise’s role. With Jacob Zuma, however, it was a different matter. He became
the subject of a series of leaks by government investigators hinting at his
involvement in corruption. In August 2003, the director of public prosecutions,
Bulelani Ngcuka, announced that there was a ‘prima facie’ case against Zuma
but that he had decided not to charge him as it was unclear whether the case was
‘winnable’ in court. Zuma’s supporters claimed that the allegations of corruption
had been levelled against him simply to discredit him and wreck his chances of
bidding for the presidency.
The evidence against Zuma was, in fact, considerable. Since his return from
exile, he had fallen ever deeper into debt and had become heavily dependent for
financial help on a wealthy Durban businessman, Schabir Shaik, who had acted
as a ‘banker’ to the ANC during the apartheid years, laundering money. When
Mandela was still president, hearing of Zuma’s financial difficulties, he had
offered to help him out with a personal loan. But Zuma continued to rely on
Shaik. Over a six-year period, Shaik made hundreds of payments to Zuma
totalling in all about 1.3 million rands. Shaik frequently boasted of his friendship
with Zuma, using it to promote his business activities.
When the government went shopping for arms, Shaik, hoping to win a slice of
the contracts, set up a joint venture with a French arms company, Thomson, and
enlisted Zuma’s help. In 1999, Shaik’s joint venture was awarded a substantial
sub-contract. When investigators began to probe the arms deal, Shaik, according
to state prosecutors, met a Thomson director to solicit a bribe of 500,000 rands a

year to be paid to Zuma for a period of two years in return for his protection
from any investigation into allegations of corruption on the part of Thomson.
The arrangement was confirmed at a meeting among Shaik, Zuma and the
Thomson director in March 2000. In the event, Shaik and Zuma received only
250,000 rands. Compared to other bribes and ‘commissions’ handed out during
the arms deal, the sum was in the minor league.
In 2004, Shaik was put on trial on corruption charges, accused of making
payments to Zuma in return for Zuma’s support of his business activities and of
soliciting a bribe for Zuma of 500,000 rands a year. The prosecution claimed
that there had been ‘a generally corrupt relationship’ between Shaik and Zuma.
In June 2005, Shaik was found guilty and sentenced to fifteen years’
imprisonment.
A fight to the finish now followed. Two weeks after Shaik had been found
guilty, Mbeki fired Zuma as deputy president of South Africa. But when Mbeki
tried to persuade Zuma to resign as deputy president of the ANC, Zuma
adamantly refused. One week later, state prosecutors announced that they
intended to bring criminal charges of corruption against Zuma. When charged,
Zuma retorted that anyone wanting to know about corruption in the arms deal
should ask Mbeki.
The backlash was ferocious. Zuma’s dismissal provoked a wave of popular
protest. Supporters claimed Zuma was the victim of Mbeki’s machinations to
eliminate him from office. Mbeki, they maintained, was using the police,
intelligence services and prosecutors to do his dirty work. At a fractious meeting
of the ANC’s national general council, delegates defied Mbeki by voting to
retain Zuma as deputy president. After a series of police raids on the homes and
offices of Zuma and his associates, trade union leaders denounced what they
called his ‘brutal persecution’, demanded his reinstatement as state deputy
president and called for a halt to court proceedings, claiming that the courts were
too biased to give him a fair hearing. A sustained campaign was mounted to
portray the judiciary as ‘counter-revolutionary’.
Both sides in the feud descended ever deeper into the mire. In the middle of
grappling with charges of corruption, Zuma was hit by accusations of rape. The
case against him had all the hallmarks of a ‘honeytrap’ orchestrated by his
opponents. His accuser was an HIV-POSITIVE family friend. Zuma admitted
having sex with the woman but denied rape. State prosecutors devoted huge

resources to winning a conviction, presenting a list of twenty-eight witnesses.
But it transpired that the complainant was an unstable woman with a long history
of making rape accusations, four of them against priests. Zuma was duly
acquitted.
His reputation, however, was severely damaged by his performance in court.
He claimed that the woman had solicited his attention by wearing a short skirt,
and he went on to explain that in Zulu tradition it would have been an insult if he
had refused to gratify her. He admitted that he had had unprotected sex with
someone he knew to be HIV positive. But, he said, as a former head of the
National Aids Council, he knew that the risk was ‘minimal’. In any case, he had
taken a shower after sex to minimise the risk of contracting the disease. Zuma
was quickly reduced to a figure of ridicule. Cartoonists delighted in depicting
him with a showerhead fixed above his head.
In September 2006, Zuma won a respite from prosecution for corruption when
a judge terminated his trial on technical grounds, but left the way open for
prosecutors to continue their investigations. Rebounding with confidence, Zuma
threw himself into the task of winning the post of ANC president at a party
conference in Polokwane in December 2007, standing in opposition to Mbeki.
Though the constitution prevented Mbeki from standing for a third term as South
Africa’s president after his second term ended in 2009, he intended to perpetuate
his grip on power by winning a third term as ANC president and keeping control
from there.
A raucous party conference gave Zuma a two-thirds majority, ensuring that he
would become the party’s candidate for the presidency in the general election
due in 2009. Many delegates voted for Zuma simply to get rid of Mbeki. But
Zuma’s ordeal was not yet over. Two weeks after his election as ANC president,
prosecutors charged him with sixteen offences, including racketeering,
corruption, money laundering and fraud.
His trial provided a further twist. In a two-hour indictment of Mbeki’s
government in September 2008, a Durban High Court judge, Chris Nicolson,
effectively accepted that Zuma had been the target of a political conspiracy.
Mbeki and his ministers, said the judge, had colluded with national prosecutors
to lay charges against Zuma as part of a ‘titanic political struggle’, in violation of
the constitution. He declared the charges ‘invalid and set aside’, but emphasised
that his decision to throw out the case was not a reflection of Zuma’s guilt or

innocence.
Zuma’s revenge came swiftly. One week later, the ANC forced Mbeki to
resign and replaced him with a caretaker president for the interim before the
2009 general election. But Mbeki was not yet finished. He challenged
Nicolson’s judgement in the courts, arguing that it was improper for the judge to
have made such ‘vexatious, scandalous and prejudicial’ findings about Mbeki’s
role in the affair. In January 2009, the Supreme Court of Appeal ruled that
Nicolson had indeed ‘overstepped’ the limits of his authority by suggesting that
there had been political meddling in Zuma’s prosecution.
Finally, in April 2009, just two weeks before the election, the National
Prosecuting Authority dropped all charges against Zuma, admitting new
evidence of serious flaws in the prosecution. Intercepted phone calls between
senior officials showed that they had conspired over the timing of charges
against Zuma so as to damage his campaign for the presidency of the ANC. The
legal process had thus been ‘tainted’. Nevertheless, said the NPA, withdrawing
the charges against Zuma did not amount to an acquittal; Zuma was still not off
the hook.
In the run-up to the election, the ANC was split asunder. Mbeki loyalists left
to set up a new party, Congress of the People. Its leader, Mosiuoa Lekota, a
former defence minister, argued that the ANC had destroyed the ‘rainbownation’ ideal for which Mandela had strived. Zuma, he said, was not fit to be
president.
In the event, the ANC won with nearly two-thirds of the vote. But it was a
victory that inspired as much a sense of foreboding as of celebration.

Mandela avoided taking sides with either of the factions. But ever loyal to the
ANC, as the election approached, he made a rare appearance at a rally to give his
public backing to Zuma. Yet the ANC had become a sorry spectacle. It was now
dominated by a corrupt elite bent on self-enrichment, on making fortunes by
virtue of political connections. The ANC’s national executive committee, elected
in December 2007, included twenty-eight members with interests in sixty-nine
companies worth billions of rands; several more had spouses with vast
empowerment empires. More than a quarter of its seventy-seven members had
criminal convictions or were under criminal investigation. Among them was

Winnie Madikizela-Mandela, who gained first place, winning more votes than
any other candidate.
ANC leaders treated the public sector, in effect, as a spoils system. They set
up a secret network of front companies, called the Chancellor House Group, to
acquire state contracts in order to channel funds back to the party. By 2007, the
party’s investments had risen to 1.75 billion rands, much of it funded through
such practices. The objective was to ensure that the ANC elite had the means to
entrench themselves in power forever or, as Jacob Zuma put it memorably, ‘until
Jesus comes back’.
The ANC administration was riddled not just with corruption but also with
rank incompetence. Because of a failure by government ministers to plan ahead,
South Africa was hit by an energy crisis in 2008 that caused widespread
economic disruption. The impact was long term. The state power corporation,
Eskom, was obliged to warn foreign companies against investment in new
power-intensive projects until at least 2013. South Africa’s place in the global
economy began to slip badly. Advances that the government made in providing
housing, piped water and electricity to poor communities were soon
overshadowed by failing education, health and other public services. At every
level, there was an acute shortage of skills, much of it aggravated by Mbeki’s
drive to dispense with white expertise. Street protests against deteriorating
public services became increasingly common.
All this was a far cry from the heady optimism of Mandela’s rainbow nation.
The sense of common citizenship and national pride that Mandela had worked so
hard to engender had long since been eroded. Looking back, South Africans
viewed the Mandela era as a golden age of hope and harmony. They missed his
radiant smile, his self-deprecating humour, his benign presence, indeed the touch
of magic he brought to everyday life. Mandela, however, preferred a simple
verdict on his own career: ‘I was not a messiah, but an ordinary man who had
become a leader because of extraordinary circumstances’.

NOTES ON SOURCES
The published work on Mandela is extensive. His autobiography, Long Walk to
Freedom, published in 1994, provides a wealth of material. Several collections
of his articles and speeches have been produced. The first collection, No Easy
Walk to Freedom, which appeared in 1965, contains an introduction written by
Oliver Tambo and many of the articles Mandela wrote for Michael Harmel’s
journal, Liberation, during the 1950s. A second collection, The Struggle Is My
Life, was published in 1978 to mark his sixtieth birthday. A documentary survey
of the struggle against apartheid from 1948 to 1990, Mandela, Tambo and the
African National Congress, edited by Sheridan Johns and R. Hunt Davis Jr. and
published in 1991, covers the same ground with much additional material. All
three collections include extracts from Mandela’s testimony in the treason trial
and his court statements in 1962 and 1964. A fourth collection, Nelson Mandela
Speaks, published in 1993, includes speeches and statements he made between
1990 and 1993. Further documentary material on Mandela is contained in a fivevolume work on African politics compiled by Thomas Karis, Gwendolen Carter
and Gail M. Gerhart, From Protest to Challenge (1972-1997). Records of the
treason trial and the Rivonia trial are held by the William Cullen Library at the
University of the Witwatersrand. In the years after his release from prison in
1990, Mandela gave scores of interviews and press conferences, which are
located in various newspaper archives.
The first of Mandela’s biographers was Mary Benson, a friend of Mandela’s
from the 1950s who interviewed him while he was underground in the early
1960s; her biography originally appeared in 1986 and was updated and
republished in 1994. A biography by Fatima Meer, another friend, was first
published in 1988 and includes a collection of letters and interviews with
members of Mandela’s family. Anthony Sampson, also a friend of Mandela’s
from the 1950s, produced an authorised biography in 1999.
Recent overviews of South Africa’s history include Leonard Thompson’s
masterly account, A History of South Africa (2001); William Beinart’s
Twentieth-Century South Africa (2001); the fifth edition of South Africa, by T.
R. H. Davenport and Christopher Saunders (2000); Frank Welsh’s History of
South Africa (2000); and Robert Ross’s Concise History (2008). Martin
Meredith deals with the making of South Africa in Diamonds, Gold and War

(2007)
The following chapter notes include references to some of the books which I
found to be of particular interest and value. A more complete list can be found in
the Select Bibliography.