JOHANNESBURG
JOHANNESBURG WAS KNOWN IN THE VERNACULAR AS EGOLI—
THE city of gold. It stood in the centre of the richest goldfield ever discovered, a
reef stretching for some forty miles along the line of a rocky ridge named by
Afrikaner farmers as the Witwatersrand, the Ridge of White Waters, after the
glistening streams that flowed from it. The gold rush there, starting in 1886, had
brought hordes of white foreigners to Paul Kruger’s ramshackle Transvaal
republic and transformed a barren stretch of highveld, 6,000 feet above sea level,
into a landscape of mining headgear, battery stamps and ore dumps. From the
original tented diggers’ camp there had grown a frontier town of corrugated-iron
buildings and boarding houses, renowned for drunkenness, debauchery and
gambling. ‘Monte Carlo superimposed on Sodom and Gomorrah’ was one
visitor’s verdict. A survey in 1895 counted ninety-seven brothels of various
nationalities, including thirty-six French, twenty German and five Russian; the
brothels in one part of the town were so numerous that it became known as
‘Frenchfontein’.
By 1896, after only a decade’s existence, Johannesburg’s population had
reached 100,000. Railways had arrived from the Cape, from Durban and from
Delagoa Bay (Maputo). More substantial buildings had appeared: a stock
exchange, banks and mining houses. At the newly built Rand Club, the white
elite—bankers, financiers, lawyers, engineers and businessmen—gathered to
grumble and plot against Kruger’s republic, for gold had made the Transvaal the
richest state in southern Africa. By 1899 more than a quarter of the world’s
output of gold came from the Witwatersrand.
All this was too glittering a prize for Britain, then at the peak of its imperial
ambitions, to ignore. An attempted coup d’êtat, known as the Jameson Raid,
engineered by mining magnates with the connivance of British ministers, failed
ignominiously. But, still determined to extend the realms of empire, Britain
provoked a war with Kruger’s republic in 1899, expecting it to be over within a
few months. Much of Johannesburg’s population—the immigrant miners,

shopkeepers, prostitutes and pimps—fled to the Cape Colony and Natal to await
the end; most of the mines closed down. But it was eight months before the
British army managed to reach Johannesburg and another two years before the
war was finally over.
In the postwar era, Johannesburg acquired a more settled appearance, though
its reputation remained much the same. ‘It is a city of unbridled squander and
unfathomable squalor,’ wrote the Australian journalist Ambrose Pratt in 1913.
Its population by then had risen to more than a quarter of a million, and its
boundaries extended to eighty-two square miles. Wealthy whites lived over the
crest of the ridge in grand mansions in Parktown, with views stretching away to
the Magaliesburg Mountains to the north, protected from the noise and dust of
the mine workings and ore dumps by northerly winds which blew it all
southwards. The middle classes went north and east, to suburbs like Hillbrow,
Yeoville and Bellevue.
Working-class suburbs sprang up in Jeppe, Troyeville and Belgravia in the
east and Fordsburg to the west. And a location for the poorest whites, mainly
unskilled Afrikaners driven out of the Transvaal countryside by poverty and war,
was specially established in Vrededorp to the west. The city centre itself
continued to prosper and expand. At its core was the financial district,
Marshallstown, where the City Hall, the Stock Exchange and the Rand Club
stood within a few blocks of each other. Johannesburg, above all, was a city of
money. But its origins as a mining camp were never far away. The din of stamp
batteries crushing gold ore persisted throughout the night in the city centre and
on windy days clouds of yellow dust from nearby ore dumps swirled through the
streets.
The African population survived in this milieu as best it could. African
mineworkers were confined to mine compounds, living in primitive barracks,
sleeping on narrow concrete shelves, cut off from family and social life on
average for periods of nine to twelve months before returning to their homes at
the end of their contracts. Thousands of migrant mineworkers passed through the
railway station in Johannesburg each week but were otherwise seldom seen
there. The resident African population mainly dwelt in squalid and overcrowded
quarters scattered around the town. Johannesburg’s municipality made little
effort to provide adequate housing, even for its own employees. Many
‘locations’ like Sophiatown, Martindale and Newclare to the west and Klipspruit
ten miles to the south-west were built adjacent to municipal sewage-depositing

sites. Klipspruit, Johannesburg’s first ‘Native location’, was the worst. By 1917,
it was virtually surrounded by a sewage farm; the mortality rate was appalling.
Close by lay Pimville, established in 1904 originally as an emergency camp for
refugees evacuated from a city slum after an outbreak of bubonic plague. Most
of its buildings had been condemned time and again but were left to stand
because of the lack of alternative housing. Part of Pimville consisted of ninetynine water tanks sliced lengthways down the middle. In 1940, Pimville
possessed sixty-three water taps to serve an estimated 15,000 people. Closer to
the centre, scattered throughout the western, central and eastern districts of
Johannesburg, a network of ‘slumyards’ proliferated, properties controlled by
white landlords who crammed as many tenants as possible into shanties and
single rooms at exorbitant rents. Slumyard life revolved around the illicit liquor
trade and the ‘incessant relentless war’ that police fought to suppress it.
In the mid-1930s, in an attempt to make urban segregation more effective,
Johannesburg’s municipality destroyed many of these slumyards, moving the
population to a new location twelve miles to the south-west, in the vicinity of
Klipspruit. It was named Orlando, after the chairman of the municipal Native
Affairs Committee at that time, Councillor Edwin Orlando Leake. By 1940,
nearly 6,000 houses had been built there. Orlando was the prototype for modernday Soweto: monotonous rows of identical houses stretching across the barren
highveld, with few facilities provided other than municipal beer halls. The
advantage for the authorities was that it was relatively easy to regulate and
administer.
To avoid municipal controls, many Africans preferred to live in the freehold
areas of Sophiatown, four miles west of the city centre, and Alexandra, nine
miles to the north, lying just outside the municipal boundary, where blacks had
been allowed to buy and own land since the early years of the century. Both
were densely populated, full of dilapidated buildings, disease-ridden, rife with
crime, violence and prostitution, but home for an ever-increasing black
community. By 1940, Johannesburg’s total African population had risen to a
quarter of a million.
The official government attitude towards South Africa’s black urban
population was based on the Stallard commission of inquiry into local
government in the Transvaal, published in 1922, which asserted that ‘natives—
men, women and children—should only be permitted within municipal areas in
so far and for so long as their presence is demanded by the wants of the white

population’ and ‘should depart there from when they cease to minister to the
needs of the white man’. The towns were regarded essentially as white
preserves; Afri - cans living there were treated as ‘temporary sojourners’, a
convenient reservoir of labour for use when required, but whose real homes were
in rural reserves. Hence there was no need for the authorities to make anything
more than the minimum provision for them. To ensure this policy worked, a
system of pass laws was employed. African men were required to carry passes
recording permission to work and live in an urban area. They needed passes for
travel, for taxes, for curfews, and these were frequently demanded for inspection
by police. Mass police raids in the locations were regularly organised to ensure
that the pass laws and liquor regulations were being enforced, and, as a police
commission of inquiry noted in 1937, the methods used were often violent.
For the hundreds of new arrivals who reached Johannesburg each week,
mainly peasants trying to escape poverty in the reserves and drawn by the
prospect of jobs, the city was a bewildering and hostile place. The tall buildings,
the noise, the traffic, the crowds, the bustle were but a beginning. Everywhere
were signs proclaiming ‘For Europeans Only’, ‘Slegs vir Blankes’. For Africans,
there were no cafés, restaurants or hotels which they could use; public transport
was segregated. Life became an immediate struggle to secure a room, to acquire
the right passes, to find a job. Because of industrial colour-bar legislation,
Africans were confined largely to unskilled, manual work; no skilled work was
available. But only a small percentage of new arrivals could read or write or
possessed a trade. What work they could find was invariably low-paid, with long
hours and poor conditions. Whites they encountered were often abusive. And on
the streets, there was the ever-present danger of tsotsis, young gangsters armed
with flick knives and sharpened bicycle spokes who left scores of victims
maimed and paralysed each week.
Yet the stream of new arrivals grew ever greater. Egoli was the city of gold, of
money, of opportunity. ‘All roads lead to Johannesburg,’ wrote Alan Paton in his
novel Cry, the Beloved Country: ‘If you are white or if you are black they lead to
Johannesburg. If the crops fail, there is work in Johannesburg. If there are taxes
to be paid, there is work in Johannesburg. If the farm is too small to be divided
further, some must go to Johannesburg. If there is a child to be born that must be
delivered in secret, it can be delivered in Johannesburg.’ So in their thousands
they came—Zulus, Swazis, Shangaans, Xhosas, Sothos, Pedis, Pondos and
Thembus. And among them, seeking his own fortune, was Nelson Mandela.

Mandela’s introduction to Johannesburg in 1941 was a sobering experience.
Together with Justice, he made his way south-west of the city through huge mine
dumps to the bleak and pockmarked site of Crown Mines. Deafened by the
relentless din of mine machinery, they passed lines of African miners tired and
dirty from their shifts underground. Justice was expected there: a letter from the
regent requesting employment for him as a clerk had arrived some months
beforehand. As the son of a Thembu leader, he was accorded special treatment
by the mine managers and greeted with gifts on his arrival from Thembu miners.
He was also able to persuade the headman, Piliso, to give Mandela a job as a
mine policeman, assuring him that another letter from the regent requesting his
employment would soon arrive. Out of courtesy to the regent, Piliso invited them
both to stay initially with him. Mandela duly started work as a night watchman,
armed with a whistle and a knobkerrie, a heavy stick with a knobbed head,
guarding the entrance to the mine compound.
It was not long before the regent learned of their whereabouts and sent a
telegram with the instruction: ‘Send the boys home.’ Piliso, realising that he had
been duped, confronted them angrily and told them arrangements would be made
for their journey back to the Transkei. Determined not to return, they continued
to use the regent’s name, gaining an introduction to a white mining official who
issued them with a letter authorising their employment as clerks at Crown
Mines. When Piliso discovered what had happened, he threw them out.
Mandela was without a job, had nowhere to stay and had little money. Worse
was to follow. In his suitcase he was carrying an old revolver given to him by his
father which he had brought to Johannesburg for protection against gangsters. As
he was leaving Crown Mines, his suitcase was searched by a watchman and the
gun was found. At a nearby police station, Mandela was charged with possession
of the gun and was told to appear in court, but he was not arrested. In court he
was given a nominal fine.
From that low ebb, Mandela’s fortunes began to change. He found lodgings
with a cousin, Garlick Mbekeni, in a house in George Goch township, a few
miles east of the city centre, and confided to him his ambition to train as a
lawyer. After making inquiries, Mbekeni took him to see ‘one of our best people
in Johannesburg’. It was a meeting that was to have the most profound effect on
Mandela’s life.

Walter Sisulu was a man to whom many Africans in Johannesburg turned for
help. Only six years older than Mandela, also originally from the Transkei, he
had established a reputation as a community leader always ready to take on other
people’s problems. His office in seedy premises near Market Street on the
western edge of the city centre, from where he ran an estate agency for Africans,
was often used as a meeting place, particularly by those from the Transkei.
Sisulu came from humble origins and grew up in circumstances far rougher
than anything Mandela had ever experienced. His father was a white government
official, Victor Dickinson, who played no part in his upbringing; his mother,
Alice Sisulu, was a Thembu domestic servant. Born in 1912, Sisulu spent his
childhood in the Transkei looked after by Thembu aunts and uncles. All were
devout Anglicans. Prayers were said twice a day at his uncle’s house and every
Sunday there was a service at the Anglican church hut. The household was often
visited by white churchmen. But Sisulu grew up disliking the deferential attitude
that his family members invariably assumed in the presence of whites: ‘I
resented being told how I must behave towards whites.’ His own light
complexion, setting him apart from his African peers, was a constant source of
annoyance. So rude was his behaviour toward white visitors that one of his aunts
seriously rebuked him. ‘I doubt whether you’ll be allowed to work for a white
man,’ she said. ‘You won’t make a man, because you can’t serve.’ At the local
Anglican mission school which he attended, the tales from the Bible that he most
relished were those of Moses and David and the struggle of the Jews against
foreign rule.
Sisulu followed the path that so many other young men in the Transkei were
taking. He left school at the age of sixteen, with little more than a basic
education, and headed by train for Johannesburg. Unable to find a job on the
mines at first, he worked as a labourer at a dairy for several months, returned
home briefly, then signed up for a four-month contract as an underground miner
at Rose Deep Mine, hating the work, the living conditions and his white bosses.
Moving to Johannesburg with his mother and sister in the 1930s, he took a
succession of factory jobs, clashing time and again with white supervisors,
becoming ever more embittered and aggressive. One evening, sitting in a train
on his way home to Orlando, he watched a white ticket collector harass a young
African girl for no apparent reason. Enraged by this, he intervened, fell into a
fight with the ticket collector, was arrested and sent briefly to prison—‘hell itself
’. In his spare time, he developed an intense interest in Xhosa history, joined a

Xhosa social group, the Orlando Brotherly Society, and wrote articles on Xhosa
heroes for the white-owned Bantu World. Then, in 1940, he was introduced to
the African National Congress, a small organisation attempting to revive African
political activity. It became his political home.
The young man who came to see him in his office impressed Sisulu. He
explained that he had fallen foul of the Fort Hare authorities, that he intended to
study by correspondence course to finish his degree and that he wanted to
become a lawyer. His royal connections, his dignified bearing, his evident
ambition all seemed promising material. Sisulu quickly recognised his potential:
‘I saw a bright young man with high ideals.’ Sisulu offered him a job at his
estate agency and decided to make inquiries of a white lawyer with whom he had
business dealings in the property market to see whether some opening could be
found for him.
Lazar Sidelsky was an unusual lawyer. Coming from a modest Jewish family
from a rural district in eastern Transvaal, where he was born in 1911, he had
found it difficult, after graduating from the University of the Witwatersrand in
Johannesburg, to obtain a position with an established law firm and so had set up
his own partnership, known as Witkin, Sidelsky, and Eidelman, concentrating on
the African property market for business. He was regarded in the African
community as fair-minded, conscientious and helpful. When African clients
visited his office, he allowed them to sit down—something unheard of in other
white law firms. He worked in conjunction with a German businessman, Philip
Muller, who was involved in constructing houses and rooms for Africans in the
few areas of Johannesburg, like Sophiatown and Alexandra, where freehold titles
were still available to them. The business was profitable.
When Mandela called at his office on the fourth floor in the Old Mutual
Building in Commissioner Street, Sidelsky, remembering his own difficulty in
finding an opening in the legal field, was inclined to be sympathetic. Mandela
had a pleasing manner, was a member of a royal family and came with a
recommendation from Sisulu, a man whose judgement Sidelsky respected. ‘I had
no difficulty in saying yes,’ he recalled. Sidelsky agreed to employ Mandela as a
clerk while he completed his university degree by correspondence course with
the University of South Africa, studying at night. After that, he could serve his
articles with Sidelsky, while studying law, as part of his legal qualification. For a
young African to be offered a position as an articled clerk with a white law firm
in Johannesburg in the 1940s was extremely rare. What made it even more

remarkable was that Sidelsky waived the premium normally paid by articled
clerks. From being perilously close to early failure, Mandela, through Sisulu’s
intervention, had secured a future.
Mandela and Sidelsky developed a high regard for each other. Mandela,
joining the firm at the age of twenty-three, was engaged at first in simple tasks
but gradually extended the range of his work, handling contracts with African
clients, acting as interpreter and dealing with wills and divorces. At each stage,
Sidelsky took care to explain the firm’s procedures, the reasons for them and the
wider purposes of the law. He was also a generous employer, providing Mandela
with an old suit and a shirt. In later years, Mandela was to remember Sidelsky as
‘a man who trained me to serve our country’. Sidelsky, for his part, found
Mandela an agreeable employee: ‘It was a pleasure to have him around. He had
an intelligent grasp of what was required.’
There was one other African at the firm, Gaur Radebe, ten years older than
Mandela. Sidelsky employed Radebe on an occasional basis for a variety of jobs,
usually on the property side of the business: salesman, clerk, messenger,
interpreter. He was streetwise, smooth-talking and fluent in English, Sotho and
Zulu; a short, stocky man, he was well known in the townships. Radebe led a
multiple life. At heart a political agitator, he had joined the Communist Party in
the 1930s and he was also active in the ANC. As the secretary for mines in the
ANC’s Transvaal branch, he had played a leading role in launching the African
Mineworkers’ Union in 1941. He was prominent too in organising protest
against the public transport system from Alexandra township, where he was
based. He was often outspoken, particularly on a political platform and
occasionally even with Sidelsky. He was also known to be unscrupulous. He was
expelled by the Communist Party in 1941 as a result of his moneylending
activities in Alexandra. He dabbled in the illicit diamond trade. Usually short of
money, he borrowed from Sidelsky without repaying and tended to live off his
wife, a hard-working teacher. But he was useful to Sidelsky, and Sidelsky
regarded him with a certain affection. Their business relationship continued on
and off for many years.
Upon Mandela, Radebe exerted a strong influence. They shared an office and
Mandela was struck by Radebe’s audacious attitude towards whites. He was
fond of telling the story of how, on his first day in the office, a white secretary,
explaining that there was no colour bar in the firm, told him that, in honour of
his arrival, two new teacups had been purchased, one for him and the other for

Radebe. These were the ones they were to take from the tray when the tea boy
came round. When Mandela relayed the news to Radebe, Radebe responded with
a mischievous look. ‘Nelson, just do as I do,’ he said. When tea arrived, Radebe,
with other members of the staff present, ostentatiously avoided the new cups and
chose an old one. Mandela, wanting neither to cause offence to the secretaries
nor to alienate his new colleague, declined to take any tea at all. He subsequently
drank tea on his own.
Radebe’s political views also made an impact. Mandela was still untutored in
politics. His primary loyalty remained with the Thembu. Radebe, however,
stressed the importance of a wider political loyalty, as advocated by the ANC in
its campaigns for African rights. His commitment to the African cause made a
strong impression on Mandela, but Mandela remained aloof from political
involvement. Having had a narrow escape from trouble, his ambition to qualify
as a lawyer was all the stronger. He was mindful of warnings from Sidelsky to
steer clear of politics, which, his employer stressed, would lead only to ruin.
It was at the firm of Witkin, Sidelsky and Eidelman that Mandela made his
first white friend. Nat Bregman, a cousin of Sidelsky, was from a poor Jewish
family and had been taken on as an articled clerk, just before Mandela arrived, at
the age of eighteen. He was already a member of the Communist Party, but he
remained, in his own words, ‘a light-hearted communist’. His main interest was
in show business. He participated in left-wing shows to raise money for Soviet
war charities and went on to perform as a part-time professional comedian at the
Plastic Theatre in the white suburb of Northcliff. He introduced Mandela to
lectures at the Left Club in Commissioner Street and invited him to multiracial
gatherings which Communist Party members organised. For about three years,
they shared an office on the fourth floor of the Old Mutual Building, often using
the same lift when they were supposed to use separate ones. Bregman
remembered Mandela at the time as ‘a quiet, studious, and reserved person’ but
with a good sense of humour that could bring a lighter touch to general
conversation. Mandela enjoyed Bregman’s talent for mimicry and was impressed
by his colour-blind attitude to life. Indeed, it was a remarkable stroke of good
fortune that Mandela, so soon after his ill-planned arrival in Johannesburg in
1941, should have found himself in the hands of an enlightened white employer,
with a radical black activist and an easygoing white youth for company.
Mandela’s home life was rudimentary. After staying briefly with his cousin in
George Goch township, he found lodgings in Alexandra. It was called ‘Dark

City’, for there were no streetlights or electricity supply. The roads were
unpaved, sanitation was primitive, disease was rife and a pall of smoke from
coal stoves polluted the air. The streets were roamed by young tsotsis. On most
mornings, the sight of a corpse lying in a gutter caused no surprise. An everincreasing population was crammed into this one square mile, many of them
‘illegals’ arriving from rural areas without proper documents. Plot owners used
every available space to build rooms and shacks in their backyards, filling them
with as many tenants as possible. Many premises were the haunts of thieves and
prostitutes or used by shebeen queens running illegal drinking dens. Police raids
in Alexandra were commonplace.
Mandela’s lodgings were at 46 Seventh Avenue, the home of the Xhoma
family. He occupied a tin-roofed room with a dirt floor at the back of the
property. There was no running water, or electricity, or heating. He had no
money for comfort. His salary of £2 per week was hardly enough to cover his
basic needs, for rent, bus fares, food and candles for studying at night. There was
also the cost of his correspondence course with the University of South Africa.
Sometimes he walked nine miles to work and back again to save money.
Sometimes he had no money even for food. The only reliable hot meal of the
week came on Sundays, thanks to the kindness of the Xhoma family. Girlfriends
provided the occasional meal, and white secretaries in the office also helped him
with food, but often Mandela went hungry. The suit that Sidelsky gave him was
stitched and patched again and again, year after year.
Despite the poverty and squalor of Alexandra, Mandela developed an
affection for the township. It was the first place he regarded as home after
Thembuland. He enjoyed its cosmopolitan nature—the mingling of different
tribes and languages, the sense of camaraderie that came from belonging to
Alexandra. He stayed for only a year, before taking advantage of an offer of free
accommodation in a mine compound closer to the city centre, but always looked
back to his time there with fondness.
His roots with Thembuland meanwhile steadily loosened. In 1942, his old
guardian, Jongintaba, died. Mandela had met him the previous year while he was
on a visit to Johannesburg. He had seemed then to be ageing rapidly. They did
not speak of the matters that had set them apart, neither Mandela’s expulsion
from Fort Hare nor his flight from the marriage that Jongintaba had arranged.
Jongintaba was more interested in his current plans. On learning of his death,
Mandela travelled to Mqhekezweni, though he arrived there too late to attend the

funeral. He found the Great Place unchanged, but realised how much his own
ambitions had altered. He was no longer interested in a career as a clerk or an
interpreter in the civil service. Nor did he see his future bound up any longer
with Thembuland or the Transkei. The new world he had entered seemed to offer
far greater possibilities.
At the end of 1942, Mandela passed the final examination for his Bachelor of
Arts degree and early the following year returned to Fort Hare for his graduation,
proudly wearing a new suit for which Walter Sisulu had provided the funds.
Both his mother and Jongintaba’s widow, NoEngland, attended the ceremony. It
was an occasion which once again reminded him of how distant his old dreams
and ambitions now seemed. Although Kaizer Matanzima pressed him to return
to Umtata after qualifying as an attorney, he realised he no longer felt any urge
to go there.
Back in Johannesburg, Mandela enrolled as a part-time law student at the
University of the Witwatersrand, one of four English-speaking universities
which permitted blacks to attend specialist courses. The campus was on a hilltop
in the district of Braamfontein, north of the city centre. The student body there
was almost entirely white. In the law faculty, Mandela was the only African. The
experience of dealing with white students was as new to him as dealing with a
black student was to them. Some reacted in traditional white fashion, keeping
themselves apart. One law teacher, Professor H. R. Hahlo, made clear his view
that Africans were not sufficiently disciplined to master the subtleties of law.
But with others he made lifelong friendships. A part-time law lecturer, Bram
Fischer, who came from a prominent Afrikaner family but was also a senior
figure in the Communist Party, was to exert the most profound influence on
Mandela. Among his fellow students, also studying law, was Harold Wolpe, the
son of a poor Jewish immigrant family who had joined the Young Communist
League at the age of seventeen. Another left-wing activist at ‘Wits’ was Ruth
First, a brilliant eighteen-year-old social science student, also from a Jewish
immigrant family active in Communist Party politics. Mandela’s fellow students
generally remembered him as being ‘a little shy, not assertive in any way’. Harry
Schwarz recalled, ‘He was very quiet, never a major participant in class debates
or discussion.’
Mandela also made his first friends in the Indian community. Ismail Meer was
a law student from Natal whose flat on the fourth floor of Kholvad House in
Market Street was a regular meeting place for Indian students where Mandela

too could often be found. Both Meer and his close friend Jaydew Singh were
active in Indian politics and also joined the Communist Party.
It was in the company of Meer, Singh and a third Indian student, Ahmed
Bhoda, that Mandela had another brush with the police. Hastening to get from
Wits to Kholvad House one day, all four boarded a tram to take them to Market
Street. They had not gone far when the white conductor, turning to the Indians,
bawled in Afrikaans, ‘Hey, you are not allowed to carry a kaffir.’ A heated
exchange followed. The conductor stopped the tram and called a policeman, who
arrested the Indians ‘for carrying a kaffir and disturbing the conductor in his
duty’. All four were escorted to Marshall Square police station. There Mandela
was taken aside and encouraged to make a statement against the three Indians,
which he refused to do. Ordered to appear in court the next day, the students
sought help from Bram Fischer, who agreed to act as their advocate. In court, the
magistrate greeted Fischer warmly, mentioning that he had just returned from the
Orange Free State, where he had had the honour to meet Fischer’s father, the
Judge President there. The accused were quickly acquitted.
As well as his work at Witkin, Sidelsky and Eidelman and his studies at Wits,
Mandela began to take a closer interest in the political world around him, in the
web of laws and regulations that kept Africans in a subordinate role and
deprived them of a political voice. Under the influence of Walter Sisulu, he was
drawn increasingly into the orbit of the ANC. His ambition to qualify as a
lawyer did not waver. When Sidelsky gave him an increase in salary, he was
pleased to hear, after asking Mandela what he would do with the extra money,
Mandela’s reply that he would spend it on more candles to help his studies at
night. But Mandela’s own political ambitions had nevertheless begun to stir. In
the office that they shared, Nat Bregman remembered vividly the occasion when
Mandela told him, ‘One day, I’m going to be prime minister of South Africa.’

When Mandela first encountered the ANC, its fortunes were at a low ebb. For
thirty years, ANC leaders had tried to gain a hearing from the government for
their demands for greater African rights. But every method they had tried—
polite petitions, deputations and appeals—had failed. Dissatisfied with the way
the old guard of politicians had run the organisation, a group of young radicals
began meeting in Johannesburg in 1943 to plot a more militant course of action.
It was to this small group that Mandela was introduced by Sisulu.

The founders of the ANC were mostly conservative men, schooled in the
Christian tradition, respectful of authority and concerned largely with their own
position in society. When they gathered on a sweltering day in January 1912 in a
community hall in a black location in Bloemfontein, formally dressed in suits,
frock coats and top hats and carrying furled umbrellas, their main objectives, to
defend African rights and to campaign against racial discrimination, were
notably modest. They were members of an African elite, brought up to believe in
the inherent value of Western rules and anxious to prove their worth as loyal
citizens. What had brought them together was not so much the urge to agitate for
advancement as the fear that their existing privileges were under threat.
The tradition that Britain had established for the Cape Colony, on the occasion
of granting it representative government in 1853, was to accord equal political
rights to all men over the age of twenty-one provided they passed certain
property or income qualifications. Any African was entitled to vote if he
qualified. The initial black electorate was small but grew in time to form a
significant minority, drawn from the constantly rising number of educated
Africans turned out by missionary schools—teachers, priests, clerks, interpreters,
journalists and traders.
The African elite put much faith in what they referred to as the ‘white sense of
fair play’ and went to great lengths to demonstrate their suitability to participate
in politics, turning themselves into model citizens. They dressed in formal
Victorian attire, went regularly to church, abstained from alcohol, put portraits of
Queen Victoria in their sitting rooms and revered the game of cricket, forming
their own teams (which often beat their white opponents). But it was all to little
avail.
The first blow to their aspirations came at the end of the Anglo-Boer War in
1902, when Britain took control of the two Boer repub - lics of the Transvaal and
the Orange Free State. The African elite had hoped that the political traditions
established by Britain in the Cape Colony would now be applied to the two
northern territories and also the neighbouring British colony of Natal. Hitherto,
no political rights had been accorded to them there. The Transvaal constitution
had bluntly stated that ‘the people desire to permit no equality between coloured
people and the white inhabitants, either in Church or State’. The only
relationship tolerated between white and black was that of master and servant. A
similar colour bar had operated in the Orange Free State. In Natal the
qualification for black voters was so rigorous that only two Africans had

obtained the vote.
Britain’s main preoccupation at the end of the war was to achieve
reconciliation between the Boers and the British, and the Boers were adamantly
opposed to the notion of political rights for Africans. Accordingly, the terms of
the peace treaty agreed at Vereeniging excluded ‘natives’ from the franchise in
the two former republics until the question was reconsidered ‘after the
introduction of self-government’. This came as a rude shock to the African elite.
One petition submitted by an African group in the Transvaal questioned why the
Boers, who had been ‘enemies of the King and British principles’, should be
favourably treated while the interests of Africans, who had shown their loyalty
by ‘heart and deeds’, should be ignored. For years ahead, African spokesmen in
all four territories continued to denounce the treaty of Vereeniging as one of the
greatest injustices perpetrated against them.
Worse was to follow. Having gained control over four southern African
territories, each of which maintained different traditions and different laws
affecting the African population, the British authorities were keen to establish ‘a
common understanding on questions of native policy’ in order to facilitate their
integration into a new dominion at some future date. The man entrusted with this
task, the British High Commissioner Lord Milner, had strong views of his own
on the subject. ‘A political equality of white and black is impossible,’ he said.
‘The white man must rule because he is elevated by many, many steps above the
black man.’
In 1903, he appointed a South African Native Affairs Commission under the
chairmanship of Sir Godfrey Lagden, the Commissioner for Native Affairs, to
investigate the matter. The Lagden Commission report, issued in 1905, was to
have a profound impact on South African thinking on race relations.
Its members were mostly English-speaking and regarded as representing
progressive opinion on native matters; in parliament they were described as ‘proNative men’. Their main recommendation was that whites and blacks should be
kept separate in politics and in land occupation and ownership on a permanent
basis. In order to avoid an ‘intolerable situation’ in the future whereby white
voters might be outnumbered by black voters, a system of separate rep resentation should be established for the black population, though political
power, of course, would always remain in white hands. Land should also be
demarcated into white and black areas, as the report said, ‘with a view to

finality’. In urban areas, separate ‘locations’ should be created for African
townsmen. These ideas on the need for segregation between white and black
were widely held at the time, by friends of the black population as well as by
adversaries. The significance of the Lagden Commission was that it elevated
practices of segregation commonly employed throughout South Africa during
the nineteenth century to the level of political doctrine. Segregation was used by
every leading white politician as a respectable slogan.
Britain’s subsequent plans to establish a union between the Cape Colony,
Natal, the Orange Free State and the Transvaal galvanized the African elite into
national opposition for the first time. The draft constitution for a united South
Africa drawn up by white parliamentary representatives from the four colonies
and released in 1909 excluded Africans from the franchise in Natal, the
Transvaal and the Orange Free State, curbed the right of Cape Africans to sit in
parliament, thus making it an all-white institution, and imposed on the Cape
African electorate a condition that their right to vote could be removed through a
two-thirds majority vote of the upper and lower houses of parliament sitting in
joint session. The African view was that the proposed constitution was a sell-out
to politicians from the northern territories. ‘This is treachery,’ remarked Alan
Soga, a prominent journalist. ‘It is worse. It is a successful betrayal, for the Act
has virtually disenfranchised the black man, even before the meeting of the
Union Parliament.’
An unprecedented number of protests followed, most couched in suitably
respectful terms. A protest meeting of prominent Africans in Waaihoek location
in Bloemfontein thanked the authorities for ‘giving the delegates the opportunity
to hold the meeting and to exercise free speech’ and sent expressions of loyalty
to the Governor, the High Commissioner and King Edward VII. A delegation
was sent to London to make representations. But Britain’s House of Commons
saw no reason to amend the constitution and it came into effect in 1910
unaltered. From then on, Britain left South Africa to its own devices.
Realising that further assaults on their position were likely, African leaders
resolved to form a national organisation to defend their rights. Much of the
initiative came from a young Zulu lawyer, Pixley Seme, who had recently
returned to South Africa to establish a law practice in Johannesburg, after
studying at Columbia University in New York and Jesus College, Oxford. He
was adamant about the need for a united front. ‘The demon of racialism, the
aberrations of the Xhosa-Fingo [Mfengu] feud, the animosity that exists between

the Zulus and the Tongas, between the Basuto and every other Native must be
buried and forgotten,’ he wrote in 1911. ‘We are one people. These divisions,
these jealousies, are the cause of all our woes and of all our backwardness and
ignorance today.’
The following year, at the inaugural conference of the South African Native
National Congress, as the ANC was first called, Seme chose the same theme.
Giving the keynote address to an audience of several hundred Africans, both
delegates and observers, he pointed out that their meeting was the first time ‘so
many elements representing different tongues and tribes ever attempted to
cooperate under one umbrella’. Their purpose was straightforward: ‘The white
people of this country have formed what is known as the Union of South Africa
—a union in which we have no voice in the making of laws and no part in the
administration. We have called you, therefore, to this conference so that we can
together find ways and means of forming our national union for the purpose of
creating national unity and defending our rights and privileges.’
The first challenge was soon upon them. In 1913 the government put forward
land legislation prohibiting Africans from purchasing or leasing land outside
areas designated as Native reserves, patches of territory scattered throughout
South Africa, numbering nearly 300 at the time, which had survived the era of
white occupation intact. The reserves varied in size from a few square miles to
large districts. In the old Boer republics of the Transvaal and the Orange Free
State, only a tiny fraction of land had officially been set aside for Native
reserves, while in the Cape Colony and Natal, as a result of the military strength
of Nguni chiefdoms like the Xhosa and Zulu, extensive areas remained under
African control. The reserves then amounted to no more than about 8 per cent of
the country. They were already showing signs of overcrowding, overstocking
and land degradation. Acknowledging that the reserves were not large enough to
hold their existing populations for long, the government made provision for the
‘release’ of additional areas for Native purchase at some future date.
The impact of the Natives’ Land Act of 1913 was felt most immediately in
areas outside the reserves, where nearly a million Africans lived as tenants,
sharecroppers and labour tenants on white-owned land. It was particularly severe
in the Orange Free State, where sharecroppers, who for years had earned a living
by giving half of their produce to white farmers in return for land, were
summarily evicted. Some sought refuge in the overcrowded reserves; others
were forced, after selling their livestock and implements, to work as labourers

for white farmers. The plight of these destitute families driven off the land was
described by Sol Plaatje, the ANC secretary-general, in his Native Life in South
Africa. ‘Awakening on Friday morning, 20 June 1913,’ he wrote, ‘the South
African Native found himself not actually a slave, but a pariah in the land of his
birth.’ Plaatje recorded how, travelling through the Orange Free State by bicycle
in the winter of 1913, he found bands of African peasants trudging from one
place to the next in search of a farmer who might give them shelter, their women
and children shivering with cold in the winter nights, their livestock emaciated
and starving: ‘It looks as if these people were so many fugitives escaping from a
war.’ A whole class of prosperous farmers was eventually destroyed.
All the protests and deputations mounted by the ANC against the legislation
proved ineffective. The ANC’s main argument was based not so much on its
opposition to the principle of segregation but on the inequitable distribution of
land. The government’s pledge to release further areas for African purchase was
not forthcoming for another twenty-three years. In 1936, the total amount of land
reserved for Africans was increased from 8 to 13 per cent. By then, as official
reports warned, the reserves had degenerated towards ‘desert conditions’: they
were ‘congested, denuded, overstocked, eroded and for the most part in a
deplorable condition’; the ‘process of ruination’ there threatened ‘an appalling
problem of Native poverty’.
The same process of segregation was applied to towns and to employment.
African entry into urban areas was regulated more strictly through greater use of
the pass system. Africans deemed surplus to the labour needs of white
households, or those leading ‘an idle, dissolute or disorderly life’, could be
deported to the reserves. Separate ‘locations’ on the outskirts of white urban and
industrial areas were set aside for African occupation. Work opportunities for
Africans were severely curtailed. The common tendency had always been to
confine Africans to unskilled work in mines, on farms and in domestic service.
The Union government now proceeded to enforce an industrial colour bar
excluding Africans from skilled employment in the mines, on the railways and in
the civil service. By the 1920s, South Africa had developed an economic system
allocating skills and high wages to whites and heavy labour and menial tasks to
blacks on meagre pay. The ANC’s efforts to withstand this onslaught of
segregation had a negligible effect.
The ultimate humiliation came in 1936, when African voters were struck from
the common roll in the Cape Province, losing a right they had held for more than

eighty years. In exchange for the loss of their franchise, they were given a
separate roll which allowed them to vote for three white representatives to speak
on their behalf in the House of Assembly and four white members of the Senate.
They were also entitled to elect twelve members of a new Native Representative
Council. But the council was a purely advisory body, without legislative or
financial power. The only benefit from this arrangement was that Africans in the
northern provinces obtained some form of representation for the first time. The
practical effect of the new legislation, the Representation of Natives Act, was
limited. By 1935, African voters in the Cape numbered some 10,000, amounting
to only 2.5 per cent of the provincial electorate, and only 1.1 per cent of the
Union’s electorate. But the political significance was crucial. As the historian
Cornelis de Kiewiet noted, ‘To destroy the Cape native franchise was to destroy
the most important bridge between the worlds of two races.’

Contemptuous of the polite methods of protest that ANC leaders had employed
to so little effect, the circle of young radicals whom Mandela joined were
impatient for confrontation with white authority. They were mostly teachers and
other young professional men, with a core group numbering no more than two
dozen. Few of them possessed political experience and none had any clear idea
of what practical measures to pursue. But they were galvanized by a new vision
of an African future inspired largely by the group’s leading intellectual, Anton
Lembede, a twenty-nine-year-old former teacher who had arrived in
Johannesburg in 1943 to train as a lawyer.
When Mandela first met Lembede at Sisulu’s house in Orlando in 1943, he
was immediately impressed by the breadth of his learning. Born into a family of
Zulu farm labourers, Lembede had pursued a life of intense study and regular
prayer, driving himself relentlessly in quest of educational and professional
achievement. He was fond of discoursing at length about the history of nations
from ancient Greece to the modern era. As Mandela noted, Lembede tended to
be verbose, but he was nevertheless struck by the boldness of the man’s ideas.
Lembede’s message was that Africa belonged to Africans. ‘Africa is a black
man’s country,’ Lembede argued. ‘Africans are the natives of Africa and they
have inhabited Africa, their Motherland, from times immemorial. Africa belongs
to them.’
At the heart of Lembede’s philosophy of ‘Africanism’, as it came to be called,

lay a determination to assert an African identity, to give Africans control of their
own future, to use African political power to change South African society. To
depend on whites for help was considered a waste of time. No group other than
Africans would free them from oppression. Other groups, whether white liberals
or communists, would merely seek to subordinate African interests to their own.
Africans should unite as one people, regardless of their tribal origins or social
status. They should stop emulating white leadership and white culture and
develop pride and confidence in their own political culture. They needed a
‘nation-building’ faith—a faith in their own worth, a pride in their past, a sense
of self-reliance and confidence in their ability to determine their own future.
This would dispel the sense of inferiority that Africans felt and attract mass
support. Mass mobilisation in turn would achieve political results.
Compared to the respectful approach long favoured by ANC leaders, with
their belief in the value of moral argument and their disdain for mass
mobilisation, Lembede’s ideas offered exciting prospects. Though aware of his
own lack of experience and knowledge, Mandela was keen to play a part.
A meeting of young dissidents discontented with the ANC’s leadership was
soon organised. Among those who attended was Oliver Tambo, Mandela’s
friend from Fort Hare, who had returned to Johannesburg to take up a teaching
post at St Peter’s, an Anglican school which he had attended as a student.
Popularly known as ‘The Christian’, he had fallen foul of the college authorities
at Fort Hare in 1942, while studying for a postgraduate teaching diploma, over a
written pledge they required from students regarding their religious conduct. ‘I
knew I could not sign that pledge,’ he later told Father Trevor Huddleston, the
Superintendent of St Peter’s School. ‘It demanded something from me that I
could not give. It would have killed my religion stone dead: an agreement with
God, written and signed! I could not do it!’ So he had been expelled. Hearing of
an unexpected vacancy at St Peter’s, he had returned there in 1943, at the age of
twenty-five, as a mathematics teacher.
By the end of a long evening, the dissidents were convinced of the need to
form a youth movement that would steer the ANC towards radical action. They
tentatively called themselves the Congress Youth League. But first they had to
persuade the ANC hierarchy to give them formal approval. Many of the old
guard were hostile to their young critics, seeing them as a threat to their own
position. Others, however, were aware that the ANC needed to develop a more
aggressive response to reflect the mood of restlessness and discontent growing

among the African population.
In the early 1940s, massive numbers of Africans moved to industrial centres
on the Witwatersrand, driven by poverty and hunger in the reserves and by harsh
conditions on white farms. They were hoping to find work in booming wartime
industries, but often met with little but hardship and squalor. The housing
shortage reached crisis proportions. The cost of food soared. A sudden rash of
industrial action broke out.
In the township of Alexandra, Mandela was given his first taste of protest. In
August 1943, when bus fares from Alexandra to central Johannesburg were
raised from fourpence to fivepence, causing serious difficulty for factory, office
and domestic workers, some 20,000 people boycotted the bus service. Some
were given lifts in cars or lorries, often by sympathetic whites, but most of them
trudged the nine miles or more to work and back again, day after day, blocking
all other traffic for miles along Johannesburg’s main northern highway.
Prominent among the organisers of the boycott was Gaur Radebe. Mandela
joined the stream of marchers with a sense of exhilaration at participating in
popular protest and he was duly impressed by the result. After nine days of
running empty buses, the bus owners reinstated the old fare.
When a delegation of young dissidents approached the ANC president, Dr
Alfred Xuma, hoping to gain his support for founding a Youth League, was
sceptical about their intentions. A distinguished doctor who had qualified at
universities in the United States, Britain and Hungary, before returning to
Johannesburg in 1927 to establish a medical practice, Xuma had set about trying
to infuse the ANC with greater vigour and to reorganise its chaotic
administration and finances. He had played a leading role in drawing up a
document entitled ‘African Claims’, which demanded full citizenship rights and
an end to all discriminatory laws, in accordance with the Atlantic Charter drawn
up by Churchill and Roosevelt in 1941, supporting the right of all peoples to
choose their own government. But he was an aloof and authoritarian figure who
lacked the common touch, finding it difficult to mix with unsophisticated blacks
and preferring a circle of mainly white friends; his vivacious wife, Madie Hall, a
black American and a qualified social worker, was socially ambitious. Xuma
warned the dissidents that it would be a great mistake to think that Africans
could ‘march barefoot’ against their opponents.
Nevertheless, in December 1943, at the annual conference of the ANC in

Bloemfontein, delegates approved the formation of the Congress Youth League.
Two months later, bearing a copy of their draft manifesto for him to review, a
Youth League deputation led by Lembede called on Xuma at his large house in
Sophiatown. Mandela was present, along with Sisulu and Tambo. While they
waited for Xuma to arrive, Madie expounded her own views that the tactics
employed by black Americans—patient conduct, education and economic selfhelp—would eventually pay dividends in South Africa.
Xuma was none too pleased with the draft manifesto. It contained virulent
criticism of the old methods of the ANC. Nor did he take kindly to the Youth
League’s demands for a programme of action, as a record of the meeting
showed:
Dr Xuma replied that the Africans as a group were unorganized and
undisciplined, and that a programme of action such as envisaged by the Youth
League would be rash at this stage. The ANC lacked people who were concerned
about the movement and who knew what they wanted. Action would merely lead
to exposure. The masses of the people were unorganized and only committees
existed in the ANC . . . He felt that what was really wrong with the manifesto
was the tone of criticism and the expressions used. The committee should start
off without antagonizing anyone.
The Youth League paid little heed. When it appeared in March 1944, the
manifesto was still bristling with criticism. It accused the ANC of adopting a
policy of yielding to oppression, ‘regarding itself as a body of gentlemen with
clean hands’. It had come to represent only a privileged few who were out of
touch with the needs of the rank and file, was poorly organised and had no
proper following. The formation of the Youth League was ‘a protest against the
lack of discipline and the absence of a clearly defined goal’. It would become the
‘brainstrust and power-station’ of African nationalism, giving ‘force, direction
and vigour to the struggle for African National Freedom’.
On Easter Sunday in April 1944, at a meeting of about 200 people at the
Bantu Men’s Social Centre in Eloff Street in central Johannesburg, the Congress
Youth League was formally launched, with a series of rousing speeches.
Lembede was elected as president, Tambo as secretary and Sisulu as treasurer.
Although Mandela was elected to the executive committee, the role he had
played in the formation of the Youth League was a minor one. He was working
full-time at Sidelsky’s law firm and part-time as a student at the University of

the Witwatersrand, leaving him little opportunity for other activities. Compared
to the likes of Lembede, he still regarded himself as a novice. In time, however,
the Youth League was to become the vehicle for his own political ambition.

The Sisulu home at 7372 Orlando West, a small brick house near the railway
line in the middle of the township, welcomed a constant stream of friends and
visitors. As well as providing a meeting place for the political activists who
gathered there, Sisulu was always ready to advise and help with people’s
problems. His many acts of kindness were renowned in the local community.
Also on hand at 7372 Orlando was his mother, Ma Sisulu, long accustomed to
providing meals for sudden arrivals. Then, in 1944, Sisulu married a twentyfive-year-old nurse, Albertina Thethiwe. In a speech at the wedding reception,
Dr Xuma said to Albertina, ‘Let me warn you, you are marrying a man who is
already married. He is married to the nation.’ Their partnership did indeed have
to endure many ordeals; it was also to form the centre of a network of close
relationships of which Mandela was a part.
Born into a peasant farming family in the Transkei, Albertina, at the age of
eleven, had been placed in charge of caring for four siblings after her father died
and her mother was too ill to look after them. She swore never to marry but to
dedicate her life to bringing them up. Friends at her Catholic school in the
Transkei called her the Virgin Mary because she refused to loiter with boys at
the train station on the way home. She performed well in school and a priest
offered to help her with a bursary for further education. ‘I suggested I became a
nun, so I could always look after my older brother, who was illiterate, and the
youngest, who was only a baby. The priest told me a nun would have to be
married to the church. So I became a nurse.’ It was while she was training at the
Non-European General Hospital in Hillbrow, Johannesburg, that in 1941 she met
a cousin of Sisulu who introduced them. Albertina instilled in Walter a new
sense of confidence, making him less sensitive about his light complexion. ‘I’m
black enough for both of us,’ she used to say.
Mandela spent more and more time at the Sisulus’ house, regarding it as a
home from home. Ma Sisulu took a great liking to him and Walter regarded him
as his closest friend. They made an odd couple. Mandela had a tall, athletic
figure, a commanding presence and a patrician manner. He was invariably well
dressed. ‘The beautiful white silk scarf he wore around his neck stands out in my

mind to this day,’ the writer Ellen Kuzwayo recalled years later. Sisulu was
short, stocky and bespectacled. He had a habit at times of nervously biting his
lip. His smile revealed a wide gap in his front teeth. At meetings of the Youth
League, they tended to sit together, Mandela dressed in a suit and polished
shoes, Sisulu usually wearing a lumber jacket and sturdy boots. Mandela was
impatient for action; Sisulu was always careful to weigh up the consequences.
It was at the Sisulus’ house that Mandela met an attractive twenty-two-yearold nurse named Evelyn Mase. She was indirectly related to Walter’s mother and
was also a friend of Albertina, training at the same hospital in Hillbrow. Ma
Sisulu introduced them, mentioning that Mandela was studying law at the
University of the Witwatersrand. ‘He was handsome and charming and he made
me laugh,’ Evelyn remembered of their first meeting. ‘He flirted and said he
would come to see me at the hospital.’
Evelyn was a ‘home girl’, born in Engcobo in the Transkei in 1921. Her
father, a mineworker, had died when she was an infant and her mother had died
when she was twelve years old. She was sent to Johannesburg to attend
secondary school and placed in the care of an older brother who was living with
the Sisulus in Orlando. When the brother moved to a house in Orlando East, she
went with him, but she often returned to visit the Sisulus. She was a quiet, hardworking girl, much loved by them. On the half-day off that she had once a
fortnight, her favourite treat was to spend it at the cinema watching Fu Manchu
films.
A few days after that first encounter, Mandela duly turned up at the hospital.
They began meeting regularly and soon fell in love. Neither of them discussed
politics. Within months Mandela proposed and Evelyn accepted. The Sisulus
were overjoyed. The couple were married in 1944 at the Native Commissioner’s
Court in Johannesburg, with Walter and Albertina as witnesses. There was no
wedding feast, for they were too poor to afford one.
Their early life was happy but impoverished. Like many other African
couples, they found it impossible to find suitable accommodation. At first they
went to stay with Evelyn’s brother in Orlando East, then with her sister and
brother-in-law at City Deep Mines. Early in 1946, they were allocated their own
two-room municipal house in Orlando East and finally, a year later, they moved
to a three-room house, no. 8115, in Orlando West. Identical to all the other
houses around it, which were lined up in one monotonous row after another, it

stood on a small plot alongside a dirt road, with a tin roof, a cement floor, a
narrow kitchen and a bucket toilet at the back. There were streetlights outside,
but in the house paraffin lamps had to be used.
The house was soon full. Mandela’s sister, Leabie, joined them from the
Transkei to continue her education at Orlando High School. Later his mother
came to stay. There were always many visitors, especially from the Transkei.
Kaizer Matanzima, now employed as an articled clerk at a law firm in Umtata,
regularly called. The Mandelas were always hospitable, making up beds on the
floor when too many arrived.
Their first child, a boy, was born in 1945. He was named Madiba Thembekile
but known by his nickname, Thembi. Mandela was an attentive father, arriving
at Bertrams Nursing Home loaded with clothes for Evelyn and the newborn
infant and ensuring that, when they returned to no. 8115, a beautiful cot was
ready. At evening time, he enjoyed bathing Thembi, feeding him and putting
him to bed with a story. A daughter, Makaziwe, born in 1948, was frail from
birth and died nine months later.
Mandela’s domestic life was highly organised. He rose at dawn (a routine he
followed all his life), went jogging, ate a light breakfast and occasionally took
over the cooking. His home was a place where he enjoyed relaxing and reading.
But he was to spend less and less time there.
Completing his three years of articles at Witkin, Sidelsky and Eidelman in
early 1947, Mandela decided to study full-time at university to gain an LLB
degree, which would enable him to practise on his own as an attorney. Without
an income, the financial burden was crippling. He managed to obtain a loan of
£150 from the Bantu Welfare Trust at the South African Institute of Race
Relations, but he was otherwise dependent on Evelyn’s earnings as a nurse.
The work of the Congress Youth League, meanwhile, occupied him more and
more. ‘We were never really young,’ Oliver Tambo recalled. ‘There were no
dances, hardly a cinema, but meetings, discussions, every night, every weekend.’
They were propelled all the more by outbreaks of popular discontent erupting
around them, throwing up new movements and new leaders on the political
terrain they wanted to capture for themselves.

In March 1944, a mighty exodus began from the overcrowded quarters of

Orlando, organised by an eccentric community leader named James Mpanza, a
born-again Christian who had spent thirteen years in prison having been
convicted of murdering an Indian trader. The first group he led consisted of a
few hundred families, living as subtenants in municipal housing in Orlando, who
moved on to open land belonging to the municipality between the community
hall and the railway line, and built themselves shacks from sackcloth, cardboard,
scrap metal and corrugated iron. Within weeks, ‘Shantytown’, as it became
known, had grown into a squatter camp of more than 6,000 people and at its
height reached 20,000 people, drawing in African families from other
overcrowded areas of Johannesburg and the Rand. Mpanza became their
unofficial ‘mayor’. He liked to compare himself with Jesus Christ, proclaimed
himself King of Orlando and organised his camp into a movement called
Sofazonke, a Zulu word meaning ‘We shall all die’.
Other squatter bosses followed suit, establishing camps on vacant land in the
same area in defiance of the municipal authorities. Like Mpanza, they levied rent
and other charges on their followers, controlled trading activities and established
‘police’ and ‘courts’, developing autonomous enclaves and enriching themselves
in the process. No whites could enter except under squatter escort. ‘The
government is beaten,’ said one squatter boss, Oriel Monongoaha. ‘The
government was like a man who has a cornfield which is invaded by birds. He
chases the birds from one part of the field and they alight in another part of the
field. . . . We squatters are the birds. The government sends its policemen to
chase us away and we move off and occupy another spot. We shall see whether
it is the farmer or the birds who get tired first.’
It was in 1946 that a maverick white Anglican priest, the Reverend Michael
Scott, entered this underworld to investigate conditions there at the request of a
group of black ex-servicemen living in a squatter camp named Tobruk, just
below Orlando West. Scott was known to Mandela. He had been an occasional
visitor to parties at Ismail Meer’s flat in Kholvad House. An old-fashioned
crusader, he had arrived in South Africa from England in 1943 to work as a
priest at a Coloured orphanage near Sophiatown, soon taking up one cause after
another. The complaint of the ex-servicemen was about the corrupt regime of the
squatter boss who ran Tobruk, Samuel Komo, an ex-serviceman himself, who
had named his camp after the North African town where South African forces
had fought during the war.
Scott duly set up home in a tent amid a sea of shacks and hovels where 17,000

squatters were living. His headquarters became the Church of Christ, a
Congregational outpost made of hessian sacks and wood, which served both as a
church and a home for the Reverend Theophilus Dlamini and his family of
seven. Their living quarters were separated from the church by a partition of
sacking and wood. During divine service, the minister’s wife could be heard
behind the ragged cloth at the back of the altar, alternately spanking, soothing
and dressing her babies.
Scott and the Reverend Theophilus were soon drawn into an ugly conflict with
Komo and his gangsters. The church’s followers were intimidated into staying
away; Scott was attacked and his tent torn down. Finally, armed with sticks and
knives, Komo’s men assaulted Theophilus and his children one night, ripped the
sacking to pieces and burned the church to the ground. Scott, Theophilus, his
wife and children sought refuge nearby at Mandela’s small house in Orlando
West. Mandela remembered Scott as a modest, unassuming guest, but took a
dislike to Theophilus, who complained about the food he served.
Over a three-year period, some 90,000 Africans set up home in squatter camps
around Johannesburg, surviving in squalor and hardship. So great were the
numbers that the municipal authorities abandoned all intention of prosecuting
them and launched instead emergency housing schemes, followed by a huge
increase in the construction of permanent housing. As the squatters were moved
to new sites, officials used what they termed ‘culling’ measures against all who
were unemployed, sending them back to the reserves. The squatter movements
were eventually broken. Nevertheless, their actions had provoked government
intervention. Years later, Mpanza was remembered in the neighbourhood as ‘the
man who founded Soweto’. Though activists in the Congress Youth League
recognised the potential for gathering mass support over the squatter issue, their
efforts to assist Mpanza were negligible. For all the brave talk about the need for
action, they had yet to make a beginning. It was from other quarters, from the
Indian community and the communists, that the action came.
