THE LONELIEST MAN
TWO WEEKS AFTER HANI’S ASSASSINATION, OLIVER TAMBO
SUDDENLY died after suffering a second stroke. Though his first stroke had
left him partly immobilised on his right side, he had remained active as the
ANC’s national chairman, working three days a week at the party headquarters
in central Johannesburg, right up to the day of his death. He was widely revered
for his soft-spoken, lucid manner, always seeking compromise and consensus.
While Mandela inspired admiration, even awe, Tambo inspired love.
Tambo’s death was a colossal blow to Mandela. The trio of Mandela, Sisulu
and Tambo had sustained the African nationalist struggle for fifty years.
Tambo’s friendship, like Sisulu’s, had spanned Mandela’s entire adult life,
starting from their days together at Fort Hare, through the Youth League, their
law partnership and the Defiance Campaign, to the treason trial and the
formation of Umkhonto we Sizwe. Even during his years in prison, Mandela said
in his autobiography, Tambo was never far from his thoughts: ‘Though we were
separated, I kept up a lifelong conversation with him in my head.’ On the day of
his release from prison in 1990, Mandela described as ‘the most wonderful
moment’ the occasion late at night when a telephone call came through from
Tambo in Sweden, where he was recuperating from his first stroke. Their
reunion in Stockholm later in the year was joyous. ‘When we met we were like
two young boys in the veld who took strength from our love for each other,’
Mandela wrote. On the day of Tambo’s death, Mandela spoke to journalists. ‘I
will feel his loss in a unique manner,’ he said. ‘We are bleeding from the
invisible wounds that are so difficult to heal.’ To a friend, he remarked that he
felt like the loneliest man in the world.
His home life compounded the sense of loneliness he felt. Separated from
Winnie, he lived alone in his six-bedroom house in Houghton, frequently with
only bodyguards and servants for company. When Zindzi paid him visits, she
would often find him on his own, eating supper at the large dining-room table by
himself.

In private, with his own children, he remained a stern figure. Zindzi, who
knew little of him until his release in 1990, noted how he avoided bodily contact.
‘He’ll only hold your hand for a moment,’ she said. In a magazine interview, she
described Mandela as ‘a typical African father’, demanding strict obedience. ‘He
thinks very traditionally,’ she said. ‘He is head of the family. . . . His will is law.’
With his son, Makgatho, Mandela still insisted he should pursue his studies.
All his affection he concentrated on his grandchildren. He developed a special
bond with one of Zindzi’s sons, Bambatha, whose father, Sizwe Sithole, had
hanged himself in a police cell shortly before Mandela’s release. Bambatha was
only three months old at the time. For two years, while Zindzi lived with her
parents in Soweto, Mandela was able to spend much time with Bambatha. He
enjoyed putting him to bed at night. ‘He even got up in the middle of the night to
change his nappy and give him his bottle, as if Bambatha were his own son,’
Zindzi recalled. But with older grandchildren, Mandela could be as stern and
demanding as he was with his own children.
In the company of friends, he found it difficult to relax. His circle of friends
was wide and varied, but there were few with whom he was on intimate terms.
With the death of Oliver Tambo, only Walter Sisulu survived of the group of
young firebrands from the 1940s who had played such a central role in his early
life. To Sisulu, Mandela remained as he had always been: warm, kind and
sociable. ‘That type of a nature doesn’t really change,’ mused Sisulu, after fifty
years of friendship. Other old friends included Yusuf Cachalia and his wife,
Amina, a strikingly attractive woman for whom Mandela had a particular
affection. Mandela and Cachalia had once cooked a pigeon pie to celebrate
Amina’s twenty-first birthday and she reminded him of the occasion in a letter
sent to him on Robben Island. Mandela replied, ‘My dear Amina, How dare you
torture me by reminding me of that pigeon meal!’ He wrote too of his lasting
friendship with the Cachalias, citing ‘the powerful links that hold us tightly
together’. When Amina first saw him in Pollsmoor, after twenty-four years, she
was shocked by his thin and emaciated appearance. She noticed that he had
become quieter, more gentle, more measured. She realised too the huge
adjustments he faced upon his release from prison: ‘He had a lot to learn, a
whole new lifestyle.’
But outside a handful of close friends, Mandela kept his distance. The
aloofness that he had shown before his imprisonment had hardened during the
long years he spent there. He evaded intimacy. Even friends like Kathy

Kathrada, who had known him on close terms for so many years in prison, still
found him to be ‘a very cool person—self-contained to an exceptional degree’.
Not once during their prison life did Kathrada ever hear Mandela proclaim any
personal ambition. ‘If he had any inner feelings about what he wanted to be, it
was never evident,’ said Kathrada. ‘In prison we never ever talked even lightly
about his being president of the country.’ As one of Mandela’s key aides upon
his release from prison, Kathrada still found it difficult to tell what went on in
his mind. ‘Take the latest incident involving Winnie, ’ he said. ‘When I would
meet him for work or casually, you would never decipher in his attitude towards
us what was going on in his mind about this matter. He would not even mention
it.’
Mandela was often most at ease in dealing with strangers or ac - quaintances.
He remained courteous and attentive to individuals, whatever their status or their
age. His aides sometimes had to chastise him from rising from his chair to greet
everyone who approached. Soon after his release from prison, when he attended
a friend’s birthday party in an affluent white suburb of Johannesburg, he spent
most of the evening greeting a constant stream of maids, gardeners and domestic
staff from the neighbourhood who came to see him, shaking each one by the
hand and conversing at length with all of them. At luncheons and banquets, he
always made a point of shaking hands with the staff, showing the same courtesy
to them that he would to dignitaries.
He was also attracted to people of wealth and fame. Among his many
acquaintances were millionaires only too willing to ingratiate themselves. The
insurance magnate Douw Steyn lent him a home after he left Winnie. The casino
tycoon Sol Kerzner helped pay for Zindzi’s extravagant wedding and provided a
honeymoon suite at one of his hotels in Mauritius. He dined regularly with the
Oppenheimers and spent holidays with the Menells, another prominent mining
family. Mandela might mock his relations with the rich and famous—at the end
of one of his sessions with Richard Stengel, he remarked, ‘I am having lunch
today with the third richest family in South Africa; I will not starve’—but he
often seemed to prefer their company. When he approached twenty leading
businessmen for at least 1 million rands each to help him with election expenses,
all but one complied.
In the absence of any real family life, all Mandela’s efforts were concentrated
on political work. His daily schedule, for a man of seventy-four, was punishing.
He still arose at about 5 a.m. for his exercises. When he first arrived in

Houghton, he enjoyed an early-morning jog through its leafy streets, but after the
assassination of Chris Hani he confined himself to exercising at home. By 7 a.m.
he was at work in his tenth-floor office in ANC headquarters at Shell House in
central Johannesburg. The rest of the day was filled with meetings, interviews,
speeches, negotiations, conferences, working lunches, fund-raising appearances
and banquets. He liked to be back home by 9.30 p.m. to catch up on his reading.
His foreign trips were as numerous as before.
With increasing frequency, Mandela suffered from bouts of exhaustion. His
doctors pointed out that what was remarkable, in view of his schedule, was not
that he was so tired but that he remained so energetic. Dr Louis Gecelter, who
examined him regularly, concluded that Mandela possessed the mental and
physical attributes of a man of fifty. The explanation, he said, lay partly in the
dietary discipline and exercise routine of twenty-seven years in prison. But it
was also because Mandela was a man for whom life was only just beginning, for
whom the important goals in life still lay ahead.
Within the ANC, Mandela played an elevated role, largely removed from
administrative concerns, internal squabbles and the hard grind of negotiations.
He usually left detail in the hands of officials like Ramaphosa. He was
recognised as being the ANC’s greatest asset, its elder statesman, able to achieve
for the ANC a degree of international respectability and support that would
otherwise be missing. But he was not always sure-footed. His pronouncements,
notably on foreign affairs, sometimes left ANC officials aghast. During a
telephone conversation with President George Bush, he lectured him on the
perils of US policy towards the Iraqi dictator, Saddam Hussein. He also
infuriated the Bush administration by taking Colonel Gaddafi’s side in the feud
over the bombing of Pan Am flight 103. He heaped praise on Cuba as an
‘inspiration to all freedom-loving people’. On British television, he spoke of his
support for the IRA’s ‘struggle against colonialism’. At home, his suggestion
that the franchise should be extended to fourteen-year-old children became a
national joke.
The one subject Mandela would not discuss was Winnie; about her, he
maintained a stony silence. In June 1993, two years after her conviction for
kidnapping and assault, the verdict on her appeal was finally handed down by
the chief justice, Michael Corbett. In reaching its decision, the Appeal Court
heard no new evidence. The allegations made by Xoliswa Falati, John Morgan
and others while the appeal process was under way were not part of the Appeal

Court’s purview. All that the Appeal Court was concerned with was evidence
given during the original trial.
Justice Corbett ruled that there was no doubt that Stompie Moe - ketsi Seipei
and three other young men had been kidnapped and assaulted in Mrs Mandela’s
home in December 1988. He found that the trial judge had been correct in
finding Winnie guilty of kidnapping them. But he accepted Winnie’s claim that
she had been far from home during the beatings and consequently found her not
guilty of being an accessory to the assaults. He reduced her six-year sentence to
a two-year suspended sentence, and ordered her to pay a fine of 15,000 rands
and compensation of 5,000 rands to each of the surviving kidnap victims. With
the threat of a prison sentence now lifted, Winnie was free to pursue her own
political ambitions. Falati, however, lost her appeal and was ordered to serve two
years in prison.
Mandela’s comment on the outcome was terse: ‘I am very happy my
estranged wife will not have to go to jail,’ he said. A few weeks later, he made
his own gesture of contrition to Stompie’s mother when, during a political rally
at her home town of Parys, he insisted she be given a place of honour on the
podium and spoke to her at length, pointedly, for all to see.
On 18 July 1993, at a party to celebrate Mandela’s seventy-fifth birthday,
some 650 guests were invited, but Winnie was not one of them.

In the wake of Hani’s assassination, Mandela was able to force the pace of
negotiations, insisting on swift, tangible progress. On 3 June 1993, negotiators at
the multiparty forum at the World Trade Centre outside Johannesburg voted to
set a date for the first democratic election—27 April 1994—even though
agreement on an interim constitution was nowhere near being in sight.
As the spectre of majority rule moved closer, a motley collection of the
ANC’s opponents—homeland leaders and extreme rightwing groups—banded
together to thwart the process. The central figure was Buthelezi. Though Inkatha
had rejoined the multiparty forum in April 1993, Buthelezi produced proposals
of his own for an autonomous region for KwaZulu-Natal and threatened a ‘go-italone’ approach if a referendum in the territory approved the plan. Buthelezi’s
proposals not only reduced the functions of central government to a minimum,
they concentrated enormous power in the hands of the rulers of KwaZulu-Natal,

with few checks and balances. The case for a federal South Africa was eminently
respectable; it would have suited several minority groups. But Buthelezi,
influenced heavily by white advisers, presented his plan on an all-or-nothing
basis, believing that he was too important for the process to continue without
him. Even his negotiators conceded that Buthelezi’s ego was a significant part of
the problem. Buthelezi also objected to the two-stage approach of the drafting of
the final constitution, insisting that the full text should be drawn up by the
present negotiators before an election rather than by an elected constitutionmaking body in the future. In protest against the setting of the April 1994 date
for the elections, Buthelezi withdrew Inkatha from the negotiations process,
clearly expecting it to founder in the same way as it had done the previous year
when the ANC walked out of Codesa.
Buthelezi found common cause with two other homeland leaders, Lucas
Mangope, the autocratic ruler of Bophuthatswana, and Brigadier Gqozo, the
military dictator of Ciskei. Both hoped to be able to secure a future for
themselves in the kind of federal system proposed by Buthelezi. Mangope had
been an ideal partner in the apartheid system and benefited from it substantially.
Like Buthelezi, he ran a tight one-party system, with control of parliament, radio
and television, and brooked no opposition. At a recent election in October 1992,
all his own candidates had been returned—unopposed. Opinion polls suggested
that Mangope possessed minimal public support—less than 1 per cent—far less
than Buthelezi’s following, but this had never troubled him. As far as apartheid’s
rulers were concerned, Mangope had been far more reliable, more predictable,
than Buthelezi. Whereas Buthelezi had refused ‘independence’, Mangope had
taken it. When Mangope was threatened by a military coup in 1988, the South
Africans had duly come to the rescue. ‘Oh! I never knew how friends could be
so loyal!’ Mangope told the white minister who arrived on the scene to help him.
Despite Mangope’s evident lack of popularity, de Klerk had always considered
him a potential ally for the National Party in an anti-ANC coalition. Like
Brigadier Gqozo in Ciskei, he had refused to allow the ANC to conduct any
political activity in his territory.
Mandela had by now lost all patience with Buthelezi. ‘He reached a point
where he was very, very angry,’ Sisulu recalled. ‘In fact, so angry that when the
whole executive took a lighter line, saying that Buthelezi should be spoken to, he
said no.’ Senior ANC officials, examining Buthelezi’s constitutional proposals,
were convinced that his real objective was secession from South Africa

altogether. They argued that no matter what concessions Buthelezi was offered,
he would still continue to boycott the transition process because he feared the
consequences of an election. They also took the view that though Buthelezi’s
participation in the election was preferable, to ensure a wider legitimacy, it was
not essential. He could therefore be ignored. A hardcore of militants, led by
Harry Gwala, still advocated using force to oust both him and his allies.
In his dealings with Mangope, Mandela found him to be equally obdurate. He
travelled to Mangope’s capital, Mmabatho, near the Botswanan border, to see if
they could come to terms, suggesting that they both address a rally in
Bophuthatswana to make clear their commitment to a peaceful resolution.
Mangope at first agreed, but then changed his mind. ‘The discussions broke
down,’ said Mandela. ‘I have phoned him since on numerous occasions and he
has avoided me.’ As with Buthelezi and Gqozo, Mandela believed that Mangope
posed no serious threat to the transition process.
The real threat, as Mandela and others in the ANC saw it, came from extreme
rightwing organisations. On their own, they were known more for weekend
parades and for fierce rhetoric than for action. They were divided into a host of
splinter groups, constantly squabbling with each other. But what worried
Mandela was the extent of support they had from within the security forces and
from army and police reserve units stationed across the country. ‘The ultra-right
is powerful in the proper sense of the word,’ said Mandela. Their support within
the public service, the army, the police and other strategic institutions was
significant: ‘They are trained and experienced and they know the country better
than we do. . . . They can derail any democratic government in this country.’
The common aim of many extreme rightwing groups was to establish an
Afrikaner homeland, a volkstaat. At the entrance to many platteland towns, road
signs decorated with the flags of the old Boer republics already declared their
allegiance. Demands for a volkstaat were frequently accompanied by threats of
violence. ‘Mandela, give us a volkstaat or you’ll have total war in South Africa,’
the AWB leader, Eugene Terre’Blanche, told supporters at Lichtenburg. A spate
of bomb explosions on railway tracks, power pylons and ANC property in the
Transvaal and the Orange Free State underlined the message.
Yet after nearly four years of talks about a volkstaat, far-right parties still
failed to make clear where it would be located or how it would work. No
explanation was forthcoming about the rights of non-Afrikaners living in an area

declared a volkstaat, or how their opinions would be taken into account. De
Klerk described the idea as ‘a hopeless illusion’.
In May 1993, in an attempt to present a united demand for a volkstaat, a
‘committee of generals’, consisting of retired army and police commanders from
the ‘total strategy’ era, formed an Afrikaner Volksfront, an umbrella group
bringing together twenty-one organisations including the Conservative Party, the
neo-Nazi AWB, the Transvaal Municipal Associations, white trade unions and
farmers’ unions from the Transvaal and the Orange Free State. The AVF’s
leader, General Constand Viljoen, a former chief of the defence staff, hoped to
provide the right wing with a more pragmatic leadership. His own experience of
warfare in Angola, Mozambique and Namibia had led him to conclude that
violence was the worst possible option. He also wanted to establish a respectable
image for the AVF. But he had to contend with the inane antics of the AWB.
On 25 June, at a demonstration organised by the AVF outside the World
Trade Centre, intended to promote its demand for a volkstaat, a group of AWB
supporters led by Terre’Blanche, brandishing shotguns and revolvers, broke
through a police cordon, drove an armoured security vehicle through the glass
front of the building and stormed into the conference chamber, screaming abuse
and assaulting delegates, officials and journalists along the way. They then
occupied delegates’ seats, scrawled slogans on walls and urinated on the floor.
Viljoen’s efforts to restrain the mob were ignored.
Despite such acts of hooliganism and violence, Mandela was determined to
seek a dialogue with the far right to avert what he feared might become a
concerted effort to sabotage the transition to majority rule. In August, at a secret
meeting in a private house in Houghton, Mandela met three of the AVF’s
generals, including Viljoen. He was blunt in presenting his appraisal of the
situation:
If you want to go to war, I must be honest and admit that we cannot stand up to
you on the battlefield. We don’t have the resources. It will be a long and bitter
struggle, many people will die and the country may be reduced to ashes. But you
must remember two things. You cannot win because of our numbers: you cannot
kill us all. And you cannot win because of the international community. They
will rally to our support and they will stand with us.
The meeting achieved an unexpected result. Mandela believed, just as much
as de Klerk, that the idea of a volkstaat was a hopeless illusion. His aim was to

engage the AVF in talks for as long as possible in the hope that rightwing fears
about their future security under majority rule might in time begin to diminish.
He found the generals amenable to further talks. A committee of ANC officials
was set up to meet the AVF generals on a regular basis. What was unexpected
was that Mandela and Viljoen developed an immediate liking for each other.
Mandela felt a genuine sympathy for Viljoen’s concerns about Afrikaner culture,
religion and language, which were in marked contrast to de Klerk’s
preoccupations with pensions and privileges. The degree of trust that Mandela
and Viljoen shared from their first meeting was to have important consequences
in crises that lay ahead.
Meanwhile, negotiators at the World Trade Centre ploughed on, doggedly
assembling a new constitution. The most contentious issue was federalism—the
balance of power between central government and the provinces. The ANC
wanted a strong central government with powers to override the provinces. The
National Party advocated a measure of devolution, but made only a half-hearted
effort to fight for it. The liberal opposition Democratic Party favoured
devolution, but possessed too little weight in the negotiations process to secure
it. Buthelezi was the most insistent on the need for maximum devolution, but he
threw away what chances there were of obtaining greater federal powers by
choosing to boycott the negotiations. Consequently, the first drafts of the new
constitution to emerge from the World Trade Centre in July and August
contained only minor elements of federalism.
Buthelezi denounced the result and, with a warning of civil war ‘or worse’,
threatened to boycott the 1994 elections unless his demands for autonomy were
met. Rightwing parties took the same line. The Conservative Party described the
draft constitution as ‘hostile to Afrikaner interests’ and ‘a recipe for civil war,
further economic deterioration and a spiral of violence’. Its new leader, Ferdi
Hartzenberg, said the Conservative Party would participate in further talks only
when Afrikaner self-determination was ‘unequivocally accepted’.
A new alliance of opposition groups was launched to fight for a federal or
confederal state. Called the Freedom Alliance, it consisted of Buthelezi from
KwaZulu, Mangope from Bophuthatswana, Gqozo from Ciskei, Hartzenberg
from the Conservative Party and General Viljoen from the Afrikaner Volksfront
—a motley crew, but one that possessed a high potential for disruption.
On the Witwatersrand, the Reef war burst out with renewed ferocity.

Townships on the East Rand such as Thokoza and Katlehong became war zones,
their streets lined with deserted, burnt-out houses, wrecked vehicles, barricades
and boulders, as Inkatha hostel dwellers and ANC comrades fought for territorial
possession. Many hostel dwellers found themselves virtually under armed siege;
food and other supplies had to be delivered under paramilitary police protection.
Hit-and-run raids continued relentlessly. In the first ten months of 1993, some
1,300 people died in political violence in the East Rand townships. Similar strife,
though on an even greater scale, occurred in the killing fields of Natal.
Mandela, now that he was close to inheriting the problem of township
violence, no longer saw fit to blame it solely on de Klerk. He still castigated the
government for its failure to deal effectively with the violence, but accepted that
the ANC had an equal responsibility for trying to bring it to an end. However,
the message of peace and reconciliation he tried to convey was often drowned
out.
Arriving in Katlehong to address a rally at a football stadium, Mandela found
a message awaiting him, scribbled on the table next to his microphone. It read,
‘No peace. Do not talk about peace. We’ve had enough. Please, Mr Mandela, no
peace. Give us weapons. No peace.’
After criticising the government, Mandela scolded his own supporters,
undeterred by the angry murmuring in the crowd of some 10,000 people: ‘There
are times now when our people participate in the killing of innocent people. It is
difficult for us to say when people are angry that they must be nonviolent. . . But
the solution is peace; it is reconciliation; it is political tolerance.’
Some in the crowd jeered, but Mandela continued:
We must accept blacks are fighting each other in our townships. So the task of
the ANC is to unite black people as well. . . . We must accept that responsibility
for ending violence is not just the government’s, the police’s, the army’s. It is
also our responsibility. . . . We should put our own house in order. If you have
no discipline, you are not freedom fighters. If you are going to kill innocent
people, you don’t belong to the ANC. Your task is reconciliation. You must go
to your area and ask a member of Inkatha: why are we fighting?
The crowd shouted back. ‘Listen to me! Listen to me!’ he cried above the din.
‘I am your leader. As long as I am your leader, I am going to give leadership. Do
you want me to remain your leader?’ Chastened, the crowd roared back, ‘Yes!’
Mandela went on, ‘Well, as long as I am your leader, I will tell you, always,

when you are wrong. ‘
Back at the World Trade Centre, after seven months of haggling, drafting and
redrafting, deadlocks and deadlines, negotiators struggled through to the last
remaining points of dispute. The most difficult of all—how cabinet decisions
were to be taken in the government of national unity—had deliberately been left
to the end. De Klerk insisted that cabinet decisions should require a two-thirds
majority, potentially a means of minority veto. The ANC’s negotiators wanted
an ordinary majority, but were privately prepared to agree to a 60 per cent
majority if necessary to break the deadlock. Hours before the final plenary
session was due to sit on 17 November, the issue still had not been resolved.
In a final encounter late at night on 17 November, Mandela and de Klerk
confronted each other over the last remaining clause. Mandela was adamant. The
majority in cabinet would decide, he said; he could not run a cabinet in any other
way. There would be no minority veto. Power would be shared voluntarily or not
at all.
As the remains of his power drained away, de Klerk surrendered even on this
point. All that he managed to salvage was an agreement that the cabinet would
function in accordance with a ‘consensus-seeking spirit’. At the very last minute,
de Klerk had been obliged to accept majority rule.
In the early hours of 18 November, the interim constitution was approved by
the plenary session, signalling the end of 341 years of white rule that had begun
when the Dutchman Jan van Riebeeck first set foot on the Cape of Good Hope in
1652. Mandela used the occasion to urge South Africans ‘to join hands and
march into the future’.
After such a marathon endeavour, there was a sense of euphoria about the
outcome. The scent of power was particularly heady for the ANC. Its chief
negotiator, Cyril Ramaphosa, crowed about how the National Party’s negotiating
position at the last hour had ‘collapsed’. Joe Slovo, writing in the African
Communist, proclaimed ‘a famous victory’, adding, ‘We got pretty much what
we wanted.’ Widespread protests at the way the ANC had blocked the use of a
double ballot paper for the election of national and provincial legislatures, which
would have enhanced the chances of smaller regionally based parties, were
dismissed with contempt. The issue, said the ANC, was not negotiable. There
would be no further concessions made to demands for greater regional powers.
Ramaphosa curtly rejected proposals that the name of Kwa Zulu should be

retained by incorporating it into a province renamed KwaZulu-Natal. The name
KwaZulu, he said, was a creation of apartheid and would not feature on maps of
post-apartheid South Africa. The province would be known henceforth simply as
Natal. At early meetings of the transitional executive council, the ANC was
quick to start throwing its weight about. Any sign of trouble from the provinces,
a senior ANC official warned, and they would ‘let the tanks roll in’. As the ANC
celebrated its triumph, whatever prospects there were of broadening the
settlement to include Inkatha and other members of the Freedom Alliance
rapidly degenerated, pushing South Africa towards civil war.

What had been achieved, nevertheless, was remarkable. Four years previously,
South Africa had been in the hands of a ruthless, authoritarian government,
determined to protect white power and privilege, buttressed by formidable
security forces and a vast administrative apparatus, and with access to huge state
revenues. De Klerk had embarked upon his reforms assuming that his
government enjoyed such a preponderance of power that it could set the terms of
any settlement. He scorned all notion of majority rule, holding firm to the need
for group rights. Indeed, even after the new constitutional agreement was
reached, he still argued that separate development for different ethnic groups as
a constitutional option was morally justified. What de Klerk expected to emerge
from the negotiations process was a government coalition of moderate parties
which the National Party would dominate.
Yet stage by stage, he had been forced into compromise. From group rights he
had moved on to the idea of power-sharing through a permanently enforced
coalition, repeatedly insisting that he would never surrender to ‘simple majority
rule’. Whatever the outcome of a popular vote, he said, he would demand a
guaranteed share in power and he would hold out as long as necessary to obtain
one. At the very least there would have to be a white veto in cabinet.
The compromises that de Klerk had been induced to accept came about in part
through skilful negotiation, in part by force of circumstance, like the Hani
assassination, which led to de Klerk’s irreversible commitment to an election
date. But they also reflected changes in the government’s thinking about white
interests and ways of protecting them. Apartheid had brought the whites
unprecedented prosperity. For much of the white community, prosperity rather
than power had become their preoccupation. Like other white communities in

Africa, they had come to accept the old adage: give them parliament and keep
the banks. As Joe Slovo had foreseen when putting forward his ‘sunset clause’,
guarantees about employment, pensions and property were sufficient to break
the log jam in negotiations. But what de Klerk also came to realise was that the
indispensable role played by whites in the civil service, the security forces and
the economy would give them far greater leverage over a new government than
mere constitutional clauses. Even when making his last stand against Mandela
over the issue of the cabinet veto, de Klerk acknowledged that a voluntary
agreement on the need for ‘consensus-seeking’ was likely to give the whites
more influence in cabinet than an entrenched clause in the constitution which an
ANC majority would seek to thwart.
Underpinning the settlement was the extraordinary stature that Mandela had
attained in the four years since his release from prison. His exemplary lack of
bitterness, his insistence on national recon - ciliation and his willingness to
compromise had earned him enduring respect among his white adversaries. The
white community would not vote for him, but they would accept a government
under his presidency.
On a personal basis, the relationship between Mandela and de Klerk never
recovered from the long war of attrition they had fought. In public and private,
their dealings over who was to blame for the violence remained abrasive.
Mandela was infuriated by what he claimed was de Klerk’s indifference to the
loss of black lives. He was also irked by de Klerk’s refusal to condemn the
principle of apartheid. While de Klerk was willing to admit that the apartheid
system had led to injustice and hardship, for which he apologised, he still
continued to speak approvingly of the idea of ethnic separation, provided it was
voluntary.
Even on the occasion when the two men were jointly awarded the Nobel
Peace Prize in Oslo in December 1993, the friction was still evident. In
interviews, Mandela spoke of his ‘disappointment’ with de Klerk’s conduct in
the negotiations and once more accused the government of involvement in
township violence. De Klerk, for his part, appeared to resent being upstaged by
Mandela, believing that his own efforts had been overlooked. In choosing them
as ‘Men of the Year’ for 1993, Time magazine noted that ‘the mutual bitterness
and resentments between de Klerk and Mandela are palpable’, and it asked
rhetorically, ‘How could these two have agreed on anything—lunch, for
instance, much less the remaking of a nation?’

At a political level, however, Mandela recognised how important de Klerk
was to the whole settlement. ‘My worst nightmare is that I wake up and de Klerk
isn’t there,’ Mandela told guests at a private dinner party. ‘I need him. Whether I
like him or not is irrelevant. I need him.’