THE MISSION SCHOOL LADDER
MANDELA WAS BORN IN THE SIMPLE SURROUNDINGS OF A
PEASANT village on the banks of the Mbashe river in Thembuland. But for his
royal connections, his childhood would have been no different from those of
many others there. His great-grandfather Ngubengcuka, however, was a Thembu
king, renowned for his skill in bringing stability to diverse Thembu clans in the
early nineteenth century. And although Mandela was descended from only a
minor branch of the dynasty—the Left-hand House—his link with the Thembu
royal family was to have a marked influence on both his character and his
fortunes.
His father, Gadla Henry Mphakanyiswa, was the village headman at Mvezo.
A tall, respected figure, he presided over local ceremonies and officiated at
traditional rites for such occasions as births, marriages, funerals, harvests and
initiation ceremonies. Like most of his generation, he had had no formal
education; he could not read or write. But he had a keen sense of history and was
valued as a counsellor to the royal family. He was also wealthy enough at one
time to afford four wives and sired in all thirteen children.
Mandela’s mother, Nosekeni Nkedama, was the third of Gadla’s wives. She
bore four children, the eldest of whom, Mandela, was her only son but the
youngest of Gadla’s four sons. Like Gadla, she could neither read nor write.
While Gadla adhered to the traditional Qaba faith, involving the worship of
ancestral spirits, Nosekeni became a devout Christian, taking the name of Fanny.
The Xhosa name given to Mandela at his birth on 18 July 1918 was
Rolihlahla, which meant literally ‘pulling the branch of a tree’, but more
colloquially ‘troublemaker’, and there were friends and relatives who later
ascribed to his Xhosa name the troubles he would encounter. But the name by
which he became popularly known was an English one, Nelson, given to him by
an African teacher on the first day he attended school. For that, there was no
ready explanation, only surmise that it was taken from the famous English

admiral.
It was shortly after he was born that the Mandela household itself encountered
serious trouble. Gadla’s position as headman was dependent not only upon tribal
lineage but upon the approval of white officials in the Cape colonial
administration. After its annexation by Britain in 1885, Thembuland had come
under the control of colonial magistrates who maintained a system of indirect
rule through village headmen appointed to keep order among the local
population as well as to represent their interests. The same system remained in
place when Thembuland became part of the Union of South Africa, established
in 1910, eight years before Mandela was born.
Well known for his stubbornness, Gadla fell into a minor dispute over cattle
with the local magistrate and refused to answer a summons to appear before him.
Gadla took the view that the matter was of tribal concern and not part of the
magistrate’s jurisdiction. He was dismissed for insubordination, losing not only
his government stipend but most of his cattle and his land and the revenue that
went with them. Facing penury, he sent Nosekeni and her young son to Qunu, a
village to the north of Mvezo, about twenty miles from the town of Umtata,
where her family could help support her. It was there that Mandela spent his
boyhood.
The landscape around Qunu—undulating hills, clear streams and lush pastures
grazed by cattle, sheep and goats—made an indelible impression on Mandela.
Qunu was the place where he felt his real roots lay. It was a settlement of
beehive-shaped huts in a narrow valley where life continued much as it had done
for generations past. The population there, numbering no more than a few
hundred, consisted predominantly of ‘red’ people, who dyed their blankets and
clothes with red ochre, a colour said to be beloved by ancestral spirits and the
colour of their faith. There were few Christians in Qunu and those that were
there stood out because of the Western-style clothes they wore.
The Mandela homestead, like most others in Qunu, was simple. Their beehive
huts—a cluster of three—were built without windows or chimneys. The floors
were made of crusted earth taken from ant - hills and kept smooth with layers of
fresh cow dung. There was no furniture, in the Western sense. Everyone slept on
mats, without pillows, resting their heads on their arms. Smoke from the fire
filtered through the grass roof. There was no opening other than a low doorway.
Their diet was also simple, mainly maize, sorghum, beans and pumpkins grown

in fields outside the village and amasi, fermented milk stored in calabashes.
Only a few wealthy families could afford luxuries like tea, coffee and sugar,
bought from the local store.
Having four wives, each living in her own kraal several miles apart, Gadla
visited them in turn, spending perhaps one week a month with each one. With
his children, he was a strict disciplinarian. Complete obedience was expected, in
accordance with Thembu tradition; questions were rarely tolerated. The life that
Mandela led as a child was governed by strict codes of custom and taboo,
guiding him through each state of adolescence. The number of taboos restricting
the course of daily life, for men, boys, girls and especially married women, ran
into hundreds. Most were associated with sex, with key passages of life and with
food. All were held in superstitious awe. Any transgression could incur the wrath
of ancestral spirits, which was to be avoided at all costs.
Along with tribal discipline came the support of an extended family. The
Mandela household in Qunu was often full of relatives, taking as much interest
in the Mandela children as in their own. In Thembu tradition, as with many other
African tribes, uncles and aunts were as responsible for the welfare of children
as the children’s own parents and were referred to as ‘little fathers’ and ‘little
mothers’. The family circle in which Mandela grew up was thus an affectionate
one. Even though he remembered his father mainly for his stern countenance,
Mandela tried to emulate him by rubbing white ash into his hair in imitation of
the tuft of white hair above Gadla’s forehead. Like Gadla, he had the distinctive
facial features of the Madiba clan, high cheek-bones and slanting eyes.
From the age of five, Mandela was set to work as a herdboy, looking after
sheep and calves and learning the central role that cattle played in Thembu
society. Cattle were not only a source of meat and milk but the main medium of
exchange and the measure of a tribes-man’s wealth. As the price of a bride was
paid in cattle, without cattle there could be no marriage. Moreover, the principal
means of propitiating ancestral spirits were through the sacrifice of cattle.
Significant events like funerals were marked by their slaughter.
Much of Mandela’s time was also spent in the open veld in the company of
members of his own age group, stick-throwing and fighting, gathering wild
honey and fruits, trapping birds and small animals that could be roasted, and
swimming in the cold streams—the normal pursuits of young Thembu boys.
What first set him on a different course was the influence of two villagers

known as Mfengu. The Mfengu had arrived in Thembuland and neighbouring
Xhosaland as refugees fleeing southwards from a series of wars and upheavals
called the mfecane which accompanied the rise of the Zulu kingdom in the
1820s. Drawn from a number of different clans among the northern Nguni, the
refugees, some moving in scattered bands, others in larger groups, were given
the name of Mfengu to describe their position as suppliants and were often
treated with contempt and animosity. Lacking land and cattle, many formed a
servant class for the Thembu and their Xhosa neighbours. But they were also
more readily adaptable to serving the interests of white colonists. Mfengu levies
fought as combatants on the colonial side in four frontier wars in the Cape
Colony, helping to inflict defeats on the Xhosa. They were rewarded with land
and cattle. A large area of what had been Xhosa territory was designated as
Fingoland. They were also among the first to take advantage of Christian
missionary education, acquiring new skills and finding employment as teachers,
clerks, policemen and court officials.
Mandela’s father did not share the common prejudice against Mfengu. Among
his friends were two Mfengu brothers, George and Ben Mbekela, both Christian,
one a retired teacher, the other a police sergeant. It was their suggestion that
Mandela should be baptised and sent to the local mission-run school. Gadla,
recognising that an education was the only advancement available for his
youngest son, accepted the idea.
At the age of seven, Mandela went to the one-room school in Qunu, crossing
the boundary between ‘red’ people and ‘school’ people. To mark the occasion,
Gadla presented him with a pair of his old trousers, cut off at the knee and
fastened around his waist with a piece of string. Hitherto, the only clothing that
Mandela had worn had been a blanket, wrapped around one shoulder and pinned
at the waist. ‘I must have been a comical sight,’ he wrote in his autobiography,
‘but I have never owned a suit I was prouder to wear than my father’s cut-off
trousers.’
Two years later, in the Mandela household in Qunu, Gadla died, leaving
Nosekeni without the means to continue her son’s education. The event changed
Mandela’s life dramatically. Because of his family ties to the Thembu royal
house and to the Madiba clan dating back to an eighteenth-century Thembu
chief, the young Mandela was taken up as a ward by Chief Jongintaba
Dalindyebo, the acting regent of the Thembu people. Accompanied by his
mother, he left the simple idyll of Qunu, walking across the hills westwards to

Mqheke - zweni, the provisional capital of Thembuland, where Jongintaba
maintained his Great Place, and entered a new world.
The royal residence, consisting of two large rectangular houses with
corrugated-iron roofs surrounded by seven thatched rondavels all washed in
white lime, was more impressive than anything the young Mandela had ever
seen. As he approached, Jongintaba himself arrived in a Ford V8, to be greeted
by a group of tribal elders who had been waiting in the shade of eucalyptus trees
with the traditional salute, ‘Bayete, Jongintaba!’—‘Hail, Jongintaba!’
In accordance with tribal custom, Mandela was accepted by Jongintaba into
the Great Place as if he were his own child. He shared a rondavel with his only
son, Justice, wore the same kind of clothes and was subject to the same parental
discipline. The regent’s wife, NoEngland, treated him with equal affection and,
once his own mother had returned to Qunu, soon filled her place. Life at
Mqhekezweni was too full of excitement for Mandela to miss for long the world
he had loved at Qunu. Even the chores seemed more enjoyable. He took
particular pride in ironing the creases in the trousers of Jongintaba’s suits.
What impressed him above all was the influence of the chieftaincy. Under
colonial rule, hereditary chiefs had retained a wide range of powers and
functions. They continued to conduct traditional court cases, to collect tributary
fees and dues, and to exercise considerable authority over the distribution of
land. They constituted a central part of the colonial administrative system, held
in high esteem by white officials, while enjoying at the same time the traditional
support of the local population.
Watching at close quarters the way in which Jongintaba exercised his power
as regent, Mandela became absorbed by the workings of the chieftaincy. At
tribal meetings at the Great Place, when high-ranking councillors gathered to
discuss both local and national issues, he observed how Jongintaba would take
care to hear all opinions, listening in silence to whatever criticism was made,
even of himself, before making a summary of what had been said and
endeavouring to find a consensus of views. It was a style of leadership which
made a profound impression upon him. He learned too of the proceedings of the
traditional courts at Mqhekezweni, where chiefs and headmen from surrounding
districts met to settle disputes and judge cases.
It was from these tribal elders, sitting around the fireside at night, that
Mandela first heard stories of Robben Island. It was mentioned often by them

when recounting the long history of conflict between white colonists and Xhosaspeaking tribes in the turbulent eastern frontier region of the Cape Colony during
the nineteenth century. The name given to it in the Xhosa language was
Esiqithini, a word which quite simply meant ‘on the island’. Everybody knew
which island was referred to and what it meant. For the Xhosa, it was a place of
banishment and death.

The first Xhosa leader whom the whites sent to Robben Island was a warriorprophet called Makana; he was also known by the name of Nxele, meaning the
Left-handed. In 1819, in retaliation for a raid by colonial troops into Xhosa
territory, Makana had led an army of 10,000 men against the British military
outpost at Grahamstown, intending ‘to chase the white men from the earth and
drive them into the sea’. The attack, in broad daylight, failed. Four months later,
after British forces had laid waste to a vast stretch of Xhosa territory, Makana
gave himself up at a military camp, hoping to stop the slaughter. ‘People say that
I have occasioned this war,’ he said. ‘Let me see whether delivering myself up to
the conquerors will restore peace to my country.’
Makana was sentenced to life imprisonment, taken in shackles to Port
Elizabeth, put on board the brig Salisbury and delivered to Robben Island, 400
miles away, off the coast at Cape Town. It had been used since the seventeenth
century as a prison colony for both criminal convicts and political dissidents.
Within a year of his imprisonment, Makana, along with other inmates, helped
organise an escape, seized a fishing boat and headed for the mainland three miles
away. As the boat came into the breakers off Blauberg beach, it capsized.
According to the survivors, Makana clung for some time to a rock, shouting
encouragement to others to reach the shore, until he was swept off and engulfed
by the raging surf.
Makana was never forgotten by his Xhosa followers. Many refused to believe
that he was dead and waited for years for his return, giving rise to a new Xhosa
expression, ‘Kukuzakuka Nxele’, the coming of Nxele, meaning forlorn hope.
The fate of Maqoma, the greatest military commander the Xhosa ever
produced, was also well remembered. Expelled from his native valley in 1829,
Maqoma engaged in a series of wars against the British in an attempt to regain
lost Xhosa lands. During the 1850s, his guerrilla force based in the Amatola
mountains held at bay a British army for months on end, inflicting one defeat

after another.
Twice Maqoma was shipped off to Robben Island. During his first term of
imprisonment, lasting eleven years, he was allowed the company of his youngest
wife and a son. But on the second occasion, at the age of seventy-three, he was
sent back there alone. No one else on the island spoke any Xhosa. He received
no visitors. According to an Anglican chaplain who witnessed his last moments
in 1873, he cried bitterly, before dying of old age and dejection, ‘at being here
alone—no wife, or child, or attendant’.
After nine frontier wars, Xhosa resistance against British colonial rule finally
ended. Once an expanding and aggressive nation, the Xhosa had lost great
swathes of land to white settlers. In the process, Xhosa leaders squabbled and
fought with each other as much as they did with the white colonists. Some chiefs
defected to the colonial side. Others were willing enough to collaborate. In the
most desperate act of resistance, the Xhosa slaughtered vast herds of their own
cattle, believing the prophecy of a teenage girl, Nongqawuse, that it would help
‘in driving the English from the land’. It resulted only in mass starvation, in
which tens of thousands of Xhosa died and enabled the authorities to take yet
more Xhosa territory for white settlement.
Unlike their Xhosa neighbours to the south-west, the Thembu, a Xhosaspeaking people, managed to avoid most of the frontier conflict and lost little
land to white settlement. Yet Thembuland, like all the other independent
chiefdoms in the area, eventually succumbed to Cape control and became
incorporated into a new region known as the Transkeian Territories. It was the
largest area of South Africa not to fall into white hands. But just as much as the
Xhosa, the Thembu had lost political control. The authority of their chiefs had
become secondary to that of colonial officials, like the magistrates, as Mandela’s
father had found to his cost.
What stirred the young Mandela’s imagination, as he listened to these tales of
Xhosa history around the fireside, were the bravery and defiance shown by
Xhosa leaders who stood against the whites’ advance. The age of the chiefs was
seen as a heroic time. The memory of men like Makana and Maqoma was
carried down from one generation to the next to ensure that a tradition of
resistance survived. They became the heroes of Mandela’s youth.

Another profound influence on Mandela at Mqhekezweni, pulling in a different
direction, was the Church. The mission station there, centred around a white
stucco church, was revered in Mqhekezweni as much as the Great Place itself. It
was part of a century of endeavour by Wesleyan Methodist missionaries to carry
Christianity to the African peoples of the Eastern Cape which had started when
the Reverend William Shaw, a pioneer missionary accompanying a party of
British settlers to the Cape frontier region in 1820, decided that a far greater
potential for mission work lay in Xhosa territory to the east, ‘a country
abounding with heathen inhabitants’. Within a few years his chain of mission
stations had reached 200 miles into African territory. One of the mission
stations, Clarkebury, on the banks of the Mgwali river in the heart of
Thembuland, was built on land donated by Mandela’s great-grandfather, King
Ngubengcuka. Anglican, Presbyterian and Moravian missionaries were also
active in the Transkei region.
Before arriving in Mqhekezweni, Mandela had been to church only on one
occasion, to be baptised in the Wesleyan chapel in Qunu as a prelude to
attending school there. At Mqhekezweni, church was taken much more
seriously. Jongintaba himself was a devout Wesleyan who regularly attended
church each Sunday, together with his wife, NoEngland, and Mandela was
expected to do the same. Once when Mandela missed Sunday service, preferring
to take part in a fight against boys from another village, he was given a hiding by
the regent.
The church was always full on Sundays, men dressed in suits, women in long
skirts and high-necked blouses—a style favoured by missionaries at the time.
The local minister, Reverend Matyolo, was a popular figure whose fire-andbrimstone sermons, seasoned with a dose of African animism, found a ready
audience. But what impressed Mandela, even more than the rituals and
ceremony, was the impact of missionary education. The African elite of the time
—clerks, teachers, interpreters and policemen—were all products of missionary
schools.
At the primary school at Mqhekezweni, a one-room building next to the royal
residence, Mandela showed no particular flair, but he was a diligent learner and
received special attention from his teachers, taking homework back every day to
the Great Place, where an aunt would check it. The subjects he studied were
standard: English, Xhosa, history and geography. They were taught, in the
tradition that missionaries had long established, with a notable British bias, for

the missionaries believed in the virtues of the British Empire, British culture and
British institutions just as much as they did in the virtues of Christianity.
Thus Mandela grew up a serious boy, respectful of the chieftaincy, the Church
and British tradition. At the Great Place, his solemn demeanour earned him the
nickname Tatamkhulu, meaning Grandpa. He spent much time in the company
of Justice, Jongintaba’s son and heir, a student at Clarkebury mission who was
four years older, admiring him for his outgoing nature, his achievements in sport
and ballroom dancing, and his success with young women, wishing he could be
as accomplished.
At the age of sixteen, Mandela underwent the ritual of circumcision. It was an
event not just of passing interest among the Thembu and other Xhosa-speaking
peoples, but of fundamental significance. The elaborate ceremonies for initiates,
lasting several weeks, marked their passage to full manhood. Without
circumcision, no Thembu male could marry, set up his own home, inherit his
father’s wealth or participate in tribal councils. In Thembu tradition, he would
remain a boy.
Preparations for the sacred rites of the abakhwetha, the groups of youths
undergoing circumcision, were made well in advance, involving whole families.
To prove that they were ready to accept adult responsibilities, initiates were
required to undergo a number of ordeals which had been prescribed for
generations. The most important was the act of circumcision itself. It was
performed by an ingcibi, a surgeon skilled in the use of an assegai blade, who
sliced off the foreskin with a single, quick motion. No word was spoken; no
sound came from the circle of parents and relatives looking on. No matter how
severe the pain, the initiates were instructed not to betray the slightest emotion,
not to moan, clench a fist, or even frown or blink. To do so would be to incur
shame and ridicule. Without a moment of hesitation, once the cut had been
made, their only action was to shout, ‘Ndiyindoda!’— ‘I am a man!’
After the ceremony, the initiates were secluded in a specially constructed
lodge for weeks on end under the guidance and discipline of an overseer who
instructed them on the rules of manhood and ensured that they adhered to strict
lodge rules and activities. Their bodies and heads were shaved and covered in
white clay until the end of their seclusion. Humbled by the experience of
initiation, the abakhwetha were welcomed back into everyday tribal life with
gifts and songs and feasting.

The occasion of Mandela’s circumcision was more important than usual, for
the group of initiates—twenty-six in all—included Justice, a royal son, and the
ceremony was held at a traditional place for circumcision for Thembu kings at
Tyhalarha, on the banks of the Mbashe river. In accordance with Thembu
tradition, Justice was both preceded and followed by commoners. Waiting in
line, Mandela heard the first boy call out ‘Ndiyindoda!’ followed a few seconds
later by Justice. Suddenly, the ingcibi was before him. ‘The pain was so intense
that I buried my chin in my chest,’ he wrote in his autobiography.
Many seconds seemed to pass before I remembered the cry, and then I
recovered and called out ‘Ndiyindoda!’ I looked down and saw a perfect
cut, clean and round like a ring. But I felt ashamed because the other
boys seemed much stronger and firmer than I had been; they had called
out more promptly than I had. I was distressed that I had been disabled,
however briefly, by the pain, and I did my best to hide my agony. A boy
may cry; a man conceals his pain.
Once the period of seclusion was over and the initiates, now daubed in red
ochre, had been welcomed back to society as men, Mandela’s spirits revived.
His gifts included two heifers and four sheep—the first property he had
possessed. ‘I remember walking differently on that day, straighter, taller, firmer.
I was hopeful, and thinking that I might some day have wealth, property and
status.’
A succession of speeches followed, delivered by fathers and tribal elders,
lengthy discourses on Xhosa customs, beliefs and etiquette, on the host of
responsibilities that initiates now faced and on the standard of behaviour
expected of them. The speech that stuck in Mandela’s mind was one by Chief
Meligqili, a brother of Jongintaba. He began with conventional remarks about
the importance of tribal tradition, but then became increasingly outspoken about
the plight of the Xhosa under white rule. They were, he said, slaves in their own
country, with no power or control over their own destiny, performing work for
the whites to make them prosperous. The talents and abilities of young Xhosa
men, like the initiates present, were meanwhile squandered. Without freedom
and independence, the Xhosa nation would die.
Mandela was irritated by the speech and put it down to the ramblings of an old
man who did not understand the value of education and the other benefits that
white rule had brought.

The career laid out for Mandela at the age of sixteen seemed assured. His
guardian, Jongintaba, intended that he should continue his education, climbing
steadily up the mission school ladder, until he was fit for service in the Thembu
royal household. His destiny, like that of other members of the Left-hand House
before him, was to become a counsellor to the Thembu chieftaincy. Mandela
readily accepted such an outcome. He saw himself fulfilling a role at the heart of
Thembu society, upholding the authority of the chieftaincy and maintaining
traditions of which he felt immensely proud.
The alternative, as it applied to the vast majority of young Thembu men of his
age, was for him to seek work far beyond the borders of Thembuland, in the
mines or on the farms of white South Africa. There was a certain glamour
attached to such journeys. Men returned home after months away in dashing
attire—flared trousers, sharp-pointed shoes, striped ties, wide-brimmed hats and
coloured handkerchiefs—bearing tales of the excitement of city life, of trams,
motor cars and electric lights, and bringing with them new possessions like
gramophones. They spoke of the mines as places of daring and courage where
men were able to prove their manhood.
But more lay behind the exodus of men from Thembuland and other African
‘reserves’ than tales of adventure. The reserves were becoming overcrowded,
without sufficient grazing land or arable land to support their growing
populations. Parts of the Transkeian Territories consistently failed to produce
enough food to meet local needs. The burden of taxation, like the poll tax, added
to the spur to men to find wage employment, as it was specifically designed to
do. The result in the Transkei, once one of the most prosperous African areas in
South Africa, was that by the 1920s nearly half of all able-bodied men were
absent from their homes at any given moment on long spells of contract labour.
In villages like Qunu, where Mandela grew up, the population consisted
predominantly of old men, women and children.
However much Mandela was attracted by stories of adventure and money far
afield, Jongintaba decided otherwise. Once he had completed his primary
education at Mqhekezweni, Mandela was sent to Clarkebury, the mission school
which Justice had previously attended. Jongintaba himself drove him there, in
his Ford V8, westwards across the Mbashe river, with Mandela wearing his first
pair of boots, given to him to mark the occasion.

Clarkebury was the most advanced educational institute in Thembuland. It had
been founded in 1875 through the efforts of a Wesleyan minister and with the
help of funds donated by Thembus themselves. It served as both a secondary
school and a teacher-training college, as well as providing practical training in
carpentry, shoemaking, printing and other trades. It was also the centre of a
Methodist network of forty-two outstation schools in Thembuland, including the
primary schools at Qunu and Mqhekezweni which Mandela had attended. Its
buildings were on a far grander scale than anything he had previously
encountered.
On arrival, Jongintaba, himself a former pupil, took Mandela to meet the
school principal, the Reverend Cecil Harris. Hitherto, Mandela had had few
direct dealings with whites. At Qunu, the only whites to be seen, apart from the
local magistrate and the local store-keeper, were occasional travellers and
policemen. At Mqhekezweni, white government officials and traders had often
called at the Great Place to speak to Jongintaba and Mandela had observed them
from a distance. But, as Jongintaba explained while they were on their way to
Clarkebury, the Reverend Harris was different from all of them. A man
renowned for his understanding and affection for the Thembu people, he was
regarded by them as a Thembu himself. One day, said Jongintaba, he would be
entrusted with the upbringing of the future paramount chief, Sabata Dalindyebo.
He was to be treated with as much respect and obedience as the regent himself.
In the principal’s office, as he was introduced by Jongintaba, Mandela shook
Harris’s hand, the first time he had shaken hands with a white man.
Mandela soon discovered that the Reverend Harris ruled Clarkebury with an
iron rod. His countenance was invariably severe. Punishment was handed out
swiftly to anyone who transgressed the rules. Students went in fear of him and
the staff, both white and black, tended to adopt a servile manner.
In private, however, Mandela came to see a different figure. Because
Jongintaba had asked the principal to take a special interest in Mandela, in view
of his likely destiny as a royal counsellor, the Reverend Harris had arranged for
him to work in his garden after school hours, instead of participating with other
pupils in manual labour elsewhere. There Mandela observed a more gentle man,
often lost in thought, taciturn but broad-minded and devoted to the cause of
educating young Africans. His wife too made a favourable impression, carrying
out to the garden warm scones and passing the time in conversation. The Harris
family were the first white family with whom Mandela became familiar.

At the age of nineteen, Mandela moved up the mission school ladder to
Healdtown, a Wesleyan foundation sited at the head of a large and fertile valley
six miles from the village of Fort Beaufort in Ciskei, an area where many of the
frontier wars had been fought. It had been established in 1857, originally for the
education of Mfengu as a reward for their loyal service to the British cause, but
had since grown into the largest educational establishment for Africans in South
Africa, providing a wide range of schooling for boys and girls, from primary
education to the end-of-school matriculation examination. Its Christian and
liberal arts education founded on English grammar and literature had profoundly
influenced generations of students. Most of the staff came from Britain and the
English model provided the basis for all teaching. The principal, Dr Arthur
Wellington, was a man who liked to boast to pupils of his connection to the
Duke of Wellington, the British general who defeated Napoleon at the battle of
Waterloo. Mandela recalled, ‘We were taught and believed that the best ideas
were English ideas, the best government was English government and the best
men were Englishmen.’
Healdtown was also renowned for its spartan routines, attributable in part to a
shortage of mission funds. Breakfast in the dining hall, overlooked by portraits
of George VI and former Healdtown teachers, consisted of a mug of lukewarm
water with sugar and a piece of dry bread; anyone who wanted butter had to buy
it. Lunch on three days of the week consisted of meat, beans and samp-porridge
made from coarsely ground maize; on other days, there was no meat. Supper was
the same as breakfast.
Wednesday afternoons were set aside for sport. Friday afternoons were free.
Saturdays were spent in competitive sports against other schools. They were also
the one day of the week when pupils were given permission to walk to Fort
Beaufort, a village which boasted a general grocer’s store and a fish and chip
shop. On Saturday nights, once a month, there was a film show and,
occasionally, a concert given by a local music troupe. On Sundays, boys
attended church in their full uniform: grey trousers, white shirts, red-and-yellowstriped ties and blazers with a badge on the pocket and the Latin motto Alis velut
aquilarum surgent—they soar as if with the wings of eagles.
There were more than 1,000 pupils at Healdtown. They mostly came from
Xhosa-speaking districts and, after school hours and at weekends, tended to keep
to groups from their own home areas. But some came from further afield in
South Africa, as well as from the British protectorates of Basutoland,

Bechuanaland and Swaziland. To Mandela, they were mostly strangers. His
sense of identity in belonging to the Thembu tribe broadened to include the
Xhosa people in general but not yet a wider African community. He felt quite
bold at having as a friend a Sotho-speaking African and was amazed to discover
a Sotho-speaking teacher there who was married to a Xhosa woman. He had
never known of anyone marrying outside his tribe before.
Mandela adapted well to life at Healdtown. He much admired his
housemaster, the Reverend Seth Mokitimi, took up long-distance running and
boxing, became a prefect and in due course passed matriculation, enabling him
to climb to the top of the mission school ladder, the South African Native
College at Fort Hare.
Before he left, the Xhosa writer and poet Samuel Mqhayi paid a visit to
Healdtown. Mqhayi was renowned for his performances as a mbongi, a praisesinger and orator in the flowery court tradition of the Xhosa people. He was
often at odds with the educational establishment. He had once taught at Lovedale
mission school, but left teaching because he opposed the way African history
was presented. His own writing was a major source of inspiration to early
African nationalists. In 1927 he had written seven stanzas for the song ‘Nkosi
Sikelel’ iAfrika’—‘God Bless Africa’, a song composed by the Xhosa teacher
Enoch Sontonga in Johannesburg’s Nancefield location in 1897 which African
nationalists had decided to use as their anthem.
Gathered in the dining hall, the entire school watched as Mqhayi, dressed in a
leopard-skin kaross and hat and carrying a spear in each hand, walked on to the
stage from a side door, followed by Dr Wellington. For Mandela, it was an
electrifying moment. He listened enthralled as Mqhayi declaimed against the
curse of foreign culture, predicting how the forces of African society would
eventually overcome it. And when he ended with a well-known praise-poem
about the Xhosa people, his school audience rose to their feet clapping and
cheering. It was an event, said Mandela, which for him was ‘like a comet
streaking across the night sky’.

Fort Hare was an educational institute for Africans of unique importance. To
reach there, as Mandela did in 1939 at the age of twenty, represented a great
achievement. To obtain a degree from there, so few were the number of
graduates each year, ensured personal fortune and advancement in any career

then open to Africans. No other place in South Africa offered such opportunity.
Like most of the African education system, its origins lay largely in
missionary endeavour. Three missionary churches—Anglican, Methodist and
Presbyterian—had combined their efforts to establish a centre for higher
education where none previously existed. The site they chose, on mission lands
belonging to the United Free Church of Scotland, lay within and adjacent to the
ramparts of Fort Hare, the largest of all the border forts, built in 1846 and named
after a British officer. It stood on a small plateau overlooking the Tyumie River,
half a mile from the village of Alice and near to Lovedale mission. Only one of
the old fort’s buildings, a square blockhouse, was still standing, but the lines and
trenches, once manned by British soldiers, were still clearly visible.
There was no imposing building in which the college could start, only a
collection of rudimentary bungalows, one of which was adapted for use as a
hostel, another as a classroom and a third as a house for the principal. The
sanitation was primitive, there was no gas or electricity, and water for bathing
had to be drawn from the Tyumie River. At the opening ceremony, in February
1916, the platform for dignitaries was erected under an awning of railway wagon
covers on what had once been a parade ground for British troops.
There was also a shortage of African students qualified to enter higher
education. Only one school in South Africa at the time, Lovedale mission,
provided secondary education for Africans. Of the first intake of students at Fort
Hare in 1916, sixteen had to undertake a four-year course in order to pass
matriculation. The initial task at Fort Hare, in fact, was to ensure that African
students could reach the minimum standard required for university entrance. The
first graduation ceremony was not held until 1924.
The eventual success of Fort Hare was due in large part to the efforts of the
two original members of staff, both of whom were still active when Mandela
arrived in 1939. One was a Scot, Alexander Kerr, educated at Edinburgh
University and appointed principal at Fort Hare at the age of thirty. Free of the
racial attitudes common to most whites in South Africa, he was devoted to the
cause of African education, taught English with a rare passion and maintained
firm discipline. The other was an African teacher of legendary talent, Dr
Davidson Jabavu. The son of a well-known Mfengu teacher, he had been refused
admission as a day scholar to a high school for white boys in King William’s
Town, so he was sent instead to Wales to complete his secondary education. He

had studied at the University of London, graduating with honours in English,
obtained a diploma in education from the University of Birmingham, then visited
Negro schools in the United States before returning to take up a post at Fort Hare
at the age of thirty. He spoke Xhosa, Zulu and Sotho; played the piano and the
violin competently; trained and conducted the college choir; and taught Latin,
Bantu studies and history with the same enthusiasm and verve he gave to music.
He also was active in Church affairs, in journalism, in politics and in founding
an agricultural society. At graduation ceremonies at Fort Hare, Jabavu was a
favourite subject for the praise-poems of the mbongi, Samuel Mqhayi.
Under the guidance of these two teachers, Fort Hare expanded year by year.
The first permanent buildings were finished in 1920. New hostels were built,
each accommodating students according to their Church denomination. The
Methodist hostel, Wesley House, was completed in 1922. No account was taken
of tribal affiliations and women were admitted on equal terms. One of the first
two graduates in 1924—the first Africans with a South African university degree
—was Z. K. Matthews, who went on to study at Yale University before returning
to Fort Hare in 1936 as a lecturer in anthropology and native law. By 1938, the
year before Mandela arrived, the number of graduates had risen to seventeen and
the number of students to 150. No longer was Fort Hare needed for matriculation
purposes, as secondary schools like Healdtown were by then able to provide a
sufficient number of qualified entrants.
Mandela arrived, a tall, thin figure, proudly sporting his first suit, a doublebreasted grey outfit given to him by Jongintaba to mark the occasion. He was
assigned a place in Wesley House in a wooden-floored dormitory of sixteen beds
with lockers and cupboards, along with other first-year students. Also resident at
Wesley House, in his third year there, was a distant cousin, Kaizer Matanzima.
Like Mandela, Matanzima was a descendant of King Ngubengcuka, but he came
from the Great House and was destined to become chief of the Emigrant
Thembu, part of the tribe that had split away in the nineteenth century. They
became close friends. Matanzima took an avuncular interest in Mandela,
introduced him to soccer and shared his allowance with him. They attended
church services at nearby Lovedale mission together. Mandela admired
Matanzima, looking up to him as he had to Justice. He introduced Matanzima to
his great wife and stood as best man at their wedding in 1940. But they were
later to become political adversaries.
Mandela adapted to the routine at Fort Hare without difficulty. In his first year

he studied English, anthropology, politics, native administration and Roman
Dutch law. In his second year he opted to take an interpreter’s course, thinking
that he might settle for a career as an interpreter in a magistrate’s court or some
other government office—positions of considerable importance for Africans. He
joined the Dramatic Society, took part in soccer and cross-country running
competitions and spent hours honing his skills as a ballroom dancer to the tunes
of Victor Sylvester on a crackly old phonograph. His personal habits changed.
He wore pajamas for the first time, used toothpaste instead of ash to clean his
teeth and a toothbrush instead of a toothpick, and used toilet soap instead of blue
detergent to wash.
He also joined the Student Christian Association. The tradition at Fort Hare
was for students to set out on foot in groups on Sunday mornings to conduct
services and Sunday schools in nearby villages, in accordance with a longestablished practice inherited from the missionary institutions in which they had
been educated. In addition to religious talks and teaching, the students would
hold discussions on more mundane matters such as village sanitation and the
prevention of disease.
On such occasions Mandela was often accompanied by a serious-minded
student named Oliver Tambo. Tambo came from humble origins from the village
of Bizana in Pondoland, north-east of Thembuland. The tribal scarification
marks on his cheeks were to remain throughout his life. His parents were poor,
illiterate peasants but he had been rescued from village life by Anglican
missionaries. At Holy Cross mission in Pondoland, he had been so impressed by
the workings of the church that he resolved to become a priest himself. ‘I arrived
there on Easter day, and I shall never forget that moment,’ he once told an
Anglican priest, Father Trevor Huddleston. ‘We entered the great church while
the Mass of Easter was being sung. I can still see the red cassocks of the servers,
the grey smoke of the incense, the vestments of the priest at the altar.’ Having
reached the mission’s highest class, he was sent to an Anglican school in
Johannesburg, St Peter’s, the first school in the Transvaal at which Africans
could take matriculation, and from there gained a scholarship to Fort Hare. A
resident of the Anglican hostel, Beda Hall, he saw little of Mandela at the time,
but the enduring friendship they eventually forged was to become a central part
of Mandela’s life.
Remote as Fort Hare was from the outside world, it was nevertheless touched
by the gathering momentum towards world war. From the warden of Wesley

House, students heard of each development abroad and gathered round an old
radio to listen to patriotic speeches. When General Smuts, the deputy prime
minister, called in at Fort Hare while campaigning for South African support for
the British war effort, Mandela cheered him to the hilt.
His own fortunes, however, were soon to suffer a serious setback. An abiding
grievance among students at Fort Hare was the monotony of the food. It was an
issue which constantly preoccupied the Student Representative Council. The low
fees charged at Fort Hare, to ensure that students from poor backgrounds could
gain access, meant that there was little room for variation in diet. Towards the
end of Mandela’s second year, complaints about food reached one of their
periodic boiling points. A meeting of students unanimously demanded an
increase in the powers of the Student Representative Council to enable it to deal
with their grievances. A majority voted to boycott elections due to be held for
the six members of the council unless their demands were met. Mandela,
nominated to stand as a candidate for one of the six seats, voted in favour of the
move. The election was duly boycotted by a majority of students, but a minority
of twenty-five went ahead and elected six members, one of whom was Mandela.
The six then decided to resign on the grounds that they did not enjoy majority
support and sent a letter of resignation to the principal, Dr Kerr.
Dr Kerr accepted the resignations, then arranged for new elections to be held
the next day in the dining hall at supper time, when the entire student body
would be present. At these new elections the same twenty-five voters supported
the same six candidates, but this time Mandela’s five colleagues accepted the
result. Mandela alone held out, deciding to resign once more. He was summoned
by Dr Kerr, who, after calmly reviewing the matter, asked Mandela to reconsider
his decision, pointing out that he could not allow students to act irresponsibly
and warning that if Mandela insisted on resigning he would be expelled from
Fort Hare.
When set against the opportunities that awaited Mandela and the expectations
of his family and his guardian, Jongintaba, who had paid for his education and
provided him with a home for twelve years, the issue was an utterly trivial one.
Mandela well knew that a degree from Fort Hare was a passport to success.
Time and again, his teachers—Kerr, Jabavu and Matthews—had stressed the life
of privilege and prestige to which graduates could look forward. Mandela
himself had dreamed of how he would be able to care properly for his mother
and sisters, restoring the family fortunes that had been lost upon his father’s

dismissal as village headman.
What overcame him was a fit of stubbornness of the kind for which his father
had been renowned. When he appeared before Dr Kerr the next morning, he was
still largely in a state of indecision, but, confronted with the need to decide, he
declared that in good conscience he could not serve on the Student
Representative Council. After a moment’s thought, Dr Kerr replied that he
would allow Mandela to return to Fort Hare for a third year, provided that he
joined the Student Representative Council. In the meantime, he would have the
summer holiday to consider the matter.
Mandela returned to Mqhekezweni to face the wrath of Jongintaba. Jongintaba
brooked no argument about Mandela’s behaviour, which he regarded as
senseless, and ordered him to obey Dr Kerr’s instructions and to return to Fort
Hare after the summer holiday to complete his third year.
In all likelihood, Mandela would have returned to Fort Hare, but for an
unexpected development. In accordance with Thembu tradition, Jongintaba, in
his old age, had begun negotiations to arrange a marriage for both his son,
Justice, and his ward, Mandela, without informing either of them, to settle the
matter before his death. A few weeks after Mandela’s return to Mqhekezweni,
Jongintaba summoned them both and told them not only who their brides were
to be but that the marriages would take place immediately.
Mandela had had a number of love affairs. He enjoyed the company of women
and felt able to relax with them in a way he was unable to do with men; with
women, he could admit his weaknesses. He was not short of admirers, being a
handsome man, powerfully built, with an engaging laugh, a radiant smile and
dark piercing eyes. He was also by nature a romantic, whose education had
distanced him from the notion that an arranged marriage was an acceptable fate.
The bride whom Jongintaba had chosen for him came from a respectable family;
her father was the local Thembu priest. Mandela had also known for many years
that Jongintaba might exercise his traditional prerogative to arrange a marriage
for him, but the reality of it was more than he could face. He briefly tried to
enlist the support of the regent’s wife, NoEngland, but Jongintaba remained
unmoved. The idea of seeking a solution through tribal intermediaries, as custom
allowed, he did not pursue.
Justice was no more enamoured of the prospect than Mandela and together
they decided to run away. Justice, always more of a playboy than a serious

student, had struggled to complete his secondary education at Healdtown for
several years. He had recently returned from Cape Town and, with Jongintaba’s
consent, had made plans to take up employment as a clerk at a gold mine outside
Johannesburg. Johannesburg seemed the obvious destination for both of them.
First, they waited for Jongintaba to depart for a scheduled week-long visit to
the Transkei capital, Umtata. Then, needing money for the journey, they
deceived a local trader into paying them for two of Jongintaba’s prize oxen,
implying that they were selling them on his behalf. They then hired a car to take
them to the local station, only to find that Jongintaba, suspecting their escapade,
had been there before them and instructed the station manager to refuse to sell
them tickets should they appear. Considerably shaken by this, they drove off in
the hired car to the next station. After taking the train to Queenstown, they
disembarked, hoping to be able to arrange travel permits for Johannesburg,
without which they risked arrest. By chance, at the house of a relative with
whom they stayed, they met Chief Mpondombini, a brother of Jongintaba.
Claiming that they were on an errand for the regent, they explained their need of
travel documents from the local magistrate. Having no reason to doubt their
story, Mpondombini agreed to help and accompanied them to the magistrate’s
office. After listening to the chief ’s explanation, the magistrate issued the
necessary permits. But before handing them over, he decided to check first on
the telephone with the chief magistrate in Umtata. By a remarkable coincidence,
Jongintaba happened to be visiting the chief magistrate when the call came
through. When told what was happening, he shouted out in anger, ‘Arrest those
boys!’ loud enough for Mandela to hear. Mandela managed to stave off arrest,
but left the magistrate’s office in humiliation and disgrace, without the travel
permits. Some time afterwards, he and Justice succeeded in arranging a lift to
Johannesburg in a car driven by an elderly white woman visiting relatives there,
but for a sum which took virtually all their remaining money.
Mandela’s fall from grace had been swift. One minute he was part of an
African elite, attending the most advanced educational institute for Africans in
South Africa, assured of prosperity and prestige in whatever field of work he
chose and welcomed at home in the ruling circles of the Thembu people. A few
weeks later he had fallen foul of the authorities at Fort Hare over a triviality,
forsaken the patronage and goodwill of his guardian, Jongintaba, his benefactor
for twelve years, and laid a trail of deceit and lies in an escapade arranged in
haste and with wanton impatience. Now he was bound, virtually penniless, for a

city renowned for its harsh and violent character, without the slightest idea of
what lay ahead.