THE FREEDOM CHARTER
FINDING ALLIES IN THE WHITE COMMUNITY WAS AN EXERCISE
FRAUGHT with complications. During the Defiance Campaign, the ANC had
said that it was ‘prepared to work with any white man who accepted the
principle of equality’. But while traditional liberals were genuinely appalled by
the onslaught of apartheid and the trail of destruction it carved through
individual rights and liberties, few were willing to take a determined stand
against the government. Mandela developed a particular dislike for their brand of
politics.
In May 1953, after Malan’s National Party had won a second election victory,
white liberals launched the Liberal Party in an attempt to bridge the gap between
white and black. By white South African standards, it was a brave endeavour.
The Liberal Party opened its membership to all races and advocated the
extension of full political rights to non-whites. With the exception of the
Communist Party, no political party in South Africa had previously gone so far.
Yet its programme was hedged with reservations. The Liberal Party wanted
not full citizenship rights for all but ‘equal rights for all civilized people’—in
other words, a qualified franchise. Furthermore, it opposed the use of passive
resistance, strikes and boycotts, rejecting such tactics as being unconstitutional
and insisting that only ‘parliamentary methods’ should be adopted.
It was also vehemently hostile to having any truck with communists, sharing
the intense distrust of communist intentions held throughout the Western world
at the time. Indeed, one of the motives of the founders of the Liberal Party was
to provide an alternative to the influence of communists among the non-white
population. All this came with a heavy dose of paternalism, with liberals
expressing ‘profound sympathy with the aspirations of all non-European
peoples’ but urging restraint, caution, compromise and gradualism on their part.
Mandela vented his anger on the liberals in a June 1953 article in Liberation.
With South Africa divided by racial discrimination into two hostile camps, he

wrote, there could be no middle course:
The fault of the Liberals—and this spells their doom—is to attempt to strike just
such a course. They believe in criticizing and condemning the government for its
reactionary policies but they are afraid to identify themselves with the people
and to assume the task of mobilizing that social force capable of lifting the
struggle to higher levels. . . .
Talk of democratic and constitutional means can only have a basis in reality
for those people who enjoy democratic and constitutional rights. . . . The theory
that we can sit with folded arms and wait for a future parliament to legislate for
‘the essential dignity of every human being irrespective of race, colour or creed’
is crass perversion of elementary principles of political struggle. No organization
whose interests are identical with those of the toiling masses will advocate
conciliation to win its demands. . . .
The real question is: in the general struggle for political rights can the
oppressed people count on the Liberal Party as an ally? The answer is that the
new party gives organizational expression to a tendency which has for many
years existed among a section of the white ruling class and in the [opposition]
United Party. This section hates and fears the idea of a revolutionary democracy
in South Africa, just as much as the Malans and the Oppenheimers [a prominent
mining family] do. Rather than attempt the costly, dubious and dangerous task of
crushing the non-European mass movement by force, they would seek to divert
it with fine words and promises and to divide it by giving concessions and bribes
to a privileged minority (the ‘suitably qualified’ voters perhaps).
It became clear, therefore, that the high-sounding principles enunciated by the
Liberal Party, though apparently democratic and progressive in form, are
essentially reactionary in content. They stand not for the freedom of the people
but for the adoption of more subtle systems of oppression and exploitation.
Though they talk of liberty and human dignity they are subordinate henchmen of
the ruling circles. . . .
Mandela’s resentment of white liberals spilled over at a meeting of the ANC’s
national executive committee attended by Chief Luthuli and Professor Matthews,
shortly after they and other ANC officials had held talks in private with a
number of white liberals about the formation of the Liberal Party. Mandela
recalled the incident in his autobiography. Along with others who had not been
present, he had wanted to know what had transpired. When told that the

conversations had taken place on a private basis and were therefore privileged,
he retorted: ‘What kind of leaders are you who can discuss matters with white
liberals and then not share that information with your colleagues at the ANC?
That’s the trouble with you, you are scared and overawed of the white man. You
value his company more than that of your African comrades.’
Mandela was quickly rebuked. Matthews, his old teacher from Fort Hare,
responded, ‘Mandela, what do you know about whites? I taught you whatever
you know about whites and you are still ignorant. Even now, you are barely out
of your student uniform.’ Luthuli replied that if he was being accused of being
afraid of the white man, he would have no alternative but to resign. Mandela
beat a hasty retreat and apologised.

There were, however, other white opponents of the government willing to
identify themselves with the ANC and the cause of African nationalism in a way
that white liberals were not prepared to do. In 1953, in conditions of utmost
secrecy, a hardcore of communist activists decided to relaunch the Communist
Party and to devote its energy to the business of liberation. So secret were the
activities of the Communist Party that no word of its existence was heard until
1960, not even by the Special Branch. Its founding conference in 1953 was held
at the back of an Indian trader’s store in a village in the eastern Transvaal to
which many delegates were taken in vehicles without knowing their destination.
The key working group included Moses Kotane, Yusuf Dadoo, Bram Fischer,
Michael Harmel and Rusty Bernstein. Although most members were readily
identified as being ‘former’ communists, their involvement in a well-organised,
tightly disciplined, underground version of the Communist Party was never
suspected.
They operated mainly in small units of four or five people, meeting
clandestinely, often in ‘unmarked’ cars owned by friends and colleagues.
Meetings of the secretariat took place several times each week. National
conferences were also held, with delegates attending from towns across South
Africa, without attracting the attention of the Special Branch. Among white
communists there were a number of notable husband-and-wife teams: Bram and
Molly Fischer, Rusty and Hilda Bernstein, Jack and Rica Hodgson, Joe Slovo
and Ruth First, Brian and Sonya Bunting, and Ben and Mary Turok. In all, their
numbers were small—fewer than 100 members were at the core of Communist

Party activity—but the impact they made was remarkable.
They were particularly adept at keeping alive a radical press. When The
Guardian, run mainly by communists since 1937, was suppressed by the
government in 1952, a new paper, The Clarion, appeared the following week,
using the same staff and the same editor; in Cape Town, a former communist
member of parliament, Sam Kahn, managed to sell a copy to the minister of
justice outside the House of Assembly, smiling as he did so. When The Clarion
was suppressed, People’ s World appeared; after that came Advance and then
New Age, at which point the government tired of the game. During the 1950s,
Ruth First served as the Johannesburg editor of all five papers, as well as editor
of the radical monthly Fighting Talk. Another outlet for left-wing views was
Michael Harmel’s monthly journal Liberation, for which Mandela wrote a series
of articles in the 1950s. All these papers devoted considerable space to
descriptions of Soviet achievements and justifications of Soviet foreign policy.
The main focus of their efforts, however, was a new political organisation, the
Congress of Democrats. Launched in 1953, largely as a result of communist
endeavour, the Congress of Democrats was intended to function as a white
counterpart to the ANC and the Indian Congress, in the way that Sisulu and
Tambo had advocated at the Darragh Hall meeting in Johannesburg at the end of
the Defiance Campaign. Unlike the Liberal Party, it had no qualms about
demanding universal franchise.
Its membership was open only to whites. By agreement with the ANC, it
confined its recruitment to the white community, to avoid competing with the
ANC for black members. But the pool of white sympathisers on which it could
draw for support was tiny. Most white opponents of the government were
attracted more by the incremental, multiracial approach of the Liberal Party than
by the radical vision proposed by the Congress of Democrats. From its inception,
therefore, it became little more than an elite organisation for whites already
committed to the idea of democratic rule in South Africa. Not all its members
were communists, but communists played a key role in its foundation and in its
leadership ranks. ‘But for them, it would not have seen the light of day,’ Rusty
Bernstein admitted forty years later. ‘It was communist pressure which got the
ANC to recognise that they had an ally. Communist Party members effectively
launched it.’
It was Bernstein who gave the keynote address at the inaugural conference of

the Congress of Democrats at the Trades Hall in Kerk Street, Johannesburg, in
October 1953, urging white opponents of white supremacy to ‘take sides’ in the
racial confrontation that was coming and fill ‘the void in the democratic camp’.
A veteran member of the Communist Party, who joined in 1939 while studying
architecture at the University of the Witwatersrand, he preferred a backroom
role, handling propaganda, but was propelled to prominence by the part he
played in launching the Congress of Democrats. Other communists active in the
leadership included Bram Fischer, Molly Fischer, Joe Slovo, Ruth First, Michael
Harmel and Cecil Williams, a theatre producer. The president, Piet Beyleveld, a
trade unionist, joined the underground Communist Party in 1956, mainly as a
result of Bram Fischer’s influence. The post of national secretary was also held
by communists: first by Jack Hodgson, then, when he was banned, by Yettah
Barenblatt and then by Ben Turok.
The presence of so many known ‘former’ communists in the leadership led to
immediate accusations by the Liberal Party that the Congress of Democrats was
little more than a communist front. The evidence of communist influence was at
times incontrovertible: discussion papers were replete with Marxist theories and
concepts, and public pronouncements, notably on foreign affairs, often followed
the party line. A war of words between white liberals and members of the
Congress of Democrats lasted for years.
The ANC too found itself under attack for its alliance with the Congress of
Democrats, not just from white liberals but from its own Africanist wing.
Africanists portrayed the Congress of Democrats as a pernicious fifth column,
intent on subverting the African liberation movement for its own purposes. They
denounced as ‘Eastern functionaries’ those ANC members like Walter Sisulu
who had accepted invitations to attend a communist-sponsored youth festival in
Bucharest in 1953 and subsequently visited Peking and Moscow. When Sisulu
returned from his tour of communist countries in 1953, he was greeted by a
storm of controversy on all sides. Most whites readily identified him as one of
the most dangerous enemies of the state. Africanists nicknamed him ‘Mao Tsetung’.
Chief Luthuli took a more philosophical view of the role of communists. He
developed a close personal relationship with Moses Kotane, the Communist
Party’s general secretary, often seeking his advice. ‘He knew Moses was 100 per
cent a member of the Communist Party,’ remarked Oliver Tambo, ‘but he also
knew him to be 100 per cent ANC, and this gave Luthuli great confidence in

him.’ When Luthuli was restricted to his home area by government banning
order, he would send for Kotane to discuss ANC issues.
‘People ask me why I work with communists and my reply is that I have one
enemy, the Nationalist government, and I will not fight on two fronts. I shall
work with all who are prepared to stand with me in the struggle for the liberation
of our country,’ he said. The ANC, he felt, must not be side-tracked by
ideological clashes and witch-hunts. The time would come when conservatives
and communists within the ranks of the ANC would have to sort out their
differences. In the meantime, he would accept help from anyone subscribing to
the ANC’s aims: ‘We leave our differing political theories to one side until the
day of liberation.’
Nor was Luthuli unduly concerned about the increasing use the ANC made of
anti-colonial rhetoric and its applause of the Soviet Union for its role as an antiimperial power. The unconditional support it expressed for the anti-apartheid
campaign was welcome. Certainly, ANC leaders had ‘picked up the language’,
he said, ‘but they learned the language without becoming communists’.
Mandela was later more forthright in explaining his willingness to collaborate
with communists:
It is perhaps difficult for white South Africans, with an ingrained prejudice
against communism, to understand why experienced African politicians so
readily accept communists as their friends. But to us the reason is obvious.
Theoretical differences amongst those fighting against oppression is a luxury we
cannot afford at this stage. What is more, for many decades communists were
the only political group in South Africa who were prepared to eat with us, talk
with us, live with us and work with us. They were the only political group which
was prepared to work with the Africans for the attainment of political rights and
a stake in society. Because of this, there are many Africans who, today, tend to
equate freedom with communism.
Year by year, Mandela was to draw closer to the communists. His closest
colleague, Walter Sisulu, eventually decided to make the leap, secretly joining
the party in 1955 and becoming a member of its central committee the following
year.

In an attempt to revive its flagging fortunes and to restore a sense of purpose to

the nationalist movement, the ANC developed the idea of holding a national
convention called the Congress of the People to give a vision of the democratic
future it wanted. The idea was first proposed by Professor Matthews, president
of the ANC’s Cape region, at a provincial conference in Cradock in August
1953. What subsequently happened assumed great significance, for not only did
the Freedom Charter that was drawn up become a major landmark in the
confrontation between the nationalist movement and the government, but the
government used it as a pretext to try to crush the nationalist movement by
charging its leaders with treason. For more than four years, Mandela’s life was
overshadowed by the possibility of a death sentence.
Matthews’s original proposal was accepted enthusiastically at the ANC’s
national conference in December 1953 and he was asked to produce a
memorandum to bring the idea into sharper focus.
The main task of the Congress will be to draw up a Freedom Charter for
all people and groups in South Africa. From such a Congress ought to
come a Declaration which will inspire all the peoples of South Africa
with fresh hope for the future, which will turn the minds of the people
away from the sterile and negative struggles of the past and the present to
a positive programme of freedom in our lifetime. Such a charter properly
conceived as a mirror of the future South African society can galvanize
the people of South Africa into action and make them go over into the
offensive against the reactionary forces at work in this country, instead of
being perpetually on the defensive, fighting rearguard actions all the
time.
Three other organisations were invited to join in: the Congress of Democrats,
the Indian Congress and the newly formed Coloured People’s Organization,
based in Cape Town. In March 1954, the four organisations, collectively known
as the Congress Alliance, formed a National Action Council, on which each
organisation had equal representation, to prepare for the Congress of the People.
Teams of ‘freedom volunteers’ were recruited to canvass support for the
Congress and to collect suggestions for what the Freedom Charter might contain.
Thousands of contributions poured in, many written on scraps of paper, pages
torn from school exercise books and bits of cardboard, from church groups,
women’s organisations, sports and cultural clubs. The range of demands was
huge, covering everything from the right to vote to the provision of proper
toilets.

Members of the Congress of Democrats were notably energetic in the
campaign, raising concern in some ANC quarters about the role of their new
allies. Africanist suspicions about white participation were voiced anew. Many
questioned why the Congress of Democrats, with a membership of no more than
a few hundred, had been accorded equal status on the National Action Council
with the ANC, with its far higher membership. An even sharper reaction came
from the Liberal Party, which refused an invitation to participate in the Congress
of the People on account of the prominent involvement of Congress of
Democrats members.
Behind the scenes, the influence of Congress of Democrats members was even
more crucial. A subcommittee formed to sort out all the bits of paper and to
prepare a draft version of the Freedom Charter for debate by delegates to the
Congress of the People included Joe Slovo and Rusty Bernstein. It was
Bernstein, a member of the Communist Party’s central committee and its chief
propaganda expert, who undertook most of the burden of writing the draft
version of the Freedom Charter.
Only a few weeks had been left at the end of the campaign for the task to be
completed before the Congress of the People assembled in June 1955. The
thousands of demands, all stored in a trunk, had first to be sorted into categories
and topics, like land, employment and housing, before the writing could begin.
‘It was one of the most difficult tasks I’ve done in the political field,’ recalled
Bernstein. ‘Many of the demands were contradictory. Some people, for example,
wanted land nationalised; some wanted it redistributed to peasants. It was a
process of gradually and unsystematically selecting what made sense, making a
précis of them. It was not a scientifically based sample. It was a fairly personal
assessment. But I also had to keep my own personal preferences out of it. It was
not a process I enjoyed. I was uneasy about some of the formulations. Some of
them I formulated against my better judgement. In some cases I would
personally have taken a more radical position.’
One clause, later to become the subject of particular controversy, was
rewritten at the last minute. In its original version, the general economic clause
of the Freedom Charter demanded that ‘the land, the forests, the mines of coal,
gold, and diamonds, the quarries, the factories and workshops, and the railways
should be worked for the benefit of the people’. It added, ‘The mines should be
nationalized.’ But a change was engineered by Ben Turok, a prominent COD
official and Communist Party member, who had been given responsibility for

presenting the economic clause at the Congress of the People. Turok’s amended
version demanded the nationalisation of ‘the mineral wealth beneath the soil, the
banks and monopoly industry’. It added, ‘All other industries and trades should
be controlled to assist the well-being of the people.’
The draft version was shown to senior ANC officials, including Mandela, on
the eve of the Congress. ‘We made few changes, as there was little time and the
document was already in good shape,’ said Mandela. Neither Chief Luthuli nor
Professor Matthews had an opportunity to see it beforehand. Luthuli was not
only subject to a banning order restricting him to his home district in Natal but
recovering from a stroke; Matthews was preoccupied with university business at
Fort Hare.
The Congress of the People duly opened on 25 June 1955 on a rough football
field near Kliptown, a ramshackle collection of houses and shacks fifteen miles
to the south-west of Johannesburg. Nearly 3,000 delegates attended—lawyers,
doctors, clergymen, trade unionists, city workers, and peasants—including 320
Indians, 230 Coloureds and 112 whites. It was a multiracial gathering unique in
South Africa’s history. Those present felt a sense of excitement and festivity. It
was also an occasion notable for the number of prominent activists who were
absent, forced to stay away by banning orders. Many nevertheless managed to
watch the proceedings from a distance. Mandela and Sisulu, both banned at the
time, found a safe place on the edge of a crowd of spectators, hidden from the
view of Special Branch detectives monitoring the Congress.
The plan had been for delegates to debate each clause of the Freedom Charter
and decide what amendments, if any, were needed. But the Congress only started
late in the day, because of the delayed arrival of many delegates, and much time
was then taken up with prayers, greetings and an awards ceremony for three
distinguished activists, Chief Luthuli, Father Trevor Huddleston and the Indian
leader Dr Yusuf Dadoo. The following day, when each clause was read out by
individual speakers, there was little time left but for their own introductions. Ben
Turok, introducing the general economic clause, added his own particular twist.
Speaking of the mine owners after liberation, he declared:
They will not have those lovely big Buicks that they drive around in. The whole
system of the big factories and the gold mines in this country are the enemies of
the people. When you walk down one of the streets in Johannesburg, you see a
very impressive-looking building, and outside you see various banks. . . That

money, friends, does not come back to you. It goes to our friends living in Lower
Houghton [a wealthy white suburb]. Let the banks come back to the people, let
us have a people’s committee to run the banks.
Along with everything else that was said from the platform, his words were
recorded by Special Branch detectives.
Clause by clause, the Freedom Charter was approved by a show of hands.
Only two sections were left by four o’clock in the afternoon, when the
proceedings were abruptly interrupted by armed police who surrounded the
delegates. Senior officers mounted the platform and presented the chairman, Piet
Beyleveld, with a warrant to investigate treason. Beyleveld explained to
delegates the reason for the police action, told them he had authorised the
removal of all papers and documents and asked if they wished to proceed with
the Congress. The crowd roared its assent. While police worked their way up
and down the rows of delegates, searching bags, confiscating documents,
recording names and addresses, and taking photographs, speakers on the
platform resumed reading out the Freedom Charter.
It was a document more notable for its modest content and naïve promises
than for any revolutionary intent. The Freedom Charter affirmed the right of all
citizens to vote, to hold office and to be equal before the law. It proposed equal
status for ‘all national groups’ and an end to discriminatory legislation. ‘South
Africa,’ it declared, ‘belongs to all who live in it, black and white.’ It went on to
state that the mines, banks and monopoly industry would be transferred to public
ownership and that land would be redistributed. Other promises included free
compulsory education, minimum wages, free medical care and welfare for the
aged. The tone throughout was one of simple idealism. ‘Rent and prices shall be
lowered, food plentiful and no one shall go hungry,’ the Freedom Charter
proclaimed. ‘Slums shall be demolished and new suburbs built.’ No suggestions
were put forward as to how all this would be achieved.
In the South African context, however, such sentiments were dangerous.
White liberals deplored the ‘socialist’ character of the Freedom Charter, arguing
that left-wing activists in the Congress had clearly got the upper hand, thus
justifying their refusal to take part. A prominent African liberal, Jordan
Ngubane, who had once played a leading role in the Congress Youth League,
claimed that the Freedom Charter’s ultimate aim was ‘to condition the African
people for the purpose of accepting communism via the back door’.

Africanist critics within the ANC were outraged by the clause declaring that
South Africa belonged to ‘all who live in it, black and white’. In the Africanist
view, the only true ‘owners’ of South Africa were Africans. The Africanists
claimed that the ANC, through its willingness to support multiracial objectives,
had yielded to the influence of other racial groups like the Congress of
Democrats and the Indian Congress. Their journal, The Africanist, asserted that
the Charter
did not emanate as a finished document from the ANC. It emanated as such from
the vodka cocktail parties of Parktown and Lower Houghton [a number of leftwing intellectuals lived in these white suburbs]. The black masses who met at
Kliptown were merely pawns in the game of power politics. The whites who
were at Kliptown, apart from the Special Branch, were mainly members of the
Congress of Democrats. They are part of the ruling class in South Africa . . . they
are in reality concerned with the maintenance of the status quo.
What the Africanists wanted, instead of the Freedom Charter, was to return to
the era of ‘go-it-alone’ politics and to revert to the goals of the 1949 Programme
of Action, which emphasised ‘freedom from white domination’. Nothing could
be gained, they insisted, by trying to appease white opinion. The only way by
which white domination would be broken was by black force.
In March 1956, at a special ANC conference called to ratify the Freedom
Charter, the Africanists kept up a noisy barrage of attacks on the ‘Charterists’,
with shouts of ‘Africa for the Africans’. Luthuli had hoped to use the occasion
for a thorough debate about the economic clauses of the Freedom Charter, about
which he and others had serious reservations. But he was obliged to abandon the
idea in order to close ranks against what he called Africanist ‘obstructionism’.
Those who shared his misgivings, he said, were ‘not prepared to split Congress
on it’. The Freedom Charter was adopted without any amendment.
Mandela had no such reservations about the Freedom Charter. In an article for
Liberation in June 1956, he described it as ‘a beacon to the Congress movement
and an inspiration to the people of South Africa’.
It is true that in demanding the nationalization of the banks, the gold
mines and the land, the Charter strikes a fatal blow at the financial and
gold-mining monopolies and farming interests that have for centuries
plundered the country and condemned its people to servitude. But such a
step is imperative because the realization of the Charter is inconceivable,

in fact, impossible, unless and until these monopolies are smashed and
the national wealth of the country turned over to the people.
He denied, however, that this would involve a socialist transformation:
Whilst the Charter proclaims changes of a far-reaching nature, it is by no means
a blueprint for a socialist state but a programme for the unification of various
classes and groupings amongst the people on a democratic basis. Under
socialism the workers hold state power. They and the peasants own the means of
production, the land, the factories, and the mills. All production is for use and
not for profit. The Charter does not contemplate such profound economic and
political changes. Its declaration ‘The People Shall Govern’ visualizes the
transfer of power not to any single social class but to all the people of this
country, be they workers, peasants, professional men or petty-bourgeoisie . . .
The breaking up and democratization of these monopolies will open fresh
fields for the development of a prosperous non-European bourgeois class. For
the first time in the history of this country the Non-European bourgeoisie will
have the opportunity to own in their own name and right mills and factories, and
trade and private enterprise will boom and flourish as never before. . . . The
Charter offers immense opportunities for an overall improvement in the material
conditions of all classes and groups.
Mandela was nevertheless clear about the impact it would make: ‘The Charter
is more than a mere list of demands for democratic reform, ’ he wrote. ‘It is a
revolutionary document precisely because the changes it envisages cannot be
won without breaking up the economic and political set-up of present South
Africa.’
The government thought so too and set out to prove that the Charter’s aims
could not be achieved without violence.

The knock on the door came just after dawn on 5 December 1956. Armed with a
search warrant, Special Branch detectives rifled through every room in
Mandela’s house in Orlando, seizing documents and papers. They then presented
him with a warrant for his arrest. On it Mandela read the words ‘Hoogverraad—
High Treason’. As his children watched, he was driven away in a police car.
At Marshall Square police station, he found a number of colleagues also under
arrest; more arrived during the course of the day. In all, the Special Branch

arrested 156 activists around the country in its swoop, including almost all senior
ANC leaders, among them Chief Luthuli, Professor Matthews, Sisulu, Tambo
and Kotane, as well as prominent white activists like Joe Slovo, Ruth First,
Rusty Bernstein, Ben Turok, Jack Hodgson, Piet Beyleveld and a British-born
social worker, Helen Joseph. Many of those arrested had expected it to happen.
Since the Congress of the People, the police had made more than 1,000 raids on
homes and offices of activists in search of evidence, and the government had
continued to issue dark warnings about treason.
For two weeks, after being formally charged in the magistrate’s court, they
were held in the Fort, Johannesburg’s main prison, a former Boer fortress built
in 1899 on top of a hill near the centre of the city to defend it against the British.
The African section there was notorious for its bullying, bribery and harsh
treatment of prisoners. Thousands of pass law offenders went through its cells
each year, emerging dazed and dumbfounded by the experience.
The African, Coloured, and Indian male prisoners—some 120 people—were
locked into two communal cells with concrete floors, no furniture and two
exposed latrines. They were each given a sisal mat on which to sleep and three
thin, lice-ridden blankets. But far from being daunted by their surroundings,
Mandela and the others relished the opportunity to make contact with their
colleagues after the months of living under bans and restrictions, unable to
attend meetings openly. ‘Our communal cell became a kind of convention for
far-flung freedom-fighters, ’ wrote Mandela. A committee was formed to
organise lectures and entertainment; freedom songs reverberated around the
prison walls. Their white colleagues—seventeen men and six women, all
members of the Congress of Democrats—were meanwhile placed in more
comfortable quarters in a separate wing and provided with mattresses, cushions
and newly-laundered blankets.
As the accused were too numerous to fit into any courtroom, the authorities
converted the army’s Drill Hall in Twist Street into a court of justice for the
preparatory examination of the case. It was a cheerless barn-like building with a
galvanised-iron roof which, during the heat of a summer’s day, felt like an oven.
At one end of the hall stood the magistrate’s table, with other tables for the
prosecutors and defence lawyers. In front of the magistrate’s table were 156
chairs for the accused, in six long rows. Behind them were placed another 150
seats for the public, divided into two groups, one for whites, one for non-whites.

On the ten-minute journey from the Fort to the Drill Hall for the opening
day’s session on 19 December, the convoy of police vehicles with the accused
on board was greeted with cheering and waving from African onlookers. A huge
crowd at the Drill Hall, shouting slogans and bearing placards inscribed ‘We
Stand by Our Leaders’, surrounded the vehicles as they swept into the backyard.
‘The trip,’ said Mandela, ‘became like a triumphal procession.’
The court proceedings quickly degenerated into farce. When the accused were
brought in, the spectators’ section, though packed, contained not a single
African. So many whites had wanted to attend that court officials had simply
moved them into chairs intended for black spectators. When defence lawyers
drew attention to the matter, the magistrate, Frederick Wessel, was obliged to
order that proper arrangements for black spectators be made.
No sooner had the prosecutor, J. C. van Niekerk, begun his opening address
than it became clear that hardly anyone could hear a word he was saying. Court
officials had forgotten to install loudspeaker equipment. No more than twenty
minutes into the case, the court adjourned for lunch. After lunch, just as the
prosecutor was about to start again, the magistrate asked whether any
interpreters were available for those accused who did not understand English.
None was. So, after two minutes, the court adjourned once more. The 156
accused were taken back to the Fort.
When they entered the courtroom the following day, they discovered that a
huge wire cage had been erected overnight for them to sit in. They were led
inside and seated on benches, surrounded by sixteen armed guards. Defence
lawyers, seeking to enter the cage to consult their clients, were told to talk to
them through the wire. Some of the accused, more amused than angry at this
absurdity, wrote signs saying, ‘Dangerous! Do not feed!’ and ‘No monkey nuts’.
The defence lawyers, however, were furious. Maurice Franks, normally a
patient, polite and softly-spoken man, could scarcely contain his outrage: ‘Your
Worship confronts this unprecedented scene which we see before us today, the
accused caged, as Your Worship sees, caged, one might almost say—I am most
anxious not to allow my indignation to get the better of the language I use—. . .
caged like wild beasts. . . . ’ He warned that unless the cage was removed
immediately, the entire defence team would walk out of court. The magistrate
adjourned the case once more, agreed that the cage should be removed and
ordered the front of it to be pulled down forthwith.

Once again, van Niekerk rose to read his opening address. But he had barely
begun when there was a new interruption. In the street outside, as crowds of
supporters pressed close to the entrance, the police ordered a baton charge to
disperse them, causing uproar which overwhelmed the court proceedings. A
burst of gunfire was heard. Everyone in court stood up; the magistrate hurried
away. The Bishop of Johannesburg, Ambrose Reeves, rushed out of the Drill
Hall and ran towards the retreating crowd with his hands in the air, appealing for
calm. A score of people were injured in the police shooting. The court adjourned
once more.
Over the next two days, van Niekerk completed his reading of the charges.
The prosecution’s case was that the 156 accused were members of a countrywide
conspiracy plotting to overthrow the existing state by revolutionary methods
involving violence and to establish a communist state. The Freedom Charter, the
Congress of the People and the Defiance Campaign were all cited as key parts of
the conspiracy. The penalty for such high treason was death.
Despite the gravity of the charges, the accused were then released on bail that
was nominal. The sliding scale fixed for bail was £250 for Europeans, £100 for
Indians and £50 for Africans and Coloureds. They were also required to report
once a week to the police and prohibited from attending meetings. Mandela and
Tambo were back in their office the next day trying to catch up on a backlog of
work.
The court resumed in calmer conditions on 9 January, with the accused seated
in alphabetical order, all races mixed up, in curious contravention of normal
procedure under apartheid. Among their number were clergymen, lawyers,
journalists and a member of parliament. Most were clerks, drivers, factory
workers and labourers.
The defence response to the charges was made by Vernon Berrangé, an
imposing figure, much feared for his rapier-like skills at cross-examination and
secretly a senior member of the underground Communist Party. The Freedom
Charter, he said, contained ideas and beliefs that were shared by the
overwhelming majority of man - kind as well as the citizens of South Africa.
What was on trial was not just the 156 individuals but the ideas they openly
espoused. Not only would the accused defend those ideas; they would show they
were ‘the victims of political kite-flying’ by the government to see how far it
could go in stifling free speech. ‘This trial has been instituted in an attempt to

silence and outlaw the ideas held by the accused and the thousands whom they
represent,’ he went on. It was no ordinary trial, but a battle of ideas between
those who wanted equal opportunities and freedom of thought and expression for
all races and those who sought to confine the riches of life to a minority.
After the preliminary exchange, the preparatory examination settled into a
routine of numbing monotony. For the first six weeks, the prosecution did
nothing else but hand in thousands of documents seized by the police in their
frequent raids on homes, offices and meetings. All the newspapers, magazines,
books and pamphlets collected over three years were duly produced to the court
and numbered one by one. Nothing was left out, not even invitations to dinner
and weddings or letters from girlfriends. A notice over the kitchen at the
Congress of the People saying ‘Soup without meat’ was solemnly read, marked
as an exhibit and handed in. The next exhibit, logically enough, was ‘Soup with
meat’. Extracts from the documents were read out, regardless of their relevance.
As the prosecution case dragged on, many of the accused began to lose interest.
Some took to reading newspapers, tackling cross-word puzzles or playing chess;
others just dozed. ‘The heat beats down in waves,’ wrote Alex La Guma, one of
the accused. ‘Heads nod. Eyelids struggle to keep open. Ears strain to listen.’ To
break the tedium, Mandela often brought a book to read or a legal brief to work
on.
A succession of Special Branch detectives took the witness stand to read out
their notes of speeches made at political meetings. Many admitted that ANC
speakers had often stressed the importance of nonviolence. ‘In the past four
years, I have attended many meetings of the ANC,’ said Detective Wilson
Gumisa. ‘At all meetings an appeal has been made to conduct the struggle in a
nonviolent manner. There is also an appeal to cooperate with Europeans. The
ANC people say this at almost all meetings.’
Others produced more contentious evidence. An African detective, Jeremiah
Mollson, claimed that he had been able to remember verbatim all the speeches
made at a five-hour meeting, recording them word for word when he returned
home. Under cross-examination from Berrangé, he admitted that he had received
only a limited education and that before joining the police in 1953, he had been
‘loafing’ for fourteen years. A week after his first appearance, he was back in
court to give further evidence on speeches. Handed his notes and asked to read
them out, Mollson puzzled over them for some time and then said that there was
a whole page that he could not decipher. Joe Slovo, conducting his own defence,

was quick to pounce:
SLOVO: Do you understand English?
MOLLSON: Not so well.
SLOVO: Do you mean to say that you reported these speeches in English but
you don’t understand English well?
MOLLSON: Yes, Your Worship.
SLOVO: Do you agree with me that your notes are a lot of rubbish?
MOLLSON: I don’t know.
Time and again, defence lawyers were able to demonstrate examples of
fabrication by Special Branch detectives. At other times, they had little difficulty
in dismissing their evidence as gibberish. Some reports of the speeches caused
so much amusement among the accused that the magistrate felt obliged to warn
that ‘the proceedings are not as funny as they may seem’.
In August 1957, eight months after the proceedings had started, the
prosecution announced it would produce evidence linking the ANC directly to
planned violence. Into the witness box walked a confident, bespectacled, middleaged man who said he was a lawyer with a degree from Fort Hare. Solomon
Ngubase told the court he was an official of the Port Elizabeth branch of the
ANC and a member of the national executive who had been present at a meeting
when it had been decided to send Walter Sisulu and David Bopape to the Soviet
Union to procure arms for a Mau-Mau type rebellion against whites in South
Africa.
Under cross-examination by Berrangé, none of this turned out to be true.
Ngubase was not a university graduate, or a member of the ANC, or a lawyer.
He had forged his certificate for a university degree, practised fraudulently as an
advocate for several years, served four jail terms and was currently facing
prosecution on another charge of fraud.
BERRANGÉ: When did you last do an honest day’s work?
NGUBASE: I can’t remember.
BERRANGÉ: You have lived a life of lies and deception?
NGUBASE: I cannot be able to check that.

‘This,’ said Berrangé, sitting down, ‘is the sort of witness the Crown brings
here.’
Another state witness, Andrew Murray, professor of philosophy at the
University of Cape Town, had a more distinguished background but also fell
foul of Berrangé. Murray was reputedly an expert on communism. After
examining various documents like the Freedom Charter and speeches made by
the accused, he had no hesitation in describing them as ‘communistic’. Berrangé
challenged the validity of Murray’s opinion and set out to demonstrate how
difficult it was to be certain that a particular comment was either communist or
bore evidence of communist tendencies. He read out a series of extracts of ‘the
sort of statement that communists make’ and asked Murray to identify them. The
first extract concerned the need for worker cooperation. It was communistic, said
Murray. Berrangé then disclosed that the author was South Africa’s former
prime minister, Dr Malan. He read two more extracts, both of which Murray
described as communistic. The author of one, said Berrangé, was Woodrow
Wilson and the other, Franklin D. Roosevelt, both former presidents of the
United States. The climax came when Berrangé read out a passage which
Murray again unhesitatingly described as ‘communism straight from the
shoulder’. The author, said Berrangé, savouring the moment, was Murray
himself.
In September 1957, the prosecution completed giving its evidence and the
court adjourned. In December, without any explanation, the charges against
sixty-one of the accused were dropped. Most were minor figures in the ANC, but
among them were Luthuli and Tambo. As the ANC’s president, Luthuli was
baffled about the reasoning behind his release. ‘The truth is I would be happier
to see the whole thing through with my comrades,’ he said.
When the court reassembled in January 1958, a different atmosphere
prevailed. To sharpen up its case, the government brought in a new chief
prosecutor, Oswald Pirow, a former justice minister renowned for his pro-Nazi
sympathies, his dislike of Jews and his hatred of communism. Pirow, a man who
believed that Hitler was ‘the greatest man of his age’, was also a formidable
lawyer. New evidence would be produced, he said, to show the existence of a
highly dangerous conspiracy. It would include an inflammatory speech by the
ANC’s Sophiatown leader, Robert Resha, in which he urged his audience to
‘murder, murder’. Later that month, the magistrate found ‘sufficient reason’ for
committing the ninety-five accused to trial in the Transvaal Supreme Court on

charges of high treason.

In its preliminary stages, the treason trial served as a rallying point for antiapartheid activists. The accused became popular heroes. For many blacks, the
ANC emerged as a real force capable of challenging the government. White
liberals raised their own voice of protest against the trial, fearing that its real
purpose was to intimidate the government’s opponents of any kind. ‘Unless
white South Africans defend under all circumstances the democratic values
which they cherish,’ said Alan Paton, chairman of the Liberal Party, ‘the day
may soon come when they lose them.’ A defence fund launched by prominent
whites to assist the accused and their families and to help pay for defence
lawyers received widespread support. In London, Canon John Collins
established a British defence fund which attracted substantial contributions.
Yet the disruption caused both to the accused and to the ANC itself was
severe. Many of the accused lost their livelihoods during the proceedings and
suffered much personal hardship. The ANC, deprived of effective leadership,
fell into disarray. Disputes and dissension, never far beneath the surface, broke
out anew, threatening to wreck the movement from within.
The law practice of Mandela and Tambo, once a thriving concern, was
effectively crippled. Mandela and Tambo attempted to keep it going by working
in the early morning, in the late afternoon and at weekends. But the practice
steadily fell apart, leaving both of them in serious financial difficulties. Added to
all this, Mandela’s marriage finally collapsed.