THE FOOTBALL CLUB
AFTER A SERIES OF ALTERCATIONS WITH POLICE, ARRESTS AND
COURT appearances, Winnie eventually succeeded in 1986 in re-establishing
her right to live in Soweto, nearly nine years after her banishment to Brandfort.
Her battle to stay in Johannesburg, in defiance of government banning orders,
attracted worldwide attention. As the result of one arrest, in December 1985,
when she was dragged from her Orlando home ‘kicking and screaming’,
according to eyewitnesses, governments in Britain, the United States and France
issued strong protests. A posse of journalists and television crews followed her
about, waiting for the next encounter. Winnie relished the attention she received.
With the township revolt then in full swing, she endeavoured to play a leading
role as a militant activist. She attended funeral rallies, making speeches which
became ever more extreme, gaining for herself a loyal following among black
youths. A speech she made at a rally in Munsieville in April 1986 which
endorsed the necklace method of killing, by which several hundred victims had
died, brought her lasting notoriety. ‘We have no guns, we have only stones,
boxes of matches and petrol,’ she said. ‘Together, hand in hand, with our boxes
of matches and our necklaces we shall liberate this country.’
The damage that Winnie did to the African nationalist cause by those words
was considerable. Necklace murders had become a symbol to much of the world
of the anarchic black-on-black violence afflicting the townships which the
government was eager to claim was all that lay behind the black revolt. The clear
implication of Winnie’s speech was that she not only supported such methods
but also advocated that whites too should be burnt.
The ANC in exile, anxious to prove to Western governments that it was not a
‘terrorist’ organisation, as leaders like Britain’s Margaret Thatcher maintained,
were appalled. Messages were sent to Winnie telling her to refrain from any
more speechmaking. In Pollsmoor, Mandela was furious and summoned her for
an angry reprimand. But Winnie was not inclined to take orders from anyone and

her activities became even more rash and ruthless.
She gathered around her a group of township youths who became known as
the Mandela United Football Club. Forming football teams in the name of
popular political leaders was a fashionable pursuit at the time; a Sisulu Football
Club already existed in Orlando. Winnie allowed them to stay in rooms at the
back of her Orlando house and provided them with track suits and money. She
acquired a ‘coach’, a thirty-eight-year-old local man named Jerry Richardson, a
skilled football player but someone with limited intelligence, a meagre education
and a reputation as a police informer. Like other members of the group, he
became dependent on Winnie, calling her ‘Mummy’ and functioning as her
henchman. Zindzi too was involved in Mandela United, sometimes playing the
role of ‘mascot’; two of her boy-friends were leading members.
From its origins as a football club, Mandela United rapidly descended into a
world of brutal crime. Winnie used it initially as a personal bodyguard, to
accompany her to rallies and funerals and to guard her house. Its members were
subject to her own strict rules. They were required to return home by a certain
time each night, signing in and out of the house in a special register. Failure to
sign the register meant a whipping, from Winnie as well as from other youths.
Looking for more recruits, club members roamed the township, accusing those
who did not want to join them of being police informers or ‘sell-outs’. Many
who were coerced into joining subsequently found it difficult to leave. No one
could resign voluntarily from the club. Stories began to circulate of youths being
taken to Winnie’s house and never seen again.
Mandela United soon began operating as a vigilante gang. Victims accused of
theft and other crimes or of being police informers were brought to Winnie’s
house for interrogation by a ‘disciplinary committee’ and for whatever
punishment it decided to order. The head of the disciplinary committee for some
time was Sizwe Sithole, the father of one of Zindzi’s children. Punishment
varied according to the offence, but included kicking, punching, whipping and
beating. A favourite form of punishment was known as ‘breakdown’, in which
victims were thrown high into the air and left to hit the floor. Other forms of
torture were also used.
In May 1987, a teenage youth, Peter Makanda, was abducted, along with his
brother, by members of Mandela United, who accused them of being informers.
They were taken to Winnie’s house and savagely beaten. Makanda was hung by

the neck with a plastic rope from a rafter until it broke; his head was placed in a
plastic bag and his face was pushed into a bucket of water. Both brothers were
then tortured with knives. A large ‘M’ for Mandela was carved on Makanda’s
chest and the words ‘Viva ANC’ sliced down the length of one of his thighs.
Battery acid was smeared into the wounds. The brothers claimed that Winnie put
in an appearance soon after they were first beaten, returning a few hours
afterwards. They later managed to escape from a garage, but others were not so
fortunate. Subsequent evidence linked Mandela United to eight known murders
of local residents, mostly teenagers.
The activities of Mandela United were an evil mess that no one was anxious to
deal with. The fear of reprisal deterred many families from making complaints.
Parents who suspected that Mandela United were responsible for the
disappearance of their children never had any proof as no bodies were ever
found. The police were not keen to be seen persecuting Winnie any more. The
activities of her gang of vigilantes were no different from those of scores of
others which had sprung up during the township revolt. Kangaroo courts, like the
one she was running at no. 8115, Orlando West, were relatively common.
When the Makanda brothers reported their ordeal to the police, three members
of Mandela United were arrested. But Winnie herself was never charged in
connection with the crime; nor was she called as a witness or even questioned.
Black political leaders were no keener to confront the problem of Winnie’s
criminal behaviour. She thus enjoyed a kind of immunity which not only
induced greater fear of her but increased her sense of her own power. She
seemed untouchable.
Only murmurs of these events reached Mandela in Pollsmoor. Neither the
local nor the foreign press delved into Winnie’s increasingly wayward activities
for fear that their reports would be used by the government for propaganda
purposes and serve only to discredit the anti-apartheid struggle. They were also
concerned that rumours about Winnie and Mandela United might have been
manufactured by the government in the first place. Friends and lawyers visiting
Mandela were careful not to draw attention to Winnie’s conduct or to her heavy
drinking to avoid alarming him.
But other embarrassments involving Winnie surfaced. Within a year of
returning to Soweto, she ordered the construction of a mansion in an exclusive
area known as Beverly Hills, where a black elite of businessmen, lawyers, and

doctors lived. By Soweto standards, the house, containing fifteen rooms, was
vast. Known as ‘Winnie’s Palace’, it attracted hostile criticism from the local
community. It hardly fitted the revolutionary image that Winnie was attempting
to establish. Where the money came from was something of a mystery. While
spending large sums on clothes, cars and her bodyguard, Winnie always pleaded
poverty.
Some funds came as a result of a business relationship struck up with a black
American entrepreneur, Robert Brown, which led to yet another scandal. Brown
was a former civil rights campaigner who switched his attention to South Africa
and began to raise substantial funds in the United States for the anti-apartheid
cause. He soon realised that there was a fortune to be made from the Mandela
family. In collaboration with Winnie, he proposed to copyright and market the
Mandela name and prevent others from cashing in on it. Their negotiations had
just reached an amicable conclusion when an incident involving Mandela United
suddenly erupted, focusing public attention on its activities.
On 28 July 1988, a crowd of teenage pupils from the Daliwonga High School
marched on Winnie’s house, smashed the doors and windows and then set fire to
it. The attack was part of a running feud between them and Mandela United,
made in revenge for the detention of a group of Daliwonga students who had
been accused of rape, found guilty and then beaten up in the back rooms of
Winnie’s house.
All the Mandela family records, their photographs, letters and gifts, and even
the slice of wedding cake that Winnie had been saving for Mandela’s release,
were destroyed in the fire. As local residents gathered in the street, none of them
ventured to help. They watched in silence as the house burned down.
Winnie appeared to be devastated by the attack. With the street full of people,
she drove slowly towards the burning house, saw what had happened and went
away. At her office in Soweto, friends found her in a state of shock. Robert
Brown was there, full of self-importance, trying to dictate who would be allowed
to see her. Members of Mandela United had barricaded the building. To her old
friend Amina Cachalia, Winnie said, ‘I don’t know what is happening to my
life.’
Accompanied by Brown, Winnie flew to Cape Town shortly afterwards to see
Mandela, both to tell him of the arson attack and to get his approval for the deal
with Brown. Mandela had been forewarned by his lawyer, Ismail Ayob, about

Brown’s attempt to control the Mandela name and he had been outraged. He told
Winnie that he would have nothing to do with the scheme and authorised a
statement disclaiming any connection with Brown. ‘If the family name needed
protection it could be protected by the African National Congress,’ his statement
said.
He also told Winnie to disband her ‘football team’ and decided not to press
charges against the Daliwonga students. To limit further damage, he asked a
group of influential community leaders, including the Reverend Frank Chikane
of the South African Council of Churches, Cyril Ramaphosa, a prominent trade
unionist, and Aubrey Mokoena of the Release Mandela Committee, to form a
‘crisis committee’ to take control of the matter. The burden of these events
added to the exhaustion that Mandela was already feeling as a result of his
tuberculosis, which had still to be diagnosed. Shortly afterwards, he collapsed
and was taken to Tygerberg Hospital.
But Winnie refused to disband Mandela United. While the house in Orlando
was being rebuilt, she moved into a house in Diepkloof Extension in another part
of Soweto, taking members of Mandela United with her. It was not long before
they resumed their murderous activities.
Two incidents became notorious. In November 1988, a gunfight erupted
between police and two MK guerrillas who were hiding in Jerry Richardson’s
house in Soweto. Richardson had been asked by Winnie to give them temporary
shelter. Just before the shooting started, Richardson, who was in the garden,
raised his arms in the air and surrendered to the police. The two guerrillas were
killed. Richardson was detained for two weeks but then released. He was already
suspected in the local community of being a police informer. The shooting of the
two guerrillas further increased local suspicion.
Members of Mandela United singled out for retribution two local youths, Lolo
Sono and Siboniso Tshabalala, who had been friendly with the guerrillas and
who had been seen at Richardson’s house shortly before the gunfight started.
Summoned to Winnie’s house, Sono was savagely beaten. Battered and
bleeding, he was then taken by Winnie and other club members in a minibus to
his parent’s home. According to Sono’s father, Winnie accused the youth of
being a police spy. The father denied it and pleaded with Winnie to let the boy
go, but she refused and drove away with him. Neither Lolo Sono nor Siboniso
Tshabalala were seen again. The police were informed of the incident, but took

no action.
The second incident, however, the death of a fourteen-year-old boy named
‘Stompie’ Moeketsi Seipei, finally ensnared Winnie. This time, by chance, a
body was found and witnesses eventually came forward.
Stompie was an obstreperous and boastful youth who had gained a reputation
for being both a fervent activist, able to cite the Freedom Charter by heart, and a
police informer who had ‘cracked’ in detention. Along with other homeless
youths, he had found lodgings in a church manse in Orlando East run by a white
Methodist minister, Paul Verryn, who was highly respected in the
neighbourhood for his commitment in helping the local community. The manse,
with only three bedrooms, was always overcrowded; on some nights as many as
forty people stayed there.
On 29 December 1988, shortly after Winnie returned home from her
Christmas visit to Mandela in Victor Verster prison, she ordered the abduction of
four occupants of the Methodist manse, including Stompie, after being told by
another occupant, Xoliswa Falati, a troublesome thirty-five-year-old woman who
had quarrelled with Stompie and with Verryn, that Verryn had engaged in
homosexual practices at the manse. The victims were brought to Winnie’s house
at Diepkloof Extension and there, according to the three survivors, Falati
repeated her accusations about homosexuality and claimed that Stompie was an
informer. All four were then interrogated and beaten mercilessly to extract
confessions. Winnie, who had been drinking and who was in a foul mood, was
accused of leading the assaults, punching and slapping each of the victims. ‘You
are not fit to be alive,’ she told them. Members of Mandela United joined in,
throwing their victims into the air, shouting ‘breakdown’ as they did. Winnie,
according to one of the victims, Kenny Kgase, watched ‘with a look of
satisfaction’. She called for a sjambok—a rawhide whip—to be brought and,
humming a freedom song, lashed the victims. Stompie, deemed to be a ‘sell-out’,
came in for especially brutal treatment, and eventually he confessed to being a
police informer. The following day, he was beaten again and again. On 1
January, he was taken away.
News of the abductions quickly spread around Soweto. On 4 January, a
member of the crisis committee, Aubrey Mokoena, questioned Winnie about
them, but she denied that any of the youths were at her home. On 6 January,
when Dr Nthatho Motlana, an old friend of the Mandela family, went to see

Winnie, she admitted that they were at her home, but refused to allow him to see
them.
Then, on 7 January, one of the kidnap victims, Kenny Kgase, managed to
escape. He immediately alerted Methodist Church elders to what had happened
to him and the three others. Led by Bishop Peter Storey, the Methodist Church
now became central in trying to free the missing youths, coordinating its efforts
with the crisis committee but avoiding contact with the police to minimise
complications.
On 11 January, four members of the crisis committee went to Winnie’s house.
This time she claimed that she was protecting the youths from Verryn and that
they were staying at her house at their own request. On the following day, when
the committee members were finally allowed to see the two remaining kidnap
victims, Pelo Mekgwe and Thabiso Mono, both of whom had clear injuries, they
claimed at first that they were staying at Winnie’s house of their own free will.
However, a club member, Katiza Cebekhulu, who had participated in the
beatings, told a different story. Finding himself alone with the committee
members, he decided to confess his involvement. ‘I am going to die anyway so I
may as well tell the truth.’ Cebekhulu told the committee members that he
believed that Stompie was dead, but they decided that it would not be ‘prudent’
to confront Winnie at that stage.
To help resolve the issue, the Methodist Church and the crisis committee
sought assistance from Oliver Tambo in Lusaka and from Mandela in Victor
Verster. A human rights lawyer, Fink Haysom, was commissioned to fly to
Lusaka to brief Tambo. As he listened to Haysom’s account, Tambo, appalled,
threw up his hands and covered his face. ‘What must I do?’ he exclaimed. ‘We
can’t control her. The ANC can’t control her. We tried to control her, that’s why
we formed the crisis committee. You must tell the crisis committee they must do
more!’
In Victor Verster, after being informed of the details by Ismail Ayob on 14
January, Mandela issued an instruction that the two youths should be released.
After further prevarication from Winnie, they were set free on 16 January and
handed over to Bishop Storey. There was, however, still no word of the
whereabouts of Stompie.
Having collected a considerable amount of evidence, the crisis committee
decided to call a meeting of community and church leaders in Soweto. This was

duly held on the night of 16 January, shortly after Mekgwe and Mono had been
released. Both of them attended, as did Kgase and Cebekhulu. Bishop Storey
was also there, together with Paul Verryn. In all, there were about 150
participants. The meeting heard from Mekgwe and Mono how they had been
abducted, taken to Winnie’s house and beaten, first by her and then by club
members. Cebekhulu confirmed their account of the beatings. When asked
whether Stompie was dead, Cebekhulu replied, ‘Yes’, but was unable to say
where his body might be found. Storey asked the meeting at large if anyone
knew of any misconduct on the part of Verryn. About a dozen residents from the
manse were present, but no one spoke against him.
Another victim of Mandela United, Lerotodi Ikaneng, a former member of the
club who had decided to quit despite being accused by Zindzi of being a ‘sellout’, described how, on 3 January, Jerry Richardson and other members of the
gang had tried to murder him using a pair of garden shears, leaving him for dead;
the wound across his neck was still raw.
On the basis of the evidence it possessed, the crisis committee resolved that
Winnie should be ostracised. It proposed that ‘all progressive organisations
should no longer give her a platform’; that she should ‘desist from creating an
impression that she speaks on behalf of the people’; that all ‘progressive
lawyers’ should refrain from helping her any longer; and that she should be
ordered immediately to dismantle her football club. A report sent to Tambo in
Lusaka confirmed that Winnie had participated in the beatings at her house. It
spoke of ‘this new ghastly situation that is developing before our eyes’, and
added, ‘She seems to think that she is above the community. She shows utter
contempt for both the crisis committee and the community.’ The committee
ended their report with a pitiful plea: ‘Help us map out the way forward.’
The crisis was to spread further. On 27 January, a popular Indian doctor, AbuBaker Asvat, was murdered in his surgery in Soweto. Asvat had been a close
friend of Winnie, always ready to respond to her requests for help. He was a
prominent political activist involved not with pro-ANC organisations but with
the black consciousness movement. Members of his family had noticed in recent
weeks that he had become increasingly troubled and anxious. Their first reaction
to the murder was to assume that he had been killed for political reasons. But
other possibilities soon emerged. The crisis committee knew that Asvat had been
called to Winnie’s house on 31 December to examine Stompie, whom he found
to be brain-damaged. Asvat had subsequently reported his findings to the crisis

committee. He was therefore a key witness to the circumstances surrounding
Stompie’s disappearance. Asvat had also been involved in the case as a result of
a visit that Winnie had paid to his surgery, bringing with her Cebekhulu, who,
after joining in the assaults of the four kidnap victims, had become distraught.
Winnie’s explanation was that he had been sexually abused by Verryn. Asvat
examined Cebekhulu, found no evidence of sexual abuse, but noted on his
medical record that he was mentally confused and occasionally hysterical.
According to the record book and the medical card completed in Asvat’s
surgery, Winnie brought Cebekhulu to see him on 30 December, the day after
the abduction took place. The date in the record book was written by Asvat’s
nurse, Albertina Sisulu; the date on the card was stamped with a date stamp. This
evidence of Winnie’s whereabouts on 30 December was to assume considerable
significance at a later stage.
On 26 January, the day before Asvat’s murder, as press inquiries about the
activities of Mandela United began to mount, he was visited in his surgery by a
new patient, Jerry Richardson. Richardson said he had been referred by Winnie
and complained of an abscess. Asvat made a note in red on Richardson’s patient
card: ‘Sent by Winnie’. He found little wrong with Richardson, but told him to
return the next morning for a penicillin injection. Friends and family who met
Asvat later that day described him as being tense and frightened. Richardson
duly returned the next morning. In the afternoon, two youths arrived at the
surgery, shot Asvat dead and escaped.
Winnie’s conduct following the murder was strange. Late that night, she
arrived at Asvat’s house, in the company of Richardson and Zindzi, went straight
up to Asvat’s widow, Zhora, and asked: ‘Who do you think did this?’ Then she
sat silently on the floor. The following day she gave a press interview claiming
that Asvat had been murdered because he possessed evidence of Verryn’s sexual
misconduct, drawing attention for the first time to a possible link between the
kidnapping at the Methodist manse and Asvat’s murder. The implication was
that the Methodist Church was involved in Asvat’s murder. In a subsequent
television interview, she referred to ‘a gigantic cover-up by the Church’.
Even now, with public and press attention gathering pace, the activities of
Mandela United still continued. On 11 February, as a court subsequently heard, a
club member known as Dodo rushed to tell a local community activist, Dudu
Chili, who had been involved in a long-standing feud with Winnie, that Winnie
had just finished chairing a meeting at which it had been decided that Chili’s

son, Sibusiso, and Lerotodi Ikaneng, whom Richardson had once tried to
murder, should be killed. According to Dodo, Winnie had said, ‘They have
become too problematic.’ On 13 February, Sibusiso Chili was intercepted by two
Mandela United members, but the alarm was raised and, in the ensuing fracas, it
was one of the club members, Maxwell Madondo, who died. In retaliation, club
members attacked Mrs Chili’s house, setting it on fire and shooting dead her
thirteen year-old niece.
The end of Mandela United, however, was nigh. On 15 February, two forensic
pathologists, alerted by press reports about Stompie’s disappearance, identified
his body in the mortuary at Diepkloof. The body, with knife wounds, had been
found lying on an open stretch of wasteland on 6 January by a local woman and
had been left unidentified in the mortuary ever since.
Now that they had a body, the police began to round up suspects, acting on
information from the three kidnap victims, Kgase, Mono and Mekgwe.
Richardson and other members of the club were arrested. Winnie’s house in
Diepkloof Extension was raided. In one of the rooms there, police found a
handwritten hit-list with eleven names on it, including those of three Chili
brothers, Lerotodi Ikaneng and two of Albertina Sisulu’s sons. Police also
arrested two illiterate youths in connection with the murder of Dr Asvat.
Winnie herself remained curiously immune from police interrogation. She was
questioned about the sjamboks found on her premises but denied any knowledge
of them. She was not required to make a statement in connection with either
Stompie’s death or Asvat’s murder. A statement made by one of the two youths
charged with Asvat’s murder clearly implicated her. He claimed that his
accomplice had said, ‘Look, I’ve been bought by Winnie Mandela and I must go
and shoot Dr Asvat dead.’ But the statement was never produced in court. The
official motive for the murder was said to be robbery.
The verdict of the black political establishment about Winnie, however, was
far more direct. On 16 February, the day after Stompie’s body had been
identified, Murphy Morobe, a prominent political leader, read out a statement
issued in the name of the Mass Democratic Movement, an umbrella organisation
representing a huge array of community associations and trade unions, censuring
her for criminal activity. He began:
We have now reached the state where we have no option but to speak publicly
on what is a very sensitive and painful matter. In recent years, Mrs Mandela’s

actions have increasingly led her into conflict with various sections of the
oppressed people and with the Mass Democratic Movement as a whole. The
recent conflict in the community has centred largely around the conduct of her
so-called football club, which has been widely condemned by the community. In
particular, we are outraged by the reign of terror that the team has been
associated with. Not only is Mrs Mandela associated with the team, in fact it is
her creation.
Morobe then directly linked Winnie to Stompie’s death. ‘We are outraged at
Mrs Mandela’s obvious complicity in the recent abductions. Had Stompie and
his colleagues not been abducted by Mrs Mandela’s “football team”, he would
have been alive today.’ He went on, ‘We are not prepared to remain silent where
those who are violating human rights claim to be doing so in the name of the
struggle against apartheid.’ Winnie had ‘abused the trust and confidence’ of the
community. Because of her conduct, he said, ‘the Mass Democratic Movement
hereby distances itself from Mrs Mandela and her actions’.
The press which had once devoted considerable space to eulogising Winnie
now spoke of her as a ‘fallen idol’. An article by Nomavenda Mathiane reflected
the particular anger and contempt felt for her in Soweto. ‘Headlines like “Fallen
Idol” create the impression that blacks had revered the “Mother of the Nation”.
The fact is that this title is a mystery, and many black people have never known
where it came from,’ she wrote. ‘The title was made popular in the eyes of the
outside world, which shows that if a small group of people set out with a
determination to create a lie they can succeed.’

In his remote prison cottage at Victor Verster, Mandela was unable to grasp the
full extent of the problem. He was well aware of Winnie’s wayward nature, but
he believed that she had committed no more than ‘errors of judgement’ in
becoming involved with rough elements in Soweto. He wanted the matter to be
dealt with internally by the nationalist movement, not through the kind of public
denunciation by the Mass Democratic Movement, which was bound to have the
effect of undermining the anti-apartheid struggle and bolstering the
government’s credibility.
On her visits to Mandela, Winnie always maintained that she had done
nothing wrong. A passage of conversation recorded by Mandela’s warder, James
Gregory, in his autobiography gives some idea of the course of their discussions.

When Mandela asked Winnie about a newspaper report that she had whipped the
kidnap victims with a sjambok, she laughed and said, ‘Why would I do a thing
like that?’
Mandela replied, ‘That is not an answer to my question.’
‘You of all people should know that you cannot trust what you read in the
newspapers. You know how they twist and bend each and every little fact. How
can you sit there and look me in the eyes and tell me you believe the newspaper
and not me? How can you?’
‘Just get rid of these people around you. They are bad for you, this is poor
judgement to have them near you, to surround yourself with them. You must get
rid of them.’
‘No, these are people, young boys, who have been rescued from the streets.
They need help and I am providing it. I cannot abandon them. They have already
been abandoned once in their lives.’
The brief glimpses of Winnie that Mandela had enjoyed during prison visits
over the years had given him little understanding of the changes in her character
that had occurred. In Mandela’s company, Winnie was warm and vivacious, full
of laughter, dressed to dazzle. He remained deeply in love with her, hoping that
one day, when he was set free, he could resolve all the difficulties that had
accumulated during his years in prison and pick up the threads of a happy
married existence.

