FRIENDS AND COMRADES
IN 1946, SHORTLY AFTER THE SQUATTER EXODUS FROM ORLANDO
HAD begun, two of Mandela’s closest friends, Ismail Meer and Jaydew Singh,
joined hundreds of other Indian volunteers who were protesting against new
legislation restricting Indian rights to land purchase and residence, resulting in
their arrest and imprisonment. The protesters included doctors, lawyers,
teachers, traders, students and even a seventeen-year-old schoolboy, Ahmed
Kathrada, who was to become another of Mandela’s close friends. The
legislation, denounced by Indians as a ‘Ghetto Act’ for prohibiting them from
owning property outside certain designated areas, had been introduced by the
government in response to an increasingly vociferous white clamour against
Indian ‘penetration’ of white areas in Natal and the Transvaal. It was seen as a
general attack on the Indian community and provoked a campaign of passive
resistance similar to ones that the Indian lawyer Mohandas Gandhi had
successfully used in South Africa forty years before. This tradition of civil
disobedience in defence of Indian rights was to have a significant influence on
both Mandela and the ANC.
Indians had first arrived in Natal in the 1860s to work as indentured labourers
for British sugar planters who were unable to secure sufficient labour from
among local Africans. By 1911, when their recruitment stopped, some 150,000
Indian contract workers had made the journey, mostly low-caste Hindus from
Madras and Calcutta, of whom about half stayed on in Natal after their terms of
indenture had expired. Following in their wake came small groups of merchants
—‘passengers’, as they were known—travelling at their own expense, mainly
Muslims from the state of Gujarat, who formed the basis of a prosperous
commercial elite. Most of the Indian community stayed in Natal, but several
thousand found their way to the Transvaal. In Johannesburg, President Kruger
set aside a ‘Coolie Location’ to the west of the town centre for Asian residents,
but they were also allowed to live in other areas there.
When Gandhi first stepped ashore in Durban in 1893, having been hired by a

Durban-based Indian merchant company to assist in a law suit against an Indian
trader in the Transvaal, he expected no more than a single assignment. But he
was swiftly drawn into South Africa’s racial vortex, remained for twenty-one
years and had a lasting effect on the Indian protest movement there.
He played a leading role in establishing the first permanent Indian political
organisation, the Natal Indian Congress, in 1894, and the Transvaal Indian
Congress in 1904. When the Transvaal government passed a law in 1906 making
it compulsory for Indians over the age of eight to carry passes bearing their
fingerprints, Gandhi led the first passive resistance campaign in defence of
Indian rights. At a mass meeting in the Empire Theatre in Johannesburg, where
he took the chair, some 3,000 representatives took an oath pledging to go to
prison rather than apply for registration. The pass law was denounced as a
‘Black Act’ reducing them to the status of pass-bearing Africans. More than
2,000 Indians were eventually jailed or deported. Gandhi himself went to jail
several times.
Other campaigns were launched in protest against changes in the status of
Indian married women and an Indian poll tax. Gandhi was never concerned with
African rights. Indeed, during an African rebellion in Zululand in 1906, out of a
‘genuine sense of loyalty to the British Empire’, he volunteered to lead an Indian
Ambulance Corps to help the authorities, just as six years before he had
volunteered his services in ambulance work to the British army during the
Anglo-Boer War. Nevertheless, the successes that his passive resistance
campaigns achieved in getting pass laws and poll taxes rescinded were long
remembered.
Confronted with government proposals to restrict Indian property rights,
Indian Congress leaders resolved to use Gandhi’s old tactics to try to thwart the
move. Passive Resistance Councils were appointed in Natal and in the
Transvaal. Mandela’s student friend Jaydew Singh served as secretary of the
Transvaal Passive Resistance Council, while Ismail Meer edited a weekly
journal entitled Passive Resister.
The main centre of the campaign was Durban, where the large Indian
population was the most seriously affected by the Ghetto Act. In June 1946, the
first group of protesters pitched tents on a vacant ‘controlled’ site at the corner of
Umbilo Road and Gale Street. ‘Resistance Camp’, as it was known, quickly
became the target for hostile white gangs, which pulled down the tents, set fire to

them and then began to assault the protesters. The protesters were instructed not
to retaliate, no matter how brutal the assaults, even if women volunteers were
attacked. Day after day, batches of protesters assembled to face renewed
assaults. The crusading priest Michael Scott witnessed a night attack.
Suddenly a whistle blew, and with shouts and catcalls the whole
formation charged and bore down upon the little group of resisters who
were standing back-to-back so as to face in all directions. . . With their
fists they struck the Indians in the face and about the body. No one
retaliated but some tried to duck or ward off the blows before falling
down. On the ground they were kicked. Some were still, and some
groaning.
The protesters also faced arrest and imprisonment. Over the months, some
2,000 protesters, including 300 women, were arrested and imprisoned.
Volunteers from Johannesburg, like Meer and Singh, travelled to Durban to play
their part. Mandela watched with admiration as the protesters left Johannesburg.
Among them was Amina Pahad, whose flat in Orient House near Commissioner
Street he often visited for lunch. ‘Suddenly, this charming woman put aside her
apron and went to jail for her beliefs,’ he wrote. ‘If I had once questioned the
willingness of the Indian community to protest against oppression, I no longer
could.’
The campaign lasted until 1948 but failed to move the government. The
Ghetto Act remained in force. But the efforts of the protesters were rewarded
when their case was taken up by Pandit Nehru’s provisional government in
Delhi, which proposed that South Africa’s treatment of its Indian population
should be placed on the agenda of the United Nations General Assembly. For the
first time, the South African government found its racial policies under
international attack.

Within weeks of the beginning of the Indian passive resistance campaign, an
even more potent threat to white authority was launched by African
mineworkers. The mineworkers’ strike of 1946 was the biggest labour protest in
South Africa’s history. What lay behind it were not just long-standing grievances
about pay and conditions but the influence of a dedicated group of communists
with the ability to mobilise workers. Once again, Mandela was left to watch on
the sidelines as friends and acquaintances threw themselves into action while the

Youth League continued to ponder its ideological position.
The Communist Party in South Africa had a tortuous past. Formed in 1921 by
a group consisting mainly of foreign-born British radicals and Eastern European
Jews, it found itself the following year supporting an insurrection by white
mineworkers on the Witwatersrand determined to protect job segregation and
block all African competition. One of its banners, held aloft during a huge
demonstration of miners on the streets of Johannesburg, proclaimed: ‘Workers
of the World, Fight and Unite for a White South Africa.’ The interests of white
workers rather than black workers remained its preoccupation for several years.
At a party congress in 1925, one delegate complained about the activities of a
prominent radical, Eddie Roux: ‘Comrade Roux should not say at public
meetings in Johannesburg that natives should walk on the pavements etcetera.
That is what causes trouble at the meetings.’
It was not until the late 1920s that the party began to attract a significant
African membership. The night school it ran at its dingy office at 41a Fox Street,
in the heart of the Ferreirastown slum in central Johannesburg, became a venue
for scores of African workers. Nearby rooms there were occupied by poor white
down-and-outs, prostitutes and methylated-spirit drinkers. Lessons were
sometimes interrupted by loud stamping from the floor above or by drunkards
forcing their way in. But the white volunteer teachers were enthusiastic and the
students eager to learn the rudiments of reading, writing and arithmetic.
One of the workers who found his way to the night school soon rose to
become a prominent figure in the hierarchy of both the Communist Party and the
ANC. Moses Kotane came from a devout Christian peasant family of Tswana
origin from the Rustenburg district in the western Transvaal. Largely self-taught,
with little formal education, he became an insatiable reader and could often be
found in the back room of Mabuza’s butchery on Market Street, where he could
read in relative peace and quiet. He joined the ANC in 1928 at the age of twentythree, but was disappointed by its ineffectiveness. The following year he joined
the Communist Party, where his abilities as a diligent and clear-thinking activist,
capable of mastering the most abstruse texts, were quickly recognised. In 1931,
he became a full-time functionary, unpaid but provided with food and sleeping
quarters at the Fox Street office. The following year, he was sent off to study at
the Lenin School in Moscow.
The fortunes of the Communist Party had meanwhile slumped. The

Communist International, or Comintern, having paid scant attention to its South
African offspring since 1921, decided abruptly in 1928 that the true task of the
party in South Africa was to work for the establishment of an ‘Independent
Native Republic’ as the first stage ‘towards a workers’ and peasants’
government’. Many white members saw this as racism in reverse and resigned.
Others were drawn into a protracted period of purges and internal strife. After
four years, most members had deserted; all that was left was a rump of 150
followers, almost all of them white.
Only during the war years did the party’s fortunes revive. Once the Soviet
Union had joined the war against Germany, communists emerged as enthusiastic
supporters of the war effort, organising a series of patriotic ‘Defend South
Africa’ rallies, which won them hundreds of new members. Speakers who had
previously denounced the war as an imperialist enterprise now urged their
audiences to ‘arm the people’ and ‘avenge Tobruk’. Pro-Soviet organisations,
like the Friends of the Soviet Union and Medical Aid for Russia, gained
widespread public support, attracting as patrons respectable figures like the
minister of justice, Dr Colin Steyn. Circulation of the pro-communist weekly
newspaper, The Guardian, reached 50,000. In the 1943 general election, party
candidates failed to capture a seat but gained in all some 7,000 votes. The
following year, in municipal elections, a party member, Hilda Bernstein, became
the first and only communist candidate ever elected to public office by an allwhite electorate, winning the Hillbrow seat on the Johannesburg City Council.
A new generation of communists came to the fore. Moses Kotane was chosen
as the party’s secretary-general and was to exercise a pragmatic influence over
party affairs in the years ahead. Also prominent was Edwin Mofutsanyana,
editor of the party newspaper, Inkululeko, who took to patrolling Orlando’s
dusty streets in an air-raid warden’s uniform.
But while the new membership of the Communist Party was predominantly
African, the leadership remained largely in white hands. White communists were
accustomed to playing a leading role both as teachers of theory and as organisers
in the field. Their financial and professional resources gave them inherent
advantages. Mostly they were middle-class activists brought up in an anti-fascist
tradition at a time when battles with pro-Nazi groups on the steps of
Johannesburg City Hall were a regular event. Many came from Jewish families,
descendants of immigrants from Lithuania and Latvia who had arrived in South
Africa in a huge influx between 1880 and 1914, escaping from political and

racial persecution there as well as economic hardship, and who then faced in
South Africa a rising tide of anti-Semitism among Afrikaner nationalists in the
1930s and early 1940s. The reality of white advantage was openly discussed.
Writing in the party press in 1942, Moses Kotane observed: ‘In a party like ours,
where whites and blacks come together, the general tendency of Non-European
members is to take back seats and leave the leadership to the Europeans. They
feel themselves inferior to the European comrades. The reason for this is to be
found in the political, economic and social structure of South Africa.’
What the Communist Party had to offer, to aspiring blacks and Indians in
particular, was not just a sense of political purpose, its vision of a socialist
future, but an avenue through the racial barriers that shaped South African
society. It was the only political organisation in South Africa not to practise
some form of colour bar. It facilitated friendship across the colour line, giving
many people their first glimpse of a multiracial world. The social gatherings
organised by the Communist Party, to which Nat Bregman introduced Mandela
soon after they first met, drew in a circle far wider than communist
sympathisers. Personal contact between white and black was otherwise
extremely rare. In the homes of white communists, Africans could sip brandy,
away from the liquor laws and the threat of police raids, and enjoy a world of
music, painting and discussion normally inaccessible to them.
Despite such efforts, the Communist Party remained an elite group. Its slavish
devotion to the Soviet Union in party pronouncements lent weight to the belief
that its true allegiance lay there. Lacking mass support, it channelled its energies
and abilities into supporting other organisations, seeking to extend its influence
by such means. It paid considerable attention to the ailing ANC, where party
officials like Kotane served simultaneously in senior ANC posts. An anti-pass
campaign initiated by the communists during the war years was in danger of
collapse until Xuma agreed to join it. In the joint campaign that followed, there
was considerable friction when it appeared that the communists were not
prepared to accept anything but token ANC leadership. The communists were
frequently impatient with the sluggish pace of ANC activity and dismissive of its
capacity to organise mass action. Moreover, their ultimate objectives differed.
The communists were intent not simply on fighting for African liberation from
white rule, as the ANC was, but on leading South Africa in the direction of a
socialist republic. This placed them constantly at odds with African activists,
who feared they would try to take over the ANC for their own purposes.

The communists made the greatest impact in the field of trade union
organisation, notably among African mineworkers. In their first attempt to
establish a mineworkers’ union during the 1930s, they encountered difficulties
over organising migrant workers and consequently decided to enlist the support
of the ANC. The initiative was taken by two prominent communists, Edwin
Mofutsanyana, who had trained at the Lenin School in Moscow, and Gaur
Radebe; both held posts in the ANC. In 1941, a steering committee to establish
an African Mineworkers’ Union was elected, headed by J. B. Marks, a former
teacher born in 1903 of mixed parentage in Ventersdorp in the western
Transvaal. Like Kotane and Mofutsanyana, he had joined the Communist Party
in the late 1920s, as well as the ANC, studied at the Lenin School in Moscow in
the 1930s and returned to South Africa to become a full-time party and trade
union organiser.
The task they faced was formidable. African miners on the Witwatersrand
were rural men with strong tribal allegiances, serving out their contracts in mine
compounds, separated from the rest of the black community until they returned
home. Their only alternative to compound life was the cheap canteens and
shabby concession stores adjacent to the compounds. They were men who
understood little of city life or modern politics, whose primary aim was to earn
money for their families back home. The compounds, moreover, were closed to
union officials. Meetings could be held only clandestinely. Organisers faced
dismissal and deportation to rural areas. One of Mandela’s tasks as a mine
policeman, if he had stayed at Crown Mines, would have been to keep a sharp
eye out for such activists.
From the outset, the African Mineworkers’ Union pressed wage demands on
the Chamber of Mines but received no hearing. In 1943, miners’ discontent
spilled over into sporadic strikes at individual mines. Seeking to avoid further
trouble during wartime, the government appointed a commission of inquiry into
the wages and conditions of African miners, giving the Mineworkers’ Union the
opportunity to organise meetings up and down the Reef to collect and formulate
workers’ grievances. The commission recommended substantial improvements.
But three years later wages in the mines were less than half the minimum
amount advocated by the commission, and employers ignored further demands
from mineworkers. Sporadic trouble broke out. At Crown Mines, 5,000 miners
went on hunger strike.
At a union meeting on 4 August 1946, held in public at the New-town Market

Square, west of Johannesburg’s city centre, delegates numbering more than
1,000 voted to call a strike of all Africans employed in the gold mines, starting
on 12 August. No previous attempt had been made to organise an industry-wide
strike. The union president, J. B. Marks, warned them of the risk of repression.
‘You are challenging the basis of the cheap labour system,’ he said, ‘and must be
ready to sacrifice in the struggle.’
The strike brought Mandela into close touch with Marks, beginning another
important friendship. Mandela had several relatives working in the mines and
visited them during the strike to express support, sometimes in the company of
Marks on his own rounds. He was impressed by his ‘cool and reasoned
leadership’ at the height of crisis.
With forty-five mines strung out along fifty miles of the Witwatersrand, often
in isolated areas surrounded by unused scrubland and constantly patrolled by
mine police, the strike call far outstretched the capacity of union organisers. To
bolster the strike, Johannesburg’s close-knit communists mobilised all their
resources, providing teams of volunteers, cars, typewriters, duplicators and
leaflet-writers. The party’s district committee met secretly at different venues
both by day and by night, directing its members’ work. Leaflets were printed and
distributed from end to end of the Witwatersrand. Flying squads of communist
activists rushed from mine to mine to back up the efforts of the union. A strike
bulletin was compiled each evening by Rusty Bernstein, a skilful writer in
charge of party propaganda, and dispatched at night to mine compounds by
volunteers, sometimes dressed to look like miners.
The strike lasted for five days, drawing in some 70,000 miners, about a
quarter of the African labour force. Nine mines came to a standstill and
production at ten others was disrupted. An increasingly ugly struggle developed
between militant miners and police called in to break the strikes, resulting in the
death of twelve miners and injuries to more than 1,200 others. On 16 August, the
Rand Daily Mail reported how a force of 400 policemen sent 1,000 feet
underground at the Nigel gold mine to deal with 1,000 miners staging a sit-down
strike ‘drove the natives up, stope by stope, level by level, until they reached the
surface’.
Police also raided the union’s office in Johannesburg and the Communist
Party’s district office in Commissioner Street, removing case-loads of
documents. Determined to show that it could deal with ‘the red menace’, the

government then ordered the arrest of the entire Johannesburg district committee
and other strike organisers, a total of fifty-two people, on charges of conspiracy
to commit sedition. These were later reduced to a charge of assisting a strike
which was illegal in terms of war measures still in force. All the accused pleaded
guilty, including Yusuf Dadoo, the communist Indian leader who had been in
prison throughout the period serving a sentence for his actions in the passive
resistance campaign, and the Afrikaner lawyer Bram Fischer, a district
committee member who had been on holiday in a wildlife reserve throughout the
strike. In terms of the objectives that the miners set, the strike was a complete
failure. None of their demands was met and their union was virtually destroyed.
The communists too now found themselves the target of harassment. Members
of the party’s central committee were charged anew with sedition. The evidence
was flimsy, but the proceedings dragged on for two years. The popular support
that the communists had enjoyed during the war evaporated. The more timid or
prudent members retired from the fray, leaving behind a committed hardcore.
Nevertheless, the strike produced a considerable shift in the political terrain.
Two days after the strike started, members of the Native Representative Council,
the advisory body established by the government as compensation for the loss of
the African franchise in 1936, assembled in Pretoria for their annual sitting in an
angry and defiant mood, appalled by the government’s treatment of the
mineworkers. Although the council possessed no executive power, it had
attracted some of the most able and respected Africans in the country, including
Mandela’ s teacher from Fort Hare, Professor Matthews, an eminent physician,
Dr James Moroka, and a distinguished Zulu chief, Albert Luthuli, all of whom
were moderate men. During the war years they had become increasingly critical
of the government’s failure to take their views seriously. Now reports of police
brutality against the miners sent them to the brink of rebellion. Their tempers
were not improved when they discovered that, on the instructions of the Pretoria
City Council, they had been barred from premises they normally used in the
Pretoria City Hall and instead given cramped quarters in the Department of
Labour, where the lavatories were for whites only. They also found, much to
their irritation, that the council’s chairman, the Secretary of the Native Affairs
Department, had been called away to Johannesburg on strike business and that
his place had been taken by a deputy. When the deputy made no mention in his
opening address of the miners’ strike or police action, the councillors reacted
with vigour. Paul Mosaka, a successful Johannesburg businessman, referred to
the ‘wanton shooting’ of miners and went on to launch a blistering attack on the

government’s neglect of the council’s work. ‘We have been fooled,’ he said.
‘We have been asked to cooperate with a toy telephone.’
The following day, the council unanimously passed a resolution which
condemned government policy, called for the abolition of all discriminatory
legislation and announced that the session would be adjourned. Even
government-appointed chiefs voted in favour of the motion. At the end of the
debate, a veteran nationalist figure, Selope Thema, turned to the council
chairman and warned, ‘It may not happen in your day, but it may come about
that the black people will stand together against the white people.’
The old style of African politics, of polite requests and suggestions, had
finally reached the end of the road. In its place came a growing interest in
collaboration between different groups of the government’s opponents. To
Mandela and to others in the Youth League, this was an unwelcome
development.

Mandela’s circle of friends and acquaintances in Johannesburg was unusually
wide and varied. He established strong friendships with white, black and Indian
alike. He enjoyed calling at the International Club in Kort Street, where political
radicals of every hue gathered for coffee, social events and lectures. He was as
much at ease in the homes of white radicals like Michael Harmel, a leading
communist theoretician and writer, as in the homes of black radicals. He
developed a liking for Indian cooking and was a welcome guest in many Indian
homes. His favourite base in town was Ismail Meer’s flat in Kholvad House,
where endless discussions and arguments took place and where parties on
Saturday nights, with dancing, illicit drink and a selection of curry meals, would
go on until the early hours of Sunday mornings. When it was too late to catch the
last train for Orlando, Mandela would stay there overnight.
In his political outlook, however, Mandela identified himself with the extreme
wing of the Congress Youth League, which was hostile to all suggestion of
collaboration with white, Indian or communist groups. As a true disciple of
Lembede, he was adamant about the need for African leadership and African
control. Lembede’s Africanism was essentially a philosophy of racial
exclusivity. In an early draft of the Youth League’s statement of policy, whites
were described as ‘foreigners’. The slogans favoured by the more extreme
Africanists included ‘Africa for the Africans’ and ‘Hurl the White man to the

sea’, which they tried to get the ANC’s annual conference in Bloemfontein to
accept in 1945. Mandela was sympathetic to their views: ‘While I was not
prepared to hurl the white man into the sea, I would have been perfectly happy if
he had climbed aboard his steamships and left the continent of his own volition.’
Above all, Mandela was anti-communist, convinced that the communists were
intent on trying to take over the African nationalist movement for their own
purposes. The prominent role that white members played in the party and the
emphasis that communists placed on class struggle rather than racial oppression
all served to confirm his distrust. In 1945, in an overt attempt to rid the ANC of
Communist Party members, Lembede, Sisulu, Tambo and Mandela put forward
a motion to the ANC’s Transvaal branch proposing that members with dual
allegiance to other organisations should be expelled from the ANC.
Towards Indian political activists Mandela was only marginally less hostile,
fearing that, with their superior education and training, Indians would dominate
African initiatives as surely as white communists wanted to. Their interests,
moreover, did not coincide with African interests. Africans were preoccupied
with issues like pass laws, which did not affect Indians, whereas Indians were
pitted against measures like the Ghetto Act, which did not directly affect
Africans. The final verdict reached by the Youth League was that Indians would
not be regarded as ‘intruders or enemies’ provided that they did not undermine
the African struggle for liberation.
For month after month, members of the Youth League argued over these
issues, meeting sometimes in Sisulu’s office off Market Street, sometimes in
Lembede’s office close by, or in each other’s homes in Orlando. The core of the
group consisted of no more than sixty Africans, with a far smaller number
playing an active part in debates. They were preoccupied principally with
establishing ideological positions, with constructing a ‘nation-building’
ideology, rather than planning political action, but they were not short of views
on other matters. When King George VI, Queen Elizabeth and the two royal
princesses toured South Africa in 1947, the Youth League executive met in
Mandela’s house in Orlando to consider the question of a boycott. Lembede
argued passionately against paying homage to the head of a state that had failed
to honour its moral duty to the African people. Mandela, more respectful of
royalty than others, cautioned against taking an emotional view, pointing out that
the British monarchy was a great and enduring institution; but he was not
opposed to a boycott. The Youth League’s subsequent call for a boycott, in

protest against the ‘barbarous policy of the Union Government maintained in the
name of His Majesty’, infuriated the ANC leader, Dr Xuma.
The main body of the ANC was meanwhile moving in a different direction,
seeking new links with other opposition groups. The Africanist attempt at the
1945 annual conference to gain approval for the slogan ‘Africa for the Africans
and the White Man for the Sea’ was rejected as being ‘not in accordance with
the Congress spirit’. Xuma was also receptive to communist approaches to
collaborate, taking part in a communist-organised anti-pass campaign during the
war years. In 1946, three veteran communists, Marks, Kotane and Daniel
Tloome, were elected to the ANC’s national executive committee. Communists
within the ANC became articulate critics of the exclusivist position that the
Africanists advocated. Attempts by the Youth League to exclude communists
from ANC membership, which gained significant support in the Transvaal ANC,
failed at a national level.
Cooperation with Indian organisations was also strengthened. In the wake of
the Indian passive resistance campaign, the ANC found common cause with the
Transvaal Indian Congress and the Natal Indian Congress in opposing
discriminatory legislation. In March 1947, all three organisations signed a pact
committing them to work together for full franchise rights and the removal of all
forms of racial discrimination. One of the first projects they launched was a
‘Votes for All’ campaign, demanding the extension of the franchise to all South
Africans.
It was over the ‘Votes for All’ issue that Mandela and Sisulu came into sharp
disagreement. Sisulu had begun to take a more pragmatic view of opposition to
the government. Once a committed member of the Africanist group, as hostile to
cooperation with whites, Indians and communists as Lembede, he had come to
accept the need for a wider approach if opposition was to succeed. However
appealing Lembede’s Africanism was at an emotional level, from a strategic
point of view it had obvious limitations. Joint campaigns were a practical way
forward.
Mandela, however, along with Oliver Tambo, insisted on the need for African
leadership of any campaign involving other groups. At a rowdy meeting of the
Transvaal ANC called to debate the ‘Votes for All’ issue, their disagreement
burst out into the open. The meeting broke up in disorder. ‘Nelson and Oliver
were so angry with me that instead of going to the station together to take the

train home, as we usually did, we went separate ways,’ recalled Sisulu.
What shifted the balance within the Youth League further in the direction of a
more moderate stance was the sudden death of Lembede, at the age of thirtythree, in July 1947. Mandela had been visiting Lembede at his office during a
lunch break when Lembede complained of a pain in his stomach. When the pain
grew worse, Lembede was taken to Coronation Hospital, but he died that
evening. The Youth League was stunned. Lembede’s forceful personality had
guided it from the beginning; his ideas on Africanism had become its own creed.
However, his obsession with sticking rigidly to Africanist ideals, fending off
critics from all sides, had become an obstacle to its advancement.
His successor, Peter Mda, an Orlando teacher with a sharper, more analytical
approach, began to move the Youth League away from the extreme positions
favoured by Lembede. In place of the term ‘Africanism’, Mda preferred to use
‘African Nationalism’. When the Youth League finally published its ‘Basic
Policy’ in 1948, four years after its formation, Mda was its author.
It must be noted that there are two streams of African Nationalism. One
centres round Marcus Garvey’s slogan ‘Africa for Africans’. It is based
on the ‘Quit Africa’ slogan and the cry ‘Hurl the Whiteman into the sea’.
This brand of African nationalism is extreme and ultra-revolutionary.
There is another stream of African Nationalism (Africanism) which is
moderate, and which the Congress Youth League professes. We of the
Youth League take account of the concrete situation in South Africa, and
realize that the different racial groups have come to stay. But we insist
that a condition for interracial peace and progress is the abandonment of
white domination, and such a change in the basic structure of South
African society that those relations which breed exploitation and human
misery will disappear.
Due warnings were given about ‘the need for vigilance against communists
and other groups which foster non-African interests . . . groups that seek to
impose on our struggle cut-and-dried formulas, which so far from clarifying the
issues of our struggle, only serve to obscure the fundamental fact that we are
oppressed not as a class, but as a people’. The help of white liberals was
dismissed as being worthless: ‘Their voice is negligible, and in the last analysis
counts for nothing. In their struggle for freedom the Africans will be wasting
their time and deflecting their forces if they look up to the Europeans either for

inspiration or for help.’ Indian organisations were given similarly short shrift.
What the Youth League essentially wanted was to ‘go it alone’. But the extent to
which other groups were to be excluded from the African struggle for power was
an issue that was left unresolved. Two rival schools of thought developed: the
Africanist school, which put African interests above all others, and the
Nationalist school, which preferred a more flexible approach towards other
groups. This division in African opinion was to be the cause of bitter clashes for
years to come.
Mandela remained firmly in the Africanist camp. Yet though he was spending
more and more time on political activity, neglecting both his law studies at the
University of the Witwatersrand and his family in Orlando, he possessed no
clear sense of direction. As a political activist in the 1940s, he made no
particular impact. He had a reputation, as he admitted, as ‘a gadfly’, knowing
what he was against rather than what he was for. Whereas Sisulu was developing
a strategic outlook about the African struggle for political rights, using the
‘Votes for All’ campaign as a means to strengthen links with other opposition
groups, Mandela was more concerned about tactical issues, worried that the
ANC might not gain the credit for the campaign rather than whether the
campaign achieved any success. Sisulu, often quiet amid fierce debate going on
around him, listened carefully to arguments by veteran communists like Marks
and Kotane about the need for collaboration; Mandela, relishing fierce argument,
was not so amenable. He was also prone to occasional hotheaded action. Oliver
Tambo, in later years, remembered him as ‘passionate, emotional, sensitive,
quickly stung to bitterness and retaliation by insult and patronage’. Sisulu,
recalling their dispute over the ‘Votes for All’ issue, reflected on the moments of
anger that Mandela sometimes showed: ‘Essentially, he is a moderate,
reasonable man in his approach. That is his general nature. But then there is this
contradiction of stubbornness. When it comes to the final point, he can become
very stubborn, very arrogant. His anger becomes extreme. It is not in argument
that he becomes angry. It is when he suspects people’s motives—as he did with
the communists.’
So engrossed were members of the Youth League with their own internal
debates and meetings that they paid scant attention to political developments in
the white community. Nor did they think they were important. It therefore came
as a shock to Mandela when, at dawn one day in the streets of Johannesburg, he
emerged with Oliver Tambo from an all-night meeting to find newspapers

proclaiming that Afrikaner nationalists had taken power in the 1948 election.
