CHAPTER 23

CODESA
BY MID-1991, EIGHTEEN MONTHS AFTER DE KLERK’S BOLD
REFORMS, South Africa was mired in crisis. The country was afflicted by
appalling bouts of violence from which there seemed no escape. In Natal, a
small-scale civil war was under way. The government’s reputation, as a result of
Inkathagate, had been seriously damaged. Distrust was manifest on all sides.
Little progress had been made towards even starting negotiations. To make
matters worse, economic recession was exacting a heavy toll.
The ANC had considerable trouble putting its own house in order. It found the
business of converting itself from an underground liberation movement into a
properly constituted political organisation—establishing party offices, recruiting
members, raising funds, organising the return of thousands of exiles and
ensuring the welfare of returning guerrillas—an immensely difficult process,
almost beyond its means. The result, more often than not, was chaos.
Internal disputes overshadowed all else. So great was the furore over the
ANC’s decision to suspend the armed struggle that the national executive
committee decided to postpone the holding of the ANC’s first national
conference inside South Africa for thirty years until July 1991. At a substitute
‘consultative conference’ in December 1990, Mandela was the target of
sustained criticism over his autocratic style, his failure to consult more
frequently about policy issues and his cordial relationship with de Klerk. When
he and Tambo put forward a proposal advocating the phased lifting of sanctions
against South Africa, ANC militants countered with their own resolution
insisting that sanctions should be maintained unchanged and received
overwhelming support from cheering delegates. In his concluding remarks,
Mandela noted ruefully, ‘One of the most disappointing features of the
conference was that there was hardly a word of praise.’ He acknowledged that he
and the national executive committee had been wrong not to keep the party
membership informed about their contacts and agreements with the government.
He said he accepted the criticism ‘without qualification’ and promised to make

‘radical adjustments’ to the ANC’s leadership. But he also defended his right to
continue with what he called ‘confidential’ discussions with the government. It
was simply not practical, he said, to refer every problem back to a party
conference.
Not just Mandela but Winnie too was the target of attack from critics within
the ANC intent on curbing her ruthless ambition. In April 1991, Winnie made a
determined bid, with Mandela’s support, to be elected president of the ANC’s
Women’s League. Two other candidates stood for election, Gertrude Shope, an
exiled leader who had been head of the ANC’s women’s division in Lusaka, and
Albertina Sisulu. In order to ensure that Winnie was not elected, Albertina
withdrew from the election and publicly called on her supporters to cast their
votes for Shope. The result was a crushing defeat for Winnie, who gained less
than a third of the vote.
At the ANC’s national conference in July 1991, at the age of seventy-two,
Mandela was elected president, in place of his ailing friend Oliver Tambo. But
many of the same criticisms of his leadership were voiced once more. One
former UDF leader, Mosiuoa Lekota, openly denounced Mandela for his
tendency to try to impose his will on internal decision-making, and received a
huge cheer for doing so. There was strong criticism too of the disorganised state
of the ANC, attributed by many delegates to the incompetence of the ‘old guard’
on the national executive committee. A confidential internal report presented to
the conference noted: ‘We lack enterprise, creativity and initiative. We appear
very happy to remain pigeon-holed within the confines of populist rhetoric and
clichés.’ Attendance at recent rallies had been low, those rallies had been poorly
organised, membership recruitment had fallen far below expectations and, the
report concluded, ‘Clearly we have not utilized our full potential to mobilize
millions of our people into effective action.’
In the election for party posts, half of the old guard were swept away and
replaced by former UDF leaders whom Mandela and Winnie had previously
contrived to exclude from influence. Despite Mandela’s strenuous efforts, the
key post of secretary-general went to Cyril Ramaphosa, whose election brought
rapturous applause from delegates. Ramaphosa represented the new generation
of political activists. As a student, he had served two prison sentences for
political activity. A lawyer by training, he had thrown himself into trade union
activity, building up membership of the mineworkers’ union from 6,000 to
340,000 and helping to launch the trade union federation, Cosatu. His abilities as

a successful organiser and as a skilful negotiator were held in high regard by
mining company executives, with whom he was often in conflict. He was
familiar with the democratic approach of the UDF and held no particular
reverence for old-guard politicians from the Mandela generation who considered
length of service the principal qualification for party office. In the months
preceding Mandela’s release from prison, when speculation about it was rife, he
remarked in a magazine interview that Mandela should not expect just to walk
out of prison and take over the ANC. His standing, he said, was ‘no different
from the status of any other member of the ANC’; he was just ‘one of those
people who may have to be considered for a leadership position’. Ramaphosa
was also one of the few individuals in the ANC hierarchy prepared to stand up to
the malevolence of Winnie Mandela. As one of the authors of the original report
exposing her crimes, he was fully aware not only of her guilt but also of the
damage that would be done to the ANC if she was allowed to continue her
relentless drive for power. Aged only thirty-eight when he was elected secretarygeneral, Ramaphosa quickly made his mark both on the ANC and on the whole
negotiation process.
Despite these curbs to his personal authority, Mandela was successful in
gaining support for his efforts in steering the ANC back towards talks with the
government, suspended since May, even though none of the demands it had
made at the time had been met. Mandela argued that for the ANC to continue
postponing talks because of political violence effectively gave a veto to
rightwing factions around de Klerk which did not want negotiations to proceed.
They should be seen as ‘a victory for the ANC’ and ‘a defeat’ for the
government, not the reverse. Negotiations, he said, were ‘a theatre of struggle’.
Any further delay would play into the hands of the enemy: ‘It can never be in
our interest that we prolong the agony of the apartheid system. It does not serve
the interests of the masses we represent and the country as a whole that we delay
. . . the achievement of the objective of the transfer of power to the people.’
Mandela also put forward for the first time the idea of a ‘transitional government
of national unity’ in which power would be shared with de Klerk’s despised
National Party.
Although Mandela regained the initiative for negotiations, revolutionary
enthusiasts were hard at work, preaching the virtues of mass action. Their day
was yet to come.
The first attempt at negotiation between the three main rivals—Mandela, de

Klerk and Buthelezi—was largely a disaster. In September 1991, they were
brought together for the first time to attend a national peace conference at the
Carlton Hotel in Johannesburg organised by a group of business, church and
civic leaders. The atmosphere at the conference was extremely tense. One week
before, gunmen, assumed to be Umkhonto members, had ambushed an Inkatha
march in Thokoza, a township near Johannesburg, killing twenty-three people
and injuring eighteen others. Inkatha gunmen retaliated with an indiscriminate
attack on buses, taxis and trains.
While delegates to the conference were discussing ‘codes of conduct’ inside
the hotel, on the street outside hundreds of Inkatha supporters, armed with
traditional weapons, paraded up and down in front of the hotel in a show of
support for Buthelezi. By the time he got round to telling the demonstrators to go
home, little sense of accord remained. At a subsequent press conference, when
de Klerk sought to play down the incident, saying that the Inkatha demonstrators
had committed ‘no crime’ and had ‘apparently enjoyed themselves’, Mandela
reacted in fury, jumping up from his seat to grab the microphone and asserting
that if the demonstrators had belonged to the ANC the police would have used
force to disperse them. The press conference, intended to mark agreement on a
peace accord, degenerated into an ugly public wrangle. Buthelezi demonstrated
his disdain for the process by refusing to participate in a three-way handshake
with Mandela and de Klerk, suggested by press photographers. When the
photographers persisted, Buthelezi, keeping his hands tightly gripped on his
ceremonial fly whisk, snapped that he was not going to ‘perform like a clown’
for them. In October, South Africa experienced one of its worst months of
violence on record.
Merely finding a starting point for negotiations proved highly contentious.
Mandela and de Klerk held several meetings during September and October but
found little common ground on how a new constitution should be formulated.
Mandela insisted that the constitution should be drawn up by an elected
assembly, so that each party’s influence on the final document would be
proportionate to its national support. De Klerk wanted an unelected conference,
comprising all political parties ‘with a proven basis of support’, to deliberate
upon two crucial issues: the composition, functioning and decision-making
process of the actual constitutional negotiating conference, and the broad
principles to be contained in a new constitution. He opposed the idea of a
constituent assembly, fearing that it would allow a single party or alliance of

parties emerging from an election with a commanding majority virtually to write
its own constitution—in effect predetermining constitutional issues which were
supposed to be the subject of negotiation. Mandela demanded an interim
government; de Klerk said he had no intention of handing over power before the
new constitution was in place.
The two men were also locked in a long-standing dispute over the status of
Umkhonto we Sizwe. De Klerk demanded that the ANC should disband its
guerrilla army and put its arms caches under joint control. He maintained it was
a ‘private army’ no longer permissible under the terms of the national peace
accord signed in September 1991. Mandela refused, telling de Klerk that for the
ANC to demobilise its armed wing when it was subject to armed attack would be
tantamount to suicide.
All that was finally agreed was to hold a multiparty conference, to be known
as the Convention for a Democratic South Africa, or Co - desa, as it was
popularly called, together with a date, an agenda and a venue. It had taken nearly
two years to get that far.

On 20 December 1991, in a cavernous and gloomy trade exhibition hall near
Johannesburg’s international airport, there assembled the widest cross-section of
political groups that had ever met in South Africa. The only similar gathering
that had ever taken place was a national convention in 1908-9, when
representatives from the Transvaal, the Orange Free State, the Cape and Natal
agreed to establish the Union of South Africa. On that occasion no Africans were
present.
Invitations to Codesa had been sent to twenty-three parties, nineteen of which
had accepted. In addition to delegations from the government, the National Party
and the ANC, there were representatives from the Inkatha Freedom Party; the
Communist Party; the Transvaal and Natal Indian Congresses; four
‘independent’ homeland governments; four ‘self-governing’ homeland parties;
three parties from the Indian and Coloured parliaments; and the liberal
parliamentary opposition party, the Democratic Party. Those who refused
invitations included the far-right Conservative Party; the extremist Afrikaner
Weerstandsbeweging; and the Pan-Africanist Congress. Four days beforehand,
the PAC had held a special conference in Cape Town which had decided to
boycott negotiations altogether, with delegates shouting, ‘One settler, one bullet.

‘
One other notable absentee was Buthelezi. Although Inkatha was present,
Buthelezi had decided to stay away in protest that his demand for two additional
delegations, one headed by the king of the Zulus, Goodwill Zwelethini, the other
representing the KwaZulu administration, had been turned down. Five days
before Codesa opened, addressing supporters outside Durban, he had warned
that Zulus should not be left aggrieved ‘lest what happens in this country
emerges as so terrible and so destructive that the civil wars [in Angola and
Mozambique] are child’s play by comparison’. Thereafter Buthelezi’s
contribution to the negotiations process was to consist largely of a similar
mixture of threats and bluster.
Codesa’s first plenary session, known as Codesa 1, was intended to be largely
a formality. Before handing over to a series of working groups, delegations were
asked to sign a Declaration of Intent, consisting mainly of expressions of
goodwill, which committed them to an undivided South Africa, a multiparty
democracy with universal suffrage, a separation of powers, an independent
judiciary and a bill of rights. Inkatha immediately adopted a dissident role,
refusing to sign on the grounds that the reference contained to an ‘undivided’
South Africa implied that the federal system it wanted had been ruled out. Only
when an amendment was later inserted, giving an assurance that the offending
clause did not preclude a federal system, did Inkatha sign.
One speaker after another stepped up to the podium to express goodwill. The
National Party’s contribution was memorable for the way in which its chief
delegate, Dawie de Villiers, endeavoured to offer an apology for apartheid. His
party, he said, had hoped that ‘a policy of separation’ would bring peace to the
country, but apartheid had produced instead conflict, injustice and misery: ‘In so
far as that occurred, we deeply regret it.’
The last two delegates due to speak were Mandela and de Klerk. What
occurred, broadcast live on radio and television, sent a shockwave across the
country. Mandela had originally been scheduled to speak last, but the previous
evening de Klerk had asked him on the phone if he could speak last instead.
Several of Mandela’s colleagues had misgivings, but Mandela saw no reason not
to accord de Klerk the favour.
Mandela, in his address, duly spoke of the importance of the occasion, as
other delegates had done. Then de Klerk went to the podium for the final speech

of the day. He too began by citing the historic significance of the gathering. He
spoke of the need to overcome mutual distrust and suspicion, and of his support
for the idea of ‘power-sharing’.
But then he turned his speech into an attack on the ANC. The ANC, he said,
had failed to honour an agreement to dismantle Umkhonto, and he went on to
question whether the ANC’s commitment to agreements reached at the
convention would be worth the paper they were written on if it did not abandon
the armed struggle. His clear intention was to belittle Mandela and to
demonstrate to his own followers his toughness in handling the ANC. He spoke
in the manner of a headmaster dealing with an errant child.
Mandela was infuriated, not just by de Klerk’s accusations but by his
deception in trying to get in the last word. Once again, he had trusted de Klerk
against the advice of his own colleagues, only to be proved wrong. Seething with
anger, he insisted on the right of reply and strode to the podium to denigrate de
Klerk in full public view, his voice manifesting all the contempt and loathing he
felt for the man:
I am gravely concerned about the behaviour of Mr de Klerk today. He has
launched an attack on the ANC and in doing so he has been less than frank. Even
the head of an illegitimate, discredited minority regime, as his is, has certain
moral standards to uphold. He has no excuse just because he is the head of such
a discredited regime not to uphold moral standards. . .
If a man can come to a conference of this nature and play the type of politics
he has played—very few people would like to deal with such a man. . .
The members of the government persuaded us to allow them to speak last.
They were very keen to say the last word here. It is now clear why they did so.
He has abused his position, because he hoped that I would not respond. He was
completely mistaken. I respond now.
The ANC, he said, had shown its commitment to peace by suspending the
armed struggle. As de Klerk well knew, it had agreed to turn in its weapons only
when it was part of a government collecting those weapons: ‘What political
organisation would hand over its weapons to the same man who is regarded by
the people as killing innocent people?’ He had warned de Klerk on countless
occasions that it served no useful purpose to attack the ANC publicly, yet ‘he
continues to do exactly that and we’re going to stop it’.

He went on to accuse de Klerk of pursuing a double agenda towards the ANC,
of talking peace and cooperation while simultaneously ‘conducting a war’
against it. Even while negotiating, the government was secretly funding covert
organisations that committed violence against the ANC. It was all well and good
for de Klerk to pretend, as he had done at the time of the Inkathagate scandal,
that he knew nothing about the large sums of money being channelled through
the police to the ANC’s main rival, but, he said, ‘if the head of state doesn’t
know when as much as 7 million rands is spent, then he’s not fit to be a head of
the government’.
Mandela concluded by saying he was nevertheless willing to continue to work
with de Klerk: ‘I am prepared to make allowances because he is a product of
apartheid. Although he wants these democratic changes, he has sometimes very
little idea of what democracy means.’
Caught off guard by Mandela’s venomous outburst, de Klerk began by taking
notes. Then he put down his pen and stroked his bald pate, becoming
increasingly agitated. By the time Mandela had finished, he was apoplectic. He
returned to the podium to make an angry rebuttal of Mandela’s accusations.
The two sides, he said, had met innumerable times over the previous ten
months to try to resolve the issue of Umkhonto. Both he and Mandela had
intervened personally to try to break the deadlock, but to no avail. They had last
discussed the matter on 12 December and had agreed that further high-level
consultations were needed: ‘The friendly exchanges that went on over the past
few days resulted in absolute stalemate.’
Hence his decision to raise the issue in public. It was an issue that had to be
solved before other agreements could be reached. Otherwise, de Klerk said, the
government would be faced with an ANC carrying ‘a pen in one hand and
claiming the right to still have arms in the other hand’.
The spectacle on prime-time television of a white head of state being given a
dressing-down by a black politician, accusing him of duplicity, trickery and even
collusion in murder, was an altogether new experience for South Africans. Even
though the two men made the point of shaking hands afterwards, it was evident
that they had lost all mutual respect. Neither of them understood the other’s
predicament over the issue of armed struggle. Both were under strong pressure
from their own constituencies to take a firm stand. But by choosing a ceremonial
occasion to bring the dispute into the open, de Klerk not only ruined the display

of goodwill it was intended to convey but incurred severe damage to his own
reputation as a strong leader. In front of the cameras, a discernible shift in power
had taken place.
The relationship between Mandela and de Klerk never recovered from this
incident. De Klerk believed that Mandela had neither the authority nor the
political will to ensure that the ANC adhered to agreements with the
government. Mandela was all the more convinced of de Klerk’s double agenda
to destroy the ANC. Their lack of trust made the search for a settlement even
more complicated, just as negotiations were beginning.
The differences in their objectives were already fundamental. De Klerk
entered the negotiations with the purpose not of transferring power but of
striking a unique power-sharing deal which would ensure that government in a
democratic South Africa was subject to a white veto. His model of majority rule
was not the standard version—‘simple majority rule’, as he disparagingly
referred to it—but a constitution which would entrench the position of minority
parties in government and restrain majority parties through an elaborate system
of checks.
He had moved on from the idea of group rights to the idea of blocking
mechanisms. What he proposed was government through an enforced coalition,
with a rotating presidency, in which decisions were taken by consensus, thus
giving the white minority an effective veto over the majority. He wanted extra
representation for white minorities in an upper house of parliament with veto
powers, coupled with the requirement for certain legislation in the lower house
to obtain specially high majorities before passage. He also wanted regional
authorities to be given autonomous powers to curb the possibility of centralised
authoritarian rule. Summing up his position, he said, ‘A party that wins 51 per
cent of the vote should not get 100 per cent of the power.’
In de Klerk’s view, the purpose of Codesa was to settle, in a multiparty forum,
as many of these constitutional details as possible before the negotiating circus
moved on to an elected assembly, where the influence of minority parties was
bound to be reduced. He wanted Codesa first to draw up an ‘interim’
constitution, setting out principles that would include permanently entrenched
power-sharing, the devolution of power, protection for minorities and other
checks and balances, before proceeding with elections for a constituent assembly
and an interim government that would rule for at least ten years.

He repeatedly insisted that the National Party would never surrender to
‘simple majority rule’, leaving the fate of the white minority of 12 per cent in the
hands of a non-racial electorate. It would demand a guaranteed share in power,
whatever the outcome of the popular vote, and it would hold out for as long as
was necessary to obtain one. Only when the National Party’s future was secure
was he prepared to relinquish sole power.
Mandela embarked on the negotiations with the aim of achieving unfettered
majority rule in the shortest possible time. He assumed that the government’s
vulnerability to international pressure, popular unrest and economic disruption,
the very factors which he believed had led de Klerk to release him and lift the
ban on the ANC in the first place, would work to his advantage in securing a
speedy victory.
His aim was to move on rapidly from Codesa to an interim government and to
an elected assembly empowered to determine a new constitution. The ANC
wanted a radical rupture with the past. In Mandela’s view, Codesa’s purpose was
merely to decide what measures were needed before an assembly could be
elected. He was anxious to achieve quick results. The slow progress so far made
on the road to majority rule since 1990 had added to the volume of criticism he
faced from within the ANC. Moreover, the ANC’s support in the townships was
being undermined daily as a result of the level of violence there and its inability
to provide protection.

While Codesa’s working groups grappled with these issues, there were signs that
de Klerk’s support within the white community was dwindling. Since the
announcement of his reforms in February 1990, the right wing had kept up a
barrage of attacks on de Klerk, denouncing him as a traitor and a sell-out—‘the
only leader in the Western world who is negotiating himself, his party and his
people out of power,’ railed the Conservative Party leader, Andries Treurnicht.
Treurnicht’s objective became the establishment of an independent white state
—an Afrikaner volkstaat. He offered no suggestions as to what its borders might
be or how it might be brought about. There was not a single magisterial district
in South Africa where whites, let alone Afrikaners, actually constituted a
majority of inhabitants. But it was an idea with immense appeal to the
Conservative Party, as well as to other factions on the far right. ‘We in the
Conservative Party are adamant that there is a territory which belongs

historically and otherwise to the white nation,’ said Treurnicht. ‘While we accept
that there are whites who are prepared to live under an ANC government in a
unitary state, there are others—we believe, the majority—who will never submit
themselves to a communist terrorist regime. . . Unless any future constitutional
dispensation addresses the problems of ethnicity and self-determination, it will
be a waste of time and a recipe for discord.’ He pledged ‘a third freedom
struggle’ in pursuit of Afrikaner self-determination, alluding to the possibility of
resistance similar to that of the Boers in the two wars against British imperial
rule in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. ‘You do not have
enough jails to keep Afrikaner nationalism imprisoned,’ he declared. ‘We warn:
this is an unfair government which no longer represents the volk.’
Treurnicht’s Conservative Party represented the respectable face of the far
right. Other groups advocated outright violence. The most prominent was the
Afrikaner Weerstandsbeweging, the Afrikaner Resistance Movement, which
used Nazi-style insignia and rituals and paraded with swastika-like banners and
guns. Led by Eugene Terre’Blanche, a former policeman who specialised in
rightwing oratory and bombast, the AWB was the moving force behind the
formation of scores of ‘commando’ units. ‘We refuse to be put under an ANC
government,’ declared Terre’Blanche. ‘That night there will be war in South
Africa. . . . We will fight, as our forefathers fought, until we have won.’ In one
town after another, white vigilante groups sprang up ‘to protect white property,
women and children against blacks’. Along with vigilante action came a spate of
bomb attacks and ‘driveby’ shootings. In August 1991, hundreds of AWB
members, armed with knives, guns and teargas canisters, clashed with police in
Ventersdorp in an attempt to prevent de Klerk from addressing a public meeting
there.
The first electoral shock for de Klerk came in a parliamentary by-election in
the Orange Free State in November 1991, when the National Party lost its seat to
the Conservative Party in a spectacular swing against the government. In
February 1992, the National Party suffered another stunning defeat in the
Afrikaner university town of Potchefstroom. The government’s faltering support
was of more than usual significance, for de Klerk had repeatedly promised that
the white electorate would be allowed the final verdict on any agreement made
about South Africa’s future constitution. Rising white opposition to the
government therefore placed the whole outcome of the negotiations in jeopardy.
Rather than delay the matter any further, within days of the Potchefstroom

defeat de Klerk announced the holding of a white referendum on the reform
process on 17 March. A clear majority in favour, he said, would obviate the need
for the government to return to the white electorate. The risks he took were
considerable. A defeat for the government would almost certainly have led to
civil war. All the resources of the white establishment were thrown into securing
a ‘Yes’ vote. De Klerk explicitly promised the electorate that he would prevent
majority rule. The National Party’s advertising campaign was based on the
slogan, ‘Vote Yes, if you’re scared of majority rule’. The Conservative Party
campaigned for a ‘No’ vote, claiming that the choice for Afrikaners was between
‘the survival of the Afrikaner volk and two cars in the garage’. The ANC did its
best to support the ‘Yes’ campaign, reassuring whites about its good intentions
in the negotiating process and promising job security for civil servants.
The result was a triumph for de Klerk. About 85 per cent of the white
electorate of 3.3 million turned out to vote and some 68 per cent said ‘Yes’.
Only one out of fifteen regions recorded a majority ‘No’ vote—Pietersburg, in
the strongly conservative northern Transvaal. Even Pretoria, which had for so
long symbolised Afrikanerdom in all its might, produced a 57 per cent ‘Yes’
vote. ‘Today,’ said de Klerk, ‘we have closed the book on apartheid. It doesn’t
often happen that in one generation a nation gets an opportunity to rise above
itself. The white electorate has risen above itself in this referendum.’

In the euphoria which followed the referendum, there seemed few other
obstacles remaining in the way of a settlement. Negotiators in several of the
working groups held behind closed doors at Codesa reported making significant
progress. Indeed, Codesa was noted for its convivial and cosy atmosphere, where
participants, wining and dining at the state’s expense, were afforded every
opportunity to settle their differences. As the deadline approached for the second
plenary session, scheduled for 15 May, public expectations were high.
The reality, however, was that the two main participants—the government and
the ANC—had come no closer to agreement on what the real role of Codesa
should be, let alone the details of a new constitution. In the working groups
dealing with the central issues of power-sharing and majority rule, the
differences were as fundamental as ever. The government was prepared to
haggle indefinitely, believing that the slower the transition proceeded, the better.
Its confidence was bolstered by the result of the referendum, which had finally

dispensed with the rightwing threat de Klerk feared so much. The ANC,
however, was alarmed not only by the lack of progress being made at Codesa but
also by signs that it had begun to lose touch with its constituency as the
negotiations dragged on. Radicals within the ANC were highly critical of its
handling of the negotiations and demanded a more aggressive approach.
When Codesa 2 reached deadlock on 15 May, Mandela and de Klerk met over
coffee late that night in their first encounter since the opening day in December.
Though they could not find a way out of the impasse, both were anxious to avoid
a public confrontation. ‘The whole of South Africa and the world is looking at
you and me,’ Mandela told de Klerk. ‘Let us save the peace process. Let us reach
some kind of agreement. Let us at least fix a date for the next round of talks.’
They agreed to address the convention the following day in a constructive
manner, de Klerk speaking first, Mandela last.
De Klerk reiterated the government’s position on the need for ‘proper checks
and balances’ to ensure that ‘no majority should ever be able to misuse its power
. . . to dominate or to damage the interests of minorities’. He rejected once more
the idea of ‘simple majoritarianism’ of ‘a winner-takes-all’ electoral system.
Following him, Mandela tried to disperse the gloom which had descended
over the convention, stressing the areas of agreement that had been reached
there. But there was no disguising the fact that the negotiating process, on which
so many hopes were based, had foundered.
The ANC now drew up alternative plans. It was just the opportunity for which
revolutionary enthusiasts had been waiting.