THE ELECTION ROLLER-COASTER
IN THE ELECTION CAMPAIGN, MANDELA WAS THE STAR
ATTRACTION. Everywhere he went, from one township to another, from one
stadium to the next, he was greeted by huge exuberant crowds eager to catch a
glimpse of him. For many, he was a messianic figure bringing them the promise
of freedom. Long before the election took place, he was regarded as the victor.
Seeing Mandela was an event in itself. He made the most of his appearances,
standing in open vehicles, smiling and waving in obvious pleasure, punching his
fist in the air, ignoring the concerns of his bodyguards in order to stretch out and
shake hands, while cheerful pandemonium erupted all around.
He proved to be a natural campaigner, as much at ease with crowds as with
small gatherings and bystanders, tailoring his speeches and his attire for each
audience. For white businessmen, he chose elegant striped suits; for the
townships, flamboyant shirts. Appearing at a mineworkers’ meeting in a suit, he
apologised, saying that he had not had time to change into something more
casual, then delighted his audience by donning a miner’s helmet. Colourful silk
shirts, buttoned at the neck, soon became his trademark. When a child asked him
why he wore them, he replied: ‘You must remember I was in jail for twentyseven years. I want to feel freedom.’
The manifesto he launched in January 1994 was thick with promises. Using
the slogan ‘A better life for all’, Mandela undertook to introduce what he
described as a ‘gigantic’ programme of public works, providing houses, essential
services, electrification, better schools, roads, clinics and formal employment for
millions of people. The specific targets laid out in the manifesto were ambitious:
jobs and training for 2.5 million people over ten years; 1 million houses to be
built over five years; electrification for 2.5 million rural and urban homes;
running water and flush lavatories for over 1 million families over five years; ten
years of free and compulsory education for all children; free school textbooks to
be doubled in number within one year; affordable access to telecommunications;
and basic health care for all. Other items included land reform, affirmative action

programmes, small business development, lower food taxes and income tax
reductions for low-paid workers.
No explanation was forthcoming in the manifesto about how all these
undertakings would be financed. Like the Freedom Charter of 1955, the
manifesto contained a large number of utopian notions. The objectives
themselves were laudable enough, but amounted to little more than a wish list.
As well as the manifesto, the ANC produced a ‘reconstruction and
development programme’ in an endeavour to provide a policy framework for the
future. But its list of promises and moral imperatives was even longer than that
contained in the manifesto and included everything from paid maternity leave to
a reduction in traffic accidents. Once again, no costs were given, no suggestion
of a funding strategy was made, no priorities were set and policy options were
left wide open.
Finding an agreed economic policy proved to be a difficult business for the
ANC. It re-emerged in South Africa in 1990, a revolutionary organisation laden
with a great deal of ideological baggage, proclaiming the virtues of socialism
and state control despite the collapse of socialist regimes in Eastern Europe. The
Freedom Charter, with its commitment to nationalisation of the banks and
‘monopoly’ industry, was regarded as sacrosanct. When Mandela first came out
of prison in 1990, he was asked whether he had changed his view in any way
about the need for a radical redistribution of wealth in South Africa. ‘No,’ he
replied, without a moment’s hesitation. ‘My views are identical to those of the
ANC. The question of the nationalisation of the mines and similar important
sectors of the community is a fundamental policy of the ANC and I believe that
the ANC is quite correct in this attitude. ’ His remarks caused a wave of panic
among businessmen and sent share prices on the Johannesburg stock exchange
plummeting.
Under pressure from the business community, foreign investors and
international financial institutions like the International Monetary Fund and the
World Bank, the ANC modified its views but still held firm to the ideals of the
Freedom Charter. Time and again, Mandela spoke of the need for a
redistribution of wealth and property. Addressing a panel at the World Economic
Forum in Davos, Switzerland, in 1992, Mandela declared, ‘Taking some key
enterprises into public ownership will itself be a major step towards overcoming
the huge inequality in the ownership of our country’s wealth.’ He was mortified

to find, however, that both de Klerk and Buthelezi, addressing the same meeting
but promising a vigorous free-enterprise system, were given a far more
enthusiastic reception from the world’s top businessmen.
Yet Mandela’s subsequent efforts to shift the direction of ANC policy
encountered strong resistance. At an ANC economic policy conference in 1992,
held after the Davos meeting, when Mandela warned that the ANC would
alienate the business community worldwide if it persisted with its nationalisation
programme, Ben Turok, the Marxist economist who had helped draft the
Freedom Charter’s economic clause nearly forty years before, rose to ask how
Mandela could now turn his back on the Charter. Facing outright opposition,
Mandela withdrew his proposal to drop nationalisation as an option.
The battle continued throughout 1993. Determined to ensure that the ANC did
not lose sight of its socialist principles once it was involved in a government of
national unity, a group of trade unionists, communists and ANC officials
initiated the idea of a ‘reconstruction’ programme setting out a string of radical
proposals. The reconstruction and development programme, as it was eventually
called, went through six drafts before the final version was approved. In the end,
the ANC emerged committed to fiscal and monetary discipline and stressing the
importance of the private sector and the need to develop a favourable investment
climate. Privatisation, as well as nationalisation, was cited as a policy option. No
mention was made of the word ‘socialism’.

On the campaign trail, Mandela went through a routine of explaining how the
reconstruction and development programme would bring more jobs, more
houses, better education and health services. His speeches tended to be dull and
didactic, delivered in a stiff and wooden manner, something of an anticlimax
after the frenzy and excitement surrounding his arrival. While promising a better
future, he spent much time trying to damp down black expectations. Change, he
warned, must be gradual and there must be no dislocation: ‘Do not expect to be
driving a Mercedes the day after the elections. You must have patience. You
might have to wait for five years for results to show.’ Narrowing the gap in
income, employment and education between white and black would not be easy.
Black demands for land and better living standards would have to be addressed
without taking white assets.
Mandela was equally forthright in upbraiding his audience for bad habits: ‘If

you want to continue living in unbridled poverty, without clothes and food, then
go and drink in shebeens. But if you want better things you must work hard. We
cannot do it all for you; you must do it yourselves.’ Mandela also took men to
task for failing to undertake more domestic chores. ‘I make my own bed. I can
cook a decent meal. I can polish a floor,’ he said. ‘Why can’t you do it?’
White audiences sometimes received the same stern treatment. When a white
businessman in Potchefstroom expressed concern about the number of
communists active within the ANC, Mandela responded by admonishing his
audience for being selfish, hypocritical and racist, in the manner of a Dutch
Reformed predikant railing against a congregation of sinners. The Communist
Party and the ANC had fought the brutal system of apartheid together, he said.
Together, members of both organisations had suffered harassment, arrest and
imprisonment: ‘Homes were broken up by a government professing to be
Christian.’ The Communist Party had done none of these things, but rather, ‘You
Christians have done them. Why should we listen to you about our comrades in
the Communist Party?’ Mandela continued: ‘Is this not a sign of selfishness on
your part? You have the temerity to come to me . . . [expecting that] I will say to
an ally with whom we have fought and suffered that we will now abandon them,
on the verge of victory—on your instructions. You, who have no concern for
me.’ Apartheid, he said, had been inflicted on masses of people by ‘a community
which claimed to be committed to religious values . . . You must stand ashamed.
Your community used the word of God to justify [apartheid].’
At the behest of his campaign managers, Mandela and a group of other elderly
inmates, including Sisulu, Mbeki and Kathrada, returned to Robben Island in
February 1994, accompanied by a horde of television crews and journalists. The
event was full of good humour, rarely affording a glimpse of the anguish that
prisoners there suffered. In the cramped space of cell number seven, Mandela
demonstrated how, by standing at an angle, he had been able to wave his arms
about for exercise. Looking through the barred window of the cell, he grinned
broadly at the photographers outside. ‘Could we have one serious one, please?’
pleaded a photographer.
‘My advisers tell me that on this occasion, I should talk about myself and not
be shy,’ he said. He spoke at length of the hardship of working in the lime
quarry, of the isolation of his prison cell, of the stimulation of political
discussions with his colleagues. Only once did he mention personal grief, in
recalling the death of his mother and his oldest son. His favourite topic was the

comradeship of his fellow prisoners. Taking a stroll in the lime quarry, he
recalled, ‘Quarry work was hard at first, but we sang freedom songs as we
worked.’ A television journalist asked, ‘Could you sing a freedom song for us
now, Mr Mandela?’ and he duly obliged. When their duty to the media was
done, Sisulu remarked, ‘It’s nice to know that I’ll be going home at the end of
the day.’
Mandela enjoyed a good working relationship with journalists. He was
attentive to their needs and invariably courteous, apologising whenever he was
late. When a British journalist died in a car accident during the campaign,
Mandela found time in the middle of a hectic schedule to phone his wife,
speaking to her for nearly half an hour. He particularly enjoyed the company of
women journalists, befriending two or three of them, with whom he used to flirt
when the occasion permitted. One was Deborah Patta, a reporter for
Johannesburg’s Radio 702. During the visit to Robben Island, seeing her
struggle with a heavy bag loaded with radio equipment, Mandela asked if he
could carry it for her. Once, at the end of a summit meeting when journalists had
been waiting for six hours, he spotted his friend: ‘Deborah, I am most concerned.
Have you had an opportunity to have any food today?’
Occasionally, amid the constant stream of promises about jobs and housing,
the election campaign was enlivened by an exchange of insults. Mandela derided
de Klerk’s efforts to woo black voters for the National Party: ‘They are a
pathetic collection of weaklings unable to reconcile themselves with the fate of
extinction that stares them in the face.’ The National Party had never served the
mass of South Africans: ‘They only know how to serve the white community.’
De Klerk, for his part, avoided personal attacks on Mandela, but branded the
ANC as ‘a dangerous party’, with no experience, no proven ability and addicted
to policies of nationalisation, communism and socialism which had failed
everywhere else in the world: ‘The ANC would cast us back into the Dark Ages.
It is secretly controlled by communists, militants and extremists. They are quiet
now but they will shout loudly if the ANC wins control.’
There was also controversy about a number of unsavoury characters standing
as candidates, in particular Winnie Mandela. In December 1993, Winnie
managed to claw her way back to election as president of the ANC’s Women’s
League which entitled her to a place on the national executive committee.
Despite her criminal conviction, she was then chosen as a candidate for the party

list for parliament, in effect ensuring her a seat. The return of Winnie came as a
nasty surprise to prominent figures in the ANC hierarchy who had assumed that
her forced resignation from all ANC posts the year before had settled her fate.
When Mandela was asked how he could justify having a convicted criminal on
his list of candidates, he replied glibly that Winnie had been the choice of the
people, a matter with which the ANC could not interfere.
The National Party was quick to take advantage of the event. Full-page
newspaper advertisements appeared containing a large photograph of Winnie
Mandela, her right arm raised in a clenched-fist salute, with a three-paragraph
commentary beneath which said:
On 10 July 1993 Winnie Mandela was convicted of kidnapping a child who later
died from his wounds. On 8 December 1993 she was elected to be the most
powerful woman in the ANC, the president of the ANC Women’s League. After
27 April 1994, Mrs Mandela could be your new Minister of Law and Order, or
even the Minister of Child Welfare. . . . Only your vote can stop this.
The climax of the campaign was a televised debate between Mandela and de
Klerk before a panel of journalists. The questions they were asked and the
ground over which they skirmished, after weeks of campaigning, were largely
familiar to viewers. What counted as much as content was style. De Klerk, more
comfortable on television than Mandela, maintained a conciliatory countenance,
admitting past wrongs, promising reconciliation, focusing on policy issues.
Mandela was grim-faced, more aggressive, resorting to personal attacks on de
Klerk’s character and credibility, tending to dwell on the past evils of apartheid
and sharply critical of the National Party’s record.
But towards the end of the debate, thinking that he had been too harsh on de
Klerk, Mandela made a dramatic gesture. ‘The exchanges between Mr de Klerk
and I should not obscure one important fact,’ he said. ‘I think we are a shining
example to the entire world of people drawn from different racial groups who
have a common loyalty, a common love, to their common country. . . . In spite of
my criticism of Mr de Klerk,’ he went on, looking across to de Klerk, ‘sir, you
are one of those I rely upon. . . . We are going to face the problems of this
country together.’ Then, reaching over to de Klerk, he said, ‘I am proud to hold
your hand for us to go forward.’
De Klerk clasped his hand and smiled wanly.

Throughout the election campaign, the threat of conflict edged ever closer.
Buthelezi’s answer to the ANC’s refusal to countenance any further
constitutional concessions was to reject Inkatha’s participation in the election.
His rhetoric became increasingly belligerent. ‘It is impossible for me to lie to
you and reassure you that the IFP’s opposition to fighting the election under the
present constitution will not bring casualties and even death,’ he told a special
Inkatha congress in Ulundi in January 1994. ‘But we must resist the ANC and
their communist surrogates. We are the only thing that stands in the way of their
quest for power.’ He urged followers to ‘fight back’, telling them, ‘This is a
region where we dominate. No foreign forces shall come into it to rule over us.’
To shore up his position, Buthelezi drew the Zulu king, Goodwill Zwelethini,
into the confrontation. A weak, pusillanimous figure, Zwelethini had been
pushed around for years by Buthelezi, who once spent a whole afternoon in the
KwaZulu legislative assembly heaping abuse on the king, causing him such
distress that he jumped from his seat and ran out of the chamber. Nevertheless,
allegiance to the king was far more widespread among Zulus than any loyalty to
Inkatha. His influence was much greater than Buthelezi’s on his own.
The issue which helped galvanize Zwelethini was the ANC’s insistence on
removing the name of KwaZulu from the map of South Africa. In a
memorandum sent to de Klerk in January, Zwelethini said that this rendered the
new constitution ‘so alien’ that he felt obliged to reject it: ‘It amounts to the
expunging of the very name of my kingdom from the constitution of South
Africa. We cannot, therefore, be expected to regard it as our constitution. This
has sent shock waves throughout the psyche of everyone of our Zulu subjects.’
Goaded on by Buthelezi, by February the king had become more ambitious.
He now demanded a sovereign Zulu kingdom encompassing the whole of Natal,
restoring what he claimed were its 1830s boundaries, before the era of white
conquest. ‘I am asking for something that belongs to me and my people—no one
else,’ he said. In public speeches, he began to use the same kind of rhetoric as
Buthelezi: ‘I will die rather than insult the memory of my great ancestral kings
by handing over the land of their people to our political enemies.’ He duly
rejected the interim constitution and declared he would not abide by the election
results.
Mandela was soon forced to concede that the threat to the election was far

more serious than he had anticipated during the first flush of excitement about
the prospect of majority rule. By the time the official deadline for the registration
of parties had been reached on 12 February, the four key members of the
Freedom Alliance—Inkatha, the AVF, the Conservative Party and
Bophuthatswana—were all standing firm against participation in the election.
Only Ciskei, whose military dictator, Brigadier Gqozo, had succumbed to
pressure from his own troops worried about their career prospects, had thrown in
its hand. Security briefings given to Mandela warned that rightwing groups were
making serious preparations for resistance, stockpiling weapons, ammunition
and medical supplies and organising training. The briefings also warned of
doubts about the loyalty of security force elements that might be required to deal
with rightwing threats at the behest of an ANC-dominated government. The
assessment of the government was that everything possible had to be done to
avoid any kind of confrontation that would enable the alliance to make a
common stand, drawing large numbers of their followers into the fray.
The possibility of active resistance to the election was reinforced by reports
from the Goldstone commission investigating ‘third force’ activity. In February,
Judge Goldstone acquired what he later described as ‘convincing evidence’ of ‘a
horrible network of criminal activity’ involving high-ranking police officers in
Pretoria, Inkatha and the KwaZulu police. This activity, according to Goldstone,
included assassination, train massacres, hostel violence, gunrunning and the
subversion of justice. Factories in the Transvaal had been used by a police covert
unit to manufacture homemade guns which, along with large quantities of other
weapons, had been smuggled to Inkatha and used in attacks in Natal and on the
Reef. Goldstone emphasised that only a small group within the police force was
involved, but he added, ‘The whole illegal, criminal and oppressive system is
still in place and its architects are in control of the South African police.’ Among
the officials whom Goldstone named were the head of police counterintelligence and the police second-in-command. Goldstone recommended that
the police commissioner himself should be removed from office forthwith.
In an attempt to draw the Freedom Alliance into the constitutional process,
Mandela announced on 16 February a series of concessions he had previously
spurned. These included the use of a double ballot for provincial and national
elections; guarantees of wider powers for provincial government; and the
renaming of Natal province to KwaZulu-Natal. Mandela also approved the
inclusion in the constitution of a principle of ‘internal’ self-determination for

groups sharing a common culture and language, intended to meet the anxieties of
both Zulu and Afrikaner nationalists. He proposed that the issue of a volkstaat
should be dealt with by authorising the establishment of a twenty-member
council, to be elected by MPs who supported the establishment of a volkstaat,
enabling the idea to be pursued by constitutional means.
Mandela’s concessions went a long way towards meeting the demands the
Freedom Alliance had made in December. General Viljoen for one was ready to
accept the inclusion of a principle of self-determination and a volkstaat council
as a reasonable basis for agreeing to participate in the election.
But Buthelezi was determined to get more, believing that the election could
not take place without Inkatha. Within hours, without waiting to consult his
colleagues in the Freedom Alliance, he dismissed the concessions as nothing
more than ‘cheap politicking’, adding, ‘Mr Mandela’s supposed concessions do
not even begin to address our demands.’
To keep the electoral process on course, the Independent Electoral
Commission imposed a final deadline for political parties to register of 4 March.
A further short period was to be allowed after that date for political parties to
present their list of candidates, thereby effectively confirming their participation
in the election. The deadline set for that, eventually, was 11 March.
In a final effort to bring Inkatha into the election, Mandela arranged to meet
Buthelezi in Durban on 1 March. Addressing a political rally beforehand,
Mandela declared, ‘I will go down on my knees to beg those who want to drag
our country into bloodshed and to persuade them not to do so.’ The meeting was
only their fourth encounter in the four years since Mandela’s release from
prison. It brought no movement in the dispute over the constitution, but what it
did produce was a deal of minor significance which was to have profound
repercussions. In exchange for Mandela’s agreement to submit their differences
on the constitution to international mediation—a device which Buthelezi hoped
would postpone the election altogether—Buthelezi agreed to register Inkatha for
the election ‘provisionally’.
Buthelezi’s sudden turnabout on the election threw his allies in the Freedom
Alliance into turmoil. Rival groups within each party argued over which course
to take. General Viljoen and his fellow retired generals decided to keep open the
possibility of rightwing participation in the election by registering a new party,
the Freedom Front, arriving at the registration office with only minutes to spare

before the deadline of midnight on 4 March. But their action was immediately
denounced by other Volksfront leaders. The Conservative Party rejected
participation in the election, as did Bophuthatswana’s president, Lucas
Mangope.
Mangope’s refusal to take part in the election plunged Bophuthatswana into
crisis. Accustomed to ruling with an iron rod and relying on the police to silence
opponents, Mangope had little respect for the groundswell of public discontent
building up. Technically, under South African law, Bophuthatswana was still an
independent state. Nevertheless, the adult population of 2 million had been given
the right to vote in the April election. Bophuthatswana’s fate, once the election
had taken place, was to be reincorporated into South Africa as part of North
West Province. Civil servants and other public-sector workers, worried about
their pensions and their future after the election, launched a wave of strikes.
ANC supporters, resentful of Mangope’s curbs on political activity, joined the
fray.
Mangope’s response to the disturbances was to ignore them. ‘I love him
dearly, but he is living in a different world,’ reported South Africa’s
‘ambassador’ to Bophuthatswana, Tjaart van der Walt. ‘I failed to convey a
sense of reality to him.’ Mandela, in his conversations with Mangope, urging
him to let the people of Bophuthatswana decide their future, also admitted
failure: ‘It seems I am talking to a stone. I think we have now given him enough
time. I have tried to reason with him but it is clear he has no vision. Further
pressures will be used and I have no doubt he will not be able to withstand
them.’
Aided and abetted by ANC activists, the strikes spread through
Bophuthatswana,
crippling
civil
service
departments,
schools,
telecommunications, health services, electricity supplies, transport and industry.
Radio and television broadcasts went off the air. Running battles broke out
between police and striking workers and students. Looters began to raid
shopping centres. Policemen started to defect. The demands of the strikers no
longer centred just on pension payments but included demands for
Bophuthatswana’s immediate reincorporation into South Africa, for free and fair
elections and for Mangope’s removal.
Facing popular revolt, Mangope took action with such potential for disaster
that it suggested he had lost all touch with reason. On 9 March, he contacted

General Viljoen, his Freedom Alliance partner, pleading for help from armed
white paramilitary groups in the extremist Afrikaner Volksfront. Mangope’s
only stipulation was that Viljoen was not to include any AWB men, notorious
for their lawless conduct and racist attacks on blacks. Viljoen agreed to
cooperate. On 10 March, he mobilised 4,000 men and dispatched some 1,500 of
them to Mangope’s capital, Mmabatho, carrying only side-arms. The plan was
for the AVF force to rendezvous at the town’s airport with units from the
Bophuthatswana Defence Force, which was commanded by white officers who
would provide them with weapons. As they headed for Mmabatho, many
rightwingers believed that they might be on the verge of establishing a volkstaat.
The plan went awry from the start. The AWB leader, Terre’Blanche, learning
of the instruction to mobilise, issued a call, broadcast on a rightwing radio
station near Pretoria, for his supporters to join in. On the night of 10 March,
hundreds of AWB members, armed with an assortment of shotguns and hunting
rifles, crossed into Bophuthatswana in convoys of pick-up trucks. Their arrival
provoked immediate dissension. White officers in the BDF ordered them out, but
they refused to leave and went on what was described as ‘a kaffir-shooting’
expedition in the streets of Mmabatho, firing at random at bystanders and
terrorising local inhabitants. BDF troops mutinied, leaving Viljoen’s men
without weapons. The operation swiftly collapsed. As the AWB pulled out, one
of its vehicles, carrying three men, was caught in a gun fight with troops
manning a roadblock. One man was killed outright; his two companions
survived but were executed by a policeman as they lay on the ground, in full
view of television cameras. The scene was replayed on South African television
again and again.
As the South African army moved into Mmabatho to restore a semblance of
order, the fate of Mangope remained undecided. De Klerk was willing to allow
him to stay in office, provided he agreed to participate in the election and
allowed free political activity, but Mandela would have none of it, saying that
Mangope had obstructed the electoral process, precipitated the crisis and should
be removed from office immediately. On 12 March, the transitional executive
council duly resolved that Mangope should be deposed. A deputation was sent to
his luxurious house near Zeerust to tell him. Mangope tried to argue, but to no
avail.
These events in Bophuthatswana produced dramatic changes across the
political landscape. The threat of organised rightwing resistance to the election

effectively collapsed. The AWB had been shown up to be nothing more than a
murderous rabble. Fear of the extreme right gave way to ridicule. While
Terre’Blanche tried to claim his men had scored a ‘brilliant victory’ in
Bophuthatswana, many Afrikaners were disgusted by this farcical boasting
carried out in the name of the Afrikaner people.
The Freedom Alliance also collapsed. Appalled by the fiasco of armed
intervention in Bophuthatswana, Viljoen broke with the AVF and, with only
minutes to spare before the deadline at midnight on 11 March, lodged a list of
Freedom Front candidates ready to participate in the election, providing a vital
route for the far-right to remain in the political process. Several prominent
members of the Conservative Party announced they would join him.
Buthelezi’s position became increasingly isolated. Unlike Viljoen, he failed to
register a list of candidates, effectively eliminating himself and Inkatha from the
election. But his options were limited. The only way he could prevent the ANC
from winning control of KwaZulu-Natal at the polls was to stop the election
taking place and force a postponement in the hope that a more favourable deal
might be obtained at a later stage, possibly through international mediation. The
only way of doing this was to threaten violence or to use it. Yet the events in
Bophuthatswana had shown that Mandela and de Klerk were determined to
protect the election process from obstruction and that the South African military
were ready to support them. They were equally adamant that the election would
not be postponed.
Ten days after Mangope’s downfall, Buthelezi’s last remaining ally, Brigadier
Gqozo, capitulated. Faced with striking civil servants and rebellious police,
Gqozo asked Pretoria to take over Ciskei’s administration. Once again, South
African troops moved in to secure control. ‘Two down,’ commented Joe Slovo
gleefully, ‘one more to go.’
In the wake of Bophuthatswana and Ciskei, ANC officials, sensing that
another victory was within their reach, became increasingly arrogant. Slovo
predicted that Buthelezi would be ‘merely a smell in history’ after the election,
boasting that he himself, a non-Zulu, could get more votes in KwaZulu-Natal
than Buthelezi. Ramaphosa spoke recklessly of the need for a military solution,
having no concept of what it involved. For those in Ulundi, the message was all
too clear: the ANC wanted to smash KwaZulu by force.
Yet Buthelezi’s power base was far stronger than the glib pronouncements of

ANC politicians suggested. In the rural backwaters of KwaZulu-Natal lived
several million Zulus ready to obey the command of their traditional chiefs, the
amakhosi, who remained loyal to Buthelezi. Moreover, Buthelezi had the
support of the king. Talk of a military solution in these circumstances was
nothing more than a dangerous fantasy. The military had neither the capacity to
take control of Buthelezi’s administration in Ulundi without precipitating a
revolt nor the means to suppress the insurgency that was bound to follow.
The scale of violence was already immense. Some 10,000 people had died in
KwaZulu-Natal over the previous six years. As the election approached, the
conflict became ever more deadly. A group of fifteen ANC election workers,
after putting up election posters, were shot and hacked to death. Election activity
of any kind became a dangerous business in many areas. The level of
intimidation from both sides soared by the day. ‘Vote?’ said a retired teacher in
Port Shepstone. ‘Why vote? Inkatha is killing us, the ANC is killing us. We are
all going to die.’
After a visit to KwaZulu in March, vainly seeking local assistance for staging
the election, the head of the Independent Electoral Commission, Judge Kriegler,
warned Mandela and de Klerk that without a sufficient degree of stability and
cooperation, free and fair elections in KwaZulu-Natal would be frustrated.
Kriegler spoke of his determination to mount an election. KwaZulu alone
possessed some 2.5 million potential voters, about 60 per cent of Natal’s black
electorate and some 12 per cent of the national electorate. Without its
involvement, the overall election result would be seriously impaired. What was
required, said Kriegler, was a political initiative.
Both sides meanwhile resorted to shows of strength. On 25 March, the ANC
organised a march through the city centre of Durban. Despite fears of violence,
the event passed off relatively peacefully. Inkatha then decided to respond in
kind in Johannesburg, but with calamitous results.
On 28 March, thousands of Zulus, brandishing spears, clubs and cowhide
shields, marched through the streets of the city’s main business district to a rally
at Library Gardens. The demonstration turned into a bloodbath when snipers
opened fire from nearby buildings. For several hours, as Zulus went on the
rampage, the streets in the city were scenes of chaos. At the ANC’s headquarters
at Shell House, ANC security guards shot and killed eight protesters who they
claimed were trying to storm the building; eyewitnesses disputed their account.

By the end of the day, fifty-three people were dead, most of them demonstrators.
The spectacle of central Johannesburg being turned into a war zone set off a
wave of alarm throughout South Africa and far beyond its borders. The prospect
of a peaceful election seemed increasingly remote. Public confidence in the
transition and in the ability of South Africa’s politicians to manage it
successfully rapidly waned at home and abroad. In anticipation of further
violence, a surge of stockpiling began—canned food, candles, batteries, Primus
stoves, toilet paper, guns and ammunition. Foreign investors too lost faith,
withdrawing funds and shelving plans.
The event also tarnished Mandela’s reputation. He was not present when Zulu
demonstrators arrived outside Shell House, but the following day, when police
wanted to search the premises for weapons and for forensic evidence, he
personally refused to allow them entry. Asked later at a press conference if, in a
new government, his law and order minister would allow political opponents to
set conditions for police probes into criminal activity, he replied, ‘Let’s face that
when we are the government. I am entitled to negotiate with law and order
officials. ’ The Johannesburg Sunday Times observed caustically, ‘What a rare
achievement for the ANC. It has succeeded in putting itself above the law before
taking power. In most banana republics it happens the other way around.’ A year
later, Mandela admitted that he had instructed ANC security guards on the phone
that day to shoot to kill demonstrators if necessary to protect the building.
The carnage in Johannesburg set Buthelezi off on another round of wild
rhetoric. ‘The Shell House massacre shows that we have now entered a final
struggle to the finish between the ANC and the Zulu nation,’ he said. The only
way this could be prevented, he claimed, was to postpone the election.
With less than three weeks to go before the polls were due to open, Mandela,
de Klerk, Buthelezi and Zwelethini finally agreed to meet to see if they could
hammer out terms for Inkatha’s participation in the election and decide about the
king’s future status. Mandela believed that the key to defusing the crisis was to
prise Zwelethini away from Buthelezi. He drew up a proposal offering to
entrench the Zulu monarchy with constitutional powers in the new constitution
of KwaZulu-Natal and to provide it with a royal constabulary and a budget,
giving the king a status not even accorded him under the KwaZulu constitution.
The only condition Mandela wanted for all this was Zwelethini’s support for the
election. He hoped to be able to speak to Zwelethini in private in advance of

formal discussions.
The meeting, held on 8 April at Skukuza, a lodge in the Kruger National Park,
was ill-tempered. Mandela found no opportunity to talk to Zwelethini in private.
Surrounded by Buthelezi’s aides, the king appeared as obdurate and
uncooperative as Buthelezi himself. For his part, Buthelezi rejected the idea that
the king’s requirements could be separated from Inkatha’s demands and insisted
that the election be postponed. Mandela refused: ‘That day is sacrosanct.’ The
meeting ended in deadlock. The only matter they could agree on was to allow
international mediation to proceed.
But even this ended in farce. A mediation team, including the former US
secretary of state, Henry Kissinger, and the former British foreign secretary,
Lord Carrington, arrived in Johannesburg only to find that the ANC and Inkatha
could not agree its terms of reference. Buthelezi wanted mediation to include the
election date; the ANC did not. The mediators promptly left.
With the failure of international mediation, Buthelezi had exhausted viable
options. His strategy of obstruction had left him completely isolated. Out of
reach of Buthelezi, King Zwelethini sent an emissary to Mandela telling him that
he wanted to accept his offer on the Zulu monarchy. Inkatha was rumbling with
discontent at the prospect of being denied a legitimate place in the new
dispensation; civil servants in Ulundi were deeply worried about the risk to their
salaries and pensions. Buthelezi himself faced nothing more than a future in the
wilderness.
On 19 April, with only seven days remaining, Buthelezi capitulated, accepting
the offer of a constitutional role for the Zulu monarchy and abandoning all his
other demands.

In the early morning, as the sun rose over the green rolling hills of Natal, Nelson
Mandela stood beside a grave in the grounds of a small rural school in Inanda,
thinking of old friends like Oliver Tambo, Bram Fischer and Albert Luthuli who
would not be voting that day. Mandela had chosen to come to Inanda, near
Durban, to cast his vote, for it was there that the founding president of the ANC,
John Dube, was buried, and it was the school that he had founded which was to
serve as a polling station during the election. After laying a wreath on Dube’s
grave, he walked down the slope towards the school. ‘I did not go into that

voting station alone,’ he said. ‘I was casting my vote with all of them.’
He emerged from the polling station, his face wreathed in smiles, and spoke of
a bright future. ‘This is for all South Africans an unforgettable occasion,’ he
said. ‘We are moving from an era of resistance, division, oppression, turmoil and
conflict and starting a new era of hope, reconciliation and nation-building.’
In their millions, South Africans made their way to the polls, black and white
citizens alike sharing a common determination to make the election a success.
Many walked miles to reach a polling station. Some arrived on crutches and
some in wheelchairs; some dressed in their Sunday-best clothes and some wore
outfits they had made specially for the occasion.
Long queues formed outside polling stations, circling around city blocks and
winding back along dirt roads and across fields. Many arriving in the early
morning were still waiting to vote late in the afternoon, tired and hungry; some
in rural areas had to vote by candlelight. Yet, hour after hour, they remained
patient. And when they finally returned home, having voted, it was with a sense
of profound fulfillment, not just from participating in the election of a new
government, but from exercising a right which had been denied to most South
Africans for so long. Time and again, voters leaving polling stations spoke of
how their dignity had been restored.
On each of the four polling days, South Africa was more peaceful than it had
been for many years. The fever of violence suddenly abated. Even the killing
fields of KwaZulu-Natal fell silent. On the Witwatersrand, members of rival
factions found themselves joining the same queue in townships, swapping
complaints about the long delays.
For many whites, the experience of the election was as moving as it was for
blacks. Standing side by side with blacks, waiting to vote, they felt a sense of
their own liberation. The feelings of relief that the curse of apartheid had finally
been lifted were as strong among the white community which had imposed it as
among the blacks who suffered under it.
There were many incidents which marred the election. Afrikaner extremists
staged a series of bomb attacks, one in the centre of Johannesburg’s business
district, another at its international airport, killing twenty-one civilians and
injuring nearly 200 others. But the effect was to increase the resolve of voters
not to be deterred.

The performance of the Independent Electoral Commission was woefully
defective and at times so incompetent that it threatened the whole electoral
process. Shortages of ballot papers, ballot boxes and other equipment created
chaos at many polling stations. The counting process was equally flawed.
Opportunities for electoral fraud proliferated. Serious disputes arose over the
conduct of the election in KwaZulu-Natal.
But rising above all the muddle and confusion was the clear verdict of the
people. By voting in their millions, free from intimidation and from violence and
with great dignity, South Africans ensured that the birth of their democracy was
a triumph.
The results, moreover, were broadly acceptable to all sides. The vast bulk of
the black electorate provided the ANC with a handsome victory: the ANC
obtained 62.6 per cent of the vote, taking 12.2 million of the 19.5 million valid
votes cast, gaining 252 seats in the 400-seat National Assembly and winning
control of seven of nine provincial assemblies. But the ANC failed to gain the
two-thirds majority which would have given it the power to write the final
constitution on its own, thereby helping to still the fears of minority groups that
it would be tempted to ride roughshod over their interests. Some ANC officials
were disappointed, but Mandela was not one of them. He wanted the final
constitution to achieve a broader measure of support. A majority of the white,
Coloured and Indian communities held fast to the National Party, giving it 20.4
per cent of the vote and control of the Western Cape province. Zulu nationalists
voted for Inkatha, giving it only 10.4 per cent of the national poll but 50 per cent
of the KwaZulu-Natal provincial vote and therefore control of the provincial
assembly a key factor in defusing the potential for another round of political
warfare. Afrikaner nationalists, hoping for a volkstaat, put their trust in the
Freedom Front, but in smaller numbers than General Viljoen had hoped: the
Freedom Front obtained 425,000 votes, less than half the target Viljoen had set
and only 2.17 per cent of the national poll. A diminished band of white liberals
voted for the Democratic Party, giving it 1.7 per cent of the national poll.
Finally, an insignificant rump of black radicals voted for the Pan-Africanist
Congress, which won only 1.2 per cent of the vote.
The victory of the ANC at the polls was as much a personal tribute to
Mandela as it was to the movement he led. His ordeal of imprisonment had
never been forgotten by the people for whom he spoke and was duly
acknowledged when the time came for them to vote. Time and again, it was said,

‘He went to prison for us.’ For blacks, the election was, above all, about
liberation—a celebration of their freedom from white rule—and it was to
Mandela’s leadership that many attributed that liberation.
The transfer of power was accomplished in an atmosphere of much goodwill.
Closing the book on three centuries of white rule, de Klerk chose words of
encouragement fitting for such a historic moment: ‘Mr Mandela has walked a
long road and now stands at the top of a hill. A man of destiny knows that
beyond this hill lies another and another. The journey is never complete. As he
contemplates the next hill, I hold out my hand to Mr Mandela in friendship and
cooperation.’
In his victory speech, Mandela was equally gracious. After congratulating de
Klerk for the strong showing the National Party had made in the election, he
continued: ‘I also want to congratulate him for the . . . four years that we have
worked together, quarrelled, addressed sensitive problems and at the end of our
heated exchanges were able to shake hands and to drink coffee.’
At a victory celebration in the ballroom of the Carlton Hotel in Johannesburg,
which he attended despite a heavy dose of flu, Mandela took to the floor with a
slow, dignified solo dance before an exuberant crowd of ANC luminaries. The
dance was quickly copied in the townships and became known as ‘The
President’s Jive’, performed to much merriment in a stiff, wooden manner with a
fixed smile.
At every opportunity, Mandela sought to calm the apprehensions of whites
and other minorities about the coming of majority rule. The liberation struggle,
he said, had not been a fight against any one group but against a system of
oppression. ‘Nothing we can say can fully describe the misery of our people as a
result of the apartheid repression,’ he told a multi-denominational thanksgiving
service in Soweto. ‘But the day we have been fighting for has come. Let us
forget the past.’ He made an emotional plea for people of all races to ‘hold
hands’ and unite: ‘The time has come for men and women, Africans, Coloureds,
Indians, whites, Afrikaners and English-speaking, to say: we are one country; we
are one people.’
On the occasion of Mandela’s election as president in parliament in Cape
Town on 9 May, the same spirit of reconciliation prevailed. To thunderous
applause, Mandela and de Klerk entered the chamber together. They walked
down the central aisle, shook hands, then went their separate ways, Mandela to

the government side, de Klerk to the opposition benches. Before the swearing-in
ceremony, Mandela left his seat and crossed the floor several times to greet other
opposition leaders, first embracing and shaking hands with Buthelezi, then
General Viljoen and finally Clarence Makwetu of the Pan-Africanist Congress.
Mandela’s nomination as president was proposed by Albertina Sisulu and went
unopposed. The chief justice, Michael Corbett, announced, ‘I accordingly
declare Mr Nelson Rolihlahla Mandela duly elected as the President of the
Republic of South Africa.’ The house erupted in cheering.
Only one note of discord was apparent. After Winnie Mandela had been
sworn in as a member of parliament alongside her husband, she sat next to him
briefly. But Mandela stared straight ahead, ignoring her, according her not the
slightest sign of recognition, his face grim and cold. There was to be no
reconciliation with Winnie.
The day of Mandela’s inauguration, 10 May 1994, was marked by the greatest
celebrations ever seen in South Africa. From all over the world, visiting
dignitaries—heads of state, royalty and government leaders representing some
170 countries—gathered in Pretoria, as much in tribute to Mandela as to mark
South Africa’s rite of passage. The acclaim he received that day from around the
world was unique: no other world leader could match the stature he had achieved
in fighting for the cause of democracy. But even more important was the acclaim
he was accorded by South Africans, both black and white. That too was unique.
For in fighting for so long for national reconciliation in such a divided country,
Mandela had earned measures of trust and admiration that were his alone.
In a glittering array, the guests assembled in the amphitheatre in front of
Union Buildings, the monumental sandstone edifice designed by Herbert Baker,
built during the years of British rule after the Anglo-Boer War and regarded ever
since as the bastion of white power. Among the guests whom Mandela
personally invited were three of his former prison warders.
Inevitably, there were family dramas beneath the surface. Winnie was among
the first of the luminaries to arrive, resplendent in a long green silk dress.
Initially she was shown to a seat among lesser dignitaries, sitting there in fury
until she was allowed on to the main podium with a seat next to Zindzi.
Mandela’s son, Makgatho, remained in Durban, where he was busy with law
exams. His daughter Maka - ziwe, an academic at the University of the
Witwatersrand, attended, but she had previously made it known that she voted

for the Democratic Party. Mandela’s first wife, Evelyn, stayed at home in
Cofimvaba. For his escort, Mandela chose Zenani, who sat alongside him on the
podium, wearing an outsize top hat.
With all duly assembled, the new national flag was slowly raised to the
accompaniment of two national anthems. One was ‘Nkosi Sikelel’ iAfrika’, ‘God
Bless Africa’, the song composed by the Xhosa teacher Enoch Sontonga at
Johannesburg’s Nancefield location in 1897 and first performed in 1899. It had
made a strong impression at the inaugural meeting of the ANC in 1912 and was
officially adopted as its anthem in 1925. The other was ‘Die Stem van Suid
Afrika’, ‘The Voice of South Africa’, a poem written in 1918 by the Afrikaner
nationalist writer C. J. Langenhoven and set to music in 1921. It had become
South Africa’s national anthem after the National Party victory in 1948. Neither
group was familiar with the other’s anthem, but for Mandela, standing to
attention with his hand across his heart in a mark of respect, the playing of the
two national anthems symbolised the true importance of the day’s events.
In his inaugural address as president, Mandela emphasised the need for South
Africans to build a new society from the legacy of apartheid: ‘Out of the
experience of an extraordinary human disaster that lasted too long must be born
a society of which all humanity will be proud.’
He went on:
The time for the healing of the wounds has come. The moment to bridge the
chasms that divide us has come. The time to build is upon us.
We have, at last, achieved our political emancipation. We pledge ourselves to
liberate all our people from the continuing bondage of poverty, deprivation,
suffering, gender and other discriminations. . . .
We enter into a covenant that we shall build the society in which all South
Africans, both black and white, will be able to walk tall, without any fear in their
hearts, assured of their inalienable right to human dignity—a rainbow nation at
peace with itself and the world.
Towards the end of his speech, the 4,000 guests rose spontane - ously to their
feet for an ovation, in a moment of genuine emotion, as he declared, ‘Never,
never and never again shall it be that this beautiful land will again experience the
oppression of one by another and suffer the indignity of being the skunk of the
world.’

As the cheering died down, from a distance, across the hills of the
Muckleneuk Ridge, came the roar of formations of jet fighters and helicopters
trailing the national flag. And as the squadrons passed overhead in a final
affirmation of white loyalty to black rule, saluting their new commander-inchief, the crowds below erupted with an outpouring of enthusiasm. Many who
witnessed that moment of national catharsis were moved to tears.