THE SUNSET CLAUSE
SOON AFTER THE CODESA NEGOTIATIONS REACHED DEADLOCK,
THE ANC announced a campaign of mass action: a series of rolling strikes,
demonstrations and boycotts across the country, intended to force the
government to back down at the negotiating table. The campaign was to be
organised with the help of the ANC’s allies, the trade union federation, Cosatu,
and the South African Communist Party. Its climax would be a general strike.
Most groups within the ‘tripartite alliance’ regarded mass action as a
necessary component of the negotiating process. A show of strength on the
streets, bringing industry to a halt, would make the government more amenable,
they believed. A radical faction within the Communist Party, however, saw mass
action not as a means of gaining compromises but as a way of bringing the
government down. These ‘insurrectionists’, as they were known, pointed to
events in Eastern Europe, especially to Leipzig, where street demonstrations had
helped topple the East German regime three years before, and believed that the
same result could be engineered in South Africa.
Among those favouring the ‘Leipzig option’ was Ronnie Kasrils, a member of
the Communist Party’s central committee, a former Umkhonto intelligence chief
and a member of the ANC’s national executive committee. A middle-aged man
driven by boyish enthusiasm for revolutionary exploits and clearly bored by the
proceedings at Codesa, which he rarely attended, Kasrils had been agitating for
months for mass action. With the failure of Codesa, he was given his chance and
put in charge of organising the ANC’s campaign. He dubbed it Operation Exit.
The ANC’s strategy carried high risks. Mass action was to be launched at a
time when many townships were in turmoil. The Reef war continued unabated.
All previous experience of strikes, boycotts and demonstrations showed that they
led to an upsurge in violence as supporters resorted to coercion to get their way.
The risk now was that the turmoil and the violence might become
uncontrollable.

The date chosen for the start of the mass action campaign was 16 June, the
anniversary of the beginning of the Soweto revolt in 1976. Dressed in a track
suit and wearing a baseball cap, Mandela marched at the head of a column of
ANC supporters through the streets of Soweto to the Orlando football stadium to
launch the campaign. Addressing the huge crowd packing the stands, he
explained the need for mass action: ‘The National Party wants a system where
people can vote but the result is fixed beforehand. All parties, they say, would
have veto powers.’ So if an ANC majority in government wanted to change
apartheid policies on education or housing, they would be able to do so only
with the consent of the white minority. Negotiations had not budged de Klerk, he
said, so the time had come for a change of strategy. In the face of violence
deliberately planned by the security forces and their ‘vigilantes’, the ANC’s
codeword for Inkatha, it was imperative, he said, that ANC supporters set about
the protests peacefully. It was even more imperative to resist suggestions from
within the ANC’s ranks to take the violence to white areas. ‘This would be a
disaster of the first magnitude. We don’t want innocent people killed, black or
white.’
A mass stayaway the ANC organised for 16 June was judged to be a success.
The following night, however, there occurred an incident of such brutality that,
just like Sharpeville and Soweto, its name came to be remembered around the
world and to represent another grim landmark in the passage of South Africa’s
violent history. It plunged South Africa into a crisis far worse than anyone had
expected.
On 17 June, a group of Inkatha hostel dwellers in Boipatong, a small township
in the Vaal Triangle, forty miles south of Johannesburg, attacked a nearby shack
settlement, kicking in doors, smashing windows and then hacking, stabbing and
shooting residents at random in a killing spree that lasted more than four hours,
leaving forty-five residents, mostly woman and children, dead. It was the fourth
mass killing that week in a black area near Johannesburg. The police were once
again accused of collusion. Two days later, three people died when police
opened fire on a crowd which had gathered to protest at the massacre.
The event propelled Mandela into the radical camp. He suspended all talks
with the government, saying, ‘I can no longer explain to our people why we
continue to talk to a regime that is murdering our people and conducting war
against us.’ His language became increasingly intemperate. He described the
activities of the National Party and its Inkatha allies as similar to Nazi attacks on

Jews. ‘They are killing our people in an effort to stop the ANC getting into
power,’ he said. The negotiations process was ‘completely in tatters’. When
hardline members on the ANC national executive committee argued that
negotiations had proved useless and should be abandoned altogether, Mandela
was inclined to agree. Among rank and file supporters, there was a huge
groundswell in favour of reverting to armed struggle. Placards waved at Mandela
during a rally to mark the Boipatong massacre read, ‘Mandela, we want arms
now’ and ‘Victory through battle not talk’.
Mandela refused to believe that de Klerk did not have the power to curb the
violence. In his mind, there were only two possible explanations for why it
continued: either the security forces were out of control or de Klerk was
conniving with them. ‘In my view, he might not be aware of every attack. But
generally speaking, the fact that the police and security services are involved, he
would know very well,’ Mandela said in July. ‘A head of state who does not
know the things that are happening is not fit to be a head of state.’

Much to de Klerk’s embarrassment, there was a continuing trickle of evidence
implicating security forces in violent activity. In April 1992, a white police
captain and four black ‘special constables’ were convicted of the killing of
eleven people—six women, three men and two children—in a small rural
settlement in Natal whom they believed were supporters of the ANC. The
‘special constables’ were Inkatha men who had been selected and trained by the
police. The judge’s verdict was that the massacre was part of a security force
operation to disrupt the community, oust an established ANC-aligned residents’
association and give Inkatha control of the area. The judge said he was
convinced that there had been a conspiracy among senior officers reaching up to
police headquarters to cover up the crime. In his evidence, the police captain,
Brian Mitchell, said he saw himself as a soldier in a civil war in which the
enemy were pro-ANC groups. The murders had been carried out in 1988, but
Mitchell’s views were still common among white police officers.
The military were also implicated. In May 1992, the press published the
contents of a military intelligence signal proposing the ‘permanent removal’ of
three prominent black activists in the Eastern Cape. Two weeks after the signal
was sent, the killing of two of them took place, along with two other activists.
The incident occurred in 1985, but the disclosure seven years later of military

involvement not only stirred black anger against the army but reinforced all the
fears and suspicions already harboured about the activities of a ‘third force’. The
man who authorised the signal was Brigadier Christoffel van der Westhuizen,
then head of joint operations at the Eastern Cape Prov - ince command. In 1992,
van der Westhuizen, promoted to the rank of general, was chief of military
intelligence.
It was the Department of Military Intelligence that was the main focus of
suspicions. For years, the DMI had been in control of special force operations
supporting Renamo rebels in Mozambique and Unita rebels in Angola fighting
to overthrow Marxist governments. It had also been involved in training Inkatha
members. The units which the DMI had run across South Africa’s borders—like
32 Battalion, composed mainly of Portuguese-speaking mercenaries—had
returned to South Africa once the DMI’s campaign of destabilisation in
neighbouring countries had come to an end and once the war with Swapo
guerrillas in Namibia was over. Many senior officers were bitterly resentful of
the outcome. In a 1992 message to soldiers who had fought in Angola and
Namibia, Colonel Jan Breytenbach, a former commander of the much-feared 32
Battalion, reflected their discontent. ‘You did not lose in Angola,’ he told them.
‘You did not lose in Namibia. You were betrayed by politicians under foreign
pressure.’ From their bases in South Africa, these special force units provided a
ready source of recruits for disgruntled officers intent on organising covert
operations. Other irregular units included Koevoet, a police counter-insurgency
force once used in Namibia, many of whose members were now active in the
South African police force. All had been trained to hunt down ANC or Swapo
cadres in the streets and shebeens of southern Africa and were prone to violent
and lawless conduct.
But as well as anti-ANC groups at work in the townships, the ANC’s own
self-defence units were running amok. SDUs had been set up with the help of
Umkhonto with the aim of protecting ANC communities from Inkatha attacks.
By mid-1992, about eighty-five SDUs were in operation. But many of them had
spun completely out of ANC control and had been taken over by gangsters,
warlords and renegade Umkhonto guerrillas. In July 1992, the Communist Party
leader, Chris Hani, writing in the party’s publication Umsebenzi, admitted that
they often served as fronts and shelters for criminals. They had brought about, he
said, ‘an alarming revival of kangaroo courts and kangaroo politics’. Some had
been infiltrated by police and army agents intent on subverting them.

The task of sorting out the evidence was given to a judicial commission into
public violence and intimidation, headed by Judge Richard Goldstone, which
had been set up as a result of the 1991 national peace accord. In May 1992,
Goldstone published an interim report which concluded that the primary cause of
the violence was not security force activity, as Mandela maintained, but the
political battle between supporters of the ANC and Inkatha: ‘Both sides resort to
violence and intimidation in their attempts to gain control over geographic
areas.’ There would be no lessening of violence ‘unless and until the leaders and
supporters’ of the two factions agreed to disarm and ‘abandon violence and
intimidation as political weapons’.
The commission exonerated de Klerk himself and his government from any
direct involvement in political violence. It had received no evidence justifying
allegations of ‘any direct complicity in or planning of current violence’, no
credible evidence of a ‘third force’ at work. But it sharply rebuked the
government for failing to implement earlier recommendations it had made,
including the need to impose security measures at hostels and to ban the carrying
of all dangerous weapons. The commission also noted that its previous
recommendation regarding the withdrawal from townships of 32 Battalion,
whose members had been found responsible for rape and other assaults during
‘peacekeeping’ operations, had been blocked by the army commander, General
George Meiring. The government, said the commission, ‘must be able to
demonstrate that it has control over its security forces’.
Police actions were also severely criticised. An independent inquiry into the
Boipatong massacre, carried out with the help of British experts, concluded in
July 1992 that while there was no evidence of police or government complicity,
the police were to blame for ‘a failure of leadership at all levels’. The inquiry
castigated the police for ‘serious incompetence’ throughout its organisation.

For month after month, as the mass action campaign continued, South Africa
was convulsed by strikes, protests and boycotts. All that was left publicly of the
negotiations process was an angry exchange of memoranda between Mandela
and de Klerk. In July, Mandela issued a list of fourteen demands the government
would have to meet before talks could be resumed. De Klerk responded with a
thirty-one-page memorandum, deriding Mandela as a ‘captive’ of
‘insurrectionists’ in the Communist Party and warning of harsh measures to

prevent chaos in the country. Mandela answered with a twenty-four-page
rebuttal, labelling de Klerk a liar and blatant propagandist suffering from selfdelusion. Negotiations to bring about democracy had failed, he said, because ‘the
ruling National Party keeps looking for ways to exercise power even if it loses a
democratic election’. His letter contained lengthy appendices charging the
government with responsibility for political violence: ‘The acts of omission and
commission by government in numerous cases can only be explained in terms of
direct complicity in the violence in order to make party political gains at great
cost in black lives and economic damage to our country.’ Mandela ended with a
stern admonition to de Klerk:
Find a way within yourself to recognize the gravity of the crisis. . . . Find a way
to address the demands we have placed before you . . . so that negotiations can
become meaningful and be vested with the urgency that the situation requires.
Failure to respond in this way can only exacerbate the crisis. You may succeed
in delaying, but never in preventing, the transition of South Africa to democracy.
In August, the ANC alliance brought the campaign to a climax with a general
strike by several million workers. Much of the country’s business and industry
came to a halt or was forced to reduce output. The strike was followed by mass
marches. In Pretoria, Mandela led more than 50,000 supporters through the heart
of the city to the seat of white government, Union Buildings. ‘Today we are at
the door of Union Buildings,’ declared Ramaphosa. ‘Next time, F. W. de Klerk,
we are going to be inside your office.’ Mandela hailed the strike as
‘unquestionably one of the great events in our history’.
Yet for all the fervour that mass action achieved, it produced nothing in terms
of forcing any movement in the government’s position. Nor was it a strategy that
ANC supporters could afford to continue indefinitely. The ANC was divided
over what to do next. Some wanted to seek a way back into negotiation. The
initiative, however, lay with Kasrils and his group of insurrectionists. They
argued that though mass action might not bring Pretoria to its knees, it would
work against weaker governments in the homelands, in KwaZulu,
Bophuthatswana and Ciskei, the allies of Pretoria which had so far kept a tight
clamp on all ANC activity.
Ciskei was a particularly tempting target. It was ruled by a military dictator,
Brigadier Oupa Gqozo, who had only recently seized power and had
increasingly resorted to repressive measures to stay there. All the ANC’s efforts

to engage in political activity in Ciskei had been blocked. Mandela had spoken
several times on the phone to Gqozo about the clampdown, and had met him
twice in Bisho, the Ciskei capital. ‘In one of our meetings, we agreed that we
should each lead delegations of ten,’ said Mandela. ‘His delegation was
composed of seven whites and three Africans. All these whites were seconded
from South Africa. We got nowhere.’
The insurrectionists believed that a mass march on Bisho from neighbouring
King William’s Town, a few miles away across the ‘border’ in white South
Africa, would trigger a switch of allegiance by the Ciskei army and public
servants, causing the homeland administration to collapse. Kasrils travelled to
Ciskei on a reconnaissance mission and pronounced it ripe for popular
insurrection. ‘I have just spent a week in Ciskei and I have never encountered
such hatred for a despot,’ Kasrils told a reporter. Once Gqozo was overthrown,
the next targets would be Lucas Mangope in Bophuthatswana and Buthelezi in
KwaZulu.
On 3 September, the ANC sent a memorandum to de Klerk demanding that
Gqozo be removed as ruler of Ciskei and replaced by an interim administration
that would permit free political activity. De Klerk refused, pointing out Ciskei’s
‘independence’. He sent Mandela three letters warning of the dangers of a
bloody confrontation and pleading with him to call off the march. Gqozo himself
issued a warning that he would meet with force any attempt to march on his
capital.
The march was set for 7 September. The night before, Gqozo sought an urgent
court order prohibiting the march. A local magistrate granted permission for the
march to take place but ordered that it should not proceed beyond Bisho’s
independence stadium, just over the border from white South Africa but more
than a mile from the town. The Ciskei police and military, commanded by white
officers seconded from Pretoria, were ordered to stop the marchers there.
In the morning, a column of 70,000 marchers set out from King William’s
Town along the road to Bisho. Their aim, according to one leading activist, was
‘to drive the pig from the barn’. The border was closed by a line of razor wire,
with Ciskei troops deployed behind it. But scouting ahead of the column, Kasrils
noticed a gap in the outer fence of the independence stadium alongside the road,
which seemed to offer a route into the centre of Bisho. Returning back down the
hill to colleagues, Kasrils urged that he should lead a breakaway group from the

main column, storm through the gap and head on to Bisho. ‘It’s going to be a
cinch,’ he was overheard to say.
But Kasrils had failed to spot a detachment of Ciskei troops covering the gap
from trench positions. As his breakaway group raced through the gap, the troops
opened fire. Kasrils and other ANC leaders survived. But twenty-eight marchers
were killed.
The day of the insurrectionists was over.

A mood of deep despondency hung over South Africa during those months in
1992. The cycle of violence seemed endless, destroying all prospect of a political
settlement. The economy was sunk in the third year of recession, with no end in
sight. A catastrophic drought had laid waste to farming areas. The very
institutions of government, it seemed, were rotten: the police proven
incompetent and the military contaminated by dirty tricks. A wave of corruption
scandals beset the administration. In the case of one government department
dealing with the homelands, a judge concluded that ‘millions, if not billions’ of
rands had been pilfered and misspent. Corruption was everywhere in the air.
White civil servants and politicians scrambled to top up their pension schemes
and fix long-term contracts before the day of reckoning. Security officials
insisted on indemnities. The columnist Shaun Johnson wrote in The Star, ‘If you
stand on a street corner in Pretoria late at night, I am sure you can hear the sound
of shredders shredding. Of assets being stripped. Of pockets being stuffed.’
The ANC added to the growing list of scandals. An internal inquiry confirmed
allegations made by former ANC members that torture and executions had taken
place in its camps in Angola during the 1980s. The ANC refused to disclose the
names of its torturers, but the press published them, revealing that several were
serving in high places in the ANC. One of them was a member of Mandela’s
own bodyguard. What was worse, ANC leaders like Oliver Tambo and Chris
Hani were accused of failing to stop the ill-treatment of its prisoners. Mandela
accepted ‘collective responsibility’ for the incidents, but the overall result was to
leave the ANC’s leadership discredited.
On top of all this was the crippling stalemate within the political arena. After
nearly three years of effort, the politicians had little to show and nothing to offer.
Each side denied its own responsibility. While they squabbled in public, the field

was left open to insurrectionists like Kasrils to pursue their revolutionary
fantasies. Whatever confidence there was about the country’s future was rapidly
ebbing away, both at home and abroad.
So deep was the crisis that it induced a willingness to compromise that had not
existed before. In the wake of Bisho, Mandela reasserted his leadership, called a
halt to mass action and severely reprimanded Kasrils. The priority, he said, was
to haul South Africa ‘out of the quagmire’. Both he and de Klerk bore
responsibility to see that it happened. In a gesture of conciliation to de Klerk,
only one week after the Bisho shooting, he compressed the ANC’s fourteen
preconditions for resuming talks to three. ‘If Mr de Klerk can just say to me,
“You have expressed your three concerns, I give you my undertaking that I will
address them,”’ Mandela said in a press interview, ‘then I will be able to go back
to my people and say, “Look, he has met us. Let us meet him.”’
Behind the scenes, ever since talks had been broken off two key negotiators,
Cyril Ramaphosa from the ANC and Roelf Meyer from the government side,
had kept in touch in private, trying to pick up the pieces. Meyer had been
appointed the government’s chief negotiator in June 1992, a few weeks before
the Boipatong massacre. He represented a new generation of Afrikaner leader,
anxious to move ahead with the reforms that de Klerk had initiated in 1990. He
was less concerned to protect white privileges from the past than to secure an
accommodation for whites in the future that would last. With Ramaphosa, he
struck up an effective working relationship. Meyer was forty-five; Ramaphosa
was forty. Meeting in private in hotel rooms, they managed to establish a
measure of trust which survived amid the turmoil and provided the basis for the
negotiation process to resume.
Meyer and Ramaphosa became convinced that the way out of the impasse was
for the government and the ANC to reach a bilateral understanding before
multiparty talks continued. For de Klerk, however, the drawback of this
approach was that bilateral talks between the government and the ANC were
likely to jeopardise his hopes of forging an electoral alliance with regional black
leaders like Buthelezi. Buthelezi’s national support was considered to be of
minor importance, but his following in KwaZulu-Natal, according to opinion
polls, was still substantial. His pro-capitalist policies were far more compatible
with National Party ideology than the ANC’s plans for ‘redistribution’.
Moreover, a significant section of the cabinet, the National Party, the military
and the police, as well as a coterie of white businessmen in Natal, much

preferred Buthelezi as an ally to the prospect of having to do business with the
likes of Mandela.
But de Klerk’s overriding concern was to get the negotiations under way
again. Reciprocating Mandela’s gesture of conciliation, he issued a public
invitation to him to join him in a summit meeting to find a way of ending the
spiral of violence. Mandela responded positively. The harsh rhetoric he had
employed against de Klerk for months on end was dropped. In his garden in
Houghton late one Sunday afternoon, he mused quietly about de Klerk’s
difficulties. ‘I phoned him two days ago,’ he said, ‘and I must say he sounded a
bit down. He is a very brave chap, you know, very bright and confident, and it
was worrying to hear him sounding so down.’ In the hurly-burly of South
African politics, such moments were rare, however, and soon forgotten.
The date for the summit was set for 26 September, less than three weeks after
the Bisho shooting. For ten days beforehand, the two sides, led by Meyer and
Ramaphosa, negotiated night and day over the three conditions set by the ANC
for resuming talks. All were highly contentious. Two of them required action
against Inkatha: the ANC demanded that Inkatha hostels should be fenced and
that Inkatha members should be prohibited from carrying traditional weapons in
public. These were demands opposed outright by the pro-Buthelezi faction
within de Klerk’s cabinet. The third demand de Klerk himself opposed. It
involved the release of a number of ANC prisoners, three of whom had been
sentenced to death for murder, including an Umkhonto member, Robert
McBride, who had killed three young white women in a bomb attack outside a
bar on Durban’s beach-front. In the white community, the idea of releasing such
convicted murderers was anathema.
Two days before the summit, the ANC’s negotiators reported to Mandela that
only one obstacle lay in the way: de Klerk had balked at the release of the three
murderers; he had said he would ‘never’ release them. They proposed a backdown to ensure that the summit went ahead. But Mandela would have none of it.
‘De Klerk needed us more than we needed him,’ Mandela recalled. ‘He
desperately needed that summit.’ Ramaphosa described Mandela’s stubbornness
over the issue: ‘He has nerves of steel. Once he has decided that a particular
issue has to be pursued, everything else matters very little. And he can be very
harsh when dealing with an opponent who is unreasonable, very brutal in a calm
and collected sort of way.’

Mandela spoke to de Klerk on the phone. Either de Klerk agreed to release the
prisoners, he said, or there would be no summit. Mandela advised de Klerk
against adopting intransigent positions, against saying he would ‘never’ release
the prisoners: ‘Because you know in the end you are going to give in. Because if
you don’t, we are going to humiliate you. And I will see to it that that happens.’
Ramaphosa feared that Mandela had gone too far and told him so, but
Mandela remained relaxed. He laughed and said, ‘This chap, I have had enough
of him. We hold the line here today.’ After several more phone calls, de Klerk
agreed to release the three men.
At the summit meeting, Mandela applied the same techniques. Facing strong
opposition from members of his cabinet over the Inkatha issues, de Klerk
attempted to prevaricate and asked for more time to study the matter. ‘Very well,
Mr de Klerk, you can have the time,’ Mandela replied, ‘provided you understand
that when we leave here to have a press conference, I shall say that this meeting
has been a total failure.’ De Klerk hastily convened a ‘working committee’ led
by Meyer to study the issue; it met over the lunch break and duly approved the
concession.
The summit ended with Mandela and de Klerk signing what was termed a
Record of Understanding, thus breaking the deadlock on constitutional
negotiations. But its real significance went even further, for it marked the point
at which the government was no longer able on its own to control the transition
process, as de Klerk had assumed it always would. Henceforth, government
action had to take into account the requirements of the ANC. No deal could be
done without it. The summit also marked the point at which Mandela gained a
psychological ascendancy over de Klerk which he was never to lose. Another
shift in the balance of power had occurred.
Buthelezi reacted to the accord between the government and the ANC with a
fit of rage, seeing it as a move to leave him on the sidelines while they
constructed their own deal. He denounced de Klerk’s ‘appeasement’ of the ANC
and warned that his followers would never give up carrying traditional weapons
and would tear down any fences erected around Inkatha hostels ‘with their bare
hands’. He poured scorn on the ANC’s threat to march on his capital, Ulundi,
reminding it of the grim fate of a British army column which had invaded
Zululand in 1879. Zulus, he said, were ready for ‘another washing of the spears’.
Buthelezi now played the tribal card for all it was worth, presenting himself as

the defender of all Zulus against external enemies like the ANC and its
communist allies bent on their destruction. At mass rallies, he warned Zulus that
their very existence was at stake, that their foes planned to wipe KwaZulu ‘off
the face of the earth’. Claiming that secret deals were being made, he broke off
negotiations with the government, determined to wreck the process.
Meanwhile, the search for a settlement between the government and the ANC
began in earnest. It received a dramatic boost in October from an unexpected
quarter: Joe Slovo. Slovo believed that what the ANC needed at this juncture
was some ‘shock therapy’ about its own negotiating position. Just as he had
taken the initiative in arguing for the suspension of the armed struggle in 1990,
so now he took the lead in proposing a highly controversial compromise in
negotiations. Writing in the Communist Party journal African Communist, Slovo
suggested that as an alternative to making a bid for total power, it might be
necessary for the ANC to offer the government ‘a sunset clause’ in a new
constitution which would entrench power-sharing in a government of national
unity for a fixed period. The ANC might also have to give ground by offering
guarantees on regional government, by accepting an amnesty for security
officials and by honouring the contracts of civil servants, either by retaining
them or by compensating them. ‘The ANC is not dealing with a defeated enemy;
an early seizure of power is not realistic; the capacity of the white civil service,
army and police to destabilize a newly born democracy is enormous; and a
sunset clause should be inserted in the new constitution to provide for
compulsory power-sharing for a fixed number of years.’ To emphasise the point,
Slovo warned, ‘All we will achieve when we have won the election is to gain
political office. We would not gain state power in the sense of having a complete
transformation on day one of the police, the armed forces, the judiciary and the
civil services.’ Coming from a figure with such impeccable revolutionary
credentials, these ideas carried all the more weight.
Slovo’s suggestions created a furore within the ANC and the Communist
Party. Hardline communists like Harry Gwala contemptuously dismissed them
as ‘bourgeois reformism’. Pallo Jordan, an independent Marxist, claimed Slovo
was advocating total ‘capitulation’. The Slovo scenario, he said, aimed at
nothing less than enabling ‘the liberation movement and the regime to ride
blissfully into the sunset together’. Members of the ANC national executive
committee sceptical of the outcome of the negotiations argued that the National
Party would never abandon power, no matter what was offered.

But in other quarters in the ANC, the idea of ‘sunset’ clauses for the white
community had gained a certain currency. Mandela himself had long believed
that a multiparty coalition might be needed in the early years of democratic rule
to help assuage the fears of minorities. ‘It may not be enough to work purely on
one-person one-vote,’ he said in 1991, ‘because every national group would like
to see that the people of their flesh and blood are in government.’
The ANC’s negotiating commission developed Slovo’s ideas into a document
of its own, entitled ‘Negotiations: A Strategic Perspective’, which was formally
adopted in November. Because of the pressure on the ANC to achieve results
and the government’s ability to ‘endlessly delay’, it said, there was a need to
make compromises and to pursue a swift negotiation process. This process
would have to address questions of job security, retrenchment packages and a
general amnesty for ‘all armed formations and sections of the civil service’. Of
crucial importance, the ANC argued in favour of a government of national unity.
The way forward, it suggested, was for the government and the ANC to reach a
bilateral agreement on those issues before including other parties in a multiparty
forum. Government negotiators were quick to discern the makings of a deal on
this basis.
De Klerk was still a long way from accepting the idea of majority rule, even
under a government of national unity. His goal remained a constitution which
would ensure that blacks could not govern without the agreement of whites. But
his authority was steadily being eroded. In November 1992, the Goldstone
Commission uncovered a secret operation set up in 1991 by the Department of
Military Intelligence to run a dirty-tricks campaign against the ANC, using a
covert unit based in Pretoria which employed a network of ‘prostitutes,
homosexuals, shebeen owners and drug dealers’ to compromise ANC and
Umkhonto leaders by involving them in criminal activity. The existence of the
unit, run by the army’s senior intelligence officer, provided the most damning
evidence so far of a deliberate strategy at high government level to discredit the
ANC.
A subsequent investigation carried out by the chief of defence force staff,
General Pierre Steyn, uncovered evidence of military intelligence involvement in
train massacres, assassination, gun-running, smuggling and other criminal
activity. Unable to dismiss the problem any more as a ‘few rogue individuals’,
de Klerk was forced to start cleaning up the military. He sacked or suspended
twenty-three officers, including two generals, and ordered a purge of military

intelligence staff. Special force units like 32 Battalion and the police counterinsurgency unit, Koevoet, were disbanded. Military personnel and their
associates, de Klerk admitted, ‘have been involved, and in some cases are still
involved, in illegal and unauthorized activities and malpractices. There are
indications that some of the activities and some of the individuals might have
been motivated by a wish to prevent us from succeeding in our goals’. The
overall result was to tarnish de Klerk’s reputation and to vindicate Mandela’s
claims about the existence of a third force.
Bilateral meetings between the government and the ANC, starting in
December 1992 with a four-day bush summit or bosberaad held in a wildlife
resort, now began to make steady progress. By February 1993, the two sides
were agreed upon the outline for a new order, which meant de Klerk giving up
many of his original negotiating aims. The new order involved an interim fiveyear government of national unity in which all parties polling over 5 per cent
would be represented proportionately in the cabinet. After five years, the
government of national unity would become a simple majority-rule government.
A transitional executive council, representing all parties accepting the process,
would oversee preparations for elections and would assure a ‘level playing field’
for all the contestants. During the five-year interim, an elected constituent
assembly would draw up the final constitution but it would be based on a set of
principles agreed to previously at multiparty negotiations which would launch
the whole process.
There were critics of this compromise arrangement on both sides, but the most
extraordinary attack of all came from Winnie Mandela. Still awaiting the
outcome of her appeal against convictions for kidnapping and assault, she was
endeavouring to resurrect her political career by adopting hardline positions
popular with militants. Her attack was launched not just against the negotiations
process but against the role of the ANC’s leaders and, by implication, Mandela
himself. The negotiations process, she said, was being conducted between ‘the
elite of the oppressed and the oppressors’, ignoring the interests of the masses:
The NP elite is getting into bed with the ANC in order to preserve its silken
sheets. And the leadership of the ANC is getting into bed with the NP to enjoy
this new-found luxury. The concern is that this new amalgam of power is
promoting its own self-interest and overlooking the plight and needs of the
underprivileged masses. . . . The quick-fix solution sought by our leaders can
only benefit a few and will backfire massively on the country as a whole. The

disillusion that will follow when the masses awaken to the fact that they have not
been included in the new freedom and in the new wealth enjoyed by their leaders
will have worse implications than what we experienced in the 1970s and 1980s,
and will plunge the country irrevocably into yet another vortex of mass violence
and protest.
A new breed of leadership was needed, she said, truly representative of the
aspirations of the ‘oppressed’.
Winnie’s own lifestyle—a grandiose mansion, an expensive wardrobe, a
Mercedes-Benz, a retinue of bodyguards and retainers—was well known for its
luxury and extravagance. Senior ANC officials dismissed her as no more than an
opportunist. ‘Who on earth is she to be speaking of silken sheets?’ demanded
one official. Yet Winnie’s remarks found a ready audience in the shack and
squatter settlements she patronised. And it was this mass of impoverished
people, she believed, who would carry her back to power within the ANC.
In April 1993, multiparty negotiations resumed. No agreement on what the
new negotiating forum should be called had been reached, so it was given no
formal name. The number of groups now represented had expanded from
nineteen to twenty-six. This time, the Conservative Party was present, forsaking
its vow never to sit down with ‘terrorists’. So was its offshoot, the Afrikaner
Volksunie. The Pan-Africanist Congress also attended, even though it still
professed to be committed to the armed struggle and had been involved in recent
murders of white farmers to prove it. Places had also been found for traditional
leaders like the Zulu king, Goodwill Zwelethini, whose presence had been
repeatedly demanded previously by Buthelezi. The participation of so many
parties seemed to augur well.
Then, within a matter of days, South Africa was struck by a cataclysmic event.
On the morning of Easter Saturday in April 1993, as Chris Hani stepped out of
his car in the driveway of his home in Dawn Park, a predominantly white suburb
of the gold-mining town of Boksburg on the East Rand, he was assassinated by a
lone white gunman who had been waiting for him in a red Ford car parked
across the road. As the gunman drove off, an Afrikaner neighbour, who had
heard the shots, memorised the registration number and phoned the police.
Fifteen minutes later, the gunman was arrested on a highway outside Boksburg.
Hani was a hero to millions of black youths, a legendary guerrilla commander
who had risen to become Umkhonto’s chief of staff. A lifelong communist, he

championed the cause of the poor and dispossessed. He was tough, ruthless and
hugely popular, second only to Mandela, according to an independent poll in
November 1992. He was also famous for fiery speech-making. Yet, even though
he had misgivings, Hani had been converted to the cause of negotiation. When
radical activists advocated a break with negotiations, Hani had argued
determinedly in favour of pursuing them. He was pragmatic about the need to
offer security forces an amnesty. When self-defence units in the townships began
degenerating into vigilante gangs, he had been the first to call for their
disbanding. He had moved to the white middle-class suburb of Dawn Park in
1991 in an attempt to break down racial barriers, influencing other black
political and union officials to do the same. A few days before his death, he had
declared, ‘I am now a combatant for peace.’ His following among the youth
remained huge. If anyone was capable of mobilising this vast, unruly
constituency behind the negotiation process, it was Hani. His death at the hands
of a white assassin seemed certain to plunge South Africa into an inferno of
violence.
Mandela was at his house in Qunu in the Transkei on that Easter Saturday,
working on his autobiography with the writer Richard Stengel. After an earlymorning walk in the countryside, Mandela had returned to the study to begin a
taped interview. He had hardly started when his housekeeper interrupted to let
him know that members of the Transkei police rugby team had arrived at the
house and wanted to greet him. Mandela rose stiffly from his chair and went
outside. While he was in the middle of shaking hands with each member of the
team in the driveway, the housekeeper ran out, in tears, telling him of an urgent
telephone call. Mandela excused himself and went inside to be told of Hani’s
assassination. ‘Mandela put down the phone and looked off into the distance, his
face drawn and concerned,’ wrote Stengel, in his own account of the incident.
He then stood up, apologised to Stengel for the interruption and returned to the
driveway to finish shaking hands with the rugby players.
With remarkable speed, the leadership of the crisis was assumed not by the
government but by the ANC and Mandela. On radio and television throughout
the day, ANC officials appealed for peace. Mandela rushed back to
Johannesburg in time to make a national address on television: ‘With all the
authority at my command, I appeal to all our people to remain calm and to
honour the memory of Chris Hani by remaining a disciplined force for peace.’
The circumstances around Hani’s murder grew more ominous. The assassin,

Janusw Waluz, a Polish immigrant who had lived in South Africa for twelve
years, was a member of the extremist Afrikaner Weerstandsbeweging. The
weapon he had used came from a batch of arms stolen from an air force armoury
in 1990 by a well-known Afrikaner extremist. One suspect arrested in
connection with the murder was a prominent member of the Conservative Party.
The possibility of a right-wing conspiracy to wreck the transition aggravated all
the tension.
Seeking to harness the tide of outrage, the ANC announced a week-long
campaign of mass protest, including a national stayaway and memorial services.
The risks of violence breaking out from such action were only too well known.
On the eve of a day of mourning declared by the ANC, Mandela again addressed
the nation on radio and television, appealing for calm in broadcasts he repeated
at 7 p.m., 8 p.m. and 11 p.m.
Tonight, I am reaching out to every single South African, black and
white, from the very depths of my being. A white man, full of prejudice
and hate, came to our country and committed a deed so foul that our
whole nation now teeters on the brink of disaster. A white woman, of
Afrikaner origin [Hani’s neighbour], risked her life so that we may know,
and bring to justice, this assassin. . . . Now is the time for all South
Africans to stand together against those who, from any quarter, wish to
destroy what Chris Hani gave his life for—the freedom of all of us.
He called for discipline and dignified conduct: ‘Chris Hani was a soldier. He
believed in iron discipline. . . . Any lack of discipline is trampling on the values
that Chris Hani stood for. Those who commit such acts serve only the interests
of the assassins.’
By the standards to which South Africa had become accustomed, the events in
the days following Hani’s assassination were relatively orderly. In nearly every
urban area, chanting crowds swept through city centres; in several they left
streets in chaos, with burnt cars and smashed and looted shops. But mostly the
demonstrators heeded Mandela’s call for discipline. Some 4 million workers
participated in the stayaway, again in relative calm. But the sheer size and
intensity of feeling of the protests were something white authority had never
before experienced.
Radical factions were active in clamouring for revenge. At a protest rally at a
squatter settlement in Cape Town, organised by the ANC’s youth leader Peter

Mokaba and by Winnie Mandela, Mokaba was captured on television chanting,
‘Kill the Boer! Kill the farmers!’ Winnie followed by calling on the ANC’s
youth to oust the ANC’s leadership and take the streets by storm. At a memorial
service in Soweto, when Mandela referred to a message of sympathy from the
National Party, he was jeered. Demonstrators were not just angry about Hani’s
murder but impatient at the failure of the negotiation process to deliver concrete
results. ‘Mandela released three years ago: South Africa still not free,’ read one
placard at Hani’s funeral.
The significance of these events, however, went far beyond the question of
violence. It was the time when Mandela emerged as a national leader,
comprehending at once the magnitude of the crisis, seeking to calm white fears
as well as black anger, demanding discipline and receiving it. De Klerk and his
government, meanwhile, were hardly to be seen. From his Cape holiday home,
de Klerk issued statements, clearly partisan in nature, aimed at white
constituents alarmed by the violence. His preoccupation, as one Johannesburg
newspaper noted, was ‘to assure whites that they were safe from the black
hordes’.
In the long struggle between Mandela and de Klerk, no other single event
provoked such a dramatic shift in the balance of power, nor revealed so clearly
to the white community how important Mandela was to their future security.
