THE APARTHEID MACHINE
FOR NEARLY FORTY YEARS, SINCE THE ESTABLISHMENT OF THE
UNION in 1910, South Africa had been led by Afrikaner generals—Botha,
Hertzog and Smuts—who had fought courageously against the might of the
British army in the Anglo-Boer War, but whose main preoccupation in office
had been to ensure a stable balance between the Boers and the British that would
underpin the Union.
The task had not been an easy one. The Anglo-Boer War had left a legacy of
bitterness among the Boers that endured for generations. Faced with guerrilla
warfare for which they were ill-prepared, British military commanders devised a
scorched-earth strategy in which Boer villages were razed to the ground,
thousands of Boer farmsteads destroyed and cattle and sheep slaughtered or
carried away on such a scale that by the end of the war the Boers of the Orange
Free State had lost half of their herds and those in the Transvaal, three-quarters.
Captured burghers were deported overseas in their thousands. Women and
children were rounded up and placed in what the British called concentration
camps, where conditions were so appalling that some 26,000 died there from
disease and malnutrition, most of them under the age of sixteen.
In the aftermath of the war, the British authorities made every effort to reestablish Boer farmers on the land and to resuscitate the shattered economy of
their new colonies. Yet the war had destroyed much that reconstruction could
never replace, reducing a large part of the Boer community to an impoverished
rural people. A growing number drifted to the towns, hoping to find work. But
the towns were the citadels of British commerce and culture, where Boers from
the platteland, possessing no skills or education, found themselves scorned and
despised for their poverty, their country ways and their language. Many were
forced to live cheek by jowl with Africans in slums on the ragged edges of
towns, like the western areas of Johannesburg, and seek work in competition
with cheap black labour. Urban poverty became as common as rural poverty.

Even though the Union was launched in 1910 with much goodwill on all
sides, with General Botha as prime minister and General Smuts and General
Hertzog as members of the cabinet, fear and resentment of British domination
ran deep. Many Afrikaners never accepted the idea of being part of the British
Empire and mourned the loss of their own republics. Everywhere they were
reminded of the presence of British authority. ‘God Save the King’ became the
official anthem. The national flag was a British Red Ensign, with the Union coat
of arms in a lower corner. Most civil servants were English-speaking. The
British dominated industry, commerce and the mines and controlled banks and
finance houses. They also held an almost complete monopoly of industrial skills
and training. Moreover, under the 1910 constitution, on questions of war and
peace South Africa was not a sovereign independent state but was bound by
decisions of the British government. When General Botha took South Africa into
the 1914 war with Germany, a group of his old Boer War comrades rose in
rebellion.
General Hertzog was prominent among those Afrikaners who feared that the
sheer weight of British influence would eventually engulf the Afrikaner people.
Dropped from the cabinet in 1913, he formed the National Party in 1914,
proposing a ‘two-stream’ policy for South Africans by which Afrikaners and
English would develop separately their own culture and traditions until the
Afrikaner stream attained an equal status with the English. As prime minister
from 1924, Hertzog achieved many of his goals. South Africa was recognised by
Britain as a sovereign independent state and given Dominion status. A new
national flag was approved. Afrikaans, a vernacular derived from a mixture of
Dutch, Malay, Portuguese creole and Khoisan speech, became an official
language for the first time.
But the problem of white poverty continued to grow. In the depression years
of 1928-32, the scale of misery affecting poor whites was immense. A Carnegie
Commission report estimated that in 1930 nearly half of the white population
was living in ‘dire poverty’. At least nine out of ten of these poor-white families
were said to be Afrikaans-speaking. In rural areas, the commission reported,
many families were living in hovels woven from reeds or in mud huts with
thatched roofs similar to those used by Africans. One third of these dwellings
were said to be ‘unsuitable for civilized life’. Many white families lived a
narrow and backward existence. More than half of the children did not complete
primary education: ‘Education was largely looked upon, among the rural

population, as something foreign, as a thing that had no bearing on their daily
life and needs.’
In an attempt to deal with the problems of poor-white unemployment, Hertzog
devised what was known as a ‘civilized labour’ policy. In practice this meant
that, wherever feasible, whites replaced black workers in the public service and
state-owned corporations like the railways. Such measures, however, were not
sufficient to keep pace with the flood of rural immigrants seeking work in towns.
Struggling to cope with the consequences of depression, Hertzog agreed in 1932
to take his National Party into a coalition with Smuts’s opposition South Africa
Party in what became known as Fusion government. The following year, the two
parties merged as the United Party.
It was out of this maelstrom of misery and hardship that a new form of
Afrikaner nationalism emerged. It was not simply a return to the old nationalism
of the past, of the kind once espoused by Hertzog, aiming to defend Afrikaner
traditions and interests. This was a new nationalism, hardened by new ideology
and driven by a ruthless determination to achieve Afrikaner domination. In place
of the idea of Suid Afrikaanse volkseenheid, a unity between all South Africa’s
whites, which Hertzog now advocated, the new nationalists wanted Afrikaner
volkseenheid. In the context of the 1930s, the greatest threat to Afrikanerdom
was seen to come not from the blacks, as it was at a later stage, but from British
imperialism and its allies in the English-speaking population. All the ills facing
the Afrikaner people were attributed to the evil designs of British policy,
stretching back to the early nineteenth century, when Britain gained control of
the Cape and imposed its rule over the Boer inhabitants.
Powerful myths, myths that endured for generations, were used by nationalist
politicians and intellectuals to gain popular support. Afrikaners were portrayed
as members of an exclusive volk created by the hand of God to fulfill a special
mission in South Africa. Their history, their language, their culture, being
divinely ordained, were unique. They were an organic unity from which ‘foreign
elements’ like English-speakers were excluded. This vision of the Afrikaners as
a chosen people, based on Calvinist ideas, had first been expounded by Paul
Kruger, president of the Transvaal republic. Now it became a central part of the
nationalist creed. At its core, the new nationalism—Christian Nationalism, as it
was called—was essentially a potent mix of the Old Testament and modern
politics.

The driving force behind the nationalist revival was a secret, tightly
disciplined Afrikaner organisation called the Broederbond, which by the mid1930s had extended its influence to every level of Afrikaner society. Its elite
membership, carefully selected and bound together by oath, comprised mainly
professional men—teachers, academics, clergymen and civil servants—many of
them based in urban areas of the Transvaal. Their objective was made clear by
the chairman of the Broederbond, Professor van Rooy, in a private circular
issued in 1934: ‘Let us keep constantly in view the fact that our chief concern is
whether Afrikanerdom will reach its eventual goal of mastery [baaskap] in
South Africa. Brothers, our solution for South Africa’s troubles is . . . that the
Afrikaner Broederbond shall rule South Africa.’
When Hertzog agreed to enter the Fusion government and merge the National
Party into the new United Party, Afrikaner nationalists led by Dr Daniel Malan,
a Dutch Reformed Church predikant who had forsaken the pulpit for politics,
launched a ‘purified’ National Party, claiming to stand for the aims and
objectives of ‘true’ Afrikaners, whom, they said, Hertzog had betrayed. The
impact they initially made was limited. For several years, Malan’s Nationalists
remained in the wilderness. Hertzog dismissed them as a group of fanatics
merely intent on stirring up discord and hatred.
What provided Malan with a breakthrough was the fierce dissension among
Afrikaners that erupted at the outbreak of the Second World War. Hertzog
insisted that South Africa should remain neutral, arguing that the war was none
of its concern. Smuts, a great admirer of Britain and the Empire and a close
friend of Winston Churchill, was adamant that South Africa should stand side by
side with Britain. The Fusion government, meeting on 2 September 1939, was
split: seven ministers wanted an immediate declaration of war against Germany
and six opposed them. The issue went to parliament two days later. By a vote of
eighty to sixty-seven, Smuts took South Africa into the war. Hertzog resigned
and with his supporters threw in his lot with Malan.
A large part of Afrikanerdom was outraged that South Africa had once again
been dragged into another of ‘England’s wars’. Overnight, Afrikaner
republicanism became a potent political force. As Hitler’s armies advanced
across Europe, the surge of pro-German sentiment grew stronger. Nationalist
newspapers cheered each Allied setback. Paramilitary groups supporting Hitler
attracted hundreds of thousands of followers. An elite paramilitary corps—
Stormjaers—was formed to sabotage the war effort. Attacks were made on

railways, power lines and public buildings. The government retaliated by
interning thousands of pro-Nazi activists, among them several Nationalist figures
who were later to achieve high office. As the tide of war turned against
Germany, the heady atmosphere created by early German successes soon
dissipated. But the overall effect was to leave Malan’s National Party as the
main focal point for Afrikaner aspirations.
It was during the war years that Nationalist politicians and intellectuals began
to pay increasing attention to ‘the Native problem’. The wartime economic boom
had drawn massive numbers of Africans into urban areas. More than half a
million were added to the urban African population between 1936 and 1946,
mostly during the war years. In urban areas, blacks outnumbered whites. On a
national basis, as the 1946 census figures showed, the whites were a declining
proportion of the population. Since 1910 the white population had increased by
little more than a million to 2.4 million, whereas the non-white population had
expanded by nearly 4.5 million to 9 million. About 60 per cent of Africans were
living in white-designated areas, either in towns or on farms, while only 40 per
cent were based in the reserves. By sheer weight of numbers, it seemed to the
Nationalists, Africans threatened to swamp the white population. As the problem
of white poverty receded, this new threat—swart gevaar, the black peril—
became their abiding obsession.
As prime minister, Smuts too was obliged to take a closer interest in the mood
of militancy spreading among the African population. He had never previously
paid much attention to ‘the Native problem’, preferring to leave it in the hands of
the Native Affairs Department. But determined to avoid possible disruption to
the war effort, he appointed a commission early in 1942 to investigate the socioeconomic, educational and health conditions of urban Africans. The commission
pointed out, as previous commissions had done, that a Native policy based
essentially on the development of the reserves was an illusion; a large and
permanent African urban population was an unavoidable part of South Africa’s
future. It recommended in particular the abolition of the pass laws, which by
then involved the arrest of 350,000 Africans each year: ‘The harassing and
constant interference with the freedom of movement of Natives gives rise to a
burning sense of grievance and injustice which has an unsettling effect on the
Native population as a whole.’
Smuts himself spoke eloquently on the matter in 1942: ‘A revolutionary
change is taking place among the Native peoples of Africa through the

movement from the country to the towns—the movement from the old Reserves
in the Native areas to the big European centres of population. Segregation tried
to stop it. It has, however, not stopped it in the least. The process has been
accelerated. You might as well try to sweep the ocean back with a broom.’
Yet though Smuts occasionally expressed liberal sentiments about African
rights, he never fulfilled them. His conviction about the virtues of European
civilisation and government ran too deep. Nor was he able to provide any clear
answers to the Native question, believing that for the foreseeable future it was
insoluble. He merely hoped, though without much confidence, that in time there
might be an improvement in race relations. The impression he gave to an
increasingly worried electorate was that his government was beginning to lose
control of the black population and, what was worse, lacked the will to restore
control.
Malan’s Nationalists, meanwhile, put forward a plan which they claimed
would provide a permanent solution to the Native problem: apartheid. The word
had come into common use in the mid-1930s among a group of Afrikaner
intellectuals searching for decisive methods of dealing with the African
population. During the war years, Malan began to mention it in speeches in
public, but it remained a vague concept. Then, in post-war years, Nationalist
intellectuals and theologians defined it more closely.
Apartheid essentially was a simple doctrine. It involved the idea of total racial
separation. Every facet of life—residence, amenities, transport, education and
politics—would be kept separate, wherever possible. This policy would apply to
Coloured and Indian people as well as to the African population. By such means
no race group would then threaten any longer the future of any other. The
survival of the white race would be assured. The blacks, meanwhile, would be
able to preserve their own culture and identity and to develop in their own areas.
All this, the Nationalists asserted, was in accordance with Christian principles of
right and justice. God had ordained the division of nations and wished them to
be kept separate. Texts from the Bible were cited as proof.
These ideas were incorporated into a political manifesto drawn up by a
National Party commission under Paul Sauer and issued in 1948, a few months
before the general election. The reserves, said the Sauer report, were the proper
homelands of the African population. There they would be allowed to develop to
their full capacities. Urban Africans, meanwhile, would be treated as ‘visitors’

and strictly controlled.
Natives in the urban areas should be regarded as migratory citizens not
entitled to political and social rights equal to those of whites. The process
of detribalization should be arrested. The entire migration of Natives into
and from the cities should be controlled by the state, which will enlist the
cooperation of municipal bodies. Migration into and from the Reserves
shall likewise be strictly controlled. Surplus Natives in the urban areas
should be returned to their original habitat in the country areas [white
farms] or the Reserves. Natives from the country areas shall be admitted
to the urban areas or towns as temporary employees obliged to return to
their homes after the expiry of their employment.
Smuts was thought to be in no particular danger from the Nationalist
challenge. With the Allied victory in 1945, his prestige had reached new heights.
Abroad, he was hailed as an international statesman, admired by leaders like
Churchill and Roosevelt and entrusted with the task of drafting the Preamble to
the United Nations Charter, earning widespread applause for the emphasis he
placed on fundamental rights. On his return home from the United Nations
conference in San Francisco in 1945, he was given a tumultuous welcome. His
views about the importance of European rule were common enough at the time,
not only in South Africa but throughout the African continent and in the capitals
of Europe, from where most of Africa was then ruled. Although South Africa’s
racial practices were beginning to attract adverse international attention, they
tended to differ in detail rather than in essence from the discriminatory policies
employed elsewhere in Africa under colonial rule. The platform he put forward
in the election was pragmatic. He endorsed a government report which argued
that the urbanisation of the African could not be reversed and that henceforth
blacks should be accepted as a permanent part of the urban population. Although
some controls over the movement of blacks to the cities were still needed, the
system of migrant labour had become obsolete and wasteful and the idea of
territorial separation of the races was ‘utterly impractical’.
Not even the Nationalists believed that victory in the 1948 election was within
their reach. Their hopes were based on the following election. The ruling United
Party, together with its parliamentary allies, went into the election with a
majority of more than fifty seats. For the Nationalists to win would require a
swing of opinion among the electorate unprecedented in the Union’s history.
Yet, with relentless propaganda, the Nationalists ensured that the swart gevaar

issue dominated public debate, using every opportunity to play on the
electorate’s racial anxieties. The choice for whites, the Nationalists said, was
between ‘integration and national suicide’ on the one hand and ‘apartheid’ and
the protection of a ‘pure white race’ on the other. The 1948 election, said Malan,
would be the most decisive in South Africa’s history. One question
overshadowed all others: ‘Will the European race in the future be able to
maintain its rule, its purity, its civilization; or will it float until it vanishes for
ever, without honour, in the black sea of South Africa’s Non-European
population?’ Only a National Party government, he said, could provide an
effective answer. It would outlaw interracial marriage, control African influx
into the cities, protect white workers from African competition and segregate
whites and blacks to the maximum extent possible. It would also outlaw the
communists and deal effectively with the Indian population. ‘Indians are a
foreign and outlandish element which is unassimilable, ’ said Malan. ‘They can
never become part of the country, and must therefore be treated as an immigrant
community.’ He would call a halt to immigration and begin repatriation. Two
crude slogans used by the National Party summed it all up: ‘Die kaffir op sy
plek’—‘The kaffir in his place’—and ‘Die koolies uit die land’—‘The coolies
out of the country’.
The National Party, together with its small ally, the Afrikaner Party, won 41
per cent of the vote; the United Party alliance won 51 per cent. But the
favourable loading of rural seats gave the Nationalists a decisive advantage.
They gained a tenuous majority of five seats. ‘Today, South Africa belongs to us
once more,’ declared Malan in his election victory speech. ‘For the first time
since Union, South Africa is our own, and may God grant that it will always
remain our own.’ The age of the generals had ended and the age of apartheid had
begun.

Mandela was twenty-nine years old at the time, an impecunious law student
struggling unsuccessfully to pass examinations for a law degree and dependent
on his wife’s earnings to keep his young family afloat. He had developed strong
political ambitions, but had so far failed to make his mark as a political activist.
The Congress Youth League, the small pressure group which he had helped to
launch with the aim of giving ‘force, direction, and vigour’ to the ANC, had
spent four years arguing over ideological positions, showing no propensity for
political action. The ANC, after thirty-six years of efforts in dealing with

governments which professed to be mindful of their ‘trusteeship’ of the African
people, had yet to achieve any significant gains in its campaign for African
rights or in its attempts to halt the inexorable march of segregation. Now they
faced a government whose explicit objective was to keep ‘die kaffir op sy plek’
and which was prepared to use power in a manner which South Africa had never
before experienced.
The ruthlessness of the Nationalists became apparent at first in their handling
not of the African population but of the English-speaking community. Malan’s
government was the first in the history of the Union to consist exclusively of
Afrikaners. The upper echelons of the civil service, the armed forces, the police
and parastatal organisations like the railways were purged of English-speakers
and filled with carefully selected Afrikaners, usually members of the
Broederbond. The state sector became virtually an Afrikaner preserve. The legal
profession eventually faced the same treatment; senior English-speaking
members of the bar were systematically overlooked in the appointment of
judges. The government also favoured Afrikaner business interests, switching
accounts to Afrikaner financial institutions and awarding contracts to Afrikaner
companies. The English-speaking community found itself on the defensive at
every turn. In an acrimonious debate in parliament, English-speaking members
faced accusations of dual allegiance and were questioned on their right to be
considered full South Africans. The English would be given equal treatment,
said one Nationalist speaker, but ‘the country belongs, in the first instance, to
those people who opened it up’.
The Nationalists then turned their attention to the Native problem. Malan, in
his mid-seventies when he came to office, had never shown much interest in
Native policy. His preoccupation had always been to consolidate the Afrikaner
community behind his drive for power. He possessed no grand design for the
African population of the kind that other Nationalist leaders developed later. His
principal aim was to reverse the trend towards interracial integration rather than
to devise some final solution to the Native problem.
His first targets, accordingly, were marriage and sex. In 1949 parliament
passed the Prohibition of Mixed Marriages Act, outlawing marriages between
Europeans and non-Europeans. Few such marriages ever took place—less than
100 a year out of an annual total of 28,000 white marriages—but for the
Nationalists it was a blurring of racial lines they were not willing to tolerate. An
amendment to the Immorality Act extended a ban on sexual intercourse between

Europeans and Natives, in force since 1927, to Europeans and Coloureds. Next
came the Population Registration Act, designed eventually to allocate every
person to one of three racial groups: White, Coloured or African. ‘A national
register is the whole basis of apartheid,’ declared Malan. Some of the early
methods used to determine a person’s race were crude in the extreme. Doubtful
cases were sometimes resolved by white officials with what became known as
the ‘pencil in the hair’ test. If a pencil stayed in the hair, it meant classification
as a Coloured or African; if it fell out it meant classification as a Coloured or
white. Small variations in the texture of hair or the shape of the lips could make
all the difference in determining where people could live and work. The effect in
many borderline cases was to wreck families and ruin careers.
The advent of apartheid prompted Mandela and his radical friends in the
Congress Youth League to demand a more aggressive strategy from the ANC. A
new document was drawn up calling for civil disobedience, boycotts and ‘stayat-home’ strikes on a mass scale.
In December 1949, shortly before the ANC’s annual conference was due to be
held in Bloemfontein, a Youth League delegation consisting of Mda, Sisulu,
Tambo and Mandela called on Dr Xuma at his home in Sophiatown to try to
obtain his support for their plan. The ANC, they told him, had become too
docile. What was needed was mass action along the lines of Gandhi’s passive
resistance campaigns and the protests carried out by the Indian community in
South Africa in 1946. Like Gandhi, the ANC’s leaders had to be prepared to
contravene the law and go to prison.
Xuma was dismissive. Such action would be premature, he said, and would
merely give the government an excuse to crush the ANC in the name of law and
order. Furthermore, he had no intention of going to prison and forsaking his
medical practice. The four activists then gave Xuma an ultimatum: unless he
supported their plan of action, they would oppose his re-election as president at
the forthcoming ANC conference. Xuma reacted furiously to their challenge. ‘I
don’t want your vote,’ he said. ‘And I won’t be dictated to by any clique.’
The ANC’s annual conference was duly held in an atmosphere of unusual
excitement. Many delegates, alarmed by the government’s apartheid programme,
wanted to end all trace of collaboration with government institutions and embark
on more determined action, as the Youth League proposed. The Youth League’s
difficulty was in finding a respectable figure to stand as their candidate against

Xuma. The first person they approached, Professor Matthews, the distinguished
academic, declined the offer.
In the audience as a guest, however, was a man with a remarkable string of
credentials. Dr James Moroka came from a wealthy landowning family in the
Orange Free State. He was a great-grandson of the Tswana chief Moroka, who in
the 1830s had given military protection to groups of voortrekkers entering his
domain. His father was white, but he had taken his mother’s name. After
graduating from the University of Edinburgh in medicine in 1918, he had
returned to South Africa, one of only two black medical doctors in the country,
and established a lucrative practice in Thaba ’Nchu. Local Afrikaners were
among his patients. In accordance with South African custom, he provided one
waiting room for whites and another for blacks, one entrance for whites, another
for blacks. He was also a shrewd businessman, the owner of a large number of
farms, shops and other concerns. At his home in Thaba ’Nchu, he lived the life
of a country gentleman, highly respected in the local community. He had helped
in the building of schools and a hospital for local people and contributed funds to
enable needy white students to train as doctors. He had shown no interest in
politics until the African franchise was threatened in 1936, when he established a
reputation as an outspoken opponent of government policy. As a member of the
Native Representative Council, he used it as a platform from which to continue
his attacks on the government. The only credential he lacked, in fact, was
membership of the ANC; he was involved with another group, the All African
Convention.
In the closing stages of the conference, after Moroka had indicated his support
for the ‘Programme of Action’, the Youth League decided to approach him. At
first he was reluctant to stand against Xuma but finally he agreed. In the election
that followed, the older generation voted for Xuma and the younger for Moroka.
Moroka won and the ‘Programme of Action’ was adopted as ANC policy. The
Youth League’s coup had succeeded.
Other significant changes occurred at the same time. Believing that the
‘Programme of Action’ was ‘too drastic’, the ANC’s long-serving secretarygeneral, the Reverend James Calata, declined to stand for re-election. Walter
Sisulu was elected in his place. Sisulu decided henceforth to devote his entire
time to building up the ANC, relying on Albertina’s wages as a nurse to support
him and his family. Five other members of the Youth League were elected to the
ANC’ s national executive committee, including Peter Mda and Oliver Tambo.

Mandela missed all the excitement. Having decided to abandon his studies for
a law degree, he had taken a job with the law firm of Terblanche and Brigish,
which was not willing to allow him time off to attend the Bloemfontein
conference. His employer, Harry Brigish, a left-wing lawyer, regarded Mandela
as ‘a fine and decent young fellow’ but, like Sidelsky before him, disapproved of
his political activity.
Mandela’s chance to join the national executive committee came two months
later, in February 1950, when Dr Xuma, having failed to be re-elected president,
decided to resign his seat. At Sisulu’s instigation, Mandela was co-opted in his
place. He viewed his new position with mixed feelings. He had enjoyed his days
as a gadfly, attacking the establishment when inclined to do so. Now he was part
of the ANC hierarchy, obliged to accept wider responsibilities.
The leadership of the ANC thus passed into the hands of a new generation of
political activists. Some members of the old guard, like the Reverend Calata,
retained their seats on the national executive committee. But the direction in
which the ANC now moved was towards active opposition to the government of
the kind advocated in its ‘Programme of Action’.
Yet, despite all the efforts of the Youth League, there was still little
ideological clarity. Africanists like Mda and Mandela remained vehemently
opposed to collaboration with communists. Communists like Kotane and Marks
argued in favour of a broader front, trying to balance their loyalty to the cause of
African rights with their commitment to socialist revolution. Others, like
Professor Matthews, favoured a traditional liberal approach. All factions,
however, were agreed on the need for direct action.
The role that Sisulu played as secretary-general, ensconced in new party
headquarters down a dingy corridor in New Court Chambers in Commissioner
Street, became increasingly important. His aim was to weld the different factions
within the ANC into a united organisation and to extend its cooperation with
other anti-apartheid groups, presenting the government with a more formidable
adversary. ‘I had gained sufficient confidence that we would survive as a
national group,’ he said. ‘We didn’t need to be unnecessarily sensitive about
cooperating with other groups.’
The pressure of events came not just from the government but from a massive
outbreak of communal violence in Durban in 1949 between Africans and Indians
which brought together ANC and Indian Congress leaders in an attempt to

defuse the crisis. Tension between the two communities, particularly in the
slums around Durban, where both groups struggled to survive, was often close to
the surface. Many Indians were as contemptuous of Africans as whites were;
Indian traders and landlords were resented in turn as exploiters. In a sudden
conflagration, starting from one small incident, Africans burned down Indian
homes, clubbed their owners to death, raped wives and daughters and looted
stores, killing in all some fifty Indians. Thousands of Indians fled their homes.
Nearly ninety Africans died, most of them in the ensuing police action. ANC
leaders from Johannesburg joined in the efforts in Durban to calm the strife,
recognising the need for a fuller understanding of each community’s problems.
Mandela remained opposed to links with other groups, even when the
communists found themselves under direct assault from the government. Almost
immediately on assuming power, Malan had set up a committee to investigate
the influence of communism in the Union. It reported in 1949 that the
Communist Party represented a danger to ‘our national life, our democratic
institutions and our Western philosophy’. The result the following year was a
piece of legislation eventually called the Suppression of Communism Act, which
gave powers to the government to suppress not only the Communist Party but
other opponents it deemed to be troublesome.
Before the legislation was passed, the communists initiated plans for a oneday strike on May Day 1950, in protest against the government. Support for the
plan was forthcoming from the Indian Congress as well as some ANC branches.
But it was adamantly opposed by Mandela and other members of the Congress
Youth League, who accused the communists of trying to upstage the ANC,
which had also called for a one-day strike in its ‘Programme of Action’ the
previous year but had so far failed to organise one. The Youth League’s bulletin,
African Lodestar, attacked communism as a foreign ideology, equating it with
movements like fascism.
So hostile were Mandela and his colleagues that they took to breaking up
Communist Party meetings, canvassing support for the May Day strike, heckling
speakers and tearing up placards. At an ANC meeting in Newclare, Mandela
pushed the Indian speaker, Yusuf Cachalia, from the platform. In Commissioner
Street, he fell into a heated argument with the young Indian activist Ahmed
‘Kathy’ Kathrada, who accused him and the Youth League of refusing to work
with Indians and Coloureds.

Despite the efforts of Mandela and other members of the Youth League, the
May Day strike achieved considerable success. Thousands stayed away from
work. But in four places—Alexandra, Sophiatown, Benoni and Orlando—the
day ended in violence between police and crowds gathering on the streets in
which eighteen people died. In Orlando, trouble broke out as police were
escorting home workers who had ignored the strike. Mandela and Sisulu were
present at the time, endeavouring to persuade protesters to disperse. When police
opened fire, they were forced to take refuge in a nearby nurses’ hostel. ‘That
day,’ recalled Mandela, ‘was a turning point in my life, both in understanding
through first-hand experience the ruthlessness of the police and in being deeply
impressed by the support African workers had given to the May Day call.’
Two weeks later, angered by the police action, the ANC’s national executive
committee decided to call for another day of protest on 26 June, joining forces
with the Indian Congress. This time, the Youth League, humbled by the lack of
support it had gained on the first occasion, issued a fiery statement in support of
the protest, concluding with the words, ‘Up, you Mighty Race!’
The Suppression of Communism Act, meanwhile, passed through parliament.
It was the first weapon in an arsenal of security measures acquired by the
government that over the next four decades would provide it eventually with
totalitarian control. So wide was the act’s definition of communism that it could
be used to silence anyone who opposed government policy simply by ‘naming’
them. Communism now meant not only Marxist-Leninism but also ‘any related
form of that doctrine’ which sought to bring about ‘any political, industrial,
social or economic change within the Union by the promotion of disturbance or
disorder’, or which aimed at ‘the encouragement of feelings of hostility between
the European and non-European races of the Union’. In effect, the act equated
communism with any determined form of opposition to apartheid. The
government was empowered to ban any organisation, to remove its members
from public office, to place them under house arrest, to restrict their movements,
to prohibit them from attending public or even social gatherings and to proscribe
their writing and their speeches. No reasons had to be given in ‘naming’
communists; nor was there any right of appeal. Such action could be taken,
moreover, against anyone who had ever professed communism.
Meeting in Cape Town in June, before the act took effect, the central
committee of the Communist Party debated whether to continue its work
underground. Among the seventeen members present were Bram Fischer,

Michael Harmel, Yusuf Dadoo, Moses Kotane, and J. B. Marks. The difficulties
of moving from legal work to illegal work without a pause were known to be
considerable. The police were already in possession of membership lists, seized
during raids on party offices at the time of the mineworkers’ strike in 1946.
Attempts to create the skeleton of an underground organisation had already
failed. The central committee decided, therefore, to disband the party to try to
protect its members, announcing its decision on 20 June, four days before the act
became law.
Many communists, however, remained politically active. African members,
who numbered 1,600 at the time, were able to channel their energies into the
ANC; senior figures like Kotane and Marks were already part of the ANC
hierarchy. Indian members, who numbered 250, found a similar home in the
Indian Congresses. Only the 150 white members lacked an immediate base from
which to operate. But it was not long before they were to regroup and continue
their work underground.
The day of protest on 26 June 1950 was the ANC’s first attempt ever to
organise political action on a nationwide basis. Mandela played his part, helping
to man party headquarters in New Court Chambers. But the organisers had left
themselves with too little time to make a success of it. The response in the
Transvaal was poor; only in Port Elizabeth and among Indians in Durban was
there a significant result. No further mass action was attempted for another two
years.

Even when he was breaking up Communist Party rallies and gaining a reputation
as a hotheaded anti-communist, Mandela maintained close friendships with
individual communists and their influence began to tell on him. While some
communists loudly denounced his activities, his group of communist friends
were always ready for discussion. He often visited the home of J. B. Marks, a
wise and genial figure with a record of political activity dating back to the
1920s. Moses Kotane, a pragmatic, clear-thinking man, frequently called on
Mandela in Orlando, talking late into the night, trying to convince him that his
fears about a communist takeover of the ANC were unfounded. Indian
communists like Yusuf Dadoo and his old student friend Ismail Meer, both of
whom had served prison sentences during the passive-resistance campaign,
encouraged him to take a broader view. In no case could Mandela fault their

credentials as dedicated opponents of apartheid.
The influence of a number of white communists was also crucial. Among
them was Ruth First, a sharply intelligent journalist, whom Mandela had first
met as a student at the University of the Witwatersrand in his first term there in
1943. Brought up in Johannesburg in a left-wing Jewish household, she had
immersed herself in political work, joining the Communist Party, serving as
secretary of the Young Communist League and helping to set up a left-wing
club, the Progressive Youth Council, into which she tried unsuccessfully to
entice Mandela. Graduating with a social science degree, she worked briefly as a
research officer for the Johannesburg City Council and helped to compile a
commemorative album for the city’s fiftieth jubilee in 1946. She resigned
abruptly at the outbreak of the mineworkers’ strike to throw herself into strike
activity, producing leaflets from duplicating machines set up in her own lodgings
and driving African organisers to mine compounds to deliver them to strikers.
When police arrested the entire district committee on charges of sedition, First
was asked to become temporary secretary of the Johannesburg party office. Six
months later she became Johannesburg editor of The Guardian, a left-wing
weekly newspaper written mainly by white communists. She made her own
mark as a journalist in 1947 with an exposé of forced labour practices on white
farms in Bethal district in the eastern Transvaal, an investigation she undertook
with Michael Scott. ‘I really respected that lady,’ said Mandela, ‘because of her
intelligence and her commitment.’
For several years, she had a close relationship with Mandela’s Indian friend,
Ismail Meer. Then in 1949 she married Joe Slovo, a law student at Wits who was
as ardent a communist as she was. The son of a poor Jewish immigrant family
from Lithuania, Slovo had left school at the age of fourteen and joined the
Communist Party three years later, throwing himself tirelessly into party work
‘in the certainty that the revolution was around the corner’—a belief that never
really left him. After serving in an army signals unit during the war, he enrolled
at Wits to study law. It was during his final year there that he met Mandela,
spending hours arguing with him about communist preparations for the May Day
strike. After graduating in 1950, Slovo specialised as a defence lawyer in
political trials. The Slovo household in Roosevelt Park in the northern suburbs of
Johannesburg was to become a regular meeting place for political activists in the
1950s.
Then there was Michael Harmel, another journalist and the party’s leading

theoretician. Mandela had met Harmel at his first encounter with communists at
a social gathering to which Nat Bregman had invited him. Taking care to dress
properly for the occasion, with a jacket and tie, as Fort Hare had taught him,
Mandela was disconcerted to find that Harmel, whom he had been told held a
master’s degree, was not wearing a tie. ‘I just could not reconcile this
discrepancy,’ he recalled. Harmel, in fact, possessed few social graces, but it was
precisely this dislike of convention that Mandela found so attractive. He led a
disorganised, forgetful life, but was admired by his colleagues for his analytical
mind and theoretical knowledge. Much of his influence stemmed from his
readiness, as a doctrinaire communist, to provide answers and explanations for
any issue that arose. Drawn to Marxism while studying economics at Rhodes
University, he had joined the Communist Party in 1939 and for nine years served
on the central committee, until the party was disbanded in 1950. He was known
as a forceful debater and one of the most rigid party men in Johannesburg.
The most remarkable communist of all was Bram Fischer. Not only was he an
Afrikaner but he came from the Orange Free State aristocracy. His grandfather
had been prime minister of the Orange River Colony during the era of British
rule and his father had served as Judge-President of the Orange Free State. A
Rhodes Scholar at Oxford University, an accomplished sportsman and a
successful lawyer, he moved with ease in the highest political and social circles
in South Africa, widely admired for his many talents and regarded as having a
brilliant career ahead of him.
But Fischer had taken a different road. After graduating in law from the
University of Cape Town, he had become involved in adult education courses
for Africans in Waaihoek location in Bloemfontein, where he taught reading and
writing in a dilapidated building with winter winds blowing dust through the
makeshift classroom. It was there, he said later, that he came to understand ‘that
colour prejudice was a wholly irrational phenomenon and that true human
friendship could extend across the colour bar. . . . That I think was Lesson
Number One on my way to the Communist Party.’ He participated in meetings
of the Joint Council of Europeans and Africans in Bloemfontein, a liberal
institution with branches around South Africa where whites and blacks, usually
teachers and clergymen, discussed African conditions; he found his encounters
with Africans there a ‘real breakthrough’. A visit he made to the Soviet Union in
1933, while on vacation from Oxford, left him deeply impressed by Soviet
achievements and he subsequently became a true believer in both communism

and the Soviet Union, attracted not so much by ideological considerations as by
the humanitarian ideals that underpinned the communist faith.
His life became filled with efforts to assist the African cause. He served along
with Dr Xuma on the Alexandra Health Committee, the only form of
administration that Alexandra township possessed, he joined the Johannesburg
Joint Council and he helped the ANC to draw up a new constitution. He was
ready at all times to act in defence of those in difficulty with the police, as on the
occasion when he came to the rescue of Mandela’s Indian friends.
His wife, Molly Krige, who was related to the Smuts family, shared his ideals,
standing as a Communist Party candidate in local elections in Johannesburg in
1945, though without success. On summer weekends their house in Oaklands
was open to friends and acquaintances of all races. At the annual dances for The
Guardian which they held in Beaumont Street, up to 200 guests would come.
The impression that Bram Fischer made on Mandela was profound, as much on a
personal level as a political one. But what was especially important in
influencing Mandela’s own outlook was that Fischer was an Afrikaner. In an age
when Afrikaners were coming to be regarded by Africans as the enemy,
Mandela had found an Afrikaner friend.
It was by keeping such company that Mandela’s hostility towards the
communists began to dissipate. Feeling the need to be able to counter their
arguments over doctrinal issues, he started to study Marxist literature, finding
some of the ideas it contained appealing: ‘I found myself strongly drawn to the
idea of a classless society which, to my mind, was similar to traditional African
culture where life was shared and communal.’ He also found aspects of Marxist
economic analysis relevant. Above all there was the communist call for
revolutionary action, together with the practical example that the Soviet Union
set in supporting liberation movements among colonial peoples.
But it was as much the need for allies in facing the onslaught of apartheid
legislation that brought Mandela to recognise the value of collaboration with
other groups. As one by one the pillars of the apartheid system were erected and
ever more draconian measures were introduced to suppress the government’s
opponents, the idea of Africans ‘going it alone’ began to look increasingly
impractical. Following the Population Registration Act in 1950 came the Group
Areas Act, a piece of legislation intended over the years to divide every town
and village in South Africa into separate racial zones, even though this would

involve uprooting whole communities. Then, in March 1951, Malan turned his
attention to the Coloured community, introducing a bill—the Separate
Registration of Voters Bill—aimed at removing the Coloureds of the Cape
Province from the common roll by which they had been entitled to vote since
1853.
Until Malan came to power, the Coloured community had largely escaped the
kind of repressive measures inflicted on the African population by successive
white governments. In the Western Cape, where most lived, the Coloureds could
reside, work and travel where they chose. In areas of Cape Town, they shared
the same streets and sometimes the same houses as whites. They also shared the
common roll. In nine Cape constituencies, their voting power was considerable
and used mainly in favour of Smuts’s United Party in the 1948 election.
In attempting to get rid of the Coloured vote, Malan precipitated both a
protracted legal battle by the Coloured community and a wave of political
protest. A new organisation formed by Coloureds, the Franchise Action
Committee, called for strike action and asked for support from other antiapartheid groups. The support they received came not only from the ANC but
also from white protesters. A group of white ex-servicemen calling themselves
the Torch Commando organised a series of torch-lit rallies in Cape Town, Port
Elizabeth and Johannesburg which drew significant support from the white
population. But the Torch Commando soon reached the limits to which
traditional liberals in South Africa were then prepared to go. While supporting
the campaign for the rights of the Coloured population, it failed to agree over the
admission of Coloureds as members, with the result that Coloured exservicemen withdrew. Thus ended the first and last major protest by whites
against the apartheid system.
Taking stock of all the protest activity under way, by Coloureds, Indians and
Africans alike, Walter Sisulu introduced the idea of a coordinated civildisobedience campaign against the government, involving trained volunteers
from all groups who would deliberately court arrest and imprisonment by
contravening selected laws and regulations in ways similar to the Indian passive
resistance campaign of 1946. If sufficient numbers were arrested, the jails would
overflow and the system would begin to break down.
When he first heard the idea, Mandela was enthusiastic, but he wanted the
campaign to be exclusively African. Although his resistance to the communists

was waning, he remained wary of the influence of Indians in any joint campaign.
His Africanist views were still firmly held. In 1950, he had been elected as
president of the Youth League, the last stronghold of the Africanist camp. For
months, Mandela continued to hold out stubbornly against a joint campaign,
even though the tide of opinion in the ANC was running strongly against him. At
an ANC national executive meeting in June 1951, when joint action with Indian
and Coloured organisations was proposed, his arguments against it were
promptly voted down. At the ANC’s annual conference in December 1951,
when he spoke again in favour of a ‘go it alone’ strategy, he was given similarly
short shrift. Only when faced with an overwhelming vote in favour of joint
action did Mandela commit the Youth League to support it.
In January 1952, an ultimatum calling for the repeal of six ‘unjust laws’,
signed by Dr Moroka and Sisulu, was sent to Prime Minister Malan. Among the
laws cited were the Suppression of Communism Act, the Group Areas Act, the
Separate Registration of Voters Bill and the pass laws, which Malan’s
government had enforced with ever-greater vigour. Unless the government
complied, the signatories warned, a ‘Defiance Campaign’ would start. Malan’s
secretary replied that the government had no intention of repealing the laws and
warned that it would ‘use the full machinery at its disposal to quell any
disturbances’. The date then set for the start of the Defiance Campaign was 26
June, the anniversary of the day of protest in 1950. It was a date that was to
become a focal point in the calendar of resistance activity for years to come.
The biggest names in the campaign were Moroka and Dadoo. Other key
figures included Marks, Sisulu and Yusuf Cachalia, the Indian activist whom
Mandela had once pushed from the platform. Mandela too, despite his prolonged
opposition to joint action, was given a central role, being appointed national
volunteer-in-chief. His main task involved the recruitment, training and
coordination of volunteers. Their mission was to flout apartheid laws through
acts of defiance such as using railway coaches, waiting rooms and platform seats
designated for Europeans only, or by parading on the streets after curfew without
permits, or by entering locations without permits. Whenever possible, the
authorities were to be forewarned of the intentions of each batch of volunteers;
in some cases, full lists of names of the volunteers involved were politely handed
to the police. Following this level of protest would come mass defiance.
Addressing groups of potential volunteers, Mandela warned of the difficulties
and dangers they would face from the authorities, who would retaliate with

arrests, imprisonment and possibly violence. But whatever happened, he told
them, they were to respond to violence with nonviolence. Mandela believed that
nonviolent protest was essential, not on moral grounds, as propounded by Indian
campaigners like Manilal Gandhi, the Mahatma’s son, but for purely practical
reasons: any attempt at violence would be swiftly crushed.
Four days before the campaign was due to start, Mandela addressed a rally in
Durban called the Day of the Volunteers, organised jointly by the ANC and the
Indian Congress. Some 10,000 Africans and Indians turned out to participate. It
was the first occasion that Mandela had addressed a mass audience and he found
the experience exhilarating. The Defiance Campaign, he said, would make
history. It would be the most powerful action ever undertaken by the masses in
South Africa: ‘We can now say unity between the non-European people in this
country has become a living reality.’ For Mandela, the remark had personal as
well as political significance in view of his long-held opposition to interracial
cooperation.
He displayed a remarkable optimism about what could be achieved by such
methods of protest:
I visualized that if the Defiance Campaign reached the stage of mass defiance,
the government would either say to the ANC . . . we will repeal these laws, we
will remove discrimination and from now on everybody in this country . . . is
entitled to vote for members of parliament . . . or, if the government refused to
take this attitude, we would expect the voters, because of the situation, to say, we
can’t go on with a government like this; we think that the government should
make way for a government which is more sensible, more responsible, a
government which will change its policy and come to terms with these people;
and then they would vote it out of power.
The campaign began in a mood of exuberance. Early in the morning, a group
of volunteers in Port Elizabeth marched through the ‘Europeans Only’ entrance
at the railway station, singing freedom songs and accompanied by a cheering
crowd of friends and family. They were promptly arrested by police. The same
cheerful atmosphere surrounded the next planned event later in the day in
Boksburg, east of Johannesburg, when a small group of Africans and Indians,
led by Walter Sisulu and a veteran Gandhi supporter, Nana Sita, walked into the
African location without entry permits, holding up their thumbs in the Congress
salute. Mandela was present, but only as a spectator. He had previously

delivered a letter to the Boksburg magistrate, advising him that a group of
volunteers would enter the location without permits. All the group were taken
off to the police cells. That night, ANC supporters meeting in the Garment
Workers’ Hall in Anderson Street in Johannesburg left the building after the
curfew had started at 11 p.m. and were arrested.
Mandela, who had been attending a meeting of his own with other campaign
leaders in a nearby office at the time, was not due to stage his own act of
defiance until later in the campaign. But emerging on to the streets at midnight
with Yusuf Cachalia, thinking of nothing more than the need for a hot meal and
some sleep, he suddenly found himself under arrest. He felt like explaining that
it was not his turn to be arrested. But, along with Cachalia, who burst out
laughing at the irony of it all, he was taken away in a police truck to the cells in
Marshall Square, a gloomy red-brick police station in the city centre, and joined
the fifty or so volunteers there.
This was Mandela’s first experience of police cells and the treatment meted
out there. In the drill yard that night, a young white policeman pushed one of the
volunteers so forcefully that he fell down some steps and broke his ankle.
Mandela, who had been walking close by at the time, immediately protested,
whereupon he was kicked on the shin and told to keep quiet. Eventually a senior
policeman was called. When Mandela demanded medical attention, he was told
to put in his request the next day. The volunteer spent the night groaning with
pain. Mandela stayed in the cells for two days, before being released on bail.
The campaign quickly caught the popular imagination. The slogan ‘Mayibuye
Afrika!’—‘Let Africa return!’—became a common greeting on the streets. With
almost religious fervour, days of prayer, hymn-singing and church services were
held throughout the country. During July, more than 1,500 people were arrested
for acts of civil disobedience; in September, the peak of the campaign, the
number reached 2,500. In five months, nearly 8,000 people went to prison for
periods ranging from one to three weeks, most of them charged under the
Suppression of Communism Act.
No longer was white help spurned. At a public meeting in November at
Darragh Hall in Johannesburg, Walter Sisulu, Oliver Tambo and Yusuf Cachalia
urged an audience of 200 whites to join forces by forming ‘a parallel white
organisation’ to work in close cooperation with the ANC and the Indian
Congress.

The silence of European democrats to the challenge of the issues
involved in the Defiance Campaign is being construed by NonEuropeans as acquiescence in and approval of the government’s policies,
thus rapidly creating the belief among large numbers of Non-Europeans
that all whites are hostile to them and their aspirations and that the
situation is being transformed into a white versus non-white struggle.
In December, in one of the final acts of defiance, when a group of volunteers
broke permit regulations in Germiston, their number included seven whites, one
of whom, Patrick Duncan, was the son of a former governor-general. Duncan’s
act of defiance gave the campaign both prestige and respectability. ‘It came as a
gift from heaven,’ remarked Cachalia. ‘It stopped the campaign from becoming
racial.’
The government, meanwhile, reacted not in the conciliatory manner that
Mandela had anticipated but with ruthless determination to crush the campaign.
In July, police raided the offices of the ANC and the Indian Congress and the
homes of their officials, confiscating documents and papers, and then arrested
twenty leaders of the campaign in Johannesburg, including Mandela, Sisulu,
Marks, Moroka, Dadoo, and Cachalia, charging them with promoting
communism. Mandela was arrested in the office of the law firm of H. M. Basner,
for which he was working at the time, but, like the others, he was subsequently
released on bail.
Their trial in November became the focus of national attention. For the first
time, ANC leaders faced the prospect of imprisonment for political protest
against the government, an event which distinguished the Defiance Campaign
from all previous protests over the past forty years. Crowds of supporters
gathered outside the Johannesburg magistrates’ court. In a packed courtroom, all
were found guilty of what was termed ‘statutory communism’. But as the judge
in the case, Judge Franz Rumpff, admitted, ‘This has nothing to do with
communism as it is commonly known.’ Furthermore, he accepted that though
the accused had planned acts that ranged from ‘open non-compliance of laws to
something that equals high treason’, they had consistently instructed their
supporters ‘to follow a peaceful course of action and to avoid violence in any
shape or form’. They were sentenced to nine months’ imprisonment with hard
labour, but the sentence was suspended for two years.
But far from being an occasion for demonstrating their solidarity against the

government, the trial became the source of considerable acrimony. For Dr
Moroka, a pillar of respectability in his community, the idea of being convicted
of supporting communism and going to prison for it was too hard to bear.
Breaking ranks with the rest of the accused, he decided to employ his own
lawyer. Mandela’s efforts to get him to change his mind were to no avail. At the
trial, he alone took the witness stand to declare his total opposition to
communism and entered a separate plea of mitigation that stressed his long
friendship with the Afrikaner people and the assistance he had given them. His
final assertion was that he did not believe in racial equality. To have the
figurehead of the campaign forsake it at its climax was a humiliating blow.
To ensure that not only this campaign was stamped out but that no similar one
could ever be started again, the government employed new measures. In
December, banning orders were imposed on fifty leaders and organisers,
preventing some, like Marks and Dadoo, from participating in any ANC or
Indian Congress activity for life and others for lesser periods. Mandela was
banned from meetings of all kinds and restricted to the district of Johannesburg
for a period of six months. New legislation was then introduced which laid down
severe penalties of fines, imprisonment and corporal punishment for anyone
inciting others to commit civil-disobedience offences and which empowered the
government to declare a state of emergency and use emergency regulations
whenever ‘the maintenance of public order was endangered’. The effect was to
make protest virtually illegal.
The Defiance Campaign of 1952 transformed the ANC from an elite group
into a mass movement. The sight of Africans defying the government won it new
prestige. The fear of refusing to submit to white authority lost its sting. Its
membership rose from 7,000 to perhaps as many as 100,000. The campaign
showed, moreover, what could be achieved through African and Indian
collaboration. Abroad, the African cause gained international attention for the
first time.
But the Defiance Campaign also marked a high point in ANC activity. Never
again, during the 1950s, was it able to mount successfully such organised
resistance against the government. Deprived of most of its leaders, fearful of
reprisal from the government’s arsenal of security measures and short of funds,
the movement lost much of its momentum. For another two years, no major
campaigning was undertaken.

Nevertheless, the sense of achievement among those like Mandela who had
participated in it was profound. ‘The campaign freed me from any lingering
sense of doubt or inferiority I might still have felt,’ he said. ‘It liberated me from
the feeling of being overwhelmed by the power and seeming invincibility of the
white man and his institutions.’
But an even more important personal transformation had begun during the
course of the campaign. For practical reasons, Mandela had come to accept that
a multiracial strategy was necessary in dealing with the government, abandoning
the Africanist notions that he had held for so long. In time, his support for a
multiracial strategy developed into a unshakeable conviction about the
importance of a multiracial approach in striving for non-racial democracy which
never wavered, even under the greatest pressure the government could inflict.
What the Defiance Campaign also showed was that Mandela harboured naïve
illusions about both the government and the white population—illusions that
were to remain with him for many years, with disastrous consequences.
