CHAPTER 22
WINNIE’S TRIAL
THE DRAMA OF THE MANDELA FOOTBALL CLUB WAS MEANWHILE
being played out in the courts. Winnie’s name figured prominently in one trial
after another, but the government was wary of taking action against her, anxious
to avoid any embarrassment that could damage the fragile peace process. ‘We
are proceeding carefully, so as not to give any indication that we are acting
vindictively against Mrs Mandela,’ said the minister of law and order, Adriaan
Vlok. ‘It is also very difficult for the police to find witnesses prepared to testify
against her. In the past, such witnesses have either suddenly changed their minds
or just disappeared.’
A serious difficulty arose in January 1990, two weeks before Mandela’s
release, when Sizwe Sithole, the head of the ‘disciplinary committee’ based at
Winnie’s house and the father of Zindzi’s three-month-old son, was found dead
in a police shower room. Arrested on an arms charge, Sithole had spent nearly
four hours telling police at Protea station about a number of serious crimes he
said involved Winnie and Zindzi. A commission of inquiry under Judge Richard
Goldstone which the government swiftly set up to investigate Sithole’s death
found that he had committed suicide, a verdict that no one disputed. One of the
main reasons Goldstone gave for Sithole’s suicide was that he had been
overcome by remorse for having implicated Winnie and Zindzi. The police went
to considerable lengths to keep Winnie’s name out of the affair and took no
action on the evidence they had been given.
The main body of evidence against Winnie emerged during the trial of the
football club’s coach, Jerry Richardson, for the murder of Stompie Moeketsi
Seipei. The trial had originally been due to start in February 1990, the day after
Mandela’s release from prison, but it was postponed until May 1990. Richardson
was the only person accused of the murder, but six others were charged on four
counts of kidnapping and four counts of assault with intent to cause grievous
bodily harm. The state prosecutors planned to bring charges against Winnie if

the case against Richardson resulted in a conviction.
Winnie did not appear in court. She had declined to testify as a witness,
ignoring requests from Richardson’s attorney to take the stand on his behalf. But
even in her absence, she overshadowed the proceedings. In their evidence, the
three kidnap victims—Kenny Kgase, Thabiso Mono and Pelo Mekgwe—related
how Winnie had told them they were not fit to be alive; how she accused
Stompie of being a sell-out; how she beat them using her fists and then whips;
and how members of the football team joined in afterwards.
Richardson, for his part, denied killing Stompie. He also denied that Winnie
had been present on 29 December 1988, when Stompie and the other kidnap
victims were brought to her house. But his testimony was riddled with lies.
When his defence counsel, Henti Joubert, came to sum up, he admitted
Richardson had lied to protect Winnie and to prevent her from being involved in
the affair: ‘He is protecting himself from others because if he mentions their
names his life won’t be worth much.’ Joubert portrayed Richardson as a poorly
educated and somewhat retarded man who had been easily exploited by the likes
of Mrs Mandela.
The question of whether or not Winnie had been present during the beatings at
her house was obviously crucial. Eighteen months after the event, having
previously made no mention of it to anyone, she now chose to claim that she had
been on a visit to Brandfort at the time. Both the defence and the prosecution in
the Richardson murder trial asked the court to make a finding on the matter.
On 24 May 1990, in the Rand Supreme Court, Justice O’Donovan found
Richardson guilty of the murder of Stompie and guilty on other counts of
kidnapping, assault and attempted murder. He was subequently sentenced to
death. The judge also ruled on the question of Winnie’s involvement: ‘The court
finding on this issue is that Mrs Mandela was present on 29 December for at
least part of the time.’
Winnie was also implicated in other trials involving members of Mandela
United Football Club. In August 1990, Charles Zwane was brought to trial,
charged with nine counts of murder, eight counts of attempted murder, one count
of arson and the unlawful possession of firearms. One of the crimes with which
Zwane was charged was a firebomb attack in February 1989 on the home of
Dudu Chili, a well-respected community leader and friend of Albertina Sisulu,
with whom Winnie had been engaged in a long-running feud over the activities

of Mandela United. Chili’s thirteen-year-old niece had died in the attack.
Zwane’s defence counsel, S. Jacobs, argued, as Richardson’s counsel had
done, that Zwane had fallen under the influence of Mrs Mandela. He asked Dudu
Chili to give her assessment of Winnie’s influence.
JACOBS: Did Winnie Mandela really have the power of life and death
over these people? If she made a decision to kill, would the people kill?
CHILI: I believe so.
JACOBS: Say, for example, she took a decision that Mr X should be
killed—a notional person—and she ordered Mr Y to do it, if Mr Y did
not carry out his orders, did you think Mr Y would be in danger himself?
CHILI: I should think so, because they seem to fear her so much.
Zwane was sentenced to death nine times for the murders.
The most incriminating piece of evidence against Winnie came during the trial
of Sibusiso Chili, Dudu Chili’s son. Along with five others, Sibusiso Chili had
been charged with the murder of a member of Mandela United, Maxwell
Madondo, who himself had been sent on a mission to kill him. Chili was
convicted of Madondo’s murder but was sentenced to only one year’s
imprisonment. The reason for such leniency was a statement agreed upon by the
prosecution and the defence that was placed on the court record: ‘The admission
the state will make is that the deceased, Maxwell Madondo, was a member of the
Mandela Football Club and that a decision was made by Mrs Winnie Mandela
and the football club to kill accused number one, Chili, and accused number six,
Ikaneng.’
On 17 September 1990, the attorney-general, Klaus von Lieres, announced
that Winnie would be charged with four counts of kidnapping and four charges
of assault with intent to cause grievous bodily harm, making her the eighth
accused in the Stompie murder case.
None of these events stopped Winnie seeking positions of political power
within the ANC or Mandela from assisting her at every opportunity. Winnie
portrayed the government’s decision to prosecute her as part of its political
campaign to discredit the Mandelas and the ANC. Mandela took the same view.
Shortly after his release from prison, he was asked in a television interview
whether he saw the Richardson trial as another government set-up. ‘Well, I have

no doubt that it is,’ he replied. ‘The way the South African police have
conducted themselves in the investigation of the so-called offence has been
totally disgraceful. And it is clear that their intention was not to investigate the
commission of any crime, but it was partly to destroy the image of the family.’
Regardless of what evidence was produced against Winnie, Mandela never
changed his line of reasoning. He threw his full weight into getting the ANC to
declare publicly its support for her. He seemed besotted by Winnie, immune to
wiser counsel, determined at whatever cost to foster her ambition and prepared
to endure in silence her affair with the lawyer Dali Mpofu. Senior ANC officials
referred to Winnie as ‘Nelson’s blind spot’. Despite considerable opposition
from within the ANC, Mandela succeeded in securing her election to the
Johannesburg regional executive committee, her position as head of the regional
Women’s League and her appointment in August 1990 as head of the ANC’s
social affairs department. Her appointment as head of social welfare brought
letters of complaint from more than 100 ANC branches around the country.
As well as obtaining Mandela’s support, Winnie cultivated her own power
base among party militants and youth activists, preaching belligerence, exhorting
the masses to fight. This won her support from revolutionary enthusiasts but set
her at odds with Mandela’s own efforts towards a negotiated settlement. On tour
with Mandela in the United States in 1990, she struck a sour note in Harlem with
talk of going ‘back to the bush to fight the white man’. Two days after the ANC
agreed to suspend armed struggle in August 1990, Winnie described the
agreement as merely a strategy. She enjoyed dressing up in designer battle
fatigues to address party rallies and took to wearing a Communist Party pin. She
projected herself as a champion of the poor and downtrodden, spending much
time visiting squatter camps around Johannesburg and helping the victims of
violence. She became renowned for her strong-arm methods of obtaining votes
in her election campaigns, openly issuing threats to anyone she thought might
not support her. Her ambition appeared insatiable.
Winnie’s trial opened on 4 February 1991 in Johannesburg’s Rand Supreme
Court amid much political fanfare. The ANC’s secretary-general, Alfred Nzo, an
‘old guard’ exile doggedly loyal to the Mandelas, declared the trial to be part of
a ‘continuing campaign of political harassment’. Members of the regional branch
of the ANC’s Women’s League, which Winnie chaired, were on hand outside
the court to cheer her: ‘Mother of the Nation, we are with you.’ Winnie had also
organised a Winnie Mandela Support Ad Hoc Committee composed of friends

and admirers. The opening session of the trial was attended by prominent
activists like Joe Slovo, Chris Hani and Alfred Nzo, who arrived, at Mandela’s
personal request, to show solidarity with Winnie. Her defence team was led by
the Mandelas’ old friend George Bizos. It was also notable for including her
lover, Dali Mpofu.
From the start, the trial was marked by one drama after another. Four of the
eight accused jumped bail and failed to appear. One of the three key state
witnesses, Pelo Mekgwe, also went missing. At first it was thought he had been
abducted, but he subsequently surfaced in Lusaka, saying that he had left South
Africa with the help of ANC officials and alleging that he had been bribed by
Winnie not to testify. Mekgwe’s disappearance so frightened the two remaining
key witnesses, Kenny Kgase and Thabiso Mono, that they refused to testify.
Without their testimony, the trial would inevitably have collapsed. After a spell
in the police cells, Kgase and Mono changed their mind. The trial proceeded.
The state prosecutor, Jan Swanepoel, began the trial by disclosing that he
would introduce two other kidnapping cases in which Winnie had taken part as
similar-fact evidence, thus demonstrating that the Stompie incident was not an
isolated case. One involved the kidnapping of two people in September 1988 and
their subsequent assault, during which Winnie was present. The other involved
the abduction in November 1988 of the Sowetan youth Lolo Sono, whose father
had pleaded with Winnie to release him just before he disappeared.
In March, Kgase and Mono took the stand, repeating the evidence they had
given during the Richardson trial, testifying how Winnie had led the assault on
them and how Stompie had been so badly beaten that he could barely walk.
Despite relentless cross-examination from Bizos, they remained steadfast in their
main version of the events.
By the time Winnie took the stand in April, the ANC had decided to distance
itself from the trial and from Mandela’s adamant defence of Winnie. Winnie was
told by senior ANC officials that the trial concerned her and not the ANC. Apart
from Mandela, no senior figures attended court sessions any more.
Winnie’s defence was to deny everything. She claimed that the Mandela
United Football Club had ceased to exist by the time of the incident. She knew
nothing about any of the ‘boys in the back’ living on her premises. Nor had she
met any of the four kidnap victims there.
Winnie claimed that on the evening of 29 December 1988, hours before Jerry

Richardson, Xoliswa Falati and her driver, John Morgan, had gone to fetch the
four victims from the Methodist manse, she had left Soweto for Brandfort,
arriving there sometime after ten. She produced two witnesses to corroborate her
stay. One of them, Thabo Motau, a seventeen-year-old youth who lived opposite
the Mandela house in Orlando West, testified that he had driven Winnie to
Brandfort on 29 December. The other, Norah Moahloli, a schoolteacher who
lived in Brandfort, testified that Winnie had stayed with her there. Winnie
claimed that she had remained in Brandfort until 31 December, returning to
Soweto in the evening. But no witnesses other than Moahloli were produced to
corroborate her claim.
At least two pieces of evidence directly contradicted Winnie’s version. One
was a statement made to the police in February 1989 by John Morgan, who was
one of her co-defendants. Morgan had told police that on 29 December he had
seen Winnie slap Stompie, accusing him of having had sex with the Methodist
minister Paul Verryn. Later that night, he said, he had used Winnie’s vehicle to
take Falati and her daughter back to the Methodist manse. The next day he had
driven the vehicle back to Winnie’s house, where he washed it. Winnie was at
home that day and had told him to drive her to her office in Commerce House.
Zindzi went with her. Faced with this statement in court, Morgan claimed that
police had tortured him into making it. But the judge, Michael Stegmann,
dismissed his assertion as false.
The other piece of evidence about Winnie’s whereabouts on 29 December
concerned the visit she made with Katiza Cebekhulu to Dr Asvat’s surgery.
According to Winnie’s version, the visit took place on 29 December, before she
left for Brandfort. According to Asvat’s medical records, Winnie visited him on
30 December. But Asvat’s medical records were not produced as evidence
during the trial. Nor was his nurse, Albertina Sisulu, asked to testify.
Cebekhulu himself never gave evidence; he was one of the four defendants
who disappeared on the eve of the trial. He had previously made a statement to
police implicating Winnie in the beating of Stompie and describing Dr Asvat’s
visit to Winnie’s house to examine Stompie shortly before he was taken away to
be killed. But the statement was not produced in court. Like Pelo Mekgwe,
Cebekhulu subsequently surfaced in Lusaka, under ANC auspices.
Judge Stegmann’s judgement, given over six hours on 13 May 1991,
contained a devastating indictment of Winnie’s character. He described her as ‘a

calm, composed, deliberate and unblushing liar’. He continued, ‘She gave her
evidence in a manner which impressed me with her wariness, her unwillingness
to commit herself to anything clear-cut or definite, and, in short, with a
remarkable absence of candour. ’ She had gone to extraordinary lengths, he said,
to distance herself from the football team bearing her name: ‘It is odd to
encounter a leader who went to as much trouble as Mrs Mandela to distance
herself from the club which adopted her name and many of whose members
lived in her own backyard.’
Stegmann was in no doubt that Winnie had masterminded the kidnapping of
the four youths. ‘To imagine that all those took place without Mrs Mandela as
the moving spirit is like trying to imagine Hamlet without the prince,’ he said.
He remained uncertain, however, about her involvement in the beatings. The
prosecution had failed to prove that her Brandfort alibis were false, so there
remained a reasonable possibility that she had gone there before the assaults
began, as she had claimed. Nevertheless, she must have known about the
kidnappings and beatings subsequently, but she wilfully ignored the victims’
plight. When pressed by Soweto leaders to release the youths, she refused to free
them. By continuing to hold them for twenty days and to give accommodation to
those who had committed the assault, she had associated herself with the crime.
At the very least, Stegmann concluded, Winnie was an accessory after the fact to
all that had happened. He found her guilty on four counts of kidnapping and of
being an accessory to the assaults.
Sitting listening to this judgement on his wife, Mandela seemed an old and
crumpled figure, drained of all dignity. Loyal to the last, after the verdict had
been given he embraced Winnie, kissing her on the lips, but even though he
managed to control the distress he felt, he was grim-faced and disheartened.
Winnie herself, though shaken by the remarks Stegmann had made about her,
quickly recovered her poise. ‘As long as you know now that I didn’t assault any
child,’ she declared to journalists gathered around her in the well of the court,
‘that is all that matters to me.’ She left the court with a clenched-fist salute,
maintaining that she had been exonerated.
The following day, Stegmann sentenced her to a prison term of five years on
the kidnapping charge and an additional one year for her role as an accessory to
the assaults. Winnie, he said, bore the brunt of the moral blame for the criminal
actions of those in her immediate circle:

Your position of leadership was not something which entitled you to play fast
and loose with the liberties of others to serve your own purposes. You
fundamentally misunderstood or ignored the responsibilities which came with
your position as leader. In this case one of the worst features was your complete
absence of compassion towards the victims of the assaults, suffering in your own
backyard, just outside your window.
Stegmann sentenced her co-defendant, Xoliswa Falati, to six years’
imprisonment, and John Morgan, the driver, to one year’s imprisonment
suspended for five years. George Bizos immediately announced his intention of
appealing against Stegmann’s verdict and applied for bail.
Mandela was not present in court to hear sentence passed on Winnie, but he
continued to protest her innocence. ‘My faith in her has been fully vindicated,’
he said, after learning of the sentence. ‘I also believe that she did not know there
was anyone at the back of the house against his will.’ The last word in the matter
had not yet been spoken, he said: ‘We trust that soon her name will be cleared
completely.’

Shortly after Mandela’s release from prison, photographers taking pictures of
Mandela and Winnie at their home in Soweto asked the couple to move closer to
one another. Winnie shyly demurred, whereupon Mandela moved his chair
closer, put an arm around Winnie and said, ‘I am the only man in the world who
can control this woman.’
The reality, however, was different. Mandela himself was a victim of
Winnie’s own manipulation. For twenty-seven years in prison, Winnie had been
one of his greatest sources of strength. The sense of guilt he felt for her own
plight during those years, he once told her in a letter, ravaged every part of his
being. He emerged from prison obdurately loyal to her. It made no difference
that she had become a criminal menace or that she was unfaithful to him.
Mandela’s loyalty was beyond reason and Winnie exploited this fact to the full.
In a plea of mitigation against the sentence Winnie was to be given, George
Bizos pointed out to Stegmann that by kidnapping standards her crime had been
relatively minor. Indeed, at a time when murders and massacres in South Africa
were commonplace, whether carried out by the police, the third force, Inkatha or
the ANC, the crimes of which Winnie had been convicted were in themselves of

little consequence.
Yet behind the trial lay a larger reality. Winnie had been the head of a
criminal gang which had been involved in murder, rape, arson and assault. Her
activities had contaminated the reputations of the ANC and of Mandela, upon
whom the future of South Africa was seen largely to depend. Mandela
compounded the problem by wilfully refusing to come to terms with what had
happened. Even after her conviction, he continued to support Winnie’s drive for
power and office. Time and again she was to become embroiled in scandal,
causing one embarrassment after another; and time and again, she was to survive
the consequences. But the burden of all this was to be carried by Mandela,
making the monumental tasks he already faced that much harder.
