THE RIVONIA TRIAL
THE CONSPIRATORS WERE HELD UNDER THE NINETY-DAY
DETENTION law, kept in solitary confinement, incommunicado and without
access to lawyers. All but two were imprisoned in Pretoria Local. But Arthur
Goldreich and Harold Wolpe were detained in police cells at Marshall Square in
Johannesburg and from there they fashioned their escape on 11 August by
bribing a young Afrikaner prison guard. Out of sheer vindictiveness, the security
police then arrested Wolpe’s law partner and brother-in-law, James Kantor, a
criminal lawyer with a reputation as a playboy but with no political connections.
No evidence was ever produced implicating Kantor in the conspiracy.
Meanwhile, the government whipped up a public mood of hysteria and fear.
Ministers and police officials openly proclaimed the guilt of the detained men,
though none of them had yet been charged with any offence. Their arrests were
described by the commissioner of police as ‘a major breakthrough in the
elimination of subversive organizations’. The head of the security police,
Colonel van den Bergh, boasted that the underground was smashed, its leaders
apprehended and that nothing remained to be done other than to mop up the
remnants. The government was portrayed as being on the verge of victory over
all its opponents and critics. ‘It was a time when to be a nonconformist, to act
offbeat, to speak against the stream, even to think against the stream, was fraught
with peril,’ said Joel Joffe, a young lawyer witnessing these events.
Like an increasing number of young white professional people, Joffe had
made plans to emigrate. He had never been politically active, but he had grown
to dislike life in South Africa, with its suffocating atmosphere of paranoia and
injustice. He was on the point of leaving for Australia when he was approached
by Hilda Bernstein, who had been searching for a lawyer willing to help defend
her husband in court in the event of charges being laid against him. Mrs
Bernstein had encountered considerable difficulty finding an instructing attorney
prepared to undertake the task. The hazards for any lawyer acting on behalf of
the Rivonia conspirators were severe, both at a professional and at a social level.

Joffe was sceptical about what could be achieved. ‘She was asking that I should
embark on a case of unknown duration in the defence of people I did not know,
whose actions I knew nothing about and on a charge which had not been
formulated, ’ said Joffe. ‘I felt that even if I were to agree, it would be a waste of
time.’ Given all the evidence the government claimed to have, the trial would
surely be a mere formality.
Joffe was nevertheless sufficiently appalled by the manner in which his fellow
lawyers had shunned Mrs Bernstein—‘I really am too busy’—to decide to take
the case. Within the next few weeks, he received other approaches: from
Albertina Sisulu, from Annie Goldberg, the frail mother of Denis Goldberg, and,
later, from Winnie Mandela.
He had yet to ascertain what charges were to be brought against the
conspirators. He went to the Grays to see Colonel George Klindt, the new head
of the Johannesburg security police, and Dr Percy Yutar, the deputy attorneygeneral of the Transvaal, who had been appointed to take charge of any legal
proceedings arising from the Rivonia raid and who had set up offices within
security police headquarters. Neither was helpful. ‘It was all very smooth, all
patently false,’ said Joffe. ‘They were obviously lying and determined to be as
unhelpful towards me as they possibly could.’
Joffe also began to assemble a defence team, although there were no funds
available to meet their costs. The obvious starting point was Bram Fischer. No
one outside a small group of conspirators knew of Fischer’s real role in the
underground. His public reputation was that of a radical lawyer involved in
political cases like the treason trial; he was also known as a skilled advocate
appearing on behalf of giant mining companies in some of the most abstruse
financial cases in the South African courts. Fischer’s political sympathies were
evident, but not his involvement in clandestine activity. When Joffe approached
Fischer for his help, he had not the slightest inkling of what he was really asking
Fischer to do. For Fischer the dilemma was only too clear. The evidence
obtained by police at Lilliesleaf was likely to implicate him; his handwriting was
on several documents seized there. But what was even more hazardous was that
he would be called upon to question witnesses in court who could betray him at
any moment. Fischer did not hesitate to offer his help. He was more than willing
to assist in the preparation of the case, but, without being able to explain his
reasons, he said he was reluctant to be part of the defence team at the trial.

Two other advocates agreed to serve on the defence team. One was Mandela’s
Greek friend George Bizos, by now well versed in political trials. The other was
Arthur Chaskalson, one of the most promising young advocates in the country,
who had no political associations but a deep commitment to the defence of
people who would otherwise have gone undefended.
Together, Joffe, Bizos and Chaskalson put tremendous pressure on Fischer to
agree to lead the defence team. Not knowing of his involvement in the
underground movement, they were unable to understand his reluctance to do so.
They insisted that no other advocate could put so well the argument that the
conspirators had done no more than the Afrikaner rebels who had taken up arms
against the government in 1914 and who had received prison sentences rather
than the death penalty. Fischer eventually agreed to lead the defence team and
persuaded Vernon Berrangé, then living abroad, to join them. The conspirators,
however, understood full well the risks that Fischer was taking. When Rusty
Bernstein first heard Fischer would be acting on their behalf in the trial, he
turned to the others and said, ‘He deserves the Victoria Cross.’
Nearly three months had passed since the conspirators’ arrest and Joffe could
still not obtain any information about who the defendants might be and what
charges they might face. Then, on 7 October, without his knowledge, the
conspirators were taken from their cells, one at a time, to a prison office. There
they were formally charged with offences under three acts of which they were
given only the numbers. They were told they would appear in court within fortyeight hours and that they were no longer being held as ninety-day detainees but
as awaiting-trial prisoners. Mandela was included on the same charges, but he
was to remain in the category of a convicted prisoner.
The same day, hearing rumours on the legal grapevine that the conspirators
were due to appear in court the following morning, Joffe phoned Percy Yutar,
the prosecutor, and was told that the prisoners would indeed be appearing then in
the Supreme Court in Pretoria. Along with Bizos and Chaskalson, Joffe duly
travelled to Pretoria the next day, only to find that no one there knew anything
about the case. From the attorney-general, Rudolf Rhein, the lawyers eventually
ascertained that the prisoners would appear in the Supreme Court on the
following day, but they were still not told who the defendants were or what the
charges were, merely that they would find the defendants in Pretoria Local.
After a long wait and various arguments about whether white and black

prisoners could mix together, the defendants were eventually produced.
Mandela’s appearance had changed considerably. His large frame had withered;
he looked thin and underweight. His face had a sallow complexion, his cheeks
were sunken and the skin under his eyes hung in bags. He was dressed in drab
prison garb: short trousers, a khaki shirt and sandals. But his mood on seeing his
fellow prisoners was buoyant. For the first time in months, he was able to talk to
friends, to touch them, to laugh with them.
The sense of reunion was not shared by all the defendants. Of the eleven
prisoners present, seven of them—Mandela, Sisulu, Mbeki, Kathrada, Mhlaba,
Bernstein and Goldberg—had all played leading roles in the conspiracy. Two
others—Elias Motsoaledi and Andrew Mlangeni—had been arrested before the
Rivonia raid and were at a lower level of Umkhonto, but both had been involved
in sabotage activity; unknown to the police, Mlangeni had been trained in China,
as had Mhlaba. But for James Kantor, a flamboyant thirty-six-year-old, on
friendly terms with police and criminals alike, who counted Colonel Klindt
among his clients, the abrupt change in his fortunes was hard to bear. He was in
a state of shock, his face haggard and drawn, his extrovert nature crushed. All
the accused knew that he had nothing to do with the conspiracy and urged him to
arrange a separate defence.
The predicament of the eleventh prisoner, Bob Hepple, was also acute. Hepple
had played an active part in the underground movement, but as a secondary
figure, passing messages, providing a conduit between the underground and the
outside world, fixing arrangements. His arrest at Lilliesleaf with the others had
been more a matter of coincidence than an indication of involvement in MK’s
military plans. In solitary confinement, his police interrogators, flourishing a
copy of Operation Mayibuye, had told him he was certain to be sentenced to
death unless he collaborated. ‘I didn’t want to die for Operation Mayibuye, ’ he
said years later. ‘I was going to be hanged for a plan which I thought was crazy
and for which I had no responsibility.’ To the dismay and consternation of his
fellow prisoners, Hepple announced that during his detention he had been
‘asked’, as he put it, to give evidence against the others. He was still considering
what to do, he said. All the excitement of the reunion vanished. As Hepple left
the room, the others continued their consultation in a more sombre mood.
The following day, 9 October, the prisoners were driven in a special prison
van from Pretoria Local, accompanied by an armed convoy, to the Supreme
Court on Church Square, an ornate nineteenth-century building, three storeys

high, with columns, marble facings and brass rails, known as the Palace of
Justice. On the other side of Church Square stood the Raadsaal, the seat of the
old Transvaal Republic government, and, in the centre, a massive bronze statue
of President Kruger. Armed policemen were everywhere, both outside and inside
the Supreme Court.
From the basement cells, Mandela, the first accused, led the procession of
prisoners up the steps into the courtroom, raising a clenched fist as he emerged.
This was the first glimpse of him in public for a year. Dressed in shabby prison
garb, short trousers, a khaki shirt and sandals, he had lost so much weight and
his skin was so pallid from prison life that to friends in the spectators’ gallery he
seemed almost unrecognisable. But his smile was still full of its old confidence.
The judge assigned to the case was Quartus de Wet, Judge-President of the
Transvaal, sixty-five years old, a moody, complex character with a reputation for
being self-willed, obstinate and impatient with legal quibbles. He shared the
common white view in the virtues of white supremacy. Yet unlike many other
judges at the time, he did not owe his position to any allegiance to the National
Party. He had been appointed to the bench in 1947, before the Nationalists came
to power.
Percy Yutar rose to call ‘the case of the state against the National High
Command’, and, for the first time, produced an indictment, handing one copy to
the court and passing another to Bram Fischer. The accused were charged under
the Sabotage Act and the Suppression of Communism Act with complicity in
more than 200 acts of sabotage aimed at aiding guerrilla warfare and facilitating
violent revolution and armed invasion of the country. The Sabotage Act carried
the death penalty. In addition to the defendants in court, the indictment listed
twenty-four co-conspirators, including Goldreich, Wolpe, Harmel, Slovo,
Hodgson, Kotane and Tambo.
Significantly, the accused were not charged under the common law of treason.
Prosecution for treason would have required a preparatory examination, useful to
the defence, with two witnesses to every overt act, and proof beyond reasonable
doubt. Mindful of the abortive treason trial, Yutar decided to proceed under the
Sabotage Act, which shifted much of the onus of proof from the prosecution to
the defence. But his decision was to have a marked influence on the outcome.
Fischer immediately rose to apply for an adjournment, asking for at least six
weeks to allow the defence time to prepare its case against such grave charges

and for the accused to recover from their ordeal of solitary confinement. Yutar
opposed any postponement. In a high-pitched voice, he spoke of witnesses who
had to be called before the end of the month, adding, with a theatrical flourish, ‘I
fear for their safety.’ The judge decided that a three-week pause was quite
sufficient and adjourned the court until 29 October.
Immediately after the adjournment, the court reconvened to hear a bail
application from Kantor. The case against Kantor was so flimsy that his lawyers
were convinced that he should have no difficulty in obtaining bail. After an
eloquent address by his lawyer, Harold Nicholas, the judge turned to Yutar and
asked simply whether there were any indications that Kantor had been involved
in the acts of sabotage alleged against the accused. Yutar assured the judge that
there was no doubt whatsoever that Kantor was fully involved. He was denied
bail.
The accused and their lawyers were to develop a contempt and hatred for
Yutar that lasted far beyond the trial. A small, bald, dapper fifty-two-year-old
who held himself ramrod-erect in court, he had ambitions to become the first
Jewish attorney-general ever appointed in South Africa. He made no secret of
his Jewish origins and seemed determined to prove that Jews could be as loyal as
any other subjects of the apartheid state. He harboured a particular dislike for
Jewish communists, of whom there were a considerable number, and felt no
qualms about ingratiating himself with the security police. When Joel Joffe,
himself a Jew, had met Yutar a few weeks beforehand at security police
headquarters, Yutar had made a point of praising his police colleagues. ‘I have
been at the Grays for three weeks now, and in all that time I have not heard a
single word of anti-Semitism from any of these people,’ he had said. He saw his
mission as being to present the accused as violent, vicious, self-interested
individuals seeking to overthrow the government for their own aggrandisement.
In court, when he thought events were going his way, Yutar resorted to open
gloating; when the tide turned against him his voice rose to a high-pitched
squeak. He also had a passion for publicity. On the day before the case began,
Yutar found time to give interviews to reporters and to hand them advance
copies of the indictment, which defence counsel had not yet been able to obtain.
During the three-week adjournment, the accused and their lawyers gathered
daily to assess the indictment and to work out their line of defence. Restored to
the company of his friends and allowed two half-hour visits a week and one meal
a day sent in from outside prison, Mandela’s spirits soon revived. But the

outlook for the conspirators was bleak. Mandela was convinced that the trial
would result in a death sentence and insisted that they had to prepare themselves
for that eventuality. He felt a sense of personal responsibility for what had
happened. ‘He was conscious of obligations over and above others,’ Bernstein
recalled. ‘He had no concern for his own position,’ said Joffe. ‘His aim was to
turn the trial into a showcase against the government. ’ It was this quality of
leadership, of standing firm in adversity, of accepting a greater responsibility for
the course of events, of maintaining dignity and confidence in the face of a death
sentence, that was to leave its mark on the Rivonia trial.
The accused were determined to use the trial for the purposes not of seeking a
lesser punishment but of openly proclaiming their political views and the reasons
why they had resorted to violence. They would not deny responsibility for
sabotage, nor would they attempt to refute evidence obtained by the prosecution
that they knew to be true. They would refuse only to provide further information.
The matter of a sentence was less important to them than the need to explain in
public the stand they had taken.
Observing the discussions, Joffe noted the influence of Sisulu on Mandela and
the others:
He was a man of deliberation and slow judgement. At no time during the whole
of that period did I ever hear Walter make a hasty judgement, or venture an
appraisal of anybody or anything without first weighing it carefully, deliberately,
generally against his own immediate, instinctive reactions. On every issue, the
other prisoners gave the greatest weight to Walter’s opinions. It seemed to me
throughout the case, neither Nelson nor anyone else made any decision without
first seeking Walter’s opinion. After a short time, we on the defence team found
ourselves behaving the same way.
The immediate concern of the lawyers was the indictment. It contained vague
and general allegations, making it impossible to discern precisely what the
offence was, by whom the offence had been committed and in what way the
accused, either individually or jointly, were alleged to be connected with it.
When the lawyers asked the prosecution for further particulars, the replies they
were given were curt: either, ‘These facts are known’ or ‘These facts are
peculiarly within the knowledge of the accused.’ The prosecution, said Joffe,
was clearly following a simple precept: ‘You are guilty. Therefore you know
what you did. Therefore we don’t have to tell you.’ The lawyers decided to ask

the court to dismiss the indictment.
When the accused reappeared in court on 29 October, each in turn emerged
from the stairwell, faced the public gallery, gave the ANC’s clenched-fist salute
and shouted ‘Amandla!’ to which their supporters in the gallery replied with a
loud, ‘Ngawethu! ’ Only Kantor and Hepple did not give the salute, but simply
smiled at friends. To prevent further outbursts, the prisoners were subsequently
brought into court after the judge had taken his seat and opened the session.
Fischer immediately opened his attack on the indictment, speaking slowly and
carefully, weighing up each word, exposing the defects of the indictment one by
one. Some of the sabotage acts, he said, had been committed before any
Sabotage Act existed in South Africa and therefore could not be offences in
terms of the act under which the accused had been charged. He pointed out that
Mandela had been charged with having committed 156 acts of sabotage which
had taken place while he was in prison. Fischer deplored the lack of particularity
and the unsatisfactory, even ludicrous answers given when the defence asked for
further particulars. The state, he said, had decided the accused were guilty and
therefore the defence was a waste of time. Fischer’s crushing exposure of the
indictment was followed up with further ridicule from Kantor’s counsellor,
George Lowen.
The judge then turned to Hepple, who was unrepresented, to ask whether he
wished to say anything about the indictment. But before he had time to reply,
Yutar, sensing that events were moving against him, sprang to his feet to
announce that all charges against Hepple were being withdrawn, adding, in a
voice of triumph, that Hepple would be the first witness for the prosecution
against the accused. Hepple turned pale, rose to his feet and was accompanied
from the dock by Captain Swanepoel down the stairwell to the cells below.
Hepple’s defection was a considerable coup for Yutar. His fellow prisoners
had been expecting it; Hepple had discussed with them the possibility of
inducing Yutar to release him and then skipping the country. However, to the
public, it seemed that Yutar had gained a star witness. But he was still left with
an indictment virtually in tatters after Fischer and Lowen had finished with it.
Ignoring the legal arguments presented by the defence team, Yutar asserted that
their application was neither genuine nor sincere, but merely an attempt to harass
and embarrass the state. With increasing desperation, he resorted to ‘begging’
and ‘imploring’ the court not to reject the indictment, promising to provide

whatever further particulars the judge wanted. De Wet replied testily that it was
not his responsibility to tell the state what particulars were required to make a
good indictment. Yutar continued, ‘I would earnestly beg Your Lordship, nay
crave Your Lordship, not to squash the indictment, but to order that the state
does what it undertakes to do, that is to supply further particulars.’
It was all to no avail. De Wet threw out the indictment. Technically the
prisoners were free men. Their friends and relatives and the security police
rushed forward. Amid pandemonium, Swanepoel leapt into the dock and struck
each of the accused on the shoulder, declaring, ‘I am arresting you on a charge
of sabotage.’ Within a few minutes, the prisoners were herded down to the cells
again.
On the same day, bail applications were due to be heard first for Kantor and
then for Bernstein. The judge appeared sympathetic to Kantor’s case and at one
stage asked his defence counsel what he considered would be a reasonable sum
for bail. The discussion was nearly at an end when Yutar suddenly intervened to
announce that he was in possession of a confidential secret document showing
that escape plans had been made for the accused. What had prompted Yutar’s
latest claim was the discovery among the Rivonia documents of the escape notes
which Mandela had exchanged with Slovo in 1962 and which Slovo had decided
to preserve for posterity. Kantor’s application was rejected; so was Bernstein’s.
Back at Pretoria Local, the accused continued with the preparation of their
defence in a consulting room on the ground floor specially set aside for them.
Assuming that the room was bugged and that everything they said was overheard
by the security police, they communicated with each other by using a simple
coded language or by writing down messages and then burning them in ashtrays
before their daily sessions were over. Prison warders watched this procedure
through a door window with some distress. Before long, Captain Swanepoel was
seen pacing up and down the corridor, glancing through the window whenever
he passed. The prisoners realised how badly Swanepoel wanted to get his hands
on their messages and laid a trap for him. On a piece of paper Mbeki wrote, ‘It’s
so nice to have Lieutenant Swanepoel with us again’, waited for Swanepoel to
pass by and then passed it ostentatiously to Joffe. Joffe studied the message for
some time, whispered in a conspiratorial manner to the prisoners and then,
placing the message in an ashtray, fumbled for his matches. Swanepoel dashed
into the room, seized the ashtray with the message in it and rushed outside. He
did not appear outside the door again.

A new indictment was eventually produced. But it was still so badly flawed
that the defence lawyers decided to apply again for its dismissal. This time,
however, de Wet was in no mood to countenance further delay and he ordered
the case to proceed.
But now yet another drama intervened. Yutar’s first witness, Bob Hepple, had
managed to flee the country and he surfaced in Dar es Salaam, the Tanganyikan
capital, stating that he had no intention of testifying against the accused, whom
he admired and supported. He spoke of threats and broken promises made by the
police, and revealed the mental and physical torture to which detainees under the
ninety-day law were subjected. What no one knew at the time was that his
escape had been arranged by Bram Fischer, who had met him in secret on three
occasions at huge potential risk to himself.
The trial eventually began on 3 December 1963. The accused were asked by
the registrar of the court to plead.
MANDELA: The government should be in the dock, not me. I plead not
guilty.
His remark caused some consternation. There was angry muttering among the
police.
SISULU: It is the government which is guilty, not me.
DE WET: I don’t want any political speeches here. You may plead
guilty, or not guilty. But nothing else.
SISULU: It is the government which is responsible for what is
happening. I plead not guilty.
GOLDBERG: I associate myself with the statements of Mr Mandela and
Mr Sisulu. I plead not guilty.
And so it went on, except for Kantor, who said simply, ‘I am not guilty, My
Lord.’
Then Yutar rose to give his opening address. He had spent con - siderable
effort on it. He had also decided to arrange for it to be recorded by the statecontrolled radio network; a small black microphone had appeared overnight in
front of his desk. Broadcasting court proceedings was unprecedented in South
African history. No attempt had been made to consult defence counsel on the
matter. No sooner was Yutar on his feet than Fischer rose to demand the removal

of the microphones. De Wet looked uncomfortable but ordered them to be
dismantled.
The ‘cornerstone’ of the state’s case was Operation Mayibuye, said Yutar.
‘The accused deliberately and maliciously plotted and engineered the
commission of acts of violence and destruction throughout the country.’
The planned purpose . . . was to bring about in the Republic of South
Africa chaos, disorder and turmoil which would be aggravated, according
to their plan, by the operation of thousands of trained guerrilla warfare
units deployed throughout the country at various vantage points. These
would be joined in various areas by local inhabitants as well as specially
selected men posted to such areas. Their combined operations were
planned to lead to confusion, violent insurrection and rebellion, followed
at the appropriate juncture by armed invasion of the country by military
units of foreign powers. In the midst of the resulting chaos, turmoil and
disorder it was planned by the accused to set up a provisional
revolutionary government to take over the administration and control of
this country.
Yutar went on to give details of the Rivonia headquarters, the arsenal at
Travallyn and the plans for training in sabotage and guerrilla warfare in African
states. Documents and witnesses would be produced, he said, to substantiate all
this.
The extent of the conspiracy, as Yutar outlined it, left the defence lawyers
feeling considerably shaken. ‘From that moment on, we saw the case in a very
simple light,’ said Joffe. ‘For most of the accused the only possible verdict was
“guilty”. The case was therefore, as far as we were concerned, a battle to prevent
the death sentence being carried out.’
During the next three months, the prosecution presented 173 witnesses,
hundreds of documents, photographs and maps and a whole library of captured
books on guerrilla warfare. All Mandela’s papers found at Lilliesleaf were
produced. ‘Nelson felt that he had been let down by that,’ Sisulu recalled.
Mandela had once asked Sisulu during a chance meeting in Pretoria Local in
1962 to ensure that his documents were removed from Lilliesleaf. Sisulu had
raised the matter with Mbeki, but nothing had been done: ‘Nelson felt that the
fact that he was linked to the whole business was because we were responsible
for not taking appropriate steps.’

But prosecution witnesses also inflicted damage. The state’s key witness was
Bruno Mtolo, a member of MK’s Natal regional command, an active saboteur
for three years whom Mandela had met on his journey to Durban in August 1962
and who had also visited the Rivonia headquarters in 1963, where he had held
discussions with Sisulu and Mbeki. Arrested by the security police in August
1963, Mtolo had decided within hours to defect, claiming he had become
disillusioned with MK’s leadership and with the extent of communist influence
over the ANC, even though he himself was a Communist Party member. Mtolo
implicated not only Mandela, Sisulu and Mbeki but a host of other people in MK
activities.
Another key witness was Patrick Mthembu, a member of the Johannesburg
regional command, who had trained in China and had worked closely with all
the conspirators, both during the days when the ANC was a legal organisation
and during Umkhonto operations. Mthembu had spent two periods in solitary
confinement. He was offered indemnity against prosecution in exchange for his
testimony.
Just before the Christmas recess, Kantor was finally granted bail. Over the
months of the trial he had developed a warm relationship with Mandela.
Knowing of Kantor’s anguish at being separated from his wife, Barbara, who
was pregnant, Mandela had once come over to him and put his arm around his
shoulder. ‘Tell Barbara I apologize,’ said Mandela. ‘What for?’ asked Kantor.
‘Because you are here,’ he answered simply.
In January 1964, while sitting in the dock, Kantor wrote a note for Mandela,
which was passed along the row of accused. It said, ‘Barbara and I have thought
about and discussed godfathers at length. We have come to the conclusion that,
whether the baby is a girl or boy, we would consider it an honour if you would
agree to accept this office as an adjunct to the more disreputable positions you
have held in the past.’ Mandela’s reply took some time to arrive, reaching
Kantor just before the tea adjournment: ‘I would be more than delighted, and the
honour is mine, not the baby’s.’ As the court rose for the tea break, Mandela
hung back as the other accused left, pretending to arrange his papers, and
exchanged a quick word with Kantor. ‘Now they dare not hang me,’ he said,
beaming broadly.
In April 1964, soon after the prosecution concluded its case, Judge de Wet
found Kantor not guilty and discharged him. He left the court wearing the tie

Mandela had offered him in exchange for his own as a token of good luck before
the hearing started.
During the five-week adjournment allowed to the defence to examine the
evidence and prepare their case, the prison authorities at Pretoria Local provided
a new consultation room for the conspirators and their lawyers. It was long and
narrow and down the middle of it the prison building staff had constructed a
wooden counter topped by a heavy metal grating, dividing the room in half. Bar
stools had been placed on either side, one side for the lawyers, the other for the
conspirators. When the lawyers were first ushered into the new consultation
room, the prisoners were already seated on their side of the partition, lined up in
a long row like customers at a milk bar. Mandela stood up, smiled politely and
said, ‘What will it be today, gentle - men? Chocolate or ice-cream soda?’ The
prison commander, Colonel Aucamp, a malevolent official with whom Mandela
had previously clashed, was not amused. The lawyers protested that the
arrangements, with nine accused in a single line along the counter on one side
and five lawyers sitting on bar stools on the other, made a proper consultation
virtually impossible. Exhibits and notes had to be slid through a tiny space under
the metal bars. But Colonel Aucamp refused to allow any changes. To add to
their difficulties, the lawyers and their clients now had to assume that the new
contraption contained listening devices relaying everything that was said to
officials outside. They resorted again to passing notes on any issue considered
important.
The conspirators were clear about their objective in the trial. They wanted an
opportunity to explain to the world their reasons for embarking on a campaign of
violence against the government and the circumstances which had forced them
to do so. They would admit to initiating the sabotage campaign; they would
admit to making contingency plans for guerrilla warfare to be implemented if the
sabotage campaign failed to change the government’s mind; but they would
deny that they had already decided to embark on guerrilla warfare, as the
prosecution contended. They therefore needed to clarify the circumstances under
which Operation Mayibuye was drawn up. They also wanted to make clear that
the sabotage campaign had been carried out with express instructions that under
no circumstances should human life be endangered at any time. They would
therefore contest prosecution claims of murder and injury. They would also deny
that the intervention of foreign forces had been contemplated, as Yutar had
further claimed.

The case against individual conspirators, however, was not of equal strength.
The evidence against Bernstein was negligible; he had merely been discovered at
Lilliesleaf with the others. The evidence against Kathrada and Mhlaba was also
limited. The evidence against Mlangeni and Motsoaledi showed mainly that they
had been involved in the recruitment and transportation of volunteers for
military training abroad, making them lower-level operatives in the conspiracy.
Goldberg was identified as a sabotage expert involved in preparations for
armaments manufacture. Only Mandela, Sisulu and Mbeki were fully implicated
as leading figures in the conspiracy. The solution agreed upon, therefore, was
that six of the conspirators would make admissions of guilt on certain charges.
The remaining three—Bernstein, Kathrada and Mhlaba—would continue to
plead not guilty.
In order to ensure that the court heard a clear and coherent account of their
political aims and ideals, the accused decided that Mandela should open the case
for the defence by reading a statement from the dock, unhindered by crossexamination or questions from the bench. This procedure also enabled Mandela
to avoid any suggestion that he was retracting from the position he had taken at
his previous trial in 1962 of refusing to enter the witness box because of the
inherent injustice of the legal system. The disadvantage for Mandela was that a
statement from the dock was not accorded the same legal weight as ordinary
testimony and thus rendered him more vulnerable before the court. But Mandela
regarded whatever sentence he received as being of secondary importance to the
need for public understanding of the conspirators’ beliefs.
Mandela spent about two weeks drafting his speech, working mainly in his
cell in the evenings. He showed the draft to his fellow prisoners, who suggested
a few changes, and to Bram Fischer. Fischer was worried about the content,
about the damage it would do to Mandela’s prospects in court, and took it to a
highly respected advocate, Harold Hanson, for his opinion. Hanson told Fischer,
‘If Mandela reads this in court they will take him straight out to the back of the
courthouse and string him up.’ Fischer urged Mandela to modify the speech, but
to no avail. ‘I felt we were likely to hang no matter what we said, so we might as
well say what we truly believed,’ said Mandela. ‘Bram begged me not to read
the final paragraph, but I was adamant.’
On 20 April 1964, the conspirators were taken back to the Palace of Justice to
commence their defence. Both Winnie and Mandela’s mother were present in
court. In his opening remarks, made in his customary quiet and calm manner,

Fischer announced that certain aspects of the state’s evidence would be
conceded by the accused, but other parts would be challenged. They would deny
that Umkhonto was a section of the ANC—‘the military wing’, as the state
claimed—but seek to show that the leaders of Umkhonto and the ANC
endeavoured to keep these two organisations entirely distinct. ‘They did not
always succeed in this,’ he said, ‘but . . . every effort was made to achieve that
object.’ They would also deny emphatically that the ANC was a ‘tool’ of the
Communist Party, as the state claimed, and that the aims and objectives of the
ANC were the aims and objectives of the Communist Party. They would further
deny that Umkhonto had adopted Operation Mayibuye and had decided upon
guerrilla warfare.
DE WET: Will that be denied?
FISCHER: That will be denied. Here the evidence will show that while
preparations for guerrilla warfare were being made from as early as 1962,
no plan was ever adopted, and the evidence will show why it was hoped
throughout such a step could be avoided.
Fischer paused, while the judge finished making notes, and then announced
that Mandela would make a statement from the dock. Yutar was caught by
surprise. He had been misled into believing that he would have the benefit of
cross-examining Mandela. As Mandela rose slowly, adjusting the spectacles
which he used for reading, Yutar jumped to his feet, his shrill voice rising in
complaint.
YUTAR: My Lord! My Lord! I think you should warn the accused that
what he says from the dock has far less weight than if he submitted
himself to cross-examination!
DE WET: I think, Mr Yutar, that counsel for the defence have sufficient
experience to be able to advise their clients without your assistance.
Standing in the dock, Mandela began reading his statement slowly and with
calm deliberation, his voice carrying clearly across the courtroom. Gradually, as
he spoke, the silence in the courtroom became more profound.
I must deal immediately and at some length with the question of
violence. Some of the things so far told to the court are true and some are
untrue. I do not, however, deny that I planned sabotage. I did not plan it
in a spirit of recklessness, nor because I have any love of violence. I

planned it as a result of a calm and sober assessment of the political
situation that had arisen after many years of tyranny, exploitation and
oppression of my people by the whites.
I admit immediately that I was one of the persons who helped to form
Umkhonto we Sizwe, and that I played a prominent role in its affairs
until I was arrested in August 1962.
He went on to explain the reasons behind the formation of Umkhonto:
Firstly, we believed that as a result of government policy, violence by the
African people had become inevitable and that unless responsible leadership was
given to canalize and control the feelings of our people, there would be
outbreaks of terrorism which would produce an intensity of bitterness and
hostility between the various races of this country which is not produced even by
war.
Secondly, we felt that without violence there would be no way open to the
African people to succeed in their struggle against the principle of white
supremacy. All lawful modes of expressing opposition to this principle had been
closed by legislation, and we were placed in a position in which we had either to
accept a permanent state of inferiority or to defy the government. We chose to
defy the law. We first broke the law in a way which avoided any recourse to
violence; when this form was legislated against, and then the government
resorted to a show of force to crush opposition to its policies, only then did we
decide to answer violence with violence.
But the violence which we chose to adopt was not terrorism. We who formed
Umkhonto were all members of the African National Congress and had behind
us the ANC tradition of non-violence and negotiation as a means of solving
political disputes. We believed that South Africa belonged to all the people who
lived in it, and not to one group, be it black or white. We did not want an
interracial war and tried to avoid it to the last minute.
Mandela referred to the time in mid-1961 when the decision to turn to
violence was taken.
For a long time the people had been talking of violence—of the day
when they would fight the white man and win back their country—and
we, the leaders of the ANC, had nevertheless always prevailed upon
them to avoid violence and to pursue peaceful methods. When some of

us discussed this in May and June of 1961, it could not be denied that our
policy to achieve a non-racial state by non-violence had achieved
nothing, and that our followers were beginning to lose confidence in this
policy and were developing disturbing ideas of terrorism. . . .
After a long and anxious assessment of the South African situation, I,
and some colleagues, came to the conclusion that as violence in this
country was inevitable, it would be unrealistic and wrong for African
leaders to continue preaching peace and non-violence at a time when the
government met our peaceful demands with force.
This conclusion was not easily arrived at. It was only when all else had
failed, when all channels of peaceful protest had been barred to us, that
the decision was made to embark on violent forms of political struggle,
and to form Umkhonto we Sizwe. We did so not because we desired such
a course, but solely because the government had left us with no other
choice.
He outlined what he thought could be achieved by the use of violence.
The initial plan was based on a careful analysis of the political and
economic situation of our country. We believed that South Africa
depended to a large extent on foreign capital and foreign trade. We felt
that planned destruction of power plants and interference with rail and
telephone communications would tend to scare away capital from the
country, make it more difficult for goods from the industrial areas to
reach the seaports on schedule and would in the long run be a heavy
drain on the economic life of the country, thus compelling the voters of
the country to reconsider their position.
Attacks on the economic lifelines of the country were to be linked with
sabotage on government buildings and other symbols of apart - heid.
These attacks would serve as a source of inspiration to our people. In
addition, they would provide an outlet for those people who were urging
the adoption of violent methods and would enable us to give concrete
proof to our followers that we had adopted a stronger line and were
fighting back against government violence.
In addition, if mass action were successfully organized, and mass
reprisals taken, we felt that sympathy for our cause would be roused in
other countries and that greater pressure would be brought to bear on the

South African government.
He dealt with the relationship between the ANC and Umkhonto. The ANC, he
said, was a political organisation with a political function to fulfil. Its members
had joined on the express policy of non - violence. It could not undertake
violence without a change in the whole nature of the organisation. Nevertheless,
it had been prepared to depart from its fifty-year-old policy of non-violence to
the extent that it would no longer disapprove of ‘properly controlled violence’.
Umkhonto remained a small organisation, recruiting its members from different
races and organisations and trying to achieve its own particular objective of
sabotage. Although there had been some ‘overlapping of functions’ and although
the distinction between the two may have become ‘blurred’, the distinction was
still clear: ‘The fact that members of Umkhonto were recruited from the ANC,
and the fact that persons served both organizations . . . did not, in our view,
change the nature of the ANC or give it a policy of violence.’
He also dealt with the relationship between the ANC and the Communist
Party: ‘It is true that there has often been close cooperation between the ANC
and the Communist Party. But cooperation is merely proof of a common goal—
in this case the removal of white supremacy—and is not proof of a complete
community of interests.’ The ANC, unlike the Communist Party, admitted only
Africans as members. Its chief goal was for the African people to win unity and
full political rights. The Communist Party’s main aim, on the other hand, was to
remove the capitalists and to replace them with a working-class government. The
Communist Party sought to emphasise class distinctions, while the ANC sought
to harmonise them. The ANC had never at any period of its history advocated a
revolutionary change in the economic structure of the country, nor had it ever
condemned capitalist society.
He turned to his own political allegiances. He described himself as ‘an
African patriot’, a socialist influenced by Marxist thought, but not a communist.
He was attracted by the idea of a classless society, partly as a result of his
reading of Marxist literature, partly as a result of his admiration for early African
societies in which the land, then the main means of production, belonged to the
tribe. But there were aspects of Marxist thinking with which he fundamentally
disagreed:
From my reading of Marxist literature and from conversations with Marxists, I
have gained the impression that communists regard the parliamentary system of

the West as undemocratic and reactionary. But, on the contrary, I am an admirer
of such a system.
The Magna Carta, the Petition of Rights and the Bill of Rights are documents
which are held in veneration by democrats throughout the world.
I have great respect for British political institutions and for the country’s
system of justice. I regard the British parliament as the most democratic
institution in the world, and the independence and impartiality of its judiciary
never fail to arouse my admiration.
The American Congress, that country’s doctrine of separation of powers, as
well as the independence of its judiciary, arouses in me similar sentiments.
I have been influenced in my thinking by both West and East. All this has led
me to feel that in my search for a political formula, I should be absolutely
impartial and objective. I should tie myself to no particular system of society
other than that of socialism. I must leave myself free to borrow the best from the
West and from the East.
He went on to outline the conditions in which the African population lived
and worked, comparing them to the affluent lifestyle of the white population.
Africans were fighting against two features that were the hallmark of African
life: poverty and lack of human dignity.
Africans want a just share in the whole of South Africa, they want a
security and a stake in society.
Above all, we want equal political rights, because without them our
disabilities will be permanent. I know this sounds revolutionary to the
whites in this country, because the majority of voters will be Africans.
This makes the white man fear democracy.
But this fear cannot be allowed to stand in the way of the only solution
which will guarantee racial harmony and freedom for all. It is not true
that the enfranchisement of all will result in racial domination. Political
division, based on colour, is entirely artificial and, when it disappears, so
will the domination of one colour group by another. The ANC has spent
half a century fighting against racialism. When it triumphs it will not
change that policy.
This then is what the ANC is fighting. Their struggle is a truly national

one. It is a struggle of the African people, inspired by their own suffering
and their own experience. It is a struggle for the right to live.
Mandela stopped reading his statement at this point, put down his papers and
turned to face the judge, speaking his final words from memory:
During my lifetime I have dedicated myself to this struggle of the African
people. I have fought against white domination, and I have fought against black
domination. I have cherished the ideal of a democratic and free society in which
all persons live together in harmony and with equal opportunities. It is an ideal
which I hope to live for and to achieve. But if needs be, it is an ideal for which I
am prepared to die.
In the courtroom there was complete silence as Mandela sat down. For
perhaps thirty seconds the silence continued. Then from the public gallery there
came a great sigh, like the release of breath, and the crying of women.

Mandela’s statement, lasting more than four hours, was followed by the
evidence of Walter Sisulu. Sisulu was the key witness for the defence, his
knowledge of the ANC and of Umkhonto being greater than anyone else’s. Upon
him lay the burden of convincing the judge that Operation Mayibuye had been
considered as a plan of action but not adopted as a policy, the issue which the
defence lawyers considered was the ‘hairline’ around which the prospect of a
death sentence revolved. As Fischer led him through his evidence, Sisulu
explained how he had been present when Operation Mayibuye had first been
placed before the high command as a plan for consideration. The implications of
launching guerrilla warfare were so far-reaching that the high command had
sought the views of the ANC and other organisations. Among members of the
high command itself, opinion was deeply divided. ‘There was a strong argument
against the plan,’ said Sisulu. Several meetings were held to discuss it further.
The last meeting had adjourned without taking a decision. ‘My view was that
conditions did not exist at that time for Operation Mayibuye.’
Sisulu was subjected to five days of cross-examination, withstanding a
barrage of questions, gibes and taunts from Yutar. ‘It was a feat of considerable
merit, and under extremely difficult conditions,’ remarked Joffe. ‘For over a
week, Sisulu was kept in complete isolation with no human contact at all, day
after day in the witness box being hammered by judge and prosecutor.’ One by

one, the other accused—Kathrada, Mhlaba, Bernstein, Mbeki and Goldberg—
took their turn in the witness box to face the same treatment. Motsoaledi and
Mlangeni made short statements from the dock, admitting their guilt as minor
participants in Umkhonto. Motsoaledi described how he had been assaulted
during his period in solitary confinement and how his wife, the mother of seven
children, had been detained under the ninety-day law and rearrested when she
had completed ninety days. Mlangeni described how he had been assaulted and
tortured with electric shocks in police custody.
On 20 May, Yutar arrived in court carrying four volumes containing a
summary of evidence which he proceeded to read out as his closing argument.
Much of it amounted to a political attack on the accused. ‘The deceit of the
accused is amazing,’ he said. ‘Although they represented scarcely more than 1
per cent of the African population [a reference to the ANC’s membership] they
took it upon themselves to tell the world that the Africans in South Africa are
suppressed, oppressed and depressed.’ He repeated his assertion that not only
had guerrilla warfare been agreed upon but that a date had actually been set.
Then de Wet intervened. ‘Mr Yutar,’ he said, ‘you do concede that you failed
to prove guerrilla warfare was ever decided upon, do you not?’
Yutar looked stunned and stammered a submission that preparations were
being made.
De Wet replied testily, ‘Yes, I know that. The defence concedes that. What
they say is that preparations were made in case one day they found it necessary
to resort to guerrilla warfare. But they say that prior to their arrest they never
considered it necessary, and took no decision to engage in guerrilla warfare. I
take it that you have no evidence contradicting that, and that you accept it?’
‘As Your Lordship pleases,’ Yutar replied, in a strangled voice. He then
concluded by arguing that the case was one of not only high treason par
excellence but murder and attempted murder, even though no such charges had
been made against the accused.
Arthur Chaskalson rose to refute that the trial had anything to do with murder
or attempted murder. He proceeded to demonstrate from the testimony of state
witnesses, like Mtolo, that Umkhonto’s clear policy was sabotage in
circumstances where life was not endangered. The indictment, he pointed out,
alleged military training and sabotage. The defence conceded, he said, that
Umkhonto recruited men for military training and that members of Umkhonto

committed acts of sabotage. The defence denied, however, that they committed
all the acts of sabotage they were charged with.
As he began to demonstrate from evidence that there were other organisations
committing acts of sabotage at the time, de Wet intervened to say that he already
accepted this as a fact. In one stroke, a major part of the state’s case—that
Umkhonto had been responsible for all acts of sabotage—fell away.
Fischer then rose to deal with the two most serious contentions: first, that the
high command had decided to embark on guerrilla warfare; and second, that
Umkhonto was the military wing of the ANC—acceptance of which could have
made every member of the ANC liable to prosecution for sabotage or treason.
Fischer had spent months preparing his submissions on these points, but before
he could develop his argument on the first issue de Wet cut him short, saying, ‘I
thought I had made my attitude clear. I accept no decision or date was fixed
upon for guerrilla warfare.’ When Fischer moved on to the second issue, de Wet
again intervened, saying he accepted that though the two organisations
overlapped, they were in fact separate.
All that remained to be determined were the verdict and the sentence. In the
case of six accused—Mandela, Sisulu, Mbeki, Goldberg, Motsoaledi, and
Mlangeni—they had already admitted guilt. The fates of Bernstein, Kathrada and
Mhlaba were less certain. But the centre of interest, as it had been throughout the
trial, was on whether or not the conspirators would receive the death penalty.
During the three-week adjournment before the sentence was announced,
Mandela settled down to write a London University law examination, which he
was to pass.
As the Rivonia trial reached its climax, the outcome stirred intense interest
internationally. Mandela’s defiant statement of his beliefs, his testimony
declaring his willingness to die for the cause of democracy in South Africa and
his bearing before the court had captured worldwide attention. Demonstrations
were held in Europe and the United States. Students at the University of London
elected Mandela as president of the student’s union midway through the trial. On
9 June, two days before the judge was due to give his decision, the United
Nations Security Council urged the South African government to end the trial
and to grant an amnesty to the defendants and to all others who had been
restricted or imprisoned for opposing apartheid; Britain and the United States
abstained on the vote. In London, an all-night vigil was held at St Paul’s

Cathedral.
It took Judge de Wet three minutes on 11 June 1964 to find all the
conspirators except Bernstein guilty. He reserved sentence for the following day.
Bernstein was immediately surrounded by security police, arrested as he tried to
reach the defence counsel’s table, hustled down to the cells with the others and
charged with new offences.
That evening, the defence lawyers called at Pretoria Local to confer with the
prisoners. The lawyers were pessimistic about the sentence they thought likely.
Recent sentences imposed by South African courts had established some harsh
precedents. An eighteen-year-old youth had been sent to prison for ten years for
attempting to leave the country in order to be trained by the ANC as a motor
mechanic. Another ANC supporter had received twenty years’ hard labour for
recruiting a man for military training abroad. Several young men had been
sentenced to ten years for attending a single meeting at which sabotage was
discussed, even though there was no evidence that the accused had done any
more than listen to the discussion.
Yet the lawyers found the prisoners as resolute as ever. Joel Joffe recalled:
They were calm, living now in the shadow of death. The strain and the tension
were becoming almost unbearable, yet the only matter that they wanted to
discuss was how they should behave in court if the death sentence was passed.
We told them that the judge would ask the first accused, Nelson Mandela,
‘Have you any reason to advance why the death sentence should not be passed?’
Nelson decided that he would have a lot to say. He would tell the court that if
they thought by sentencing him to death they would destroy the liberation
movement they were wrong; he was prepared to die for his beliefs and knew that
his death would be an inspiration to his people.
We pointed out that such an address was hardly designed to facilitate an
appeal. Nelson’s answer was simple. If sentenced to death he would not appeal.
Mandela, Sisulu and Mbeki had already decided among themselves not to
appeal. They believed that an appeal would undermine the moral stand they had
taken. It might be interpreted by their supporters as an act of weakness. ‘Our
message was that no sacrifice was too great in the struggle for freedom,’ said
Mandela.
That night, after the lawyers had left, dismayed at their decision and hoping

they would change their minds, Mandela scribbled a few lines which he intended
to use if he were sentenced to death. ‘I meant everything I said,’ he wrote.
‘I was prepared for the death penalty,’ Mandela said in his autobiography. ‘To
be truly prepared for something, one must actually expect it. One cannot be
prepared for something while secretly believing it will not happen. We were all
prepared, not because we were brave but because we were realistic.’
The following morning, outside the Palace of Justice, a large crowd gathered
silently, some carrying banners declaring, ‘We are proud of our leaders.’ Inside,
the courtroom was packed. Winnie and Mandela’s mother were once again
present.
Before sentence was passed, the court heard two pleas in mitigation. The
defendants were at first reluctant to allow anyone to speak on their behalf but
then agreed on condition that nothing was said that could be construed as an
apology. A number of names were suggested, but most of those approached
declined to undertake the task. Bram Fischer finally gained the assistance of two
distinguished South Africans: Harold Hanson, a highly respected advocate, and
Alan Paton, the writer. As leader of the Liberal Party, a devout believer in non violence and a known anti-communist, Paton had often been critical of the
accused, but when approached for his help Paton asked one simple question:
‘Are their lives in danger?’ On being told yes, Paton said, ‘In that case, there is
no question at all. I will give evidence if I am called.’ Joel Joffe remarked later,
‘He was almost the last of a breed that had become nearly extinct in South
Africa—the liberal of principle and courage, who is not afraid to raise his voice
against the stream.’
Paton spoke of Mandela, Sisulu and Mbeki as ‘men well known for their
courage, determination and ability’. He added, ‘I have never had any doubt
about their sincerity, their deep devotion to the cause of their people and their
desire to see that South Africa become a country in which all people participate.’
He told the judge that the exercise of clemency in this case was of great
importance for the future of the country.
In a move virtually unprecedented in the South African courts, Yutar rose to
launch an attack on Paton’s character. ‘I propose to cross-examine this witness
with Your Lordship’s leave. And I don’t do so in order to aggravate the
sentence, but in order to unmask this gentleman and make perfectly clear that his
only reason for going into the witness box, in my submission, is to make

political propaganda from the witness box.’
Yutar implied that Paton was a fellow-traveller of the Communist Party and
that he moved readily in communist circles. He questioned his actions in asking
countries abroad to maintain their concern about the injustices of apartheid. As
the smears continued, Paton became angry and confused. The security police
witnessing the spectacle tittered.
It was left to Harold Hanson to restore some sense of propriety to the
proceedings. He spoke eloquently, saying a nation’s grievances could not be
suppressed, people would always find a way to give voice to those grievances.
‘It was not their aims which had been criminal,’ said Hanson, ‘only the means to
which they had resorted.’ He reminded the judge that his own Afrikaner people,
during their struggle against British imperialism, had conducted armed uprising,
rebellion and treason and had appeared for such offences before courts which
had decided to show leniency. Two Boer generals, de Wet and Kemp, charged
with high treason after leading an armed rebellion against the government in
1914, had been sentenced to no more than six years’ imprisonment.
De Wet appeared to pay scant attention to these arguments. He neither looked
up nor made notes. When Hanson had finished, he nodded to the accused to rise.
I have heard a great deal during the course of this case about the
grievances of the non-European population. The accused have told me
and their counsel have told me that the accused, who were all leaders of
the non-European population, were motivated entirely by a desire to
ameliorate these grievances. I am by no means convinced that the
motives of the accused were as altruistic as they wish the court to
believe. People who organize a revolution usually take over the
government and personal ambition cannot be excluded as a motive.
De Wet paused for a moment, then continued, his voice quieter than before,
making it hard for the public gallery to hear what he was saying:
The function of this court, as is the function of the court in any other country, is
to enforce law and order and to enforce the laws of the state within which it
functions. The crime of which the accused have been convicted, that is the main
crime, the crime of conspiracy, is in essence one of high treason. The state has
decided not to charge the crime in this form. Bearing this in mind and giving the
matter very serious consideration, I have decided not to impose the supreme
penalty. . .

There was a gasp of relief, but the judge was continuing:
which in a case like this would usually be the proper penalty for the crime, but
consistent with my duty that is the only leniency which I can show. The sentence
in the case of all the accused will be one of life imprisonment.
Mandela smiled at his comrades and turned to look for Winnie and his mother
in the gallery. But there was consternation among many there who had not heard
the sentence. Goldberg’s mother cried out in desperation, ‘Denis! What is it?’
‘Life!’ he shouted back, ‘Life! To live!’ Then they all disappeared out of sight
for the last time, down the courtroom steps to the cells below.
Their lawyers stood in silence, then each shook hands silently with Bram
Fischer. ‘It had been his responsibility in the first place to save their lives,’
remarked Joffe, ‘and it was his victory in the first place that they would live.’
The outcome of the Rivonia trial made little impact on white public opinion
other than to reassure the white population that the government had succeeded in
overcoming serious threats to their well-being. The press praised the police, the
prosecutor and the judge. Reaction abroad, however, was very different. ‘The
verdict of history,’ prophesied the London Times, ‘will be that the ultimate guilty
party is the government in power—and that already is the verdict of world
opinion.’ The New York Times concurred: ‘To most of the world, these men are
heroes and freedom fighters. The George Washingtons and Ben Franklins of
South Africa.’
From his own lonely outpost in the mission village of Groutville, to which he
was restricted, Chief Luthuli, who had remained so adamantly opposed to
violence, issued his own verdict:
In the face of the uncompromising white refusal to abandon a policy which
denies the African and other oppressed South Africans their rightful heritage—
freedom—no one can blame brave just men for seeking justice by the use of
violent methods; nor could they be blamed if they tried to create an organized
force in order to ultimately establish peace and racial harmony.
For this, they are sentenced to be shut away for long years in the brutal and
degrading prisons of South Africa. With them will be interred this country’s
hopes for racial cooperation.
His words could not be quoted in South Africa and so went unheard.

In the early hours of 13 June 1964, Mandela and the other African prisoners
were taken from their cells in Pretoria Local and put on a military transport
aircraft for the flight to Robben Island. As dawn came, they could see below the
mountains and forests of the Western Cape. The terrain excited Mandela. He saw
it ‘not as a tourist but as a strategist, looking for areas where a guerrilla army
might hide itself’. Even after being sentenced to life imprisonment for a forlorn
and futile campaign of violence against the government, he could still not shake
off his ambition to be a guerrilla leader.

In terms of the objectives that Mandela set out in court during the Rivonia trial,
Umkhonto’s sabotage campaign was a total failure. The impact on the economy
was negligible. Foreign investors, far from being frightened away, became more
deeply involved. Foreign governments, while vociferous in condemning
apartheid, were still content to sit on the sidelines. There was much debate about
economic sanctions but little action.
The white electorate remained largely unaffected by the sporadic nature of
sabotage attacks and reacted by demanding not reform, as Mandela had
anticipated, but tougher action, thus allowing the government to take ever more
repressive counter-measures in the name of law and order. At each successive
election, the National Party gained higher levels of white support.
By making unlimited use of the ninety-day detention laws, the security police
soon broke the back of all underground resistance. Subjected to solitary
confinement and prolonged interrogation, allowed no visitors or reading material
except the Bible, detainees were constantly taunted with the threat that they
could be held in such conditions indefinitely. Their ‘cracking point’ varied.
Writing of her own experience of being held incommunicado for 117 days, Ruth
First, a member of the Communist Party’s central committee, noted, ‘Men
holding key positions in the political movement, who had years of hard political
experience and sacrifice behind them, cracked like eggshells. Others, with quiet,
reticent, self-effacing natures, who had been woolly in making decisions and
slow to carry them out, emerged from long spells of isolation shaken but
unbroken.’ Where interrogation methods failed, torture usually succeeded.
‘Under torture,’ said Ben Turok, ‘many victims found to their regret that they
knew too much and that the police knew that they knew.’

In the wake of the Rivonia raid, Umkhonto endeavoured to establish a new
high command, whose members included Wilton Mkwayi, a China-trained
saboteur, and David Kitson, a young Communist Party instructor who had been
due to attend the Lilliesleaf meeting in July 1963 but had fortuitously been
confined to bed with influenza. A key figure in setting up the new arrangement
was Bram Fischer, who, even during the course of the Rivonia trial, remained
actively involved in the underground. Fischer and Kitson would meet in Greek
cafés on Nuggett Street in Johannesburg, where Fischer would pass on funds for
Umkhonto obtained from abroad and even copies of maps and sabotage targets
captured from Lilliesleaf which had been handed to Fischer by the prosecution in
the normal course of court proceedings. However ingenious such activities were,
they came to naught. Soon after the end of the Rivonia trial, Kitson and Mkwayi
were arrested. By mid-1964, Umkhonto was effectively crushed.
The same fate befell the other sabotage group, the National Committee of
Liberation, or the African Resistance Movement as it eventually became known.
The ARM was little more than a collection of white middle-class dissidents,
about fifty in number, former communists, Trotskyists and Liberal Party radicals
who had set themselves the task of helping to bring about the downfall of
apartheid without any clear idea of how this was to be achieved other than by
random sabotage strikes. Following the departure abroad of its founder, Monty
Berman, the ARM’s main organiser became a twenty-four-year-old former
student leader based in Cape Town, Adrian Leftwich. Leftwich was a competent
administrator who kept detailed records of ARM members and activities in his
flat.
Though some members began questioning the wisdom of continuing with
sabotage, Leftwich remained an ardent enthusiast. In April 1964, at an ARM
meeting in Johannesburg, when a Coloured member, Eddie Daniels, argued that
sabotage was a counterproductive strategy that should be abandoned, Leftwich
attacked his attitude as cowardly. What he proposed instead was a series of
sabotage attacks to coincide with the sentencing of the Rivonia trialists. On 10
June, a number of power pylons were toppled.
The security police responded with a series of raids on the homes and offices
of dissidents they had so far neglected. Leftwich’s flat, with its large archive of
ARM documents, was one of them. Within a few days, Leftwich had ‘cracked’,
supplying his interrogators with all the information on members, addresses and
operations they required to roll up the organisation. Leftwich went on to

compound this betrayal of his friends and colleagues by testifying against them
in one trial after another, gaining his own freedom in exile in return.
The end of the sabotage era was marked by an incident which to most whites
justified all the security measures the government had enforced. On 24 July, one
of the few remaining activists still at large, John Harris, a Liberal Party member,
filled a suitcase with explosives and a detonator and left it in the white section of
Johannesburg’s main railway station. It exploded, killing an elderly woman,
maiming a child and injuring a score of other whites. Harris was subsequently
hanged, the only white saboteur ever to be executed in South Africa. More than
any other episode, the bombing was used by the government to assert the evil
nature of all anti-apartheid opponents.
One last defiant stand was taken against the government, a personal stand
made by Bram Fischer. For the duration of the Rivonia trial, Fischer had
acquired a form of immunity which no one expected to last once the trial was
over. He had managed to avoid being identified by farm workers and servants at
Lilliesleaf called as witnesses in the trial by making sure he was engaged on
other legal business elsewhere when they appeared in court. But his handwriting
on documents found at Lilliesleaf provided evidence less easily circumvented.
One document identified by a handwriting expert as being written by Harold
Wolpe was passed by the prosecutor in court to Fischer, who looked at it without
a trace of concern and then passed it to the rest of his team, who, aghast, saw
only too clearly that it had been written by Fischer. But the prosecution had
other examples of Fischer’s handwriting which they chose, for reasons of
convenience, not to identify at the time. Percy Yutar would simply say, ‘There is
a document here, My Lord, which is in somebody else’s handwriting . . . ’
Fischer’s fate, in fact, was already sealed. Unknown to him, the senior ranks
of the Communist Party had been penetrated by a police agent, Gerard Ludi,
providing the security police with enough information to wipe out its entire
structure. What evidence they lacked was subsequently obtained from a senior
figure in the Communist Party, Piet Beyleveld, who agreed to testify against his
former colleagues, including Fischer, in exchange for his own freedom. A
member of the party’s central committee, Bartholomew Hlapane, also defected
and was used as a state witness in one trial after another.
Not only was Fischer’s political world on the verge of disintegration, but his
personal life was suddenly afflicted by personal tragedy. On the day after the

sentence in the Rivonia trial was given, Fischer and his wife, Molly, left
Johannesburg by car for a holiday in the Cape. On the way there, approaching a
bridge over a river, Fischer swerved to avoid a motorcyclist. The car left the road
and plunged into a waterhole some thirty feet deep. Fischer managed to escape,
but Molly was pinned in the back and drowned.
In September 1964, Fischer and thirteen other white communists were
arrested and charged with membership of the illegal Communist Party. Fischer at
the time was acting chairman of the central committee, the last survivor of the
original 1950s central committee. Released on bail, he was given permission to
fly to London to argue an international patents case before the Privy Council,
which his client subsequently won. In London, friends tried to persuade him to
remain there, but Fischer believed not only that it would be dishonourable to
jump bail but that his place was in South Africa. He returned to face trial.
But in January 1965, Fischer decided to go underground in a last act of
defiance against the might of the apartheid state. He explained his reasons in a
letter to the court:
What is needed is for white South Africans to shake themselves out of their
complacency. . . . Unless this whole intolerable system is changed radically and
rapidly, disaster must follow. . . . To try to avoid this becomes a supreme duty,
particularly for an Afrikaner, because it is largely representatives of my fellow
Afrikaners who have been responsible for the worst of these discriminatory laws.
. . . If by my fight I can encourage even some people to think about, to
understand and to abandon the policies they now so blindly follow, I shall not
regret any punishment I may incur.
He concluded, ‘I can no longer serve justice in the way I have attempted to do
during the past thirty years. I can do it only in the way I have now chosen.’
Using a variety of disguises, Fischer evaded capture until November 1965.
Brought to trial, he was found guilty of conspiring, along with the Rivonia
trialists he had defended, to commit sabotage and, at the age of fifty-seven,
sentenced to life imprisonment.
Fischer was the last of the conspirators to remain at large in South Africa. By
1965 no active revolutionaries survived there. Those activists who managed to
evade arrest soon fled the country, joining a small coterie of exiles based in
London. Rusty Bernstein, released on bail after the Rivonia trial, was one of
them. Others, like Ruth First and Wolfie Kodesh, accepted the government’s

offer of a one-way exit permit.
How widespread resistance against the government had been was shown in a
series of trials across the country. Nearly 8,000 people were charged with
offences linked to political defiance. Most were convicted and imprisoned, some
for life, some for fifteen or twenty years, others for lesser periods. Nearly fifty
men were sentenced to death. Most of the trials were held in relative obscurity.

In trying to explain the collapse of Umkhonto, Joe Slovo spoke of ‘an heroic
failure’. The reality, however, was that right from the start the conspirators had
made a fatal miscalculation about the power of the government and the ways in
which the government was willing to use it. They also underestimated the
effectiveness of police techniques. ‘Having talked of fascism for a decade or
more, the movements were nevertheless caught by surprise when the police
behaved like fascists,’ noted Ben Turok. All the other mistakes and errors
committed by the conspirators—the ‘mood of carelessness and bravado’ which
Slovo admitted had overtaken the conspirators, the neglect of political work
among their African constituency that Kotane wanted to continue, the failure to
develop a real underground organisation of the kind that Mandela had once
proposed—all this merely compounded the process of defeat. Whatever reasons
were given, what was ultimately proved was that a collection of amateur
revolutionaries were no match for the brute strength of the South African state.
The price for this miscalculation was huge. With the nationalist movement
destroyed, a silence descended for more than a decade. On Robben Island,
Mandela and his colleagues became largely forgotten men.