TALKING WITH THE ENEMY
THE AMOUNT OF ATTENTION FOCUSED UPON MANDELA MADE THE
government acutely concerned about his conditions in prison. There was a
constant worry that he might die, setting off an avalanche of condemnation and
protest. Rumours of his ill-health and ill treatment frequently circulated,
sometimes started deliberately by Winnie. During one visit she paid to Mandela
in 1983, he complained he had been issued with a new pair of shoes which were
a size too small and pinched his toe. He said he would return them and get
another pair, and was subsequently treated in hospital for a sore toenail. But as
Winnie reported the matter, Mandela had been forced to wear shoes that were
too small for him and as a result had had to have a toe amputated. Articles in the
foreign press referred to such ill-treatment and suggested the prison authorities
in Pollsmoor were trying to break his spirit. When the veteran opposition MP
Helen Suzman visited Mandela to ascertain the truth, she asked how his foot was
after the operation. Mandela at first looked blank and then said, ‘Oh, you mean
the toenail that was removed. That’s fine. It was my fault really, as I ordered the
wrong size shoe.’ He took off his sock, held his bare foot up to the glass partition
and wiggled his toes.
To demonstrate that Mandela was in good health and being well treated, the
government allowed a number of foreign visitors to interview him. Just before
Christmas in 1984, Nicholas Bethell, a member of the British House of Lords
and of the European Parliament, met him in the prison commander’s office. His
account of the meeting appeared in a British newspaper in January 1985.
Mandela entered the room in the company of two senior prison officers—‘a sixfoot-tall, lean figure, with silvery hair, an impeccable olive-green shirt and wellcreased navy blue trousers’. His manner was self-assured. He was anxious to put
Bethell at his ease and invited him to sit down at the commander’s desk, where
he could take notes. He confirmed that he was in good health: it was not true, he
said, that he had cancer or that he had had a toe amputated. He was
complimentary about the helpful attitude of senior officers. He listed a number

of complaints—a damp patch on the wall of his room, the lack of contact with
other political prisoners, the need for more family visits—but mentioned nothing
to cause Bethell undue concern. ‘The problem is, therefore, not one of brutal
prison conditions,’ said Bethell. ‘It is that Mandela and his friends are in prison
at all.’
Mandela explained his position about the armed struggle:
The armed struggle was forced on us by the government. And if they want us
now to give it up, the ball is in their court. They must legalize us, treat us as a
political party and negotiate with us. Until they do, we will have to live with the
armed struggle. . . Of course, if there were to be talks along these lines, we in the
ANC would declare a truce.
When the interview ended, Brigadier Munro invited Bethell to visit Mandela’s
quarters.
We walked in slow procession up flights of stairs and around corners,
with Mandela leading the way as if showing me around his home. He did
not open doors for me; this was done by sergeants with heavy keys after
much saluting and clanking. Always, though, Mandela was the one who
showed the way, inviting me to go first through every door and plying
me with questions on Britain and the world . . .
Mandela introduced Bethell to his cell mates and proudly showed him his
vegetable garden before saying goodbye. As a sergeant opened the grey, heavy
steel door, Mandela shook hands, saying, ‘Well, Lord Bethell, this is my frontier,
and this is where I must leave you.’
A few weeks later, Samuel Dash, a professor of law at Georgetown
University, met Mandela and he too testified to his commanding personality. He
described him as looking younger than his sixty-six years. ‘He appeared
vigorous and healthy with a calm, confident manner and dignified bearing that
seemed incongruous in our prison surroundings. Indeed, throughout our meeting
I felt that I was in the presence not of a guerrilla fighter or radical ideologue, but
a head of state.’
Dash asked him if he took any encouragement from suggestions that the
government might repeal laws banning interracial marriage and ease influx
controls. Mandela smiled. ‘You are speaking about pinpricks,’ he replied.
‘Frankly, it is not my ambition to marry a white woman or to swim in a white

pool. The central issue is political equality.’
Mandela outlined three basic principles for a future South Africa: a unitary
state without homelands; non-racial elections for parliament; and one-person
one-vote. Dash asked how this programme would affect the white population,
many of whom feared that political equality would mean subjugation at the
hands of an embittered black majority. Mandela stressed that this was a
fundamental concern of the ANC’s leadership. ‘Unlike white people anywhere
else in Africa, whites in South Africa belong here—this is their home,’ Mandela
said. ‘We want them to live here with us and to share power with us.’
But, Dash asked, how could he reconcile such moderate positions with the
ANC’s avowed goal of overthrowing the regime by force? Mandela replied that
he wished the changes he sought for South Africa could be achieved peacefully.
And he conceded that blacks would suffer most if they resorted to violence.
‘However,’ he said, ‘if white leaders do not act in good faith towards us, if they
will not meet with us to discuss political equality, and if, in effect, they tell us
that we must remain subjugated by the whites, then there is really no alternative
for us other than violence. And, I assure you, we will prevail. ’ Because of the
military power of the South African government, blacks could not defeat the
white regime in direct combat, but, over time, ‘we can make life most miserable
for them’.

A second cycle of violence, more intense and more prolonged, began in March
1985, centred on the townships of the Eastern Cape. Army units were sent in to
quell the violence but their efforts made little impact. In June, the focus of
‘unrest’ shifted to the mining towns of the East Rand. In July, Soweto erupted.
As well as the daily chronicle of violence, there was an upsurge of boycotts,
stay-aways, rent strikes, marches and demonstrations. Funeral services were
turned into political rallies where ANC flags and banners were openly flaunted,
all adding to the climate of insurrection.
In July, Botha declared a state of emergency in thirty-six magisterial districts
in the Eastern Cape, the East Rand, the Vaal Triangle and Johannesburg, giving
the police and the army virtually unlimited powers to deal with the local
population. Security forces arrested hundreds of community leaders, student
activists, church workers and union officials, hoping to break the back of local
opposition. Assassination squads were once more at work.

The daily spectacle of violent protest and government repression, shown on
television screens around the world, provoked a chorus of international
condemnation and calls for action against Botha’s government to force him to
undertake major reforms and open negotiations with black leaders, including
Mandela. Foreign investors, taking fright at the continuing violence and the
possibility of international action, began unloading their South African shares.
American banks decided to stop rolling over loans to South African borrowers,
starting a chain reaction which pitched South Africa into a major financial crisis.
In an attempt to restore foreign confidence, government officials promised
that major reforms were imminent and pointed to an address that Botha was due
to make at the opening of a National Party conference in Durban on 15 August
as a likely occasion on which they would be unveiled. The foreign minister, Pik
Botha, travelled to Western capitals bearing the glad tidings and pledging that a
formula would be found that would permit the unconditional release of Mandela.
International interest in what Botha would say was intense.
But Botha never reacted well to pressure, either from the international
community or from cabinet ministers anxious to proceed faster with reform. In a
truculent performance that was watched on television around the world, Botha,
wagging his finger, contemptuously dismissed demands for more change. ‘I am
not prepared to lead white South Africa and other minority groups on a road to
abdication and suicide,’ he said. He offered not a single new reform, blamed
violence in the townships on ‘communist agitators’ and the foreign media, and
castigated his critics at home and abroad, warning, ‘Don’t push us too far.’
It was a display of intransigence which worked well with Afrikaner audiences
but made South Africa a leper in the world’s financial markets. Foreign investors
deserted South Africa in droves. The value of the rand plunged. The government
was forced to suspend trading on the foreign exchange market, to close the
Johannesburg stock exchange for five days and to impose a unilateral
moratorium on the repayment of foreign debt.
The tide of opinion against South Africa was so strong that even conservative
Western leaders like Ronald Reagan and Margaret Thatcher, previously
outspoken in their opposition to sanctions as a means of dealing with South
Africa, were obliged to agree to a package of measures. Though the action taken
in Washington and London was of largely token significance, it was a sign of the
strength of hostility towards South Africa that it was taken at all. At a

Commonwealth conference in October, Thatcher joined other Commonwealth
leaders in calling on Botha to dismantle apartheid, end the state of emergency,
lift the ban on the ANC and release Mandela.
White business leaders, appalled by the unending cycle of black anger,
government ineptitude, disinvestment, financial mayhem and international
sanctions, lined up to condemn the government’s failure to introduce meaningful
reforms, and demanded urgent action, including the release of Mandela and
moves to establish a new political system involving ‘genuine power sharing’. In
September, a small group of businessmen, led by the chairman of the AngloAmerican Corporation, Gavin Relly, took the audacious step of flying to Zambia
for talks with Oliver Tambo and other ANC leaders. The meeting took place at a
lodge in a wildlife park, with the ANC members dressed impeccably in suits and
ties and the businessmen wearing more casual attire, looking almost unkempt by
comparison. ‘What we are concerned with,’ Relly told Tambo, ‘is not so much
whether the following generation will be governed by white or black people, but
that [South Africa] will be a viable country and that it will not be destroyed by
violence and strife.’ Tambo replied that he personally abhorred violence—‘I
even take insects out of the bath’—but warned that the conflict was bound to
escalate unless apartheid was dis - mantled. At the end of the meeting, the
participants all declared their satisfaction with the outcome. ‘It was one of the
nicest days I’ve ever spent,’ said Relly. ‘A picnic among South Africans talking
about their future together.’ Botha denounced the businessmen for their
‘disloyalty’ and for showing ‘signs of weakness towards the enemies of South
Africa’.
From Pollsmoor, Mandela took his own initiative, writing to the minister of
justice, police and prisons, Kobie Coetsee, pressing him for a meeting to discuss
talks between the ANC and the government. He received no reply.
By the end of 1985, now anxious to improve South Africa’s standing with
foreign banks and foreign governments and to head off the possibility of another
debt crisis and a more punishing round of sanctions, Botha was ready to move
ahead with further reforms. Apartheid, he declared in January 1986, was ‘an
outdated concept’. Finally conceding the inevitability of African urbanisation, he
agreed to scrap the pass laws and influx controls that were once considered vital
protection for the white population and had for much of the century constituted a
crippling burden for the African population. He pledged his commitment to
‘power sharing’ and proposed to establish a new national forum to represent

African interests which he hoped would appeal to moderate African leaders. He
talked of a ‘single South Africa’ with ‘one citizenship’ for all South Africans,
shedding all further notion of turning South Africa into a country of separate
homelands, as Verwoerd had planned. He also agreed to allow a Commonwealth
negotiating team, the Eminent Persons Group, to visit South Africa as part of a
mission to promote a dialogue between the government and black political
leaders, including Mandela and ANC officials in exile.

The circumstances of Mandela’s imprisonment now began to change. In
November 1985, he had been admitted to the Volks Hospital in Cape Town for
surgery on an enlarged prostate gland. While recuperating from the operation, in
a tightly guarded section of the hospital, he had received an unexpected visitor:
the prisons minister, Kobie Coetsee. By chance, on the day before the operation,
Coetsee had boarded the same flight from Johannesburg to Cape Town as
Winnie, who was on her way to see Mandela in hospital. Coetsee had stopped by
her seat in the economy section to assure her of the government’s concern for
her husband’s health and later, during the flight, Winnie had marched through to
the first-class section to talk to him. As a result of this encounter, Coetsee
decided to pay Mandela a visit.
Mandela was amazed by the visit, but immediately took command of the
situation, introducing Coetsee and the commissioner of prisons, General Johan
Willemse, who was with him, to his nurses, inviting them to sit down, making
sure they were comfortable and engaging in pleasantries. Coetsee was struck by
his natural dignity and ease of manner. Mandela, for his part, sensed a change of
atmosphere from previous meetings with government officials. Coetsee was
altogether more gracious and cordial. Little of substance was discussed, but
Coetsee hinted that he was looking for a way to put Mandela ‘in a situation
between prison and freedom’.
Upon leaving hospital in December, Mandela was told that he would not be
rejoining his colleagues on the top floor at Pollsmoor but given separate quarters
on the ground floor of a separate wing. His new quarters consisted of a large
main room, comfortably furnished, with a private bathroom next door, and two
other rooms, one for exercise and the other for study. Mandela was not happy to
be separated from his colleagues. To meet with them henceforth, he had to put in
an official request. But he realised that his new circumstances facilitated the

possibility of discussions with the government, an objective he had always held.
He also realised that his ANC colleagues would fear that, in isolation, he might
be tricked into making a deal with the government which they could not support.
He therefore asked George Bizos, his lawyer and friend, to fly to Lusaka to
assure Tambo he would take no decisions without their approval. He wrote twice
to Coetsee proposing talks, but was disheartened to receive no reply. He spent
his days listening avidly to radio news broadcasts, devouring newspapers,
exercising hard and continuing his studies, waiting for some signal from the
outside world.
The opportunity for talks came not from the government but from the
Commonwealth Eminent Persons Group. In early 1986, the Commonwealth
negotiators, led by General Obasanjo, a former military leader of Nigeria, and
Malcolm Fraser, a former Australian prime minister, began shuttling around
southern Africa, endeavouring to find a common basis for negotiation between
the South African government and the ANC. After some hesitation, Botha
agreed to let Obasanjo meet Mandela in February and then for the group of
seven to see him in March and then in May.
The prison authorities made sure that Mandela was well turned out for the
occasion. A tailor was summoned to take his measurements for a new pin-stripe
suit. He was also given a shirt, tie, underwear, shoes and socks. The prison
commander, Brigadier Munro, inspected the result. ‘Mandela,’ he said, ‘you
look more like a prime minister now, not a prisoner.’
When they met him at Pollsmoor’s guest house, the Commonwealth team
were equally impressed. ‘We were first struck by his physical authority—by his
immaculate appearance, his apparent good health, and his commanding
presence,’ they reported. ‘In his manner he exuded authority and received the
respect of all around him, including his jailers.’
At the start of their second meeting, both Coetsee and Willemse put in an
appearance. Mandela urged them to stay to listen to the discussion. He had
nothing to hide from them, he said. If only the government and the ANC could
sit down and talk, some of the differences between them which arose solely
through a lack of contact could be eliminated. The fact of talking was essential
in the building of mutual confidence. But the two men went away.
Mandela expounded at length on his hopes for a multiracial democracy in
South Africa. He acknowledged the fears that whites held about majority rule

and stressed the importance of providing minority groups with a real sense of
security. He emphasised that he was a nationalist, not a communist, whose
principles were unchanged from those to which he subscribed when the Freedom
Charter was drawn up in 1955.
He was questioned extensively on the issue of violence. Mandela explained
that he was not yet in a position to renounce violence, but stressed that violence
could never provide an ultimate solution to South Africa’s problems; only
negotiations could. The Commonwealth team found him ‘reasonable and
conciliatory’. They planned one further meeting with him before concluding
their assignment.
Botha, however, was becoming impatient with the whole process. During the
course of their endeavours, the Commonwealth team had drawn up a ‘possible
negotiating concept’ which went far beyond anything he was willing to
contemplate. In exchange for a commitment from the ANC to suspend violence
and enter into negotiation, the South African government would have to release
Mandela and other political prisoners and detainees, withdraw the military from
the townships, lift the ban on the ANC and the PAC, suspend detention without
trial and permit normal political activity. Botha had held back from terminating
the whole exercise only because of the threat of further sanctions.
Yet Botha was also faced with signs of a growing white backlash. Opinion
polls and parliamentary by-elections showed a clear resurgence of support for
extreme right-wing parties which accused the government of dealing leniently
with township unrest for fear of offending foreign opinion. Added to fears about
black unrest and the government’s failure to suppress it, there was deep alarm
about how far the government was prepared to go with its reform programme. A
chance remark by the verligte foreign minister, Pik Botha, that he could foresee
circumstances in which South Africa might one day have a black president, sent
a shockwave through the white community. Botha denied any such notion, but
the damage was done. National Party officials reported mass defections to rightwing parties.
Black activists meanwhile, convinced that they had the government on the
run, were becoming ever more defiant. Black leaders predicted the government’s
downfall. The ANC in exile declared 1986 to be the ‘Year of Umkhonto we
Sizwe’ and talked of ‘turning every corner of our country into a battlefield’. In
scores of townships across the country, the tide of black militancy was thought

to be unstoppable. On May Day, workers and students staged a nationwide
strike, the largest anti-apartheid protest in South Africa’s history. An even larger
three-day general strike was planned for 16 June to mark the tenth anniversary of
the Soweto uprising.
Under pressure from every quarter, Botha reacted impetuously with a display
of belligerence and ill-temper that brought upon him universal condemnation.
On 19 May, the day the Commonwealth Eminent Persons Group was due to
meet cabinet ministers, Botha ordered air strikes against targets in three
neighbouring capital cities, Lusaka, Harare and Gaborone, claiming that they
were ANC bases. In parliament subsequently he bragged that the raids were just
a ‘first instalment’ and that they showed ‘South Africa has the capacity and the
will to break the ANC’. The Commonwealth team immediately cut short its
mission.
Next Botha ordered outright repression of all black opposition. Under a
nationwide state of emergency declared on 12 June, the security forces set out to
decapitate all black resistance through mass arrests and tight control of township
activity. The army surrounded whole townships and moved into schools. Prisons
were soon filled with community leaders, trade unionists, church workers,
students and other anti-apartheid activists. Strict censorship was imposed on the
media, prohibiting all but official information on security force activities and
black resistance. Defending his proclamation of a state of emergency, Botha
claimed he faced a choice akin to that ‘between war and a dishonourable, fearful
peace’. He acknowledged that there would be a price to pay in terms of
sanctions. But he declared that South Africa would not ‘crawl before anyone’ to
avert the threat of sanctions and was quite prepared to ‘go it alone’.

Despite the repression, Mandela was determined to find a way out of the
deadlock. Soon after the state of emergency was declared, he wrote a note to
General Willemse saying he wanted to see him on a matter of national
importance. Willemse responded by arranging to meet Mandela in his residence
in the grounds of Pollsmoor a few days later. When they met, Mandela told
Willemse he wanted to see Kobie Coetsee to raise the question of talks between
the government and the ANC. Then and there, Willemse telephoned Coetsee at
his official residence in Cape Town and was told to bring Mandela around
immediately for a meeting. Within minutes Mandela was on his way to

Savernake, Coetsee’s residence, eight miles away. Coetsee welcomed him with a
glass of sherry and apologised that he had not been given a chance to change out
of his prison clothes. To Mandela, the sherry, his first drink in twenty-four years,
was like nectar.
Their discussion lasted for three hours. Mandela found Coetsee both
knowledgeable about the central issues involved and willing to listen. He asked
Mandela under what circumstances the ANC would be willing to suspend its
armed struggle and whether he envisioned constitutional guarantees for
minorities in a future South Africa. The two men, both lawyers, formed a liking
for each other which was to endure for many years. Towards the end of their
discussion, Coetsee asked what the next step was. Mandela replied that he
wanted a meeting with Botha. Coetsee made a note of this and said he would
send his request through the appropriate channels. They parted on good terms.
Mandela told no one of this encounter, neither his colleagues in Polls moor
nor those in exile in Lusaka. He wanted the talks process to gain some
momentum before disclosing that it was under way. But, to his frustration, he
heard nothing more for months from Coetsee. He wrote him a letter but received
no reply.
The difficulty was President Botha. He had been informed about Coetsee’s
discussion with Mandela and was willing to allow Coetsee to stay in touch with
him. But his interest in Mandela was limited to finding ways and means of
releasing him from prison, and he had no intention of engaging in talks about
political change. Botha had reached the limits of his reform programme. He
believed that the reforms he had introduced to South Africa were of major
importance and yet had earned him little credit, either at home or abroad. He
certainly had no intention of contemplating the idea of talks with the ANC. In
his view the ANC was an organisation under communist control, bent on
destroying white civilisation. It was at the centre of the ‘total onslaught’ the
country was facing. Its links with the Soviet Union and other communist states,
the support it received from Marxist regimes in Mozambique and Angola, and,
above all, its alliance with the South African Communist Party were all cited by
Botha as evidence of the ANC’s true nature. The only answer to this ‘total
onslaught’ was ‘total strategy’ and with this the government was already
succeeding.
For the rest of his term of office, Botha concentrated more and more power in

the hands of his security officials. A complex web of committees was
constructed to give the State Security Council direct control over a vast range of
government activity. The security network covered the entire country, reaching
down to every level of society and designed to meet any contingency. Specialist
teams were set to work on every subject, from manpower and transport to
cultural affairs and community services. The underlying belief was that
economic welfare and social improvements would win the hearts and minds of
the local population. As the defence minister, Magnus Malan, caustically
remarked, once blacks had toilets, they would not want democracy. To ensure
more effective control of the townships, the government coopted allies in the
black community—councillors, policemen, businessmen, traders and vigilante
groups—providing them with the means necessary to defend their position
against radical activists. In the war against ‘enemies of the state’, all methods,
including assas - sination, were considered by security officials to be legitimate.
At a meeting of the State Security Council in February 1986, Botha, impressed
by a magazine article he had read about a ‘third force’ operating against the
Mafia in Italy, suggested the need for a similar ‘third force’ in South Africa ‘to
combat terrorism and unrest’.
The state of emergency, meanwhile, effectively crippled organised black
opposition. With thousands of activists in detention, opposition groups fell into
disarray. Youth organisations, once at the forefront of the township revolt, lost
all vigour. The UDF was reduced to a mere shadow of its former self. After two
years of bitter conflict, the black opposition movement had proved to be no
match for a government armed with totalitarian powers and prepared to use
them.
Botha’s tough, aggressive posture on security found ready support from the
white electorate. In the 1987 election, he succeeded in holding on to his twothirds majority in parliament. But what the result also showed was a massive
lurch to the right. The extreme right wing picked up nearly 30 per cent of the
vote. In all, more than 80 per cent of the white electorate voted for right-wing or
extreme right-wing parties which rejected all notion of fundamental change to
the apart - heid system. Liberal opposition parties fared badly. Political debate
henceforth was conducted more in terms of right-wing demands to curb reform
than liberal demands to increase it. All this served to reinforce Botha’s
determination to hold firm.
Yet even within the heart of the Afrikaner establishment, there were critics of

Botha’s kragdadigheid approach who believed that it had no long-term future.
One of them was Pieter de Lange, chairman of the Broederbond, which had
played a highly influential role in Afrikaner nationalist politics since the 1920s.
De Lange embarked on a personal campaign to convince Afrikaners of the need
for fundamental changes conceding political rights to the black population and
established his own contacts with ANC officials in exile in 1986. Other groups
too—opposition politicians, churchmen and academics—found their way to
Lusaka and Harare for meetings with the ANC. Botha, meanwhile, denounced
all such contacts and did his best to obstruct them. A group of respected Dutch
Reformed Church clergymen who wanted to talk to the ANC he branded as
‘naïve’ and ‘childish’ and threatened to confiscate their passports.

Even though Mandela heard nothing from Coetsee for months on end, there were
signs that the government was planning a different role for him. On Christmas
Eve in 1986, he was given his first taste of freedom outside prison in twenty-four
years. After breakfast, the deputy commander of Pollsmoor, Lieutenant-Colonel
Gawie Marx, called by his cell to ask whether he would like to see something of
Cape Town. Together they drove along the coast road to Cape Town and
meandered in the car through its streets. Mandela was riveted, watching the
ordinary activities of people out shopping, walking their dogs, sitting in the sun:
‘I felt like a curious tourist in a strange land.’ On the way back to the prison,
Marx asked Mandela if he would like a cold drink and stopped the car at a café:
‘He just left me there, sitting alone in the car with the keys in the ignition.’ As he
waited for Marx to return, Mandela became more and more agitated and intense,
wondering whether he should try to make a run for it, and was greatly relieved
when Marx reappeared.
Other trips were arranged for him. He was taken to coastal resorts and fishing
villages, to the mountains and inland to the edge of the Great Karoo. He walked
on beaches, took tea in cafés and ate fish and chips. Once he visited the home of
one of his warders, meeting his wife and children. Only a handful of trusted
prison staff and guards knew of these secret journeys. No word of them leaked
out. Nor was he ever recognised in public. No photograph of him had been
allowed to be published in South Africa since his imprisonment. The last
photographs taken of him in the 1960s, for anyone who could remember, showed
a heavily built middle-aged man. Now he was a lean, grey-haired, elderly figure,
with creases and furrows etched on his face and a slightly fragile air.

He also spent hours whiling away the time in vegetable gardens at the
southern edge of the prison grounds in the company of his warder, James
Gregory. Together they would sit in the lush, long grass on the banks of a small
reservoir, watching the flights of wild geese and ducks and reminiscing about
their childhoods and their families. Mandela took a close interest in Gregory’s
family. ‘It was not merely politeness but genuine interest,’ said Gregory. ‘He
was genuinely concerned for people, all people, and when he asked about their
welfare, he took time to listen. It was not just a polite refrain.’ When Gregory’s
son, Brent, joined the staff at Pollsmoor, he was astonished when Mandela
greeted him as a friend, saying he had known all about him since his schooldays.
‘It was like meeting an uncle for the first time,’ said Brent.
In 1987, Coetsee resumed his secret discussions with Mandela, seeking a
formula that would enable the government to grant him an ‘honourable release’.
By publicly requiring Mandela to renounce violence, Botha had made the task
more difficult. Having taken such a firm stand, he would only appear weak if he
subsequently released Mandela unconditionally, and Botha was a man obsessed
by the need to appear tough and in control. ‘He wanted this thing to be done. He
knew it had to be done,’ recalled Coetsee, ‘but he didn’t want to appear weak.’
Mandela, however, had no interest in negotiating his own release unless it was
part of a package of measures including the lifting of the ban on the ANC. As he
had made clear when first rejecting Botha’s conditional offer of release, there
was no point in being freed if he was not then free to engage in political activity.
He continued to press for a meeting with Botha. He was also concerned to secure
the release of his older colleagues, including Sisulu, who was seventy-five, and
Mbeki, who was seventy-seven, and asked for Coetsee’s help in this matter.
By 1988, the government had decided to take the discussions with Mandela a
stage further. A secret committee was formed to explore the political issues that
Mandela had long wanted to raise. It was headed by Coetsee and included two
senior officials in the prisons department, General Willemse, the commissioner,
and Fanie van der Merwe, the director-general, providing the meetings with the
ostensible cover, if any word leaked out, that they were concerned with no more
than discussions about prison conditions.
The presence of the fourth member of the committee, Niel Barnard, however,
signified their true importance. Barnard, a thirty seven-year-old former
academic, was the head of Botha’s National Intelligence Service, a member of

the inner circle of his advisers. He was an ardent Afrikaner nationalist and a
committed supporter of the ‘total onslaught’ school, but he took a pragmatic
view of the government’s options. Along with other senior government officials,
he believed that splits could be found within the ANC between nationalists and
communists which the government would be able to exploit to its advantage,
opening the possibility of an accommodation with moderate nationalists. As well
as the ‘Mandela initiative’, Barnard was monitoring secret talks which had
begun in England in October 1987 between a number of prominent Afrikaners
and ANC officials in exile.
Before agreeing to attend the first meeting of the committee, Mandela decided
to consult his colleagues on the third floor. He was less than frank in what he
told them. Meeting them one by one, at the insistence of the prison authorities,
he gave them no idea of the extent of his talks with Coetsee which had begun
two years previously. Nor did he reveal that the government had set up a special
committee to handle the talks which included Botha’s intelligence chief.
Sisulu, his oldest friend and mentor, was highly sceptical about the idea of
talks. ‘I was not against negotiations in principle,’ he recalled. ‘But I would have
preferred the government to take the initiative to talk to us rather than our
initiating talks with them.’ Mandela retorted that if he was not against the
principle of negotiations, it did not matter who took the initiative. Realising that
Mandela had already made up his mind, he did not try to stand in his way. Years
later Sisulu acknowledged, ‘I would have hesitated. I would have wanted certain
things done. I might have lost the chance.’ Kathrada was even more adamant in
his opposition. By initiating talks, he said, it would appear that they were
capitulating. Only Mhlaba and Mlangeni were in favour.
Mandela was no more forthcoming with Tambo. When Tambo asked, in a
message conveyed by Bizos, what it was that he was talking to the government
about, Mandela sent only a terse reply, giving no detail. His colleagues,
meanwhile, feared that in isolation from the other prisoners, he would misjudge
events and compromise the struggle. Many of them were averse to any idea of
dialogue. ‘I knew it would be opposed by our own people as well as those on the
government side,’ Mandela said. What he wanted was to present his ANC
colleagues with the fait accompli of a dialogue before any of them could disrupt
it.
The first meeting of the committee was held in May 1988 in the office of the

prison commander at Pollsmoor. It was a tense occasion, with much suspicion on
both sides. Mandela had never met Barnard before. Barnard was conscious of the
fact that in Mandela’s eyes he was ‘a youngster’, half Mandela’s age. The
second meeting, which took place at Willemse’s house, over sherry and supper,
was more relaxed. To put Barnard at ease, Mandela always greeted him in
Afrikaans and allowed him to conduct his side of the talks in Afrikaans.
Subsequent meetings occurred regularly, almost every week.
Once the preliminary discussions were over, the talks centred on three main
issues: the armed struggle, the ANC’s alliance with the Communist Party and the
question of majority rule. The government representatives insisted that the ANC
would have to renounce violence before the government would agree to
negotiations and before Mandela would be allowed to meet Botha. The
government’s position had always been clear: it would not negotiate with any
organisation involved in violence. To change its position now would involve a
loss of credibility. Mandela’s reply was that if the government adopted peaceful
methods, so would the ANC.
They were equally adamant that the ANC would have to sever its link with the
Communist Party before negotiations could begin. The Communist Party, they
maintained, dominated and controlled the ANC. No progress could be made
until the link was broken. Mandela explained at length the reason behind the
alliance. They had similar aims in overthrowing apartheid, but different longterm interests. No move would be made to break the alliance merely because the
government wanted it to end.
The government side was also sceptical about the fate of the white minority
under majority rule. Their interests, they suggested, would be trampled on. They
questioned Mandela on what protection for minorities the ANC would offer.
Mandela referred them to the Freedom Charter, which stated that South Africa
belonged to all who lived in it, black and white, and tried to reassure them that in
any future dispensation the majority would depend heavily on the skills and
experience of the whites.
Mandela’s grasp of the issues and, in particular, his knowledge and
understanding of the Afrikaner people greatly impressed those present. Mandela
knew ‘more about the Afrikaners’ history than many Afrikaners themselves,’
recalled Coetsee. Yet the questions, and the answers, soon became repetitive. As
Mandela’s seventieth birthday passed by in July—marked by a huge festival

concert in London but by no particular celebration in Pollsmoor—he became
increasingly restless. ‘You don’t have the power,’ he told Barnard. ‘I want to
talk to the man with the power, and that is P. W. Botha. I want to talk to him.’
On the basis of these secret sessions, Coetsee and Barnard succeeded in
persuading Botha to agree to a meeting. ‘I spent an hour with him telling him
there was no way he could lose out if he saw Mandela,’ Barnard recalled. ‘“If
the meeting goes wrong and jumps the tracks and all that,” I said, “you will still
be remembered as the one who tried to keep things moving forward to a
solution. But if it goes well it will be the beginning of South Africa’s settlement
politics, and history will acknowledge you for that.”’ The meeting was arranged
for the end of August 1988.
Yet to Mandela’s immense frustration, he fell ill. A persistent cough had
troubled him for some weeks. Just before a meeting with one of his lawyers,
Ismail Ayob, at the end of July, he began to vomit. At first, doctors diagnosed
flu, aggravated by dampness in his ground-floor rooms, but Mandela continued
to feel sick. On 12 August, he was taken to Tygerberg Hospital near Cape Town,
where he was found to have tuberculosis. He immediately underwent an
operation to remove fluid from his lungs. Because the tuberculosis had been
arrested at an early stage, no long-term damage was likely and Mandela
recovered more quickly than expected. But the prized meeting with Botha, for
which he had striven for more than two years, had to be postponed.
In September, he was moved to a luxury private clinic, the Constantiaberg,
near Pollsmoor, the first black patient ever to stay there. His meetings with
Coetsee and the secret committee resumed. Then in December he was taken to a
new location, the Victor Verster prison-farm near Paarl, in the heartland of the
Cape wine-growing district, thirty-five miles from Cape Town—a place intended
to be half-way between prison and freedom.
The house he was given was the most spacious and comfortable home in
which he had ever lived. A whitewashed single-storey residence, it stood in an
isolated part of the farm, at the end of a winding dirt road, shaded by tall fir trees
and surrounded by fields and a wood. It contained a large lounge and four
bedrooms, with a garden full of flowers and fruit trees and a swimming pool, all
enclosed behind a high wall.
The keys were left in the doors for Mandela to use as he chose. The cupboards
were stocked with provisions, wines and spirits, courtesy of the government. On

hand to greet him was the prison commander, Brigadier Keulder, who told him
that if he needed anything, he just had to ask. The following day, Coetsee arrived
with a crate of wine as a housewarming gift. The prison staff assigned to him
included James Gregory, whom he had known for twenty-two years and whom
he regarded as a friend, and Jack Swart, a warrant officer who served as his
personal chef, providing him with whatever meals and delicacies he fancied.
Mandela particularly enjoyed Swart’s homemade ginger beer. Gregory’s son,
Brent, was also a member of the staff.
Mandela soon settled into a comfortable routine. Each morning, he was
examined by a doctor. He toured the garden, taking a proprietorial interest in the
plants. He tried out the swimming pool. Ignoring protests from his household
staff, he insisted on making his own bed and on doing his share of washing the
dishes. He finally succeeded in passing his law degree. He watched television.
He entertained his lawyers and members of his family in style. His four
comrades from Pollsmoor paid him a visit, Sisulu marvelling at his ‘five-star
hotel’ conditions ‘complete with room service’. On Christmas Day in 1988,
Winnie, Zindzi and Zindzi’s two children came for the day, the first proper
family gathering Mandela had enjoyed in twenty-six years.
But as for his main immediate objective of opening a dialogue with Botha, he
made no further progress. In January, the seventy-three-year-old president
suffered a stroke and once again, the meeting had to be rescheduled. And then
the sense of tranquillity he had just begun to experience was disrupted by a
massive scandal involving Winnie with which he had to contend.