SPEAR OF THE NATION
A WARRANT FOR MANDELA’S ARREST WAS SOON ISSUED. HE WAS
THE only member of the National Action Committee, given responsibility for
organising the national strike, who had been publicly identified. The names of
other members, like Sisulu, were deliberately not disclosed, since organising a
strike by Africans was a criminal offence. Mandela was therefore certain to face
a prison sentence, unless he could successfully evade capture. There was a large
contingent of ANC supporters ready to help. But what was even more important
was that Mandela had access to the network of Communist Party supporters who
had had eight years of experience of working underground undetected and were
already proficient in the use of secret communications, safe houses and hidden
meetings.
This new style of leadership—operating from an underground headquarters—
caused considerable controversy within the ANC. The ANC was accustomed to
its leaders standing openly in defiance of the government to demonstrate their
willingness to make the same sacrifices they were urging on their supporters.
During the Defiance Campaign, prominent officials had lined up to be arrested
and had openly sought imprisonment. Imprisonment was seen to be as much a
symbol of defiance as the breaking of laws. Mandela’s decision, therefore, not to
seek arrest or to stand trial in connection with charges arising from his
leadership of the strike represented a significant change in how the ANC
believed it should conduct the business of liberation; some critics charged it was
tantamount to ‘running away’.
Mandela’s skill in evading capture, however, soon caught the imagination of
the press and the public. The press dubbed him the Black Pimpernel, an African
version of the Scarlet Pimpernel, a fictional character who evaded capture during
the French Revolution. Mandela moved about the country, from Port Elizabeth
to Cape Town, to Durban, to Johannesburg, urging support for the strike,
meeting journalists and advertising his activities through telephone calls to
newspapers. Much of the work he carried out at night, growing used to spending

his days in hide-outs. He disguised himself with different outfits, dressing in
workmen’s overalls or chauffeurs’ clothes, growing a beard, wearing round,
rimless spectacles, walking and speaking in a manner as unobtrusive as possible.
After dark he often appeared as a night watchman, dressed in a large grey
overcoat and cap pulled over his eyes and occasionally sporting large earrings.
Police efforts to find him—mounting roadblocks, searching houses—proved
fruitless. Mandela was constantly on the move, going from one safe house to
another. There were times, however, when he had a narrow escape. An African
policeman in Johannesburg recognised him in his chauffeur’s uniform, but
passed by with a smile. Once while he was waiting in his car at a traffic light,
Colonel Spengler, the head of the security police on the Witwatersrand, who had
known him for ten years, drew up alongside but did not glance his way.
Mandela adapted to the solitary nature of underground life without difficulty:
‘I welcomed the opportunity to be by myself, to plan, to think, to plot.’ But he
was never able to overcome his longing to see more of Winnie. With Winnie, the
discipline by which he was determined to live fell away. ‘His meetings with
Winnie were foolhardy,’ said Rusty Bernstein. ‘They were high-risk. This was
his Achilles’ heel. Otherwise he was extremely cautious.’ On one occasion when
a scheduled meeting with Winnie fell through, Mandela was so disappointed that
he simply drove off to look for her. He eventually managed to see her after
getting a friend to telephone her. Winnie recalled:
I saw him frequently when he was underground. I waited for that sacred knock at
the window in the early hours of the morning. I never knew when. I never had an
appointment made. At the beginning he used to come home for an hour or so
early in the morning, depending on the political situation. Later, they were
watching me twenty-four hours a day and I had to slip out through police
cordons to go to him.
Then, someone would come and order me to follow him in my car. We would
drive a kilometre or so from the house, we would then meet another car, we
would jump from that one into another, and by the time I reached him I had gone
through something like ten cars. I never knew where I was. His hide-outs were
all over the country. The people who arranged this were, of course, mostly
whites.
She never knew the identity of these white couriers. ‘I would just find myself
at the end of the journey in some white house; in most cases when we got there

they were deserted. You could see that arrangements had been made for families
to stay away while we were there together.’
The dates chosen for the three-day stay-at-home were 29-31 May, to coincide
with the day nominated by the government to proclaim South Africa a republic,
31 May. The establishment of a republic, free from all links with the British
crown, had been one of the most cherished objectives of Afrikaner nationalists
since Britain’s defeat of the old Boer republics of the Transvaal and the Orange
Free State in 1902. A referendum among the white electorate in October 1960
had produced a small overall majority in favour of a republic. Verwoerd
intended that Republic Day on 31 May would be remembered as a day of
celebration.
The ANC’s plans for strike action thus became a trial of strength. In April,
Mandela wrote a letter to Verwoerd, on behalf of the National Action
Committee, requesting him to call a national convention or face a massive strike.
‘We have no illusions about the counter-measures your government might take,’
he wrote. ‘During the last twelve months we have gone through a period of grim
dictatorship.’ Nevertheless, he added, ‘We are not deterred by threats of force
and violence.’ Verwoerd did not reply.
Mandela appealed for help from the leader of the opposition United Party, Sir
de Villiers Graaf. ‘Stated bluntly, the alternatives appear to be these: talk it out,
or shoot it out,’ he wrote. ‘It is still not too late to turn the tide against the
Nationalist-created crisis. A call for a national convention from you now could
well be the turning point.’ He did not receive a reply.
In an article in the liberal journal Contact, Mandela appealed for support from
student leaders and sportsmen. He was optimistic about what could be achieved:
‘There are some who are still assailed by doubts and hesitations. We say to them
that the times are critical and momentous. We urge them to join in with us and
together to deliver the knockout punch.’
The counter-measures ordered by Verwoerd far exceeded anything that
Mandela had expected. In the largest mobilisation since the war, the government
called out army and police reserves. All police leave was cancelled. Armed
guards were posted to protect power stations and other essential services. Police
raids were conducted night after night in African townships; helicopters were
used to train searchlights on houses, yards and unlit areas; police vans broadcast
warnings that Africans who went on strike would be sacked and forced out of

towns. Employers threatened mass dismissals. All political meetings were
banned. A twelve-day detention law was introduced. Troops camped in the heart
of Johannesburg, ready for action. It was the biggest show of strength the
Nationalist government had ever mounted.
In parliament, Verwoerd issued warnings not only to ‘agitators’ but also to
‘members of the ordinary public’, including ‘some intellectuals and some
pseudo-intellectuals as well as some newspapers’ who were ‘busy playing with
fire’ by advocating a multiracial national convention. This proposal, he said, was
made by communists and ‘everyone who lends support to this proposition, will,
whatever his personal aims may be, become jointly responsible for what is their
[the communists’] aim’.
Despite this display of might by the government, the strike call on 29 May
was answered by thousands of workers in major towns. Scores of industries and
factories were disrupted. But the overall result did not match Mandela’s
expectations. He described the first day of the stay-at-home as ‘not the national
success I had hoped for’; and on the second day, he called off the campaign.
In the following days, at carefully arranged venues, Mandela gave a series of
interviews to foreign journalists. At one meeting, in a sparsely furnished flat in
Yeoville, north-east of the city centre, he appeared relaxed, dressed in a striped
sports shirt and grey trousers, with a side-parting clipped neatly in his hair,
laughing easily as he welcomed the visitors. Did he concede, asked one
correspondent, that the strike had been a failure? ‘In the light of the steps taken
by government to suppress the stay-at-home, it was a tremendous success,’ he
replied. The mobilisation of the army as well as the police was ‘striking
testimony of African strength and a measure of the government’s weakness’. But
in a television interview, at the house of a white supporter, he struck a far more
sombre note: ‘If the government reaction is to crush by naked force our
nonviolent demonstrations, we will have to seriously reconsider our tactics. In
my mind we are closing a chapter on this question of nonviolent policy.’

The failure of the May strike convinced Mandela that there was nothing further
to be gained from continuing with protest action and that the only alternative
available was to resort to violence. ‘Non - violent, passive resistance is effective
as long as your opposition adheres to the same rules as you do,’ he said. ‘But if
peaceful protest is met with violence, its efficacy is at an end.’ The case for

hitting back at the government, he believed, was now overwhelming. Africans
had to show that their white rulers were still vulnerable and could be hurt.
Mandela conferred first with Sisulu, who agreed that a change in strategy was
inevitable. ‘Looking at the situation, I can’t see what else could have been done,’
said Sisulu. ‘There was this dilemma. The government was acting violently. We
were leading the movement. People were entitled to know how we were meeting
this violence. The time had come for us to make preparations. But this was not
the type of issue that we could have taken to the masses. We had to get the
leadership committed. We needed a small number of people to start it. With
delay, the idea might have fizzled out.’
Mandela and Sisulu both believed that a limited campaign of sabotage would
scare off foreign investors, disrupt trade and cause sufficient damage to the
economy to force the white electorate and the government to alter course. The
government, they assumed, was not strong enough to embark on further
repression. ‘I didn’t think the government could suppress the whole movement,’
said Sisulu.
Mandela raised the issue of armed struggle with the ANC’s working
committee, but ran into a wall of opposition from Moses Kotane. Kotane, in his
characteristically blunt manner, accused Mandela of failing to think through his
proposal carefully. Mandela, he said, had been outmanoeuvred and paralysed by
the government’s actions and now, in desperation, was resorting to revolutionary
language. ‘There is still room,’ he said, ‘for the old methods if we are
imaginative and determined enough. If we embark on the course Mandela is
suggesting, we will be exposing innocent people to massacres by the enemy.’
Kotane’s argument carried the day.
Shortly afterwards, at a meeting Sisulu had arranged, Mandela and Kotane
spent a whole day arguing further over the issue. There was a certain irony about
the confrontation. Kotane, a lifelong communist from peasant origins, a graduate
of the Lenin School in Moscow, secretary-general of the underground
Communist Party, with revolutionary credentials far superior to Mandela’s,
argued adamantly that the potential for conventional political struggle had by no
means been exhausted; it was only because political work had become more
difficult that Mandela was seeking the easy way out and trying to escape the
responsibilities of political leadership. The time for armed struggle had not yet
arrived. An austere, puritanical figure, Kotane was known both for his arrogant

and assertive manner and also for his hard-headed realism.
Mandela, a Xhosa aristocrat, a trained lawyer who had just emerged from a
marathon trial, the outcome of which had depended on convincing a panel of
judges about the ANC’s commitment to nonviolent methods, responded to
Kotane by using arguments fashioned by Kotane’s own colleagues in the
Communist Party in favour of violence. Castro’s recent revolution in Cuba,
Mandela said, had shown how it was not necessary for revolutionaries to wait for
appropriate conditions, as defined in the textbooks of Lenin and Stalin, to
materialise. ‘If you wait for textbook conditions, they will never occur.’
Militants were already forming their own armed units. The leadership was now
falling behind its supporters.
The influence of revolutionary enthusiasts in the Communist Party at this
juncture was crucial. The communists had already formed their own specialist
units for sabotage activity, some fifteen groups of three to four men each, which
had begun trying their hand at cutting telephone and communications links. They
also had ready access to the Soviet Union and China, both quartermasters to
revolution around the world. Plans had already been made to send recruits
outside the country for training.
What further convinced them of the feasibility of guerrilla warfare in South
Africa were the heady examples set by Algeria and by Cuba. By mid-1961,
Algerian nationalists were on the verge of victory over French forces seeking to
defend the white settler population. In Cuba, the example was even more potent.
A group of no more than twelve revolutionaries, including Fidel Castro and Che
Guevara, survived a landing on the island’s coast in a rickety old boat and within
two years had marched into Havana at the head of a 10,000-strong victorious
guerrilla army. Guevara’s ‘detonator’ theory of revolution, the idea that armed
action on its own would create a momentum among the population, had a
dramatic impact on the thinking of South African revolutionaries. ‘The seminal
work was Che Guevara’s Guerrilla Warfare. And many of the errors can be
attributed to that fact,’ said Ben Turok. ‘I remember the discussions at the time.
The point made was, is it wrong to wait for the objective conditions to develop
where violence becomes naturally part of the struggle, or is the situation such
that the subjective element can create the objective, and that’s Che’s argument.
And we became convinced that the subjective could actually play an important
role.’

The communists’ objectives did not stop short at sabotage. Joe Slovo, the key
operational figure in devising the party’s military strategy, believed that
sabotage would provide a bridge to popular armed struggle, drawing in new
recruits and conditioning the population to accept methods of violence,
eventually leading to a broad revolutionary assault on the government. Attaining
this objective was feasible given the mass support enjoyed by the ANC. What
the Communist Party therefore envisaged was ‘a united front of national
liberation’ which would set out ‘to destroy white domination’. When that goal
was reached, the communists would then work to transform South Africa into a
socialist state. These two stages of the revolution became official Communist
Party policy.
The flaws in this revolutionary strategy tended to be overlooked. South Africa
possessed few heavily wooded areas suitable for guerrilla bases. It was
surrounded by white-run African colonies which provided no opportunity for
rear bases. In rural areas, the ANC had never been successful in mobilising
support for its political campaigns; it remained essentially an urban-based
organisation. In urban areas, the black population was subject to a vast array of
controls which had already effectively crippled political action. Above all, the
government had never shown any signs of losing control. Its security apparatus
was formidable, as the crushing of the May strike had just demonstrated.
The communists’ enthusiasm for armed struggle had a marked influence on
Mandela’s own outlook, making it seem more feasible than would otherwise
have been the case. ‘The communists manoeuvred hard for violence,’ remarked
Yusuf Cachalia, Mandela’s Indian activist friend and himself a member of the
Communist Party. ‘They certainly influenced Mandela’s attitude towards
violence.’
At a second meeting of the ANC’s working committee in June, it was agreed
that the issue of armed struggle should be put to the ANC’s national executive
committee and that the Congress alliance, comprising the Indian Congress, the
Congress of Democrats, the Coloured People’s Congress, the South African
Congress of Trade Unions and the ANC, should also be consulted. The venue
chosen for both meetings, to be held on consecutive days, was Tongaat, a small
village surrounded by sugar plantations north of Durban and close to Luthuli’s
home in the Umvoti Mission Reserve, enabling him to attend. About sixty
delegates in all, most of them subject to banning orders, travelled in secret to
Tongaat.

The ANC meeting lasted all night. Mandela presented his case vigorously.
Violence, he said, had become inevitable, whether or not it was initiated by the
ANC. ANC supporters were beginning to lose confidence in the policy of
nonviolence and would eventually resort to violent methods of protest on their
own. If nationalist leaders failed to take decisive action, the undercurrents of
hatred rising among the African population would surface in outbreaks of
terrorism that would have a disastrous impact on race relations. It was both
wrong and unrealistic for African leaders to continue preaching peace and
nonviolence when the government’s only response was to meet their demands
with force. It would be far better for the ANC to channel and control the
momentum towards violence to ensure that it was directed at proper targets. If
the ANC failed to take the lead now, it would be left behind.
Luthuli’s commitment to nonviolence was well known. He believed that
nonviolence was the only justifiable course of action on both moral and practical
grounds. ‘Violence disrupts human life and is destructive to perpetrator and
victim alike,’ he said in 1961. ‘I do not regard peace as a passive thing. The
nonviolent policy I am advocating is a positive one. . . . It demands moral
courage and taxes our physical courage.’
Luthuli held firmly to his views, but, after hours of argument, he agreed to a
compromise. The ANC would remain committed to nonviolence, but it would
not stand in the way of members who wanted to establish a separate and
independent military organisation, nor would it disapprove of ‘properly
controlled violence’.
The following night, at the Congress alliance meeting, the arguments raged
anew. The position was more complex for the ANC’s allies, for while the ANC
was an illegal organisation, the others were still able to conduct political work
legally. Within the Indian Congress, the commitment to nonviolence was held as
determinedly by many members as it was by Luthuli. The Indian Congress
leader, Dr Monty Naicker, was adamantly opposed to armed struggle. Jaydew
Singh, Mandela’s old friend from Kholvad House, declared, ‘Nonviolence has
not failed us; we have failed nonviolence.’ Yusuf Ca - chalia argued
emphatically that any attempt at armed struggle would end in the government
wiping out the entire nationalist movement. ‘It was pure adventurism,’ he said
years later. ‘It was impractical. They had not worked out the consequences.’ Yet
most Indian communists were in favour of armed struggle. The Congress of
Democrats, influenced mainly by white communists, also supported the move.

By the end of a tumultuous night, Mandela had received the authorisation he
wanted to establish a military wing.
The new organisation rapidly took shape. It was given the name of Umkhonto
we Sizwe, meaning the Spear of the Nation, but it became more commonly
known by the initials MK. A high command was formed, consisting of Mandela
as chairman and Slovo as chief-of-staff; Sisulu acted as a political adviser.
Essentially, MK was launched as a joint venture between the ANC and the
Communist Party, with access to all the Communist Party’s resources and its
international connections.
Mandela and Slovo had known each other for more than ten years, but they
had never been particularly close. As students at the University of the
Witwatersrand, they had argued over the role of the communists in the liberation
struggle. They had differed on many occasions since. Slovo was widely known
as an urbane and affable character, a witty raconteur with a liking for wine, song
and red socks, but he was also a narrow ideologue never deviating from the party
line. ‘Slovo and Mandela were often at cross-purposes,’ noted Mac Maharaj, a
Communist Party activist. ‘Their relationship was often abrasive. Joe was unable
to appreciate what Mandela was saying. He was devious in his arguments, taking
contradictory positions. The debate frequently went off the rails.’ But over the
question of armed struggle they found common ground. ‘Slovo was an
enthusiast, determined to make an im - mediate impact,’ Maharaj recalled.
‘Mandela had a liking for the bold stroke.’
The difficulties they faced were immense. None of the conspirators had any
experience of sabotage or guerrilla action. Mandela embarked on the armed
struggle knowing literally nothing in practice about what was involved. Slovo’s
experience had been limited to his role in a signals unit in the closing stages of
the Second World War in Italy; he had never taken part in combat. The
conspirator with the most military experience was Jack Hodgson, a ‘desert rat’
who had served in a tank corps in North Africa and also had knowledge of
explosives gained while working in the mines. An ardent communist and
founding member of the Congress of Democrats, Hodgson became MK’s first
instructor, teaching recruits the basis of bomb-making. He turned his own flat,
on the fourth floor of a block in Hillbrow, into a bomb laboratory and later into a
bomb factory. He was a resourceful man, but nevertheless an amateur.
To make up for his own lack of knowledge, Mandela read everything he could

lay his hands on about guerrilla warfare and war history: authors like Guevara,
Mao Tse-tung, Castro and Clausewitz; books on Algeria, Cuba, Israel, Kenya
and the Anglo-Boer War. ‘He was particularly impressed by a study of the
communist insurrectionary movement in the Philippines,’ Bernstein recalled. At
hide-outs during the day, before leaving for night-time assignments, he spent
hours studying texts and making copious notes. His notes on Mao Tse-tung’s
Strategic Problems of China’s Revolutionary War ran to sixty-five pages.
‘Mandela wanted a theoretical knowledge of guerrilla warfare,’ noted Maharaj.
‘Slovo was less interested.’
Mandela was provided with a support committee, a small group of activists
who arranged everything for him from safe houses to transport and reading
material. Among the group was Kathy Kathrada, who had been sceptical about
the feasibility of armed struggle but who had nevertheless volunteered his
services. Another member was Wolfie Kodesh, a long-time communist ‘foot
soldier’ who had seen army service during the Second World War and was
currently a reporter for the radical journal New Age. The support team also
included a talented young lawyer, Bob Hepple, whom Bram Fischer had
recruited to the Communist Party. The son of a former leader of the Labour
Party, he was heavily involved in trade union activity, trying to keep alive the
South African Congress of Trade Unions. Like Fischer and Slovo, he worked
from offices in Innes Chambers in central Johannesburg, a building used by
many advocates, which provided a convenient cover for meetings of the
conspirators.
Mandela’s life underground, as leader of MK, became more settled than it had
been when he was trying to organise support for strike action in May. After
staying with a family in Market Street for a few weeks, he moved into a small
bachelor flat in Berea with Wolfie Kodesh. Mandela insisted on using a camp
bed, letting Kodesh keep the bed, but Kodesh was considerably ‘peeved’ to find
that it was Mandela’s habit to get up at five each morning to run on the spot. ‘It
went on for well over an hour, followed by exercises,’ Kodesh recalled. Mandela
told Kodesh that he would have to join in, which he did, though without much
enthusiasm. In daytime, Mandela remained inside the flat with the blinds drawn,
venturing out at night, usually in his disguise as a chauffeur. After two months in
Berea, he moved briefly to a doctor’s residence in Johannesburg, then spent two
weeks on a sugar plantation in Tongaat, before returning to Johannesburg to a
new address. It was here that MK was eventually to meet its demise.

Lilliesleaf Farm lay in a secluded, wooded hollow in the Rivonia area, about ten
miles north of Johannesburg. It was a smallholding of roughly twenty-eight
acres, reached only by a dirt road or across the open veld. The farmhouse was
spacious, with whitewashed walls, large curved windows at the front and a high
shingle roof, a desirable residence for a wealthy family. Behind the main
building stood an assortment of outbuildings, storerooms, fuel sheds, work
rooms and servants’ quarters. There was also a large, imposing thatch-roofed
cottage.
Lilliesleaf had been bought by the Communist Party in July 1961 initially for
use as a safe house. Michael Harmel, adopting a false name, had handled the
transaction with an estate agent and Harold Wolpe, the communist lawyer, had
helped set up a dummy company to buy the property. The plan was for
Lilliesleaf to be used, by all outward appearances, as a normal white
smallholding. The main house would be occupied by a party member, Arthur
Goldreich, and his family and the farm worked by African labourers. Goldreich
was a little-known activist. By profession an artist and designer, employed by a
large department store in Johannesburg, he was a flamboyant personality,
charming and talented, who struck many acquaintances as being no more than a
dilettante. But in his youth he had joined Palmach, a branch of the underground
Jewish army in Palestine, and at heart he was a revolutionary enthusiast.
The buildings at Lilliesleaf were in need of renovation and ex - tension, so
before the Goldreichs moved there, a team of African painters and builders was
hired to do the job. It was at this stage that Mandela took up residence in the
thatched cottage at Lilliesleaf, ostensibly as an employee of the white owner
waiting for his arrival. The alias he used was David Motsamayi, the name of one
of his former clients. Mandela knew Goldreich quite well; his house in Parktown
was one of the secret locations where he met Winnie.
Mandela’s routine at Lilliesleaf was much the same as before. He stayed at
home during the day and left for meetings at night. ‘Mandela had time to read, to
think and study at Rivonia,’ said Bernstein. ‘It was a quiet and peaceful
existence. A committee attended to his needs.’ He was joined for a while by
Michael Harmel, whom he knew as an engaging character but who proved to be
a hopeless conspirator. Disorganised and forgetful, he was invariably sloppy
about underground work, infuriating colleagues like Bram Fischer with his

lapses of security. Mandela returned to Lilliesleaf late one night to find the house
lights on, the front door open, the radio at full blast and Harmel fast asleep in
bed. When Mandela woke him up, he complained, ‘Nel, must you disturb my
sleep? Can’t this wait until tomorrow?’
Once the renovations were complete and the Goldreichs had moved into the
main house, it was possible for Winnie and the children to spend weekends with
Mandela. ‘Ironically,’ said Mandela, ‘we had more privacy at Lilliesleaf than we
ever had at home. The children could run about and play, and we were secure,
however briefly, in this idyllic bubble.’ The older children, Thembi, Makgatho,
Makaziwe and Zeni, retained indelible impressions of those times spent with
their father, going for walks, playing in the big, rambling house, being carried
through the orchard. Zeni imagined Lilliesleaf to be her real house, because it
was the only place she could remember where her father played with her. For
years afterwards, she would ask Winnie, ‘Mummy, when are we going home to
see Daddy?’
Meanwhile, the business of organising armed struggle continued apace. The
strategy decided upon by the high command was twofold. First, a sabotage
campaign would be carried out against targets like government buildings and
installations, railways, power plants and telecommunications; second,
preparations would be made for guerrilla warfare if the sabotage campaign failed
to get the government to change its policies. The strict instruction given to all
MK members from the start was that on no account were they to kill or injure
people in planning or carrying out operations. As Mandela later explained,
‘Sabotage did not involve loss of life, and it offered the best hope for race
relations. Bitterness would be kept to a minimum and, if the policy bore fruit,
democratic government could become a reality.’
The high command, based in Johannesburg, was made responsible for
determining tactics and general targets and given charge of training and finance.
Regional commands were to be set up in each of the provinces and, below them,
local commands and cells. The most readily available source of recruits would
be ANC or Communist Party members. An MK constitution was drawn up,
devised largely by Mandela and Slovo.
The bomb-making end of the enterprise was also progressing. Hodgson had
discovered that permanganate of potash, more commonly used in washing
lettuce, mixed with aluminium powder and catalysed by a drop of acid, could

make an effective explosion. Sacks of permanganate of potash were duly
transported to his fourth-floor flat. ‘We spent days with mortars and pestles
grinding this substance to a fine powder,’ recalled Slovo. ‘Permanganate of
potash permeated walls, curtains, carpets, and every crevice.’ Fortunately,
Hodgson’s wife, Rica, was as ardent a revolutionary as her husband.
Hodgson also constructed timing devices using the thin plastic tubing
contained in ballpoint pens. Large quantities were purchased for the purpose:
‘Every drawer,’ recalled Rica Hodgson, ‘seemed to be full of ballpoint pens.’ He
fashioned an incendiary device by using a small bottle of acid and covering the
top with a specific thickness of cardboard or paper. Just before placing the
device in the target area, the saboteur had to turn the bottle upside down.
When the time came for the bombs to be tested, Mandela insisted on
witnessing the event. The site chosen was a brickworks near Kempton Park, to
the east of Johannesburg, owned by Wolfie Kodesh’s brother and not in use at
the time. Explosions there during the day, to loosen clay, were a normal
occurrence. Taking with them a dozen Molotov cocktails and an improvised
bomb, Mandela, Hodgson, Kodesh and an obliging chemist who had supplied
MK with gun-powder and nitroglycerine, drove off one morning in a large 1949
Chevrolet to the brickworks to see the results of their handiwork. The site was
deserted except for a solitary watchman who was taken to one side by Mandela
and persuaded to walk away for a while.
Hodgson first tried out the Molotov cocktails—petrol bombs—on one of the
brickworks’ buildings and then chose a pit in an open space to test the bomb. He
had calculated that the device would explode in fifteen minutes, but after twenty
minutes nothing had happened. Hodgson retrieved the bomb from the bottom of
the pit, adjusted the charge and put the bomb back. Suddenly, a huge explosion
rent the air, throwing up clouds of dust and earth. In an instant the conspirators
fled the scene, piling into the Chevrolet and driving helter-skelter out of the
brickworks. Mandela was buoyed up by the event. This was the first explosion
of the campaign.
The first group of recruits was dispatched to China for training in guerrilla
warfare through an arrangement that the Communist Party had already made
with their colleagues in Peking. The recruits included Raymond Mhlaba, a trade
unionist and Communist Party organiser from Port Elizabeth who had played a
prominent role there during the Defiance Campaign; Joe Gqabi, a reporter for

New Age who had joined one of the first communist sabotage units before MK
was formed; and Wilton Mkwayi, another trade unionist and former treason
trialist who had escaped into the underground during the trial.
Amid all these preparations, there was a growing sense of urgency. Other
armed groups were beginning to surface to challenge the government.
Supporters of the banned Pan-Africanist Congress in the Western Cape were in
the process of forming a military wing called Poqo, a Xhosa expression meaning
‘alone’ or ‘pure’, to emphasise their African origins, still intending to liberate
South Africa by 1963. An odd assortment of dissident whites led by Monty
Berman, a communist recently expelled from the party who had dreamed up the
idea of establishing his own guerrilla outfit while detained in Pretoria prison
during the state of emergency, banded together to form the National Committee
of Liberation and announced their presence in October by dismantling a pylon
carrying power lines in the northern suburbs of Johannesburg, disrupting
telephone services and burning down a government office. This was the terrain
on which MK wanted to establish its own reputation.
Yet however anxious MK enthusiasts were to get started, they were
constrained by an unexpected development. On 23 October 1961, Chief Luthuli
was nominated winner of the Nobel Peace Prize in recognition of his determined
efforts to gain political rights for Afri - cans through nonviolent means. The
award was a serious blow for the government, which had endeavoured to portray
Luthuli as the head of a dangerous communist conspiracy. But it also came at an
awkward time for MK’s high command, for to launch the armed struggle just
when the ANC’s leader had achieved international recognition for his
contribution to peace could have resulted in international humiliation for
Luthuli. No action could be started at least until the award ceremony in Oslo had
taken place on 11 December.
The date finally set for the start of the sabotage campaign was 16 December
1961, a day then known as the Day of the Covenant, on which whites celebrated
their victory over the Zulu chief Dingane at the Battle of Blood River in 1838.
Leaflets dropped on the streets announced the formation of Umkhonto we Sizwe
with the warning, ‘The time comes in the life of any nation when there remain
only two choices: submit or fight. That time has now come to South Africa.’ The
leaflets added:
We hope, even at this late hour, that our first actions will awaken everyone to a

realization of the disastrous situation to which the Nationalist policy is leading.
We hope that we will bring the government and its supporters to their senses
before it is too late, so that both the government and its policies can be changed
before matters reach the desperate stage of civil war.
Bombs exploded that night at government buildings in Johannesburg, Durban
and Port Elizabeth. But not everything went according to plan. Slovo’s
assignment was to plant one of Hodgson’s incendiary devices in the
Johannesburg Drill Hall, where the preparatory examination of the treason trial
had taken place:
I had reconnoitred it on more than one occasion and had chosen the spot which
would have ignited not only the enormous wooden floor but also the hundreds of
wooden chairs which covered it. But when the moment came, I found the
military authorities had decided to have their monthly spring-clean. I entered the
hall through a side door and found myself in the presence of about fifty black
cleaners who were removing the chairs and polishing the floor.
Slovo found another suitable spot, an office with huge wooden cupboards. He
turned the bottle of the incendiary device upside down, which gave him fifteen
minutes for a getaway, and was about to place the carrier bag behind one of the
cupboards when a clipped military voice came from behind him: ‘Can I do
anything for you, sir?’
Slovo was ready with an excuse about looking for an officer who could deal
with an administrative problem about call-up papers for his brother and duly
followed the sergeant-major in search of the officer: ‘I did so with racing pulse,
knowing that the acid in that small bottle had begun to eat away at the flimsy
cardboard. Had our kitchen laboratory calculated the fifteen minutes correctly?’
Fortunately, the officer had left the building and Slovo was politely advised
by the sergeant-major to come back another day. ‘I gave him a sweaty hand and
walked briskly away. As soon as I decently could, I opened the tennis-ball
cylinder box which housed all the ingredients and snatched the bottle. The three
or four minutes which preceded this were perhaps the longest in my life.’
Ben Turok, part of a three-man unit which included Harold Wolpe, was less
fortunate. His assignment was the Native Law Courts, then housed in the same
building as the Rissik Street post office. When Hodgson arrived in his car at an
agreed spot to deliver an incendiary device to Turok, he was clearly still having
trouble with the devices; one of them had caught fire prematurely on the way,

leaving the outside wrapping of Turok’s parcel charred. Turok re - wrapped the
device in an old paper packet which he found in the boot of his own car and
went on his way to the Native Law Courts. The device briefly caught alight but
soon fizzled out due to a lack of oxygen. The police found it virtually intact with
fingerprints on the outside wrapping. Five months later, when Turok was
arrested in a police raid intended to disrupt an antigovernment demonstration,
the police found by chance that his fingerprints matched those on the Rissik
Street bomb package. He was sentenced to three years’ imprisonment. His
defence team included Slovo and his co-conspirator, Harold Wolpe.
Another bomb device on 16 December also proved faulty, blowing up
prematurely at the municipal office in Dube, an African township south of
Johannesburg, killing one saboteur and injuring another. However, the overall
result was judged to be successful.
Yet there was a large measure of improvisation to all this which went far
beyond the crude home-made bombs that were used in the campaign. In the
excitement to strike a blow at the government, armed activity was seen to be the
only meaningful form of action worth pursuing; the need for political
mobilisation, as Kotane had urged, was neglected. Harold Wolpe, Slovo’s
closest friend, was later scathing in his criticism: ‘We weren’t prepared at a
technical level, or at the level of political strategy. We had no knowledge, no
background, we were just naïve.’ Turok was equally succinct: ‘We threw the
first bombs without having an underground.’

Three weeks after MK had initiated its sabotage campaign, Mandela left South
Africa to canvass for foreign support for armed struggle. He was taken by car
across the border into Bechuanaland, a British protectorate, on 11 January 1962
and did not return for six months. He had never been abroad before and found
the experience of being a ‘free man’ for the first time exhilarating: ‘Though I
was a fugitive and wanted in my own land, I felt the burden of oppression lifting
from my shoulders.’
Most of his time was spent in Africa. He travelled from one country to
another, seeking financial assistance, political recognition and military training
facilities from governments known to be sympathetic to the liberation cause.
Much preliminary groundwork had been done by Oliver Tambo, who had set up
an exile base in London after his departure from South Africa in 1960 and had

since established ANC offices in Tanganyika, Ghana and Egypt.
From the start, however, Mandela found himself competing for attention with
the Pan-Africanist Congress, which had also established connections across
Africa and had expended considerable effort in denouncing the ANC as a
communist-front organisation. Time and again, Mandela encountered deep
suspicions in African states about the ANC’s links with white and Indian
communists. ‘There is a widespread feeling that the ANC is a communistdominated organization, ’ he reported. There was a far wider understanding of
the PAC’s objectives of African rule in South Africa than the ANC’s goal of a
multiracial democracy. Since the Sharpeville massacre, the PAC’s standing in
Africa had risen higher than that of the ANC.
At his first stop in the newly independent state of Tanganyika, Mandela was
dismayed to hear President Nyerere suggest that perhaps the armed struggle
should be postponed until Robert Sobukwe, the PAC leader then serving a threeyear sentence for incitement, came out of prison. ‘The PAC has started off with
tremendous advantages ideologically, and has skilfully exploited opposition to
whites and partnership,’ he wrote. ‘Sharpeville boosted them up and the stand of
their leaders during the trial, and the imprisonment of Sobukwe, fostered the
belief that they were more militant than the ANC.’
In Addis Ababa in February, Mandela addressed a conference of the PanAfrican Freedom Movement for East, Central and Southern Africa, a joint
organisation of independent African states and liberation movements. The
question was often asked, he said, how strong was the liberation struggle in
South Africa?
The view has been expressed in some quarters outside South Africa that,
in the special situation obtaining in our country, our people will never
win freedom through their own efforts. Those who hold this view point
to the formidable apparatus of force and coercion in the hands of the
government, to the size of its armies, the fierce suppression of civil
liberties and the persecution of political opponents of the regime.
Consequently, in these quarters, we are urged to look for our salvation
beyond our borders. Nothing could be further from the truth.
He acknowledged the importance of outside help, but added, ‘We believe it
would be fatal to create the illusion that external pressures render it unnecessary
for us to tackle the enemy from within. The centre and cornerstone of the

struggle for freedom and democracy in South Africa lies inside South Africa
itself.’
Before leaving Addis Ababa, Mandela arranged with the Ethiopian military to
return later in the year for six months’ military training to equip himself as a
professional guerrilla leader. ‘If there was to be guerrilla warfare,’ he said, ‘I
wanted to be able to stand and fight with my people and to share the hazards of
war with them.’
From Ethiopia, he travelled to Egypt, Tunisia, Morocco, Guinea, Sierra
Leone, Liberia, Ghana and Senegal. Along the way, he kept notes in meticulous
detail of all the ideas, information and offers of help he received. His notes on
consultations with Algerian officers based in Morocco in March ran to ninetyfour pages. Under a section headed ‘Funds’, he wrote:
£10,000 from Nigeria
£5,000 in Tunisia
£3,000 in Liberia will be yearly amount
£5,000 in Ethiopia
Definite promises from Senegal and the Sudan
All these monies were sent to O.R [Tambo] in London
Money collecting is a job which requires a lot of time. You must be prepared to
wait.
Visit to Socialist countries has become imperative
In June, Mandela visited London for ten days, enjoying the atmosphere of
British style and manners which his school education had taught him to regard
so highly. He met the Labour Party leader, Hugh Gaitskell, the Liberal Party
leader, Jo Grimond, and the editor of the Observer, David Astor, whose
newspaper took a close interest in African affairs. Accompanied by Tambo and
Mary Benson, a South African writer, he went sightseeing to the Houses of
Parliament and Westminster Abbey and took a boat ride on the Thames to
Chelsea.
Then he returned to Addis Ababa to prepare himself for guerrilla war. He
learned how to use an automatic rifle and a pistol, listened to lectures on tactics
and strategy, and gained experience of bombs and mortars. Entries in his diary

recorded:
June 29th: First lesson on demolition. Instructor Lt. Befikadu June 30th: I have
practice in demolition
July 10th: A demonstration on mortar fire
July 11th: We spend 4 hours at the shooting range
July 12th: I spend the day doing fieldcraft drills
July 13th: Lt. Befikadu and I cover 26 kilometres in fatigue marches. We do it in
3 hours.
But Mandela’s training programme was cut short abruptly after three weeks
by a message from Sisulu in Johannesburg insisting that he return to South
Africa. Sisulu was concerned that Mandela’s prolonged absence abroad would
give rise to suspicions that he did not intend to return to South Africa, as he had
repeatedly committed himself to do. The main purpose of Mandela’s trip abroad,
as Sisulu understood it, was for him to make connections there, not to get
involved in military training. As a farewell gesture, the Ethiopians presented
Mandela with an automatic pistol and 200 rounds of ammunition.
During the six months that he had been away, sabotage attacks had continued
sporadically. Most of the attempts were clumsy and ineffectual, none causing
any lasting damage. The white electorate, on the rare occasions that it was
alerted to the danger of sabotage attacks, reacted by demanding tougher
measures from the government, not, as Mandela had calculated, by calling for
reform.
The government duly responded. In June, Vorster introduced the General Law
Amendment Act of 1962, or the ‘Sabotage’ Act, as it was usually called, which
gave new definitions to the meaning of sabotage. Acts of sabotage henceforth
included such offences as tampering with property, possessing firearms,
hindering essential services, putting up a poster and unlawful entry. The
minimum penalty laid down for offences under the Sabotage Act was five years’
imprisonment; the maximum was death.
Vorster was further empowered to order the ‘house arrest’ of anyone he
believed to be a threat to security. He could prohibit persons banned or listed
under the Suppression of Communism Act from preparing anything for
publication, from communicating with each other, from having visitors, from

joining organisations, from attending social gatherings.
The security police were also gaining in experience, building up a network of
informers and keeping an ever-tighter watch on the movement of activists.
Walter Sisulu was arrested by Warrant Officer Dirker six times in 1962. Once,
when police were raiding his home, a reporter arrived and asked why they were
raiding. ‘Just routine,’ a police officer told him. ‘We just want to see what Sisulu
keeps in his house.’ But the conspirators, used to treating the Special Branch
with contempt, neither anticipated the improvement in their techniques nor paid
much attention when they did notice it.