PRISONER 466/64
THE WINTER OF 1964 ON ROBBEN ISLAND, WHEN MANDELA AND
SIX other Rivonia prisoners arrived there, was the coldest that anyone could
remember. So fierce were the Atlantic winds sweeping across the island that
prisoners working in the quarries were numbed to the bone, hardly able to raise
their picks; at night they huddled together in groups, desperate for warmth. On
the day that the Dakota aircraft bringing the Rivonia men landed, it was bitterly
cold, wet and windy.
In the year since Mandela had left the island, a new maximum security prison
had been constructed, close to Murray’s Bay harbour, not far from the old prison
buildings. A special section within it, a single-storey rectangular block with a
cement courtyard in the centre, had been built at the southeastern corner of the
compound to house prisoners whom the authorities wanted to isolate from the
mass of the prison population. This prison within a prison was intended to be the
home of the Rivonia group for the rest of their lives.
Mandela’s cell, like the others in B Section, was no more than about seven
feet square. A barred window looked out on to a cement courtyard and beyond it
to a high wall patrolled by guards. The walls of the cell were damp. There was
no bed. Mandela was provided with a sisal mat on which to sleep, three flimsy
blankets, a toilet bucket and a plastic bottle of water. In the winter months, his
cell was so cold he slept fully dressed in prison garb. Outside the cell was fixed a
white card giving his name and identification number: 466/64.
As well as the Rivonia group, a number of other political prisoners were
brought to the isolation section, or the koeloekoetz, as it was known, from the
main communal prison blocks. Among them were Zephenia Mothopeng, a PAC
leader; Dennis Brutus, a Coloured poet and writer, once active in campaigning
for a sports boycott of South Africa, who had been imprisoned for contravening
his banning orders; Neville Alexander and Fikile Bam, both members of an
obscure Maoist group known as the Yu Chi Chan Club, which had dabbled with

the idea of guerrilla warfare; and Andrew Masondo, a mathematics lecturer from
Fort Hare University, who had become an MK saboteur. In the following months
this group was joined by other se - nior MK figures, including Wilton Mkwayi,
Joe Gqabi, Mac Maharaj and Michael Dingake. Another arrival was Eddie
Daniels, a Coloured member of the ill-fated African Resistance Movement.
Together with the Rivonia group, this motley collection of prisoners, numbering
in all about thirty, provided Mandela’s companions for the years ahead.
Though the prison buildings were new, the regime remained as harsh and as
brutal as before. Prisoners in the general section were crowded into large
communal cells where few toilets were available. Food rations were meagre.
Prisoners reporting sick were often turned away by hospital orderlies, castigated
for laziness when they were seriously ill; some gained admission to hospital only
when it was too late to save them.
Several incidents had occurred to add to the island’s infamous reputation. For
work purposes, prisoners were divided up into different teams or spans, as they
were known. Most were sent to work in the stone quarries; others went to the
harbour, the laundry or the stores. The work most dreaded was with the
landbouspan, the agricultural team run by Piet Kleynhans, one of three
Kleynhans brothers then employed on Robben Island. One of the tasks of the
landbouspan was to push a huge grass roller, seven feet high and weighing
several tons, on which Kleynhans would sit perched on the crossbar, shouting
and swearing and flicking a leather whip at the prisoners. The roller was so
heavy that as many as fifty prisoners were needed to move it, hauling it by a
heavy handle and long chains attached to each side and pushing from the back.
The work began in the early morning and went on for hour after hour, with
guards routinely lashing out at prisoners with canes and hosepipes, cursing them
for their laziness.
One morning, Kleynhans singled out for punishment a PAC leader, Johnson
Mlambo, whom he had heard complaining about the work. While other prisoners
continued hauling the roller round in circles, Kleynhans instructed two convicts
to dig a hole deep enough to hold a man and then ordered Mlambo to get into it.
The convicts then filled in the hole with soil, leaving only Mlambo’s head jutting
out above the ground. He remained there for the rest of the morning, his head
baking in the sun. At midday, Kleynhans, clearly enjoying himself, went up to
Mlambo and asked him, ‘Kaffir, soek jy water?’—‘Kaffir, do you want water?’
‘Nee ek sal jou nie water gee nie, ek sal hou whisky gee, die beste

whisky!’—‘No, I won’t give you water, I’ll give you whisky, the very best!’ As
other warders looked on laughing, Kleynhans pulled out his penis and urinated
on Mlambo’s face. Shortly afterwards, at the lunch break, Mlambo was dug out
of the hole and told to join other prisoners for the afternoon work shift on the
roller. Mlambo was later to lose an eye; it was gouged out by another PAC
prisoner during a fight over food.
In March 1964, the prison authorities ordered a carry-on—a mass assault—
involving political prisoners who had complained about work conditions in the
stone quarry. One of their main targets was Andrew Masondo, whose arm was
severely injured in the beatings that took place. The carry-on was witnessed by
Dennis Brutus, who had arrived on Robben Island only the day before: ‘We saw
dozens of prisoners running wild or crawling vainly under barbed-wire fences
while the batons, staves and pick-handles of the warders fell indiscriminately
and mercilessly.’ Later in the day, Brutus himself, still recovering from a police
bullet wound in the stomach, was caught up in the carry-on when he and other
prisoners were ordered to wade into the sea to collect seaweed. There, in the
water, they were set upon by warders armed with batons and rubber pipes:
I do not think I will ever be able to erase from my mind the images that day of
terror and violence by the sea with the bright water and the bright sunlight, and
the men struggling with shiny masses of seaweed and on the sharp slippery rocks
. . . and all the time men were beaten and kicked and the batons thwacked.
All attempts at taking legal action against the prison authorities were thwarted.
Prisoners queueing at the dispensary for medical attention were frequently
assaulted. One warder named Mostert, a huge ox of a man, made a practice of
walking along the queue, punching prisoners as he went, until only the most
courageous remained standing. He used to say, to justify his conduct, ‘If you
don’t run away, then you are really sick, you actually need treatment.’
Since Mandela’s first incarceration on Robben Island, the prison staff had
become exclusively white. No longer were there any Coloured warders to offer a
friendly hand. An atmosphere of racial hostility was ever present. White warders
regarded themselves as members of a master race and accordingly required
prisoners to adopt a servile manner. They insisted on being addressed as ‘baas’
and referred contemptuously to prisoners as ‘kaffirs’, ‘hotnots’ and ‘koelies’.
They were used to dealing with hardened criminals, employing only the most
brutal methods, and treated political prisoners with similar vindictiveness,

handing out punishment at the slightest sign of defiance. Their objective was to
destroy the morale of prisoners, to strip them of dignity and self-respect. It was
what the system required.
From previous experience, Mandela knew how crushing the effects of prison
life could be. The burden to be carried was not just constant abuse from warders
and hardship at work, but the sheer tedium of prison routine, stretching for ever
into the distance, week after week, month after month, year after year.
Mandela’s first prison sentence had at least been limited to a fixed term of five
years. The Rivonia trial had meanwhile engaged his full attention, keeping him
close to lawyers, relatives and friends. But back on Robben Island, the full
impact of his new sentence now took its toll. At the age of forty-six, the prospect
before him was spending the rest of his life in a cell.
The first weeks were particularly difficult. Prisoners in the isolation section
were subjected to rigid control, their every move dictated by a posse of warders
ready to pounce on any infringement of the regulations. The routine was
deadening. The morning bell rang at 5:30 a.m. Prisoners were required to roll up
their mats and blankets and clean their cells, but were not allowed out until 6:45
a.m. Mandela used the time for exercising. In the cramped space of his cell, he
found that by standing at an angle he could wave his arms about. At 6:45 a.m.,
prisoners were let out to clean their toilet buckets in sinks at the end of the
corridor, giving them a brief opportunity for a few whispered words if warders
were not lingering about there. Back in their cells, breakfast, consisting of maize
porridge and what was described as coffee, was delivered to them by convicts
from the general section. At inspection after breakfast, prisoners were required
to doff their cloth caps to warders as they passed by. If the buttons on their
canvas jackets were undone or if they failed to doff their caps, they were
punished with either loss of meals or solitary confinement.
They were then taken out to the courtyard, where for hour after hour, sitting
cross-legged in four rows, forbidden to talk, they bashed away with five-pound
hammers at piles of stones in front of them, crushing them into fine gravel. Not
until lunch break at noon were they permitted to rest. Lunch consisted once
again of boiled maize and a drink known as phuzamandla made from maize and
a bit of yeast. In the afternoon, they were allowed to exercise for half an hour
under strict supervision, walking in silence around the courtyard in single file,
before resuming their places at the rock piles.

Work ended at 4 p.m., when they were given half an hour to clean up using
the seawater showers and buckets in a bathroom at the end of the corridor.
Supper, consisting of maize porridge with a piece of vegetable or meat gristle
added, came at 4:30 p.m., delivered to the cells by convicts. At 8 p.m., the night
warder ordered everyone to go to sleep, but each cell’s single light bulb
remained glowing throughout the night. At weekends, prisoners were kept inside
their cells all day, except for half an hour of exercise. No prisoner was allowed
to possess a watch or clock. Everyone was ruled by bells and the whistles and
shouts of warders.
All political prisoners were automatically given the lowest classification,
category D, according them a minimum of privileges. Category D prisoners were
allowed to have only one visitor in every six months and to write and receive
only one letter in the same period. Sometimes letters were handed over so
heavily censored that they made no sense; sometimes they were never handed
over at all. No study privileges were permitted. The only way for prisoners to
gain a higher classification and hence more privileges was through what the
authorities deemed to be good behaviour. Prisoners who eventually won a high
classification could be threatened with demotion and hence the loss of privileges
—visits, letters and studies—if they were insufficiently compliant.
The only solace in this grim schedule was the company of friends. The
courage that each man showed fortified the determination of others to stand firm.
Walter Sisulu, in particular, proved a constant source of strength for Mandela
and for many other prisoners, always ready to comfort them in moments of
anguish and despair, no matter how hard his own burden at the time. ‘Even when
his own wife and children were put in jail, he was an inspiration,’ recalled
Kathrada. ‘I could always turn to him for help.’
But inmates in the koeloekoetz were far from being a harmonious group. The
old rivalry between the PAC and the ANC provoked continual bouts of friction.
In the general section, hostility between the two groups was an open sore. The
reaction of PAC members to the outcome of the Rivonia trial was typical. ‘They
were very disappointed when none of the Rivonia people was sentenced to
death,’ recalled an ANC prisoner, Ebrahim Ismail Ebrahim. There was also
friction between Neville Alexander and ANC members. Alexander, an
intellectual with a doctorate in literature from Germany, initially dismissed ANC
prisoners as ‘ordinary nationalists inferior to us socialists . . . almost
collaborators’. Nor was it long before members of the Rivonia group were

embroiled in their own disputes.
Mandela’s plan for survival on Robben Island involved challenging the
system with a series of complaints aimed at improving prison conditions. Prison
life he came to regard as a microcosm of the apartheid system outside, requiring
a similar struggle for basic rights. Striving for better conditions gave him both a
set of attainable objectives and a sense of purpose otherwise missing in the
monotony of prison routine. He hoped to achieve results through negotiation
rather than confrontation. This meant according a measure of respect to the
prison authorities which several of his own colleagues found difficult to accept.
PAC members refused outright to have any dealings with the prison authorities,
never lodging complaints of any kind, regarding such contacts as a form of
collaboration. Mandela’s argument was that not only would each advance raise
the morale of prisoners but the process of negotiation itself would require the
prison authorities to show a measure of respect for prisoners’ interests. It would
help break down the walls of prejudice.
The complaints procedure had hitherto been a meaningless ritual. Once a
week, prisoners were lined up and asked if they had any complaints or requests.
Many complaints were made—about food, about clothes, about blankets, about
visits—but no note was ever taken and nothing was ever done. Prisoners who
pursued complaints about assaults faced reprisal. No one succeeded in gaining
redress.
Mandela’s first complaint was about the prison clothes he was given to wear.
African prisoners were issued with a pair of short trousers, a coarse collarless
khaki shirt, a canvas jacket and a thin jersey. In true apartheid tradition, Indian
prisoners, like Kathrada, were allowed long trousers. Mandela objected to
wearing short trousers on the grounds that they were demeaning, intended to
remind Africans of their position as ‘boys’. Though his initial protest was
ignored, after two weeks he was given a pair of long trousers. Since no other
African prisoner was given long trousers, he declined to accept them and
continued to wear short trousers. But he had made a start. When he complained
about the dampness of his cell, he was told by a prison official, ‘The dampness
of the cells will eventually be absorbed by your bodies.’
Along with other political prisoners in the isolation section, he refused to
address warders as baas. In the general section, any such refusal would incur
swift punishment—a beating, a loss of meals or solitary confinement if

necessary. But the koeloekoetz men stood firm and warders left the issue alone.
When the quotas of stone-crushing set for prisoners working in the courtyard
were repeatedly raised, they resolved not to meet them. The warders threatened
them, but did not succeed in getting their way.
With each case of complaint, Mandela took on the authorities in a polite but
resolute manner, in the process gaining not only the attention of warders but the
respect of critics within the prisoner community. Neville Alexander, who was
serving a ten-year sentence, recalled, ‘We were terribly impetuous and would
have run ourselves suicidally against the prison walls.’ But Mandela and Sisulu
had argued that, by adopting a dignified and disciplined approach, ‘eventually
we would break through’. The impact that both men made on Alexander was
considerable: ‘Nelson and Walter taught me to respect people, to disagree with
them, but to continue to respect them.’
Though prison regulations stipulated that each prisoner was permitted to speak
only for himself, not on behalf of others, the prison authorities soon found it
expedient to use Mandela as a spokesman for prisoner interests. When an official
from the International Red Cross arrived on Robben Island, Mandela was singled
out to talk to him and on subsequent occasions he continued to act as the
prisoners’ representative. Mandela dwelt at length on prisoners’ grievances over
food, clothing, letters and such matters as the conduct of warders, unsure of
whether any worthwhile result might be achieved. Not long afterward, African
prisoners were issued with long trousers.
He became adept at concealing his emotions behind a mask, rarely letting any
sign of anger or bitterness emerge and never betraying doubt or despair before
others. He built around himself a wall of self-discipline, steeling himself to face
whatever ordeal prison might hold. He came to distrust emotion, prizing reason
and logic above all else, recognising that bitterness would bring him no closer to
his goal. Time and again, he held back his anger at the taunts and insults from
prison staff. Warders enjoyed goading Mandela by letting him know that they
were withholding a letter for him—his main lifeline to the outside world. ‘It
required all my self-discipline not to explode at such times,’ he wrote.
‘Afterward, I would protest through the proper channels, and sometimes get it.’
With other prisoners, Mandela exercised the same degree of self-control,
never showing any sign of weakness, always conscious of the effect his
leadership had on them. Only Sisulu was privy to the inner man. With everyone

else, even with old friends like Kathrada, Mandela distanced himself with a
measure of aloofness. Kathrada noted his ability in prison to react in a cool
manner, no matter how serious the issue was: ‘He would return from a meeting
with a prison official, having heard of some momentous issue or having had a
message of great importance, then come back to the cells, joke with us, talk to
us, then relate what had happened very casually.’ Kathrada often found it
difficult to tell what was in his mind.
His darkest moments, he faced alone. Some of them came during periods of
solitary confinement. As he wrote in a manuscript while in prison:
The worst part of imprisonment is being locked up by yourself. You come face
to face with time and there is nothing more terrifying than to be alone with sheer
time. Then the ghosts come crowding in. They can be very sinister, very
mischievous, raising a thousand doubts in your mind about the people outside,
their loyalty. Was your sacrifice worth the trouble? What would your life have
been like if you hadn’t got involved?
He also had to endure times of great personal anguish, but never betrayed how
deeply he had been hurt.
Whatever doubts and despair he suffered, in the company of others he
remained steadfast, always seeking to bolster their morale. And he never gave up
hope that one day he would emerge from prison a free man. ‘I never thought that
a life sentence truly meant life and that I would die behind bars,’ he said in his
autobiography. ‘Perhaps I was denying this prospect because it was too
unpleasant to contemplate.’

Yet, events in prison were not the only cause of Mandela’s concerns. In August
1964, two months after he had been back on the island, Mandela was allowed a
visit from Winnie. They met in a cramped cubicle in the visiting room, separated
by a partition, able to see each other only through a pane of thick, smudged
glass. Their conversation was carried on through holes drilled in the partition.
Both had been warned that the only topics permitted were family and personal
matters. Warders stood by on either side of the partition, listening carefully to
what was said, ready to interrupt if unfamiliar names were mentioned or if the
conversation seemed to stray beyond bounds. They were given just thirty
minutes together.

Winnie appeared to Mandela to be under tremendous strain. He had known
that his imprisonment would leave her exposed to hardship and hazards with few
sources of support. In a letter written to her on the eve of his first term of
imprisonment, he had tried to offer her every encouragement for the long and
lonely road she faced, urging her to act with fortitude and dignity and warning of
the traps that would be set for her. It was a letter full of love and inspiration
which Winnie cherished, reading it time and again until it was seized by security
police during one of their periodic raids on her house in Orlando West.
What worried Mandela most was that Winnie’s impetuous and headstrong
nature would lead her into ever deeper trouble. In the treacherous world of South
African politics, she was a novice, naïve and gullible, and easy prey for the
security police. The story often told about her during her early years of marriage
was that while Mandela was engaged in serious debate in the front room of their
house, Winnie would be found in the back reading a women’s magazine. She
had joined the ANC Women’s League and done a two-week spell in prison for
her part in protesting against pass laws, but among political activists she was
regarded as being a lightweight.
Once Mandela was in prison, however, Winnie became more ambitious. She
saw herself as Mandela’s heir, capable of acting on his behalf. Towards other
activists, she adopted a superior manner, making herself unpopular with them.
‘Winnie always acted on her own,’ recalled Rusty Bernstein. ‘She wouldn’t
cooperate with anyone. She refused to take advice. She was an individual piece
of militancy, a rogue element.’
She also had a propensity for becoming involved with shady characters. She
maintained a long friendship with Maude Katzellenbogen, the partner of a
corrupt Indian businessman, Moosa Dinath, convicted of fraud, who had once
tried to inveigle her into a reckless scheme to free Mandela from prison in
Johannesburg, even though she knew he had dubious connections with the
government.
She also developed a close relationship with Brian Somana, a journalist who
had acted as her driver on journeys to see Mandela at Lilliesleaf Farm. Somana
had been arrested in June 1963, shortly before the police raid on Lilliesleaf took
place. In activist circles, he was widely suspected of being a police informer,
possibly the source of their information on Lilliesleaf.
On Robben Island, Mandela was aware of both Somana’s role as a police

informer and Winnie’s involvement with him. One of his own colleagues in the
isolation section, Fikile Bam, had encountered them while he was on the run
from the police in August 1963. A graduate of the University of Cape Town, he
had known Winnie since his youth in the Transkei; his sister had been her close
friend. While a student at St Peter’s in Johannesburg, he had been befriended by
Oliver Tambo, who had enabled him to gain experience of the workings of the
law by arranging for him to help out at the firm of Mandela and Tambo on
Saturdays. He subsequently became involved with Neville Alexander’s Maoist
group in Cape Town.
Wanted by the police for distributing literature on guerrilla warfare in Cape
Town, he fled to Johannesburg, where Winnie, hearing of his predicament,
offered to arrange his escape to neighbouring Bechuanaland and turned to
Somana for help. On the day arranged for his escape, Somana turned up driving
Winnie’s car, with Mandela’s two daughters in the back. They had travelled only
a short distance when they ran straight into a roadblock manned by police, who
had clearly been expecting them. Bam was to spend ten years on Robben Island.
Word soon spread that Winnie was not to be trusted, making her more isolated
and vulnerable than before. Bram Fischer warned her about Somana and tried to
persuade her to leave South Africa to get her out of the way, but she refused to
heed him. In London, Oliver Tambo told colleagues that they should no longer
take Winnie into their confidence.
Despite all this, Winnie and Somana remained close. According to Somana’s
wife, they lived together in Winnie’s Orlando house from May 1964, when the
Rivonia trial was still under way, until December 1964. On one occasion,
Somana was arrested in Winnie’s house during a 5 a.m. police raid. Winnie was
subsequently cited in Somana’s divorce case, though she flatly denied adultery.
She also became involved with Somana in a business enterprise which he was
able to finance from a sudden and unexplained flow of funds. According to
Winnie’s testimony in a subsequent court case, concerning an arson attack on
her garage, their business partnership foundered ‘because of rumours that it was
financed out of reward money offered by the police for the capture of Walter
Sisulu’.
There was nothing that Mandela could do from Robben Island to curb
Winnie’s wayward conduct. He blamed himself for being unable to offer her the
protection she evidently needed, and his sense of guilt and frustration mounted

as the security police instigated a campaign of persecution against Winnie which
continued year after year.
The first banning order on Winnie, issued in 1963, restricted her movements
to the Johannesburg area and prohibited her from attending meetings and social
gatherings. Only by obtaining official permission was she allowed to travel to
Pretoria to attend the Rivonia trial or to Cape Town to visit Mandela in prison on
Robben Island. A second banning order, in 1965, restricted her movements
further, forcing her to leave her job as a social worker with the Child Welfare
Society in Johannesburg, a position she cherished. She took a succession of other
jobs, working in a furniture shop, a dry-cleaning shop and a shoe-repair shop,
but at each place she was fired after security police paid a visit to her employers.
She was charged on several occasions with violating her banning order, often for
no more than trivial infringements, usually ending up with a suspended sentence
or a fine.
Her house was often raided. In her autobiography, she recalled an incident in
which a white police sergeant walked into her bedroom without knocking while
she was half-dressed and put his hand on her shoulder: ‘All I remember is
grabbing him, and throwing him on the floor, which is what he deserved. I
remember seeing his legs up in the air and him screaming, and the whole
dressing-stand falling on him. That is how he broke his neck (he did recover).’
In the subsequent court case, Winnie was defended by George Bizos. She
wrote:
I would listen to him as I would listen to my father. He treats me in the same
way as Nelson does. He weighs the same authority with us. So he says to me
outside court, ‘I want you to behave like a lady in front of the magistrate and not
like an Amazon!’ Nelson always says to me—‘Zami, you are completely and
utterly undisciplined! You need a great deal of taming!’ I don’t think I’m
undisciplined. But you have to use the language they understand: to have peace,
you must be violent.
Winnie won the case.
As well as harassing Winnie, the security police turned their attention to her
two daughters, Zeni and Zindzi. The terms of Winnie’s banning order prohibited
her from entering any educational establishment, so she was always obliged to
depend on relatives or friends to help with the children at school. The first
nursery school which Zeni attended asked her to leave after a few days,

according to Winnie, on instructions from the security police. Both Zeni and
Zindzi were later expelled from a Coloured primary school after the police
intervened. Eventually, they were taken to schools in Swaziland, where
Mandela’s other three children were being educated.
The anguish that Mandela suffered on learning of these events was acute. ‘To
see your family, your children, being persecuted when you are absolutely
helpless in jail, that is one of the most bitter experiences, most painful
experiences I have had,’ he recalled.

After six months of pounding stones in the prison courtyard, Mandela and his
colleagues in the isolation section were sent to work in the lime quarry. Each
morning they set out on a twenty-minute march towards the centre of the island
where the quarry was sited. Warders made sure they were kept well away from
all other groups of prisoners, isolating them like lepers. On the way, they passed
near the small house where the PAC leader, Robert Sobukwe, was being held in
relative comfort but confined to a solitary existence, with no one to talk to other
than warders and the occasional visitor he was permitted. He complained to one
visitor that he was forgetting how to speak. Occasionally the koeloekoetz group
caught a glimpse of him in his garden.
The lime quarry was a huge crater carved out of a hillside, blindingly white in
the sunlight. There was no shade other than a few tin sheds at the base. The heat
in summer was stifling; in winter, it became bitterly cold. All day long, with
only a break for lunch, the prisoners toiled away with picks and shovels, digging
out seams of lime from the rock, their faces and bodies covered in white dust,
their eyes aching from the dazzling glare. In the late afternoon, they trudged
back to the prison cells, exhausted.
The glare, in particular, caused them severe problems. ‘The reflection from
the lime catches the sunlight and throws it back on to you and it can be
extremely sharp and scorching,’ said Maharaj, who spent twelve years on the
island. To protect their eyes, the lime quarry prisoners repeatedly put in requests
for sunglasses. It took three years before permission was granted and even then
the prison authorities made the prisoners pay for the sunglasses themselves.
For all the hardship that working in the lime quarry involved, it also provided
the prisoners with an opportunity to engage in day-long discussion and debate.

Working in small groups of four or five, they talked endlessly about the politics
and history of the African struggle for rights, analysing the past in terms of what
successes and failures had occurred. They had time too to dwell on a whole
range of other issues, some serious, some trivial. They debated the merits of
circumcision, argued over beauty competitions and spent days trying to sort out
whether tigers were indigenous to Africa. Discussions in the quarry became the
main event of the day. ‘The lime quarry was, even at the worst of times, a site
for intellectual stimulation,’ recalled Michael Dingake.
Mandela gained the reputation of being a hard taskmaster in these discussions.
He gave short shrift to anyone putting up flimsy arguments. Some prisoners
regarded him as being dogmatic and overbearing. ‘He can be harsh with
colleagues,’ agreed Sisulu, ‘even with me.’ Writing about his experiences on
Robben Island, Dingake referred to Mandela’s ‘direct, fiercely candid approach’
and recalled arguments with him from which he emerged ‘bloodied’ and
‘humiliated’. ‘In argument against someone with insubstantial facts, Nelson can
be vicious,’ he wrote. ‘Very few people like to be cross-examined and exposed
in their vagueness and ignorance.’
Mandela had no time, added Dingake, for idle chat or gossip. ‘Every day, but
every day,’ he wrote, ‘he had numerous appointments with individuals, always
on his own initiative, to discuss inter-organizational relations, prisoners’
complaints, joint strategies against prison authorities and general topics.’
Not all the discussions were amicable. A serious rift developed between
Mandela and Govan Mbeki which resulted in a direct challenge to Mandela’s
leadership. Mbeki was even more inclined to be dogmatic in argument than
Mandela. A hard, uncompromising communist, intolerant of contrary opinion, he
clashed with Mandela over the issue of Operation Mayibuye. Mbeki was
adamant that the plan had been officially approved. Mandela disagreed. The feud
between them opened up a fault line within the small ANC community in the
isolation section. Mbeki was supported by other hardline communists, including
Raymond Mhlaba, Joe Gqabi and Andrew Masondo. A fierce row flared up in
the quarry between Mandela and Gqabi, who considered himself, after six
months’ training in China, to be better qualified on guerrilla warfare tactics than
Mandela. On one issue after another, the rift widened. An acrimonious dispute
developed over the relationship between the ANC and the Communist Party,
with Mbeki insisting that they were one and the same and Mandela maintaining
they were separate entities with the same objectives. At times the feud degen -

erated into accusation and counter-accusation. Some inmates were accused of
being ready to abandon the armed struggle; others of fomenting racial hostility.
A memorandum smuggled out of prison to ANC officials in exile spoke of
‘extreme tension and bitterness’ between Mandela and Mbeki. For several years
they were hardly on speaking terms. Eventually the feud was brought formally to
an end and Mandela’s leadership reaffirmed, but the fault line remained. ‘It
resurfaced time after time again,’ said Maharaj.
The warders in charge of the lime quarry span differed in deciding how much
discussion to allow prisoners. One warder, known to them as
‘Mazithulele’—‘the quiet one’—for his soft-spoken and tolerant manner, usually
positioned himself at some distance from the group and took a lenient view of
how much work they did. He was there on the first day that Michael Dingake
worked in the lime quarry, shortly after his arrival on Robben Island in 1966.
‘The whole morning I did nothing but give a report to Mandela and Sisulu,’ he
wrote. ‘Three of us had our right feet on our spades and conversed. Mazithulele
sat under a bush and never interfered.’
His replacement, however, a warder named van Rensburg, who sported a
swastika tattoo on his wrist, enforced much harsher discipline. He stood close to
the prisoners, constantly shouting at them to work harder and accusing anyone
he considered was not exerting himself of ‘malingering’. All this was
accompanied by a stream of racial abuse. Van Rensburg issued so many charges
against prisoners that they responded by forming a legal committee, consisting
of Mandela, Bam and Maharaj, to advise them on how to defend themselves
before the prison’s administrative court. Mandela’s advice was always the same:
ask the court for ‘further particulars’, a tactic which often had van Rensburg
stumped.
Even under van Rensburg’s supervision, the prisoners managed to keep up
their discussions and the work songs that lightened their day. But the risk of
punishment was never far away. One day, the long-running debate over the
question of tigers in Africa took on political overtones. As tempers ran high,
everyone stopped working and ignored calls from the warders to get back to
work. Finally, van Rensburg marched over and bellowed in English, ‘You talk
much, but you work too few!’ At which point, the prisoners collapsed in
laughter. The upshot was that Mandela and Masondo were taken away in
handcuffs for a spell of solitary confinement on a spare diet of rice water.

When they were first taken to the lime quarry, the prisoners were told that
their work there would last six months. Officials of the International Committee
of the Red Cross were given regular assurances by the prison authorities that
digging at the lime quarry had stopped, but Mandela and other members of the
Rivonia group were to spend thirteen years there.

During a tour of inspection of Robben Island in 1965, the Commissioner of
Prisons, General Steyn, questioned Mandela, in his role as spokesman for the
isolation section, about prisoners’ requests for study privileges. ‘What is it you
want about things like studies?’ he asked. ‘What is it you want?’ Mandela at the
time was the only prisoner on Robben Island entitled to study; soon after
entering prison in 1962, he had gained permission to complete his law degree
with London University and he had pursued his studies intermittently ever since.
His colleagues in the isolation section hoped to gain the same right, even though
they were category D prisoners. Replying to the general, Mandela said, ‘You
should let the atmosphere of a university prevail here on the island.’
The following year, the prison authorities granted permission to prisoners to
study. They were allowed to register with the University of South Africa for a
degree or with the Rapid Results College for secondary school education. Those
who had yet to reach secondary-level education were helped by inmate teachers
like Neville Alexander. Most prisoners took to the task with enthusiasm, even
though it came at the end of a hard day’s work at the quarry. ‘At night, our cell
block seemed more like a study hall than a prison,’ recorded Mandela.
The conditions in which prisoners began their studies were primitive. Their
cells were permanently damp and in winter bitterly cold. They were given
neither desks nor chairs. After complaints, the prison authorities installed in each
cell a wooden board attached to walls at chest-height to serve as a makeshift
stand-up desk. It took six months of more complaints before they were willing to
provide wooden stools and to lower the stand-up desks.
Strict rules were imposed on study activities. Books and periodicals deemed
unsuitable were banned. In Mandela’s case, study material prescribed by the
University of London fell victim to the prison censors, making it difficult for
him to meet examination standards. Students were not allowed either to lend
books to those who were not students or even to exchange books with prisoners
studying the same subject. Students able to afford books they needed were thus

unable to help those too poor to buy them. Applications for library books were
always carefully scrutinized. Warders were often deliberately obstructive,
delaying the delivery of mail and books. Students who failed to abide by study
conditions risked losing the privilege altogether.
While working at the lime quarry, prisoners formed their own study groups.
‘Our economics class was a very lively class,’ wrote Dingake. ‘Not even van
Rensburg managed to curb the animation of its members. The “laymen” in
economics stood and watched as we argued noisily over our supply and demand
curves and drew them on the ground to demonstrate their gradients and
elasticity.’ Mandela and Fikile Bam often worked alongside each other in the
quarry, discussing law.
Mandela also took up the study of Afrikaans and encouraged others to do the
same. To those colleagues who argued that Afrikaans was the language of their
oppressor, Mandela replied that it was a vital means of understanding the mind
of their oppressor, useful in the longer term as well as in prison. It was long-term
possibilities that Mandela always managed to keep in sight.
With the help of the International Committee of the Red Cross, graduate
prisoners were given permission to teach literacy courses to other prisoners. As
Govan Mbeki recalled:
We took people from the lowest level, who came to the island illiterate. I
remember one group I had. I started with them when they were illiterate, started
them up. And by the time they left Robben Island they were able to write letters
home—they didn’t require anybody to write letters for them and to address their
envelopes. And they spoke English. Upon completing each stage of their
courses, students were issued with certificates headed ‘The University of
Robben Island’.
In addition to these approved activities, the koeloekoetz men began to develop
their own political education courses. The courses grew out of a series of
informal talks on ANC history given at the lime quarry by Sisulu, who was
renowned for his encyclopedic knowledge of the organisation. Other lectures
were added. Kathrada talked about the Indian struggle for political rights,
Maharaj expounded on Marxism and Mandela taught a course in political
economy. The lectures became part of a course of study known as Syllabus A,
which was spread over two years. When prisoners in the general section heard of
the lectures, they asked to become involved. Copies of the lectures were

smuggled out to them.
University activity became the only real source of stimulation that prisoners
enjoyed. Many attributed their ability to endure Robben Island to their study
privileges. ‘It is one single thing that really keeps you together,’ said Dikgang
Moseneke, who graduated with a school-leaving certificate and then went on to
obtain a degree in political science and English.
However, just as much as study privileges were prized by inmates, so they
became a weapon in the hands of the prison administration, subject to the whims
of prison officials.

The kitchens on Robben Island were notorious not just for turning out food that
was barely edible but for corruption. They were manned by common-law
convicts who ensured that the tastiest foods were kept back for themselves, their
friends and the warders who supervised them. The official rations allowed to
prisoners were meagre enough, but what emerged from the kitchens was even
less adequate. ‘Lunch and supper, especially the supper of African prisoners,
were sometimes so full of sand and miscellaneous kinds of dirt and insects that
even the strong stomachs of the most hard-bitten would somersault,’ said Ne ville Alexander. ‘Hungry people would sometimes leave food uneaten.’
Complaints about food were commonplace, but nothing was ever done to
improve the system.
A particular grievance of political prisoners was the discrimination the
authorities applied between food for Africans and food for Coloureds and
Indians. African prisoners received what was termed an ‘F diet’; Coloureds and
Indians were placed higher on the scale with ‘D diet’. Both diets were based
largely on maize, but D-diet prisoners were given bread and extra helpings of
meat, vegetables and coffee. The regulations were quite specific. D-diet
prisoners, for example, were allowed two ounces of sugar a day; F-diet
prisoners, one and a half ounces. Sharing food with prisoners with different diets
was forbidden and resulted in punishment.
It was a shortage of food which in 1966 precipitated the island’s first major
act of defiance. At the stone quarry, where about 600 prisoners from the general
section were working, food for lunch arrived as usual in half-drums transported
on two wheeled trolleys. When the bell for lunch rang, the prisoners formed

queues, with Coloured and Indian prisoners in front and Africans behind,
waiting patiently while a common-law convict doled out food on plates set out in
long rows, starting with Coloured and Indian plates and moving on to the
African ones. No one was allowed to take a plate until all the food had been laid
out.
The food ran out. About 100 plates stood empty. The usual rou - tine when
this happened was for warders to send prisoners back to the kitchens for more
food, but on this occasion the warder in charge of the quarry span, a large redfaced man named Delport, universally hated as a ‘slave-driver’, gave the order to
reduce the F-diet rations already doled out. When two prisoners stepped forward
to protest, Delport told them, ‘You either take your food or leave it.’ Though Ddiet prisoners at the front of the queue were not affected, they decided to refuse
their food. One by one, prisoners filed past the plates without taking them.
In the afternoon, they resumed work in the quarry having had nothing to eat,
then trudged back to the prison and again refused their food. In hurried
discussions, ANC, PAC and other prisoners agreed to continue the hunger strike
for as long as possible in protest not just against food rations but against all the
other grievances they had raised—over working conditions, arbitrary
punishment, beatings and other malicious treatment meted out by warders. There
were fears that the prison authorities might retaliate by ordering mass assaults.
No one was sure what the outcome would be, but the prevailing view among
prisoners in the general section was that the time had come to take a stand. The
warders, meanwhile, remained confident that the strike would soon collapse.
It was not until the second day of the strike that Mandela and others in the
isolation section heard of what was happening. A note wrapped in plastic telling
them a hunger strike was under way arrived in their food drum but gave no
details. Mandela was sceptical about the value of hunger strikes, arguing that
they tended to harm prisoners more than the authorities. He favoured work
strikes or go-slow action instead. But on hearing the news, he and others readily
agreed to join. When prisoners in the general section in turn learned of
Mandela’s involvement, their spirits revived.
Each day, the prison authorities produced ever more appetizing food, steaming
hot, laced with vegetables and soaked in fat. But still the resolve of prisoners, in
both the general and the isolation sections, held firm. Even the sick and elderly
insisted on taking part. Patients in hospital who refused food were turned out of

their beds and told they would have to work in the quarry. In a pathetic straggle,
they stumbled along the road, some in bandages, some crawling, accompanied
by a warder shouting, ‘No food—no medicine.’
By the fifth day of the strike, the prisoners were beginning to flag. The
journey to the quarry, normally half an hour, took an hour. The hospital group
hobbled along several hours later. Work in the quarry tailed off. Prisoners started
to collapse. In the afternoon, the hospital group was taken back to the prison
compound in a van.
On the sixth day, prisoners sat around listlessly in the quarry, not even
pretending to work. Nobody had the energy even to speak. Those who collapsed
were carted away in wheelbarrows. But just when it seemed to the survivors that
they could endure no more, a senior officer arrived and, after a few taunts, asked
what their complaints were. Everyone began to shout at once. A deputation of
prisoners was organised to present their case at a meeting with prison officials.
The officials duly promised to investigate all the complaints the prisoners raised.
For a few days, a more lenient regime prevailed on Robben Island. The food
improved, the warders were more restrained and there were fewer beatings. It
was not long, however, before the prison administration took its revenge. Some
sixteen prisoners deemed to be ringleaders of the strike were sentenced to an
extra six months’ imprisonment. The improvements turned out to be temporary
as the old methods soon returned. Yet the atmosphere on the island was never
quite the same as it had been before. The prisoners regarded the strike as a
success. They had defied the administration and survived.

As the number of ANC prisoners on Robben Island rose month by month,
reaching about 1,000 by 1966, Mandela and his colleagues devised ways and
means of setting up their own forms of organisation to maintain internal
discipline and control, and to circumvent the authorities. An elaborate network
of committees was established—disciplinary, political, educational, literary,
recreational—to deal with every aspect of prisoners’ lives and to keep open
channels of communication between different sections. At the apex was a
committee known as the High Organ, consisting of four members of the old
national executive: Mandela, Sisulu, Mbeki and Mhlaba. Mandela served as its
head.

Every opportunity was used to keep the leaders in the isolation section in
touch with the mass of prisoners in the general section. Messages were hidden in
drums of food, in toilets, which the warders rarely searched, or in matchboxes
discarded by warders on their way to the quarries and surreptitiously picked up
by prisoners. The prison hospital was a regular contact point to exchange
information. The penalties for being caught in possession of messages or any
illicit piece of paper were severe: messengers risked a prolonged spell in solitary
confinement or the loss of study privileges. The danger from searches carried out
by warders or from tip-offs by informers was ever-present. But despite the
hazards, the communications system functioned effectively enough.
A perpetual war was also conducted over the possession of newspapers.
Prisoners were always desperate for news of the outside world. ‘Newspapers are
more valuable to political prisoners than gold or diamonds, more hungered for
than food or tobacco,’ wrote Mandela. ‘They were the most precious contraband
on Robben Island.’ The prison authorities equally relentlessly endeavoured to
prevent prisoners gaining access to newspapers. Raids in search of newspapers
were commonplace.
Despite the risks, prisoners stole newspapers from careless warders, bribed
corrupt ones, retrieved them from rubbish dumps and took them surreptitiously
from visiting doctors and priests. Every scrap of newspaper, whether it had been
used to wrap warders’ sandwiches or for toilet purposes, was seized upon. Old
newspapers were as valued as recent ones. Each item, however trivial, was
memorised or copied, passed on and talked about for days. The disposal of
newspapers, torn into minute shreds and flushed down toilets, took hours. Some
cuttings ended up being eaten.
In the isolation section, Kathrada was given the task of organising
communications and newspaper distribution. To minimise the risk, he first took
cuttings, then handed them on to other prisoners to make short summaries which
were then passed down the line. But there were frequent casualties. Mandela was
once caught in his cell reading a newspaper which a warder had inadvertently
left lying on a bench at the end of the corridor and which had so engrossed him
he failed to hear the footsteps of an approaching officer. It cost him three days in
isolation on a diet of rice water.
Prisoners also had some success in managing to talk individual warders into
adopting a more tolerant regime. As a matter of policy, the ANC’s High Organ

took the view that warders who accorded fair treatment to prisoners should be
respected in return and that others should be encouraged to act similarly. The
results were usually worthwhile. Mandela recalled:
We soon became aware that in terms of our daily lives a warder in our section,
an ordinary warder, not a sergeant, could be more important to us than the
commissioner of prisons or even the minister of justice. If you went to the
commissioner of prisons or even the minister of justice and said, ‘Sir, it’s very
cold, I want four blankets,’ he would look at the regulations and say, ‘You can
only have three blankets . . . more would be a violation of the regulations and if I
give you four blankets I’ll have to give others four blankets.’ If you went to a
warder in your section and said, ‘Look, I want an extra blanket,’ and if you
treated him with respect, he’d just go to the storeroom, give you an extra blanket
and that’s the end of it. If you said, ‘Can I have some gravy today from the
kitchen,’ he just went to the kitchen and got you gravy.
Mandela developed cordial relationships with a number of indi - vidual
warders. ‘With junior officers who knew their position, Nelson was charming
and fatherly,’ Dingake recalled. ‘Many young warders were friendly to him,
occasionally soliciting advice from him in connection with their jobs or social
problems.’ With senior officers, with whom he was frequently at odds over
prison practices, his relationship was far more abrasive.
Prisoners were particularly effective in encouraging warders, often poorly
educated, to study, like them, hoping it would bring a more enlightened
approach to their prison duties. More and more warders turned to graduate
prisoners to help them with their courses. ‘Eventually, we ended up teaching
them subjects like history, maths, English and even Afrikaans,’ said Neville
Alexander.
On occasion, they resorted to blackmail. An elderly warder on night duty in
the isolation section whom Maharaj had befriended asked him one night for help
with writing an essay for a newspaper competition he wanted to enter. Maharaj
agreed. Two weeks later the warder asked for more help; he had reached the
final round, needed to produce another essay and offered Maharaj a cooked
chicken in return. After consulting Mandela and Sisulu, Maharaj agreed to write
the essay in exchange for a packet of cigarettes. The warder duly handed one
over. Once Maharaj had the packet of cigarettes with the warder’s fingerprints
on it, he threatened to expose him to the prison authorities unless he allowed him

to borrow his newspaper each night. The warder, fearful of losing his job and
pension, duly obliged. For three hours every night, Maharaj transcribed items
from the newspaper, handing it back before the warders changed shift, and then
passed his work on to other prisoners to copy so that nothing could be traced
back to him. This nightly transaction went on for six months until the warder
was transferred.
The struggle for improvements in conditions, meanwhile, slowly began to
show results. In 1967, the authorities allowed prisoners in the general section to
start playing football on Saturday mornings. Football and other outdoor sports
like rugby and cricket became the mainstay of long, dreary weekends when
prisoners were otherwise kept locked up in cells. Within months, the Makana
Football Association on Robben Island boasted some twenty-six sides in three
divisions. Training was carried out in cells during weekdays. ‘Sport was very
important on the island,’ said Steve Tshwete, an ANC prisoner. ‘It relieved the
tension and anxiety about family, about home and about survival in prison
itself.’
Prisoners in the isolation section were excluded from participating in generalsection sports; nor were they permitted to attend as spectators. For a time they
managed to get a view of football matches by peering through the tops of
windows in the isolation section facing the pitch. Mandela’s voice could be
heard booming out, ‘Good move, well played!’ But the authorities soon put a
stop to that by painting over the windows. The only relief to the monotony of
weekends in the early years, apart from brief exercise periods, came from the
visits of priests on Sundays. For the first two years, prisoners were confined to
their cells while the priest preached from the head of the corridor, but during the
third year services were conducted in the courtyard outside, allowing inmates to
bask in the sun.
A notable boost to morale was provided by a visit in 1967 by Helen Suzman,
the only member of parliament to take an interest in the welfare of political
prisoners. Before her arrival, the warders moved Mandela out of his customary
cell, no. 4, which was close to the entrance of the corridor, to no. 18, at the end
of it, in the hope that by the time Suzman reached him, she might have little time
left to speak to him. But this ploy was quickly thwarted when Suzman stopped at
the first cell and was told by Eddie Daniels not to waste time talking to him but
to go straight to the end of the corridor to talk to Mandela.

Mandela put his hand through the bars of the cell door and said, ‘How do you
do, Mrs Suzman, I’m very pleased to meet you.’ Suzman was struck by his
remarkable degree of self-assurance. With both the commissioner of prisons and
the commanding officer of Robben Island standing close by, Mandela proceeded
to list grievances over food, clothing, study facilities, labour conditions and the
harsh treatment meted out by warders, singling out by name van Rensburg, the
warder with the swastika tattoo, for whom he harboured an abiding hatred.
Suzman promised to take up all these issues with the minister of justice.
In a subsequent meeting with the minister, when she threatened to expose van
Rensburg’s conduct in parliament, the minister hastily agreed to his removal.
The prisoners had struck back and won. But it was to be another seven years
before Suzman was given permission to return to Robben Island.

