THE NO-TAX CAMPAIGN IN THE 
UNITED PROVINCES 

After eight clays’ absence I was back again in Naini, and I 
rejoined Syed Mahmucl, Narmada Prasad and Ranjit Pandit in 
the same old barrack. Some days afterwards I was tried in 
prison on a number of charges, all based on various parts of 
that one speech I had delivered at Allahabad, the day after my 
discharge. As usual with us, I did not defend myself, but made 
a brief statement in court. I was sentenced for sedition under 
Section 124. A to 18 months’ rigorous imprisonment and a fine 
of Rs.500; under the Salt Act of 1882 to six months and a fine 
of Rs.ioo; and under Ordinance VT of 1930 (I forget what this 
Ordinance was about) also to six months and a fine of Rs. 100. 
As the last two were concurrent, the total sentence was two years' 
rigorous imprisonment and, in addition, five months in default 
of fines. This was my fifth term. 

My re-arrest and conviction had some effect on the tempo of 
the civil disobedience movement for a while; it put on a little 
spurt and showed greater energy. This was largely due to 
father. When news was brought to him by Kamala of my 
arrest, he had a slightly unpleasant shock. Almost immediately 
he pulled himself together and banged a table in front of him, 
saying that he had made up his mind to be an invalid no 
longer. He was going to be well and to do a man’s work, and 
not to submit weakly to illness. It was a brave resolve, but un- 
happily no strength of will could overcome ^d crush that 
deep-seated disease that was eating into him. Yet for a few days 
it worked a marked change, to ihe surprise of those who saw 
him. For some months past, ever since he was at Yeravda, he 
had been bringing up blood in his sputum. This stopped quite 
suddenly after this resolve of his, and for some days it did not 
reappear. He was pleased' about it, and he came to see me in , 
prison and mentioned this feet to me in some triumph. It was •' 
unfortunately a brief respite, for the blood came later in greater 
quantities and the disease reasserted itself. During this interval 
he worked with his old energy and gave a push to the civil 
disobedience movement all over India. He conferred with many 
people from various places and issued detailed instructions. He 
fixed one day (it was my birthday in November 1 ) fijr an all- 



336 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


India celebration at which the offending passages from my 
speech, for which I had been convicted, were read out at public 
meetings. On that day there were numerous lathi charges and 
forcible dispersals of processions and meetings, and it was esti- 
mated that, on that day alone, about five thousand arrests were 
made all over the country. It was a unique birthday celebra- 
tion. 

Ill as he was, this assumption of responsibility and pouring 
out of energy was very bad for father, and I begged of him to 
take absolute rest. I realised that such rest might not be pos- 
sible for him in India, for his mind would always be occupied 
with the ups and downs of our struggle and, inevitably, people 
would go to him for advice. So I suggested to him to go for a 
short sea voyage towards Rangoon, Singapore, and the Dutch 
Indies, and he rather liked the idea. It was arranged that a 
doctor friend might accompany him on the voyage. With this 
object in view he went to Calcutta, but his condition grew 
slowly worse and he was unable to go far. In a Calcutta suburb 
he remained for seven weeks, and the whole family joined him 
there, except Kamala, who remained in Allahabad for most of 
the time, doing Congress work. 

My re-arrest had probably been hastened because of my 
activities in connection with the no-tax campaign. As a matter 
of fact few things could have been better for that campaign 
than my arrest on that particular day, immediately after the 
kisan conference, while the peasant delegates were still in Alla- 
habad. Their enthusiasm grew because of it, and they carried 
the decisions of the conference to almost every village in the 
district. Within a couple of days the whole district laiew that 
the no-tax campaign had been maugurated, and everywhere 
there was a joyml response to it. 

Our Aief difficulty in those days was one of communication, 
of getting people to know what we were doing or what we 
wanted them to do. Newspapers would not publish our news for 
fear of being penalised and suppressed by Government; print- 
mg presses would not print our leaflets and notices; letters and 
telemams were censored and often stopped. The only reliable 
method of communication open to us was to send couriers with 
despat^es, and even so oin: messengers were sometimes 
arrested. T^e method was an expensive one and required a 
great deal of organisation. It was organised with some success, 
and the provmcial centres were in constant touch with hcad- 
quartera as well as with their principal district centres. It was 
not difficult to spread any information in the cities. Many of 



THE NO-TAX CAMPAIGN 237 

these issued unauthorised news-sheets, usually cyclostyled, daily 
or weekly, and there was always a great demand for thenv 
For our public notifications, one of the city methods was by 
beat of drum; this resulted usually in the arrest of the drum- 
mer. This did not matter, as arrests were sought, not avoided. 
All these methods suited the cities and were not easily appli- 
cable to the rural areas. Some kind of touch was kept up with 
principal village centres by means of messengers and cyclo- 
styled notices, but this was not satisfactory, and it took time for 
our instructions to percolate to distant villages. 

The kisan conference at Allahabad got over this difficulty. 
Delegates had come to it from practically every impoiTant vil- 
lage in the district and, when they dispersed, they carried the 
news of the fresh decisions affecting the peasantry, and of my 
arrest in connection with them, to every part of the district. 
They became, sixteen hundred of them, effective and enthusi- 
astic propagandists for the no-tax campaign. The initial success 
of the movement thus became assured, and there was no doubt 
that the peasantry as a whole in that area would not pay their 
rent to begin with, and not at all unless they were frightened 
into doing so. No one, of course, could say what their powers 
of endurance would be in face of official or zamindari violence 
and terrorism. 

Our appeal had been addressed both to zamindars and tenants 
not to pay; in theory it was not a class appeal. In practice most 
of the zamindars did pay their revenue, even some who sympa- 
thised with the national struggle. The pressure on them was 
great and they had more to lose. The tenantry, however, stood 
firm and did not pay, and our campaign thus became prac- 
tically a no-rent campaign. From the Allahabad district it 
spread ta some other districts of the United Provinces. In 
many districts it was not formally adopted or declared, but in 
effect tenants withheld their rents or, in many cases, were 
wholly unable to pay them owing to the fall in prices. As it 
happened, neither Government nor the big zamindars took any 
widespread action to terrorise the recalcitrant tenantry for 
several months. They were not sure of their ground, as they 
had the political struggle with civil disobedience on the one 
side, and the economic slump, resultingTn agricultural distress, 
on the other. The two merged into each other, and the Govern- 
ment was alw^s afiraid of an agrarian upheaval. With the 
Round Table Gonference in session in London, they^ were not 
keen on adding to their troubles in India or on giving a still 
more striking demonstration of ‘ strong ’ government. 



3^8 JAWAHARI.AL NEHRU 

The no-tax movement in the United Provinces had one im- 
portant result so far as this province was concerned. It shifted 
the centre of gravity of our struggle from the urban to the 
rural areas, and it thereby revitalised the movement and put it 
on a broader and more enduring basis. Though our city people 
became bored and tired, and our middle-class workers were 
obviously rather stale, the movement itself in the U.P. was as 
strong, or even stronger, than it had been at any other time. 
In the other provinces this change-over from urban to rural, 
from political to economic issues, did not take place to the same 
extent, and consequently they continued to be dominated by 
the cities and to suffer increasingly from the weariness of the 
middle-class elements. Even the city of Bombay, which had all 
along played a prominent part in the movement, began to grow 
a little stale. Defiance of authority would go on there and else- 
where, and arrests would continue, but all this seemed some- 
what artificial. The organic element had gone. This was 
natural enough, as it is impossible to keep the masses at a cer- 
tain revolutionary pitch for long periods. Ordinarily, this was a 
question of days, but civil disobedience had the remarkable 
capacity for lengthening this period to many months, and even 
then of carrying on at a lower pitch for an indefinite period. 

Government repression grew. Local Congress Committees, 
Youth Leagues, etc., which had rather surprisingly carried on 
so far, were declared illegal and suppressed. The treatment of 
political prisoners in gaols became worse. Government was 
especially irritated when people retturned to gaol for a second 
sentence soon after their discharge. This failure to bend in 
spite of punishment hurt the morale of the rulers. In Novem- 
ber or early December 1930 there were some cases of flogging 
of political prisoners in U.P. prisons, apparently for offences 
against gaol discipline. News of this reached us in Naini Prison 
and upset us-— since then we have got used to this, as well as 
many worse happenings in India— for flogging seemed to me to 
be an undesirable infliction, even on hardened criminals of the 
worst type. For young, sensitive boys and for technical offences 
of disapline, it was barbarous. 'We four in our barrack wrote 
to the Government about it, and, not receiving any reply for 
about two weeks, we decided to take some definite step to mark 
our protest at the floggings and our sympathy with the victims 
of this barbarity. We undertook a complete fast for three days 
— 7* hours. This was not much as fasts go, but none of us was 
accustomed to fasting, and did not know how we would stand 
it. My previous fasts had seldom exceeded 24 hours|. 



THE NO-TAX CAMPAIGN 239 

We went through that fast without any great difficulty, and T 
was glad to find out that it was not sucli an ordeal as I feared. 
Very foolishly I carried on my strenuous exercises — ^running, 
jerks, etc.— -right through that fest. I do not think that did me 
much good, especially as I had been feeling a little unwell pre- 
viously. Each ope of us lost seven to eight pounds in weight 
during those three days. This was in adffition to the fifteen to 
twenty-six pounds that each had lost in the previous months in 
Naini. 

Quite apart from our fasting, there was a fair amount of 
agitation outside against the flogging, and I believe that the 
U.P. Government issued orders to its Gaol Department not to 
indulge in it in future. But these orders were not to remain un- 
changed for long, and a little more than a ye.ar later there was 
going to be no lack of flogging in the gaols of the United 
Provinces and the other provinces. 

Except for these occasional alarms, we lived a quiet life in 
prison. The weather was agreeable, for winter in Allahabad is 
very pleasant. Ranjit Pandit was an acquisition to our barrack, 
for he, knew much about gardening, and soon that dismal en- 
closure of ours was full of flowers and was gay with colour. 
He even arranged in that narrow, restricted space a miniature 
golf course I 

One of the welcome excitements of our prison existence at 
Naini was the passage of aeroplanes over oiu: heads. Allahabad 
is one of the ports of call for all the great air lines between 
East and West, and the giant planes going to Australia, Java, 
and French Indo-China would pass almost directly above our 
heads at Naini. Most stately of all were the Dutch liners flying 
to and from Batavia. Sometimes, if we were lucky, we saw a 
plane in the early winter morning, when it was still dark and 
the stars were visible. The great Bner was brightly lit up, and 
at both ends it had red lights. It was a beautiful sight, as it 
sailed by, against the dark background of the early morning 

Pandit Madan Moh'an Malaviya was also transferred to Naini 
from some other gaol. He was kept separately, not in qur 
barrack, but we met him daily, and perhaps I saw more of him 
there than I had done outside. He was a delightful companion, 
full of vitality and a youthful interest in things. He even 
started, with Ranjit’s help, to learn German, and he showed 
quite a remarkable memory. He was in Naini when news of 
the floggings came, and he was greatly upset and wrote to the 
Acting-Governor of Ae Province. Soon afterwards he fell ill. 



■ 240 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


He was unable to bear the cold in the conditions that prevailed 
in prison. His illness grew serious, and he had to be reniovcd 
to the city hospital, and later to be discharged before his term 
was over. Happily, he recovered in hospital. 

• The New Year’s Day, the first of January 1931, brought us 
the news of Kamala’s arrest. I was pleased, for she had so 
longed to follow many of her comrades to prison. Ordinarily, 
if they had been men, both she and my sister and many other 
women would have been arrested long ago. But at that time 
the Government avoided, as far as possible, arresting women, 
and so they had escaped for so long. And now she had her 
heart’s desire I How glad she must be, I thought. But I was 
apprehensive, for she was always in weak health, and I feared 
that prison conditions might cause her much suffering. 

As she was arrested, a pressman who was present asked her 
for a message, and, on the spur of the moment and almost un- 
consciously, she gave a little message that was characteristic of 
her : " I am happy beyond measure and proud to follow in the 
footsteps of my husband. I hope the people will keep the flag 
flying.” Probably she would not have said just that if she had 
thought over the matter, for she considers herself a champion 
of woman’s right against the tyranny of man. But at that 
moment the Hindu wife in her came uppermost and even man’s 


tyranny was forgotten. 

My father was in Calcutta and was far from well, but news 
of Kamala’s arrest and conviction shook him up, and he de- 
cided to return to Allahabad. He sent on my sister Krishna 
immediately to Allahabad, and fisllowed himself, with the rest 
of the family, a few days later. On the 12th of January he 
came to see me in Naini. I saw him after nearly two months, 
and I had a shock which I could conceal with difficulty. He 
seemed to be unaware of the dismay that his appearance had 

E reduced in me, and told me that he was much better than he 
ad lately been in Calcutta. His face was swollen up, and he 
seemed to think that this was due to some temporary cause. 

That face of his haunted me. It was so utterly unlike him. 
For the first time a fear began to creep in my mind that there 
was real danger for him ahead. I had always associated him 
with strength and health, and I could not think of death in 
connection with him. He had always laughed at the idea of 
death, made fun of it, and told us that he proposed to live for 
a further long term of years. Latterly I had noticed that when- 
ever an old friend of his youth died, he had a sense of lone- 
4 iness, of being left by himself in strange company, and even a 



THE NO-TAX CAMPAIGN 


241 

hint of an approaching end. But generally this mood passed 
and his overflowing vitality asserted itself, and we of his family 
had grown so used to his rich personality and the all-embracing 
warmth of his affection, that it was difiicult for us to think of 
the world without him. 

1 was troubled by that look of his and my mind was full of 
forebodings. Yet I did not think that any danger to him lay in 
the near fiiture. I was myself, for some imknown reason, keep- 
ing poor health just then. 

Those were the last days of the first Round Table Confer- 
ence, and we were a little amused — and I am afraid our amuse- 
ment had a touch of disdain in it — at the final flourishes and 
gestures. Those speeches and platitudes and discussions seemed 
unreal and futile, but one reality stood out: that even in the 
hour of our country’s sorest trial, and when our men and 
women had behaved so wonderfully, there were some of our 
countrymen who were prepared to ignore our struggle and give 
their moral support to the other side. It became clearer to us 
than it had been before how, under the deceptive cover of 
nationalism', conflicting economic interests were at work, and 
how those with vested interests were trying to preserve them 
for the future in the name of this very nationalism. The Round 
Table Conference was an obvious collection of these vested 
interests. Many of them had opposed our struggle; some had 
silently stood aside, reminding us, however, from time to time 
that " they also serve who only stand and wait.” But the wait- 
ing period came to a sudden end when London beckoned, and 
they trooped up to ensure the safety of their own particular 
interests and to share in such further spoils as might be forth- 
coming. This general lining up in London was hastened by a 
realisation that the Congress was going increasingly to the Left 
and the masses were influencing it more and more. Instinc- 
tively, it was felt that if a root and branch political change 
came in India, it would mean the dominance, or at least the 
emergence into importance, of various mass elements, and these 
would inevitably press towards radical social changes and thus 
endanger those vested interests. The Indian vested interests 
drew back from this, to them, alarming prospect, and this led 
them to oppose any far-reaching political change. They wanted 
the British to remain in India as a deciding factor, to preserve 
the existing social structure and the existing vested interestsf^ 
This was the real thought that underlay the insistence on 
Dominion Status. A well-known Indian Liberal leader once got 
rather“'irritated with me fiar insistiiig j:hat, as an essential.part 
■ a 



343 JAWAHAKLAL NEHRU 

of a settlement with Great Britain, the British Army should 
withdraw immediately from India and the Indian Army must 
be put under Indian dcmociratic control. He went to the length 
of saying that even if the British Government agreed to do this, 
he would oppose it with all his might. He opposed this obvious 
and essential preliminary to any Icind of national freedom, 
therefore, not because it was difficult of achievement under 
existing circumstances, but because he considered it undesirable. 
Partly, it may be thought, this was due to fear of external 
invasion, and he wanted the British Army to protect us from 
this. Quite apart from the possibility or otherwise of such an 
invasion, it seems a humiliating thought for any Indian of 
spirit to ask for an outsider’s protection. But I do not think this 
is the real reason behind the desire to keep the strong arm of 
the British in India; the British are required to preserve Indian 
vested interests against Indians themselves, against undiluted 
democracy, against an upsurge of the masses. 

So the Indian Round Table Delegates, not only the declared 
reacribnaries and communalists, but even those who called them- 
selves progressives and nationalists, found much in common 
between themselves and the British Government. Nationalistn in- 
deed seemed to us a term of wide and varied reach, if it included 
in its embrace both those who went to gaol hi India in further- 
ance of the struggle for freedom and those who shook hands and 
lined up with our gaolers and discussed a common policy with 
them. There were others also in our country, brave nationalists, 
fluent of speech, who encouraged the Swadeshi movement in 
eve:y way, telling us that therem lay the heart of Swaraj, and 
calling upon their countrymen to further it even at a sacrifice. 
Fortunately the movement brought no sacrifice to them; it in- 
creased their busmesses and their dividends. And while many 
went to prison or faced the lathi, they sat in their counting 
houses counting out their money. Later, when aggressive 
nationalism became a little more risky, they toned down their 
speeches, and condemned the ‘extremists and made pacts and 
agreements with the other party. 

We did not really mind or care what the Round Table Con- 
ference did. It was far away, unreal and shadowy, and the 
struggle lay here in our towns and villages. We had no illusions 
about the speedy termination of our struggle or about the 
dangers ahead, and yet the events of 1930 had given us a cer- 
tain confidence in our national strength and stamina, and with 
that confidence we faced the future. 

One incident in December or early January had pained us 



THE NO-TAX CAMPAIGN 


343 

greatly. Mr. Srinivas Sastri, in a speech at Edinburgh (where, 
I think, the freedom of the city was firesented to him), referred 
with some contempt to those who were going to prison in India 
in the civil disobedience movement. That speech, and especi- 
ally the occasion for it, hurt us to the quick. For though we 
differed from Mr. Sastri greatly in politics, we respected him. 

Mr. Ramsay MacDonald had wound up the Round Table 
Conference with one of his usual brotherly speeches, and this 
seemed to contain an implied appeal to the Congress to give up 
its evil ways and join the happy throng. Just about that time— 
the middle of January 1931 — ^the Congress Worldng Committee 
met at Allahabad, and, among other matters, this speech and 
appeal were also considered. I was in Naini Prison then, and I 
heard of the proceedings on my release. Father had Just re- 
turned from Calcutta, and, though he was very ill, he insisted 
on the members gathering round his bed and discussing this 
subject there. Some one made a suggestion in favour of a 
gesture to Mr. MacDonald and toning down civil disobedience. 
This excited father greatly, and he sat up in bed and declared 
that he would not compromise till the national objective had 
been gained, and that he would cany on the struggle, even if 
he was the sole person left to do so. This excitement was very 
bad for him, and as his temperature shot up, the doctors suc' 
ceeded at last in removing the visitors and leaving him alone. 

Largely at his instance, the Working Committee passed an 
uncompromising resolution. Before this was published, a cable 
came from Sir Tej Bahadur Sapru and Mr. Srinivas Sastri ad- 
dressed to father, requesting the Congress, through him, not to 
come to any decision till they had had an opportunity of a 
discussion. They were already on their way home. A reply was 
sent to the effect that a resolution had already been passed by 
the Working Committee, but this would be withheld fi'om the 
Press till Messrs. Sapru and Sastri had arrived and had a dis- 
cussion. 

Inside the prison we did not know of these developments 
outside. But we knew that something was afoot and we were 
rather worried. What filled our minds much more was the 
approach of Januwy a6th, the first anniversary of Indepen- 
dence Day, and we wondered how this would be celebrated. It 
was observed, as we learnt subsequently, all over the country 
by the holding of mass meetings which confirmed the resolu- 
tion of independence, and passed an identical resolution called 
the “ Resolution of Remenibrance The organisation of this 
' This resolution is given in Appendix C. (p. 606). 



244 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

celebration was a remarkable feat, for newspapers and printing 
presses were not available, nor could the post or telegraph be 
utilised. And yet an identical resolution, in the particular lan- 
guage of the province concerned, was passed at large gatherings 
held at more or less the same times at innumerable places, 
urban and rural, throughout the country. Most of these 
gatherings were held in defiance of the law and were, forcibly 
di^ersed by the police. 

January 36th found us in Naini Prison musing of the year 
that was past and of the year that was to come. In the fore- 
noon I was told suddenly that my father’s condition was serious 
and that I must go home immediately. On enquiry, I was in- 
formed that I was being discharged. Ranjit also accompanied 
me. 

That evening, many other persons were discharged from 
various prisons throughout India. These were the original and 
substitute members of the Congress Working Committee. The 
Government was giving us a chance to meet and consider the 
situation. So, in any event, I would have been discharged that 
evening. Father’s condition hastened my release by a few hours. 
Kamala also was discharged that day from her Lucknow pri.son 
after a brief gaol life of a6 days. She too was a substitute 
member of the Working Committee. 