DOMINION STATUS AND INDEPENDENCE 

Most of those who have sh^ed Congress policy during the last 
seventeen years have come from the middle classes. Liberal or 
Congressmen, they have come from the same class and have 
grown up in the same environment. Their social life and con- 
tacts and friendships have been similar, and there was little 
difference to begin vidth between the two varieties of bourgeois 
ideals that they professed. Temperamental and psychological 
differences began to separate them, and they began to look in 
different directions — one group more towards the Government 
and the rich, upper middle class, the other towards the lower 
middle classes, ttie ideology still remained the same, the objec- 
tives did not differ, but behind the second group there was now 
the push of larger numbers from the market-place and the 
humbler professions as well as the unemployed intelligentsia. 
The tone changed; it was no longer respectful and polite, but 
strident and aggressive. Lacking strength to act effectively, some 
relief was found in strong language. Frightened by this new 
development, the moderate elements dropped out and sought 
safety m seclusion. Even so, the upper middle class was strongly 
represented in the Congress, though in numbers the little 
bourgeoisie was predominant. They were drawn not only by the 
desire for success in their national struggle, but because they 
sought an inner satisfaction in that struggle. They sought 
thereby to recover their lost pride and self-respect, and to reha- 
bilitate their shattered dignity. It was the usual nationalist 
urge, and though this was common to all, it was here that the 
temperamental differences between the moderate and the ex- 
tremist became evident. Gradually the lower middle class began 
to dominate the Congress, and later the peasantry made their 
influence felt. 

As the Congress became more and more the representa- 
tive of the rural masses, the gulf that separated it from 
the Liberals widened, and it became almost impossible for 
the Liberal to understand or appreciate the Congress view-point. 
It is not easy for the upper-dMs drawing-room to understand 
the humble cottage or the mud hut. Yet, in spite of these 
differences, both ideologies were nationalist and bourgeois; 
the variation was one of degree, not of kind. In the Congress 



DOMINION STATUS AND INDEPENDE*ICE 417 

many people remained to the last who would have been quite at 
home in the Liberal group. 

For many generations the British treated India as a kind of 
enormous country-house (after the old English fashion) that 
they owned. They were the gentry owning the house and occu- 
pying the desirable parts of it, while the Indians were consigned 
to the servants* hall and pantry and kitchen. As in every proper 
country-house there was a fixed hierarchy in those lower regions 
— ^butler, housekeeper, cook, valet, maid, footman, etc. — and 
strict precedence was observed among them. But between the 
upper and lower regions of the house there was, socially and 
politically, an impassable barrier. The fact that the British 
Government should have imposed this arrangement upon us 
was not surprising; but what does seem surprising is that we, 
or most of us, accepted it as the natural and inevitable ordering 
of our lives and destiny. We developed the mentality of a good 
country-house servant. Sometimes we were treated to a rare 
honour — we were given a cup of tea in the drawing-room. The 
height of our anobition was to become respectable and to be 
promoted individually to the upper regions. Greater than any 
victory of arms or diplomacy was this psychological triumph 
of the British in India. The slave began to think as a slave, as 
the wise men of old had said. 

Times have, changed, and the country-house type of civilisa- 
tion is not accepted willingly now, either in England or India. 
But still there remain people amongst us who desire to .stick to 
the servants’-halls and take pride in the gold braid arrll livery 
of their service. Others, like the Liberals, accept that country- 
house in its entirety, admire its architecture and the whole 
edifice, but look forward to replacing the owners, one by one, by 
themselves. They call this Indianisation. For them the problem 
is one of changing the colour of the administration, or at most 
having a new administration. They never think in terms of a 
new State. 

For them Swaraj means that everything continues as 
' before, only with a darker shade. They can oiuy conceive of a 
future in which they, or people like them, will play the principal 
r61e and take the place of the English high officials; in which 
there are the same types of services, government departments, 
legislatures, trade, industry — ^with the I.C.S. at their jobs; the 
pnnees in their palaces, occasionally appearing in fancy dress 
or carnival attire with all their jewels glittering to impress their 
subjects; the landlords claiming special protection, and mean- 
while harassing their tenants; tiie money-lender, with hb 



4i8 jawaharlal nehrv 

money-bags, harassing both zamindar and tenant; the lawyer 
with his fees; and God in His heaven. 

Essentially their outlook is based on the maintenance of the 
status quo, and the changes they desire can almost be termed 
personal changes. And they seek to achieve these changes by a 
slow infiltration with the goodwill of the British. The whole 
foimdation of their politics and economics rests on the continu- 
ance and stability of the British Empire. Looking on this 
Empire as unshakable, at least for a considerable time, uiey adapt 
themselves to it, and accept not only its political and economic 
ideology but also, to a large extent, its moral standards, which 
have all been firamed to secure the continuance of British 
dominance. 

The Congress attitude differs fundamentally from this because 
it seeks a new State and not just a different administration. 
What that new State is going to be may not be quite clear to 
l^e average Congressman, and opinions may differ about it. But 
it is common ground in the Congress (except perhaps for a 
moderate firing^ that present conditions and methods cannot 
and must not continue, and basic changes are essential. Herein 
lies the difference between Dominion Status and Independence. 
The former envisages the same old structure, with many bonds 
visible and invisible tying us to the British economic system; 
the latter gives us, or ought to give us, fireedom to erect a new 
structure to suit our circumstances. 

It is not a question of an inmlacable and irreconcilable anta- 

S onism to England and the English people, or the desire to 
reak firom them at all costs. It would be - natural enough If 
there was bad blood between India and En|;land after what has 
happened. "The clumsiness of power spoils the key and uses 
the pi^-axe,” says Tagore, and the key to our hearts was 
destroyed long ago, and the abundant use of the pick-axe on us 
has not made us partial to the British. But if we claim to serve 
the larger cause of India and humanity we cannot afford to be 
carried away by our momentary passions. And even if we were 
so inclined the hard training which Gandhiji has given us for 
the last fifteen years would prevent us. I write this sitting in a 
British prison, and for months past my mind has been full of 
anxiety, and I have perhaps suffered more during this solitary 
imprisonment than I have done in gaol before. Anger and 
resentment have often filled my mind at various happenings, 
and yet as I sit here, and look deep into my mind and heart, I 
I do not find any anger against England or the English people. I 
dislike British imperialism and I resent its imposition on India; 



DOMINION STATUS AND INDEPENDENCE 419 

I dislike the capitalist system; I dislike exceedingly and resent 
the way India is exploited by the ruling classes of Britain. But 
I do not hold England or the English people as a whole respon- 
sible for this, and even if I did, I do not think it would make 
much difference, for it is a little foolish to lose one’s temper at 
or to condemn a whole people. They are as much the victims 
of circumstances as we are. 

Personally, I owe too much to England in my mental make- 
up ever to feel wholly alien to her. And, do what I will, I can- 
not get rid of the habits of mind, and the standards and ways 
of judging other countries as well as life generally, which I 
acquired at school and college in England. All my predilections 
(apart from the political plane) are in favour of England and 
the English people, and if I have become what is called an un- 
compromising opponent of British rule in India, it is almost in 
spite of myself. 

It is that rule, that domination, to which we oHect, and with 
which we. cannot compromise willingly — ^not the English people. 
Let us by all means have the closest contacts with the English 
and other foreign peoples. We want fresh air in India, fresh 
and vital ideas, healthy co-<meration; we have grown too 
musty with age. But if the English come in the rSle of a 
tiger they can expect no friendship or co-operation. To the tiger 
of imperialism there will only be the fiercest opposition, and 
to-day our country has to deal with that ferocious animal. It 
may be possible to tame the wild tiger of the forest and to 
charm away ,his native ferocity, but there is no such possibility 
of taming capitalism and imperialism when they combine and 
swoop down on An unhappy land. 

For any one to say that he or his country will not comptomise 
is, in a sense, a foolish remark, for life is always forcing us to 
compromise. When applied to another country or people, it is 
completely foolish. But there is truth in it when it is applied to 
a system or a particular set of circumstances, and then it be- 
comes something beyond human power to accomplish. Indian 
freedom and British imperialism are two incompatibles, and 
neither martial law nor all the sugar-coating in the world 
can make them compatible or bring them together. Only 
with the elimination of British imperialism from India will 
conditions be created which permit of real Indo-British co- 
operation. 

We are told that independence is a narrow creed in the 
modern world, which is increasingly becoming inter-dependent, 
and therefore in demanding independence we are trying to put 



430 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

the, clock back. Liberals and pacifists and even so-called social- 
ists in Britain advance this plea and chide us for our narrow 
nationalism, and incidentally suggest to us that the way to a 
fuller national life is through the " British Commonwealth of 
Nations.” It is curious how all roads in England — ^liberalism, 
pacifism, socialism, etc. — lead to the maintenance of the 
Empire. " The desire of a ruling nation to maintain the status 
quo,” says Trotsky, “frequently dresses up as a superipfity to 
' nationalism just as the desire of a victorious nation to hang 
on to its booty easily takes the form of pacifism. Thus Mac- 
Donald, in the face of Gandhi, feels as though he were an inter- 
nationalist." 

I do not know what India will be like or what she will do 
when she is politically free. But I do know that those of her 
people who stand for national independence to-day stand also 
for the widest internationalism. For a socialist, nationalism can 
have no meaning, but even many of the non-socialists in the 
advanced ranks of the Congress are confirmed internationalists. 
If we claim independence to-day it is with no desire for isola- 
tion. On the contrary, we are perfectly willing to surrender part 
of that independence, in common with other countries, to a real 
international order. Any inmerial system, by whatever high- 
sounding name it may be called, is an enemy of such an'order, 
and it is not through such a system that world co-operation or 
world peace can be reached. 

Recent developments have shown all over the world how the 
various imperialist systems are isolating themselves more and 
more by autarchy and economic imperialism. Instead of the 
growth of internationalism we see a reversal of the process. The 
reasons for this are not difficult to discover, and they indicate 
the growing weakness of the present economic order. One of 
the results of this policy is that while it produces greater co- 
operation within the area of autarchy, it also means isolation 
from the rest of the world. For India, as we have seen by 
Ottawa and other decisions, it has meant a progressive lessening 
of our ties and contacts with other countries. We have become, 
even more than we were, the hangers-on of British industry; 
and the dangers of this policy, apart firom the immediate harm 
it has done in various ways, are obvious. Thus Dominion 
Status seems to lead to isolation and not to wider international 
contacts. 

Our friends the Indian Liberals, however, have an amazing 
knack of seeing the world, and more particularly their own 
country, throu^ British speaacles of true-blue colour. With- 



DOMINION STATUS AND INDEPENDENCE 431 

out trying to appreciate what the Congress says and why it says 
so, they repeat the old British argument of independence being 
narrower and less soul-lifting man Dominion Status. Inter- 
nationalism means for them vihitehall, for they are singularly 
ignorant of other countries, partly because of the langua^ 
difficulty, but even more so because they are quite content to 
ignore them. They are, of course, averse to direct action or 
any kind of aggressive politics in India. But it is curious 
to note that some of their leaders have no objection to such 
methods being adopted in other countries. They can appre- 
ciate and admire them from a distance, and some of the 
present-day dictators of Western countries receive their mental 
homage. 

Names are apt to mislead, but the real cmestion before us in 
India is whether we are aiming at a new State or merely at a 
new administration. The Liberal answer is clear; they want the 
latter, and nothing more, and even that is a distant and pro^es- 
sive ideal. The words ' Dominion Status ’ are mentioned from 
time to time, but their real objective for the time being is ex- 
pressed in those mystic words .“responsibility at the centre". 
Not for them the full-blooded words: Power, Independence, 
Freedom, Liberty; they sound dangerous. The lawyer's lan- 
guage and approach appeals to them far more, even though it 
may not enthuse the multitude. History has innumerable in- 
stances of individuals and groups facing perils and risking their 
lives for the sake of faith and fireedom. It seems doubtful if 
any one will ever deliberately give up a meal or sleep less 
soundly for "responsibility at the centre" or any other legal 
phrase. 

This, then, is their objective, and this is to be reached not by 
' direct action ’ or any other form of aggressive action but, as 
Mr. Srinivasa Sastri put it, by a display of " wisdom, experi- 
ence, moderation! power of persuasion, quiet influence and real 
efficiency.” It is hoped that by our good behaviour and qur 
good work we shall ultimately induce our rulers to part with 
power. In other words, they resist us to-day because either they 
are irritated against us on account of our aggressive attitude, or 
they doubt our capacity, or both. This seems a rather naive 
analysis of im perialism and the present situation. That brilliant 
English writer. Professor R. H. Tawney, has written an appro- 
priate and arresting passage dealing with the notion of gaining 
power in stages and with the co-operation of the ruling classes. 
He refers to the British Labour Pa^ty, but his words are even 
more applicable to India, for in England they have at least 



422 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

democratic institutions, where the will of the majority can, in 
theory, make itself felt. Professor Tawney writes : 

" Onions can be eaten leaf by leaf, but you cannot skin a live 
tiger paw by paw; vivisection is its trade, and it does the skin- 
nmg first. . . . 

“If there is any country where the privileged classes are 
simpletons, it is certainly not England. The idea that taa and 
amiability in presenting the Labour Party’s case can hoodwink 
them into the belief that it is their case also, is as hopeless as 
an attempt to bluff a sharp solicitor out of a property of which 
he holds the title-deeds. The plutocra(^ consists of agreeable, 
astute, forcible, self-confident, and, when hard pressed, tmscni- 
pulous people, who know pretty well on which side their bread 
IS buttered, and intend that the supply of butter shall not run 
short. ... If their position is seriously threatened, they will use 
every piece on the board, political and economic — ^the House of 
Lords, the Crown, the Press, disaffection in the Army, financial 
crisis, international difficulties,- and even, as newspaper attacks 
on the pound in 1931 showed, the emigri trick of mjuring one’s 
country to protect one’s pocket.” 

The British Labour Party is a powerful org^isation. It is 
backed by the Trade Unions, with their millions of paying 
members, and a highly developed co-operative organisation, as 
well as many members and sympathisers among the professional 
classes. Britain has democratic parliamentary institutions based 
on adult suffrage, and a long tradition of civil liberty. In spite 
of all this, Mr. Tawney is of opinion — and recent events have 
cotifiimed the soundness of this — ^that the Labour Party cannot 
hope to gain real power merely by smiling and persuasion, use- 
ful and desirable as both these approaches are. Mr. Tawney 
suggests that even if the Labour Party obtained a majority in, 
the House of Commons, it would still be powerless . to make any 
radical change in face of the opposition of the privileged 
classes, who hold so many political, social, economic, financial 
and military citadels. In India, it need hardly be pointed out, 
conditions are very different. There are no democratic institu- 
tions or traditions. We have instead a well-established practice 
of ordinance and dictatorial rule and the supprestion of the 
liberties of the person, of meech, writing, assembly and the 
Press. Nor have the liberals any strong organisation behind 
them. They have thus to rely on thtir smile alone. 

Liberals are strongly opposed to any activity that is ' uncon- 
stitutional’ or ‘illegal’. In countries with democratic constitu- 
tions the word ‘ cpnstitutional ’ has a wide significance. It 



DOMINION STATUS AND INDEPENDENCE 433 

controls the making of laws, it protects liberties, it checks the 
executive, it provides for the democratic methods of bringing 
about changes in the political and economic structure. But in 
India there is no such constitution and the word can mean no 
such thing.*. To use it here is merely to introduce an idea which 
has no place in the India of to-day. The word ‘ constitutional ' 
is often used here, strange to s^, in support of the executive's 
more or less arbitrary actions. .Or else it is used in the sense of 
‘ legal ’. It is far beltter to confine ourselves to the words ' legal ’ 
or ‘ illegal ’, though they are vague enough and vary fiom day 
to day. 

A new ordinance or a new law creates new offences. To 
attend a public meeting may be an offence; so also to ride a 
bicycle, to wear certain clothes, not to be home by sunset, not 
to report oneself to the police daily— all these and numerous 
other acts are offences to-day in some part of India. A certain 
act may be an offence in one part of the country and not in 
another. When these laws can he promulgated by an irrespon- 
sible executive at the shortest notice, the word ‘ legal ' simply 
means the will of that executive and nothing more. Ordinarily 
that will is obeyed, willingly or sullenly, because the conse- 

3 uences of disobedience are unpleasant. But for any one to say 
lat he will always obey’ it means abject submission to a dic- 
tatorship or irresponsible authority, the surrender of his con- 
science, and the impossibility of ever gaining freedom, so far as 
his activities are concerned. 

In every democratic country to-day there is an argument 
going on as to whether radical economic changes can be 
brought^ about in the ordinary course through the constitu- 
tional machin ery at their disposal. Many people are of opinion 
that this cannot be done, and some unusual and revolutionary 
method will have to be adopted. For our purpose in India the 
issue of this argument is immaterial, for we have no constitu- 
tional means of bringing about the changes we desire. If the 
White Paper or something like it is enacted, constitutional 
progress in many directions will be stopped completely. There 
is no way out except by revolution or illegal action. What 

* Mr. C. Y. eSuntamani, the eminent Liberal leader and editor- 
in-diief of the Leader newspaper, has himself laid stress on the lack 
of any kind of constitutional government in India, in his criticism, 
in the U.P. Council, of the Report of the Parliamentary Joint Select 
Committee on hidia: "(Better submit to the present unconsdm- 
tional government rather than to the more reacdonary and further 
more unconstitudonal government of the future.” 



4H 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


then is one to do? Give up all idea of change and resign 
oneself to fate? 

The position to-day in India is even more extraordinary. The 
Executive can and does prevent or restrict all manner of public 
activities. Any activity that is, in its opinion, dangerous for it 
" is prohibited. Thus all effective public activity can be stopped, 
as it was stopped during the last three years. Submission to 
this means giving up all public work. Ihat is an impossible 
position to take up. 

No one can say that he will always and without fail act 
legally. Even in a democratic state occasions may arise when 
one's conscience compels one to act otherwise. In a despotically 
or arbitrarily governed country these occasions are bound to 
be more frequent; indeed, in such a state the law loses all moral 
justification. 

“Direct action is allied to dictatorship and not democracy, 
and those who wish to bring about the triumph of democracy 
must eschew direct action,” say the Liberals. This is confused 
thinking and loose writing. Sometimes direct action — e.g. a 
workers’ strike — ^may even be legal. But probably political 
action was meant. In Germany to-day under Hitler what kind 
of action is possible? Either abject submission or illegal and 
revolutionary action. How could democracy be served mere? 

Indian Liberals often refer to democracy, but most of them 
have no desire to go near it. Sir P. S. Sivaswamy Iyer, one of 
the most prominent of Liberal leaders, said in May 1934: "In 
advocating the convention of a constituent assembly, the Con- 
gress places too much faith in the wisdom of the multitude, 
and does too little justice to the sincerity and ability of men 
who have taken part in various Round Table Coniterences. I 
very much doubt whether the constituent assembly would have 
done better.” Sir Sivaswamy’s idea of democracy is thus some- 
thing apart from the 'multitude', and fits in more with a 
collection of ' sincere and able ’ men nominated by the British 
Government. Further, he blesses the White Paper, for though 
"not fully satisfied” with it, “he thought it would be unwise 
for the country to oppose it wholesale . There appears to be 
no reason whatever why there should not be the most perfect 
co-operation between the British Government and Sir P. S. 
Sivaswamy Iyer. 

The withdrawal of civil disobedience by the Congress was 
naturally welcomed by the Liberals. It was also not surprising 
that th^ should take credit for their wisdom in having kept 
aloof firom this “foolish and ill-advised movemprit”, “Did w** 



DOMINION STATUS AND INDEPENDENCE 425 

not say so? ” they told us. It was a strange argument. Because 
when we stood up and put up a good fight we were knocked 
down; therefore, the moral pointed out was that standing up is 
a bad thing. Crawling is best 'and safest. It is quite impossible 
£0 be knocked down or to fall from that horizontal position. 