A CIVIL MARRIAGE AND A QUESTION 
OF SCRIPT ' 

After spending about a week in Poona and Bombay in the 
middle of September 1933, ^ returned to Lucknow, My mother 
was still in hospital there, and was improving very slowly. 
Kamala was also in Lucknow, trying to attend on her, although 
she v<ras not very well herself. My^ sisters used to come over 
firom Allahabad for the week-ends. I remained in Lucknow for 
two or three weeks, and I had more leisure there than I was 
likely to have in Allahabad, my chief occupation being visits 
to the hospital twice daily. I utilised my spare hours in viuiting 
some articles for the Press, and these were widely published all 
over the country. , A series of articles entitled “ Whither India? ”, 
in which I had surveyed world affairs in relation to the Indian 
situation, attracted considerable attention. I learnt later that 
these articles were even reproduced in Persian translations in 
Teheran and Kabul. There was nothing novel or original in 
these articles for any one in touch with recent developments 
and modern Western thought But in India our people had 
been too engrossed in their domestic troubles to pay much 
attention to what was happening elsewhere. The reception 
given to my articles, as well as many other indications, showed 
that they were developing a wider outlook. 

My mother was getting very tired of being in hospital, and 
we decided to take her back to Allahabad. One of the reasons 
for this was my sister Krishna’s engagement, which had just 
then been announced. We wanted to have the marriage as soon 
as possible, before I was suddenly removed to prison again. I 
had no notion how long I would be allowed to remain out, as 
Civil Disobedience was still the official programme of the Con- 
gress, and the Congress itself and scores of other organisations 
were illegal. 

We fixed the marriage for the third week of October in 
Allahabad. It was to be a civil ceremony. I was glad of this, 
though as a matter of fact we had no choice in the matter. 
The marriage was between two different castes, a Brahman and 
a non*Brahman, and under jpresent British Indian Law no 
reli^ous ceremony had validity for such a marriage. Fortu- 
nately a recently passed Civil Marriage Act came to our rescue. 

460 



CIVIL MARRIAGE AND A QUESTION OF SCRIPT 45I 

There were two such Acts, the second one, under which my 
sister’s marriage took place, being confined to Hindus and those 
belonging to allied faiths — ^Buddhists, Jains, Sikhs. But if either 
party does not belong to one of these faiths, by birth or con- 
version, then this second Act does not apply and the first Civil 
Marriage Act has to be resorted to. This first Act requires from 
both the parties a denunciation of all the leading religions, or 
at any rate a statement that they do not belong to them. This 
wholly unnecessary denunciation is a great nuisance. Many 
people, even though they are not religiously inclined, object to 
this statement and thus cannot take advantage of the Act. The 
orthodox of various faiths oppose all changes which would 
facilitate inter-marriages. The result is that they drive people 
either to make that statement of denunciation or to a patently 
superficial conversion to get within the law. Personally I should 
like to encourage inter-marriages, but whether they are en- 
couraged or not, it is very necessary to have a permissive general 
civil marriage Act, applicable to persons of all religions, per- 
mitting them to marry without any denunciation or change of 
faith. 

There was no fuss about my sister’s wedding; it, was a very 
simple affair. Ordinarily I dislike the fiiss attendant on Indian 
marriages. In view of my .mother’s illness and, even more so, 
the fact that civil disobedience was still going on and many of 
our colleagues were in prison, anything m the nature of show 
was singularly out of place. Only a few relatives and local 
friends were invited. Many old friends of my father’s were hurt 
because they felt, quite wrongly, that I had purposely ignored 
them. 

The little invitation we issued for the wedding was written in 
Hindustani in the Latin script. This was an innovation, as 
such invitations are always either in the nagri or the Persian 
script, and the idea of writing Hindustani in the Latin script 
is almost unknown, except in army and missionary circles. I 
used the Latin script as an experiment, and I wanted to see the 
reactions of various people. It had a mixed reception, mostly 
unfavourable. The recipients were few: if a larger circle had 
been approached the reaction would have been still more un- 
favourable. Gandhiji did not approve of what I had done. 

I did not use the Latin script because I had become a convert 
to it, although it had long attracted me. Its success in Turkey 
and Central Asia had impressed me, and the obvious arguments 
in its favour were weighty. But even so I was not convinced, 
and even if T had been convinced, I knew well that it did not 



452 jawaharlal nehru 

stand the faintest chance of being adopted in present-day India. 
There would be the most violent opposition to it from all groups, 
nationalist, religious, Hindu, Muslim, old and new. And I feel 
that the opposition would not be merely based on emotion. A 
change of script is a very vital change for any language with a 
rich past, for a script is a most intimate part of its literature. 
Change the script and different word-pictures arise, different 
sounds, different ideas. An almost insurmountable barrier is put 
up between the old literature and the new, and the former be- 
comes almost a foreign language that is dead. Where there is no 
literature worth preserving this risk should be taken. In India I 
can hardly conceive of the change, for our literature is not only 
rich and valuable but is bound up with our history and our 
thought, and is intimately connected with the lives of our 
masses. It would be cruel vivisection to force such a change, and 
it would retard our progress in popular education. 

But this question is not even an academic one in India to-day. 
The irext step in script reform for us seems to me the adoption 
of a common script for the daughter languages of Sanskrit — 
Hindi, Bengali, Marathi and Gujrati. As it is, their scripts have 
a common origin and do not differ greatly, and it should not 
be difficult to strike a common mean. This would bring these 
four great sister languages much nearer to each other. 

One of the legends about India which our English rulers 
have persistently circulated all over the world is that India has 
several hundred languages — 1 forget the exact number. For 
proof there is the census. Of these several hundred, it is an 
extraordinary fact that very few Englishmen know even one 
moderately well, in spite of a life-long residence in this country. 
They class the lot of these together and call them the 'Verna- 
cular the slave language (from the Latin verna, a home-born 
slave), and many of our people have, unknowingly, accepted 
this nomenclature. It is astonishing how English people spend 
a life-time in India without taking the trouble to learn the 
language well. They have evolved, with the help of their 
khansamahs and ayahs, an extraordinary jargon, a kind of 
pidgin-Hindustani, which thw imagine is the real article. Just 
as they take their facts about Indian life from their subordinates 
and sycophants, they take their ideas about Hindustani from 
their domestic servants, who make a point of speaking their 
pic^n language to the sahib-log for fear that they would not 
unoCTStand anything else. They seem to be wholly ignorant of 
the fact that Hindustani, as well as the other Indian languages, 
have high literary merit and extensive literatures. 



CIVIL MARRIAGE AND A QUESTION OF SCRIPT 453 

If the census tells us that India has two or three hundred 
languages, it also tells us, I believe, that Germany has about 
fifty or sixty languages. I do not remember any one pointing 
out this fact in proof of the disunity or disparity of Germany. 
As a matter of fact, a census mentions all manner of petty 
languages, sometimes spoken by a few thousand persons only; 
and often dialects are classed, for scientific purposes, as different 
languages. India seems to me to have surprisingly few lan- 
guages, considering its area. Compared to the same area in 
Europe, it is far more closely allied in regard to language, but 
because of widespread illiteracy, common standards have not 
developed and dialects have formed. The principal languages 
of India (excluding Burma) are Hindustani (of the two varieties, 
Hindi and Urdu), Bengali, Gujrati, Marathi, Tamil, Telegu, 
Malayalam and Canarese. If Assamese, Oriya, Sindhi, Pushtu 
and Punjabi are added, the whole country is covered, except for 
some hill and forest tribes. Of these, the Indo-Aryan languages, 
which cover the whole north, centre and west of India, are 
closely allied; and the southern Dra vidian languages, though 
different, have been greatly influenced by Sanskrit and are full 
of Sanskrit words. 

The eight principal languages mentioned above have all old 
and valuable literatures, and each of them is spoken to-day over 
a vast area, which is definite and clearly marked. Thus from 
the point of view of numbers speaking a language, these lan- 
guages are among the major languages of the world. Fifty 
million people speak Bengali. As for Hindustani, with its varia- 
tions, it is spoken, I imagine (I have no figures here), by about 
a hundred and forty millions in India, and it is partly under- 
stood by a vast number of others all over the country.* Such a 
language has obviously enormous possibilities. It rests on the 
solid foundation of Sanskrit and it is closely allied to Persian. 
Thus it can draw from two rich sources, and of course, in recent 
years, it has drawn from English. The Dravidian country in 
the south is the only part where Hindustani comes as almost a 
foreign tongue, but the people there are making a great effort 
to learn it. Two years ago (in 193a) I saw some figures of a 
private voluntary society which had undertaken the teaching of 
Hindi in the south. During the previous fourteen years, since 
its formation, it was stated that 550,000 persons had learnt Hindi 
through its efforts in the Madras Presidency alone. For a yolun- 

* The following figures have been given by the advocates of Hin- 
dustani. I do not know if they are based on the last census 01.1931 



454 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

tary effort, which is supported in no way by the State, this is 
remarkable, and most of the persons who learn Hindi them- 
selves become missionaries in the cause. 

I have no doubt whatever that Hindustani is going to be the 
common language of India. Indeed it is largely so to-day for 
ordinary purposes. Its progress has been hampered by foolish 
controversies about the script, n5gn or Persian, and by the mis- 
directed efforts of the two factions to use language which is 
either too Sanskritised or too Persianised. There is no way out 
of the script difficulty, for it arouses great heat and passion, 
except to adopt both officially, and allow people to use either. 
But an effort must be made to discourage the extreme tenden- 
cies' and develop a middle literary language, on the lines of the 
spoken language in common use. With mass education this will 
inevitably take place. At present the small middle-class groups, 
that are supposed to be the arbiters of literary taste and style, 
are terribly narrow-minded and conservative, each in its own 
way. They cling tt? antique forms that have no life in them and 
have few contacts with their own masses or with world 
literature. 

The development and spread of Hindustani must not and 
will not con&ct with the continued use and enrichment of the 
other great languages of India — ^Bengali, Gujrati, Marathi, 
Oriya and the Dravidian languages of the south. Some of these 
languages are already more wide-awake and intellectually alert 
than Hindustani, and they must remain the official languages 
for educational and other purposes in their respective areas. 

*or the previous one of 1931. I imagine they refer to the latter, and 
up-to-date figures would show a considerable increase under each 
head. 


Hindustani (including western Hindi, Pun- 


jabi and Rajasthani) 

- 139-3 

millions 

Bengali 

- 49-3 

t> 

Telcgu 

... 33.6 

it 

Marariii 

... i8.8 

it 

Tamil - 

... 18.8 


Canarese 

... 10.3 

tt 

Oriya 

ro.i 

tt 

Gujrati 

9.6 

9 i 


. Total 379.8 


Some languages like Pushtu, Assamese and, of couse, Burmese, 
which is entirely different, Unguisdcally and territorially, have been' 
nmittpd frorn thin Kst- 




CIVIL marriage and a question of script 455 

Only through them can education and culture spread rapidly 
among the masses. 

Some people imagine that English is likely to become the 
lingua franca of India, That seems to me a fantastic concep- 
tion, except in respect of a handful of upper-class intelligentsia. 
It has no relation to the problem of mass education and culture. 
It may be, as it is partly to-day, that English will become in- 
creasingly a language used for technical, scientific and business 
communications, and especially for international contacts. It is 
essential for many of us to know foreign languages in order to 
keep in touch with world thought and activities, and I should 
like our universities to encourage the learning of other lan- 
guages besides English— French, German, Russian, Spanish, 
Italian. This does not mean that English should be neglected, 
but if we are to have a balanced view of the world we must not 
confine ourselves to English spectacles. We have already become 
sufficiently lop-sided in our mental outlook because of this con- 
centration on one aspect and ideology, and eyen the most rabid 
of our nationalists hardly realise how much they are cribbed 
and confined by the British outlook in relation to India. 

But however much we may encourage the other foreign lan- 
guages, English is bound to remain our chief link with the out- 
side world. That is as it should be. For generations past we 
have been trying to learn English, and we have achieved a fair 
measure of success in the endeavour. It would be folly to vidpe 
the slate dean now and not to take full advantage of this long 
training. English also is to-day undoubtedly the most wide- 
spread and important world language, and it is gaining fast on 
the other languages. It is likely to become more and mote the 
medium of international intercourse and radio broadcasting, 
unless ‘ American ’ takes its place. Therefore we must continue 
to spread the knowledge of English. It is desirable to learn it as 
well as possible, but it does not seem to me worth while for us 
to spend too much time and energy in appreciating the finer 
points of the language, as many of us do now. Individuals may 
do that, but to set it as an id^ for large numbers is to put a 
needless burden on them and prevent them firom progressing in 
other directions. 

I have been greatly attracted lately by ‘ Basic English ’, and it 
seems to me that this extreme simplification of English -has a 
great future before it. It would be desirable for us to undertake 
the teaching of Basic English on an extensive scale rather than 
Standard English, which can be left to specialists and particular 
students. 



45^ JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

I would personally like to encourage Hindustani to adapt and 
assimilate many words from English and other foreign lan- 
guages. This is necessary, as we lack 'modern terms, and it is 
better to have well-known words rather than to evolve new and 
difficult words from the Sanskrit or Persian or Arabic. Ptirists 
object to the use of foreign words, but I think they make a 
great mistake, for the way to enrich our language is to make it 
flexible and capable of assimilating words and ideas from other 
languages. 

I happened to go, soon after my sister’s wedding, to Benares 
to visit an old friend and colleague, Shiva Prasad Gupta, who 
had been lying ill for over a year. He was in Lucknow Gaol 
when he had a sudden attack of paralysis, and he had been 
recovering from it very slowly ever since. During my Benares 
visit, a small Hindi literary society gave me an address and I 
had a pleasant informal talk with its members. I told them that 
I hesitated to speak to experts on subjects I knew little about, 
but still I made a few suggestions. I criticised the intricate and 
ornate language that was customary in Hindi writing, full of 
difficult Sanskrit words, artificial, and clinging to ancient forms, 
I ventured to suggest that this courtly style, addressed to a select 
audience, should be given up, and Hindi writers should deliber- 
ately write for the masses and in language understood by 
them. Mass contacts would give new life and sincerity to the 
language, and the writers themselves would catch some of the 
emotional energy of the mass and do far better work. Further, 
I suggested that if Hindi authors paid more attention to 
Western thought and literature, they would derive great benefit 
from it; it would be desirable to have translations from the 
classics of the European languages as well as from books dealing 
with modem ideas. I also mentioned that probably modern 
Bengali, Gujrati and Marathi were a little more advanced 
in these matters than modem Hindi, and certainly more cre- 
ative work had been done in Bengali in recent years than in 
Hindi. 

We had a friendly talk about these matters and then I came 
away. I had no idea that my remarks would be sent to the 
Press, but some one present sent a report to the Hindi papers. 

And then there was a tremendous outcry in the Hindi Press 
against me and at my presumption in criticising Hindi and 
comparing it, to its disadvantage, with Bengali, Gujrati and 
Marathi. I was called an ignoramus — ^which indeed I was in 
that particular subject — and many harder words were used to 
squash and suppress me. I had no time to follow the contro- 



CIVIL MARRIAGE AND A QUESTION OF SCRIPT 457 

versy and it went on, I am told, for months, till I was again in 
prison. 

This incident was a revelation to me. It revealed the extra- 
ordinary sensitiveness of Hindi literary men and journalists, 
and their refusal to face a litde honest criticism from one who 
wished them well. The inferiority complex was evidently at 
work. Self-criticism there was none at all, and critical standards 
were poor. It was not unusual for an author and his critic to 
fall out and accuse each other of personal motives. The whole 
outlook was narrow, bourgeois and parochial, and both the jour- 
nalists and the authors seemed to write for each other and for a 
small circle, ignoring the vast public and its interests. It seemed 
to me an extraordinary pity and an unhappy waste of energy 
when the field was so vast and inviting. 

Hindi literature has a fine past, but it cannot live for ever on 
its past. I feel sure that it has a great future, and that Plindi 
journalism will be a tremendous power in this country. But 
neither will progress much till it shakes itself firee of narrow 
conventions and boldly addresses the masses. 