THE ROUND TABLE CONFERENCE 

In a recent book an English journalist, who claims to have 
seen a great deal of Mr. Gandhi both in India and at the 
Round Table Conference in London, writes as follows ; 

“The leaders on board the Mooltan knew that there was a 
conspiracy against Mr. Gandhi within the Congress Working 
Committee. They knew that, when the time was ripe. Congress 
might expel him. But Congress, by expelling Mr. Gandhi, would 
expel in all probability half its members; and that was the half 
Sir Tej Bahadur Sapru and Mr. Jayakar wished to attach to the 
Liberal cause. They never disguised the fact that Mr. Gandhi 
was, in their own words, ‘muddle-headed’. It was worth 
winning a ‘ muddle-headed ’ leader when he could bring with 
him a million ‘ muddle-headed ’ followers.” * 

I do not know how far this quotation represents the views 
of Sir Tej Bahadur Sapru, Mr. Jayakar, or the other members of 
the R.T.C. on their way to London in 1931. But it does seem 
to me an astonishing thing that any person, journalist or 
'leader', with the least acquaintance with Indian politics, 
could have made such a statement. I was astounded to read it; 
I had not heard of it previously even as a suggestion, though 
that is not difficult to understand, as I have been in prison ffir 
most of the time since then. 

Who were the conspirators and what were they after? It was 
sometimes stated that the President, Vallabhbhai Patel, and I 

^ From Glorney Bolton’s The Tragedy of Gandhi. I have taken 
this extract from a review of the book, as I have had no opportunity 
so far of reading the book itself. I hope that 1 am not doing an 
injustice thereW to the author or to the persons mentioned in the 
quotation. . . . Since writing the above I have read the book. Many 
of the statements of Mr. Bolton and the inferences he draws are, to 
my thinking, wholly unjustified. There are also a number of errors 
of fact, especially in re^d to what the Working Committee did or 
did not do during the Delhi Pact negotiations and after. There is 
also a curious assumption that Mr. \^labhbhai Patel got the Con- 

g ess presidentship m 1931, and thereby the leadership of the 
mgress, in rivalry with Mr. Gandhi. As a matter of fact, during 
the last fifteen years Mr. Gandhi has been a far bigger person in the 
Congress (and, of course, in the country) than any Congress Presi- 



THE ROUND TABLE CONFERENCE 387 

were among the extremists of the Working Committee, and, 
therefore, I suppose, we must have been numbered among the 
leaders of the conspiracy. Perhaps in the whole of India 
Gandhiji has had no more loyal colleague than Vallabhbhai, a 
man strong and unbending in his work, and yet devoted to 
him personally and to his ideals and policy. I could not claim 
to have accepted these ideals in the same way, but I had had 
the privilege of working with Gandhiji in the closest associa- 
tion, and the idea of intriguing against him in any way is 
a monstrous one. Indeed, that applied to the whole Working 
Committee. That Committee was practically his creation; he 
had nominated it, in consultation with a few colleagues, and 
the election itself was a formal matter. The backbone of the 
Committee consisted of members who had served on it for 
many years and had come to be considered almost as per- 
manent members. There were political dififerences amongst 
them, differences in outlook and in temper; but years of associa- 
tion, the joint shouldering of burdens and the facing of com- 
mon perils, had welded them together. Between diem had 


dent could posably be. He has been the president-maker, and 
invariably his suggestions have been followed. Repeatedly he refused 
to preside and preferred that some of his colleagues and lieutenants 
should do so. I became president of the Congress entirely because 
of him. He had acmally been elected, but he withdrew and forced 
my election. Mr. Vallabhbhai Patel’s election was not normal. We 
had just come out of prison, and the Congress Committees were sdll 
illegal bodies, and could not function in the ordinary way. The 
Working Committee, therefore, took it upon itself to elect the Presi- 
dent of the Karachi Congress. The whole Committee, including 
Mr. Vallabhbhai Patel, begged Mr. Gandhi to accept the president- 
ship and thus to be the titular head, as he was the real head, of the 
Congress dunng the coming critical year. He would not agree, and 
inusted on Mr. Vallabhbhm Patd accepting it. I remember that it 
was pointed out to him at the time that he wanted to be Mussolini 
all me time while others were made by him temporary kings and 
figureheads. 

It is not possible to deal with various other misapprehensions of 
Mr. Bolton in a footnote. One somewhat personal matter I should, 
howev«, like to refer to. He seems to be convinced that the turning- 
point in my father’s political career was his non-election by a 
European dub, and that this led him not only to radical ways but 
to an avoidance of English sodety. This story, though often re- 

f eated, is wholly untrue. The real facts have litde importance, but 
am giving them here to dear up this mystery.- In his early days 
at the Bar, he became a favourite of Sir John Edge, who was then 


288 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

f rown Up firiendship and camaraderie and regard for each other. 

’hey formed not a coalition but an organic unity, and it was 
inconceivable for any one to intrigue against the other. 
Gandhiji dominated the Committee, and every one looked to 
him for guidance. That had been so for many years; it was 
even more marked in 1931 after the great success that had 
attended our struggle in 1930. 

What could have been the purpose of the ‘ extremists ’ in the 
Working Committee to try to ^ expel’ him? Perhaps it was 
thought that he was considered too compromising a person 
and was, therefore, an encumbrance. But without mm where 
was the struggle, where was Civil Disobedience and Satyagraha? 
He was part of the living movementr indeed, he was the move- 
ment itself. So far as that struggle was concerned everything 
depended on him. The nation^ struggle, of course, was not 
his creation, nor did it depend on any individual; it had deeper 
roots. But that particular phase of the struggle, of which avil 
disobedience was the symbol, was singularly dependent on 
him. Parting with him meant winding up that movement and 
building anew on &esh foimdations. That would have been a 
difficult enough proposition at any time; in 1931 it was im- 
thinkable for any one. 

It is amusing to think how, according to some people, some of 

the Chief Jusdce of the Allahabad High Court. Sir John suggested 
to him that he should join the Allahabad (European) Club, and 
wanted to propose his name himself. My father manked him for 
his kindly suggesdon, but pointed out that there was bound to be 
trouble, as many English people would object to him as an Indian 
and might vote against him. Any subaltern could bladtball him, 
and he would rather not offer himself for election under these cir- 
cumstances. Sir John even suggested that he would get the Brigadier- 
General commanding the AQahabad area to second my mther's 
name. Ultimately, however, the matter dropped, and my father’s 
name was not proposed, as he made it dear that he was not prepared 
to risk an insint. This inddent, far from embittering him against 
English people, drew him to Sir John Edge, and most of his En ^sh 
friendships and connections grew up in subsequent years. This 
occurred in the ’nineties, and it was nearly a quarter of a century 
later that he became the radical poliddan and non-co-operator. The 
change was not sudden, but the Punjab Martial Law hiuried up 
the process, and Mr. Gandhi’s influence at the right moment made 
a difference. Even then he had no deliberate intention of giving up 
social contacts with Englishmen. But where Engjlishmen are largely 
offidals, non-co-operadon and dvil disobedience inevitably prevent 

istirh 



THE ROUND TABLE CONFERENCE 289 

US were conspiring to drive him out of the Congress in 1931. 
Why should we conspire when a gentle hint to him was 
sufficient? A mere suggestion from him that he would retire 
has always been enough to upset the Working Committee as 
well as the country. He was so much part of our struggle that 
the very thought that he might leave us was unbearable. We 
hesitated to send him to London, because in his absence the 
burden in India would fall on us, and we did not welcome the 
prospect. We were so used to shifting it on to his shoulders. 
For many of us, in the Working Committee and outside, the 
bonds that tied us to Gandhiji were such that even failure with 
him seemed preferable to the winning of some temporary ad- 
vantage without him. 

Whether Gandhiji is ‘ muddle-headed * or not we can leave to 
our Liberal friends to decide. It is undoubtedly true that his 
politics are sometimes very metaphysical and difficult to imder- 
stand. But he had shown himself a man of action, a man of 
wonderful courage, and a man who could often deliver the 
goods: and if ' muddle-hcadedness ’ yields such practical results 
perhaps it compares not unfavourably with the ‘practical 

? olitics ’ that begin and end in the study and in select circles. 

rue, his millions of followers were ‘muddle-headed’. They 
knew nothing of politics and constitutions; they could think 
only in terms of their human needs, of food and shelter and 
clothing and land. 

It has always seemed to me very remarkable how eminent 
foreign journalists, trained in the observation of human nature, 
go wrong in India. Is it because of the ineradicable impression 
‘of their childhood that the East is utterly difrerent and cannot 
be judged by ordinary standards? Or is it, in the case of Eng- 
lishmen, the kink of empire that governs their vision and 
distorts their view? They wiU believe almost anything, however 
unlikely it might be, without any surprise, for everything is 
deemed to be possible in the mysterious East. They publish 
books sometimes containing able surveys and acute bits of 
observation and, in between, amazing lapses. 

I remember reading, just on the eve of Gandhiji’s departure 
for Europe in 1931, an article by a well-known Paris correspon- 
dent (at the time) of a London newspaper. The article was about 
India, and in the course of it he referred to an incident which, 
according to him, took place in 1921 during the non-co-operation 
days when the Prince of Wales visited India. It was stated that 
in some place (probably it was Delhi) Mahatma Gandhi burst in 
dramatically and unannounced on the Prince, fell on his knees 
u 



ago ‘JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

clasped the Prince’s feet and, weeping copiously, begged him to 
give peace to this unhappy land. None of us, not even Gandhiji, 
had heard of this remarkable story, and I wrote to the journalist 
pointing this out to him. He expressed regret, but added that 
he had got it from a reliable source. What astonished me was 
that he should have given credence, without any attempt at 
an enquiry, to a story on the face of it highly improbable, and 
which no one who knew anything about Mr. Gandhi, the Con- 
gress, or India could believe. It is, unhappily, true that there 
are many Englishmen in India who, in spite of long residence, 
know nothing about the country or about the Congress or about 
Gandhiji. The story was an incredible and ridiculous one, com- 
parable perhaps to a fanciful account of the Archbishop 
of Canterbury suddenly" bursting in upon Mussolini, stand- 
ing on his head, and waving his legs in the air in token of 
greeting. 

A recent report in a newspaper gives another type of 
story. It is stated that Gandhiji has got huge funds, running 
into millions of" pounds, secretly deposited with friends, and 
the Congress is after this money. It (the Congress) is afraid that 
if Ganmiiji retires from its membership it might lose these 
hoards. The story is on the face of it absurd, for he never keeps 
funds personally or secretly, and whatever he has collected he 
hands over to a public organisation. He has the harm’s instinct 
for careful accounting, and all his collections are publicly 
audited. 

This rumour is probably based on the sto^ of the famous 
crore of rupees which were collected by the Congress in ipai. 
This sum, which sounds big but was not much if spread out 
all over India, was utilised for national universities and schools, 
promotion of cottage industries and especially khaddar, un- 
touchability work and a variety of other constructive schemes. 
Much of it was tied up in ear-marked funds, which still exist, 
and are used for their special purposes. The rest of the col- 
lections were left with the local committees, and spent for 
Congress organisational and political work. The non-co- 
operation movement was financed by it, as weU as Congress 
work for a few years after. We have been taught by Ganmiiji, 
as wdl as by the poverty of the country, to carry on our 
political movement with exceedingly limited means. Most of 
our work has been wholly voluntary, and where payment has 
been made ,it .has been on a starvation scale. The best of our 
•workers; uilivetsity graduates with families to support, have been 
paid less than the unemployment allowance in England. I 



THE ROUND TABLE CONFERENCE Spi 

doubt if any political or labour movement on a la^e scale 
has been run anywhere with so little money as the Congress 
movement during the last fifteen years. And all Congress 
funds and accounts have been publicly audited from year to 
year, no part of them being secret, except during the civil 
disobedience periods, when the Congress was an illegal organisa- 
tion. 

Gandhiji had gone to London as the sole representative of 
the Congress to the Round Table Conference. We had decided, 
after long debate, not to have additional representatives. Partly 
this was due to our desire to have our best men in India at 
a very critical time, when the most tactful handling of the 
situation was necessary. We felt that, in spite of the R.T.C. 
meeting in London, die centre of gravity lay in India, and 
developments in India would inevitably have their reactions in 
London. We wanted to check xmtoward developments, and to 
keep our organisation in proper condition. This was, however, 
not the real reason for our sending only one representative. If 
we had thought it necessary and advisable, we would certainly 
have sent omers also. Deliberately we refrained ftom doing 
so. 

We were not joining the Round Table Conference to talk 
interminably about the petty details of a constitution. We 
were not interested in those details at that stage, and they could 
only be considered when some agreement on fundamental 
matters had been arrived at with the British Government. The 
real question was how much power was to be transferred to 
a democratic India. Any solicitor almost could do the drafting 
and the settlemmt of details afterwards. The Congress position 
was a fairly simple one on these basic matters, and there was 
no great room for argument over it. It seemed to us that the 
dignified course would be for one representative, and that one 
our leader, to go and explain that position, to show the essential 
reasonableness of it and the inevitability of it, and to try to 
win over, if he could, the British Government to it. That was 
very difBcult, we knew; hardly possible as matters stood then, 
but then we had no other alternative. We could not give up 
that position and our principles and ideals, to which we were 
pledged and in which we firmly believed. If by a strange 
chance a basis of agreement was found on those fundamentals, 
the rest followed easily enough. Indeed, it had been settled 
between us that, in case of sum an agreement, Gandhiji would 
immediately summon to London some or even all the members 
of the Working Committee, so that we could then share the 



apa JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

work of detailed negotiation. We were to keep ourselves in 
readiness for that summons, and even. travel by air if necessary. 
We could thus be with him within ten days of the call. 

But if there was no initial agreement on fundamentals, then 
the question of further and detailed negotiations did not arise, 
nor was it necessary for additional Congress representatives to 
go to the R.T.C, So we decided to send Gandhiji only. One 
other member of the Working Committee, Mrs. Sarojini 
Naidu, also attended the R.T.C. , but she did not do so as a 
Congress representative. She was invited as a representative of 
Indian womanhood, and the Working Committee permitted 
her to go as such. 

The British Government had, however, no intention of falling 
in with our wishes in the matter. Their policy was to postpone 
the consideration of fundamental questions and to make the 
Conference exhaust itself, more or less, on minor and immaterial 
matters. Even when major matters were considered, the 
Government held its hand, refused to commit itself, and 

f )romised to express its opinion after mature consideration 
ater on. Their trump card was, of course, the communal issue 
and they played it for all it was worth. It dominated the Con- 
ference. 

The great majority of the Indian members of the Conference 
fell in, most of them vdllingly, some unwillingly, with this 
official manoeuvring. They were a motley assembly. Few of 
them represented any but themselves. Some were able and 
respected; of many others this could not be said. As a whole 
they represented, politically and socially, the most reactionary 
elements in India. So backward and reactionary were they that 
the Indian Liberals, so very moderate and cautious in India, 
shone as progressives in their company. They represented 

f roups of vested interests in India who were tied up with 
ritish i^erialism, and looked to it for advancement or pro- 
tection. The most prominent representation came from various 
' minority ’ and ‘majority ’ groups on the communal issue. This 
consisted of a number of upper-class irreconcilaliles who, it was 
notorious, could never agree amongst themselves. PoUtically 
they were thorough reactionaries, and their sole interest seemed 
to be to gain a communal advantage, even though that might 
involve a surrender of political advance. Indeed they pro- 
claimed that they would not agree to having any greater 
measure of political freedom unless and ■until their communal 
demands were satisfied. That was an extraordinary sight, and 
it revealed with painful clarity the depths to which a subject 



Tj ROVNU TABLE CONi-EKENCE 


293 

people could fall, and how they could be made pawns in the 
imperialist game. It was true that the Indian people could not 
be said to be represented by that crowd of highnesses, lords, 
knights and others of high degree. The members of the Round 
Table Conference had been nominated by the British Govern- 
ment, and, from its own point of view', the Government had 
chosen well. And yet the mere fact that the British authorities 
could use and exploit us so, showed the weakness of our people, 
and the strange facility with which they could be side-tracked 
and made to undo each other’s efforts. Our upper classes were 
still wrapped up in the ideology of our imperialist rulers, and 
played their game. Was it because they did not see through 
it? Or did they, knowing its real significance, accept it 
knowingly because of their fear of democracy and freedom in 
India? 

It was fitting that in this assembly of vested interests— im- 
perialist, feudal, financial, industrial, religious, communal — ^the 
leadership of the British Indian delegation should usually fall 
to the Aga Khan, who in his own person happened to combine 
an these interests in some degree. Closely associated as he has 
been with British imperialism and the British ruling class for 
over a generation, residing chiefly in England, he could 
thoroughly appreciate and represent our rulers’ interests and 
view-point. He would have been an able representative of 
Imperialist England at that Round Table Conference. The 
irony of it was that he was supposed to represent India. 

The scales were terribly loaded against us at that Conference 
and, little as we expected from it, we watched its proceedii^s 
with amazement and ever-growing disgust. We saw the pitiml 
and absurdly inadequate attempts to scratch the surface of 
national and economic problems, the pacts and intrigues and 
manceuvres, the joining of hands of some of our own country- 
men with the most reactionary elements of the British Conser- 
vative Party, the endless talk over petty issues, the deliberate 
shelving of all that really mattered, the continuous playing into 
the hands of the big vested interests and especially British 
imperialism, the mutual squabbles, varied by feasting and 
mutual admiration. It was ail jobbery-big jobs, little jobs, 
jobs and seats for the Hindus, for the Muslims, for the Sikhs, 
for the Anglo-Indians, for the Europeans; but all jobs for the 
upper classes, the masses had no look-in. Opportunism was 
rampant, and different groups seemed to prowl about like 
hungry wolves waiting for their prey— the spoils under the new 
constitution. The very conception of freedom had taken the 



294 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

form of large-scale jobbery — ' indianisation ’ it was called — more 
jobs for Indians in the army, in the civil services, etc. No one 
thought in terms of independence, of real freedom, of a trans- 
fer of power to a democratic India, of the solution of any 
of the vital and urgent economic problems facing the Indian 
people. Was it for this that India had struggled so manfully? 
Must we exchange this murky air for the rare atmosphere of 
fine idealism and sacrifice? 

In that gilded and crowded hall Gandhiji sat, a very lonely 
figure. His dress, or absence of it, distinguished him from all 
others, but there was an even vaster difference between his 
thought and outlook and that of the well-dressed folk around 
him. His was an extraordinarily difficult position in that Con- 
ference, and we wondered from afar how he could tolerate it. 
But with amazing patience he carried on, and made attempt 
after attempt to find some basis of agreement. One charac- 
teristic gesture he made, which suddenly showed- up how com- 
munalism really covered political reaction. He did not like 
many of the communal demands put forward on behalf of the 
Muslim delegates to the Conference: he thought,' and his own 
Muslim Nationalist colleagues thought so, that some of these 
demands were a bar to freedom and democracy. But still he 
offered to accept the whole lot of them, without question or 
argument, if the Muslim delegates there joined forces with him 
and the Congress on the political issue, that is, oh indepen- 
dence. 

That offer was a personal offer because he could not, situ- 
ated as he was, bind down the Congress. But he promised 
to urge Congress to agree to it, and no one who knew his 
position in the Congress could doubt that he would succeed in 
getting Congress approval. The offer, however, was not 
accepted, and indeed it is a little difficult to imagine the Aga 
Khan standing for Indian independence. This demonstrated 
that the real trouble was not communal, although the com- 
munal issue loomed large before the Conference. It was political 
reaction that barred all progress and sheltered itself behind 
the communal issue. Bjr careful selection of its nominees for 
the Conference, the British Government had collected these 
reactionary elements, and by controlling the procedure, they 
had made the communal issue the major issue, and an. issue 
on which no agreement was possible between the irreconcilables 
gathered there. 

The British Government succeeded in its oideavour, and 
thereby demonstrated that it still has, not only the physical 



THE ROUND TABLE CONFERENCE 295 

Strength to uphold its Empire, but also the cunning and state- 
craft to carry on the imperial tradition for a while longer. The 
people of India failed, although the Round Table Conference 
neither represented them nor was it a measure of their strength. 
They failed because they had no ideological background of 
what they were striving for, and could be easily misled and 
side-tracked. They failed because they did not feel themselves 
strong enough to discard the vested interests that encumbered 
their progress. They failed because of an excess of religiosity, 
and the ease with which communal feelings could be roused. 
They failed, in short, because they were not advanced enough 
and strong enough to succeed. 

There was no question of iailure or success at this Round 
Table Conference itself. Little was expected of it, and yet it 
made a difference. The previous conference, the first of its 
kind, had attracted very little attention in India or elsewhere 
for the Civil Disobedience movement absorbed attention. The 
nominees of the British Government who went to the Con- 
ference of 1930 often went to the accompaniment of black 
flags and imcomplimentary slogans. But in 1931 all was 
different, and it was different because Gandhiji went as the 
representative of the Congress, and as a leader whom millions 
followed. This gave prestige to the Conference, and India fol- 
lowed its career with far greater interest; and any failure, what- 
ever the cause, redounded now to the discredit of India. We 
understood then why the British Government had attached so 
much importance to Gandhiji’s participation in it. 

The Conference itself, with all its scheming and opportunism 
and futile meandering, was no feilure for India. It vras consti- 
tuted so as to fail, and the people of India could hardly be 
made responsible for its failing. But it succeeded in diverting 
world attention ftom real issues in India, and, in India itself 
it produced disillusion and depression and a sense of humi- 
liation. It gave a' handle to reactionary forces to raise their 
heads again. 

Success or failure was to come to the people of the country 
by events in India itself. The powerful nationalist movement 
could not fade away, because of distant manoeuvring in 
London. Nationalism represented a real and immediate need 
of the middle classes and peasantry, and by its means they 
sought to solve their problems. Ihe movement could thus 
either succeed, fulfil its function, and give place to some other 
movement, which would carry the people further on the road 
to progress and fireedom, or else it could be forcibly suppressed 



296 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

for rlie rime being. That struggle was to come in India 
soon after, and was to result in temporary disablement. The 
second Round Table Conference could not affect this struggle 
much, but it did create an atmosphere somewhat unfavourable 


