MY FATHER AND GANDHIJI 

Early in 1924 there came suddenly the news of the serious 
illness of Gandhiji in prison, followed by his removal to a 
hospital and an operation. India was numbed with anxiety; we 
held our breaths almost and waited, full of fear. The crisis 
passed, and a stream of people began to reach Poona from all 
parts of the country to see him. He was still in hospital, a 
prisoner under guard, but he was permitted to see a limited 
number of friends. Father and I visited him in the hospital. 

He was not taken back from the hospital to the prison. As 
he xvas convalescing, Government remitted the rest of his sen- 
tence and discharged him. He had then served about two years 
out of the six years to which he had been sentenced. He went 
to Juhu, by the sea-side near Bombay, to recuperate. 

Ohr family also trekked to Juhu, and established itself in a 
tiny little cottage by the sea. We spent some weeks there, and 
I had, after a long gap, a holiday after my heart, for I could 
indulge in swimming and running and riding on the beach. 
The main purpose of our stay, however, was not holiday-makingi 
but discussions with Gandhiji. Father wanted to explain to him 
the Swarajist position, and to gain his passive co-operation at 
least, if not his active sympathy. I was also anxious to have 
some light thrown on the problems that were troubling me. I 
wanted to know what his future programme of action was going 
to be. 

The Juhu talks, so far as the Swarajists were concerned, did 
not succeed in winning Gandhiji, or even in influencing him to 
any extent. Behind all the friendly talk, and the courteous 
gestures, the fact remained that there was no compromise. They 
agreed to differ, and statements to this effect were issued to the 
Press. 

I also returned from Juhu a little disappointed, for Gandhiji 
did not resolve a single one of my doubts. As is usual with Mm, 
he refused to look into the future, or lay down any long-distance 
promamme. We were to carry on patiently * serving ’ the people, 
working ft)r the constructive and social reform programme of 
the Congress, and await the time for aggressive activity. The 
real difficulty, of course, was that even when that time came, 
would not some incident like Chauri Chaura upset all our calcu- 

IS4 



MY FATHER AND GANDHIJI 125' 

lations and again hold us up? To that he gave no answer then. 
Nor was he at all definite in regard to our objective. Many of 
us wanted to be clear in our own minds what we were driving at, 
although the Congress did not then need to make a formal de- 
claration on the subject. Were we going to hold out for indepen- 
dence and some measure of social change, or were our leaders 
going to compromise for something very much less? Only a few 
months before, I had stressed independence in my presidential 
address at the U.P. Provincial Conference. This Conference was 
held in the autumn of 1923, a little after my return from Nabha. 
I was just recovering from the illness with which Nabha Gaol had 
presented me and I was unable to attend the Conference; but my 
address, written under fever in bed, went to it. 

While some of us wanted to make the issue of independence 
clear in the Congress, our friends the Liberals had drifted so far 
from us — or perhaps the drifting had been done by us — that they 
publicly gloried in the pomp and power of the Empire, although 
that Empire might treat our countrymen as a doormat, and its 
dominions keep our countrymen as helots or refuse them all 
admittance. Mr. Sastri had become an Imperial Envoy, and Sir 
Tej Bahadur Sapru had proudly declared at the Imperial Con- 
ference in London in 1923: "I can say with pride that it is my 
country that makes the Empire imperial.” 

A vast ocean seemed to separate us from these Liberal leaders; 
we lived in different worlds, we spoke in different languages, and 
our dreams — ^if they ever had dreams — ^had nothing in common. 
Was it not necessary then to be clear and precise about our goal? 

But such thoughts were then confined to a few. Precision is not 
loved by most people, especially in a nationalist movement which 
by its very nature is vague and somewhat mystical. In the early 
months of 1924, public attention was largely concentrated on the 
Swarajists in the Legislative Assembly and the Provincial Coun- 
cils. Wiat were these groups going to do after their brave talk 
about "opposition from within” and wrecking the Councils? 
Some fine gestures took place. The budget for the year was re- 
jected by the Assembly; a resolution demanding a round-table 
discussion to settle the terms of Indian freedom was passed. The 
Bengal Council, under Deshbandhu’s leadership, also bravely 
voted down supplies. But both in the Assembly and in the pro- 
•vinces, the Viceroy or the Governor certified the budgets and 
they became law. There were some speeches, some excitement 
in the legislatures, a momentary feeling of triumph among the 
Swarajists, headlines in the Press, and nothing more. What else 
could they do? Tltey could repeat their tactics, but the novelty. 



126 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

wore oftj the excitement vanished, and the public mind grew 
accustomed to budgets and laws being certified by tlie Viceroy 
or Governor, The next step, of course, was beyond the compe- 
tence of the Swarajists inside the Councils. It lay outside the 
Council chamber. 

Some time in the middle of that year (1924) a meeting of the 
All-India Congress Committee was held at Ahmedabad. At this 
meeting, unexpectedly, a sharp conflict appeared between 
Gandhiji and the Swarajists, and there were some dramatic situa- 
tions. The initiative was taken by Gandhiji. He proposed a fun- 
damental alteration in the Congress constitution, changing the 
franchise and the rules for membership. So far, every one who 
subscribed to the first article of the Congress constitution, which 
laid down the objective of Swaraj and peacefiil methods, and 
paid four annas could become a member. He now wanted to 
limit membership to those who gave a certain amount of self- 
spun yam instead of the four annas. This was a serious limita- 
tion of the franchise, and the A.I.C.C. was certainly not com- 
petent to do this. But Gandhiji has seldom cared for the letter 
of a constitution when this has come in his way, I was shocked 
at what I considered a violence to oin constitution, and I offered 
to the Working Committee my resignation from the secretary- 
ship. But some new developments took place and I did not press 
it. In the A.I.C,C. the proposal was fiercely resisted by my father 
and Mr. Das, and ultimately, to show their entire disapproval of 
it, they marched out with a goodly number of their followers 
just before the voting. Even then some people, opposed to the 
resolution, still remained present in the Committee. The resolu- 
tion was passed by a majority, but ultimately it was withdrawn. 
For Gandhiji had been tremendously affected by the walk-out 
of the Swarajists and the unbending attitude on this subject of 
Deshbandhu and my father. He was emotionally wo rked up . 
and a chance remark of a member upset him and he broae 
do^. It was obvious that he had been cut to the quick. He 
addressed the Committee in a most feeling inanner and reduced 
a number of members to tears. It was a moving and extra- 
ordinary sight.* 

* The above account was written in prison from memory. I find 
now that my memory was defective antf I had overlooked an impor- 
tant aspect of the A.I.C.C. discussions, thus giving a wrong impres- 
sion of what happened. What moved Gandhiji was a resolution 
relating to a , young Bengali terrorist (Gopinath Saha) which was 
moved m the meeting and was ultimately lost. The resolution, so 
tar as I remember, condemned his deed but expressed sympathy for 



MY FATHER AND GANDHIJI 127 

I could never make out why he was so keen on that exclusive 
form of spuming franchise then, for he must have known that it 
would be bitterly opposed. Probably he wanted the Congress to 
consist only of people who were believers in his constructive 
programme of Khadi, etc., and was prepared to drive out the 
others or make them conform. But although he had the majority 
with him, he weakened in his resolve and began to compromise 
with the others. During the next three or four months, to my 
amazement, he changed several times on this question. He 
seemed to be completely at sea, unable to find his bearings. That 
was the one idea that I did not associate with him, and hence 
my surprise. The question itself was not, so it seemed to me, a 
very vital one. The idea of labour being made the qualification 
for franchise was a very desirable one, but in the restricted form 
in which it came up, it lost some of its meaning. 

I came to the conclusion that Gandhiji’s difficulties had been 
caused because he was moving in an unfamiliar medium. He was 
superb in his special field of Satyagrahic direct acdon, and his 
instinct unerringly led him to take the right steps. He was also 


his motives. More than the resolution itself, the speeches accom- 
panying it distressed Gandhiji, and it was this feeling that many 
people in the Congress were not serious about its profession of non- 
violence that upset him. Writing of this meeting in Young India 
soon after, he said : " I had a bare majority always for the four reso- 
lutions. But it must be regarded by me as a minority. The house 
was fairly evenly divided. The Gopinath Saha resolution clinched 
the issue. The speeches, the result and the scenes I wimessed after 
were a perfect eye-opener. . . . Dignity vanished after the Gopinath 
Saha resolution. It was before this house that 1 had to put my last 
resolution. As the proceedings went on, I must have become more 
and more serious. I felt like runifing away from the oppressive scene. 
I dreaded having to move a resolution m my charge. ... I do not 
know ffiat 1 have made it dear that no speaker had any malice in 
him. What preyed upon my mind was the fact of unconsdous 
irresponsibility and disregard of the Congress creed or policy of non- 
violence. . . . That there were seventy Congress representatives to 
support the resolution was a staggering levdation.” This inddent, 
•with Gandhiji’s commentary on it, is vary agnificant, as it shows 
the extreme importance attached by Gan&ji to non-violence, and 
the reactions on him of any attempt, even though this might be 
unconsdous and indirect, to challenge it. Much that he has subse- 
quently done is probably due fundamentally to some such reactions. 
Non-violence has been, and is, the sheet-anchor of his policy and 
artivitie" 




128 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

very good in working himself and making others work quietly 
for social reform among the masses. He could understand abso- 
lute war or absolute peace. Anything in between he did not 
appreciate. The Swarajist programme, of struggle and opposi- 
tion inside Councils, left him cold. If a person wants to go to 
the legislature, let him do so with the object of co-operating 
with the authorities for better legislation, etc., and not for the 
sake of opposition. If he does not want to do so, let him stay 
out. The Swarajists adopted neither of these positions, and hence 
his difficulty in dealing with them. 

Ultimately he adjusted himself to them. Tlie spinning fran- 
chise became an alternative form, the old four-anna fianchise 
remaining. He almost blessed the Swarajist work in the legis- 
latures, but for himself he kept severely aloof. It was said that 
he had retired from politics, and the British Government and its 
officers believed that his popularity was waning and that he was 
a spent force. Das and Nehru, it was said, had driven Gandhi 
into the badkground; they seemed to dominate the political 
scene. Such remarks, with suitable variations, have been repeated 
many times in the course of the last fifteen years, and they have 
demonstrated evety time how singularly ignorant our rulers are 
about the feelings of the Indian people. Ever since Gandhiji 
appeared on the Indian political scene, there has been no going 
back in popularity for him, so far as the masses are concerned. 
There has been a progressive increase in his popularity, and this 
process still continues. They may not carry out his wishes, for 
human nature is often weak, but Aeir hearts are full of goodwill 
for him. When objective conditions help they rise in huge mass 
movements, otherwise they lie low. A leader does not create a 
mass movement out of nothing, as if by a stroke of the magi- 
cian’s wand. He can take advantage of the conditions themsdves 
when they arise; he can prepare for them, but not create them. 

But it is true to say that there is a waning and a waxing of 
Gandhiji’s popularity among the intelligentsia. In moments of 
forward-going enthusiasm they follow him; when the inevitable 
reaction comes they grow criticaL But even so the great majority 
of them bow down to him. Partly this has been due to the 
absence of any other effective programme. The Liberals and 
various groups resembling them, like the Responsivists, do not 
count; those who believe in terroristic violence are completely 
out of court in the modem world and are considered ineffective 
,and out of date. The socialist programme is still little known, 
and it ftightens the upper-class members of the Congress. 

After a brief political estrangement in the middle of 1024, the 



Mi jjATHJiR ANiJ GANDHIJI 129 

old relations between my father and Gandhiji were resumed and 
they grew even more cordial. However much they differed from 
one another, each had the warmest regard and respect for the 
other. What was it that they so respected? Father has given us 
a glimpse into his mind in a brief Foreword he contributed to a 
booklet called Thought Currents, containing selections horn 
Gandhi ji’s writings : 

" I have heard,” he writes, “ of saints and supermen, hut have 
never had the pleasure of meeting them, and must confess to a 
feeling of scepticism about their real existence. I believe in men 
and things manly. The ‘ Thought Currents ’ preserved in this 
volume have emanated fiom a man and are things manly. They 
are illustrative of two great attributes of human nature — ^Faith 
and Strength. . . . 

“ ‘ What is all this going to lead to? ' asks the man with neither 
faith nor strength in him. The answer ‘ to victory or death ' does 
not appeal to him. . . . Meanwhile the humble and lowly figure 
standing erect ... on the firm footholds of faith unshakable 
and strength imconquerable, continues to send out to his country- 
men his message of sacrifice and suffering for the motherland. 
That message finds echo in millions of hearts. . . .” 

And he finishes up by quoting Swinburne’s lines : 

Have we not men with us royal. 

Men the masters of things? . . . 

Evidently he wanted to stress the fact that he did not admire 
Gandhiji as a saint or a Mahatma, but as a man. Strong and 
unbending himself, he admired strength of spirit in him. For it 
was dear that this little man of poor physique had something 
of steel in him, sometliing rock-like which did not yield to 
physical powers, however great they might be. And in spile of 
his unimpressive features, his Ioin<ioth and bare body, there was 
a royalty and a kingiigess in him which compelled a willing 
obdsance fiom others. Consdously and deliberately meek and 
humble, yet he was full of power and authority, and he knew it, 
and at times he was imperious enough, issuing commands which 
had to be obeyed. His calm, deep eyes would hold one and 
gently probe into the depfhs; his voice, clear and limpid, would 
purr its way into the heart and evoke an emotional response. 
Whether his audience consisted of one person or a thousand, the 
charm and magnetism of the man passed on to it, and each one 
had a &eling of communion with the speaker. This feeling had 
little to do with the mind, though the appeal to the mind was 
not wholly ignored. But mind and reason definitely had second 



1^0 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

place. This process of ‘ spell-binding ' was not brought about by 
oratory or the hypnotism of silken phrases. The language was 
always simple and to the point and seldom was an unnecessary 
word used. It was the utter sincerity of the man and his person- 
ality that gripped; he gave the impression of tremendous inner 
reserves of power. Perhaps also it was a tradition that had grown 
up about him which helped in creating a suitable atmosphere. 
A stranger, ignorant of this tradition and not in harmony with 
the surroundings, would probably not have been touched by 
that spell, or, at any rate, not to the same extent. And yet one 
of the most remarkable things about Gandhiji was, and is, his 
capacity to win over, or at least to disarm, his opponents. 

Gandhiji had litde sense of beauty or artistry in man-made 
objects, though he admired natural beauty. The Taj Mahal was 
for him an embodiment of forced labour and little more. His 
sense of smell was feeble. And yet in his own way he had dis- 
covered the art of living and had made of his life an artistic 
whole. Every gesture had meaning and grace; without a false 
touch. There were no rough edges or sharp corners about him, 
no trace of vulgarity or commonness, in which, unhappily, our 
middle classes excel. Having found an inner peace, he radiated 
it to others and marched tlirough life’s tortuous ways with firm 
and undaunted step. 

How different was my father from him 1 But in him too there 
was strength of personality and a measure of kingliness, and the 
lines of Swinburne he had quoted would apply to him also. In 
any gathering in which he was present he would inevitably be 
the centre and the hub. Whatever the place where he sat at table 
it would become, as an eminent English judge said later, the 
head of the table. He was neither meek nor mild, and, again 
unlike Gandhiji, he seldom spared those who differed firom him , 
Consciously imperious, he evoked great loyalty as well as bitter 
opposition. It was difficult to feel neutral about him; one had to 
like him or dislike him. With a broad forehead, tight lips and a 
determined chin, he had a marked resemblance to the busts of 
the Roman Emperors in the museums in Italy. Many friends in 
Italy who saw his photograph with us remarked on this resem- 
blance. In later years especially, when his head was covered with 
silver hair— unlike me, he kept his hair to the end— -there was a 
magmficence about him and a grand manner, which is sadly to 
seek in this world of to-day. I suppose I am partial to him, but 
I miss his noble presence in a world full of pettiness and weak- 
ness. I look round in vain for that grand manner and splendid 
strength that was his. r « 



MY FATHER AND GANDHIJI 13I 

I remember showing Gandhiji a photograph of father’s some 
time in 1924, when he was having a tug-of-war with the Swaraj 
Party. In this photograph father had no moustache, and, till 
then, Gandhiji had always seen him with a fine moustache. He 
started almost on seeing this photograph and gazed long at it, 
for the absence of the moustache brought out the hardness of 
the mouth and the chin, and he said, widi a somewhat dry smile, 
that now he realised what he had to contend against, Ine face 
was softened, however, by the eyes and by the lines that frequent 
la^hter had made. But sometimes the eyes glittered. 

father had taken to the work in the Assembly like a duck to 
water. It suited his legal and constitutional training, and, unlike 
Satyagraha and its offshoots, he knew the rules of this game. 
He kept his party strictly disciplined and even induced other 
groups and individuals to give support. But soon he had to face 
difficulties with his own people. During the early days of the 
Swaraj Party, it had to contend against the No-changers in the 
Congress, and many undesirables were taken in to increase its 
strength within the Congress. Then came the elections, and these 
demanded funds which had to come from the rich. So these rich 
folk had to be kept in good humour, and some were even asked 
to become Swarajist candidates. “Politics,” says an American 
socialist (quoted by Sir Stafforcl Cripps), "is the gentle art of 
getting votes from the poor and campaign funds from the rich 
by promising to protect each fixim the other.” 

All these elements weakened the Party from the very begin- 
ning. Work in the Assembly and the Councils necessitated daily 
compromises with other and more moderate groups, and no 
crusading spirit or principles could long survive this. Gradually a 
decline in the discipline and temper of the Party set in, and the 
weaker elements and the opportunists began to give trouble. The 
Swaraj Party had invaded the legislatures • with the declared 
object of “ opposition from within But two could play at this 
game, and the Government decided to have a hand in it by 
creating opposition and disruption within the ranks of the 
Swarajists. High office and patronage in innumerable ways was 
placed in the way of the westker brethren. They had just to pick 
them up. Their ability and their qualities of statesmanship and 
sweet reasonableness were praised. A pleasant and agreeable 
atmosphere was created round them — so different from the dust 
and tumult of the field and market-place. 

The general tone of the Swarajists went down. Individuals 
here and there began to slip away to the other side. My father 
shouted and thundered and talked about cutting ‘ the mscased 



1^2 JAWAIIARLAL NEHRU 

limb But this threat has no great eflfect when the limb is eager 
to walk away by itself. Some Swarajists became ministers, some 
became Executive Councillors in the provinces later. A number 
formed a separate group calling themselves ' Responsivists ’ or 
‘Responsive Co-operators’, a name ori^nally used by Loka- 
manya Tilak in entirely different circumstances. As used now it 
seemed to mean : take a job when you have the chance and make 
the best of it. The Swaraj Party carried on in spite of these 
defections, but father and Mr. Das became a little disgusted with 
the turn of events and somewhat weary of what seemed to be 
their profitless work in the legislatures. To add to this weariness 
of spirit was the growing Hindu-Muslim tension in North India, 
leading occasionally to riots. 

Some Congressmen who had been to prison with us in 1921 
and ipaa were now ministers and holders of high offices in the 
Government. In 1921 we had had the satisfaction of being de- 
clared unlawful and being sentenced to prison by a Government 
of which some Liberals (also old-time Congressmen) were mem- 
bers. In future we were going to have the additional solace of 
being imprisoned and outlawed by some of our own old col- 
leagues in some provinces at least. These new ministers and 
Executive councillors were far more efficient for this job than the 
Liberals had been. They knew us and our weaknesses and how 
to exploit them; they were well acquainted with our methods; 
and they had some e^erience of crowds and the feelings of 
the masses. Like the Nazis, they had flirted with revolutionary 
methods before changing sides, and could apply this knowledge 
to suppress more efficiently their old colleagues of the Congress 
tlian either the official hierarchy or the Liberal ministers in their 
ignorance could have done. 

In December 1924 the Congress session was held at Belgaum, 
and Gandliiji was President. For him to become the Congress 
President was something.in the nature of an anticlimax, for he 
had long been the permanent super-president. I did not like his 
presidential address. It struck me as being very uninspiring. At 
the end of the session I was again elected, at Gandhiji’s instance, 
the working secretary of the A.I.G.C. for the next year. In spite 
of my own wishes in the matter, I was gradually becoming a 
semi-permanent secretary of the Congress. 

In the summer of 1925 my father was unwell and his asthma 
troubled him greatly. He went vnth the family to Dalhousie in 
the Himalayas, and I joined him for a short while later; We 
made a Uttle trip from Dalhousie to Chamba in the interior of 
the Himalayas. It was a June day when we arrive^ and we were 



MY FATHF.R AND GANDIIIJI 133 

a little tired after our journey by mountain paths. A telegram 
came. It told us that Chitta Ranjan Das had died. For a long 
time father sat .still without a word, bowed down with grief. It 
was a cruel blow to him, and I had seldom seen him so affected. 
The one person who had grown to be a closer and dearer comrade 
to him than any one else had suddenly gone and left him to 
shoulder the burden alone. That burden had been growing, and 
both he and Deshbandhu had grown aweary of it and of the 
weakness of their people. Deshbandhu’s last speech at the 
Faridpur Conference was the speech of a person who is a little 
tired. 

We left Chamba the next morning and tramped back over the 
mountains to Dalhousie, and from there to the distant railhead 
by car, and then to Allahabad and Calcutta. 