DEATtI OF MY FATHER 

I SAW father after two weeks, for he had visited me at Naini 
on January lath when his appearance had given me a shock. 
He had now changed for the worse, and his irace was even more 
swollen. He had some little difiRculty in speaking, and his mind 
was not always quite clear. But his old will remained, and this 
held on and kept the body and mind functioning. 

He was pleased to see Ranjit and me. A A&y or two later 
Ranjit (who did not come in tihe category of Working Com- 
mittee members) was taken back to Naini Prison. This lipset 
father, and he was continually asking for him and complaining 
that when so many people were coming to see him from dis- 
tant parts of India, his own son-in-law was kept away. The 
doctors were worried by this insistence, and it was obvious that 
it was dqing father no good. After three or four days, I think 
at the doctors’ suggestion, the U.P. Government released Ranjit. 

On January a6th, the same day that I was discharged, Gandhiji 
was also discharged from Yeravda Prison. I was anxious to 
have him in Allahabad, and when I mentioned his release to 
father, I found that he was eager to see him. The very next 
day Gandhiji started from Bombay after a stupendous mass 
meeting of welcome there, such as even Bombay had not seen 
before. He arrived at Allahabad late at night, but father was 
lying awake, waiting for him, and his presence and the few 
words he uttered had a markedly soothing effect on father. To 
my mother also his coming brought solace and relief. 

The various Working Committee members, original and sub- 
stitute, who had been released, were meanwhile at a loose end 
and were waiting for directions about a meeting. Many of 
them, anxious about fkther, wanted to come to Allahabad im- 
mediately. It was decided therefore to summon them all forth- 
with to a meeting at Allahabad. Two days later thir^ or forty 
of them arrived, and their meetings took place in Swaraj 
Bhawan next to our house. I went to these meetings from time 
to time, but I was much too distraught to take any efectiye 
part in them, and I have at present no recollection whatever 
of what their decisions were. 1 suppose they were in favour of 
a continuance of the civil disobedience movement. 

All these old friends and colleagues who had come, many of 



246 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

them freshly out of prison and expecting to go back again soon, 
wanted to visit father and to have what was likely to be a last 
glimpse and a last farewell of him. They came to him in twos 
and threes in the mornings and evenings, and father insisted 
on sitting up in an easy-chair to receive his old comrades. There 
he sat, massively and rather expressionlessly, for the swelling 
on his face prevented much play of expression. But as one old 
friend came after another and comrade succeeded comrade, 
there was a glitter in his eye and recognition of them, and his 
head bowed a little and his hands joined in salutation. And 
though he could not speak much, sometimes he would say a 
few words, and even then liis old humour did not leave him. 
There he sat like an old lion mortally wounded and with his 
physical strength almost gone, but still very leonine and kingly. 
As I watched him, I wondered what thoughts passed through 
his head, or was he past taking interest in our activities? He 
was evidently often struggling with himself, trying to keep a 
grip of things which threatened to slip away from his grasp. 
To the end this struggle continued, and he did not give in, 
occasionally speaking to us with extreme clarity. Even when 
a constriction in his throat made it difficult for him to make 
himself understood, he took to writing on slips of paper what 
he wanted to say. 

He took practically no interest in the Working Committee 
meetings which were taking place next door. A fortnight earlier 
they would have excited him, but now he felt that he was 
already far away from such happenings. “I am going soon, 
Mahatmaji,” he said to Gandhiji, “ and I shall not be here to 
see Swaraj. But I know that you have won it and will soon 
have it.” 

Most of the people who had come from other cities and pro- 
vinces departed. Gandhiji remained, and a few intimate friends 
and near relatives, and the three eminent doctors, old friends 
of his, to whom, he used to say, he had handed over his body 
for s^e keeping— M. A. Ansari, Bidhan Chandra Roy, and 
Jivraj Mehta. On the morning of February 4th he seemed to 
be a little better, and it was decided to take advantage of this 
and remove him to Lucknow, where there were facilities for 
deep X-ray treatment which AlIaha^d did not possess. That 
very day we took him by car, Gandhiji and a large party fol- 
lowing us. We went slowly, but he was nevertheless exhausted. 
The next day he seemed to be getting over the fatigue, and yet 
there were some disquieting symptoms. Early next morning, 
February 6th, I was watching by his bedside. He had had a 



DEATH OP MY FATHER 247 

troublesome and restless night; suddenly I noticed that his face 
grew calm and the sense of struggle vanished from it. I thought 
that he had fallen asleep, and I was glad of it. But my mother’s 
perceptions were keener, and she uttered a cry. I turned to her 
and begged her not to disturb him as he had fallen asleep. But 
that sleep was his last long sleep, and from it there was no 
awakening. 

We brought his body that very day by car to Allahabad. I 
sat in that car and Ranjit drove it, and there was Hari, father’s 
favourite personal servant. Behind us came another car con- 
taining my mother and Gandhiji, and then other cars. I was 
dazed all that day, hardly realising what had happened, and a 
succession of events and large crowds kept me from thinking. 
Great crowds in Lucknow, gathered together at brief notice— 
the swift dash from Lucknow to Allahabad sitting by the body, 
wrapped in our national flag, and with a big flag flying above— 
the arrival at Allahabad, and the huge crowds that had gathered 
for miles to'pay homage to his memo^. There were some 
ceremonies at home, and then the last journey to the Ganga 
with a mighty concourse of people. As evening fell on the 
river bank on that winter day, the great flames leapt up and 
consumed that body which had meant so much to us who were 
close to him as well as to millions m India. Gandhiji said a few 
moving words to the multitude, and then all of tis crept silently 
home. The stars were out and shining brightly when we re- 
turned, lonely and desolate. 

Many thousands of messages of sympatliy came to my 
mother and to me. Lord and Lady Irwin also sent my inother 
a courteous message. This tremendous volume of goodwill and 
sympathy took, away somewhat the sting from our sorrow, but 
it was, above all, the wonderfully soothing and healing presence 
of Gandhiji that helped my mother and all of us to face that 
crisis in our hves, 

I found it difiBcult to realise that he had gone. Three months 
later I was in Ceylon with my wife and daughter, and we were 
spending a few quiet and restful days at Nuwara Eliya. I liked 
the place, and it struck me suddenly that it would suit fether. 
Why not send for him? He must be tired out, and rest would 
do him good I was on the point of sending a telegram to him 
to Allahabad. 

On our return to Allahabad from Ceylon the post brought 
one day a remarkable letter. The envelope was addressed to 
me in fether’s handwriting, and it bore innumerable marks and 
stamps of different post offices, I opened it in amazement to 



248 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

find that it was, indeed, a letter from father to me, only it was 
dated the 28th February, 1926. It was delivered to me in the 
summer of 1931, thus taking five and a half years in its 
journey. The letter had been written by father at Ahmedabad' 
on the eve of my departure for Europe with Kamala in 1926. 
It was addressed to me to Bombay care of the Italian Lloyd 
steamer on which we were travelling. Apparently it just missed 
us there, and then it visited various places, and perhaps lay in 
many pigeon-holes till some enterprising person sent it on to 
me. Curiously enough, it was a letter df farewell. 
