EXPERIENCE OF LATHI CHARGES 

The assault on Lala Lajpat Rai, and his subsequent death, 
increased the vigour of the demonstrations against the Simon 
Commission in the places which it subsequently visited. It was 
due in Lucknow, and the local Congress Committee made 
extensive preparations for its ‘reception’. Huge processions, 
meetings, and demonstrations were organised many days in 
advance, both as propaganda and as rehearsals for the actual 
show. I went to Lucknow, and was present at some of these. 
The success of these preliminary demonstrations, which were 
perfecdy orderly and peaceful, evidently nettled the authorities, 
and they began to obstruct and issue orders against the taking 
out of processions in certain areas. It was in this connection 
that I had a new experience, and my body felt the baton and 
lathi blows of the police. 

Processions had been prohibited, ostensibly to avoid any inter- 
ference vidth the traffic. We decided to give no cause for com- 
plaint on this score, and arranged for small groups of sixteen, 
as far as I can remember, to go separately, along unfeequoited 
routes to the meeting place. Technically, this was no doubt a 
breach of the order, for sixteen with a Sag were a procession. 
I led one of the groups of sixteen and, after a big gap, came 
another such group under the leadership of my colleague, 
Govind BaUabh Pant. My group had gone perhaps about two 
hundred yards, the road was a deserted one, when we heard 
the datter of horses’ hoofs behind us. We looked back to find 
a bunch of mounted police, probably two or three dozen in 
number, bearing down upon us at a rapid pace. They were soon 
right upon us, and the impact of the horses broke up our little 
cwumn of sixteen. The moimted polic^en then started 
belabouring our volunteers with huge batons or truncheons and, 
insfmctivdy, the volunteers sought refuge on the side-walks, and 
some even entered the petty shops. 'They were pursued and 
beaten down. My own instinct had urged me to seek safety when 
I saw the horses charging down upon us; it was a discouraging 
sight. But then, I suppose, some other instinct held me to my 
place and I survived the first charge, which had been chedcra 
by the volunteers behind me. Suddenly I ffiund myself alone in 
the middle of the road; a few yards away from me, in various 

N m 



iy8 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

direaions, were the policemen beating down our volunteers. 
Automatically, I began moving slowly to the side of the road 
to be less conspicuous, but again I stopped and had a little argu- 
ment vvith myself, and decided that it would be unbecoming 
for me to move away. All this was a matter of a few seconds 
only, but I have the clearest recollections of that conflict within 
me and the decision, prompted by my pride, I suppose, which 
could not tolerate the idea of my behaving like a coward. Yet 
the line between cowardice and courage was a thin one, and I 
might well have been on the other side. Hardly had I so decided, 
when I looked round to find that a mounted policeman was 
trotting up to me, brandishing his long new baton. I told him 
to go ahead, and turned my head away— -again an instinctive 
effort to save the head and face. He gave me two resounding 
blows on the back. I felt stunned, and my body quivered all 
over but, to my surprise and satisfaction, I found that I. was still 
standing. The police force was withdrawn soon after, and made 
to block the road in front of us. Our volunteers gathered 
together again, many of them bleeding and with split skulls, 
and we were joined by Pant and his lot, who had also been 
belaboured, and all of us sat down facing the police. So we sat 
for an hour or so, and it became dark. On the one side, various 
high officials gathered; on the other, large crowds began to 
assemble as the news spread. Ultimately, the officials agreed to 
allow us to go by our original route, and we went that way 
with the mounted policemen, who had charged us and belab- 
oured us, going ahead of us as a kind of escort. 

I have written about this petty incident in some detail because 
of its effect on me. The bodily pain I felt was quite forgotten 
in a feeling of exhilaration that I was physically strong enough 
to foce and bear lathi blows. And a thing that surprised me was 
that right through the incident, even when I was being beaten, 
my mind was quite dear and I was consdously analysing my 
feelings. This rehearsal stood me in good stead the next 
morning, when a stiffer trial was in store for us. For the next 
morning was the time when the Simon Commission was due 
to arrive, and our great demonstration was going' to take place. 

My fother was at Allahabad at the time, and I was afraid 
that the news of the assault on me, when he read about it in 
the next morning's papers, would upset, him and the rest of 
the family. So I telephoned to him late in the evening to assure 
him that all was well, and that he should not worjy. But 1^ 
did worrjr and, finding it difficult to sleep over it, he dedded at 
about midnight to come over to Lucknow. The last train had 



EXPERIENCE OP -LATHI CHARGES 179 

gone, and so he started by motor-car. He had some bad luck 
on the way, and it was nearly five in the morning by the time 
he had covered the journey of 146 miles and reached Lucknow, 
tired out and exhausted. 

That was about the time when we were getting ready to go 
in procession to the station. The previous evening’s incidents 
had the effect of rousing up Lucknow more than anything that 
we could have done, and even before the sun was out, vast 
numbers of people made their way to the station. Innumerable 
little processions came from various parts of the city, and from 
the Congress office started the main procession, consisting of 
several thousands, marching in fours. We were in this main 
procession. We were stopped by the police as we approached 
the station. There was a huge open space, about half a mile 
square, in front of the station (this has now been built over by 
the new station) and we were made to line up on one side of 
this maidan, and there our procession remained, making no 
attempt to push our way forward. The place was full of foot 
and mounted police, as well as the military. The crowd of 
sympathetic onlookers swelled up, and many of these persons 
managed to spread out in twos and threes in the open space. 
Suddenly we saw in the far distance a moving mass. They 
were two or three long lines of cavalry or mounted police, 
covering the entire area, galloping dotvn towards us, and 
striking and riding down the numerous stragglers that dotted 
the maidan. That charge of galloping horsemen was a fine 
sight, but for the tragedies that were being enacted on the 
way, as harmless and very much surprised sightseers went 
under the horses’ hoofs. Beliind the charging lines these people 
lay on the ground, some still unable to move, others wnthing 
in pain, and the whole appearance of that maidan was that of 
a battlefield. But we did not have much time for gazing on 
that scene or for reflections; the horsemen were soon upon us, 
and their front line clashed almost at a gallop with the massed 
ranks of our processionists. We held our ground, and, as we 
appeared to be unyielding, the horses had to pull up at the 
last moment and reared up on their hind legs with their front 
hoofs quivering in the air over our heads. And then began 
a beating of us, and battering with lathis and long batons 
both by the mounted and the foot police. It was a tremendous 
hammering, and the dearness of vision that I had had the 
evening before left me. All I knew was that I had to stay 
where I was, and must not yield or go back. I felt half blinded 
with the blows, and sometimes a oull anger seized me and a 



l8o JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

desire to hit out. I thought how easy it would be to pull down 
the police officer in front of me from his horse and to mount 
up myself, but long training and discipline held and I did not 
raise a hand, except to protect my face from a blow. Besides, 
I knew well enough that any aggression on our part would 
result in a ghastly tragedy, the firing and shooting down of 
large numbers of our men. 

After what seemed a tremendous length of time, but was 
probably only a few minutes, our line began to yield slowly, 
step by step, without breaking up. This left me somewhat 
isolated, and more exposed at the sides. More blows came, and 
then I was suddenly lifted off iny feet from behind and carried 
off, to my great annoyance. Some of my young colleagues, 
thinking that a dead-set was being made at me, had decided to 
protect me in this summary fashion. 

Our processionists lined up again about a hundred feet behind 
our original line. The police also withdrew and stood in a line, 
fifty feet apart from us. So we remained, when the cause of 
all this trouble, the Simon Commission, secretly crept away 
firom the station in the far distance, more than half a mile 
away. But, even so, they did not escape the back flags or demon- 
strators. Soon after, we came back in full procession to the 
Congress office, and there dispersed, and I went on to father, 
who was anxiously waiting for us. 

Now that the excitement of the moment had passed, I felt 
pains all over my body and great fatigue. Almost every part 
of me seemed to ache, and I was covered with contused wounds 
and marks of blows. But fortunately I was not injured in any 
vital spot. M^y of our companions were less fortunate, and 
were badly injured. Govind Ballabh Pant, who stood by me, 
offered a much biggw target, being six foot odd in height, and 
the injuries he received then have resulted in a painful at<d 
persistent malady which prevented him for a long tirop firom 
straightening his back or leading an active life. I emerged with 
a somewhat peater conceit or my physical conditton and 
powers of endurance. But the memory that endures with me, 
mr more than that of the beating itself, is that of many of 
the feces of those policemen, and especially of the officers, who 
were attacking us. Most of the real beating and battering was 
done by European sergeants, the Indian rank and file were 
milder in their methods. And those faces, full of hate and 
blood-liMt, almost mad, with no trace of sympathy or touch of 
humamtyl Probably the feces on our side just then were 
equally hateful to look at, and the feet that we were mostly 



EXPERIENCE OF LATHI CHARGES l8l 

passive did not fill our minds and hearts with love for our 
opponents, or add to the beauty of our countenances. And yet, 
we had no grievance against each other; no quarrel that was 
personal, no ill-will. We happened to represent, for the time 
being, strange and powerful forces which held us in thrall and 
cast us hither and thither, and, subtly gripping our minds and 
hearts, roused our desires and passions and made us their blind 
tools. Blindly we struggled, not knowing what we struggled for 
and whither we went. The excitement of action held us; but, 
as it passed, immediately the question arose : To what end was 
all this? To what end? 