INDIA OLD AND NEW 

It was natural and inevitable that Indian nationalism should 
resent alien rule. And yet it was curious how large numbers of 
our intelligentsia, to the end of the nineteen^ century, ac- 
cepted, consciously or unconsciously, the British ideology of 
empire. They built their own arguments on this, ^d only 
ventured to criticise some of iw outward manifestations. The 
history and economics and other subjects that were taught in 
the schools and colleges were written entirely from the British 
imperial view-point, and laid stress on our numerous failings 
in the past and present and the virtues and high destiny of the 
British. We accepted to some extent this distorted version, and 
even when we resisted it instinctively we were influenced by it. 
At first there was no intellectual escape from it for we knew no 
other iacts or arguments, and so we sought relief in religious 
nationalism, in me thought that at least in the sphere of re- 
ligion and philosophy we were second to no other people. We 
comforted ourselves m our misfortune and degradation with 
the notion that though we did not possess the outward show 
and glitter of the "^^st we had the real inner article, which 
was far more valuable and worth having. Vivekananda and 
others, as well as the interest of Western scholars in our old 
philosophies, gave us a measure of self-tespect again and 
roused up our dormant pride in our past. 

Gradually we began to suspect and examine critically British 
statements about our past and present conditions, but still we 
thought and worked within the framework of British ideology. 
If a thing was bad, it would be called ‘un-British’; if a 
Britisher in India misbehaved, the fault was his, not that of 
the system. But the collection of this critical material of 
British rule in India, in spite of the moderate outlook of the 
authors, served a revolutionary purpose and gave a political and 
economic fisundation to our nationalism. Dadabhai Naoroji’s 
Poverty and Un-British Rule in India, and books by Romesh 
Dutt and William Digby and others, thus played a revolu- 
tionary r61e in the development of our nationalist thought. 
Further researches in andent Indian history revealed b rilliant 
and highly dvilised periods in the remote past, and we read of 
these with great satisfaction. We also discovered that the 

4*6 



INDIA OLD AND NEW 


4»7 

British record in India was very different from what we had 
been led to believe from their history books. 

Our challenge to the Britisfr version of history, economics, 
and administration in India grew, and yet we continued to 
function within the orbit of their ideology. That was the 
position of Indian nationalism as a whole at the turn of the 
century. That is still the position of the Liberal group and 
other small groups as well as a number of moderate Congress- 
men, who go forward emotionally from time to time, but 
intellectually still live in the nineteenth century. Because of 
that the Liberal is unable to grasp the idea of Indian freedom, 
for the two are fundamentally irreconcilable. He imagines that 
step by step he will go up to higher offices and will deal with 
fatter and more important files. The m ach in ery of govern- 
ment will go on smoothly as before, only he will be at the 
hub, and somewhere in the background, without intruding 
themselves too much, wiU be the British Army to give him 
protection in case of need. That is his idea of Dominion Status 
within the Empire. It is a naive notion impossible of achieve- 
ment, for the price of British protection is Indian subjection. 
We cannot have it both ways, even if that was not degrading 
to the self-respect of a great coimtry. Sir Frederick Whyte (no 
pahisan of Indian nationalism) says in a recent book:* "He 
(the Indian) stiU believes that England wUl stand between him 
and disaster, and as long as he cherishes this delusion he can- 
not even lay the foundation of his own ideal of selfgovem- 
ment.” Evidently he refers to the Liberal or the reactionary 
and communal t^es of Indians, largely with whom he must 
have come into contact when he was President of the Indian 
Legislative Assembly. This is not the Congress belief, much 
less is it that of other advanced groups. They agree with 
Sir Frederick, however, that there can be ho freedom till this 
delusion goes and India is left to free disaster, if that is her 
fate, by herself. The complete withdrawal of British military 
control of India wUl be the beginning of Indian freedom. • 

It is not surprising that the Indian intelligentsia m the lune- 
teenth century should have succumbed to British ideology; 
what is surprising is that some people should continue to sufiw 
that delusion even after the -stirring events and changes of the 
twentieth century. In the nineteenth century the British ruling 
classes were the aristocrats of the world, with a long record 
of wealth and success and power behind them. Inis long 
record and training gave them some of the virtues as well as 
* Sir Frederick \^yte: The Future of East and West. 



428 TAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

failings of aristocracy. We in India can comfort ourselves with 
the thought that we helped substantially during the last cen- 
tury and three-quarters in providing the wherewithal and the 
traming for this superior state. They began to think themselves 
— as so many races and nations have done — ^the chosen of 
God and their Empire as an earthly Kingdom of Heaven. If 
their special position was acknowledged and their superiority 
not challenged, they were gracious and obliging, provided that 
this did them no harm. But opposition to them became opposi- 
tion to the divine order, and as such was a deadly sin which 
must be suppressed. 

M. Andr^ Siegfried has an interesting passage dealing with 
this aspect of British psychology.^ 

“Par Vhabitude hdrSditaire du pouvoir joint a la richesse, il 
a find par contracted une maniere ^Stre, aristocratique, curieuse- 
metit imbue de droit divin ethnique et qui mime a continui 
de s^accentuer quand dejd la suprematie hritannique itait 
contestie, Les jeunes ginirations de la fin du siicle , . , elles 
en arrivent h se dire, inconsciemment, que ce succhs leur est 
dd. . . . 

“ Cette facon d’interpriter les chases est intiressante d 
souligner, parce qu’elle ecladre, dans ce difiU particuliirement 
dilicat, les rdactions de la psychology britamdque. On n’aura 
pas manqud de le, remarquer, c’est dans des causes extdriiures 
que I’Angleterre croit trouver la source de ces difficultds; 
toujoursj pour commencer, c’est la faute de quelqu’un, et si ce 
quelqu’un veut bien se reformer, I’Angleterre alors pourra 
retrouvey sa prospdrite . . . toujours cet instinct de vouloir 
changer les autres au lieu dud se changer soimSme! ” 

If this was the general British attitude to the rest of the 
world, it was most conspicuous in India. There was something 
fascinating about the British approach to the Indian problem, 
even though it was singularly irritating. The .calm assurance 
of always being in the Hght and of having home a great 
burden worthily, faith in their racial destiny and their own 
brand of imperialism, contempt and anger at the unbelievers 
and sinners who challenged the foundations of the true faith — 
there was something of the religious temper about this attitude, 
like the Inquisitors of old, they were bent on saving us re- 

f ardless of our desires in the matter. Incidentally they profited 
y this traffic in virtue, thus demonstrating the truth of the 
old proverb: “Honesty is the best policy”. The progress of 
India became synonymous with the adaptation of the country 
^ In La Crise Britannique au XX* Sidcle, 



INDIA OLD AND NEW 


429 

to the imperial scheme and the fashioning of chosen Indians 
after the British mould. The more we accepted Bridsh ideals 
and objectives the fitter we were for ‘self-government’. Free- 
dom would be ours as soon as we demonstrated and guaranteed 
that we would use it only in accordance with British wishes. 

Indians and Englishmen are, I am afraid, likely to disagree 
about the record of British mle in India. That is perhaps 
natural, but it does come as a shock when high British officials, 
including Secretaries of State for India, draw fanciful pictures 
of Indins past and present and make statements which have 
no basis in fact. It is quite extraordinary how ignorant English 
people, apart firom some experts and others, are about India. If 
facts elude them, how much more is the spirit of India beyond 
their reach? They seized her body and possessed her, but it 
was the possession of violence. They did not know her or try 
to know her. They never looked into her eyes, for theirs were 
averted and hers downcast through shame and humiliation. 
After centuries of contact they face each other, strangers still, 
full of dislike for each other. 

And yet India with all her poverty and degradation had 
enough of nobility and greatness about her, and though she 
was overburdened with ancient tradition and present misery, 
aiid her eyelids were a little weary, she had “ a beauty wrought 
out firom within upon the flesh, the deposit little cell by 
cell, of strange thoughts and fantastic reveries and exquisite 
passions B^ind and within her battered body one could still 
glimpse a majesty of soul. Through long ages she had travelled 
and gathered much wisdom on the way, and trafficked with 
strangers and added them to her own big family, and witnessed 
days of glory and of decay, and suffered humiliation and ter- 
rible sorrow, and seen many a strange sight; but throughout her 
long journey she had clung to her immemorial culture, drawn 
strength and vitality fi:om it, and shared it , with other lands. 
Like a pendulum she had swung up and down; she had ven- 
tured with the daring of her thought to reach up to the 
heavens and unravel their mystery, and she had also had bitter 
experience of the pit of hell. Despite the woeful accumulations 
of superstition and degrading custom that had clung to her 
and borne her down, she had never wholly fiirgotten the in- 
spiration that some of the wdsest of her children, at the dawn 
of history, had given her in the Upanishads. Their keen minds, 
ever restless and ever striving and exploring, had not sought 
refuge in blind dogma or grown complacent in the routine 
observance of dead forms or ritual and creed. They had de- 



430 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

manded not a personal relief from suffering in the present or 
a place in a paradise to come, but light and understanding: 
“ Lead me ffom the unreal to the real, lead me from darkness 
to light, lead me from death to immortality.” * In the most 
famous of the prayers recited daily even to-day by millions, the 
gayatri mantra, the call is for knowledge, for enlightenment. 

Though often broken up politically her spirit always guarded 
a common heritage, and in her diversity there was ever an 
amazing unity.® Like all ancient lands she was a curious mix- 
tutc of the good and bad, but the good was hidden and had 
to he sought after, while the odour of decay was evident and 
her hot, pitiless sun gave full publicity to the bad. 

There is some similarity between Italy and India, Both are 
ancient countries with long traditions of culture behind them, 
though Italy is a newcomer compared to India, and India is 
a much vaster country. Both are split up politically, and yet 
the conception of Italia, like that of India, never died, and 
in all their diversity the unity was predominant. In Italy the 
unity was largely a Roman unity, for that great city had 
dominated the country and been the fount and symbol of 
unity. In India there was no such single centre or dominant 
dty, although Benares might well be called the Eternal City 
of the East, not only for India but also for Eastern Asia. But, 
unlike Rome, Benares never dabbled in empire or thought of 
temporal power. Indian culture was so widespread all over 
India that no part of the country could be called the heart of 
that culture. From Cape Comorin to Amaranath and Badrinath 
in the Himalayas, from Dwarka to Puri, the same ideas coursed, 
and if there was a clash of ideas in one place, the noise of it 
soon reached distant parts of the country. 

Just as Italy gave the gift of culture and religion to Western 
Europe, India £d so to Eastern Asia, though Qiina was as old 
and venerable as India. And even when Italy was lying pros- 
trate politically, her life coursed through the veins of Europe. 

It was Mettemich who called Italy a “geographical ex- 
pression”, and many a would-be Mettemich has used that 

^ Brihadaranyak Upanishad, i, 3, 37. 

® “ greatest of all the contradictions in India is that over 
this diversity is spread a greater unity, which is not immediately 
evident because it failed historically to find expression in any 
political cohesion to make the country one, but which is so great 
a reality, and so powerful, that even the Musulman world of mdia 
has to confess that it has been deeply affected by coming wiritdn 
its influence.” Sir Frederick Whyte ; Tha Future of East and West. 



INDIA OLD AND NEW 43! 

phrase for India, and, strangely enough, there is a similarity 
even in their geographical positions in the two continents. 
More interesting is the comparison of England with Austria, 
for has not England of the twentieth century been compared 
to Austria of the nineteenth, proud and haughty and imposing 
still, but with the roots that gave strength shrivelling up and 
decay eating its way into the mighty fabric. 

It is curious how one cannot resist the tendency to give an 
anthropomorphic form to a country. Such is the force of habit 
and early associations. India becomes Bharat Mata, Mother 
India, a beautiful lady, very old but ever youthful in appear- 
ance, sad-eyed and forlorn, cruelly treated by aliens and out- 
siders, and calling upon her children to protect her. Some such 
picture rouses the emotions of Hundreds of thousands and 
drives them to aaion and sacrifice. And yet India is in the 
main the peasant and the worker, not beautiful to look at, for 
pove^ is not beautiful. Does the beautiful lady of our 
ima^ations represent the bare-bodied and bent workers in 
the fields and factories? Or the small group of those who have 
from ages past crushed the masses and exploited them, imposed 
cruel customs on them and made many of them even untouch- 
able? We seek to cover truth by the creatures of our imagina- 
tions and endeavour to escape firom reality to a world of 
dreams. 

And yet despite these diSerent classes and their mutual con- 
flicts there was a common bond which united them in India, 
and one is amazed at its persistence and tenacity and enduring 
vitality. What was this strength due to? Not merely the 
passive strength and weight of inertia and tradition, |[reat as 
these always are. There was an active sustaining princmle, fijr 
it resisted successfully poweiful outside influences and absorbed 
internal forces that rose to combat it. And yet with all its 
stren^h it could not preserve political fifeedom or endeavour 
to brmg about political unity. These latter do not appear to 
have been considered worth much trouble; their importance 
was very foolishly ignored, and we have suffered fiir this neglect. 
Right through history the old Indian ideal did not glorify 
political and military triumph, and it looked down upon money 
and the professional money-making class. Honour and wealm 
did not go together, and honour was meant to go, at least in 
theory* to the meii who served the community with little in the 
shape of financial reward. 

The old culture managed to live through many a fierce storm 
and tempest, but though it kept its outer fijrm, it lost its real 



433 JAWAHAKLAL NEHRU 

content. To-day it is fighting silently and desperately against 
a new and all-powerful opponent — the bania civilisation of the 
capitalist West. It will succumb to this newcomer, for the West 
brmgs science, and science brings food for the hungry millions. 
But the West also brings an antidote to the evils of this cut- 
throat civilisation — the principles of socialism, of co-operation, 
and service to the community for the common good. This is 
not so unlike the old Brahman ideal of service, but it means 
the brahmanisation (not in the religious sense, of course) of all 
classes and groups and the abolition of class distinctions. It 
may be that when India puts on her new garment, as she must, 
for the old is tom and tattered, she will have it cut in this 
fashion, so as to make it conform both to present conditions 
and her old thought. The ideas she adopts must become racy to 
her soil. 
