THE OPPRESSED MEET AT BRUSSELS 

Towards the end of 1926 1 happened to be in Berlin, and I learnt 
there of a forthcoming Congress of Oppressed Nationalities, 
which was to be held at Brussels. The idea appealed to ine, and 
I wrote home, suggesting that the Indian National Congress 
might take official part in the Brussels Congress. My suggestion 
was approved, and I was appointed the Indian Congress repre- 
sentative for this purpose. 

The Brussels Congress was held early in February 1927. I do 
not know who originated the idea. Berlin was at the time a centre 
which attracted political exiles and radical elements from abroad; 
it was gradually catching up Paris in that respect. The Com- 
munist element was also strong there. Ideas of some common 
action between oppressed nations inter $e, as well as between 
them and the Labour left wing, were very much in the air. It 
was felt more and more that ffie struggle for freedom was a 
common one against the thing that was imperialism, and joint 
deliberation and, where possmle, joint acuon were desirable. 
The colonial Powers— England, France, Italy, etc., were natur- 
ally hostile to any such attempts being made, but Germany was, 
since the War, no longer a colonial Power, and the German 
Government viewed wiui a benevolent neutrality the growth of 
agitation in the colonies and dependencies of other Powers. This 
was one of the reasons which made Berlin a centre for advanced 
and disaftected elements from abroad. Among these the most 
prominent and active were the Chinese belonging to the left wing 
of the Kuo-Min-Tang, which was then sweeping across China, 
and the old feudal elements seemed to be rollmg down befere its 
irresistible advance. Even the Imperialist powers lost their 
aggressive habits and minatory tone befere this new phenome- 
non. It appeared that the solution of the problem of China's 
unity and freedom could not long be delayed. The Kuo-Min- 
Tang was flushed with success, but it knew the difficulties that 
lay ahead, and it wanted to stiaigthen itself by international 
propaganda. Probably it was the left wring of the party, co- 
operating with . Communists and near-Commimists abroad, that 
laid stress on this propaganda, both to strengthen China’s 
national position abroad and its own position in the Party ranks 
at home. The Party had not split up at the time into two or 

ii/T .161 



l62 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

more rival and bitterly hostile groups, and presented, to all out- 
ward seeming, a united front. 

The European representatives of the Kuo-Min-Tang, there- 
fore, welcomed the idea of the Congress of Oppressed Nationali- 
ties; perhaps they even originated the idea jointly with some 
other people. Some Communists and near-Communists were also 
at the back of the proposal right from the beginning, but, as a 
whole, the Communist element kept in the backgroimd. Active 
support and help also came from Latin America, which was 
chafing at the time at the economic imperialism of the United 
States. Mexico, with a radical President and policy, was eager 
to take the lead in a Latin American bloc against the United 
States; and Mexico, therefore, took great interest in the Brussels 
Congress. Officially the Government could not take part, but it 
sent one of its leading diplomats to be present as a benevolent 
observer. 

There were also present at Brussels representatives from the 
national organisations of Java, Indo-China, Palestine, Syria, 
Egypt, Arabs from North Africa, and African Negroes. Then 
there were many left-wing Labour organisations represented, and 
several well-known men, who had played a leading part in Euro- 
pean Labour struggles .for a generation, were present. Com- 
munists were there also, and they took an important part in the 
jiroceedings; they came not as Communists, but as representa- 
tives of trade umon or similar organisations. 

George Lansbury was elected president, and he delivered an 
eloquent address. That in itself was proof that the Congress 
was not so rabid after all, nor was it merely hitched on to the star 
of Communism. But there is no doubt that the gathering was 
friendly towards the Communists, and, even though agreement 
might be lacking on some matters, there appeared to be several 
common grounds for aaion. 

Mr. Lansbury agreed to be president also of the permanent 
organisation that was formed— the League Against Imperialism. 
But he repented of his rash behaviour soon, or perhaps his 
colleagues of the British Labour Party did not approve of it. 
The Labour Party was ‘ His Majesty’s Opposition ' then, soon to 
blossom out as ‘ Ifrs Majesty’s Government ’, and future Cabinet 
Ministers cannot dabble in risky and revolutionary politics. Mr. 
Lansbury resigned from the presidentship on the ground ' of 
being too busy &r it; he even resigned from the membership of 
the League.. I was hurt by this sudden change in a person whose 
speech I had admired only two or three months earlier. 

The League Against Imperialism had, however, quite a num- 



THE OPPRESSED MEET AT BRUSSELS 163 

ber of distinguished persons as its patrons, Einstein was one of 
them, and Madame Sun Yat Sen and, I think, Remain Rolland. 
Many months later Einstein resigned, as he disagreed with the 
pro-Arab policy of the League in the Arab-Jewish quarrels in 
Palestine. 

The Brussels Congress, as well as the subsequent Committee 
meetings of the League, which were held in various places from 
time to time, helped me to understand some of the problems of 
colonial and dependent countries. They gave me also an insight 
into the inner conflicts of the Western Labour world. I knew 
something about them already; I had read about them, but there 
was no reality behind my knowledge, as there had been no per- 
sonal contacts. I had some such contacts now, and sometimes 
had to face problems which reflected these inner conflicts. As 
between the Labour worlds of the Second International and the 
Third International, my sympathies were with the latter. The 
whole record of the Second International from the War onwards 
filled me with distaste, and we in India had had sufficient per- 
sonal experience of the methods of one of its strongest supports 
— the British Labour Party. So I turned inevitably with good- 
will towards Communism, for, whatever its faults, it was at least 
not hypocritical and not imperialistic. It was not a doctrinal 
adherence, as I did not know much about the fine points of 
Communism, my acquaintance being limited at the time to its 
broad features. These attracted me, as also the tremendous 
changes taking place in Russia. But Communists-often irritated 
me by their dictatorial ways, their aggressive and rather vulgar 
methods, their habit of denouncing everybody who did not agree 
with them. This reaction was no doubt due, as they would say, 
to my own bourgeois education and up-bringing. 

It was curious how, in our League Against Imperialism Com- 
mittee meetings, I would usually be on the side of the Anglo- 
American members on petty matters of argument. There was a 
certain similarity in our outlook in regard to method at least. 
We would both object to declamatory and long-winded resolu- 
tions, which resembled manifestos. We preferred something 
simpler and shorter, but the Continental tradition was against 
this. There was often difference of opinion between the Com- 
munist elements and the non-Communists. Usually we agreed 
on a compromise. Later on, some of us returned to our homes 
and could not attend any further Committee meetings. 

The Brussels Congress was viewed with some consternation by 
the Foreign and Colonial Offices of the Imperialist powers. 
'Angur’, the well-known writer of the British Foreign Office, 



164 JAWAHAHLAL NEHRU 

has given a somewhat sensational, and occasionally ludicrous, 
account of it in one of his books. The Congress itself was 
probably full of international spies, mahy of the delegates even 
representing various secret services. We had an amusing instance 
of this. An American friend of mine, who was in Paris, had a 
visit from a Frenchman who belonged to the French secret 
service. It was quite a friendly visit to enquire about certain 
matters. When he had finished his enquiries he asked the 
American if he did not recognise him, for they had met 
previously. The American looked hard, but he had to admit 
that he could not place him at aU. The secret service agent then 
told him that he had met him at the Brussels Congress as a 
Negro delegate, with his face, hands, etc., all blacked overl 

One of the meetings of the Committee of the League Against 
Imperialism took place at Cologne, and I attended it. After the 
meeting was over we were asked to go to Dusseldorf, near by, to 
attend a Saccho-Vanzetti meeting. As we were returning from 
that meeting, we were asked to show our passports to the police. 
Most of the people had their passports with them, but I had 
left mine at the hotel in Cologne, as we had only come for a few 
hours to Dusseldorf. I was thereupon marched to a police^tation. 
Fortunately for me I had companions in distress— an English- 
man and his wife, who also had left their passport in Cologne. 
After about an hour’s wait, during which probably tdephonic 
enquiries were made, the police chief was graciously pleased to 
allow us to depart. 

The League Against Imperialism veered more towards Com- 
munism in later years, though at no time, so far as I know, did 
it lose its individual character. I could only remain in distant 
touch with it Iw means of correspondence. In 1931, because of 
my part in the Delhi truce between the Congress and the Govern- 
ment of India, it grew exceedingly angry witib me, and excom- 
municated me with bell, book, and candle — or to be more accu- 
rate, it expelled me by some kind of a resolution. I must confess 
that it had great provocation, but it might have given me some 
chance of explaining my position. 

In the summer of 1917 my father came to Europe. I met biTvi 
at Venice, and during the next few months we were often 
together. All of us — ^my father, my wife, my young sister, and 
I — paid a brief visit to Moscow in November during the tenth 
anniversary celebrations of the Soviet. It was a very brief visit, 
just three or four days in Moscow, decided upon at the last 
moment. But we were glad we went, for even that glimpse 
was worth while. It did not, and could not, tearb ns much about 



THE OPPRESSED MEET AT BRUSSELS 165 

the new Russia, but it did give us a background for our reading. 
To my father all such Soviet and collectivist ideas were wholly 
novel. His whole training had been legal and constitutional, and 
he could not easily get out of that framew'ork. But he was 
definitely impressed by what he saw in Moscow. 

We were in Moscow when the announcement about the Simon 
Commission was first made. We first read about it in a Moscow 
sheet. A few days' aftenvards, fether was appearing in the Prity 
Council in London in an Indian appeal with Sir John Simon 
as a colleague. It was an old zamindari case in the earlier stages 
of which, many years previously, I had also appeared. I had 
no further interest in it, but at Sir John Simon’s suggestion I 
accompanied my father on one occasion to Sir John’s chambers 
for a consultation. 

The year 1937 was drawing to an end, and our stay in Europe 
had been unduly prolonged. Probably we would have returned 
home sooner but ror father visiting Europe. It was our intention 
to spend some lime in south-eastern Europe and Turkey and 
Egypt on our way back. But there was no time for this then, 
and I was eager to be back in time for the next Congress session 
which was going to be held in Madras at Christma.s-time. We 
sailed firom Marseilles, my wife, sister, daughter and I, early in 
December for Colombo. My fiither remained in Europe for 
another three months. 