A VISIT TO GANDHIJI 

Immediately after my release, I hastened to Lucknow to my 
mother’s bed-side, and I remained with her for some days. I 
had come out of prison after a fairly long period, and I felt 
detached and out of touch with my surroundings. I realised 
with little shock, as we all do, that the world had gone on 
moving and changing while I lay stagnating in prison. Chil- 
dren and boys and girls growing up, marriages, births, deaths; 
love and hate, work and play, tragedy and comedy. New 
interests in life, new subjects &r conversation, always there was 
a little element of surprise in what I saw and heard. Life 
seemed to have passed by, leaving me in a backwater. It was 
not a wholly pleasant feeling. Soon I woidd have adapted 
myself to my environment, but I felt no urge to do so. I realised 
that I was only having a brief outing outside prison, and 
would have to go back again before long. So why trouble 
myself about adaptation to something which I would leave 
soon? 

Pol itica lly, India was more or less quiet; public activities were 
largely controlled and suppressed by the Government, and ar- 
rests occasionally took place. But the silence of India then was 
full of significance. It was the ominous silence which follows ex- 
haustion after experiencing a period of fierce repression, a 
silence which is often very eloquent, but is beyond the ken of 
governments that repress. India was the ideal poUce state, and 
the police mentality pervaded ail spheres of government. Out- 
wardly all non-conformity was suppressed, and a. vast army of 
spies and secret agents covered the land. There was an atmo- 
sphere of demoralisation and an all-pervading fear among the 
people. Any political activity, especially in the rural areas, was 
immediately suppressed, and the various provincial govern- 
ments were trymg to hound out Congressmen firom me ser- 
vice of municipauties and local boards. Every person who 
had been to pruon as a civil resister was unfit, according to 
Government, for teaching in a municipal school or serving the 
municipality in any other way. Great pressure was brought to 
bear on municipalities, etc., and threats were held out that 
Government grants would be stopped, if the ofifending Con- 
gressmen were not dismissed. The most .n&torious example of 

SQ9 



400 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

this coercion took place in the Calcutta Corporation. Ulti- 
mately, I believe, the Bengal Government passed a law against 
the employment hy the Corporation of persons who had been 
convicted for political offences. 

Reports of Nazi excesses in Germany had a curious effect 
on British officials and their Press in India. They gave them 
a justification for all they had done in India, and it was pointed 
out to us, with a glow of conscious virtue, how much worse 
our lot would have been if the Nazis had had anything to do 
with us. New standards and records had been set up by the 
Nazis, and it was certainly not an easy matter to rival them. 
Perhaps our lot would have been worse; it is difficult for me to 
judge for I have not all the facts of the occurrences that have 
taken place in various parts of India during the past five years. 
The British Government in India believes in the charity that 
its right hand should not know what its left hand does, and so 
it has turned down every suggestion for an impartial enc^ry, 
although such enquiries are always weighted on the official 
side. I think it is true that the average Englishman hates 
brutality, and I cannot conceive English people openly glorying 
in and repeating lovingly the word ' Brutahtdt ’ (or its English 
equivalent) as the Nazis do. Even when they indulge in the 
deed, they are a little ashamed of it. But whether we are 
Germans or English or Indians, I am afraid our veneer of 
civilised conduct is thin enough, and when passions are aroused 
it rubs off and reveals something that is not good to look at. 
The Great War brutalised humanity terribly, and we saw the 
aftermath of this in that awful hunger blockade of Germany 
even after the Armistice — "one of the most senseless, brutal 
and hideous atrocities ever committed by any nation” as an 
English writer has described it. The years 1857 and 1858 have 
not been forgotten in India. Whenever die challenge to 
our own interests is made we forget our good breeding and 
society manners, and untruth becomes ‘propaganda', and 
brutality ‘ scientific repression ’ and the preservation of ‘ law and 
order ’. 

It is not the fault of individuals or any particular people. 
More or less every one behaves so under simuar drcumstances. 
In India, and in every country under foreign domination, there 
is always a latent challenge to the ruling power, and firom time 
to time this becomes more obvious and threatening. This 
challenge always develops the military virtues and vices in the 
ruling groups. We have had evidence of these military virtues 
and vices in a superlative degree in India during the last few 



A VISIT TO CANDHIJI 40I 

years, because our challenge had become powerful and efifective. 
But to some extent we have always to put up with the military 
mind (or absence of it) in India. That is one of the conse- 
quences of Empire, and it degrades both the parties involved. 
The degradation of Indians is obvious enough, the other degra- 
dation is more subtle, but in times of crisis it becomes patent. 
Then there is a third group, which has the misfortune to share 
in both types of degradation. 

I have had ample leisure in gaol to read the speeches of high 
officials, their answers to questions in the Assembly and Coim- 
cUs, and Government statements. I noticed, during the last 
three years, a marked change coming over them, and this 
change became progressively more and more obvious. They 
became more threatening and minatory, developing more and 
more in the style of a sergeant-major addressing his men. A 
remarkable example of this was a speech dehvered by the 
Commissioner of, I think, the Midnapur Division in Bengal in 
November or December 1933. Vae victis seems to run like 
a thread through these utterances. Non-official Europeans, in 
Bengal especially, go even further than the official vanety, and 
both in their speeches and actions have shown a very decided 
Fascist tendency. 

Yet another revealing instance of brutalisation was the 
recent public hangings of some convicted criminals in Sind. 
Because crime was on the increase in Sind the authorities there 
decided to execute these criminals publicly, as a warning to 
others. Every facility was given to the public to attend and 
watch this ghastly spectacle, and it is said that many thousands 
came. 

So after my discharge from prison, I surveyed political and 
economic conditions in India, and felt little enthusiasm at them. 
Many of my comrades were in prison, fresh arrests continued, 
all the Ordinance laws were in operation, censorship throttled 
the Press and upset our correpondence. A colleague of mine, 
Rafi Ahmad Kidwai, was greatly irritated at the vagaries of 
the censor regarding his correspondence. Letters would be hdd 
up and came very late, or would get lost, and this would upset 
his engagements. He wanted to appeal to the censor to do his 
job a littie more efficiently, but who was he to write to? The 
censor was not a public official. He was probably some C.I.D. 
officer working secretly, whose existence and work were not 
even adknowledged openly. Rafi Ahmad solved the difficulty 
by writing to the censor, and addressing the envelope of this 
letter to himself 1 Sure enough the letter reached its proper 



402 


JAWAHAHLAX, NEHRU 


destination, and there was some improvement afterwards in 
Rafi Ahmad's correspondence. 

I had no desire to go back to prison. I had had enough of it. 
But I could not see how I could escape it under the existing 
circumstances, unless I decided to retire from all political 
activity. I had no such intention, and so I felt that I was 
hound to come into conflict with the Government. At any 
moment some order might be served on me to do something, 
or to abstain from doing something, and all my nature rebelled 
at being forced to act in a particular way. An attempt was 
being made to cow down and coerce the people of India. I was 
helpless, and could do nothing on the wider field, but, at any 
rate, I could refuse personally to be cowed down and coerced 
into submission. 

Before I went back to prison I wanted to attend to certain 
matters. My mother’s illness claimed my attention first of all. 
Very slowly she improved; the process was so slow that for a 
year she was bed-ridden. I was eager to see Gandhiji, who lay 
recovering from his latest fast in Poona. For over two years 
I had not met him. I also wanted to meet as many of my 
provincial colleagues as possible to discuss, not only the existing 
political situation in India, but the world situation as well as 
the ideas that filled my mind. I thought then that the world 
was going rapidly towards a catastrophe, political and economic, 
and we ought to keep this in mind m drawing up our national 
programmes. 

My household affairs also claimed my attention. I had 
ignored them completely so far, and I had not even examined 
my father’s papers since his death. We had cut down our 
e^enditure greatly, but still it was far more than we could 
anord. And yet it was difficult to reduce it further, so long as 
we lived in that house of oure. We were not keeping a car 
because that was beyond our means, and also because, at any 
moment, it could be attached by Government. Faced by finan- 
cial difficulties, I was diverted by the large mail of b^ging 
letters that I received. (The censor passed the lot on.) There, 
was a general and very erroneous impression, especially in 
South India, that I was a wealthy person. 

Soon after my release my younger sister, Krishna, got en- 
gaged to be married and I was anxious to have the wedding 
early, befiire my enforced departure took place. Krishna herself 
had come out of prison a few months earlier after serving out 
a year. 

As soon as my mother’s health permitted it, I went to Poona 



A VISIT TO GANDHIJI 4O3 

to see Gandhiji. I was happy to see him again and to find that, 
though weak, he was making good progress. We had long 
talks. It was obvious that we- differed considerably in our out- 
look on life and politics and economics, but I was grateful to 
him for the generous way in which he tried to come as fer as 
he could to meet my view point. Our correspondence, subse- 
quently published, dealt with some of the wider issues that 
filled my mind, and though they were referred to in vague 
language, the general drift was clear. I was happy to have 
Gandhiji’s declaration that there must be a de-vesting of vested 
interests, though he laid stress that this should be by conversion, 
not compulsion. As some of his methods of conversion are not 
far removed, to my thinking, from courteous and considerate 
compulsion, the difference did not seem to me very great. I had 
the feeling with him then, as before, that though he might be 
averse to considering vague theories, the logic of facts would 
take him, step by step, to the inevitability of fundamental 
social changes. He was a curious phenomenon — a person of the 
t3q)e of a medieval Catholic saint, as Mr. Verrier Elwin has called 
him — and at the same time a practical leader with his pulse 
always on the Indian peasantry. Which way he might turn in 
a crisis it was difficult to say, but whichever way it was, it would 
make a difference. He might go the wrong way, according to 
our thinking, but it would always be a straight way. It was 
good to work with him, but if necessity arose then different 
roads would have to he followed. 

For the present, I thought then, this question did not arise. 
We were in the middle of our national struggle and civil diso- 
bedience was still the programme in theory, of the Congress, 
although it had been restncted to individuds. We must carry 
on as we are and try to spread socialistic ideas among the 
people, and especially among the more politically-conscious 
Congress workers, so that when the time came for another 
declaration of policy we might be ready for a notable advance. 
Meanwhile, Congress was an unlawful organisation, and the 
British Government was trying to crush it. We had to meet 
that attack. 

The principal problem which faced Gandhiji was a personal 
one. What was he to do himself? He was in a tangle. If he 
went to gaol again the same question of Harijan privileges 
would arise and, presumably, the Government would not give 
in, and he would fast again. Would the same round be re- 
peated? He refused to submit to such a cat-and-mouse policy, 
and said that if he fasted again for those privileges, the fast 



404 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

would continue even though he was released. That meant a 
fast to death. 

The second possible course before him was not to court 
imprisonment during the year of his sentence (ten and a half 
months of this remained still) and devote himself to Harijan 
work. But at the same time he would meet Congress workers 
and advise them when necessary. 

A third possibility he suggested to me was that he should 
retire from the Congress altogether for a while, and leave it in 
the hands of the " younger generation,” as he put it. 

The first course, ending, as it seemed, in his death by star- 
vation, was impossible for any one of us to recommend. The 
third seemed very undesirable when the Congress was an illegal 
body. It would either result in the immediate withdrawal of 
civil disobedience and all forms of direct action and a going 
back to legality and constitutional activity, or to a Congress, 
outlawed and isolated, now even from Gandhiji, being crushed 
still further by Government. Besides, there was no question of 
any group taking possession of an illegal organisation which 
could not meet and discuss any policy. By a process of ex- 
clusion' we arrived thus at the second course of action suggested 
by him. Most of us disliked it, and we knew that it would give 
a heavy blow to the remains of civil disobedience. If the 
leader had himself retired from the fight, it was not likely that 
many enthusiastic Congress v/orkers would jump into the fire. 
But there seemed no other way out of the tangle, and Gandhiji 
made his announcement accordingly. 

"We agreed, Gandhiji and I, though perhaps for different 
reasons, that the time was not yet for a withdrawal of civil 
disobedience and we. must carry on even at a low-ebb. For the 
rest, I wanted to turn people’s attention to socialistic doctrines 
and the world situation. 

I spent a few days in Bombay on my way back. I was for- 
tunate in catching udai Shankar there and seeing his dancing. 
This was an unexpected treat which I enjoyed greatly. Theatres, 
music, cinema, talkies, radio and broadcasting— all this had 
been beyond my reach for many years, for even during my 
intervals of freedom I was too engrossed in other activities. I 
have only been once to a talkie so for, and the great names of 
dnema stars- are names onljr to me. I have missed the theatre 
especially, and I have often read with envy of new productions 
in foreign countries. In northwn India, eVen when I was out 
of gaol, there was little opportunity of seeing good plays, for 
there were hardly any within reach. I believe the Bengali, 



A VISIT TO GANDHIJI 405 

Gujrati and Marathi drama has made some progress; not so 
the Hindustani stage, which is, or was (for I do not know the 
latest developments) terribly crude and inartistic. I am told 
most of the Indian films, both silent and talkies, do not err 
on the side of artistry. They are usually operettes or melo- 
dramas, drawing upon some theme firom old Indian history or 
mythology. 

I suppose they supply what is most appreciated by the city 
people. The contrast between these crude and painful shows 
and the still surviving artistry of the folk-song and -dance, and 
even village drama, is very marked. In Bengal, in Gujrat and 
in the south, one discovers sometimes, with a shock of pleasant 
surprise, how fundamentally, and yet unconsciously, artisdc the 
mass of the village people are. Not so the middle classes; they 
seem to have lost their roots and have no aesthetic tradition, to 
cling to. They glory in cheap and horrid prints made in bulk 
in Germany and Austria, and sometimes even rise to Ravi 
Varma’s pictures. The harmonium is their favourite instru- 
ment. (I live in hope that one of the earliest acts of the Swaraj 
government will be to ban this awful instrument.) But perhaps 
the height of painful incongruity and violation of all artistic 
codes is met with in the houses of most big taluqadars in 
Lucknow or elsewhere. They have money to spend and a desire 
to show off, and they do so; and the people who visit them are 
the pained wimesses of the fulfilment of this desire. 

Recently there has been an artistic awakening, led by the 
brilliant Tagore family, and its influence is already apparent 
all over India. But how can any art flourish widely when the 
people of the country are hampered and restricted and sup- 
pressed at every turn and live in an atmosphere of fear? 

In Bombay i met many friends and comrades, some only 
recently out of prison. The socialistic element was strong there, 
and there was much resentment at recent happenings in the 
upper ranks of the Congress. Gandhiji was severely critidsed 
for his metaphysical ouuook applied to politics. Witji much 
of the criticism I was in agreement, but I was quite clear that, 
situated as we were, we had little dioice in the matter and had 
to carry on. Any attempt to withdraw civil disobedience would 
have brought no relief to us, for the Government's offensive 
would continue and all effective work would mevitably lead to 

E rison. Our national movement had arrived at a stage when it 
ad to be suppressed by Government, or it would impose its will 
on the British Government. This meant that it had arrived at a 
stage when it was always likely to be declared illegal and, as a 



4o6 jawahaulal nehru 

movement, it could not go back even if civil disobedience was 
withdrawn. The continuance of disobedience made little differ- 
ence in practice, but it was an act of moral defiance which had 
value. It was easier to spread new ideas during a struggle than it 
would be when the strugde was wound-up for the time being, and 
demoralisation ensued. The only alternative to the struggle was 
a compromising attitude to the British authority and consti- 
tutional action m the councils. 

It was a difficult position, and the choice- was not an easy one. 
I appreciated the mental conflicts of my colleagues, for I had 
myself had to face them. But I found there, as I have found 
elsewhere in India, some people who wanted to make high 
socialistic doctrine a refuge for inaction. It was a little irritating 
to find people, who did little themselves, criticise others who 
had shouldered the burden in the heat and dust of the fray, 
as reactionaries. These parlour Socialists are especially hard on 
Gandhiji as the arch-reactionary, and advance arguments which 
in logic, leave little to be desired. But the little fact remains 
that this ‘ reactionary ’ knows India, understands India, almost 
is peasant India, and has shaken up India as no so-called 
revolutionary has done. Even his latest Harijan activities have 
gently but irresistibly undermined orthodox Hinduism and 
shaken it to its foundations. The whole tribe of the Orthodox 
have ranged themselves against him, and consider him their 
most dangerous enemy, almough he continues to treat them 
with all gentleness and courtesy. In his own peculiar way he 
has a knack of releasing powerful forces which spread out, like 
ripples on the water’s surface, and affect millions. Reaaionary 
or revolutionary, he has changed the face of India, given pride 
and character to a cringing and demoralised people, built up 
strength and consciousness in the masses, and made the Indian 
problem a world problem. Quite apart from the objectives 
aimed at and its metaphysical implications, the method of 
non-violent non-co-operation or civil resistance is a unique and 
powerful contribution of his to India and the world, and there 
can be no doUbt that it has been peculiarly suited to Indian 
conditions. 

I think it is right that we should encourage honest criticism, 
and have as much public discussion of our problems as possible. 
It is unfortunate that Gandhiji’s dominating position has to 
some extent prevented this discussion. There was always a ten- 
dency to rely on him and to leave the decision to him. This is 
obviously wrong, and the nation can only advance by reasoned 
acceptance of objectives and methods, and a co-operation and 



A VISIT TO GANDHIJl 407 

discipline based on them and not on blind obedience. No one, 
however great he may be, should be above criticism. But when 
criticism becomes a mere refuge for inaction there is something 
wrong with it. For socialists to indulge in this ItinH of thing 
is to invite condemnation &om the public, for the masses judge 
by acts. “ He who denies the sharp tasks of to-day,” says Lenin, 
” in the name of dreams about soft tasks of the mture becomes 
an opportunist. Theoretically it means to fail to base oneself 
on the developments now going on in real life, to detach oneself 
from them in the name of dreams.” 

Socialists and communists in India are largely nurtured on 
literature dealing with the industrial proletariat. In some 
selected areas, like Bombay or near Calcutta, large numbers of 
factory workers abound, but for the rest India remains agricul- 
tural, and the Indian problem caimot be disposed of, or treated 
effectively, in terms of the industrial workers. Nationalism and 
rural economy are the dominating considerations, and Euro- 
pean socialism seldom deals with &ese. Pre-war conditions in 
Russia were a much nearer approach to India, but there again 
the most extraordinary and imusual occurrences took place, 
and it is absurd to expect a repetition of these anywhere else. 
I do believe that the philosophy of communism helps us to 
understand and analyse existing conditions in a^ country, and 
further indicates the road to mture progress. But it is doing 
violence and injustice to that philosophy to apply it blindfold 
and without due regard to fiicts and conditions. 

Life is anyhow a complex afi^r, and the conflicts and con- 
tradictions of life sometimes make one despair a little. It is not 
surprising that people should differ, or even that comrades with 
a common approach to problems should draw different con- 
clusions. But a person who tries to hide his own weakness in 
high-sounding phrases and noble principles is apt to be suspect. 
A person who. tries to save himself from prison by giving 
undertakings and assurances to the Government, or by other 
dubious conduct, and then has the temerity to criticise others, 
is likely to, injure the cause he espouses. 

Bombay being a vast cosmopolitan city had all manner of 
people. One prominent citizen, however, showed a perfecdy 
remarkable catholicity in his political, economic, social and 
religious outlook. As a Labour leader, he was a Socialist; in 
politics generally he called himself a Democrat; he was a 
favourite of the Hindu Sabha and he promised to protect old 
religious and social customs and prevent the legislature from 
interfering; at dection-time he became the nominee of the 



4o8 jawaharlal nehru 

Sanatanists, those high priests at the shrine of the ancient 
mysteries. Not finding this varied and diverting career ex- 
haustii^ enough, he utilised his superfluous energy in criti- 
cising Congress and condemning Gandhiji as reactionary. In 
co-operation with a few others he started a Congress Democratic 
Party, which incidentally had nothing to do with democracy, 
and was connected with Congress only in so far as it attacked 
that august body. Searching fiir firesh fields to conquer, he 
then attended the Geneva Labour Conference as a Labour 
delegate. One might almost think that he was qualifying for 
the Prime Ministership of a ‘ National ' Government after the 
E^lish fashion. 

ilSw people can have had the advantage of such a varied out- 
look and activities. And yet among the critics of the Congress 
there were many who had experimented in various fields, and 
who kept a finger in many a pie. A few of these called them- 
selves socialists, and they gave a bad name to socialism. 