CIVIL DISOBEDIENCE BEGINS 

Independence Day came, January a6th. 1930, and it revealed to 
us, as in a flash, the earnest and enthusiastic mood of the 
country. There was something vastly impressive about the great 
gatherings everywhere, peacefully and solemnly taking the 
pledge of independence * without any speeches or exhortation. 
This celebration gave the necessary impetus to Gandhiji, and he 
felt, with his sure touch on the pulse of the people, that the 
time was ripe for action. Events followed then in quick suc- 
cession, like a drama w-orking up to its climax. 

As Civil Disobedience approached and electrified the atmo- 
sphere, our thoughts went back to the movement of 1921-22 and 
the manner of its sudden suspension after Qiauri Chaura. The 
country was more disciplined now, and there was a clearer 
appreciation of the nature of the struggle. The technique was 
understood to some extent, but more important still from 
Gandhiji’s point of view, it was fully realised by every one that 
he was terribly in earnest about non-violence. There could be 
no doubt about that now as there probably was in the minds of 
some people ten years before. Despite all this, how could we 
possibly be certain that an outbreak of violence might not occur 
in some locality either spontaneously or as the result of an in- 
trigue? And if such an incident occurred, what would be its 
effect on our civil disobedience movement? Would it be suddenly 
wound up as before? That prospect w^as most disconcerting. 

Gandhiji probably thought over this question also in his own 
way, though the problem that seemed to trouble him, as far as 
I could gather from scraps of conversation, was put differently. 

The non-violent method of action to bring about a change for 
the better was to him the only right method and. if rightly 
pursued, an infallible method. Must it be said that this method 
required a specially favourable atmosphere for its functioning 
and succe.ss, and that it should not be tried if outward conditions 
were not suited to it? That led to the conclusion that the non- 
violent method was not meant for all contingencies, and was 
thus neither a universal nor an infallible method. This con- 
clusion was intolerable for Gandhiji, for be firmly believed that 
it was a universal and infallible method. Therefore, necessarily, 

* This pledge is given in Appendix A. (p. 6or). 
aoo 



210 


JAWAHARLAL NRHRU 

it must fuiiciioii even tlmugh the external conditions were un- 
favourable. and even in the midst of strife and violence. The 
way of its functioning might be varied to suit varying circum- 
stances, but to stop it would be a confession of failure of the 
method itself. 

Perhaps his mind worked in some such way, but I cannot be 
sure of his thoughts. He did ^ve us the impression that there 
was a slightly diffei'cnt orientation to his thinking, and that Civil 
Disobedience, when it came, need not be stopped because of a 
sporadic act of violence. If, however, the violence became in 
any way part of the movement itself, then it ceased to be a 
peaceful civil disobedience movement, and its activities had to 
be curtailed or varied. This assurance went a long way in satis- 
fying many of us. The great question that hung in the air 
now was — how? How were vve to begin? What irorm of civil 
disobedience should we take up that would be effective, suited 
to the circumstances, and popular with the masses? And then 
the Mahatma gave the hint. 

Salt suddenly became a mysterious word, a word of power. 
The Salt Tax was to be attacked, the salt laws were to be broken. 
We were bewildered and could not quite fit in a national 
struggle with common .salt. Anodier surprising development was 
Gandhiji’s announcement of his ‘ Eleven Points What was the 
point of making a list of some political and social refiirms — good 
m themselves, no doubt — when we were talking in terms of 
independence? Did Gandhiji mean the same thing when he used 
this term as we did, or did we speak a different ^guage? We 
had no time to argue for events were on the move. They were 
moving politically before our eyes from day to day in India; and, 
hardly realised by us at the time, they were moving fast in the 
world and holding it in the grip of a terrible depression. Prices 
were falling, and the city dwellers welcomed this as a sign of 
the plenty to come, but the farmer and the tenant saw the pros- 
pect with alarm. 

Then came Gandhiji’s correspondence with the Viceroy and 
the beginning of the Dandi Salt Mardi ffom the Ashram at 
Sabarmati^ As people followed the fertimes of this marching 
column of pilgrims from day to day, the temperature of the 
country went up. A meeting of the All-India Congress Com- 
mittee was held at Alimedabad to make final arrangements fi)r 
the struggle that was now almost upon us. The Leader in the 
struggle was not present, for he was already tramping with his 
pilgrim hand to the sea, and he refused to return. The A,I.C.C. 
planned what should be done in case of arrests, and large powers 



CIVIL i^laUuLUlLNCj-^ Bi:.UlNo 


1 


were given to the President to act on behalf of the Committee, 
in case it could not meet, to nominate members of the Working 
Committee in place of those arrested, and to nominate a suc- 
cessor for himself with the same powers. Similar powers were 
given by Provincial and local Congress Committee.s to their 
presidents. 

Thus was inaugurated a regime when so-called ‘ dictators ’ 
flourished and controlled the struggle on behalf of the Congress. 
Secretaries of State for India and Viceroys and Governors have 
held up their hands in horror and proclaimed how vicious and 
degraded was the Congress because it believed in dictatorships; 
they, of course, being convinced adherents of democracy. 
Occasionally the Moderate Press in India has also preached to 
us the virtues of democracy. We listened to all this in silence 
(because we were in prison) and in amazement. Brazen-faced 
hypocrisy could hardly go further. Here was India being 
governed forcibly under an absolute dictatorship with Ordinance 
laws and suppression of every kind of civil liberty, and yet our 
rulers talked unctuously of democracy. Even normally, where 
was the shadow of democracy in India? It was no doubt natural 
for the British Government to defend its power and vested in- 
terests in India and to suppress those who sought to challenge 
its authority. But its assertion that all this was the democratic 
method was worthy of record for future generations to admire 
and ponder over. 

The Congress had to face a situation when it would be impos- 
sible for it to function normally; when it would be declared an 
unlawful organisation, and its committees could not meet for 
consultation or any action, except secretly. Secrecy was not 
encouraged by us, as tve wanted to keep our struggle a perfectly 
open one, and thus to keep up oiu: tone and influence the masses. 
But even secret work did not take us far. All our leading men 
and women at the centre, as well as in the provinces and in local 
areas, were botmd to be arrested. Who was then to carry on? 
The only course open to us was, after the fashion of an army 
in action, to make arrangements for new commanders to be 
appointed as old ones were disabled. We could not sit down in 
the field of battle and hold committee meetings. Indeed, we did 
so sometimes, but the object of this, and the inevitable result, 
was to have the whole committee arrested en bloc. We did not 
even have the advantage of a general staff sitting safely behind 
the lines, or a dvilian cabinet in still greater saety elsewhere. 
Our general staffs and cabinets had to keep, by the very nature of 
our struggle, in the most advanced and exposed positions, and 



212 


JAWAIIARLAL NEHRU 

they were arrested and removed in the early stages. And what 
was the power we conferred on our ‘ dictators ’? It was an honour 
for them to be put forward as symbols of the national determina- 
tion to carry on the struggle: but the actual authority they had 
wa.s largely confined to ' dictating ’ thera.selves to prison. They 
could only function at all when the committee they represented 
could not meet on account of force majeure-, and wherever and 
whenever that committee could meet, the 'dictator’ -lost his 
individual authority, such as it was. He or she could not tackle 
any basic problems or principles; only minor and superficial 
phases of the movement could be affected by the ‘dictator’. 
Congress ‘ dictatorships ’ were really stepping-stones to prison; 
and from day to day this proces.s went on, new persons taking 
the place of those who were disabled. 

And so, having made our final preparations, we bade good-bye 
to our comrades of the All-India Congress Committee at 
Ahmedabad, for none knew when or how we would meet again, 
or whether we would meet at all. We hastened back to our posts 
to give the finishing touches to our local arrangements, in 
accordance with the new directions of the A.I.C.C., and, as 
Sarojini Naidu said, to p^ck up our toothbrushes for the journey 
to prison. 

On our way back, father and I went to see Gandhiji. He was 
at Jambusar with his’pilgrim band and we spent a few hours 
with him there, and then saw him stride away with his party 
to the next stage in the journey to the salt sea. That was my 
last glimpse of him then as I saw him, staff in hand, marching 
along at the head of his followers, with firm step and a peaceful 
but undaunted look. It was a moving sight. 

At Jambusar my father had decided, in consultation with 
Gandhiji, to make a gift of his old house in Allahabad to the 
nation and to rename this Swaraj Bhawan. On his return to 
Allahabad he made the announcement, and actually handed 
over charge to the Congress people; part of the large house being 
converted into a hospital. He was unable to go through the legal 
formalities at the time, and, a year and half later, I created a 
trust of the property, in accordrace with his wishes. 

April came, and Gandhiji drew near to the sea, and we waited 
for the word to begin civil disobedience by an attack on the salt 
laws. For months past we had been drilling our volunteers, and 
Kamala and Krishna (my wife and sister) had both joined them 
and donned male attire for the purpose. The volunteers had, of 
course, no arms or even sticks. The object of training them was 
to make them more efficient in their work and capable of dealing 



CIVIL DISOBEDIENCE BEGINS 


213 

with large crowds. The 6th of April was the first day of the 
National Week, which is celebrated annually in memory of the 
happenings in 1919, Irom Satyagraha Day to Jallianwala Bagh. 
On that day Gandhiji began the breach of the salt laws at Dandi 
beach, and three or four days later permission was given to all 
Congress organisations to do likewise and begin Civil Dis- 
obedience in their own areas. 

It seemed as though a spring had been suddenly released; and 
all over the country, in town and village, salt manufacture was 
the topic of the day, and many curious expedients were adopted 
to produce salt. We knew precious little about it, and so we read 
it up where we could, and issued leaflets giving directions, and 
collected pots and pans and ultimately succeeded in producing 
some unwholesome stuff, which we waved about in triumph, 
and often auctioned for fancy prices. It was really immaterial 
whether the stuff was good or bad; the main thing was to commit 
a breach of the obnoxious Salt I..aw, and we were successful 
in that, even though the quality of our salt was poor. As we saw 
the abounding enthusiasm or the people and the way salt- 
making was spreading like a prairie fire, we felt a little abashed 
and ashamed for having questioned the efficacy of this method 
when it was first proposed by Gandhiji. And we marvelled at 
the amazing knack of the man to impress the multitude and 
make it act in an organised way. 

I was arrested on the 14th of April as I was entraining for 
Raipur in the Central Provinces, where I was going to attend 
a conference. That very day I was tried in prison and sentenced 
to six months’ imprisonment under the Salt Act. In anticipation 
of arrest I had nominated (under the new powers given to me 
by the A.I.C.) Gandhiji to act as Congress President in ray 
absence, but, fearing his refusal, my second nomination was for 
father. As I expected, Gandhiji would not agree, and so father 
became the acting-President of the Congress. He was in poor 
health, nevertheless he threw himself into the campaign with 
great energy; and, during those early months, his strong 

f uidance and enforcement of discipline was of tremendous 
enefit to the movement. The movement benefited greatly, but 
it was at the cost of such health and physical fitness as had 
remained in him. 

Those were days of stirring news— processions and lathi 
charges and firing, frequent hartals to celebrate noted arrests, 
and special observances, like Peshawar Day, Garhwali Day, etc. 
For the time being the boycott of foreign cloth and all British 
goods was almost complete. When I heard that my aged mother 



214 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

and, of course, my sisters used to stand under the hot summer 
sun picketing before foreign cloth shops, I was greatly moved. 
Kamala did so also, but she did something more. She threw 
herself into the movement in Allahabad city and district with 
an energy and determination which amazed me. who thought 
I had known her so well for so many years. She forgot 
her ill-health and rushed about the whole day in the sun, and 
showed remarkable powers of organisation. I heard of this 
vaguely in gaol. Later, when my father joined me there, I was 
to learn from him how much he had himself appreciated 
Kamala’s work, and especially her organising capacity. He did 
not at all fancy my mother or the girls rushing about in the hot 
sun, but, except for an occasional remonstrance, he did not 
interfere. 

The biggest news of all that came to us in those early days 
was of the ocairrences in Peshawar on April 23rd, and sub- 
sequently all over the Frontier Province. Anywhere in India 
such a. remarkable exhibition of disciplined and peacefiil courage 
before machine-gun firing would have stirred the country. In 
the Frontier Province it had an additional significance, for the 
Pathans, noted for their courage, were not noted for their peace- 
ful nature; and these Pathans had set an example which was 
unique in India. In the Frontier Province also occurred the 
famous incident of the refusal to fire on the civil population by 
the Garhwali soldiers. They refused to fire because of a soldier's 
distaste for firing on an unarmed crowd, and because, no doubt, 
of sympathy with the crowd. But even sympathy is not usually 
enough to induce a soldier to take the grave step of refusing to 
obey his officer’s orders. He knows the consequences. The 
Garhwalis probably did so (in common with some other regi- 
ments elsewhere whose disobedience did not receive publicity) 
because of a mistaken notion that the British power was collaps- 
ing. Only when such an idea takes possession of the soldier does 
he dare to act according to his own sympathies and inclinations. 
Probably for a few days or weeks the general commotion and 
civil disobedience led some people to think that the last days 
of British rule had come, and this influenced part of the Indian 
Army. Soon it became obvious that no such thing was going to 
happen in the near future, and then there was no more dis- 
obedience in rile army. Care was also taken not to put them in 
coxnpromising positions. 

Ntoy strange things happened in those days, hut undoubtedly 
the most striking was the part of the women in the national 
struggle. They came out in large numbers from the sedusion 



CIVIL DISOBEDIENCE BEGINS 3IJ 

of tlieir homes and, though imusued to public activity, threv? 
themselves into the heart of the struggle. The picketing of 
foreign cloth and liquor shops they made their preserve. 
Enormous processions consisting of women alone were taken 
out in all the cities; and, generally, the attitude of the women 
was more unyielding than that of the men. Often they became 
Congress ‘ dictators ’ in provinces and in local areas. 

The breach of the Salt Act soon became jmt one activity, and 
civil resistance spread to other fields. This was facilitated by the 
promulgation of various ordinances by the Viceroy prohibiting 
a number of activities. As these ordinances and prohibitions 
grew, the opportunities for breaking them also grew, and civil 
resistance took the form of doing the very thing that the ordi- 
nance tvas intended to stop. The initiative definitely remained 
with the Congress and the people, and as each ordinance law 
failed to control the situation from the point of vietv of govern- 
ment, fresh ordinances were issued by the Viceroy. Many of the 
Congress Working Committee members had been arrested, but 
it continued to function with new members added on to it, 
and each official ordinance was countered by a resolution of the 
Working Committee giving directions as to how to meet it. 
These directions were carried out with surprising uniformity all 
over this country — with one exception, the one relating to the 
publication of newspapers. 

When an ordinance was issued for the further control of the 
Press and the demand of security from newspapers, the Working 
Committee called upon the Nationalist Press to refuse to give 
any security, and to stop publication instead. This was a hard 
pill to swallow for the newspapermen, for just then the public 
demand for news was very great. Still the great majority of 
newspapers — some Moderate papers excepted — stopped publica- 
tion, with the result that all manner of rumours began to spread. 
But they could not hold out for long, the temptation was too 
great, and the sight of their moderate rivals picking up their 
business too irritating. So most of them drifted back to pub- 
lication. 

Gandhiji had been arrested on May 5th. After his arrest big 
raids on the salt pans and depots were organized on the west 
coast. There were very painful incidents of police brutality 
during these raids. Bombay then occupied the centre of the 
picture with its tremendous hartals and processions and lathi 
charges. Several emergency hospitals grew up to treat the vic- 
tims of these lathi charges. Much that was remarkable happened 
in Bombay, and being a great city it had the advantage or pub* 



2I(J JAWAHAUI.AL NtHRU 

licity. OccurrencYs of equal importance in small towns and the 
rural areas received no publicity. 

In the latter half of June my father went to Bombay; and 
with him went my mother and Kamala. They had a great 
reception, and during their stay there occurred some of the 
fiercest of the lathi charges. These were, indeed, becoming 
frequent occurrences in Bombay. A fortnight or so later an 
extraordinary all-night ordeal took place there, when Malaviyaji 
and members of the Working Committee, at the head of a huge 
crowd, spent the night facing the police, who blocked their way. 

On his return from Bombay father was arrested on June 30th, 
and Syed JVIahmud was arrested tvith him. They were arrested 
as acting-president and Secretary of the Working Committee, 
which was declared unlawful. Both of them were sentenced to 
six months. My father's arrest was probably due to his having 
issued a statement defining the duties of a soldier or policeman 
in the event of an order to fire on civil populations being given. 
The statement was st];ictly a legal affair, and contained the 
present British Indian law on this point. Nevertheless, it was 
considered a provocative and dangerous document. 

The Bombay visit had been a great strain on father, and from 
early morning to late at night he was kept busy, and he had to 
take the responsibility for every important decision. He had 
long been unwell, but now he returned fagged out, and decided, 
at the urgent advice of his doctors, to take complete rest 
immediately. He arranged to go to Mussoorie and packed up 
for it, but the day before he intended leaving for Mussoorie, he 
appeared before us in our barrack in Naini Central Prison. 