BACK TO PRISON 

Shadow is itself unrestrained in its path while sunshine, 
as an incident of its very nature, is pursued a hundredfold 
by nuance. Thus is sorrow from happiness a thing apart; 
the scope of happiness, however, is hampered by the aches 
and hurts of endless sorrows. 

Rajatarangini.^ 

I WAS back again in Naini Prison, and I felt as if I was starting 
a fresh term of imprisonment. In and out, out and in; what a 
shuttlecock I had become I This switching on and oflf shook 
up the whole system emotionally and it was not easy to adjust 
onself to repeated changes. I had expected to be put in my old 
cell at Naini to which a previous long stay had accustomed 
me. There were some flowers there; originally planted by my 
brother-in-law, Ranjit Pandit, and a good veranda. But this 
old Barrack No. 6 was occupied by a detenu, a State prisoner, 
kept confined without trial or conviction. It was not considered 
desirable for me to associate with him, and I was therefore 
placed in another part of the gaol which was much more closed 
m and was devoid of flowers or greenery. 

But the place where I spent my days and nights mattered 
little, for my mind was elsewhere. I feared that the little im- 
provement that had taken place in Kamala’s condition would 
not stand the shock of my re-arrest. And so it happened. For 
some days it was arranged to supply me in prison with a very 
brief doctor’s bulletin daily. This came by a devious route. The 
doctor had to telephone it to the police headquarters and the 
latter then sent it on to the prison. It was not considered 
desirable to have any direct contacts between the doctors 
and the gaol staff. For two weeks these bulletins came to 
me, sometimes rather irregularly, and then they were stopped 
although there was a progressive deterioration in Kamala's 
condition. 

Bad news and the waiting fer news made the days intolerably 
long and the nights were sometimes worse. Time seemed almost 
to stand still or to move with desperate slowness, and every 

^ R. S. Pandit’s translation. (“River of Kings.” Taranga, ym 
verse, 1913.) 


666 



KA.MALA NEHRU 



BACK TO PRISON 


567 

hour was a burden and a horror. I had never before had 
this feeling in this acute degree. I thought then that I 
was likely to be released within two months or so, after the 
Bombay Congress Session, but those two months seemed an 
eternity. 

Exactly a month after my re-arrest a police ofBcer took me 
from prison on a brief visit to my wife, I was told that I would 
be allowed to visit her in this way twice a week, and even the 
time for it was fixed. I waited on the fourth day— no one came 
for me; and on the fifth, sixth, seventh. I became weary of wait- 
ing. News reached me that her condition was becoming critical 
again. What a joke it was, I thought, to tell me that I would 
be taken to see her twice a week. 

At last the month of September was over. They were the 
longest and most damnable thirty days that I had ever 
experienced. 

Suggestions were made to me through various intermediaries 
that if I could give an assurance, even an informal assurance, 
to keep away from politics for the rest of my term I would 
be released to attend on Kamala. Politics were far enough from 
my thoughts just then, and the politics I had seen during my 
eleven days outside had disgusted me, but to give an assurance! 
And to be disloyal to my pledges, to the cause, to my col- 
leagues, to myself 1 It was an impossible condition, whatever 
happened. To do so meant inflicting a mortal injury on the 
roots of my being, on almost everything I held sacred. I was 
told that Kamala’s condition was becoming worse and worse 
and my presence by her side might make all the difforence 
between Ufe and death. Was my personal conceit and pride 
greater than my desire to give her this chance? It might have 
been a terrible predicament for me, but fortunately that 
dilemma did not face me in that way at least. I knew that 
Kamala herself would strongly disapprove of my giving any 
undertaking, and if I did anything of the kind it would shock 
her and harm her. 

Early in October I was taken to see her again. She was lying 
almost in a daze with a high temperature. She longed to have 
me by her, but as I was leaving her, to go back to prison, she 
smiled at me bravely and beckoned to me to bend down. When 
I did so, she whispered : " What is this about your giving an 
assurance to Government? Do not pve it! ” 

During the eleven days I was out of prison it had been de- 
cided to send Kamala, as soon as she was a little better,, to a 
more suitable place for treatment. Ever since then we had 



JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


568 


waited for her to get better, but instead she had gone down- 
hill, and now, six weeks later, the change for the worse was 
very marked. It was futile to continue waiting and watching 
this process of deterioration, and it was decided to send her to 
Bhowali in the hills even in her present condition. 

The day before she was to leave for Bhowali I was taken from 
prison to bid her good-bye. When will I see her again? I 
wondered. And will I see her at all? But she looked bright 
and cheerful that day, and I felt happier than I had done 
for long. 

Nearly three weeks later I was transferred from Naini Prison 
to Almora District Gaol so as to be nearer to Kamala. Bhowali 
was on the way, and my police escort and I spent a few hours 
there. I was greatly pleased to note the improvement in Kamala, 
and I left her, to continue my journey to Almora, with a light 
heart. Indeed, even before I had reached her, the mountains had 
filled me with joy. 

I was glad to be back in these mountains, and as our car sped 
along the winding road the cold morning air and the unfolding 
panorama brought a sense of exhilaration. Higher and higher 
we went: the 'gorges deepened: the peaks lost themselves in the 
clouds : the vegetation changed till the firs and pines covered 
the hill-sides. A turn of the road would bring to our eyes sud- 
denly a new expanse of hills and valleys with a little river 
gurgling in the depths below. I could not have my fill of the 
sight and I looked on hungrily, storing my memory with it, so 
that I might revive it in my mind when actual sight was 
denied. 


Clusters of little mountain huts clung to the hill-sides, and 


from a distance, huge steps iraich sometimes went from the 
valley below right up almost to the mountain top. What 
enormous labour had gone to make nature yield a little food 
to the sparse population! How they toiled unceasingly only to 
get barely enough for their needs! Those ploughed terraces 
gave a domesticated look to the hillsides and they contrasted 
strangely with the bleaker or the more wooded slopes. 

It was very pleasant in the daytime and, as the sun rose 
higher, the growing warmth brought life to the mountains and 
they seemed to lose their remoteness and become friendly and 
companionable. But how they change their aspect with the pass- 
ing of day ! How cold and grim they become when “ Night with 
giant strides stalks o'er the world " and life hides and protects 



BACK TO PRISON 


569 

itself and leaves wild nature to its own. In the semi-darkness 
of the moonlight or starlight the mountains loom up mys- 
terious, threatening, overwhelming, and yet almost insub- 
stantial, and through the valleys can be heard the moaning 
of the wind. The poor traveller shivers as he goes his lonely 
way and senses hostility everywhere. Even the voice of the 
wind seems to mock him and challenge him. And at other 
times there is no breath of wind or other sound, and there is 
an absolute silence that is oppres.sive in its intensity. Only the 
telegraph wires perhaps hum faintly, and the stars seem 
brighter and nearer than ever. The mountains look down 
grimly, and one seems to be face to face with a mystery that 
terrifies. With Pascal one thinks: “La silence dternel de ces 
espaces infini m'effraie”. In the plains the nights are never 
quite so soundless; life is still audible there, and the murmuring 
and humming of various animals and insects break the stillness 
of the night. 

But the night with its chill and inhospitable message was yet 
distant as we motored along to Almora. As we neared the end 
of our journey, a turn in the road and a sudden lifting of the 
clouds Ijrought a new sight which I saw with a gasp of sur- 
prised delight. The snowy peaks of the Himalayas stood glisten- 
ing in the far distance, high above the wooded motmtains that 
intervened. Calm and inscmtable they seemed, with all the 
wisdom of past ages, mighty sentinels over the vast Indian 
plain. The very sight of them cooled the fever in the brain, 
and the petty conflicts and intrigues, the lusts and falsehoods 
of the plains and the cities seemed trivial and far away before 
their eternal ways. 

The little gaol of Almora was perched up on a ridge. I was 
given a lordly barrack to live in. This consisted of one huge 
hall, fifty-one feet by seventeen, with a katcha, very uneven floor, 
and a worm-eaten roof which was continually coming down in 
little bits. There were fifteen windows and a door, or rather 
there were so many barred openings in the walls, for there were 
no doors or windows. There was thus no lack of fresh air. As 
it grew colder some of the window-openings were covered with 
coir matting. In this vast expanse (which was bigger than any 
yard at D^ra Dun) I lived in solitary grandeur. But I was 
not quite alone, for at least two score sparrows had made 
their home in the broken-down roof. Sometimes a wandering 
cloud would visit me, its many arms creeping in through 
the numerous openings and filling the . place with a damp 
m}»i* 



570 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

Here I was locked up every evening at about five, after I had 
taken my last meal, a kind of high tea, at four-thirty; and at 
seven in the morning my barred door would be unlocked. In 
the daytime I would sit either in my barrack or outside in an 
adjoining yard, warming myself in the sun. I could just see 
over the enclosing walls the top of a mountain a mile or so 
away, and above me I had a vast expanse of blue sky dotted 
with clouds. Wonderflil shapes these clouds assumed, and I 
never grew tired of watching them. I fancied I saw them take 
the shape of all manner of animals, and sometimes they would 
join together and look like a mighty ocean. Or they would be 
like a beach, and the rustling of the breeze through the deodars 
would sound like the coming in of the tide on a distant sea- 
front. Sometimes a cloud would advance boldly on us, seem- 
ingly solid and compact, and then dissolve in mist as it came 
near and finally enveloped us- 

I preferred the wide expanse of my barrack to a narrow cell, 
though it was lonelier than a smaller place would have been. 
Even when it rained outside I could walk about in it. But as 
it grew colder its cheerlessness became more marked, and my 
love for fresh air and the open abated when the temperature 
hovered about the freezing-point. The new year brought a 
good fall of snow to my delight, and even the drab surround- 
ings of prison became beautiful. Especially beautiful and fairy- 
like were the deodar trees just outside the gaol walls with their 
garment of snow, 

I was worried by the ups and downs of Kamala’s condition, 
and a piece of bad news would upset me for a while, but the 
hill air calmed me and soothed me and I reverted to my habit 
of sleeping soundly. As I was on the verge of sleep I often 
thought what a wonderful and mysterious thing was sleep. 
Why should one wake up fi:om it? Suppose I did not wake 
at all? 

Yet the desire to be out gaol was strong in me, more than I 
had ever felt before. The Bombay Congress was over, and 
November came and went by and the excitement of the As- 
sembly elections also passed away. I half expected that I might 
be released soon. 

But then came the surprising news .of the arrest and con- 
viction of Khan Abdul Ghaffiir Khan and the amazing 
orders passed on Subhas Bose during his brief visit to India. 
These orders in themselves were devoid of aU humanity 
and consideration; they were applied to one who was held 
in affection and esteem by vast numbers of his country- 



BACK TO PRISON 


57 1 

men, and who had hastened home, in spite of his own 
illness, to the death-bed of his father — to arrive too late. If 
that was the outlook of the Government there could be no 
chance of my premature release. Official announcements later 
made this perfectly clear. 

After I had been a month in Almora gaol I was taken to 
Bhoivali to see Kamala. Since then I have visited her approxi- 
mately every third week. Sir Samuel Hoare, the Secretary of 
State for India, has repeatedly stated that I am allowed to visit 
my wife once or twice a week. He would have been more cor- 
rect if he had said once or twice a month. During the last 
three and a half months that I have been at Almora I have 
paid five visits to her. I do not mention this as a grievance, 
because I think that in this matter the Government have been 
very 'considerate to me and have given me quite unusual 
facilities to visit Kamala. I am grateful to them for this. The 
brief visits I have paid her have been very precious to me and 
perhaps to her also. The doctors suspended their regime for 
the day of my visit to some extent, and I was permitted to 
have fairly long talks with her. We came ever nearer to each 
other, and to leave her was a wrench. We met only to be 
parted. And sometimes I thought with anguish that a day 
might come when the parting was for good. 

My mother had gone to Bombay for treatment, for she had 
not recovered ftom her ailment. She seemed to be progressing. 
One morning in mid-January a telegram brought a wholly un- 
expected shock. She had had a stroke of paralysis. There was 
a possibility of my being transferred to a Bombay prison to 
enable me to see her, but as there was a little improvement in 
her condition I was not sent. 

January has given place to February, and there is the whisper 
of spring in the air. The bulbul and other birds arc again to 
be seen and heard, and tiny shoots are mysteriously bursting 
out of the ground and gazing at this strange world. Rhododen- 
drons make blood-red patches on the hiU-sides, and peace and 
plum blossoms are peeping out. The days pass and I count 
them as they go, thinking of my next visit to Bhowali. I won- 
der what truth there is in the saying that life's rich gifts follow 
frustration and cruelty and sedation. Perhaps the gifts would 
not be appreciated otherwise. Perhaps suffering is necessary for 
clear thought, but excess of it may cloud the brain. Gaol 
encourages introspection, and my long years in prison have 
forced me to look more and more withm myself. I was not by 
namre an introvert, but prison life, like strong coffee or 



JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


51 ^ 

Strychnine, leads to introversion. Sometimes, to amuse myself, 
I draw an outline of Professor McDougall's cube for the 
measurement of introversion and extroversion, and I gaze at 
it to find out how frequent are the changes from one interpreta- 
tion to another. They seem to be rapid. 