MY WEDDING AND AN ADVENTURE IN 
THE HIMALAYAS 

My marriage took place in 1916 in the city of Delhi. It was on 
the Vasanta Panchavvi day which heralds the coming of spring 
in India. That summer we spent some months in Kashmir. I left 
my family in the valley and, together with a cousin of mine, 
wandered for several weeks in the mountains and went up the 
Ladakh road. 

This was my first experience of the narrow and lonely 
valleys, high up in the world, which lead to the Tibetan 
plateau. From the top of the Zoji-la pass we saw the rich verdant 
mountain sides below us on one side and the bare bleak rock on 
the other. We went up and up the narrow valley bottom Hanked 
on each side by mountains, with the snow-covered tops gleaming 
on one side and little glaciers creeping down to meet us. The 
wind was cold and bitter but the sun was warm in the day time, 
and the air was so clear that often we were misled about the dis- 
tance of objects, thinking them much nearer than they actually 
were. The loneliness grew ; there were not even trees or vegetation 
to keep us company — only me bare rock and the snow and ice 
and, sometimes, very welcome flowers. Yet I found a strange 
satisfaction in these wild and desolate haunts of nature; I was 
full of energy and a feeling of exaltation. 

I had an exciting experience during this visit. At one place on 
our march beyond the Zoji-la pass— I think it was called Matayan 
— ^we were told that the cave of Amaranath was only eight miles 
away. It was true that an enormous mountain all covered vidth 
ice and snow lay in between and had to be grossed, but what did 
that matter? Eight miles seemed so little. In our enthusiasm and 
inexperience we decided to make the attempt. So we left our 
camp (which was situated at about 11,500 feet altitude) and with 
a small party went up the moimtain. We had a local shepherd 
for a guide. 

We crossed and climbed several gladers, roping ourselves 
up, and our troubles increased and breathing became a little 
difficult. Some of our porters, lightly laden as they were, began 
to bring up blood. It began to snow and the glaciers became 
terribly slippery; we were fa^ed our and every step meant 
a special effort. But still we persisted in our foolhardy attempt. 

8 ? 



38 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

We had left our camp at four in the morning and alter twelve 
hours’ almost continuous climbing we were rewarded by the 
sight of a huge ice-field. This was a magnificent sight, surrounded 
as it was by snow-peaks, like a diadem or an amphitheatre of the 
gods. But fresh snow and mists soon hid the sight from us. I do 
not know what our Jiltitude was but I think it must have been 
about 15,000 to 16,000 feet, as we were considerably higher than 
the cave of Amaranath. We had now to cross this ice-field, a 
distance probably of half a mile, and then go down on the other 
side to the cave. We thought that as the climbing was over, our 
principal difficulties had also been surmounted, and so, very 
tired but in good humour, we Iregan this stage of the journey. It 
was a tricky business as there were many crevasses and the fresh 
snow often covered a dangerous spot. It was this frc.sh snow that 
almost proved to be my undoing, for I stepped upon it and it 
gave way and down I went a huge and yawning crevasse. It was 
a tremendous fissure and anything that went right down it could 
be assured of safe keeping and preservation for some geological 
ages. But the rope held and I clutched to the side of the crevasse 
«ad was pulled out. We were shaken up by this but still we per- 
sisted in going on. The crevasses, however, increased in number 
and width and we had no equipment or means of crossing some 
of them. And so at last we turned back, weary and disappointed, 
and the cave of Amaranath remained unvisited. 

The higher valleys and mountains of Kashmir fascinated me 
so much that I resolved to come back again soon. I made many 
a plan and worked out many a tom, and one, the very thought of 
which filled me with delight, was a visit to Manasarovar, the 
wonder lake of Tibet, and snow-covered Kailas near by. That was 
eighteen years ago, and I am still as far tis ever from Kailas and 
Manasarovar. I have not even been to visit Kashmir again, much 
as I have longed to, and ever more and more I have got en- 
tangled in the coils of politics and public affairs. Instead of 
going up mountains or crossing the seas I have to satisfy my 
wanderlust by coming to prison. But still I plan, for that is a joy 
that no one can deny even in prison, and besides what else can 
one do in prison? And I dream of the day when I shall wander 
about the Himalayas and cross them to reach that lake and 
mountain of my desire. But meanwhile the sands of life run on 
and youth passes into middle age and that will give place 
to something worse, and sometimes I think that I may grow 
too old to reach Kailas and Manasarovar. But the journey 
is always worth the making even though the end may not be 
in siRht. 



MY WEDUING AND AN ADVENTURE 

“ Yea, in tny mind these mountains rise. 
Their perils dyed with evening’s rose ; 
And still my ghost sits at my eyes 
And thirsts for their unirouhlcd snows.” 
