PARADOXES 

People who do not know Gandhiji personally and have only 
read his writings are apt to think that he is a priestly type, 
extremely puritanical, long-feced, Calvinistic, and a kill-joy, 
something like the “ priests in black gowns walking their 
rounds.” But his writings do him an injustice ; he is far greater 
than what he writes, and it is not quite fair to quote what he 
has written and criticise it. He is the very opposite of the 
Calvinistic priestly type. His smile is delightful, his laughter 
infectious, and he radiates light-hcartedness. There is some- 
thing childlike about him which is full of charm. When he 
enters a room he brings a breath of fresh air with him which 
lightens the atmosphere. 

He is an extraordinary paradox. 1 suppose all outstanding 
men are so to some extent. For years I have puzzled over this 
problem : why with all his love and solicitude for the underdog 
he yet supports a system which inevitably produces it and 
crushes it; why with all his passion for non-violence he is in 
fayour of a political ^nd social stnlcture which is wholly, based 
on violence and coercion? Perhaps it is not correct to say that 
he IS in favour of such a system; he is more or less of * a philo- 
sophical anarchist. But as the ideal anarchist state is too far 
off stiH and cannot easily be conceived, he accepts the present 
order. It is not I think a question of means, that he objects, as 
he does, to the use of violence in bringing about a change. Quite 
apart from the methods to be adopted for changing the existing 
order, an ideal objective can be envisaged, something that is 
possible of achievement in the not distant future. 

Sometimes he calls himself a socialist, but he uses the word 
in a sense peculiar to himself which has little or nothing to do 
with the economic framework of society which usually goes 
by the name of socialism. Following his lead a number of 
prominent Congressmen have taken to the use of that word, 
meaning thereby a kind of muddled humanitarianism. They err 
in distinguished company in the use of this vague political ter- 
minology, for they are but following the example of the Prime 
Minister of the British National Government.* I know that 

* Mr., Ramsay MacDonald in the course of his message to the 
Federation of Conservative and Unionist Associations at Edinburgh 



5i6 jawaharlal nehru 

Gandhiji is not ignorant of the subject, for he has read many 
books on economics and socialisni and even Marxism, and has 
discussed it with others. But I am becoming more and more 
convinced that in vital matters the mind by itself does not 
carry us far. “ If your heart does not want to,” said William 
James, “your head will assuredly never make you believe.” 
The emotions govern the general outlook and control the mind. 
Our conversations, whether they are religious, political or 
economic, arc really based on emotion or instinct. As Schopen- 
hauer has said : “ Man can do what he wills, but he cannot will 
what he will will.” 

Gandhiji underwent a tremendous conversion during his early 
days in South Africa, and this shook him up greatly and altered 
his whole outlook on life. Since then he has had a fixed basis 
for all his ideas, and his mind is hardly an open mind. He 
listens with the greatest patience and attention to people who 
make new suggestions to him, but behind all his courteous 
interest one has the impression that one is addressing a closed 
door. He is so firmly anchored to some ideas that everything 
else seems unimportant. To insist on other and secondary 
matters would be a distraction and a distortion of the larger 
scheme. To hold on to that anchor would necessarily result in 
^proper adjustment of these other matters. If the means are 
•'ri^t, the end is bound to be right. 

^That, I think, is the main background of his thought. He 
suspects also socialism, and more particularly Marxism, because 
of their association with violence. The very words ‘ class war ’ 
breathe conflict and violence and arc thus repugnant to him. 
He has also no desire to raise the standards of the masses 
beyond a certain very modest competence, for higlier standards 
and leisure may lead 'to selfiindulgehce and sin. It is bad 
enough that the handful of the well-to-do are self-indulgent, it 
would be much worse if their, numbers were added , to. ‘ Some 
such inference can be drawn from a letter he wrote in 1926. 
This was in answer to a letter that came to him from England 
during the great coal lock-out or strike. His correspondent was 
advancing the argument that the miners will be beaten in the 
struggle because there are too many of them and thdy should 
therefore use contraceptives and limit their numbers. In the 
course of his reply Gandhiji said ; “ Lastly, if the mine-owners 

in January 1935 said: ‘"ITie difficulties of the times make integra- 
tion and concentration essential for every people. This is the true 
Socialism, as it is also the true NationaUsm — and, for that matter, 
the true Tndividti-li'rn " 




PARADOXES 


517 

are in the wrong and still win, they will do so not because the 
miners overbreed, but because the miners have not learnt the 
lesson of restraint all along the line. If the miners had no 
children, they would have no incentive for any betterment and 
no provable cause for a rise in wages. Need they drink, gamble, 
smoke? Will it be any answer to say that mine-owners do 
all these things and yet have the upper hand? If the miners 
do not claim to be better than the capitalist, what right have 
they to ask for the world’s sympathy? Is it to multiply capi- 
talists and strengthen capitalism? We are called upon to pay 
homage to democracy under a.promise of a better world when 
it reigns supreme. Let us not reproduce on a vast scale the 
evils we choose to ascribe to capitalist and capitalism.” ‘ 

As I read this, the starved and pinched faces of the English 
miners and their wives and children came before me, as I had 
seen them in that summer of 1926, struggling helplessly and 
pitifully against the monstrous system that crushed them. 
Gandhiji’s facts are not quite correct, for the miners were not 
asking for a rise in wages; they were fighting against a reduc- 
tion and had been locked out. But this need not concern us 
now. Nor need the question of the use of contraceptives by 
miners concern us, although it was a somewhat remarkable 
suggestion for the solution of industrial conflicts. I have 
quoted from Gandhiji's reply to help in the understanding of 
his outlook on labour matters and the usual demand for a rise 
in the workers’ standard of living. That outlook is as far 
removed from the socialistic, or for the matter of that the 
capitalistic, as anything can Iw. To say that science and indus- 
trial technique to-day can demonstrably feed, clothe and house 
everybody and raise their standards of living very greatly, if 
vested interests did not intervene, does not interest him much, 
for he is not keen on those results, beyond a certain limit. The 
promise of socialism therefore holds no attraction for him, and 
capitalism is only partly tolerable because it circumscribes the 
evil. He dislikes both, but puts up with the latter for the pre- 
sent as a lesser evil and as something which exists and of which 
he has to take cognizance. 

I may be wrong perhaps in imputing these ideas to him, but 
I do feel that he tends to diink in this manner, and the para- 
doxes and confusions in his utterances that trouble us are really 
due to entirely different premises from which he starts. He does 
not want people to make an ideal of over-increasing comfort 

* This letter is quoted in Self-Restraint vs. Self-Indulgence, by 
M riandbi 



Jl8 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

and leisure, but to think of the moral life, give up their bad 
habits, to indulge themselves less and less, and thus to develop 
themselves individually and spiritually. And those who wish to 
serve the masses have not so much to raise them materially as 
to go down themselves to their level and mix with them on 
equal terms. In so doing inevitably they will help in raising 
them somewhat. That, according to him, is true democracy. 
“Many have despaired of resisting me,” he writes in a state- 
ment he issued on 17th September, 1934. “ This is a humiliating 
revelation to me, a born democrat. I make that claim, if com- 

S dete identification with the poorest of mankind, longing to 
ive no better than they, and a corresponding conscious elfort 
to approach that level to the best of one’s ability, can entitle 
one to make it.” 

With this argument and outlook probably no modern demo- 
crat, capitalist, or socialist, will agree, except in so far as it is 
indecent and improper to cut ourselves off from the masses 
and flaunt our luxury and far higher standards in the faces of 
the vast majority of those who lack the barest necessities. But 
a man with the old religious outlook may find some agreement, 
for both are emotionally tied up with tne past and are always 
thinking in terms of that past. They think more of what has 
been that of what is or what is going to be. There is all the 
difference in the world between the psychological urge to the 
past and to the future. In the old world it was difficult to 
think of raising the general material level of the masses. The 
poor were always with us. The handful of rich men were then 
an essential part of the social febric, they were necessary to the 
productive system. And so the moralist, the reformer, and the 
sensitive man, accepted them, but at the same time tried to 
impress them with their obligations to their needy brethren. 
They were to be the trustees of the poor. They were to be 
charitable. And charity became one of the major virtues 
ordained by religion. Gandhiji is always laying stress on this 
idea of trusteeship of the feudal prince, of the big landlord, of 
the capitalist. He follows a long succession of men of religion. 
The Fope has declared that ‘^the rich must consider them- 
selves the servants of the Almighty as well as the guardians 
and the distributors of his wealth, to whom Jesus Christ him- 
self entrusted the fate of the poor.” Popular Hinduism and 
Islam repeat this idea and are al'tmys camng upon the rich to 
be charitable, and they respond by building temples or mosques 
or dharamshalas, or giving, out of their abundance, coppers or 
silver to the poor and feeling very virtuous in .consequence. 



PARADOXES 


5*9 

A striking passage illustrating this old-world religious attitude 
occurs in the famous Encyclical Rerum Novarum of Pope Leo 
XIII issued in May 1891. Continuing his argument dealing 
with the new industrial conditions, he says : 

" To suffer and to endure, therefore, is the lot of humanity: 
let men try as they may, no strength and no artifice will ever 
succeed in banishing from human life the ills and troubles 
which beset it. If any there are who pretend differently — who 
hold out to a hard-pressed people freedom from pain and 
trouble, undisturbed repose and constant enjoyment— they cheat 
the people and impose upon them, and their lying promises 
will only make the evil worse than before. There is nothing 
more useful than to look at the world as it really is — ^and at 
the same time look elsewhere for a remedy to its troubles.” 

Further on we are told where this ' elsewhere ’ is : 

“The things of the earth cannot be understood or valued 
rightly without taking into consideration the life to come, the 
life that will last for ever. . . . The great truth which we learn 
firom Nature herself is also the grand Christian dogma on 
which religion rests as on its base— that when we have done 
with this present life then we shall really begin fo live. God has 
not created us for the perishable and transitory things of the 
earth, but for things heavenly^ and everlasting; He has given us 
the world as a place of exile, and not as our true country. 
Money and the other things which men call good and desirable 
— ^we may have them in abtmdance or we may want them alto- 
gether; as far as eternal happiness is concerned, it is no 
matter. ...” 

This religious attitude is bound up with the world of long 
ago when me only possible escape fi'om present misery was in 
the hope of a world to come. But though conditions changed 
and raised the human level in material prosperity beyond the 
wildest dreams of the past, the stranglehold of that past, con- 
tinued, the stress nhw being laid on certain vague, unmeasur- 
able spiritual values. The ^tholics look back to the twelfth 
and thirteenth centuries— the ve^ period which is called the 
'Dark Age' by others — as the Golden Age of Christianity, 
when saints flourished, and Christian rulers sallied forth to 
fight in the Crusades, and Gothic cathedrals grew up. That 
vras the age, according to them “ of true Christian democracy 
which was then realised under the control of the medieval 
^Ids, more fully than it has ever been before or since.” 
Muslims look back with longing to the “ democracy of Islam ” 
under the early Khalifa, and to their amazing career of viaory. 



520 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

Hindus think likewise of the Vedic and Epic Periods, and 
dream of a Rama Raj. And yet all history tells us that the 
great masses of the people lived in utter misery in those past 
days, lacking food and the barest necessaries of life, A handful 
of people at the top may have indulged in the spiritual life, 
having leisure and means to do so, but for the others, it is 
difficult to imagine them doing anything but struggling for 
bare sustenance. To a person who is starving, cultural and 
spiritual progress is highly unlikely; his thoughts will be con- 
centrated on food and how to get it. 

The industrial age has brought many evils that loom large 
before us; but tye are apt to forget that, taking the world as a 
whole, and especially the parts that are most indu.strialised, it 
has laid down a basis of material well-being which makes cul- 
tural and spiritual progress fiir easier for large numbers. This 
is not all evident in India or other colonial countries as we have 
not profited by industrialism. We have only been exploited by 
it and in many respects made worse, even materially, and more 
so culturally and spiritually. The fault is not of industrialism 
ybut of foreign domination. The so-called Westernisation in 
India has actually, for the time being, strengthened feudalism, 
and instead of solving any of our problems has simply intensi- 
fied them. 

That has been our misfortune, and we must not allow it to 
colour our vision of the world to-day. For under present con- 
ditions the rich man is no longer a necessary or a desirable part 
of the productive system or of society as a whole. He is re- 
dundant and he is always coming in the way. And the old 
business of the priest to ask the rich to be charitable and the 
poor to be resigned, grateful for their lot, thrifty and well- 
behaved, has lost its meaning. Human resources have grown 
tremendously and can face and solve the world’s problems. 
Many of the rich have become definitely parasitical and the 
existence of a parasite class is not only a hindrance but an 
enormous waste of these resources. That class and the system 
that breeds them actually prevent work and production and 
encourage the worklcss at either end of the scale, both those 
who live on other people’s labour and those who have no work 
to do and famish. Gandhiji himself wrote some time ago: 
" To a people famishing and idle, the only acceptable form in 
which God dare appear is work and promise of food as wages. 
God created man to work for his food, and said that those who 

+e without work Were thieves." 

To try to understand the complex problems of the modern 



PARADOXES 


531 

world by an application of ancient methods and &rmulae when 
these problems did not exist, to use out-of-date phrases in regard 
to them, is to produce confiision and to invite failure. The 
very idea of private property, which seems to some people one 
of the fundamental notions of the world, has been an ever- 
changing one. Slaves were property at one time, and so were 
women and children, the seigneur’s right to the bride’s first 
night, roads, temples, ferries, bridges, public utilities, air and 
land. Animals are still property, though legislation has in many 
countries limited the rights of ownership. During war-time 
there is a continuous infringement of property rights. Property 
to-day is becoming more and more intangible, the possession of 
shares, a certain amount of credit, etc. As the conception of 
property changes, the State interferes more and more, public 
opinion demands, and the law enforces, a limitation of the 
anarchic rights of property-owners. All manner of heavy 
taxes, which are in the nature of confiscation, swallow up indi- 
vidual property rights for the public good. The public good 
becomes the basis of public policy, and a man may not act 
contrary to this public good even to protect his property rights. 
After all, the vast majority of people had no property rights in 
the past, thjcy were themselves property owned by others. Even 
to-day a very small number have such rights. We hear a great 
deal of vested interests. To-day a new vested interest has come 
to be recognised, that of everj man and woman, to live and 
labour and enjoy the fruits of labour. . Because of these 
changing conceptions property and capital do not vanish, they 
are diffiised, and the power over others, which a concentration 
of them gave to a few, is taken back by society as a whole. 

Gandhiji wants to improve the individual internally, morally 
and spiritually, and thereby to change the external environ- 
ment; He wants people to pve up bad habits and indulgences 
and to become pure. He lays stress on sexual abstinence, on the 
giving up of drink, smoking, etc. Opinions may differ about 
the relative wickedness of these indulgences, but can there be 
any doubt that even from the individual point of view, and 
much more so from the social, these personal failings are less 
harmful than covetousness, selfishness, acquisitiveness, the fierce 
conflicts of individuals for personal gain, the ruthless struggles 
of groups and classes, the inhuman suppression and exploita: 
tion of one group by another, the terrible wars between 
nations? Of course he detests all this violence and degrading 
conflict. But are they not inherent in the acquisitive society of 
to-day with its law that the strong must prey on the weak, and 



533 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

its motto, that, as of old, “ they shall take who have the power 
and they shall keep who can ”? The profit motive to-day inevit- 
ably leads to conflict. The whole system protects and gives 
every scope to man’s predatory instincts; it encourages some 
finer instincts no doubt, but much more so the baser instincts 
of man. Success means the knocking down of others and 
mounting on their vanquished selves. If these motives and 
ambitions are encouraged by society and attract the best of our 
people, does Gandhi ji think that he can achieve his ideal — the 
moral man — in this environment? He wants to develop the 
spirit of service; he will succeed in the case of some individuals, 
but so long as society puts forward as exemplars the victors of 
an acquisitive society and the chief urge as the personal profit 
motive, the vast majority will follow this course. 

But the problem is no longer merely a moral or an ethical 
one. It is a practical and urgent problem of to-day, for the 
world is in a hopeless muddle, and some way out must be found. 
We cannot wait, Micawber-lUce, for something to turn up. Nor 
can we live by negation alone criticising the evil aspects of 
capitalism, socialism, communism, etc., and hoping vaguely for 
the golden mean, which will produce a happy compromise com- 
bining the best features of all systems, old and new. The 
malady has to be diagnosed and the cure suggested and worked 
for. It is quite certain that we cannot stand where we are, 
nationally and internationally; we may try to go back or we 
may push forward. Probably there is no choice in the matter, 
for going back seems inconceivable. 

And yet many of Gandhiji’s activities might lead one to 
think that he wants to go bade to the narrowest autarchy, not 
only a self-sufficient nation, but almost a self-suffident village. 
In primitive communities the village was more or less self- 
sufficient and fed and clothed itself and otherwise provided for 
its needs. Of necessity that means an extremdy low standard 
of living. I do not think Gandhiji is permanently aiming at 
this, for it is an impossible objective. The huge populations of 
to-day would not be able even to subsist in some countries, thw 
would not tolerate this reversion to scardty and starvation. It 
is possible, I think, that in an agricultural country like India, so 
very low is our present standard, that there might be a slight 
improvement for the masses wifh the development of village 
industries. But we are tied up, as every country is tied up, with 
the rest of the world, and it seems to me quite impossible for 
us to cut adrift. We must think, therefore, in terms of the 
world, and in these terms a narrow autardxy is out of the 



PAKAUOaJiIS 


5*3 

question. Personally I consider it undesirable from every point 
of view. 

Inevitably we are led to the only possible solution—the estab- 
lishment of a soeialigt order, first within national boundaries, and 
eventually in the world as a whole, with a controlled production 
and distribution of wealth for the public good. How this is to 
be brought about is another matter, but it is clear that the 
good of a nation or of mankind must not be held up because 
some perale who profit by the existing order object to the 
change. If political or social institutions stand in the way of 
such a change, they have to be removed. To compromise with 
them at the cost of that desirable and practical ideal would be 
a gross betrayal. Such a change may partly be forced or expe- 
dited by world conditions, but it can hardly take place without 
the willing consent or acquiescence of the great majority of the 
people concerned. They have therefore to be converted and 
won over to it. Conspiratorial violence of a small group will 
not help. Naturally' efforts must be made to win over even 
those who profit by the existing system, but it is highly unlikely 
that any large percentage of flrem will be converted. 

The khadi movement, hand-spinning and hand-weaving, 
which is Gandhiji’s special favourite, is an intensification of 
individualism in production, and is thus a throw-back to the 

{ >re-industrial age. As a solution of any vital present-day prob- 
^ it cannot he taken seriously, and it produces a mentality 
which may become an obstacle to growth in the right direction. 
Nevertheless as a temporary measure I am convinced that it has 
served a useful purpose, and it is likely to be helpful for some 
time to come, so long as the State itself does not undertake the 
rightful solution of agrarian and industrial problems on a 
coimtry-wide scale. There is tremendous unrecorded unemploy- 
ment in India and even greater partial unemployment in rural 
areas. No attempt has been made by the State to combat this 
unemployment, or help in any way the unemployed. Econo- 
niically khadi has been of some little help to these wholly and 
partially imemployed, and because this improvement has come 
from their own efforts, it has raised their self-respect and given 
them some feeling of confidence. The most marked result has 
indeed been a psychological one. Khadi tried with some success 
to bridge the gap betwera the city and the village. It brought 
nearer to each other the middleclass intelligentsia and ^e 
peasantry. Clothing has a marked psychological effect on &e 
wearer as well as the beholder, and the adoption of the simple 
white khadi dress by the middle-classes resulted in a growth of 



5^4 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

simplicity, a lessening of vulgarity and ostentation, and a feel- 
ing of unity with the masses. Tlie lower middle classes no 
longer tried to ape the richer classes in the matter of clothes or 
feel humiliated in their cheaper attire. Indeed they felt not 
only dignified but a little superior to those who still Haunted 
silks and satins. Even the poorest felt something of this dig- 
nity and self-respect. It was difficult in a large khadi-clad 
gathering to distinguish between the rich and the poor, and 
a spirit of camaraderie grew up. Khadi undoubtedly helped 
the Congress to reach the masses. It became the uniform of 
national freedom. 

Khadi also became a check on the ever-present tendency of 
the mill-owners to raise the prices of their stuffs. These mill- 
owners in India were only kept in check in the past by foreign 
competition, especially that of Lancashire. Whenever this com- 
petition ceased, as during the World War, cloth prices soared 
up in India to extraordinary heights and vast sums were made 
by the Indian mills. The swadeshi and foreign-cloth boycott 
movements later on also helped these mills greatly, but the 
presence of khadi made a difference and prices could not go 
up as high as they might otherwise have done. Indeed the 
mills exploited the kham sentiment of the people (and so did 
Japan) by manufacturing coarse cloths which were almost indis- 
tinguishable from the hand-spun and hand-woven article. In 
the event of another emergency arising, like a war, resulting in 
a stoppage of foreign cloth, it is unlikely now that the Inman 
mill-owners will he able to exploit the consumers to the extent 
they did from 1914 onwards. The khadi movement will prevent 
that, and the khadi organisation has the capacity in it to spread 
out at short notice. 

In spite of all these present-day advantages of the khadi 
movement in India it seems to me after all a transitional affair. 
It may continue even later on as an auxiliary movement easing 
the change-over to a higher economy. Btit .the main drive m 
future will have to be a complete overhauling of the agrarian 
system and the growth of industry. No tinkering wUh the 
land, and a multitucifi of commissions costing lakhs of rupees 
and suggesting trivial changes in the superstructure, will do the 
slightest good. The land system which we have is collapsing 
before our eyes, and it is a hindrance to production, distribution 
■ and any rational and large-scale operations. Only a radical 
change in it, putting an end to the little holdings and intro- 
ducing organised collective and co-operative enterprises, and 
thus increasing the yield greatly with much less effort, will meet 



PARADOXES 


525 

modem conditions. The land will not and cannot absorb all 
our people, and large-scale operations will (as Gandhlji fears) 
lessen the workers required on the land. The others must turn, 
partly it may be, to small-scale industry, but in the main to 
large-scale socialised industries and social services. 

Khadi has certainly brought some relief in many areas, but 
this very success that it has attained has an element of danger. 
It means that it is propping up a decaying land system and 
delaying, to that extent, the change-over to a better system. 
The effect is not substantial enough to make a marked 
difference, but the tendency is there. For the tenant or the 
small peasant proprietor, his share of the produce of the land 
is no longer enough to keep him going even on the very low 
level he has reached. He has to find extraneous aids to his 
meagre income or, as he does usually, get more into debt, in 
order to pay his rent or revenue. The additional income thus 
helps the landlord or the State to realise their share which 
otherwise they might be unable to do. In the event of the 
additional income being substantial enough it is likely eventu- 
ally the rent will rise and catch up to it. Under the present 
system most of the additional labour of the tenant and his 
attempts to be thrifty will ultimately benefit the landlord. As 
far as I can remember, Henry George in his Progress and 
Poverty has dealt with this point, giving instances, especially of 
Ireland. 

Gandhiji’s attempt to revive village industries is an extension 
of his khadi programme. It will do immediate good, part of it 
more or less permanent, most of it temporary. It will help the 
villager in his present distress and revive certain artistic and 
cultural values which were in danger of dying. But in so far 
as it is a revolt against machinery and industrialism it will 
not succeed. In a recent article on Village Industries in the 
Harijan Gandhi ji writes: "Mechanisation is good when hands 
are too few for the work intended to be accomplished. It is an 
evil when there are more hands than required for the work, as 
is the case of India. . . . The problem with us is not how to 
find leisure for the teeming millions inhabiting our villages. 
The problem is how to utilise their idle hours, which are equal 
to the working days of six months in the year.” This objection 
applies in varying measure to all the countries suffering ftom 
unemployment. But the fault surely is not that there is not 
work to do, but that under the present profit system the work 
is not profitable enough to the employers. There is an abim- 
dance of work simply calling out to be done — ^the building of 



^26 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

roads, irrigation schemes, houses, the spread of sanitation and 
medical facilities, of industry, electricity, social and cultural 
services, education, and the provision of the scores of necessary 
articles that the people lack. All our millions can work hard 
for the next fifty years without exhausting the present possi- 
bilities. But that can only be done if the urge is social im- 
provement and not the profit motive, and if the community 
organises it for the general good. The Russian Soviet Union, 
whatever other shortcomings it may possess, has no unem- 
ployed. Our people are idle not fijr lack of work, but because 
no facilities for work and cultural improvement are provided 
for them. The abolition of child labour, the provision of com- 
pulsory education up to a reasonable age, would take boys and 
girls oif from the ranks of labour or the unemployed, and 
relieve the labour market of the weight of tens of millions of 
prospective workers. 

Gandhiji has tried, with some success, to improve the charkha 
and the takli and increase their productive capacities. That is 
an attempt to improve the tool and the machine, and if the 
improvement continues (it is quite conceivable to have cottage 
industries worked by electricity), the profit motive will agam 
step in and produce what is cdled over-production and unem- 
ployment. Village industries without being tacked on to som^ 
modern industrial technique can never provide even the essen- 
tial material and cultural goods that we need to-day. And they 
cannot compete with the machine. Is it desirable or possible fiir 
us to stop the functioning of big-scale machinery in our 
country? Gandhiji has said repeatedly that he is not against 
machinery as such; he seems to think that it is out of place 
in India to-day. But can we wind up the basic industries, 
such as iron and steel, or even the lighter ones that already 
exist? 

It is obvious that we cannot do so. If we have railways, 
bridges, transport facilities, etc., we must either produce them 
ourselves or depend on others. If we want to have the means 
of defence we must not only have the basic industries but a 
highly developed industrial system. No country to-day is really 
independent or capable of resisting aggression unless it is indus- 
trially developed. One basic industry demands another for its 
support and as a complement to it, and finally we have the 
machine-building industry itself. With all these basic industries 
functioning it is inevitable that the lighter industries should 
spread. There is no stopping this process, for not only is our 
material and cultural progress bound up with it, but also our 



PARADOXES 


5*7 

freedom itself. And the more big industry spreads the less can 
small-scale village industries compete with it. They may have 
some chance of survival under a socialist system, but none under 
capitalism, and even under sodalism they can only exist as 
cottage industries specialising in particular goods which are not 
manufactured on a mass scale. 

Some Congress leaders are frightened of industrialisation, 
and imagine that the present-day troubles of the industrial 
countries are due to mass production. That is a strange mis- 
reading of the situation.^ If the masses lack anything, is it bad 
to produce it in sufficient quantities for them? Is it preferable 
for them to continue in want rather than have mass produc- 
tion? The fault obviously is not in the production but in the 
folly and inadequacy of the distributive system. 

Another difficulty wliich the promoters of village industries 
have to face is the dependence of our agriculture on the world 
market. The peasant is forced to grow commercial crops and to 
depend on world prices. While these prices vary he has to 
pay his rent or revenue in hard cash. He has to raise this 
money somehow, or at any rate he tries to do so, and so he 
sows the crops which he thinks will bring him the best price. 
He cannot afford to grow what he himself needs to make 
himself and his family self-sufficient even in the matter of 
food. 

In recent years the fall in agricultural prices of most food 
grains and other articles suddenly led millions of the peasantry, 
especially in the U,P, and Behar, to cultivate sugaivcane. A 
tariff on sugar had resulted in sugar factories cropping up like 
mushrooms, and sugar-cane was in great demand. But the 
supply was soon far in excess of the demand, and the factory 
owners cruelly exploited the peasantry, and the price fell. 

These few considerations and a host of others seem to me to 
exclude' the possibility or the desirability of any narrow 
autarchichal solution of our agrarian and industrial problems. 
Indeed they affect every phase of our national life. We cannot 
take refuge in vague and emotional phrases, but must face these 
facts and adapt ourselves to them, so that we may become the 
subjects of history instead of being its helpless objects. 

1 Sardar VaUabhbhai Patel speaking at Ahmedabad on January 
3, 1935: ‘“IVue socialism lies in the development of village indus- 
tries, We do not want to reproduce in our country the chaotic 
conditions prevalent in the Western countries consequent on mass- 
production.” 



5a8 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

A^ain I think of the paradox that is Gandhiji.* With all his 
keen intellect and passion for bettering the downtrodden and 
oppressed, why does he support a system, and a system which 
is obviously decaying, which creates this misery and waste? He 
seeks a way out, it is true, but is not that way to the past 
barred and bolted? And meanwhile he blesses all the relics of 
the old order which stand as obstacles in the way of advance — 
the feudal States, the big zamindaris and taluqadaris, the 
present capitalist system. Is it reasonable to believe in the theory 
of trusteeship — to give unchecked power and wealth to an 
individual and to expect him to use it entirely for the public 
good? Are the best of us so perfect as to be trusted in this way? 
Even Plato’s philosopher-kings could hardly have borne this 
burden worthily. And is it good for the others to have even 
these benevolent supermen over them? But there are no super- 
men or philosopher-kings; there are only frail human beings 
who cannot help thinking that their own personal good or the 
advancement of their own ideas is identical with the public, 
good. The snobbery of birth, position, and economic power is 
perpetuated, and the consequences in many ways are disastrous. 

Again, I would repeat that I am not at present considering 
the question of how to effect the change, of how to get rid of 
the obstacles in the way, by compulsion or conversion, violence 
or non-violence. I shall deal with this aspect later. But the 
necessity for the change must be recognised and clearly stated. 
If leaders and thinkers do not clearly envisage this and state it, 
how can they expect even to convert anybody to their way of 
thinking, or develop the necessary ideology in the people? 
Events are undoubtedly the most powerful educators, but events 
have to be properlp understood and interpreted if their signifi- 
cance is to be realised, and properly directed action is to result 
from them. 

^ In one of his speeches at the Round Table Conference in 
London in 1931, Gandhiji said: “Above all, the Congress repre- 
sents, in its essence, the dumb semi-starved millions scattered over 
the length and breadth of the land in its 700,000 villages, no matter 
whether they come from Briti^ India or what is called Indian 
India (Indian States), Every interest which, in the opinion of the 
Congress, is worthy of protection has to subserve the interests of 
these dumb millions; and so you do find now and again apparently 
a dash between several interests, and if there is a genume real 
clash, I have no hesitadon in saying, on behalf of the Congress^ 
that the Congress will sacrifice every interest for the sake of the 
inti'»'i*«t of thpoe dnmh millioTi",” 



PARADOXES 


539 

I have often been asked by hricnds and colleagues who have 
occasionally been exasperated by my utterances : Have you not 
come across good and benevolent princes, charitable landlords, 
well-meaning and amiable capitalists? Indeed I have. I myself 
belong to a class which mixes with these lords of the land and 
owners of wealth. I am a typical bourgeois, brought up in 
bourgeois surroundings, with all the early prejudices that this 
training has given me. Communists have called me a petty 
bourgeois with perfect justification. Perhaps they might label 
me now one of the " repentant bourgeoisie.” But whatever I 
may be is beside the point. It is absurd to consider national, 
international, economic and social problems in terms of isolated 
individuals. Those very friends who question me are never tired 
of repeating that our quarrel is with the sin and not the sinner. 
I would not even go so far. I would say that my quarrel is with 
a system and not with individuals. A system is certainly em- 
bodied to a great extent in individuals and groups, and these 
individuals and groups have to be converted or combated. But 
if a system has ceased to be of value and is a drag, it has to go, 
and the classes or groups that cling to it will also have to 
undergo a transformation. That process of change should 
involve as little suffering as possible, but tmhappily suffering and 
dislocation are inevitable. We cannot put up with a major evil 
for fear of a far lesser one, which in any event is beyond our 
power to remedy. 

Every type of human association — ^political, social or economic 
— ^has some philosophy at the back of it. When these associa- 
tions change this philosophical foundation must also change in 
order to fit in with it and to utilise it to the best advantage. 
Usually the philosophy lags behind the course of events, and 
this lag creates all the trouble. Democracy and capitalism grew 
up together in the nineteenth century, but they were not mutu- 
ally compatible. There was a basic contradiction between them, 
for democracy laid stress on the power of the many, while 
capitalism gave real power to the few. This ill-assorted pair 
carried on somehow because political parliamentary democracy 
was in itself a very limited kind of democracy and did not 
interfere much with the growth of monopoly and power concen- 
tration. 

Even so, as ,the spirit of democracy grew a divorce be? 
came inevitable, and the time for that has come now. Parlia- 
mentary democracy is in disrepute to-day, and as a. reaction 
from it all manner of new slogans fill the air.' Because of this, 
the British Government in India becomes, more reactiontuy still 





530 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

and makes it an excuse for withholding from us even the outer 
forms of political freedom. The Indian Princes, strangely 
enoug)i, make this a justification for their unchecked autocracy 
and stoutly declare their intention of maintaining medieval 
conditions in their domains such as exist nowhere else in the 
world.* But the failure of parliamentary democracy is not that 
it has gone too far, but that it did not go far enough. It was not 
democratic enough because it did not provide for economic 
democracy, and its methods were slow and cumbrous and un- 
suited to a period of rapid change. 

The Indian States represent to-day probably the extremest 
type of autocracy existing in the world. They are, of course, 
subject to British suzerainty, but the British Government inter- 
feres only for the protection or advancement of British interests. 
It is really astonishing how these feudal old-world enclaves have 
carried on with so little change right into the middle of the 
twentieth century. The air is heavy and still there, and the 
waters move sluggishly, and the newcomer, used to change and 
movement and a little weary of them perhaps, feels a drowsi- 
ness, and a faint charm steals over him. It all seems unreal, like 
a picture where time stands still and an unchanging scene meets 

* The Maharaja of Patiala, Chancellor of the Chamber of 
Princes, speaking in tire Chamber at Delhi on January aand, 1935, 
referred to the opinion of Indian politicians who favour Federation 
in the hope that the Princes would be forced by circumstances to 
introduce democratic forms of government. He went on to say that 
“while the Princes of India have always been willing to do what 
was best for their people, and will be ready to accommodate them- 
selves and their constitutions to the spirit of the times, we must 
frankly say that if British India is hoping to compel us to wear on 
our healthy body politic the Nessus shirt of a discredited political 
theory, they are Mving in a world of unreality.” (See also p. 501 ante 
for Mysore Dewan’s speech.) Speaking on the same day in the 
Chamber of Princes, the Maharaja of Bikaner said: “We, the 
Rulers of the Indian States, are not soldiers of fortune. And I take 
the liberty of stating that we who, through centuries of heredity, 
can claim to have inherited the instincts of rule and, I trust, a 
certain measure of statesmanship, should take the utmost care to 
safeguard against our being stampeded in a hurry to any hasty or 
Ul-considcred decision. . , . May I in all modesty say that the Princes 
have no intention of allowing themselves to be destroyed by any- 
body, and that should the time unfortunately come when the 
Crown is unable to afford the Indian States the necessary protection 
in fulfilment of its treaty obligations, the Princes and States will die 
fighting to the bitter end.” 



PARADOXES 


531 

the eye. Almost unconsciously he drifts back to the past and to 
his childhood’s dreams, and visions of belted and armoured 
knights and fair and brave maidens come to him, and turreted 
casdes and chivalry and quixotic ideas of honour and pride and 
matchless courage and scorn of death. Especially if he happens 
to be in Rajputana, that home of romance and of vain and im- 
possible deeds. 

But soon the visions fade and a sense of oppression comes; it 
is stifling and difficult to breathe, and below the still or slow- 
moving waters there is stagnation and putrefaction. One feels 
hedged, circumscribed, bound down in mind and body. And 
one sees the utter backwardness and misery of the people, con- 
trasting vividly with the glaring ostentation of the prince’s 
palace. How much of the wealth of the State flows into that 
palace for the personal needs and luxuries of the prince, how 
little goes back to the people in the form of any service! Our 
pi inces are terribly expensive to produce and to keep up. What 
do they give back for this lavish expense on them? 

A veil of mystery surrounds these States. Newspapers are not 
encouraged there, and at the most a literary or semi-official 
weekly might flourish. Outside newspapers are often barred. 
Uteracy is very low, except in some of the Southern States — 
Trivancore, Cochin, etc.— -where it is far higher than in British 
India. The principal news that comes from the States is of a 
Viceregal visit, with all its pomp and ceremonial and mutually 
complimentaij speeches, or of an extravagantly celebrated 
marriage or birthday of the Ruler, or an agrarian rising. Special 
laws protect the princes from criticism, even in British India, 
and within the States the mildest criticism is rigorously sup- 
pressed. Public meetings are almost unknown, and even meet- 
ings for social purposes are often banned.^ Leading public men 

‘ A Press message from Hyderabad, Deccan, dated October 3rd, 
1934, states : " A public meeting to celebrate Mi, Gandhi's birthday 
announced to be held in the local Vivekvardini Theatre yesterday 
had to be abandoned. The meeting was organised by the Hydera- 
bad Harijan Sevak Sangh (Servants of the Untouchables Society). 
The secretary of the soaety, in a letter to the Press, .stated that 04 
hours before the time of the meeting the authorities demanded that 
permission to hold the meeting could only he granted on condition 
that a cash security of Rs. 2000 was furnished and an undertaking 
given that no speeches of a political nature should be ddivCTed, 
and no official actions of Government officers should be criticised. 
As this gave the convener insufficient time to readjust matters with 
the authorities the meeting had to be abandoned." 



532 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

from outside are frequently prevented from entering the States. 
In the middle ’twenties Mr. C. R. Das was very ill and he de- 
cided to go to Kashmir to recuperate. He was not on a political 
mission. He journeyed right up to the Kashmir border, but was 
stopped there. Even Mr. M. A. Jinnah was debarred from enter- 
ing Hyderabad State, and Mrs. Sarojini Naidu, whose home is 
in Hyderabad city, was not permitted to go there for a long 
period. 

When such conditions prevail in the States it would have 
been natural for the Congress to stand up for the elementary 
rights of the people of the States and to criticise their whole- 
sale suppression. But Gandhiji fathered a novel policy on the 
Congress in regard to the States— the “policy of non-interference 
in the internal administration of the States.’’ This hush-hush 
policy has been adhered to by him in spite of the most extra- 
ordinary and painful occurrences in the States, and in spite of 
wholly unprovoked attacks by the States’ governments on the 
Congress. Apparently the fear is that Congress criticism might 
offend the Rulers and make it more difficult to ‘ convert ’ them. 
In a letter written in July 1934 by Gandhiji to Mr. N. C. Kelkar, 
the President of the States Subjects’ Conference, he reiterated 
his conviction that the policy of non-interference was both wise 
and sound, and the view he took of the legal and constitutional 
position of these States was most extraordinary. " The States,’’ 
he wrote, “are independent entities under British law. That 
part of India which is described as British has no more power 
to shape the policy of the States than it has, say, that of 
Afghanistan or Ceylon.” It is not surprising that even the mild 
and moderate Indian States’ People’s Conference and the 
Liberals took exception to his views and his advice. 

But these views were welcome enough to the Rulers of the 
States, and they took advantage of them. Within a month the 
Travancore Government banned the National Congress in its 
territories and stopped all its meetings and its enrolment of 
members. In doing so, it stated that ^responsible leaders ’ had 
themselves given this advice— obviously hinting at Gandhiji’s 
statement. This ban, it might be noted, was after the with- 
drawal of the Civil Disobemence movement in British India 
(the States had never been involved in the movement) and when 
the Congress' had been declared a legal organisation again by 
the Government of India. It is also interesting to note that the 
chief political adviser of the Travancore Government at the 
tims was (and still is) Sir C. P. Ramaswamy Aiyar, once a 
General Secretary of the Congress as well as of the Home Rule 



PARADOXES 


533 

League, later a Liberal, and the holder of high office in the 
Government of India and the Madras Government. 

In accordance with the Congress policy, following Gandhiji’s 
advice, not a word was said in public about this unprovoked 
attack on the Congress in normal times by the Travancore 
Government.* Some of the Liberals even protested against it 
vigorously. Indeed, Gandhiji’s position in regard to the States is 
far more moderate and restrained than that of the Liberals. 
Perhaps among the leading public men only Pandit Madan 
Mohan Malaviya, with his close contacts with numerous 
Princes, is equally restrained and solicitous of not offending the 
susceptibilities of the Rulers. 

Gandhiji was not always so cautious in regard to the Indian 
Princes. On a famous occasion in February 1916, during the 
inauguration ceremonies of the Hindu University at Benares, 
he addressed a meeting presided over by one of the Princes and 
attended by a host of other Princes. He had freshly returned 
from South Africa, and the burden of all-India politics was not 
yet on his shoulders. Earnestly and with a prophet’s fire he 
addressed them and told them to mend their ways and give up 
their vain pomp and luxury. "Princes I Go and sell your 
jewels I ” he said; and though they may not have sold their 
jewels, they certainly went. In great consternation, one by one 
and in small groups, they left me hall, and even the president 
trooped out, leaving the speaker to carry on by himself. Mrs. 
Annie Besant, who was present then, was also ofended at Gand- 
hiji’s remarks and withdrew fiom the meeting. 

In his letter to Mr. N. C. Kelkar, Gandhiji says further : " I 
would like the States to grant autonomy to their subjects, and 
would like the Princes to regard themselves and be, in tact, 
trustees for the people over vffiom they rule. . . ." If there is 
anything in this idea of trusteeship, why should we object to the 
claim of the British Government that they are trustees for the 
Government of India? Except for the fact that they are^ 
foreigners in India, I see no difference. There are almost equally 
marked differences as regards the colour of the skin, racial origin 
and culture between various peoples in India. 

* Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel laid stress on this non-intervention , 
policy in a speech at Baroda on January 6th, 1935. He is reported to 
have said " that workers in Indian States should do their work with 
all the limitations inmosed by the State, and instead o£ criticising 
the administration, efforts should be made to keep up cordial rela- 
Tinn'' hptwe'*n the ruler and the ruled.” 



534 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

During the past few years there has been a rapid permeation 
of British officials in Indian States, often thrust on an unwilling 
but helpless Ruler. The Government of India always exercised 
a great deal of control over the States from above; now in ad- 
dition to this there is an internal grip on some of the most im- 
portant States. So that when these States speak it is often the 
Government of India speaking with another voice, but taking 
full advantage of the feudal background. 

I can understand that it is not always possible to indulge in 
the same activities in the States as elsewhere. Indeed, there 
are considerable differences — ^agrarian, industrial, communal, 
governmental — between the various British Indian provinces, 
and a uniform policy is not always feasible. But though action 
must depend on circumstances, our general policy should not 
vary in diflFerent localities, and what is bad in one place must 
be bad in another. Otherwise the charge will be made, and it 
has been made, that we have no consistent policy or principles, 
and all we are out for is to gain power for ourselves. 

A great deal of criticism has been directed, and quite rightly, 
against separate electorates for religious and other minorities. 
It has been pointed out that they are quite inconsistent with 
democracy. It is, of course, not possible to have democracy, 
or what is called responsible government, if the electorate is 
divided , up into watertight religious compartments. But the 
most earnest and persistent of the critics, like Pandit Madan 
Mohan Malaviya and the leaders of the Hindu Mahasabha, 
are singularly acquiescent in regard to the conditions in the 
States, and are apparently prepared to have a federal union be- 
tween the autocracy of the States and the democracy (so it is 
called) of the rest of India. A more incompatible and absurd 
union it is difficult to imagine, but this is swallowed without an 
effort by the champions of democracy and nationalism in the 
Hindu Mahasabha. We talk of logic and consistency, but our 
basic urges continue to be emotional. 

And- so I come back to the paradox of the Congress and the 
States. My mind travels to Thomas Paine and the phrase he 
used about Burke nearly a century and a half ago: ‘^He pities 
the plumage, but forgets the dying bird." Gandhiji certainly 
never forgets the dying bird. But why so much insistence on 
thcplumage? • 

More or less the same considerations apply to the taluqadari 
. and big zamindari system. It hardly seems a matter for argu- 
ment that this semi-feudal system is out of date and is a great 
hindrance to production and general progress. It conflicts even 



PARADOAiS 


53J 

with a developing capitalism, and almost all over the world 
large landed estates have gradually vanished and given place to 
peasant proprietors. I had always imagined that the only pos- 
sible question that could arise in India was one of compen- 
sation. But to my surprise I have discovered during the last 
year or so that Gandhiji approves of the taluqudari system as 
such and wants it to continue. He said in July 1934 at Cawn- 
pore " that better relations between landlords and tenants could 
be brought about by a change of hearts on both sides. If that 
was done both could live in peace and harmony. He was never 
in favour of abolition of the taluqardari or zamindari system, 
and those who thought that it should he abolished did not 
know their own minds.” (This last charge is rather unkind.) 

He is further reported to have said : “ I shall be no party to 
dispossessing propertied classes of their private property with- 
out just cause. My objective is to reach your hearts and convert 
you [he was addressing a deputation of big zamiiidars] so that 
you may hold all your private property in trust for your tenants 
and use it primarily for their welfare. . . . But supposing that 
there is an attempt unjustly to deprive you of your property 
you will find, me fighting on your side. . . . The socialism and 
communism of the West is based on certain conceptions which 
are fundamentally different &om ours. One such conception is 
their belief in the essential selfishness of human nature. . . . 
Our socialism and communism should therefore be based on 
non-violence and on the harmonious co-operation of Labour 
and Capital, landlord and tenant.” 

I do not know if there are any such differences in the basic 
conceptions of the East and West. Perhaps there are. But an 
obvious difference in the recent past has been that the Indian 
capitalist and landlord have ignored far more the interests of 
their workers and tenants than their Western prototypes. There 
has been practically no attempt on the part of the Indian land- 
lord to interest himself in any social service for the tenants’ 
welfare. A Western observer, Mr. H. N. Brailsford, has re- 
marked that “Indian usurers and landlords are the most 
rapacious parasites to be found in any contemporary social 
system.” ‘ The fault, perhaps, is not the Indian landlord’s. Cir- 
cumstances have been too much for him and he has gone down 
progressively, and is now in a difficult position firom which he 
can hardly extricate himself. Many landlords have been de- 
prived of their lands by moneylenders and the smaller ones 

* H. N. Brailsford: Property or Peaeef 



JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


536 

have sunk to the position of tenants in the land they once 
owned. These moneylenders from the city advanced money on 
mortgages and foreclosed, and blossomed out into zamindars, 
and, according to Gandhiji, they are now the trustees for the 
unhappy people whom they have themselves dispossessed of 
their lands, and are to be expected to devote their income 
primarily for the welfare of their tenantry. 

If the taluqardari system is good, why should it not be intro- 
duced all over India? Large tracts of India have peasant pro- 
prietors. I wonder if Gandhiji would be agreeable to the 
creation of large zamindaris and taluquas in Gujrat? I imagine 
not. But then why is one land system good for the U.P. or 
Behar or Bengal, and another for Gujrat and the Punjab? Pre- 
sumably there is not any vital difference between the people of 
the north and ea.st and west and south of India, and their basic 
conceptions, are the same. It comes to this, then, that whatever 
is should continue, the status quo should be mainained. There 
should be no economic enquiry as to what is most desirable or 
beneficial for the people, no attempts to change present con- 
ditions; all that is necessary is to change the people’s hearts. 
That is the pure religious attitude to life and its problems. It 
has nothing to do with politics or economics or sociology. And 
ye Gandhiji goes beyond this in the political, national, sphere. 

Such are some of the paradoxes that face India to-day. We 
have managed to tic ourselves up into a number of knots, and 
it is difficult to get on till we untie them. That release will not 
come emotionally. What is better, Spinoza asked long ago: 
" Freedom through knowledge and understanding, or emotional 
bondage? ” He preferred the former. 
