THE END OF THE TRUCE 


In spite of my preoccupation in the United Provinces, I had 
long been anxious to visit the two other storm centres, the 
Frontier Province and Bengal. I wanted to study the situation 
on the spot and to meet old colleagues, many or whom I had 
not seen for nearly two years. But, above all, I wanted to pay 
my homage to the spirit and courage of the people of these 
provinces and their sacrifices in tlie national struggle. The 
Frontier Province was beyond reach for the time being, for the 
Government of India did not approve of any prominent Con- 
gressman visiting it, and we had no desire to go in view of this 
disapproval, and thus create an impasse. 

In Bengal the situation was deteriorating and, much as I was 
attracted to the province, I hesitated before going. I realised 
that I would be helpless there and could do little good. A 
deplorable and long-standing dispute between two groups of 
Congressmen in the province had long frightened outside Con- 
gressmen and kept them away, for they were afraid of getting 
involved in it on one side or the other. This was a feeble and 
ostrich-like policy, and did not help either in soothing Bengal 
or in Solving her problems. Some time after Gandhiji had gone 
to London two incidents suddenly concentrated all-India atten- 
tion on the situation in Bengal. These two took place in Hijli 
and Chittagong. 

Hijli was a special detention camp gaol for detenus. It was 
officially announced that a riot had taken place inside the 
camp, the detenus had attacked the staff, and the latter had 
been forced to fire on them. One detenu was killed by this firing 
and many were wounded. A local official enquiry, held im- 
mediately after, absolved the staff from all blame for this firing 
and its consequences. But there were many curious features, 
and some fticts leaked out which did not fit m with the official 
version, and vehement demands were made for a fuller enquiry. 
Contrary to the usual official practice in India, the Government 
of Bengal appointed an Enqmry Committee consisting of high 
judicial officers. It was a purely official committee, but it 
took evidence and considered the matter fully, and its findings 
were against the staff of the Detention Camp Gaol. It was held 
that the feult was largely that of the staff, and the firing was 



314 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

unjustified. The previous Government communiques issued on 
the subject were thus entirely falsified. 

There was nothing very extraordinary about the Hijli occur- 
rence. Unhappily such incidents or accidents are not rare in 
India, and one frequently reads of ' gaol riots ’ and of the 
g allan t suppression of unarmed and helpless prisoners within 
the gaol by armed warders and others. Hijli was unusual in 
so far as it exposed, and exposed officially, the utter one-sided- 
ness, and even the falsity of Government communiques on such 
occurrences. Little credence had been attached to these 
communiques in the past, but now they were completely found 
out. 

Since the Hijli affair a large number of gaol ‘ occurrences ' 
involving sometimes firing, sometimes the use of other kinds 
of force ny the staff, have taken place all over India. Strangely 
enough in these ‘gaol riots' only the prisoners seem to get hurt. 
Almost invariably an official communiqu6 has been issued 
accusing the prisoners of various misdeed and absolving the 
staff. Very rarely some departmental punishments have been 
awarded to the staff. All demands for a fiill enquiry have been 
curdy refused, a departmental enquiry being deemed sufficient. 
Evidently the lesson of Hijli was well learnt by Government, that 
it is imsafe to have proper and impartial enquiries, and the best 
judge is the accuser himself. Is it surprising that the people 
also should learn the lesson of Hijli, that Government com- 
muniques tell us what the Government wants them to believe 
and not what actually happens? 

The Chittagong affair was much more serious. A terrorist 
shot down and killed a Muslim police inspector. This was &1- 
lowed by a BBndu-Muslim riot, or so it was called. It was 
patent, however, that it was something much more than that; 
something different from the usual communal riot. It was 
obvious mat the terrorist’s act had nothing to do with com- 
munalism; it was directed against a police officer, regardless 
of whether he was a Hindu or Muslim. Yet it is true 
that there was some Hindu-Muslim rioting afterwards. How 
this started, what was the occasion for it, has not been cleared 
up, although very serious charges have been made by respon- 
sible public men. Another feature of the rioting was the part 
taken by definite groups of other people, Anglo-Indians, chiefly 
railway employees, and other Government employees, who are 
alleged to have indulged in reprisals on a large scale. J. M. Sen- 
Gupta and other noted leaders of Bengal made specific allega- 
tions in regard to the occurrences in Chittagong, and challenged 



THE END OF THE TRUCE 315 

an enquiry or even a suit for defamation, but the Government 
preferred to take no such step. 

These somewhat unusual occurrences in Chittagong drew 
pointed attention to two dangerous possibilities. Terrorism had 
been condemned from many points of view; even modem 
revolutionary technique condemned it. But one of its possible 
consequences had always especially frightened me, and mat was 
the danger of sporadic and communal violence spreading in 
India. I am not enough of a ‘ timi d Hindu ’ to be afraid of 
violence as such, although I certainly dislike it. But I do feel 
that the disruptive forces in India are still very great, and 
sporadic violence would certainly give them strength and make 
the process of building up a united and disciplined nation a 
much harder task than it is. When people murder in the name 
of religion, or to reserve a place for themselves in Paradise, it 
is a dangerous thing to accustom them to the idea of terroristic 
violence. Political murder is bad. And yet the political terrorist 
can be reasoned with and won over to other ways, because pre- 
sumably the end he is striving for is an earthly one, not per- 
sonal but national. Religious murder is worse, for it deals with 
things of the other world, and one cannot even attempt to 
reason about such matters. Sometimes the dividing line between 
the two is very thin and almost disappears, and political mur- 
der, by a metaphysical process, becomes semi-religious. 

The Chittagong murder of a police official by a terrorist, and 
its consequences, made one realise very vividly the dangerous 
possibilities of terroristic activity and the enormous harm it 
might do to the cause of Indian unity and freedom. The re- 
prisals that followed also showed us that fascist methods had 
appeared in India. Since then there have been many instances, 
notably in Bengal, of such reprisals, and the fascist spirit has 
undoubtedly spread in the European and Anglo-Indian com- 
munity. Some of the Indian hangers-on of Brinsh imperialism 
have also imbibed it. 

It is a curious thing, but the Terrorists themselves, or many 
of them, also have this fascist oudook, but it looks in a different 
direction. Their nationalist-fescism faces the imperialist-fascism 
of the Europeans, Anglo-Indians, and some upper-class Indians. 

I went to Calcutta for a few days in November 1931. I had 
a very crowded programme, and, apart from meeting individuals 
and groups privately, addressed a number of mass meetings. In 
all these meetings I discussed the question of terrorism, and 
tried to show how wrong and futile and harmful it was for 
Indian freedom. I did not abuse the Terrorists, nor did 1 call 



3i6 jawaharlal nehru 

them ' dastardly ’ or ‘ cowardly after the fashion of some of 
our countrymen who have themselves seldom, if ever, yielded 
to the temptation of doing anything brave or involving risk. 
It has always seemed to me a singularly stupid thing to call a 
man or woman, who is constantly risking his life, a coward. 
And the reaction of it on that man is to make him a little more 
contemptuous of his timid critics who shout from a distance 
and are incapable of doing anything. 

On my last evening in Calcutta, a little before I was due to go 
to the station for my departure, two young men called on me. 
They were very young, about twenty, with pale, nervous faces, 
and hrilliant eyes. I did not know who they were, but soon I 
guessed their errand. They were very angry with me for my 
propaganda against terroristic violence. They said that it was 
producing a bad effect on young men, and‘ they could not 
tolerate my intrusion in this way. We had a little argument; 
it was a hurried one, for the time for my departure was at hand. 
I am afraid our voices and our tempers rose, and I told them 
some hard things; and as I left them, they warned me finally 
that if I continued to misbehave in the future they would deal 
with me as they had dealt with others. 

And so I' left Calcutta, and as I lay in my berth in the train 
that night I was long haunted by the excited faces of these 
two boys. Full of life and nervous energy they were; what good 
material if only they turned the right way! I was sorry that 
I had dealt with them hurriedly and rather brusquely, and 
wished I had had the chance of long conversation with them. 
Perhaps I could have convinced them to apply their bright 
young lives to other ways, ways of serving India and freedom, 
in which there was no lack of opportunity for daring and self- 
sacrifice. Often I have thought of them in these after years, I 
never found out their names, nor did I have any other trace of 
them; and I wonder, sometimes, if they are dead or in some 
cell in the Andaman Islands. 

It was December. The second Peasant Conference took place 
in Allahabad, and then I hurried south to the Karnataka to 
fulfiOl a long promise made to my old comrade of the Hindu- 
stani Seva Dal, Doctor N. S. Hardiker. The Seva Dal, the 
volunteer wing of the national movement, had all along been 
an auxiliary of the Congress, though its organisation was quite 
separate. In the summer of 1931, however, the Working 
Committee decided to absorb it completely into the Congress 
organisation, and to make it the Volunteer Department of the 
Congress. This was done, and Hardiker and I were put in charge 



THE ENU Or' iHE 'iRUCE 317 

of it. The headquarters of the Dal continued in the Karnataka 
province at Hubli, and Hardiker induced me to visit the place 
for various functions connected with the Dal. He then took 
me about on tour tor a few days in Karnataka, and I was 
amazed at the tremendous enthusiasm of the people every- 
where. On my way back I visited Sholapur of Martial Law 
fame. 

That tour in the Karnataka assumed the character of a fare- 
well performance for me; my speeches became swan-songs, 
though they were rather aggressive and, I am afraid, not 
musical. News from the U.P. was definite and clear, the Govern- 
ment had struck, and struck hard. On my way to the Karnataka 
from Allahabad I had gone to Bombay with Kamala. She was 
again ill, and I arranged for her treatment in Bombay. It was 
in Bombay, almost immediately after our arrival from Allaha- 
bad, that we learnt that the Government of India had pro- 
mulgated a special Ordinance for the United Provinces. TTiey 
had decided not to wait for Gandhiji’s arrival, although he was 
already on the high seas, and was due in Bombay soon. The 
Ordinance was supposed to deal with the agrarian agitation, 
but it was so extraordinarily wide-flun^ and far-reaching that 
it made aU political or public activity impossible. It provided 
even for the punishment of parents and guardians for the sins 
of their children and wards — a reversal of the old Biblical 
practice. 

It was about this time that we read the report of the inter- 
view alleged to have been given by Gandhiji in Rome to the 
Giomale d’ltalia. This came as a surprise, as it was unlike him 
to give an interview of this kind casually in Rome. On closer 
examination we foimd many words and phrases in it which 
were quite foreign to him, and it was patent to us, even before 
the denial came, that the interview could not have been given 
as published. We thought that there had been a great deal of 
distortion of something that he had said. Then came his 
emphatic contradiction of it, and his statement that he had 
never given any interview at all in Rome. It was evident to us 
that some one had played a trick on him. But to our amaze- 
ment British newspapers and public men refused to believe him, 
and contemptuously referred to him as a liar. This hurt and 
angered. 

I was eager to go back to Allahabad and to give up the 
Karnataka tour. I felt that my place was with my comrades in 
the U.P., and to be far away when so much was happening at 
home was an ordeal. I decided, however, in fevour of adhering 



3i8 jawaharlal nehru 

to the Karnataka programme. On my return to Bombay some 
friends advised me to stay on for Gandhiji’s arrival, which was 
due exactly a week later. But this was impossible. From 
Allahabad came news of Purushottam Das Tandon’s arrest and 
other arrests. There was, besides, our Provincial Conference 
which had been fixed at Etawah for that week. And so I 
decided to go to Allahabad and to return to Bombay six days 
later, if I was free, to meet Gandhiji and to attend a meeting 
of the Working Committee. I left Kamala bed-ridden in 
Bombay. 

Even before I had reached Allahabad, at Chheoki station, an 
order under the new Ordinance was served on me. At Allaha- 
bad station another attempt was made to serve a duplicate of 
that order on me; at my iiouse a third attempt was made by 
a third person. Evidently no risks were being taken. The order 
interned me within the municipal limits of Allahabad, and I 
was told that I must not attend any public meeting or function, 
or speak in public, or write anything in a newspaper or leaflet. 
There were many other restrictions. I found that a similar order 
had been served on many of my colleagues, including Tasadduq 
Sherwani. The next morning 1 wrote to the District Magistrate 
(who had issued the order) acknowledging receipt of it and 
informing him that I did not propose to take my orders from 
him as to what I was to do or not to do. I would carry on with 
my ordinary work in the ordinary way, and in the course of 
this work I proposed to return to Bombay soon to meet 
Mr. Gandhi, and take part in the meeting of the Working 
Committee, of which I was the secretary. 

A new problem confronted us. Our U.P. Provincial Con- 
ference had been fixed to meet at Etawah that week, I had 
come from Bombay with the intention of 8Ug|esting a post- 
ponement, as it clashed somewhat with Gandhiji's arrival, and 
in order to avoid conflict with the Government. But before my 
return to Allahabad a peremptory message had come from the 
U.P, Govermnent to cur President, Sherwani, enquiring if our 
conference would consider the agrarian question, for if so, they 
would prohibit the conference itself. It was patent that the 
main purpose of the conference was to discuss the agrarian 
question which was agitating the whole province; to meet and 
not to discuss it would be the height of absurdity and s elf - 
sj^]^§gaiaon. And in any event our President or any one else 
had no aicLthority to tie down the conference. Quite apart from 
the Govemmmt’s threat it was the intention of some of us to 
postpone the conference, but this threat made a difference. 



1932 

Jawaharlal and Mr. Sherwanij before they were 
arrested on their way to meet Mahatma Gandhi 



THE END OF THE TRUCE 


319 

Many of us were rather obstinate in such matters, and the 
idea of being dictated to by Government was not pleasant. 
After long argument we decided to swallow our pride and to 
postpone the conference. We did so because almost at any cost 
we wanted still to avoid the development of the conflict, which 
had already beg^n, till Gandhiji’s arrival. We did not want 
him to be confronted with a situation in which he was power- 
less to take the helm. In spite of our postponement of our 
Provincial Conference there was a great display of the police 
and military at Etawah, some stray delegates were arrested, 
and the Swadeshi Exhibition there was seized by the military. 

Sherwani and I decided to leave Allahabad for Bombay on 
the morning of December 26th. Sherwani had been especially 
invited to me Working Committee meeting to confer on the 
U.P. situation. Both of us had been served with orders under 
the Ordinance not to leave Allahabad city. The Ordinance 
was said to be directed against the suspension of rent activities 
in the rural areas of Allahabad and some other U.P. districts. 
It was easy to understand that the Government should prevent 
us from visiting these rural areas. But it was obvious that we 
could not carry on this agrarian agitation in the city of Bom- 
bay; and the Ordinance, if it was really meant for the agrarian 
situation only, should have welcomed our departure from the 
province. Ever since the promulgation of the Ordinance our 
general policy had been a defensive one, and we had avoided 
coming to grips with it, although there had been individual 
cases of disobedience of orders. So far as the U.P. Cbngress 
was concerned, it was clear that they wanted to avoid or post- 
pone conflict with the Government for the present at least. 
Sherwani and I were going to Bombay where Gandhiji and the 
Working Committee would consider these matters, and no one 
knew— certainly I was by no means sure— what their ultimate 
decisions might be. 

All these considerations made me think that we would be 
permitted to go to Bombay, and the technical breach of the 
order of internment would, for the moment at least, be tolerated 
by Government. And yet in my bones I felt otherwise. 

As' we got into the train we read in the morning’s papers 
of the new Frontier Province Ordinance and the arrest of 
Abdul GhafFar Khan and Doctor Khan Sahib and others. Very 
soon our train, the Bombay Mail, came to a sudden halt at a 
wayside station, Iradatganj, which is not one of its usual 
stopping places, and police officials mounted up to arrest us. A 
Black Maria waited by the railway line, and Sherwani and I 



320 JAWAHARLAL NkHRU 

mounted this closed prisoners’ van and were bumped away to 
Naini. The Superintendent of Police, an Englishman, who had 
arrested us on that morning of Boxing Day looked glum and 
unhappy. I am afraid we had spoiled his Christmas. 

And so to prison! 

“ Absent thee from felicity a while. 

And for a season draw thy breath in pain.” 



