HARROW AND CAMBRIDGE 

On a May day, towards the end of the month, we reached 
London, reading in the train from Dover of the great Japanese 
sea victory at Tsushima. I was in high good humour. The very 
next day happened to be Derby day and we went to see the race. 
I remember meeting, soon after our arrival in London, M. A. 
Ansari, who was then a smart and clever young man with a 
record of brilliant academical achievement behind him. He was 
a house surgeon at the time in a London hospital. 

I was a lutle fortunate in finding a vacancy at Harrow for I 
was slightly above the usual age mr entry, being fifteen. My 
famil y went to the Continent and after some months they 
returned to India. 

Nevg: before had I been left among strangers all by myself 
and I felt lonely and homesick, but not for long. I managed to 
fit' in to some extent in the life at school and work and play kept 
me busy. I was never an exact fit. Always I had a feehng that I 
was not one of them, and the others must have felt the same 
way about me. I was left a little to myself. But on the whole I 
took my full share in the games, without in any way shining at 
them, and it was, I believe, recognised that I was no shirker. 

I was put, to begin with, in a low form because of my small 
knowledge of Latin, but I was pushed higher up soon. In many 
subjects probably, and especially in general knowledge, I was in 
advance of those of my age. My interests were certainly wider, 
and I read both books and newspapers more than most of my 
feUow-students. I remember writing to my father how dull most 
of the English boys were as they could talk about nothing but 
their games. But there were exceptions, especially when I reached 
the upper forms. 

I was greatly interested in the General Election, which took 
place, as far as I remember, at the end of 1905 and which ended 
m a great Liberal victory. Early in 1906 our form master, asked 
us about the new Government and, much to his surprise, I was 
the only boy in his form who could gi'^e him much information 
on the subject, including , almost a complete list of members of 
Campbell-Bannerman’s Cabinet. 

Apart from politics another subject that fascinated ihe was the 
early growth of aviation. Those were the dgys of the Wright 

c *7 



l8 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

Brothers and Santos Dumont (to be followed soon by Farman, 
Latham and Bleriot), and I wrote to father from Harrow, in my 
enthusiasm, that soon I might be able to pay him a week-end 
visit in India by air. 

There were mur or five Indian boys at Harrow in my time, I 
seldom came across those at other houses, but in our own house — 
the Headmaster’s— we had one of the son’s of the Gaekwar of 
Baroda. He was much senior to me and was popular because of 
his cricket. He left soon after my arrival. Later came the eldest 
son of the Maharaja of Kapurthala, Paramjit Singh, now the 
Tikka Sahab. He was a complete misfit and was unhappy and 
could not mix at all with the other boys, who often made fun of 
him and his ways. This irritated him greatly and sometimes he 
used to tell them what he would do to thetn if they came to 
Kapurthala. Needless to say, this did not improve matters for 
him. He had previously spent some time in France and could 
speak French fluendy but, oddly enough, such were the methods 
of teaching foreign languages in English public schools, that this 
hardly helped him in the French classes. 

A curious incident took place once when, in the middle of the 
night, the house-master suddenly visited our rooms and made a 
thorough search all over the house. We learnt that Paramjit 
Singh had lost his beautiful gold-mounted cane. The search was 
not successful. Two or three days later the Eton and Harrow 
match took place at Lord’s, and immediately afterwards the cane 
was discovered in the owner’s room. Evidently some one had 
used it at Lord’s and then returned it. 

There were a few Jews in our house and in odaer houses. They 

f ot on fairly well but there was always a background of anti- 
emitic feeling. They were the ‘ damned Jews ’, and soon, almost 
unconsciously, I began to think that it was the proper thing to 
have this feeUng. I never really felt anti-Semitic in the least, and, 
in later years, I had many good friends among the Jews. 

I got used to Harrow and liked the place, and yet somehow I 
began to feel that I was outgrowing it. The university attracted 
me. Right through the years tpoo and 1907 news from India 
had been agitating me. I got meagre enough accounts from the 
English papers ; but even that little showed that big events were 
happening at home, in Bengal, Punjab and the Maharashtra. 
There was Lala Lajpat Rai’s and S. Ajit Singh’s deportation, and 
Bengal seemed to be in an uproar, and Tilak’s ijame was often 
flashed from Poona, and there was Swadeshi and boycott. All 
this stirred me tremendously ; but there was not a soul in Harrow 
to whom I could talk about it. During the holidays I met some of 



HARROW AND CAMBRIDGE IQ 

my cousins or other Indian friends and then had a chance of 
relieving my mind. 

A prize I got for good work at school was one of G, M, 
Trevelyan’s Garibaldi books. This fascinated me and soon I 
obtained the other two volumes of the series and studied the 
whole Garibaldi story in them carefully. Visions of similar deeds 
in India came before me, of a gallant fight for freedom, and in 
my mind India and Italy got strangely mixed together. Harrow 
seemed a rather small and restricted place for these ideas and I 
wanted to go to the wider sphere of the university. So I induced 
father to agree to this and left Harrow after only two years’ stay, 
which was much less than the usual period. 

I was leaving Harrow because I wanted to do so myself and 
yet, I well remember, that when the time came to part I felt 
unhappy and tears came to my eyes. I had grown rather fond of 
the place and my departure for good put an end to one period 
in my life. And yet, 1 wonder, how far I was really sorry at 
leaving Harrow. Was it not partly a feeling that I ought to be 
unhappy because Harrow tradition and song demanded it? I was 
susceptible to, these traditions for I had deliberately not resisted 
them so as to' be in harmony "with the place. 

Cambridge, Trinity College, the beginning of October 1907, 
my age seventeen, or rather approaching eighteen, I felt elated 
at being an undergraduate with a great deal of fireedom, com- 
pared to school, to do what I chose. I had got out of the shackles 
of boyhood and felt at last that I could claim to be a grown-up. 
With a self-conscious air I wandered about the big coiuts and 
narrow streets of Cambridge, delighted to meet a person I knew. 

Three years I was at Cambridge, three quiet years with little 
of disturbance in them, moving slowly on like the sluggish Cam. 
They were pleasant years, with many friends and some work and 
some play and a gradual widening of the intellectual horizon. 
I took the Natural Sciences Tripos, my subjects being chemistry, 
geology and botany, but my interests were not confined to these. 
Many of the people I met at Cambridge or during the vacations 
in London or elsewhere talked learnedly about books and litera- 
ture and history and politics and economics. I felt a little at sea 
at first in this semi-highbrow talk, but I read a few books and 
soon got the bang of it and could at least keep my end up and 
not betray too great an ignorance on any of me usual subjects. 
So we discussed Nietzsche (he was all the rage in Cambridge , 
then) and Bernard Shaw’s prefaces and the latest book by Lowes 
Dickinson. We considered ourselves very sophisticated and 
talked of -sex and morality in a superior way, rwerring casually 



20 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

to Ivan Block, Havelock Ellis, Kraft Ebbing or Otto Weininger. 
We felt that we knew about as much of the theory of the subject 
as anyone who was not a specialist need know. 

As a matter of fact, in spite of our brave talk, most of us were 
rather timid where sex was concerned. At any rate I was so, 
and my knowledge for many years, till after I had left Cam- 
bridge, remained confined to theory. Why this was so it is a little 
difficult to say. Most of us were strongly attracted by sex and I 
doubt if any of us attached any idea of sin to it. Certainly I 
did not; there was no religious inhibition. We talked of its 
being amoral, neither moral nor immoral. Yet in spite of all 
this a certain shyness kept me away, as well as a distaste for the 
usual methods adopted. For I was in those days definitely a 
shy lad, perhaps because of my lonely childhood. 

My general attitude to life at the time was a vague kind of 
cyrenaicism, partly natural to youth, partly the influence of 
Oscar Wilde and Walter Pater, It is easy and gratifying to give 
a long Greek name to the desire for a soft life and pleasant ex- 
periences. But there was something more in it than that for I was 
not particularly attracted to a soft life. Not having the religious 
temper and disliking the repressions of religion, it was natural 
for me to seek some other standard. I was superficial and did 
not go deep down into anything. And so the aesthetic side of 
life appealed to me, and the idea of going through life worthily, 
not indulging it in the vulgar way, but still making the most of 
it and living a full and many-sided life attracted me. I enjoyed 
life and I roused to see why I should consider it a thing of sin. 
At the same time risk and adventure fascinated me; I was always, 
like my father, a bit of a gambler, at first with money and then 
for higher stakes, with the bigger issues of life, Indian politics 
in 1907 and 1908 were in a state of upheaval and I wanted to 
play a brave part in them, and. this was not likely to lead to a 
soft life. All these mixed and sometimes conflicting desires led 
to a medley in my mind. Vague and confused it was but I did 
not worry, for the time for any decision was yet far distant. 
Meanwhile, life was pleasant, both physically and intellectually, 
firesh horizons were ever coming into sight, there was so much 
to be done, so much to be seen, so many fresh avenues to explore. 
And we would sit by the fireside in the long winter evenings and 
talk and discuss unhurriedly deep into the night till the dying 
fire drove us shivermg to our beds. And sometimes, during our 
discussions, our voices would lose their even tenor and would 
grow, loud and excited in heated argument. But it was all make- 
believe, We played with the problems of human fife in a mock- 



HARROW ANO CAMBRIDGE 


21 


serious way, for they had not become real problems for us yet, 
and we had not been caught in the coils of the world’s affairs. 
It was the pre-war world of the early twentieth century. Soon 
this world was to die, yielding place to another, full of death and 
destruction and anguish and heart-sickness for the world’s youth. 
But the veil of the future hid tliis and we saw around us an 
assured and advancing order of things and this was pleasant for 
those who could afford it. 

I write of cyrenaidsm and the like and of various ideas that 
influenced me then. But it would be wrong to imagine that I 
thought clearly on these subjects then or even that I thought it 
necessary to try to be clear and definite about them. They were 
just va^ue fancies that floated in my mind and in this process 
left their impress in a greater or less degi-ee. I did not worry 
myself at all about these speculations. Work and games and 
amusements filled my life and the only thing that disturbed me 
sometimes was the political struggle in India. Among the books 
that influenced me politically at Cambridge was Meredith 
Townsend’s Asia and Europe. 

Frpm 1907 onwards for several years India was seething with 
unre^ and trouble. For the first time since the Revolt of 1857 
India was showing fight and not submitting tamely to foreign 
rule. News of Tilak’s activities and his conviction, of Aravindo 
Ghose and the way the masses of Bengal were taking the 
swadeshi and boycott pledge stirred all of us Indians in England. 
Almost without an exception we were Tilakites or Extremists, as 
the new party was caUed in India. 

The Indians in Cambridge had a society called the ‘ Majlis '. 
We discussed political problems there oftbn but in somewhat 
unreal debates. More eflbrt was spent in copying Parliamentary 
and the University Union style and mannerisms thaii in grap- 
pling with the subject. Frequently I went to the Majlis but 
during my three years I har^ spoke there. I could not get ovex 
my shyness and diffidence. Inis same difficulty pursued me in 
my college debating society, “ The Magpie and Stump ”, where 
there was a rule tliat a member not speaking for a whole term 
ha 4 to pay a fine. Often 1 paid the fine. 

I remember Edwin Montagu, who later became Secretary of 
State for India, often visiting “The Maroie and Stumjfi.” He 
was an old Trinity man and was then Member of Parliament 
for Chmbridge. It was from him that I first heard the modem 
definition of :^th : to believe in something which your reason 
tells you cannot be true, for if your reason approved of it there 
could be no question of blind faith. I was mfluenced by my 



12 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

scientific studies in the university and had some of the assurance 
which science then possessed. For the science of the nineteenth 
and the early twentieth centuries, unlike that of to-day, was very 
sure of itself and the world. 

In the Majlis and in private talks Indian students often used 
the most extreme language when discussing Indian politics. They 
even talked in terms of admiration of the acts of violence that 
were then beginning in Bengal. Later I was to find that these 
very persons were to become members of the Indian Civil Service, 
High Court judges, very staid and sober lawyers, and the like. 
Few of these parlour-firebi’ahds took any eifective part in Indian 
political movements subsequently. 

Some of the noted Indian politicians of the day visited us at 
Cambridge. We respected them but there was also a trace of 
superiority in our attitude. We felt that ours was a wider culture 
and we could take a broader view of things. Among those who 
came to us were Bepin Chandra Pal, Lajpat Rai and G. K. 
Gokhale. We met Bepin Pal in one of our sitting-rooms. There 
were only a dozen of us present but he thundered at us as if he 
was addressing a mass meeting of ten thousand. The volume of 
noise was so terrific that I could hardly follow what he was 
saying. Lalaji spoke to ua in a more reasonable way and I was 
impressed by his talk. I wrote to father that I preferred Lalaji’s 
address to Bepin Pal’s and this pleased him for he had no liking 
in those days for the firebrands of Bengal. Gokhale addressed 
a public meeting in Cambridge and my diief recollection of this 
meeting is of a question that was put by A. M. Khwaja at the 
end of it. Khwaja got up from the body of the hall and put 
an interminable question, which went on and on, till most of us 
had forgotten how it began tmd what it was about. 

Har Dayal had a great reputation among the Indians but he 
was at Oarord a little before my time at Cambridge. I met him 
once or twice in London during my Harrow days. 

Among my contemporaries at Cambridge there were several 
who played a prominent part in Indian Congress politics in later 
years. J. M. Sen Gupta left Cambridge soon after I went up. Saif- 
ud-Din Kitchlew, Syed Mahmud and Tasadduk Ahmad Sher- 
wani were more or less my contemporaries. S, M. Sulaiman, 
who is now the Chief Justice of the Allahabad High Court, was 
also at Cambridge in my time. Other contemporaries have 
blossomed out as ihinisters and members of the Indian Civil 
Service. 

In London we used to hear also of Shyamji Krishnavarma and 
his India House but I never met him or visited that house. fJoinp. 



HARROW AND CAMBRIDGE 23 

times we saw his Indian Sociologist. Long afterwards, in 1936, 
I saw Shyamji in Geneva. His pockets still bulged with ancient 
copies of the Indian Sociologist, and he regarded almost every 
Indian who came near him as a spy sent by the British Govern- 
ment. 

In London also there was the student centre opened by the 
India Office. This was universally regarded by Indians, with a 
great deal of justification, as a device to spy on Indian students. 
Many Indians, however, had to put up with it, whether they 
wanted to or not, as it became almost impossible to enter a 
university without its recommendation. 

The political situation in India had drawn ray father into more 
active politics and I was pleased at this although I did not agree 
with his politics. He had, naturally enough, joined the Moderates 
whom he knew and many of whom were his colleagues in his 
profession. He presided over a provincial conference in his pro- 
vince and took up a strong line against the Extremists of Bengal 
and Maharashtra. He also became president of the U.P. Provin- 
cial Congress Committee, He was present at Surat in 1907 when 
the Congress broke up in disorder and later emerged as a purely 
moderate group. 

Soon after Surat, H. W. Nevinson stopped with him at Allaha- 
bad as his guest for a while and, in his book on India, he referred 
to father as Being “ moderate in everything except his generosity.” 
This was a very wrong estimate, for father was never moderate 
in anything except his politics, and step by step his nature drove 
him mom even that remnant of moderation. A man of strong 
feelings, strong passions, tremendous pride and great strength 
of will, he was very far from the moderate type. And yet in 
1907 and 1908 and for some years afterwards, he was undoubtedly 
a moderate of Moderates and he was bitter against the 
Extremists, though I believe he admired Tilak. 

Why was this so? It was natural for him with his grounding 
in law and constitutionalism to take a lawyer’s and a constitu- 
tional view of politics. His clear thinking led him to see that 
hard and extreme words lead nowhere unless they are followed by 
action appropriate to the language. He saw no raective action in 
prospect. The swadeshi and boycott movements did not seem 
to him to carry matters far. And then the background of these 
movements was a religious nationalism which was alien to his 
nature. He did not look back to a revival in India of ancient 
times. He had no sympathy or understanding of them and 
utterly disliked many old social customs, caste and the like, 
which he considered reactionary. He looked to the West and 



24 


JAWAHABLAL NEHRU 


felt greatly attracted by Western progress, and thought that this 
could come through an association with England. 

Socially speaking, the revival of Indian nationalism in 1907 
was definitely reactionary. Inevitably, a new nationalism in India, 
as elsewhere in the East, was a religious nationalism. The 
Moderates thus represented a more advanced social outlook but 
they were a mere handful on the top with no touch with the 
masses. They did not think much in terms of economics, except 
in terms of the new upper middle class whicli they partly repre- 
sented and which wanted room for expansion. They advocated 
also petty social reforms to weaken caste and (lo away with old 
social customs which hindered growth. 

Having cast his lot with the Moderates, father took an aggres- 
sive line. Most of the Extremists, apart from a few leaders in 
Bengal and Poona, were young men and it irritated him to find 
that these youngsters dared to go their own way. Impatient and 
intolerant of opposition, and not suffering people whom he con- 
sidered fools, gladly, he pitched into them and hit out whenever 
he could. I remember, I think it was after I left Cambridge, 
reading an article of his which annoyed me greatly. I wrote him 
rather an inmertinent letter in which I suggested that no doubt 
the British Government was gready pleased with his political 
activities. This was just the kind of suggestion which would 
make him wild, and he was very angry. He almost thought of 
asking me to return from England immediately. 

During my stay at Cambridge the question had arisen as to 
what career I should take up. For a little while the Indian Civil 
Service was conteinplated; there was a glamour about it still in 
those days. But this idea was dropped as neither my father nor 
I were keen on it. The principal reason, I think, was that I was 
still under age for it, and if I was to appear for it I would have 
to stay three to four years more after taking my degree. I was 
twenty when I took my degree at Cambridge and the age-limit 
fijr the I.C.S, in those days was aa to 24. If successful an extra 
year had to be spent in England. My people were a little tired 
of my long stay in England and wanted me back soon. Another 
reason which weighed with father was that in case I was 
^pointed to the LC.S. I would be posted in various distant places 
fi:om home. Both father and mother wanted me neaf them 
after my long absence. So the die was cast in favour of the 
paternal profession, the Bar, and I joined the Inner Temple. 

It IS curious that in spite of my grovring extremism in politics, 
T strong disfavour the idea of joining 

the I.C,S. and thus becoming a cog in the British Government’s 



HARROW AND CAMBRIDGE 25 

administrative machine in India. Such an idea in later years 
would have been repellent to me. 

I left Cambridge after taking my degree in 1910. I was only 
moderately successful in my saence tripos examination, obtain- 
ing second class honours. For the next two years I hovered 
about London. My law studies did not take up much time and 
I got through the Bar examinations, one after the other, with 
neither glory nor ignominy. Fox the rest I simply drifted, doing 
some general reatSng, vaguely attracted to the Fabians and 
socialistic ideas, and interested m the political movements of the 
day. Ireland and the woman suffrage movement interested me 
especially. I remember also how, during a visit to Ireland in the 
summer of 1910, the early beginnings of Sinn Fein had attracted 
me. 

I came across some old Harrow friends and developed expensive 
habits in their company. Often I exceeded the handsome allow- 
ance that father made me and he was greatly worried on my 
account fearing that I was rapidly going to the devil. But as a 
matter of fact I was not doing anything so notable. I was merely 
trying to ape to some extent the prosperous but somewhat 
empty-headed Englishman who is caQed a ‘ man about town.’ 
This soft and pointless existence, needless to say, did not improve 
me in any way. My early enthusiasms began to tone down and 
the only thing that seemed to go up was my conceit. 

During my vacations I had sometimes travelled on the Con- 
tinent. m the summer of 1909 my father and I happened to be 
in Berlin when Count Zeppdin arrived flying in his new airship 
from Friederichshafen on Lake Constance. I believe that was 
his first long flight and the occasion was celebrated by a huge 
demonstration and a fiirmal welcome by the Kaiser. A vast 
multitude, estimated at between one and two millions, gathered 
in the Tempdhof Field in Berlin, and the Zeppelin arrived to 
time and circled gracefully above us. The Hotel Adlon presented 
all its residents that day with a fine picture of Coimt Zeppelin, 
and I have still got that picture. 

About two months later we saw in Paris the first aeroplane to 
fly all over the city and to cirde round the Eiffel Tower. The 
aviator’s name was, I think, Comte de Lambert. Eighteen years 
later I was again in Paris when Lindbergh came like a shining 
arrow from across the Atlantic. 

I had a narrow escape once in Norway where I had gone on a 
pleasure cruise soon after taking my degree at Cainbridge in 
1910. We were tramping across the mountainous country. Hot 
and weary we readied oui destination, a little hotel, arid 



J6 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

demanded baths. Such a thing had not been heard of there and 
there was no provision for it in the building. We were told 
however that we could wash ourselves in a neighbouring stream. 
So, armed with table napkins or perhaps small face towels, which 
the hotel generously gave, two of us, a young Englishman and 
I, went to this roaring torrent which was coming from a glacier 
near by. I entered the water; it was not deep but it was freezing 
and the bottom was terribly slippery. I slipped and fell and the 
ice-cold water numbed me and made me lose all sensation or 
power of controlling my limbs. I could not regain my foothold 
and was swept rapidly along by the torrent. My companion, 
the Englishman, however, managed to get out and he ran along 
the side and ultimately, succeeding in catching my leg, dragged 
me out. Later we realized the danger we were in for about two 
or three hundred yards ahead of us this mountain torrent 
tumbled over an enormous precipice, forming a waterfall which 
was one of the sights of the place. 

In the summer of 191a I was called to the Bar, and in the 
autumn of that year I returned to India finally after a stay of 
over seven years in England. Tvrice, in between, I had gone home 
during my holidays. But now I returned for good, and I am 
afraid, as I landed at Bombay, I was a bit of a prig with little 
to commend me. 