PRISON HUMOURS 

Two of us were transferred together from the Bareilly District 
Gaol to the Dehra Dun Gaol— Govind Ballabh Pant and I. To 
avoid the possibility of a demonstration, we were not put on the 
train at Bareilly, but at a wayside station fifty miles out. We were 
taken secretly by motor-car at night, and, after many months of 
seclusion, that drive through the cool night air was a rare delight. 

Before we left Bareilly Gaol, a little incident took place which 
moved me then and is yet fresh in my memory. The Superinten- 
dent of Police of Bareilly, an Englishman, was present there, 
and, as I got into the car, he handed to me rather shyly a packet 
which he told me contained old German illustrated magazines. 
He said that he had heard that I was learning German and so 
he had brought these magazines for me. I had never met him 
before, nor have I seen him since. I do not even know his name. 
This spontaneous act of courtesy and the kindly thought that 
prompted it touched me and I felt very grateful to him. 

During that long midnight drive I mused over the relations of 
Englishmen and Indians, of ruler and ruled, of official and non- 
official, of those in authority and those who have to obey. What 
a great gulf divided the two races, and how they distrusted and 
disliked each other. But more than the distrust and the dislike 
was the ignorance of each other, and, because of this, each side 
was a little afraid of the other and was constantly on its guard in 
the other’s presence. To each, the other appeared as a sour-looking, 
unamiable creature, and neither realised that there was decency 
and kindliness behind the mask. As the rulers of the land, with 
enormous patronage at their command, the English had attracted 
to themselves crowds of cringing place-hunters and opportunists, 
and they judged of India from these unsavoury specimens. The 
Indian saw the Englishman function only as an official with all 
the inhumanity of the machine and with all the passion of a 
vested interest trying to preserve itself. How different was the 
behaviour of a person acting as an individual and obeying his 
own impulses from his behaviour as an official or a unit in an 
army. The soldier, stiffening to attention, drops his humanity, 
and, acting as an automaton, shoots and kills inoffensive and 
harmless persons who have done him no ill. So also, I thought, 
the police officer who would hesitate to do an unkindness to an 



PRISON HUMOURS 


347 


individual would, the day after, direct a lathi charge on inno- 
cent people. He would not tliink of himself as an individual 
then, nor will he consider as individuals those crowds whom he 
beats down or shoots. 

As soon as one begins to think of the other side as a mass or 
a crowd, the human link seems to go. We forget that crowds 
also consist of individuals, of men and women and children, 
who love and hate and suffer. An average Englishman, if he 
was frank, would probably confess that he knows some quite 
decent Indians, but they are exceptions, and as a whole Indians 
are a detestable crowd. The average Indian would admit that 
some Englishmen whom he knows were admirable, but, apart 
from these few, the English were an overbearing, brutal, and 
thoroughly bad lot. Curious how each person judges of the 
other race, not from the individual with whom he has come in 
contact, but ftom others about whom he knows very little or 
nothing at all. 

Pei-sonally, I have been very fortunate and, almost invariably, 
I have received courtesy from my own countrymen as well as 
from the English. Even my gaolers and the policemen, who 
have arrested me or escorted me as a prisoner from place to 
place, have been kind to me, and much of the bitterness of 
conflict and the sting of gaol life has been toned down because 
of this human touch. It was not surprising that my own coun- 
trymen should treat me so, for I had gained a measure of 
notoriety and popularity among them. Even for Englishmen I 
was an individual and not merely one of the mass, and, I 
imagine, the fact that I had received my education in England, 
and especially my having been to an English public school, 
brought me nearer to them. Because of this, they could not help 
considering me as more or less civilised after their own pattern, 
however perverted my public activities appeared to be. Often I 
felt a little embarrassed and humiliated because of this special 
treatment when I compared my lot with that of most of my 
colleagues. 

Despite all these advantages that I had, gaol was gaol, and 
the oppressive atmosphere of the place was sometimes almost 
unbearable. The very air of it was full of violence and mean- 
ness and graft and untruth; there was either cringing or cursing. 
A person who was at all sensitive was in a continuous state of 
tension. Trivial occurrences would upset one. A piece of bad 
news in a letter, some item in the newspaper, would make one 
almost ill with anxiety or anger for a while. Outside there was 
always relief in action, and various interests and activities pro- 



348 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

duced an equilibrium of the mind and body. In prison there 
was no outlet and one felt bottled up and repressed, and, in- 
evitably, one took one-sided and rather distorted views of 
happenings. Illness in gaol was particularly distressing. 

And yet I managed to accustom myself to the gaol routine, 
and with physical exercise and fairly hard mental work kept fit. 
Whatever the value of work and exercise might be outside, they 
are essential in gaol, for without them one is apt to go to pieces. 
I adhered to a strict time-table and, in order to keep up to the 
mark, I carried on with as many normal habits as I could, such 
as the daily shave (I was allowed a safety razor). I mention this 
minor matter because, as a rule, people gave it up and slacked in 
other ways. After a hard day’s work, the evening found me 
pleasantly tired and sleep was welcomed. 

And so the days passed, and the weeks and the months. But 
sometimes a month would stick terribly and would not end, or 
so it seemed. And sometimes I would feel bored and fed up and ’ 
angry with almost everything and everybody — with my com- 
panions in prison, with the gaol staff, with people outside for 
something they had done or not done, with the British Empire 
(but this was a permanent feeling), and above all with myself. I 
would become a bundle of nerves, very susceptible to various 
humours caused by gaol fife. Fortunately I recovered soon from 
these humours. 

Interview days were the red-letter days in gaol. How one 
longed for them and waited for them and counted the daysl 
And after the excitement of the interview there was the 
inevitable reaction and a sense of emptiness and loneliness. If, 
as sometimes happened, the interview was not a success, because 
of some bad news which upset me, or some other reason, I would 
feel miserable afterwards. There were gaol officials present of 
course at the interviews, but two or three times at Bareilly there 
was in addition a C.I.D. man present ivith paper and pencil, 
eagerly taking down almost every word of the conversation. I 
found this exceedingly irritating, and these interviews were 
complete failures. 

And then I gave up these precious interviews because of the 
treatment my mother and wife had received in the course of an 
interview in the Allahabad Gaol and afterwards firom the 
Government. For nearly seven months I had no interview. 
It was a dreary time for me, and when at the end of that period 
I dedded to resume intervieivs and my people came to see me, 
I was almost intoxicated with the joy of it. My sister’s little 
children also came to see me, and when a tiny one wanted to 



PRISON HUMOURS 


349 

mount on my shoulder, as she used to do, it was more than my 
emotions could stand. That touch of home life, after the long 
yearning for human contacts, upset me. 

When interviews stopped, the fortnightly letters from home or 
from some other gaol (for both my sisters were in prison) 
became all the more precious and eagerly expected. If the letter 
did not come on the appointed day I was worried. And yet 
when it did come, I almost hesitated to open it. I played about 
with it as one does with an assured pleasure, and at the back of 
my mind there was also a trace of fear lest the letter contain 
any news or reference which might annoy me. Letter writing 
and receiving in gaol were always serious incursions on a peace- 
ful and unruffled existence. They produced an emotional state 
which was disturbing, and for a day or two afterwards one’s mind 
wandered and it was difficult to concentrate on the day’s work. 

In Naini Piison and Bareilly Gaol I had several companions. 
In Dehra Dun there were three of us to begin with-AJovind 
Ballabh Pant, Kunwar Anand Singh of Kashipur and I— but 
Pantji was discharged after a couple of months on the expiry 
of his six months. Two others joined us later. By the begin- 
ning of January 1933 all my companions had left me and I was 
alone. For nearly eight months, till my discharge at the end of 
August, I lived a solitary life in Dehra Dun Gaol with hardly 
any one to talk to, except some member of the gaol staff for a 
few minutes daily. This was not technically solitary confine- 
ment, but it was a near approach to it, and it was a dreary 
period for me. Fortunately I had resumed my interviews, and 
they brought some relief. As a special favour, I suppose, I was 
allowed to receive fresh flowers from outside and to keep a few 
photographs, and they cheered me greatly. Ordinarily, flowers 
and photographs are not permitted, and on several occasions I 
have not been allowed to receive the flowers that had been sent 
for me. Attempts to brighten up the cells were not encouraged, 
and I remember a superintendent of a gaol once objecting to 
the manner in which a companion of mine, whose cell was next 
to mine, had arranged his toilet articles. He was told that he 
must not make his cell look attractive and “ luxurious ”. The 
articles of luxury were: a tooth brush, tooth paste, fountain- 
pen ink, a bottle of hair oil, a brush and comb, and perhaps 
one or two other little things. 

One begins to appreciate the value of the little things of life 
in prison. One’s belongings are so few and they cannot easily 
be added to or replaced, and one clings to them and gathers up 
odd bits of things whidi, in the world outside, would go- to the 



JAWAHARLAL NliHRU 


350 

waste-paper basket. The property sense does not leave one even 
when there is nothing worth while to own and keep. 

Sometimes a physical longing would come for the soft things 
of life — ^bodily comfort, pleasant surroundings, the company of 
friends, interesting conversation, games with children. ... A 
picture or a paragraph in a newspaper Would bring the old days 
vividly before one, carefree days of youth, and a nostalgia 
would seize one, and the day would be passed in restlessness. 

I used to spin a little daily, for I found some manual occupa- 
tion soothing and a relief from too much intellectual work. My 
main occupation, however, was reading and writing. I could not 
have all the books I wanted, as there were restrictions and a 
censorship, and the censors were not always t'ery competent for 
the job. Spengler’s Decline of the, West was held up because 
the title looked dangerous and seditious. But I must not com- 
plain, for I had, on the whole, a goodly variety of books. Again 
I seem to have been a favoured person, and many of my col- 
leagues (A Class prisoners) had the greatest difficulty in getting 
books on current topics. In Benares Gaol, I was told, even the 
official White Paper, containing the British Government’s con- 
stitutiona^roposals, was not allowed in, as it dealt with political 
matters. The only books that British officials heartily recom- 
mended were religious books or novels. It is wonderful how dear 
to the heart of the British Government is the subject of religion 
and how impartially it encourages all brands of it. 

When the most ordinary civil liberties have been curtailed in 
India, it is hardly pertinent to talk of a prisoner’s rights. And 
yet the subject is worthy of consideration. If a court of law 
sentences a person to imprisonment, does it follow that not only 
his body but also his mind should be incarcerated? Why should 
not the minds of prisoners be free even though their bodies are 
not? Those in charge of the prison administrations in India will 
no doubt be horrified at such a question, for their capacity for 
new ideas and sustained thought is usually limited. Censorship 
is bad enough at any time and is partisan and stupid. In India 
it deprives us of a great deal of modem literature and advanced 
journals and newspapers. The list of proscribed books is exten- 
sive and is frequently added to. To add to all this, the prisoner 
has to suffer a second and a separate censorship, and thus many 
books and newspapers that can be legally purchased and read 
outside the prison may not reach him. 

Some time ago this question arose in the United States, in the 
famous Sing Sing Prison of New York, where some Communist 
newspapers had been banned. The fe^ng against Communists 



PRISON HUMOURS 


351 

is very strong among the ruling classes in America, but in spite 
of this the prison authorities agreed that the inmates of the 
prison could receive any publication which they desired, inchid- 
ing Communist newspapers and magazines. The sole exception 
made by the Warden was in the case of cartoons which he 
regarded as inflammatory. 

It is a little absurd to discuss this question of freedom of 
mind in prison in India when, as it happens, the vast majority 
of the prisoners are not allowed any newspapers or writing 
materials. It is not a question of censorship but of total denial. 
Only A Class (or in Bengal, Division I) prisoners are allowed 
writing materials as a matter of course, and not even all these are 
allowed daily newspapers. The daily newspaper allowed is of the 
Government’s choice. B and C Class prisoners, politicals and 
non-politicals, are not supposed to have writing materials. The 
former may sometimes get them as a very special privilege, 
which is frequently withdrawn. Probably the proportion of 
A Class prisoners to the others is one to a thousand, and they 
might well be excluded in considering the lot of prisoners in 
Inma. But it is well to remember that even these favoured 
A Class convicts have far less privileges in regard to books 
and newspapers than the ordinary prisoners in most civilised 
countries. 

For the rest, the 999 in every thousand, two or three books 
are permitted at a time, but conditions are such that they 
cannot always take advantage of this privilege. Writing or the 
taking of notes of books read arc dangerous pastimes in which 
they must not indulge. This deliberate discouragement of in- 
tellectual development is curious and revealing. From the point 
of view of reclaiming a prisoner and of making him a fit 
citizen, his mind should be approached and diverted, and he 
should be made literate and taught some craft. But this point 
of view has perhaps not struck the prison authorities in India. 
Certainly it has been conspicuous by its absence in the United 
Provinces, Recently attempts has been made to teach reading 
and writing to the boys and young men in prison, but they are 
wholly ineffective, and the men in charge of them have no 
competence. Sometimes it is said that convicts are averse to 
learning. My own experience has been the exact opposite, and 
I found many of them, who came to me for the puroose, to 
have a perfect passion for learning to read and write. We used 
to teach such convicts as came our way, and they worked hard; 
and sometimes when I woke up in the middle of the night I 
was surprised to find one or two of them sitting by a dim 



352 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

lantern inside their barrack, learning their lessons for the next 
day. 

So I occupied myself with ray books, going from one type of 
reading to another, but usually sticking to ‘ heavy ’ books. 
Novels made one feel mentally slack, and I did not read many 
of them. Sometimes I would weary of too much reading, and 
then I would take to writing. My historical scries of letters to 
my daughter kept me occupied right through my two-year 
term, and they helped me very greatly to keep mentally fit. 
To some extent I lived through the past I was writing about 
and almost forgot about my gaol surroundings. 

Travel books were always welcome — ^records of old travellers, 
Hiuen Tsang, and Marco Polo, and Ibn Battuta and others, and 
moderns like Sven Hedin, with his journeys across the deserts 
of Central Asia, and Roerich, finding strange adventures in 
Tibet. Picture books also, especially of mountains and glaciers 
and deserts, for in prison one hungers for wide spaces and seas 
and mountains. I had some beautiful picture books of Mont 
Blanc, the Alps, and the Himalayas, and I turned to them often 
and gazed at the glaciers when the temperature of my cell or 
barrack was ii5”F. or even more. An atlas was an exciting 
affair. It brought all manner of past memories and dreams of 
places we had visited and places we had wanted to go to. And 
the longing to go again to those haunts of past days, and visit 
all the other inviting marks and dots that represented great 
cities, and cross the shaded regions that were mountains, and 
the blue patches that were seas, and to see the beauties of the 
world, and watch the struggles and conflicts of a changing 
humanity — ^the longing to do all this would seize us and clutch 
us by the throat, and we would hurriedly and sorrowfully put 
the atlas by, and return to the well-known walls that sur- 
rounded us and the dull routine that was our daily lot. 
