DOUBT AND CONFLICT 

I OCCUPIED myself with many activities and sought thereby to 
keep away from the problems that troubled me. But there was 
no escape from them, no getting away from the questions that 
were always being formed in my mind and to which I could 
find no satisfactory answer. Action now was partly an attempt to 
run away from myself ; no longer was it a wholehearted expres- 
sion of the self as it had been in 1920 and 1921. I came out of the 
shell that had protected me then and looked round at the Indian 
scene as well as at the world outside. I found many changes that 
I had not so far noticed, new ideas, new conflicts, and instead of 
light I saw a growing confusion. My faith in Gandhiji’s leader- 
ship remained, but I began to examine some parts of his pro- 
gramme more critically. But he was in prison and beyond our 
reach, and his advice could not be taken. Neither of the two 
Congress parties then functioning~the Council party and the 
No-changers — attracted me. The former was obviously veering 
towards reformism and constitutionalism, and these seemed to 
me to lead to a blind alley. The No-changers were supposed to 
he the ardent followers of the Mahatma, but like most disciples 
of the great, they prized the letter of the teaching more than 
the spirit. There was nothing dynamic about them, and in 
practice most of them were inoffensive and pious social re- 
formers. But they had one advantage. They kept in touch with 
the peasant masses, while the Swarajists in the Councils were 
wholly occupied with parliamentary tactics. 

Deshbandhu Das tried, soon after my discharge from prison, 
to convert me to the Swarajist creed. I did not succumb to his 
advocacy, though I was by no means clear as to what I should do. 
It is curious and rather remarkable, but characteristic of him, 
that my father, who was at the time very keen on the Swaraj 
Party, never tried to press me or influence me in that direction. 
It was obvious that be would have been very pleased if I had 
joined him in his campaign, but with extraordinary considera- 
tion for me, he left me to myself so far as this subject was 
concerned. 

During this period there grew up a close friendship between 
my father and Mr. C. R. Das. It was something much more 
than political camaraderie. There was a warmth and intimacy 

104 



DOUBT AND CONFLICT IO5 

in it that I was not a little surprised to notice, since intimate 
friendships are perhaps rarely formed at advanced ages. My 
father had a host of acquaintances, and. had the gift of laughing 
his way through them, but he was chary of friendship, and 
in later years he had grown rather cynical. And yet between 
him and Deshbandhu the barriers seemed to fall, and they took 
each other to heart. My father was nine years older, but was, 
physically, probably the stronger and the healthier of the two. 
Though both had the same background of legal training and 
success at the Bar, they differed in many ways. Mr. Das, in spite 
of being a lawyer, was a poet and had a poet’s emotional 
outlook — believe he has written fine poetry in Bengali. He was 
an orator, and he had a religious temperament. My father was 
more practical and prosaic; he was a great organiser, and he had 
little of religion in him. He had always been a fighter, reac^ to 
receive and give hard blows. Those whom he considered mols 
he suffered not at all, or at any rate not gladly ; and opposition 
he could not tolerate. It seemed to him a challenge requiring 
the use of a broom. The two, my fether and Deshbandhu, unlike 
in some ways as they were, fitted in and made a remarkable and 
efective combination for the leadership of a party, each in 
some measure supplying the other’s deficiencies. And between 
the two of them there was absolute .confidence, so much so 
that each had authorised the other to use his name for any 
statement or declaration, even without previous referoice or 
consultation. 

It was this personal factor that went a long way to establish 
the Swaraj Party firmly and give it strength and prestige in the 
country. From the earliest days there were fissiparous tendencies 
in it, for many careerists and opportunists had been drawn into 
it by the possibilities of personal advancement through the 
Councils. There were also some genuine moderates in it who 
were inclined to more co-operation with the Government. As 
soon as these tendencies appeared on tlie surface after the 
elections, they were denounced by the Party leadership. My 
father declared that he would not hesitate ‘ to cut off a diseased 
limb ’ firom the Party, he acted up to this declaration. 

From 1933 onwards I found a great deal of solace and happi- 
ness in family life, though I gave little time to it. I have been 
fortunate in my family relatitmships, and in times of strain and 
difficulty they have soothed me and sheltered me. I realised, 
with some shame at my own unworthiness in this respect, how 
much I owed to my wife for her splendid behaviour since ipao. 
Proud and sensitive as she was, she had not only pat up with 



lo6 JAWAHARLAU NEHRU 

my vagaries but brought me comfort and solace when I needed 
them most. 

Our style of living had undergone some change since 1920. 
It was much simpler, and the number of servants had been 
greatly reduced. Even so, it was not lacking in any essential 
comfort. Partly to get rid of superfluities and partly to raise 
money for current expenditure, many things had been sold off- 
horses and carriages, and household articles which did not fit in 
with our new style of living. Part of our furniture had been 
seized and sold by the police. For lack of furniture and gar- 
deners, our house lost its prim and clean appearance, and the 
garden went wild. For nearly three years little attention had 
been paid to house or garden. Having become accustomed to a 
lavish scale of expenditure, father disliked many economies. He 
decided therefore to go in for chamber practice in his spare time 
and thus earn some money. He had very little spare tune, but, 
even so, he managed to earn a fair amount. 

I felt uncomfortable and a little unhappy at having to depend 
financially on father. Ever since I had given up my legal practice 
I had practically no income of my own, except 'a trifle from 
some dividends on shares. My wife and I did not spend much. 
Indeed, I was quite surprised to find how little we spent. This 
was one of the discoveries made by me in 1921 which brought 
me wear satisfaction. Khadi clothes and third-class railway 
travdling demand little money. I did not fully realise then, living 
as we did with father, that tnere are innumerable other house- 
hold expenses which mount up to a considerable figure. Anyhow, 
the fear of not having money has never troubled me ; I sup- 
pose I could earn enough in case of necessity, and we can do 
with relatively little. 

We were not much of a burden on father, and even a hint of 
this kind would have pained him greatly. Yet I disliked my 
position, and for the next three years 1 thought over the problem 
without finding a solution. There was no great difficulty in my 
finding paying work, but the acceptance of any such work 
necessitated my giving up or, at any rate, my curtailing the 
public work I was doing. So far I had given all my working time 
to Congress work and Municipal work. I did noc like to with- 
draw from them for the sake of making money. So I refused 
offen, financially very advantageous, fi:om big industrial firms. 
Probably they were willing to pay heavily, not so much for 
my competence as for the opportunity to exploit my name. I did 
not lite the idea of being associated with big-industry in this 
way. To go back to the profession of law was also out of the 



DOUBT AKD CONFLICT IO7 

question for me. My dislike for it had grown and kept on 
growing. 

A suggestion was made in the 1934 Congress that the General 
Secretaries should be paid. I happened to be one of the secre- 
taries then, and I welcomed the proposal. It seemed to me quite 
wrong to expect whole-time work from any one without paying 
him a maintenance allowance at least. Otherwise some person 
with private means has to be chosen, and such gentlemen of 
leisure are not perhaps always politically desirable, nor can they 
be held responsible for the work. The Congress would not have 
paid much; our rates of payment were low enough. But there 
is in India an extraordinary and thoroughly unjustified preju- 
dice against receiving salaries from public funds (though not 
from the State), and my father strongly objected to my doing so. 
My co-secretary, who was himself in great need of money, also 
considered it below his dignity to accept it from the Congress. 
And so I, who had no dignity in the matter and was perfectly 
prepared to accept a salary, had to do without it. 

Once only I spoke to father on the subject and told him how 
I disliked the idea of my financial dependence, I put it to him 
as gently and indirectly as possible so as not to hurt him. He 
pointed out to me how foolish it would be of me to spend my 
tinie, or most of it, in earning a little money, instead of doing 
public work. It was far easier for him to earn with a few days’ 
work all that my wife and I would require for a year. The argu- 
ment was weighty, but it left me unsatisfied. However, I con- 
tinued to act in consonance tvith it. 

These family affairs and financial worries carried us from the 
beginning of 1933 to the end of 1925. Meanwhile the political 
situation had been changing and, almost against my will, I was 
dragged into various combinations and acceptance of responsible 
office in the All-India Congress. The position in 1923 was a 
peculiar one. Mr. C. R, Das had been the President of tire 
preceding Congress at Gaya. As such, he was the ex-officio 
Chairman of me All-India Congress Committee for the year 
1933. But in this Committee there was a majority against him 
and the Swarajist policy, though the majority was a small one, 
and the two groups were pretty evenly balanced. Matters came 
to a head in the early summer of 1933 at a meeting of the 
A,I.C,C. in Bombay, Mr. Das resigned from the chairmanship, 
and a small centre group emerged and formed the new Working 
Committee. This centre group had no backing whatever in the 
A.I.C.C., and could only exist with the goodwill of one of the 
two main parties. Allied to either, it could just defeat the other. 



I08 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

Dr. Ansari was the new President, and I was one of the 
secretaries. 

We soon got into trouble on both sides. Gujrat, which was a 
no-change stronghold, refused to carry out some of the directions 
of the central oflBce. Late in the summer of the same year 
another meeting of the A.I.C.C. was held, this time in Nagpur, 
where the National Flag Satyagraha was being carried on. 
Our Working Committee, representing the unfortunate Centre 
Group, came to an end here after a brief and inglorious career. 
It had to go because it repre.sented nobody in particular, and it 
tried to boss it over those who held the real power in the Con- 
gress organisation. The resignation was brought about by the 
failure of an attempt to censure Gujrat for its indiscipline. I 
remember how gladly I sent in my resignation and how relieved 
I felt. Even a short experience of party manoeuvres had been too 
much for me, and I was quite shocked at the way some promi- 
nent Congressmen could intrigue. 

At this meeting Mr. C. R. Das accused me of being 'cold- 
blooded ’. I suppose he was right ; it depends on the standard 
used for comparison. Compared to many of my friends and 
colleagues I am cold-blooded. And yet I have always been afraid 
of being submerged in or swept away by too much sentiment 
or emotion or temper. For years I have tried my hardest to 
become 'cold-blooded’, and I fear that the success that has 
attended me in this respect has been superficial only. 