IN BAREILLY AND DEHRA DUN GAOLS 

After six weeks in Naini Prison I was transferred to the Bareilly 
District Gaol. I was again keeping indifferent health and, much 
to my annoyance, I used to get a daily rise in temperature. 
After four months spent in Bareilly, when the summer tem- 
perature was almost at its highest, I was again transferred, this 
time to a cooler place, Dehra Dun Gaol, at the foot of the 
Himalayas. There I remained, without a break, for fourteen 
and a half months, almost to the end of my two-year term. 
News reached me, of course, from interviews and letters and 
selected newspapers, but I was wholly out of touch with much 
that was happening and bad only a hazy notion of the principal 
events. 

When I was discharged I was kept busy with personal affairs 
as well as the political situation as I found it then. After 
a little more than five months of freedom I was brought back 
to prison, and here I am still. Thus, during the last three years 
I have been mostly in prison and out of touch with events, 
and I have had little opportunity of making myself acquainted 
in any detail with all that has happened during this period. 
I have still the vaguest of knowledge as to what took place 
behind the scenes at the second Round Table Conference, which 
was attended by Gandhiji. I have had no chance so far of a 
talk with him on this subject, nor of discussing with him or 
others much that has happened since. 

I do not know enough of those years 193a and 1933 to 
trace the development of our national struggle. But I knew 
the stage and the background well and the actors also, and 
had an instinctive appreciation of many a little thing that 
happened. I could thus form a feir notion of the general com'se 
of the struggle. For the first four months or so civil diso- 
bedience functioned strongly and aggressively, and then there 
was a gradual decline with occasional bursts. A direct action 
struggle can only remain at a revolutionary pitch for a very 
short time. It cannot remain static; it has to go up or down. 
Civil disobedience, after the first flush, went down slowly, but 
it could carry on at a lower levd &r long periods. In spite of 
outlawry, the All-India Congress orgamsation continued to 
fimetion with a fair measure of success. It kept in touch 



IN BAREILLY AND DEHKA DUN GAOLS 337 

with its provincial workers, sent instructions, received reports, 
occasionally gave financial assistance. 

The provincial organisations also continued with more or less 
success. I do not know much about other provinces during 
those years when I was in prison, but I gathered some infor- 
mation about U.P. activities after my release. The U.P. Con- 
gress office functioned regularly right through 193a and till the 
middle of 1933, when civil disobedience was first suspended by 
the then acting Congress president, on the advice of Gandhiji. 
During this period frequent directions were sent to districts, 
printed or cyclostyled bulletins issued regularly, district work 
inspected from time to time, and our National Service workers 
paid their allowances. Much of this work was necessarily secret 
work; but the secretary of the Provincial Committee in charge 
of the office, etc., was always working as such, publicly, till he 
was arrested and removed and another took his place. 

Our experience of 1930 and 193a showed that it was easily 
possible mr us to organise a secret network of information all 
over India. Without much effort, and in spite of some oppo- 
sition, good results were produced. But many of us had the 
feeling that secrecy did not fit in with the spirit of civil diso- 
bedience, and produced a damping effect on the mass conscious- 
ness. As a small part of a big open mass-movement it was 
useful, but there was always the danger, especially when the 
movement was declining, of a few more or less inefi^tive secret 
activities taking the place of the mass-movement. Gandhiji 
condemned all secrecy in July 1933. 

Agrarian no-tax movements flourished for some time in 
Gujrat and the Kamatak, apart from the U.P. In both Gujrat 
and Karnatak there were peasant proprietors who refused to 
pay their revenue to the Government, and suffered greatly 
because of this. Some effort, necessarily inadequate, was made 
on behalf of the Congress to help the sufferers and relieve the 
misery caused by the ejectments and confiscation of property. 
In 'the U.P. no effort to help the dispossessed tenantry in this 
way was made by the Provincial Congress. The problem here 
was a much vaster one (tenants are far more numerous than 
peasant proprietors), the area was much bigger, and the pro- 
vincial resources were very limited. It was quite impossible for 
us to help scores of thousands who had suffered because of 
the campaign, and equally difficult for us to draw a line between 
them and the vast numbers who were always on the starvation 
line. To help a, few thousands only would have led to trouble 
and bad blood. So we dedded not to give financial assis- 



338 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

tance, and we broadcasted this fact right at the beginning, and 
our position was thoroughly appreciated by the peasantry. It 
was wonderful how much they put up with without complaint 
or murmur. Of course, we tried to help individuals where we 
could, especially the wives and children of workers who went 
to prison. Such is the poverty of this unhappy country that 
even one rupee per month was a godsend. 

Right through this period the U.P. Provincial Committee 
(which was, of course, a proscribed body) continued to pay the 
usual meagre allownances to its paid workers; and if they went 
to prison, as all of them did in turn, to support their families. 
This was a major item in its budget. Then came the charge 
for printing and duplicating leaflets and bulletins; this also 
was a heavy charge. Travelling expenses formed another 
principal item, and some grants had to be given to the less 
prosperous districts. In spite of all these and other expenses 
during a period of intensive mass-struggle against a powerful 
and entrenched government, the total expenditure of the U.P. 
Provincial Committee for twenty months from January 193a to 
the end of August 1933 were about Rs. 63,000, that is about 
Rs.31410 per month. (This figure does not include the separate 
expenditure of some of the strong and more prosperous district 
committees like Allahabad, Agra, Cawnporc, Lucknow.) As a 
province, the U.P. kept in the very forefront of the struggle 
right through 1932 and 1933, and I think, considering the 
results obtained, it is remarkable how little it spent. It would be 
interesting to compare with this modest figure the provincial 
Government’s special expenditure to crush civil disobedience. 
I imagine (though I have no knowledge) that some of the other 
major Congress provinces spent much more. But Behar was, 
from the Congress view-point, an even poorer province than its 
neighbour, the U.P., and yet its part in the struggle was a 
splendid one. 

So, gradually, the civil disobedience movement declined; but 
still it carried on, not without distinction. Progressively it 
ceased to be a mass movement. Apart from the severity of 
Govemment repression, the first severe blow to it came in Sep- 
,-tember 1932 when Gandhi ji fasted for the first time on the 
Hafijan issue. That fast roused mass consciousness, but it 
directed it in another direction. Civil disobedience was finally 
killed fisr all practical purposes by the suspension of it in May 
1933. It continued after that more in theory than in practice. 
It is no doubt true that, even without that suspension, it would 
have gradually petered out. India was numbed by the violence 



IN BAREILLY AND DEHRA DUN GAOLS 339 

and harshness of repression. The nervous energy of the nation 
as a whole was for the moment exhausted, and it was not being 
re-charged. Individually there were still many who could cany 
on civil resistance, but they functioned in a somewhat artificial 
atmosphere. 

It was not pleasant for us in prison to learn of this slow decay 
of a great movement. And yet very few of us had expected a 
flashing success. There was always an odd chance that some- 
thing flashing might happen if there was an irrepressible up- 
heaval of the masses. But that was not to be counted upon, 
and so we looked forward to a long struggle with ups and 
downs and many a stalemate in between, and a progressive 
strengthening of the masses in discipline and united action and 
ideology. Sometimes in those early days of 1932 I almost feared 
a quick and spectacular success, for this seemed to lead inevit- 
ably to a compromise leaving the ‘ Governmentarians ’ and 
opportunists at the top. The experience of 1931 had been 
revealing. Success to be worth while should come when the 
people generally were strong enough and clear enough in their 
ideas to take advantage of it. Otherwise the masses would fight 
and sacrifice and, at the psychological moment, others would 
step in gracefully and gather the spoils. There was grave 
danger of this, because in the Congress itself there was a great 
deal of loose thinking and no clear ideas as to what system of 
government or society we were driving at. Some Congressmen, 
indeed, did not think of changing the existing system of 
government much, but simply of replacing the British or alien 
element in it by the swadeslii brand. 

The ' Governmentarians ’ of the pure variety did not matter 
much, for their first article of fiiith was subservience to the 
State authority whatever it was. But even the Liberals and 
Responsivists accepted the ideology of the British Government 
almost completely; and their occasional criticism, such as it was, 
was thus wholly ineffective and valueless. It was well known 
that they were legalists at any price, and as such they could not 
welcome civil resistance. But they went much further, and 
more or less ranged themselves on the side of the Government. 
They were almost silent and rather frightened spectators of 
the complete suppression of civil liberties of all kinds. It was 
not merely a question of civil disobedience being countered and 
suppressed by the Government, but of all political life and pubhc 
activity being stopped, and hardly a voice was raised against 
this. Those who usually stood for these liberties were involved 
in the struggle itself, and they took the penalties for refusing to 



340 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

submit to the State’s coercion. Others were cowed into abject 
submission, and hardly raised their voices in criticism. Mild 
criticism, when it was indulged in, was apologetic in tone and 
was accompanied by strong denunciation of the Congress and 
those who were carrying on the struggle. 

In Western countries a strong public opinion has been built 
up in favour of civil liberties, and any limitation of them is 
resented and opposed. (Perhaps this is past history now.) There 
are large numbers of people who, though not prepared to par- 
ticipate in strong and direct action themselves, care enough for 
the liberty of speech and writing. Assembly and Organisation, 
person and Press, to agitate for diem ceaselessly and thus help 
to check the tendency of the State to encroach upon them. 
The Indian Liberals claim to some extent to carry on the 
traditions of British Liberalism (although they have nothing 
in common with them except the name), and might have been 
expected to put up some intellectual opposition to the sup- 
pression of these liberties, for they suffered from this also. But 
they played no such part. It was not for them to say with 
Voltairej “ I disagree absolutely with what you say, but I will 
defend to the death your right to say it.” 

It is hot perhaps fair to blame them for this, for they have 
never stood out as the champions of democracy or liberty, and 
they had to face a situation in which a loose word might have 
got them into trouble. It is more pertinent to observe the 
reactions of those ancient lovers of liberty, the British Liberals, 
and the new socialists of the British Labour Party to repression 
in India. They managed to contemplate the Indian scene with 
a certain measure of equanimity, painful as it was, and some- 
times their satisfaction at the success of the "scientific appli- 
cation of repression,” as a correspondent of the Manchester 
Guardian put it, was evident. Recently the National Govern- 
ment of Great Britain has sought to pass a Sedition Bill, and 
a great deal of criticism has been directed to it, especially from 
Liberals and Labourites on the ground, inter alia, that it 
restricts free speech and gives magistrates the right of issuing 
warrants for searches. Whenever I read this criticism I sym- 
pathised with it, and I had at the same time the picture of 
India before me, where the actual laws in force to-day are 
approximately a hundred times worse than the British Sedition 
BiU seeks to enact. I wondered how it was that Britishers who 
strain at a gnat in England could swallow a camel in India 
without turning a hair. Indeed I have always wondered at and 
admired the astonishing knack of the British people of 



IN BAREILLY AND DEHRA DUN GAOLS 34I 

making their moral standards correspond with their material 
interests, and of seeing virtue in everything that advances 
their imperial designs. Mussolini and Hitler are condemned by 
them in perfect good faith and with righteous indignation for 
their attacks on liberty and democracy; and, in equal good 
faith, similar attacks and deprivation of liberty in India seem 
to them as necessary, and the highest moral reasons are ad- 
vanced to show that true disinterested behaviour on their part 
demands them. 

While fire raged all over India and men’s and women’s souls 
were put to the test, far away in London the chosen ones 
forgathered to draw up a constitution for India. There was 
the third Round Table Conference in 193a and numerous com- 
mittees, and large numbers of members of the Legislative 
Assembly angled for membership of these committees so that 
they might thus combine public duty with private pleasure. 
Quite a crowd went at the public expense. Later, in 1933, came 
the Joint Committee with its Indian assessors, and again free 
passages were provided by a benevolent Government to those 
who went as witnesses. Many people crossed the seas again at 
public cost in their earnest desire to serve India, and some, it 
was stated, even haggled for more passage money. 

It was not surprising to see these representatives of vested 
interests, frightened by the mass movements of India in action, 
gathering together in London under the aegis of British im- 
perialism. But it hurt the nationalism in us to sec any Indian 
behave in this way when the mother country was involved in 
a life-and-death struggle. And yet from one point of view it 
seemed to many of us a good thing, for it separated once and for 
all, as we thought (wrongly, it now appears), the reactionary 
firom the progressive elements in India. This sifting would help 
in the political education of the masses, and make it clearer 
stiU to Si concerned, that only through independence could we 
hope to face social issues and raise the burdens firom the 
masses. 

But it was surprising to find how far these people had 
alienated themselves, not only in their day-to-day lives, but 
morally and mentally, from the Indian masses. There were 
no links with them, no understanding of them or of that inner 
urge which was driving them to sacrifice and suffering. Reality 
for these distinguished statesmen consisted of one thing— 
British imperial power, which could not be successfully chal- 
lenged and therefore should be accepted with good or bad 
grace. It did not seem to strike them that it was quite im- 



JAWAIIARLAL NEHRU 


342 

possible for them to solve India's problem or draw up a real 
live constitution without the goodwill of the masses. Mr. J. A. 
Spender, in his recent Short History of Our Times, refers to the 
failure of the Irish Joint Conference of 1910 which sought to 
end the constitutional crisis. He says that the political leaders 
who were trying to find a constitution in the midst of a crisis 
were like men trying to insure a house when it is on fire. The 
fire in India in 1933 and 1933 was far greater than in Ireland 
in 1910, and even though the flames die down, the burning 
embers will remain for a long time, hot and unquenchable as 
India’s will to freedom. 

In India there was an amazing growth of the spirit of 
violence in official circles. The tradition was an old one, and 
the country had been governed by the British mainly as a 
police State. The overriding outlook even of the civilian ruler 
had been military: there was always a touch of a hostile army 
occupying alien and conquered soil. This mentality grew 
because of the serious challenge to the existing order. The 
occasional acta of terrorism in Bengal or elsewhere fed this 
official violence, and gave it some justification for its own acts. 
The various ordinances and the Government policy gave such 
tremendous power to the executive and the police, that in 
effect India was under Police Raj and there were hardly any 
checks. 

To a greater or less degree all the provinces of India went 
through this fire of fierce repression, but the Frontier Province 
and Bengal suffered most. The Frontier Province had always 
been a predominantly military area, administered under semi- 
military regulations. Its strategic position was important, and 
the ‘Redshirt’ movement had thoroughly upset the Govern- 
ment. Military columns were very much in evidence in the 
' pacification ’ of the province, and in dealing with ‘ recalcitrant 
villages ’. It was a common practice all over India to impose 
heavy collective fines on villages, and occasionally (in Bengal 
especially) on towns. Punitive police were often stationed, and 
police excesses were inevitable when they had enormous powers 
and no checks. We had typical instances of the lawlessness and 
disorderliness of law and order. 

Parts of Bengal presented the most extraordinary spectacle. 
Government treated the whole populations (or, to be exact, the 
Hindu population) as hostile, and everyone — ^man, woman, 
boy or girl between 12 and 35 — ^had to carry identity cards. 
There were extemments and internments in the mass, dress 
was regulated, schools were regulated or closed, bicycles were 



IN BAREILLY AND DEHRA DUN GAOLS 343 

not allowed, movements had to be reported to the police, 
curfew, sunset law, military marches, punitive police, collective 
fines, and a host of other rules and regulations. Large areas 
seemed to be in a continuous state of siege, and the inhabitants 
were little better than ticket-of-leave men and women under 
the strictest surveillance. Whetlicr, firom the point of view of 
the British Government, all these amazing provisions and regu- 
lations were necessary or not, it is not for me to judge. If they 
were not necessary, then that Government must be held guilty 
of a grave offence in oppressing and humiliating and causing 
great loss to the populations of whole areas. If they were 
necessary then surely that is the final verdict on British rule in 
India. 

The spirit of violence pursued our people even within the 
gaols. The class division of prisoners was a farce, and often 
a torture for those who were put in an upper class. Very few 
went to these upper classes, and many a sensitive man and 
woman had to submit to conditions which were a continuing 
agony. The deliberate policy of Government seems to have 
been to make the lot of political prisoners worse than that of 
ordinary convicts. An Inspector-General of Prisons went to the 
length of issuing a confidential circular to all the prisons, point- 
ing out that Civil Disobedience prisoners must be “ dealt with 
grimly.” * Whipping became a ftequent gaol punishment. On 
April 27, 1933, the Under Secretary for India stated in the House 
of Commons “ that Sir Samuel Hoare was aware that over 500 
persons in India were whipped during 1932 for offences in con- 
nection with the civil disobedience movement.” It is not clear if 
this figure includes the many whippings in prisons for breaches 
of gaol discipline. As news of firequent whippings came to us in 
prison in 1932, 1 remembered our protest and our three-day fast 
m December 1930 against one or two odd instances of whip- 
ping. I had felt shocked then at the brutality of it, and now 
I was still shocked and there was a dull pain inside me, but it 
did not strike me that I should protest and fast again. I felt 
much more helpless in the matter. The mind gets blunted to 


^ This circular was dated June 30, 1932, and it contained the 
following : “ The Inspector-General impresses upon Superintendents 
and gaol subordinates the fact that there is no justification for 
preferential treatment in favour of Civil Disobedience Movement 
prisoners as such. This class require to be kept in their places and 
dealt with grimly.” 



JAWAHARLAL NEIIRU 


344 

brutality after a while. A bad thing has only to continue for 
long for the world to get used to it. 

The hardest of labour tvas given to our men in prison — mills, 
oil-presses, etc. — and their lot was made as unbearable as pos- 
sible in order to induce them to apologise and be released on an 
undertaking being given to Government. That was considered 
a great triumph for the gaol authorities. 

Most of these gaol punishments fell to the lot of boys and 
young men, who resented coercion and humiliation. A fine and 
spirited lot of boys they were, full of self-respect and ' pep ’ and 
the spirit of adventure, the kind that in an English public 
school or university would have received every encouragement 
and praise. Here in India their youthful idealism and pride led 
them to fetters and solitary confinement and whipping. 

The lot of our womenfolk in prison was especially hard 
and painful to contemplate. They were mostly middle-class 
women, accustomed to a sheltered life, and suffering chiefly 
from the many repressions and customs produced by a society 
dominated to his own advantage, by man. The call of freedom 
had always a double meaning for them, and the enthusiasm 
and energy with which they threw themselves into the struggle 
had no doubt their springs in the vague and hardly conscious, 
but nevertheless intense, desire to rid themselves of domestic 
slavery also. Excepting a very few, they were classed as 
ordinary prisoners and placed with the most degraded of com- 
panions, and often under horrid conditions. I was once lodged 
m a barrack next to a female enclosure, a wall separating us. 
In that enclosure there were, besides other convicts, some 
women political prisoners, including one who had bera my 
hostess and in whose house I had once stayed. A high wall 
separated us, but it did not prevent me from listening in horror 
to the language and curses which our friends had to put up 
with from the women convict warders. 

It was very noticeable that the treatment of political prisoners 
in 1932 and 1933 was worse than it had been two years earlier, 
in 1930. Tlris could not have been due merely to the whims of 
individual officers, and the only reasonable inference seems to 
be that this was the deliberate policy of the Government, Even 
apart from political prisoners, the United Provinces Gaol 
Department had had the reputation in those years of being 
very much against anything that might savour of humanity. 
We had an interesting instance of this firom an unimpeachable 
source. A distinguished gaol visitor, a gallant knight, not a 
rebel and a sedition-monger like us, but one whom the Govern- 



IN BAREILLY AND DEHRA DUN GAOLS 345 

ment had delighted to honour, paid us a visit once in prison. 
He told us that some months earlier he had visited another 
gaol, and in his inspection note had desciibed the gaoler as 
a “ humane disciplinarian.” The gaoler in question begged him 
not to say anything about his humanity, as this was at a dis- 
count in official circles. But the knight insisted, as he could 
not conceive that any harm would befall the gaoler because of 
his description. Result: soon after the gaoler was transferred 
to a distant and out-of-the-way place, which was in the nature 
of a punishment to him. 

Some gaolers, who were considered to be particularly fierce 
and unscrupulous, were promoted and given titles. Graft is 
such a universal phenomenon in gaols that hardly any one 
keeps clear of it. But my own experience, and that of many 
of my friends, has been that the worst offenders among the 
gaol staff are usually those who pose as strict disciplinarians. 

I have been fortunate in ^aol and outside, and almost every one 
I have come across has given me courtesy and consideration, 
even when perhaps I did not deserve them. One incident in 
gaol, however, caused me and my people much pain. My 
mother, Kamala and Indira, my daughter, had gone to inter- 
view my brother-in-law, Ranjit Pandit, in the Allahabad District 
Gaol and, for no fault of theirs, they were insulted and hustled 
out by the gaoler. I was grieved when I learnt of this, and 
the reaction of the Provincial Government to it shocked me. To 
avoid the possibility of my mother being insulted by gaol 
officials, I decided to give up all interviews. For nearly seven 
months, while I was in Dehra Dun Gaol, I had no interview. 