KARACHI CONGRESS 

Gandhiji learnt indirectly of my distress, and the next morning 
he asked me to accompany him in his usual walk. We had a 
long talk, and he tried to convince me that nothing vital had 
been lost, no surrender of principle made. He interpreted 
Clause 2 of the agreement in a particular way so as to make it 
fit in with our demand for independence, relying chiefly on the 
words in it: “in the interests of India.” The interpretation 
seemed to me to be a forced one, and I was not convinced, but 
I was somewhat soothed by his talk. The merits of the agree- 
ment apart, I told him that his way of springing surprises upon 
us frightened me; there was something unknown about him 
which, in spite of the closest association for fourteen years, I 
could not understand at all and which filled me with appre- 
hension. He admitted the presence of this unknown element 
in him, and said that he himself could not answer for it or 
foretell what it might lead to. 

For a day or two I wobbled, not knowing what to do. There 
was no question of opposing or preventing that agreement 
then. That stage was past, and all I could do was to dissociate 
myself theoretically from it, though accepting it as a matter 
of fact. That would have soothed my personal vanity, biit how 
did it help the larger issue? Would it not be better to accept 
gracefully what had been done, and put the most favourable 
interpretation upon it, as Gandhiji had done? In an interview 
to the Press immediately after the agreement he had stressed 
that interpretation and that we stood completely by indepen- 
dence, He went to Lord Irwin and made this point quite clear, 
so that there might he no misapprehension then or in the 
future. In the event of the Congress sending any representative 
to the Round Table Conference, he told him, it could only be 
on this basis and to advance this claim. Lord Irwin could not, 
of course, admit the claim, but he recognised the right of the 
Congress to advance it. 

So I decided, not without great mental conflict and physical 
distress, to accept the agreement and work for it whole- 
’ heartedly. There appeared to me to be no middle way. 

In the course of Gandhiji’s interviews with Lord Irwin 
prior to the agreement, as well as after, he had pleaded for 

* 460 



KARACHI CONGRESS 


261 

the release of political prisoners other than the civil disobedience 
prisoners. The latter were going to be discharged as part of 
the agreement itself. But there were thousands of others, both 
those convicted after trial and detenus kept without any charge, 
trial or conviction. Many of these detenus had been kept so for 
years, and there had always been a great deal of resentment 
all over India, and especially in Bengal which was most affected, 
at this method of imprisonment without trial. Like the Chief 
of the General Staff in Penguin Island (or was it in the Dreyfus 
case?) the Government of India believed that no proo& are the 
best proofs. No proofs cannot be disproved. The detenus were 
alleged by the Government to be actual or potential revolu- 
tionaries of the violent type. Gandhiji had pleaded for their 
release, not necessarily as part of the agreement, but as 
eminently desirable in order to relieve political tension and 
establish a more normal atmosphere in Bengal. But the Govern- 
ment was not agreeable to this. 

Nor did the Government agree to Gandhiji’s hard pleading 
for the commutation of Bhagat Singh’s death sentence. This 
also had nothing to do with the agreement, and Gandhiji 
pressed for it separately because of the very^ strong feeling all 
over India on this subject. He pleaded in vain. 

I remember a curious incident about that time, which gave 
me an insight into the mind of the terrorist group in India. 
This took place soon after my discharge fi-om prison, either a 
little before father’s death or a few days after. A stranger came 
to see me at our house, and I was told that he was Chan- 
drashekhar Azad. I had never seen him before, but I had 
heard of him ten years earlier, when he had non-co-operated 
from school and gone to prison during the N.C.O. movement 
in 1921, A boy of fifteen or so then, he had been flogged in 
prison for some breach of gaol discipline. Later he had drifted 
towards the terrorists, and he became one of their prominent 
men in north India. All this I had heard vaguely, and I had 
taken no interest in these rumours. I was surprised, therefore, 
to see him. He had been induced to visit me because of the 
general expectation (owing to our release) that some negotia- 
tions between the Government and the Congress were likely. 
He wanted to know if, in case of a settlemmt, his group of 
people would have any peace. Would they still be coiwidered, 
and treated, as outlaws; hunted out ftom place to place, with 
a price on their heads, and the prospect of the j^Uows ever 
brfore them? Or was there a possibility of their being allowed 
to pursue peaceful vocations? He told me that as far as he was 



262 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

concerned, as well as many of his associates, they were con- 
vinced now that purely terrorist methods were futile and did no 
good. He was not, however, prepared to believe that India 
would gain her freedom wholly by peaceful methods. He 
thought that some time in the future a violent conflict might 
take place, but this would not be terrorism. He ruled out 
terrorism as such, so far as the question of Indian freedom was 
concerned. But then, he added. What was he to do when no 
chance was g^vcn him to settle down, as he was being hounded 
all the time? Many of the terroristic acts that had occurred 
recently, according to him, were purely in self-defence. 

I was glad to leam from Azad, and I bad confirmation of 
this subsequently, that the belief in terrorism was dying down. 
As a group notion, indeed, it had practically gone, and indi- 
vidual and sporadic cases were probably due to some special 
reason, act of rmrisal, or individual aberration, and not to 
a general idea. This ^d not mean, of course, that the old 
terrorists or their new associates had become .converts to non- 
violence, or admirers of British rule. But they did not thinlf 
in terms of terrorism as they used to. Many of them, it seems 
to me, have definitely the fascist mentality. 

I tried to explain to Chandrashekhar Azad what my philo- 
sophy of political action was, and tried to convert him to my 
view-point. But I had no answer to his basic question: what 
' was he to do now? Nothing was likely to happen that would 
bring him, or his like, any relief or peace. All I could suggest 
was that he should use his influence to prevent the occurrence 
of terrorist acts in the future, fer these could only injure the 
•la^er cause as well as his own group. 

Two or three weeks later, while the Gandhi— Irwin talks were 
going on, I heard at Delhi that Chandrashekhar Azad had 
been shot down and killed by the police in Allahabad. He was 
recognised in the day-time in a park, and was surrounded by 
a large force of police. He tried to defend himself from behind 
a tree; ^ere was quite a shooting-match, and he injured one or 
two policemen before he was shot down. 

I left Delhi soon after the provisional settlement wafe arrived 
at, and went to Lucknow. We had taken immediate steps to 
.stop civil disobedience all over the country, and the whole 
Congress organisadon had reroonded to our new instructions . 
with remarluble disdpline. 'We had many people in our ranks 
who were ^ssatisfied, many fire-brands, and we had no means 
of compelling them to desist ftom the old activities. But with- 
out a single exception known to me, the' huge organisation 



KARACHI CONGRESS 263 

accepted in practice the new r 61 e, though many criticised it. 
I was particularly interested in the reactions in our province, 
as the no-tax campaign was going strong in some areas there. 
Our first job was to see that the civil disobedience prisoners 
were discharged. Thousands of these were discharged from day 
to day, and after some time only a number of disputed cases 
were left in prison; apart, of course, from the thousands of 
detenus and those convicted for violent activities, who were 
not released. 

These discharged prisoners, when they went home to their 
town or villages, were naturally welcomed back by their people. 
There were often decorations and buntings, and processions, 
and meetings, and speeches and addresses of welcome. It was 
all very natural and to be expected, but the change was sudden 
from the time when tlie police lathi was always in evidence, 
and meetings and processions were forcibly dispersed. The 
police felt rather uncomfortable, and probably there was a feel- 
ing of triumph among many of our people who came out of 
gaol. There was little enough reason to be triumphant, but a 
coming out of gaol always brings a feeling of elation (unless the 
spirit has been crushed in gao^ and mass gaol deliveries add 
very much to this exhilaration. 

I mention this fact here, because in later months great 
exception was taken by the Government to this ‘air of 
triumph’, and it was made a charge against us I Brought up 
and living always in an authoritarian atmosphere, ■ with a 
military notion of government and with no roots or supports 
in the people, nothing is more painful to them than a weaken- 
ing of what they consider their prestige. None of us, so far 
as I know, had given the least thought to the matter, and it 
was with great surprise that we learnt latet that Government 
officials, from the heights of Simla to the plains below, were 
simmering with anger and wounded pride at this impudence 
of the people. The newspapers that echo their views have not 
got over it yet; and even now, three and a half years later, they 
refer with almost a visible shudder to those bold, bad days 
when, according to them. Congressmen went about in triumph 
as if they had won a great victory. These outbursts on me 
part of the Government and its friends in the Press, came as 
a revelation to us. They showed what a state of nerves they 
had been in, what suppressions they had put up with, resulting 
in aU manner of complexes. It was extraordinary that a few 
processions and a few speeches of our rank-and-file men should 
so upset them. 



264 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

As a matter of fact there was in Congress ranks then, and 
even less in the leadership, no idea of having ‘ defeated ’ the 
British Government. But there was a feeling of triumph 
amongst us at our own people’s sacrifices and courage. We 
were a little proud of what the country had done in 1930; it 
raised us in our self-esteem, gave us confidence, and even our 
littlest volunteer straightened himself and held up his head at 
the thought of this. We also felt that this great effort, which had 
attracted world attention, had brought enormous pressure on 
the British Government, and had taken us nearer our goal. 
All this had nothing to do with defeating the Government, 
and indeed many of us were fully conscious of the fact that 
the Government had done rather well in the Delhi Pact. Those 
of us who pointed out that we were far from our goal, and big 
and difficult struggles lay ahead, were accused by mends of the 
Government of war-mongering and going behind the spirit of 
the Delhi Pact. 

In the United Provinces we had now to face the agrarian 
problem. Our policy now was one of co-operation, as far as 
possible, with the British Government and immediately we put 
' ourselves in touch with the U.P. Provincial Government. After 
a long interval — for a dozen years we had had no official deal- 
ings with them— I visited some of the high officials of the 
province to discuss the agrarian question. We also carried on 
a lengthy correspondence on the subject. Our Provincial Con- 
gress Committee appointed one of our leading men, Govind 
Ballabh Pant, as a special liaison officer to keep in continuous 
touch with the Provincial Government, The facts of the 
agrarian crisis, of the tremendous fall in agricultural prices, 
and of the inability of the average peasant to pay the rent 
demanded, were admitted. The question was, what remissions 
should be given, and in this matter the initiative lay with the 
Provincial Government. Ordinarily the Government dealt with 
the landlords alone, and not with their tenants direct, and it 
was for the landlords to reduce or remit rents. ‘But the land- 
lords refused to do any such thing, so long as the Government 
did not remit part of their revenue demand; and in any event 
they were not, as a mle, keen on giving remissions to their 
tenantry. So the decision rested with the Government. 

The Provincial Congress Committee had told the peasantry 
that the no-tax campaign was off, and they should pay as much 
of their rent as they could. But, as their representatives, they 
had demanded heavy remissions. For a long Government 
took no action. Probably it was handicapped by the absence 



KARACHI .CONGRESS 


265 

on leave or special duty of the Governor, Sir Malcolm Hailey. 
Prompt and far-reaching action was necessary, but the acting 
Governor and his colleagues hesitated to commit themselves, 
and preferred to delay matters rill the return of Sir Malcolm 
Hailey in the summer. This indecision and delay made a diffi- 
cult situation worse, and resulted in much suffering for the 
tenantry. 

I had a little breakdown in health soon after the Delhi Pact. 
Even in gaol I had been unwell, and then the shock of father’s 
death, followed immediately by the long strain of the Delhi 
negotiations, proved too much for my physical health. I re- 
covered somewhat for the Karachi Congress. 

Karachi is far to the north-west of India, difficult of access, 
and partly cut off firom the rest of the country by desert 
regions. But it attracted a great gathering &om distant parts, 
and truly represented the temper of the country at the 
moment. There was a feeling of quiet, but deep satisfaction 
at the growii^ strength of jhe national movement in India; 
pride in the Congress organisation which had so far worthily 
responded to the heavy calls made on it, and fully justified 
itself by its disciplined sacrifice; a confidence in our people, 
and a restrained enthusiasm. At the same time there was a heavy 
sense of responsibility at the tremendous problems and perils 
ahead; our words and resolutions were now the preludes to 
action on a national scale, and could not be lightly uttered or 
passed. The Delhi Pact, though accepted by the great majority, 
was not popular or liked, and there was a fear that it might 
lead us to all manner of compromising situations. Somehow it 
seemed to take away fi'om the clarity of the issues before the 
country. On the very eve of the Congress, a new element of 
resentment had crept in— the execution of Bhagat Singh. This 
feeling was especially marked in North India, and Karachi, 
being itself in the north, had attracted large numbers of people 
from the Punjab. 

The Karachi Congress was an even greater personal triumph 
for Gandhiji than any previous Congress had been. The pre- 
sident, Sardar VaUabhbhai Patel, was one of the most popular 
and forceful men in India with the prestige of victorious 
leadership in Gmrat, but it was the Mahatma who dominated 
the scene. The Cfongress also had a strong contingent of ‘ Red- 
shirts ' from the Frontier Province under the leadership of 
Abdul Ghaffar Khan. These Redshirts were popular and drew 
a cheer wherever they went, for India had been impressed by 
their extraordinary and peaceful courage in the face of great 



266 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

provocation from April 1930 onwards. The name ' Redshirts ’ 
led some people to think, guite wrongly, that they were Com- 
munists or left-wing labourites. As a matter of fact their name 
was "Khudai Khidmatgar ”, and this organisation had allied 
itself to the Congress (later in 1931 they were to become 
integral parts of the Congress organisation). They were called 
Redshirts simply because of their rather primitive uniforms, 
which were red. They had no economic policy in their pro- 
gramme, which was nationalistic and also dealt with social 
reform. 

The principal resolution at Karachi dealt with the Delhi Pact 
and the Round Table Conference. I accepted it, of course, as 
it emerged from the Working Committee, but when I was 
asked by GandKiji to move it in the open Congress, I hesitated. 
It went against the grain, and I refused at first, and then this 
seemed a weak and unsatisfactory position to take up. Either 
I was for it or against it, and it was not proper to prevaricate 
or leave people guessing in the matter. Almost at the last 
moment, a few minutes before the resolution was taken up in 
the open Congress, I decided to sponsor it. In my speech I tried 
to lay before the great gathering quite frankly what my feelings 
were and why I had wholeheartedly accepted that resolution 
and pleaded with them to accept it That speech, made on the 
spur of the moment and coming from the heart, and with little 
of ornament or fine phrasing in it, was probably a greater 
success than many of my other efforts, which had followed a 
more carefrd preparation. 

. I spoke on other resolutions, too, notably on the Bhagat Singh 
resolution and the one on Fundamental Rights and Economic 
Policy. The latter resolution interested me especially, partly 
because of what it contained, and even more so because it 
represented a new outlook in the Congress. So far the Congress 
had thought along purely nationalist lines, and had avoided 
facing economic issues, except in so far as it encouraged cottage 
industries and swadeshi generally. lii the Karachi resolution it 
took a step, a very short step, in a socialist direction by advo- 
cating nation^sation of key industries and services, and 
various other measures to lessen the burden on the poor and 
increase it on the rich. This was not soc^ism at all, and 
a capitalist state could easily accept almost everything con- 
tained in that resolution. 

This very mild and prosaic resolution evidently made the big 
people of the Qoveminent of India furiously to think. Perhaps 
they even pictured, with their usual perspicacity, the red gold 



KARACHI CONGRESS 


•467 

of the Bolsheviks stealing its way into Karachi and corrupting 
the Congress leaders. Living in a kind of political harem, cut 
off from the outer world, and surrounded by an atmosphere of 
secrecy, their receptive minds love to hear tales of mystery and 
imagination. And then these stories are given out in little bits 
in a mysterious manner, through favoured newspapers, with 
a hint that much more could be seen if only the veil were 
lifted. In this approved and well-practised manner, frequent 
references have been made to the Karachi resolution on Fun- 
damental Rights, etc., and I can only conclude that they 
represent the Government view of this resolution. The story 
goes that a certain mysterious individual with communist 
afEliations drew up this resolution, or the greater part of it, 
and thrust it dovm upon me at Karachi; that thereupon I -issued 
an ultimatum to Mr. Gandhi to accept this or to face my 
opposition on the Delhi Pact issue, and Mr. Gandhi accepted 
it as i sop to me, and frtrced it down on a tired Subjects 
Committee and Congress on the concluding day. 

The name of the ‘mysterious individual’ has, so far as I 
know, not been direcdy mentioned, but numerous hints make 
it quite clear who is meant. Not being myself used to ways of 
mystery and roundabout methods of expression, I might as 
w^ state that this person seems to be M. N. Roy. It woxdd be 
interesting to know, and instructive to the big ones of Simla 
and Delhi to find out, what M. N. Roy or any other person 
‘ communisdcally inclined ’ thinks of that very iimocent Karachi 
resolution. It may surprise them to discover that any such 
person is rather contemptuous of the resolution because, 
according to him, it is a typical product of a bourgeois re- 
formist mentality. 

So for as Mr. Gandhi is concerned, I have had the privilege 
of knowing him pretty intimately for the last seventeen years, 
and the idea of my presenting ultimatums to him or bar- 
gaining with him seems to ine monstrous. We may accommo; 
date ourselves to each other; or we may, on a particular issue, 
part company, hut the methods of the market-place can never 
affect bur mutual dealings. 

The idea of getting the Congress to pass a resolution of this 
kind was an old one. For some years the U.P. Provincial 
Congress Committee had been agitating in the matter, and 
tr^g to get the A.I.C.C. to accept a socudist resolution. In 
1939 it succeeded to some extent in getting the AJ.C.C. tb’ 
accept the principle. Then followed civil disobe^ence. During 
my early morning talks in Delhi with Gandhiji in February 



j68 jawaharlal kehru 

and March 1931, I had referred to this matter, and he had 
welcomed the idea of having a resolution on economic matters. 
He asked me to bring the matter up at Karachi, and to draft 
a resolution and show it to him there. I did so at Karachi, 
and he made various changes and suggestions. He wanted both 
of us to agree on the wording, before we asked the Working 
Committee to consider it. I had to make several drafts, and 
this delayed matters for a few days, and we were otherwise 
very much occupied with other matters. Ultimately Gandhiji 
and I agreed on a draft, and this was placed before the Working 
Committee, and later before the Subjects Committee. It is 
perfectly true that it was a new subject for the Subjects Com- 
mittee and some members were surprised. However, it was 
easily passed by the Committee and the Congress, and was 
referred to the A.I.C.C. for further elucidation and enlargement 
on the lines laid down. 

While I was drafting this resolution various people, who used 
to come to ray tent, were sometimes consulted by me about it. 
But M. N. Roy had absolutely nothing to do with it, and I 
knew well enough that he would disapprove of it and laugh 
at it. 

I had come across M. N. Roy in Allahabad some days before 
coming to Karachi. He turned up suddenly one evening at 
our house, and though I had no notion that he was in India, 
I recognised him immediately, having seen him in Moscow 
in 1937. He saw me at Karachi also, but that was probably for 
not more than five minutes. Dtuing the past few years Roy 
had written a great deal in condemnation of me politically, 
and -le had often succeeded in hurting me a little. There was 
a great deal of diiference between us, and yet I felt attracted 
towards him, and when later he had been arrested and was in 
trouble, I wanted to do what little I could (and that was little 
enough) to help him. I was attracted to him by his remarkable 
intellectual capacity; I was also attracted to him because he 
seemed such a lonely figure, deserted by everybody. The British 
Government was naturally after him; nationalist India was not 
interested in him; and those who called themselves Communists 
in India condemned him as a traitor to the cause. I knew that 
after many years’ residence in Russia and close co-operation 
with the Comintern, he had parted with them or, perhaps, 
been made to part. Why this happened I did not know, nor 
do I know still, except very vaguely, what his present views 
or his differences with the orthodox Communists are. But this 
desertion of a man -like him by almost everybody pained me. 



KARACHI CONGRESS 


269 

and, against my usual habit, I joined the Defence Committee. 
Since that summer in 193 over three years ago now, he has 
been in prison, unwell and practically in solirary confinement. 

One of the final acts of the Congress session at Karachi was 
to elect a new Working Committee. This is elected by the All- 
India Congress Committee, but a convention has grown up 
that the suggestions of the President for the year (made in 
consultation with Gandhiji and sometimes other colleagues) are 
accepted by the A.I.C.C. The Karachi election of the Working 
Committee led to an imtoward result, which none of us anti- 
cipated then. Some Muslim members of the A.I.C.C. objected 
to this election, in particular to one (Muslim) name in it. Per- 
haps they also felt slighted because no one of their group had 
been chosen. In an all-India committee of fifteen it was mani- 
festly impossible to have all interests represented, and the real 
dispute, about which we knew nothing, was an entirely personal 
and local one in the Punjab. The result was that the protestant 
group gradually drifted away from the Congress in the Punjab, 
and joined others in an ‘Ahrar Party’ or ‘ MaJlis-e-Ahrar 
Some of the most active and popular Muslim Congress workers 
in the Punjab joined this, and it attracted large numbers of 
Punjab Muslims to it. It represented chiefly the lower middle- 
class elements and it had numerous contacts with the Muslim 
masses. It thus became a powerful organisation, far stronger 
than the decrepit Muslim communal organisations of upper- 
class folk, which functioned in the air or, rather, in drawing- 
rooms and committee rooms. Inevitably, the Ahrars drifted 
towards communalism, but because of their touch with the 
Muslim masses they remained a live body with a vague 
economic outlook. They played an important part later in 
Muslim agitations in Indian States, notably Kashmir, where 
economic ills and communalism were strangely and unhappily 
mixed together. The defecdon of some of the leaders of the 
Ahrar Party from the Congress was a serious loss for the Con- 
gress in the Punjab. But we did not know of this at Karachi; 
the realisation came slowly in later months. This defection did 
not, of course, come because of resentment at the election of 
the Congress Working Committee. That was just a straw show- 
ing the drifi: of the wind; the real causes lay deeper. 

While we were all at Karachi news had come of the Hindu- 
Muslim riots at Cawnpore, to be followed, soon after, by the 
report of the murder of Ganesh Shankar Vidyarthi by a 
frenzied mob of persons whom he was trying to help. Those 
terrible and brutal riots were bad enough, but Ganeshji's death 



270 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

brought them home to U8 as nothing else could have done. 
He was known to thousands in that Congress camp, and to all 
of us of the U.P. he was the dearest of comrades and friend, 
brave and intrepid, far-sighted and full of wise counsel, never 
downhearted, quiedy working away and scorning publicity and 
office and the limelight. In me pride of his youth he willingly 
offered his life for the cause he loved and served, and foolish 
hands struck him down, and deprived Cawnpore and the pro- 
vince of the brightest of their jewels. There was gloom over 
our UJP. camp in Karachi when this news came; the glory 
seemed to have departed. And yet there was pride in him, 
that he had faced death so un&lteringly and died so gloriously. 