NINETEEN TWENTY-ONE AND THE FIRST 
IMPRISONMENT 

Nineteen twenty-one was an extraordinary year for us. There 
was a strange mixture of nationalism and politics and religion 
and mysticism and fanaticism. Behind all this was agrarian 
trouble and, in the big cities, a rising working-class movement. 
Nationalism and a vague but intense country-wide idealism 
sought to bring together all these various, and sometimes mutu- 
ally contradictory, discontents, and succeeded to a remarkable 
degree. And yet this nationalism itself was a composite force, 
and behind it could be distinguished a Hindu nationalism, a 
Muslim nationalism partly looking beyond the frontiers of 
India, and, what was more in consonance with the spirit of the 
times, an Indian nationalism. For the time being they over- 
lapped and all pulled together. It was Hindu-Musalman hi Jai 
everywhere. It was remarkable how Gandhiji seemed to cast a 
spell on all classes and groups of people and drew them into 
one motley crowd strug^ing in one direction. He became, in- 
deed (to use a phrase which has been applied to another leader), 
" a symbolic expression of the confused desires of the people ”. 

Even more remarkable was the fact that these desires and 
passions were relatively free from hatred of the alien rulers 
against whom they were directed. Nationalism is essentially an 
anti-feeling, and it feeds and fattens on hatred and anger against 
other national groups, and especially against the foreign rulers 
of a subject country. There was certainly this hatred and anger 
in India in 1931 against the British but, in comparison with 
other countries similarly situated, it was extraordinarily litde. 
Undoubtedly this was due to Gandhiji’s insistence on the impli- 
cations of non-violence. It was also due to the feeling of release 
and power that came to the whole country with the inaugura- 
tion of the movement and the wide^read belief in success in 
the near fiiture. Why be angry and full of hate when we were 
doing so well and were likely to win through' soon? We felt that 
we could afford to be generous. 

We were not so generous in our hearts, though our actions 
were circumspect and proper, towards the handfel of our own 
countrymen who took sides against us and opposed the national 
movement. It was not a question of hatred or anger, for they 

.7fi 



76 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

carried no weight whatever and we could ignore them. But deep 
within us was contempt for their weakness and opportunism and 
betrayal of national honour and self-respect. 

So we went on, vaguely hut intensely, the exhilaration of 
action holding us in its grip. But about our goal there was an 
entire absence of clear thinking. It seems surprising now, how 
completely we ignored the theoretical aspects, the philosophy of 
our movement as well as the definite objective that we should 
have. Of course we all grew eloquent about Swaraj, but each one 
of us probably interpreted the word in his or her own way. To 
most of the younger men it meant political independence, or 
something like it, and a democratic form of government, and 
we said so in our public utterances. Many of us also thought 
that inevitably this would result in a lessening of the burdens 
that crushed the workers and the peasantry. But it was obvious 
that to, most of our leaders Swaraj meant something much less 
than independence. Gandhiji was delightfully vague on the 
subject, and he did not encourage clear thinking about it either. 
But he always spoke, vaguely but definitely, m terms of the 
under-dog, and this brought great comfort to many of us, 
although, at the same time, he was full of assurances to the top- 
dog also. Gandhiji’s stress was never on the intellectual approatm 
to a problem but on character and piety. He did succeed amaz- 
ingly in giving backbone and character to the Indian people. 
There were many, however, who developed neither much back- 
bone nor character, but who imagined that a limp body and a 
flabby look might be the outward semblance of piety. 

It was this extraordinary stiffening-up of the masses that filled 
us with confidence. A demoralized, backward, and broken-up 
people suddenly straightened their backs and lifted their heads 
and took part in disciplined, joint action on a country-wide scale. 
This action itself, we felt, would give irresistahle power to the 
masses. We ignored the necessity of thought behind the action; 
we forgot that without a conscious ideology and objective the 
energy and enthusiasm of the masses must end largely in smoke. 
To some extent the revivalist element in our movement carried 
us on; a feeling that non-violence as concrived for political or 
economic movements or for righting wrongs was a new message 
which our people were destined to mve to the world. We be- 
came victims to the curious illusion of all peoples and all nations 
that in some way they are a chosen race. Non-violence was the 
moral equivalent of war and of aU violent struggle. It was not 
merely ethical alternative, but it was efeitive also. Few of 
us, I think, accepted Gandhiji’s old ideas about machinery 



■JIHE FIRS'i IMPRISONMENT 77 

and modern civilization. We thought that even he looked upon 
them as utopian and as largely mapplicable to modern con- 
ditions. Certainly most of us were not prepared to reject the 
achievements of modern civilization, although we may have 
felt that some variation to suit Indian conditions was possible. 
Personally, I have always felt attracted towards big machinery 
and fast travelling. Still there can be no doubt that Gandhiji’s 
ideology influenced many people and made them critical of the 
machine and all its consequences. So, while some looked to the 
future, others looked back to the past. And, curiously, both felt 
that the joint action they were indulging in was worth while, 
and this made it easy to bear sacrifice and face self-denial. 

I became wholly absorbed and wrapt in the movement, and 
large numbers of other people did likewise. I gave up all my 
other associations and contacts, old friends, books, even news- 
papers, except in so far as they dealt with the work in hand. 
I had kept up till then some reading of current books and had 
tried to follow the developments of world affairs. But there 
was no time for this now. In spite of the strength of my family 
bonds, I almost forgot my family, my wife, my daughter. It 
was only long afterwards that I realised what a burden and a 
trial I must have been to them in those days, and what amazing 
patience and tolerance my wife had shown towards me. I lived 
in offices and committee meetings and crowds. “Go to the 
villages ” was the slogan, and we trudged many a mile across 
fields and visited distant villages and addressed peasant meetings. 
I experienced the thrill of mass-feeling, the power of influencing 
the mass. I began to understand a little the psychology of 
the crowd, the difference between the city masses and the 
peasantry, and I felt at home in the dust and discomfort, the 
pushing and jostling of large gatherings, though their want of 
discipline often irritated me. Since those days I have sometimes 
had to face hostile and angry crowds, worked up to a state when 
a spark would light a flame, and I found that that early ex- 
perience and the confidence it begot in me stood me in good 
stead. Always I went straight to the crowd and trusted it, and 
so far I have always had courtesy and appreciation ftom it, even 
though there was no agreement. But crowds axe fickle, and the 
future may have different experiences in store for me. 

, I took to the crowd and the crowd took to me, and yet I never 
lost myself in it; always I felt apart from it. From my separate 
mental perch I looked at it critically, and I never ceased to 
wonder how I, who was so, different in every way from those 
thousands who surrounded me, different in -habits, in desires. 



y8 JAWAHAELAL NEHRU 

in mental and spiritual outlook, how I had managed to gain 
goodwill and a measure of confidence from these people. Was 
it because they took me for something other than I was? 
Would they bear with me when they knew me better? Was I 
gaining their goodwill under false pretences? I tried to be frank 
and straightforward to them; I even spoke harshly to them 
sometimes and criticised many of their pet beliefs and customs, 
but still they put up with me. And yet I could not get rid of 
the idea that their affection was meant not for me as 1 was, but 
for some fanciful image of me that they had formed. How long 
could that false image endure? And why should it be allowed 
to endure? And when it fell down and they saw the reality, 
what then? 

I am vain enough in many ways, but there could be no question 
of vanity with these crowds of simple folk. There was no' posing 
about them, no vulgarity, as in the case of many of us of the 
middle classes who consider ourselves their betters. They were 
dull certainly, uninteresting individually, but in the mass they 
produced a feeling of overwhelming pity and a sense of ever- 
impending tragedy. 

■very different were our conferences where our chosen workers, 
including myself, performed on the platform. There was suffi- 
cient posing there and no lack of vulgarity in our flamboyant 
addresses. All of us must have been to some extent guilty of 
this, but some of the minor Khilafat leaders probably led the 
rest. It is not easy to behave naturally on a platform before 
a large audience, and few of us had previous experience of such 
publicity. So we tried to look as, we imagined, leaders should 
look, thoughtful and serious, with no trace of levity or frivolity. 
"When we walked or talked or smiled we were conscious of 
thousands of eyes staring at us and we reacted accordingly. Our 
speeches were often very eloquent but, equally often, singularly 
pointless. It is difficult to see oneself as others see one. And so, 
unable to criticise myself, I took to watching carefully the ways 
of others, and I found considerable amusement in tnis occupa- 
tion. And then the terrible thought would strike me that I might 
perhaps appear equally ludicrous to others. 

Right through the year igai individual Congress workers were 
being arrested and sentenced, but there were no mass arrests. 
The All Brothers had received long sentences for inciting the 
Indian Army to disaffection. Their words, for which they had 
been sentenced, were repeated at hundreds of platforms by 
thousands of persons. I was threatened in the summer with 
proceedings for sedition because of some speeches I had de- 






THE FIRST IMPRISONMENT 79 

livered. No such step, however, was taken then. The end of the 
year brought matters to a head. The Prince of Wales was 
coming to India, and the Congress had proclaimed a boycott 
of all the functions in connection with his visit. Towards the 
end of November the Congress volunteers in Bengal were de' 
dared illegal and this was Allowed by a similar declaration for 
the United Provinces. Deshbandhu Das gave a stirring message 
to Bengal : “ I feel the handcuffs on my wrists and the weight 
of iron chains on my body. It is the agony of bondage. The 
whole of India is a vast prison. The work of the Congress must 
be carried on. What matters it whether I am taken or left? 
What matters it whether I am dead or alive? ” In the U.P. we 
took up the challenge and not only announced that our volun- 
teer organisation would continue to function, but published lists 
of names of volunteers in the daily newspapers. The first list 
was headed by my father s name. He was not a volunteer but, 
simply for the purpose of defying the Government order, he 
joined and gave his name. Early in December, a few days before 
the Prince came to our province, mass arrests began. 

We knew that matters had at last come to a head; the inevit- 
able conflict between the Congress and the Government was 
about to break out. Prison was still an unknown place, the idea 
of going there still a novelty. I was sitting rather late one day 
in me Congress office at Allahabad trying to clear up arrears 
of work. An excited clerk told me that the police had come 
with a search warrant and were surrounding the office building. 
I was, of course, a little excited also, for it was my first experience 
of the kind, but the desire to show off was strong, the wish to 
appear perfectly cool and collected, unaffected by the comings 
and goii^s of the police. So I asked a clerk to accompany the 
police officer in his search round the office rooms, and insisted 
on the rest of the staff carrying on their usual work and ignoring 
the police. A little later a fiicnd and a colleague, who had been 
arrested just outside the office, came to me, accompanied by 
a policeman,’ to bid me good-bye. I was so full of the conceit that 
I must treat these novel occurrences as everyday happenings 
that I treated my colleague in a most unfeeling manner. Casu- 
ally I asked him and the policeman to wait till I had finished 
the letter I was writing. Soon news came of other arrests in 
the city. I decided at last to go home and see what was happen- 
ing there. I found tlie inevitable police searching part of the 
large house and learnt that they had come to arrest both father 
and me. • ^ 

Nothing that we could have done would have fitted in so well 



8o 


JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


with our programme of boycotting the Prince’s visit. Where- 
ever he was taken he was met with hartals and deserted streets. 
Allahabad, when he came, seemed to be a city of the dead; 
Calcutta, a few days later, suddenly put a temporary stop to all 
the activities of a great city. It was hard on the Prince of Wales; 
he was not to blame, and ^ere was no feeling against him what- 
ever. But the Government of India had tried to exploit his 
personality to prop up their decaying prestige. 

There was an orgy of arrests and convictions, especially in the 
United Provinces and in Bengal. All the prominent Congress 
leaders and workers in these provinces were arrested, and or- 
dinary volunteers by the thousand went to prison. They were, 
at first, largely city men and there seemed to be an inexhaustible 
supply of volunteers for prison. The U.P. Provincial Congress 
Committee was arrested en bloc (55 members) as they were actu- 
ally holding a committee meeting. Many people, who had so far 
taken no part in any Congress or political activity, were carried 
away by the wave of enthusiasm and insisted on being arrested. 
There were cases of Government clerks, returning fiom thnr 
ofiices in the evening, being swept away by this current and 
landing in gaol instead of their homes. Young men and boys 
would crowd inside the police lorries and refuse to come out. 
Every evening we could near firom inside the gaol, lorry after 
lorry arriving outside heralded by our slogans and shouts. The 
gaols were crowded and the gaol officials were at their wits’ ends 
at jhis extraordinary phenomenon. It happened sometimes that 
a police lorry would bring, according to the warrant accom- 
panying it, a certain number of prisoners— no names were or 
could be mentioned. Actually, a larger number than that men- 
tioned would emerge firom the lor^ and the gaol officials did 
not know how to meet this novel situation. There was nothing 
in the Jail Manual about it. 

Gradually the Government gave up the policy of indis- 
criminate arrests; only noted workers were picked out. Gradu- 
ally also the ffist flush of enthusiasm of the people cooled 
down and, owing to the absence in prison of all the trusted 
workers, a feeling of indecision and helplessness spread. But 
the change was superflcial only, and there was stiU thunder in 
the air ^d the atmosphere was tense and pregnant with 
revolutionary possibilities. During the months of December 10a i 
and January igaa it is estimated that about thirty thousand 
perstjns were sentenced to imprisonment in connection with the 
non-co-operation movement. W though most of the prominent 
men and , workers were in prison, the leader of die whole 



THE FIRST IMPRISONMENT 


8l 

Struggle, Mahatma Gandhi, was still out, issuing from day to 
day messages and directions which inspired the people, as well 
as checking many an undesirable activity. The Government 
had not touched him so far, for they feared the consequences, 
the reactions on the Indian Army and the police. 

Suddenly, early in February 1932, the whole scene shifted, 
and we in prison learnt, to our amazement and consternation, 
that Gandhiji had stopped the aggressive aspects of our struggle, 
that he had suspended civil resistance. We read that this was 
because of what had happened near the village of Chauri 
Chaura where a mob of villagers had retaliated on some police- 
men by setting fire to the police-station and burning half a 
dozen or so policemen in it. 

We were angry when we learnt of this stoppage of our struggle 
at a time when we seemed to be consolidating our position and 
advancing on all fronts. But our disappointment and anger in 
prison could do little good to any one, and civil resistance stopped 
and non-co-operation wilted away. After many months of strain 
and anxiety the Government breathed again, and for the first 
time had the opportunity of taking the initiative. A few weeks 
later they arrested Gandhiji and sentenced him for a long term 
of imprisonment. 



