COMMUNALISM AND REACTION 

About the time of my sister’s wedding came news of Vithal- 
bhai J. Patel’s death in Europe. He had long been ailing, and it 
was because of his ill-health that he had been released from 
prison in India. His passing away was a painful event, and the 
thought of our veteran leaders leaving us in this way, one after 
another, in the middle of our struggle, was an extraordinarily 
depressing one. Many tributes were paid to Vithalbhai, and 
most of these laid stress on his ability as a parliamentarian and 
his success as President of the Assembly, This was perfectly 
true, and yet this repetition irritated me. Was there any lack of 
good parliamentarians in India or of people who could fill the 
Speaker’s chair with ability? That was the one job for which 
our lawyer’s training had fitted us. Vithalbhai had been some- 
thing much more than that — ^he had been a great and indomi- 
table fighter for India’s freedom. 

During my visit to Benares in November I was invited to 
address the students of the Hindu University. I gladly accepted 
this invitation and addressed a huge gathering presided over by 
Pandit Madan Mohan Malaviya, the Vice-Chancellor. In the 
course of my speech I had much to say about communalism, 
and I denounced it in forcible language, and es^cially con- 
demned the activities of the Hindu Mahasabha. This was not 
exactly a premeditated attack, but for a long time past my mind 
had been lull of resentment at the increasingly reactionary 
efforts of the communalists of ail groups, and as I warmed up 
to my subject, some of this resentment came out. Deliberately 
I laid stress on the reactionary character of the Hindu com- 
munalists, for there was no point in my criticising Muslims 
before a Hindu audience. At the moment, it did not strike me 
that it wsis not in the best of taste to criticise the Hindu Maha- 
sabha at a meeting presided over by Malaviyaji, who had long 
been one of its pillars. I did not think of this, as he had not 
had much to do with it lately, and it almost seemed that the 
new aggressive leaders of the Mahasabha had pushed him out. 
So long as he had been one of the leading spirits, the Maha- 
sabha, in spite of its communalism, had not been politically 
reactionary. But latterly this new development has become very 
patent, and I felt sure that Malaviyaji could not have anything 



COMMUNALISM AND REACTION 459 

to do with it and must have disapproved of it. Still, it was not 
quite right for rhe, as I realised later, to have taken an undue 
advantage of his invitation by making remarks which put him 
in an awkward position. I was sorry for this. 

I was also sorry for a foolish error into which I had fallen. 
Some one sent us by post a copy of a resolution which, it stated, 
had recently been passed in Ajmer by a Hindu young men’s 
organisation. This resolution was most objectionable and I 
referred to it in my Benares speech. As a matter of fact no such 
resolution had been passed by any organisation, and we had been 
the victims of a hoax. 

My Benares speech, briefly reported, created an uproar. Used 
as I was to such outcries, I was quite taken aback by the vehe- 
mence of the attack of the Hindu Mahasabha leaders. These 
attacks were largely personal and seldom touched the point in 
issue. They overreached themselves, and soon I was glad of 
them, for they gave me an opportunity for having my say on 
the subject. I had been bursting with it for months past, even 
when I was in prison, hut did not know how to tackle it. It was 
a hornets’ nest, and though I was used to hornets, it was no 
pleasure to enter into controversies which degenerated into 
abuse. But now I had no choice, and I wrote what I considered 
a reasoned article on Hindu and Muslim communalism, show- 
ing how in neither case was it even bona fide communalism, but 
was political and social reaction hiding behind the communal 
mask. I happened to possess odd newspaper cuttings, which I 
had collected in prison, of variotis speeches and statements of 
conomimal leaders. Indeed 1 had so much material that I was 
hard put to it how to compress it in a newspaper article. 

This article of mine was given great publicity in the Indian 
Press. But strange to say there was no response to it from either 
side — ^Hindu or Muslim communalists — although there was a 
great deal about both in my article. The Hindu Mahasabha 
leaders, who had denoimced me in the most vigorous and varied 
language, now remained perfeedy silent. From the Muslim side 
Sir Mohamad Iqbal endeavoured to correct some of my fricts 
regarding the second Round Table Conference, but otherwise 
he did not say anything about my argument. It was in my 
reply to him that I suggested that a Constituent Assembly 
should decide both the political and communal issues. Later I 
wrote one or two additional articles on communalism. I was 
very much heartened, not only by the reception of all these 
articles, but by the visible effect they were producing on people 
who tried to think. I did not imagine, of course, mat I could 



460 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

conjure away the passions that underlay the communal spirit. 
My object was to point out that the communal leaders were 
allied to the most reactionary elemcnw in India and England, 
and were in reality opposed to political, and even more so to 
social advance. All their demands had no relation whatever to 
the masses. They were meant only to bring some advancement 
to the small groups at the top. It was my intention to carry on 
with this reasoned attack when prison claimed me again. The 
oft-repeated appeal for Hindu-Muslim unity, useful as it no 
doubt is, seemed to me singularly inane, unless some effort 
was made to understand the causes of the disunity. Some 
people, however, seem to imagine that by a frequent repetition 
of the magic formula, unity will ultimately emerge. 

It is interesting to trace British policy since the Rising of 1857 
in its relation to the communal question. Fundamentally and 
inevitably it has been one of preventing the Hindu and Muslim 
from acting together, and of playing off one community 
against another. After 1857 the heavy hand of the British fell 
more on the Muslims than on the Hindus. They considered the 
Muslims more aggressive and militant, possessing memories 
of recent rule in India, and therefore more dangerous. The 
Muslims had also k^t away from the new education and had 
few jobs under the Government. All this made them suspect. 
The Hindus had taken far more kindly to the English language 
and clerkly jobs, and seemed to be more docile. 

The new nationalism then grew up from above— -the upper- 
class English-speaking intelligentsia — and this vras naturally 
confined to the Hindus, for the Muslims were educationally very 
backward. This nationalism spoke in the gentlest and most 
abject of tones, and yet it was not to the liking of the Govern- 
ment, and they decided to encourage the Muslims more and 
keep them away from the new nationalist platform. Lack of 
English education was in itself a sufficient bar then, so far as 
the Muslims were concerned, but this was bound to go gradu- 
ally. With foresight the British provided for the future, and in 
this task they were helped by an outstanding personality— Sir 
Syed Ahmad Khan. 

Sir Syed was unhappy about the backward condition of his 
community, especially in education, and he was distressed at the 
lack of favour and influence it had in the eyes of the British 
Government. Like many of his contemporaries, he was a great 
admirer of the British, and a visit to Europe seems to have had 
a most powerful effect on liim, Europe, or rather Western 
Europe, of the second half of the nineteenth century was at 



COMMUNALISM AND REACTION 461 

the height of its civilisation, the unchallenged mistress of the 
world, with all the qualities that had made it great most in 
evidence. The upper classes were secure in their inheritance and 
adding to it, with little fear of a successful challenge. It was the 
age of a growing liberalism and a firm belief in a great destiny. 
It is not surprising that the Indians who went there were fasci- 
nated by this imposing spectacle. More Hindus went there to 
begin with and they returned admirers of Europe and England. 
Gradually they got used to the shine and glamour, and the first 
surprise wore off. But in Sir Syed’s case that first surprise and 
fascination is very much in evidence. Visiting England in 1869, 
he wrote letters home giving his impressions. In one of these 
he stated: “The result of all this is that although I do not 
absolve the English in India of discourtesy, and of looking upon 
the natives of that country as animals and beneath contempt, I 
think they do so from not understanding us: and I am afraid I 
must confess that they are not far wrong in their opinion of us. 
Without flattering the English, I can truly say that the natives 
of India, high and low, merchants and petty shopkeepers, 
educated and illiterate, when contrasted with the English in 
education, manners and uprightness, arc as like them as a dirty 
animal is to an able and handsome man. The English have 
reason for believing us in India to be imbecile brutes. . . . What 
I have seen, and seen daily, is utterly beyond the imagination 
of a native of India. . . . All good things, spiritual and worldly, 
which should be found in man, have been bestowed by the 
Almighty on Europe, and especially on England.”^ 

Greater praise no man could give to the British and to 
Europe, and it is obvious that Sir Syed was tremendously im- 
pressed. Perhaps also he used strong language and heightened 
the contrasts in order to shake up his own people out of their 
torpor and induce them to take a step forward. This step, he 
was convinced, must be in the direction of Western education; 
without that education his community would become more and 
more backward and powerless. English education meant govern- 
ment jobs, security, influence, honour. So to this education he 
turned all his energy, trying to win over Ms community to his 
way of thinking. He wanted no diversions or distractions firom 
other directions: it was a difficult enough piece of work to over- 
come the inertia and hesitation of the Muslims. The be- 
ginnings of a new nationalism, sponsored by the Hindu 
hourgepisie, seemed to him to offer such a distraction, and he 
1 This quotation has been taken from Hans Kohn’s History of 
Nationalism in the East, 



463 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

opposed it. The Hindus, half a century ahead in Western edu- 
cation, could indulge in this pastime of criticising the Govern- 
ment, but he had counted on the full co-operation of that 
Government in his educational undertakings and he was not 
going to risk this by any premature step. So he turned his 
back on the infant National Congress, and the British Govern- 
ment were only too willing to encourage this attitude. 

Sir Syed’s decision to concentrate on Western education for 
Muslims was undoubtedly a right one. Without that they could 
not have played any effective part in the building up of Indian 
nationalism of the new type, and they would have been doomed 
to play second fiddle to the Hindus with their better education 
and rar stronger economic position. The Muslims were not 
historically or ideologically ready then’ for the bourgeois 
nationalist movement as they had developed no bourgeoisie, as 
the Hindus had done. Sir Syed’s activities, therefore, although 
seemingly very moderate, were in the right revolutionary direc- 
tion. The Muslims were still wrapped up in a feudal anti- 
democratic ideology, while the rising middle class among the 
Hindus had begun to think in terms of the European liberals. 
Both were thoroughly moderate and dependent on British rule. 
Sir Syed’s moderation was the moderation of the landlord-class 
to which the handful of well-to-do Muslims belonged. The 
Hindu’s moderation was that of the cautious professional or 
business man seeking an outlet for industry and investment. 
These Hindu politicians looked up to the shining lights of 
English liberalism — Gladstone, Bright, etc. I doubt if the 
Muslims did so. Probably they admired the Tories and the 
landed classes of England. Gladstone, indeed was their bite noir 
because of his repeated condemnation of Turkey and the 
Armenian massacres; and because Disraeli seemed to be more 
friendly to Turkey they — ^that is of course the handful who 
took interest in such matters — ^were to some extent partial to 
him. 

Some of Sir Syed Ahmad Khan’s speeches make strange 
reading to-day. At a speech ddivered in Lucknow in December 
1887 he seems to have criticised and condemned the very 
moderate demands of the National Congress which was hold- 
ing its annual sessions just then. Sir Syed said; . .If 
Government fight Afghanistan or conquer Burma, it is no 

business of ours to criticise its policy Government has 

made a Council for making laws. , . . For this Council she 
selects ftom all Provinces those officials who are best acquainted 
with the administration and the condition of the people, and 



COMMUNALISM AND REACTION 463 

also some Raises who, on account of tlieir high social position, 
are worthy of a scat in that assembly. Some people may ask- 
why should they be chosen on account of social position in- 
stead of ability? ... I ask you— Would our aristocracy like 
that a man of low caste or insignificant origin, though he be a 
B.A. or M.A. and have the requisite ability, should be in a 
position of authority above them and have power in making 
the laws that affect their lives and property? Never I . . . None 
but a man of good breeding can the Viceroy take as his col- 
league, treat as his brother, and invite to entertainments at 
which he may have to dine with Dukes and Earls. . . . Can we 
say that the Government, in the method it has adopted for 
legislation, acts without regard to the opinions of the people? 
Can we say that we have no share in the making of the laws? 
Most certainly not.” ^ 

Thus spoke the leader and representative of the ‘ democracy 
of Islam’ in India I It is doubtful if even the taluqadars of 
Oudh, or the landed magnates of Agra Province, Behar, or 
Bengal would venture to speak in this vein to-day. And yet 
Sir Syed was by no means unique in this. Many of the Con- 
gress speeches read equally strangely to-day. But it seems clear 
that the political and economic aspect of the Hindu-Muslim 
question then was this: the rising and economically better- 
equipped middle class (Hindu) was resisted and checked to some 
extent by part of the feu«ial landlord-class (Muslim). The 
Hindu landlords were often closely coimected with their 
bourgeoisie, and thus remained neutral or even sympathetic 
to the middle-class demands which were often influenced by 
them. The British, as always, sided with the feudal elements. 
The masses and the lower middle classes on either side were not 
in the picture at all. 

Sir Syed’s dominating and forceful personality impressed 
itself on the Indian Muslims, and the Aligarh College became 
the visible emblem of his hopes and desires. In a period of 
transition a progressive impulse may soon play out its part and 
be reduced to functioning as a brake. (The Indian Liberals are 
an obvious example of this. They remind us often that they 
are the true heirs of the old Congress tradition and we of a 
later day are interlopers. True enough. But they forget that 
.the world changes and the old Congress tradiuon has vanished 
with the snows of yester-year and only remain as a memory. 
So also Sir Syed’s message was appropriate and necessary when 

* Taken from Hans Kohn’s History of Nationalism in the East. 



464 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

it came, but it could not be the final ideal of a progressive 
community. It is possible that had he lived a generation later, 
he would himself have given another orientation to that 
message. Or other leaders could have re-interpreted his old 
message and applied it to changing conditions. But the very 
success that came to Sir Syed and the reverence that clung to 
his memory made it difficult for others to depart from the old 
faith; and, unhappily, the Muslims of India were strangely 
lacking in men of outstanding ability who could point a new 
way. Aligarh College did fine work, produced a large number 
of competent men, and changed the whole tone of the Muslim 
intelligentsia, but still it could not wholly get out of the frame- 
work in which it was built — a feudal spirit reigned over it, and 
the goal of the average student’s ambition was government 
service. Not for him the adventures of the spirit or the quest 
of the stars ; he was happy if he got a Deputy Collectorship. 
His pride was soothed by his being reminded that he was a 
unit in the great democracy of Islam, and in witness of this 
brotherhood, he wore jauntily on his head the red cap, called 
the Turkish fez, which the "Turks themselves soon afterwards 
were going to discard utterly. Having assured himself of his 
inalienable right to democracy, which enabled him to feed and 
pray with his brother Muslims, he did not worry about the 
existence or otherwise of political democracy in India. 

This narrow outlook and hankering after government service 
was not confined to the Muslim students of Aligarh and else- 
where. It was equally in evidence among the Hindu students 
who were far from being adventurous by nature. But circum- 
stances forced many of them out of the rut. There were far 
too many of them and not enough jobs to go round, and so 
they became the declasse intellectuals who are the backbone of 
national revolutionary movements. 

The Indian Muslims had not wholly recovered from the 
cramping effects of Sir Syed Ahmad Khan’s political message 
when the events of the early years of the twentieth century 
helped the British Government to widen the breach between 
them and the nationalist movement, now clamant and aggres- 
sive. Sir Valentine Chirol wrote in 1910 in his Indian Unrest-, 
“It may be confidently asserted that never before have the 
Mohammadans of India as a whole identified their interests 
and their aspirations so closely as at the present day with the 
consolidation and permanence of British rule." Political pro- 
phesies are dangerous. Within five years after Sir Valentine 
wrote, the Muslim intelligentsia was trying hard to bteak 



COMMUNALISM AND REACTION 465 

through from the fetters that kept it back and to range itself 
beside the Congress. Within a decade the Indian Muslims 
seemed to have outstripped the Congress and were actually 
giving the lead to it. But these ten years were momentous 
years, and the Great War had come and gone and left a broken- 
down world as a legacy. 

And yet Sir Valentine had superficially every reason to come 
to the conclusion he did. The Aga Khan had emerged as the 
leader of the Muslims, and that fact alone showed that they 
still clung to their feudal traditions, for the Aga Khan was no 
bourgeois leader. He was an exceedingly wealthy prince and 
the religious head of a sect, and from the British point of view 
he was very much a persona grata because of his close associa- 
tion with the British ruling classes. He was widely cultured, 
and lived mostly in Europe, the life of a wealthy English 
landed magnate and sportsman; he was thus far from being 
personally narrow-minded on communal or sectarian matters. 
His leadership of the Muslims meant the lining up of the 
Muslim landed classes as well as the growing bourgeoisie with 
the British Government; the communal problem was really 
secondary and was obviously stressed in the interests of 
the main objective. Sir Valentine Chirol tells us that the 
Aga Khan impressed upon Lord Minto, the Viceroy, "the 
Mahommedan view of the political situation created by the 
partition of Bengal, lest political concessions should be hastily 
made to the Hindus which would pave the way for the ascen- 
dency of a Hindu majority e<jually dangerous to the stability 
of British rule and to the interests of the Mahommedan 
minority whose loyalty was beyond dispute.” 

But behind this superficial lining up with the British Govern- 
ment other forces were working. Inevitably the new Muslim 
bourgeoisie was feeling more and more dissatisfied with existing 
conditions and was being drawn towards the nationalist move- 
ment. The Aga Khan himself had to take notice of this and 
to warn the British in characteristic language. He wrote in the 
Edinburgh Review of Jamiary 1914 (that is, long befpre the 
War) advising tlie Government to abandon the policy of 
separating Hindus from Muslims, and to rally the moderate of 
both creeds in a common camp so as to provide a counterpoise 
to the radical nationalist tendencies of young India — ^both 
Efindu and Muslim. It was thus clear that he was far more in- 
terested in checking political change in India than in the 
communal interests of Muslims. 

But the Aga Khan or the British Government could not stop 

HH 



466 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

the inevitable drift of the Muslim bourgeoisie towards national- 
ism. The World War hastened the process, and as new leaders 
arose the Aga Khan seemed to retire into the background. Even 
Aligarh College changed its tone, and among the new leaders 
the most dynamic were the All Brothers, both products of 
Aligarh. Doctor M. A. Ansari, Moulana Abul Kalam Azad, 
and a number of other bourgeois leaders now began to play 
an important part in the political affairs of the Muslims. So 
also, on a more moderate scale, Mr. M. A. Jinnah. Gandhiji 
swept most of these leaders (not Mr. Jinnah) and the Muslims 
generally into his non-co-operation movement, and they played 
a leading part in the events of 1919-33. 

Then came the reaction, and communal and backward ele- 
ments, both among the Hindus and the Muslims; began to 
emerge from their enforced retirement. It was a slow process, 
but it was a continuous one. The Hindu Mahasabha for the 
first time assumed some prominence, chiefly because of the 
communal tension, but politically it could not make much 
impression on the Congress. The Muslim communal organisa- 
tions were more successful in regaining some of their old 
prestige among the Muslim masses. Even so a very strong 
group of Muslim leaders remained throughout with the 
Congress. The British Government meanwhile gave every 
encouragement to the Muslim communal leaders who were 
politically thoroughly reactionary. Noting the success of these 
reactionaries, the Hmdu Mahasabha began to compete with 
them in reaction, thereby hoping to win the goodwill of 
the Government. Many of the progressive elements in the 
Mahasabha were driven out or left of their own accord, and it 
inclined more and more towards the upper middle classes, and 
especially the creditor and banker class. 

The communal politicians on both sides, who were inter- 
minably arguing about percentages of seats in legislatures, 
thought only in terms of patronage which influence in Govern- 
ment gives. It was a struggle for jobs for the middle-class in- 
telligentsia. There were obviously not enough jobs to go round, 
and so the Hindu and Muslim communalists quarrelled about 
them, the former on the defensive, for they had most of the 
existing jobs, the latter always wanting more and more. Be- 
hind this struggle for jobs there was a much more important 
contest which, was not exactly communal but which influenced 
the communal issue. On the whole the Hindus were, in the 
Punjab, Sind, and Bengal, the richer, creditor, urban class; the 
Muslims in these provinces were the poorer, debtor, rural class. 



COMMUNALISM AND REACTION 467 

The conflict between the two was therefore often economic, but 
it was always given a communal colouring. In recent months 
this has come out very prominently in the debates on various 
provincial bills for reducing the burden of rural debt, especially 
in the Punjab. The representath'es of the Hindu Mahasabha 
have consistently opposed these measures and sided with the 
banker class. 

The Hindu Mahasabha is always laying stress on its own 
irreproachable nationalism when it criticises Muslim communal- 
ism. That the Muslim organisations have shown themselves to 
be quite extraordinarily communal has been patent to every- 
body. The Mahasabha’s communalism has not been so obvious, 
as it masquerades under a nationalist cloak. The test comes 
when a national and democratic solution happens to injure 
upper-class Hindu interests, and in this test the Mahasabha 
has repeatedly failed. The separation of Sind has been con- 
sistently opposed by them in the economic interests of a minority 
and against the declared wishes of the majority. 

But the most extraordinary exhibition of anti-nationalism 
and reaction, both on the part of Muslim and Hindu com- 
munalists, took place at the Round Table Conferences. The 
British Government had insisted on nominating only definitely 
communal Muslims, and these, under the leadership of the Aga 
Khan, actually went to the length of allying themselves with 
the most reactionary and, from the point of view not only of 
India but of all progressive groups, the most dangerous elements 
in British public life. It was quite extraordinary to see the close 
association of the Aga Khan and his group with Lord Lloyd and 
his party. They went a step further, and made pacts with the 
representatives of the European Association and others at the 
R.T.C. This was very depressing, for this Association has been 
and is, in India, the stoutest and the most aggressive opponent 
of Indian freedom. 

The Hindu Mahasabha delegates responded to this by de- 
manding, especially in the Punjab, all maniler of checks on 
freedom — safeguards in the interests of the British. They tried 
to outbid the Muslims in their attempts to offer co-operation 
to the British Government, and, without gaining anything, 
damned their own case and betrayed the cause of freedom. 
The Muslims had at least spoken with dignity, the Hindu com- 
munalists did not even possess this. 

The outstanding fact seems to me how, on both sides, the 
communal leaders represent a small upper class reactionary 
group,' and how these people exploit and take advantage.of the 



468 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

religious passions of the masses for their own ends. On both 
sides every effort is made to suppress and avoid the considera- 
tion of economic issues. Soon the time will come when these 
issues can no longer be suppressed, and then, no doubt, the 
communal leaders on both sides will echo the Aga Khan’s 
warning of twenty years ago for the moderates to join hands 
in a common camp against radical tendencies. To some extent 
that is already evident, for however much the Hindu and 
Muslim communalists attack each other in public they co- 
operate in the Assembly and elsewhere in helping Government 
to pass reactionary measures. Ottawa was one of the links 
which brought the three together. 

Meanwhile it is interesting to notice that the Aga Khan’s 
close association with the extreme Right wing of the Conserva- 
tive party continues. In October 1934 he was the guest of 
honour at the British Navy League dinner, at which Lord 
Lloyd presided, and he supported wholeheartedly the proposals 
for further strengthening the British Navy, which Lord Lloyd 
had made at the Bristol Conservative Conference. An Indian 
leader was thus so anxious* about imperial defence and the 
safety of England that he wanted to go further in increasing 
British armaments than even Mr. Baldwin or the ‘National’ 
Government. Of course, this was all in the interest of peace. 

The next month, in November 1934, it was reported that a 
film was privately shown in London, the object of which was 
“ to link the Muslim world in lasting friendship with the British 
Crown ”. We were informed that the guests of honour on this 
occasion were the Aga Khan and Lord Lloyd. It would seem 
that the Aga Khan and Lord Lloyd have become almost as 
inseparably united— two hearts that beat as one— in imperial 
affairs, as mr Tej Bahadur Sapru and Mr. M. R. Jayakar are in 
our national politics. And it is worth noticing that, during 
these months when the two were so frequently communing 
with each other, Lord Lloyd was leading a bitter and unre- 
lenting attack on the official Conservative leadership and the 
National Government for their alleged weakness in giving too 
much to India.' 

Latterly thCTe has been an interesting development in the 
speeches arid statements of some of the Muslim communal 
leaders. This has no real importance, but I doubt if many 

' Recently a Council of some British peers and Indian Muslims 
has been formed to cement and further the union of these extreme 
reactionary elements. 



COMMUNALISM AND REACTION 469 

people think so, nevertheless it is significant of the men- 
tality of communalism, and a great deal of prominence has 
been gjiven to it. Stress has been laid on the ‘ Muslim nation ’ 
in India, on ‘ Muslim culture ’ on the utter incompatibility of 
Hindu and Muslim ‘ cultures The inevitable deduction from 
this is (although it is not put baldly) that the British must 
remain in India for ever and ever to hold the scales and 
mediate between the two ‘ cultures 

A few Hindu communal leaders think exactly on the same 
lines, with this difference, however, that they hope that being 
in a majority their brand of ‘ culture ’ will ultimately prevail. 

Hindu and Muslim ‘ cultures ’ and the ‘ Muslim nation ’ — 
how these words open out fascinating vistas of past history 
and present and future speculation! The Muslim nation in 
India — a nation within a nation, and not even compact, but 
vague, spread out, indeterminate. Politically, the idea is absurd, 
economically it is fantastic; it is hardly worth considering. And 
yet it helps us a little to understand the mentality befind it. 
Some such separate and unmixable ‘ nations ’ existed together 
in the Middle Ages and afterwards. In the Constantinople of 
the early days of the Ottoman Sultans each such ‘ nation ’ 
lived separately and had a measure of autonomy — Latin 
Christians, Orthodox Christians, Jews, etc. This was the be- 
ginning of extra-territoriality which, in more recent times, 
became such a nightmare to many eastern countries. To talk 
of a ‘ Muslim nation ’, therefore, means that there is no nation 
at all hut a religious bond; it means that no nation in the 
modern sense must be allowed to grow; it means that modern 
civilisation should be discarded and we should go back to the 
medieval ways; it means either autocratic government or a 
foreign government; it means, finally, just nothing at all except 
an emotional state of mind and a conscious or unconscious de- 
sire not to face realities, especially economic realities. Emotions 
have a way of upsetting logic, and we may not ignore them 
simply because they seem so unreasonable. But this idea of a 
Muslim nation is the figment of a few imaginations only, and, 
but for the publicity given to it by the Press, few people would 
have heard of it. And even if many people believed in it, it 
would still vanish at the touch of reality. 

So also the ideas of Hindu and Muslim ‘ culture ’. The day 
of even national cultures is rapidly passing and the world is 
becoming one cultural unit. Nations may retain, and will retain 
for a long time much that is peculiar to them— -language, habits, 
ways of thought, etc. — ^but the machine age and science, with 



470 jawaharlal nj^hru 

swift, travel, constant supply of world news, radio, cinema, etc., 
will make them more and more uniform. No one can fight 
against this inevitable tendency, and only a world catastrophe 
which shatters modern civilisation can really check it. There 
are certainly many differences between the traditional Hindu 
and Muslim philosophies of life. But these differences are 
hardly noticeable when both of them are compared to the 
modern scientific and industrial outlook on life, for between 
this latter and the former two there is a vast gulf. The real 
struggle to-day in India is not between Hindu culture and 
Muslim culture, but between these two and the conquering 
scientific culture of modern civilisation. Those who are de- 
sirous of preserving ' Muslim culture *, whatever that may be, 
need not worry about Hindu culture, but should withstand the 
giant from the West. I have no doubt, personally, that all 
efforts, Hindu or Muslim, to oppose modern scientific and in- 
dustrial civilisation are doomed to failure, and I shall watch 
this failure without regret. Our choice was unconsciously and 
involuntarily made when railways and the like came here. 
Sir Syed Ahmad Khan made his choice on behalf of the 
Indian Muslims when he started the Aligarh College. But 
none of us had really any choice in the matter, except the 
choice which a drowning man has to clutch at something which 
might save him. 

But what is this ‘Muslim culture’? Is it a kind of racial 
memory of the great deeds of the Arabs, Persians, Turks, etc.? 
Or language? Or art and music? Or customs? I do not re- 
member any one referring to present-day Muslim art or 
Muslim music. The two languages which have influenced 
Muslim thought in India are Aramc and Persian, and especi- 
ally the latter. But the influence of Persian has no element of 
religion about it. The Persian language and many Persian 
customs and traditions came to India in the course of thou- 
sands of years and impressed themselves powerfully all over 
north India. Persia was the France of the East, sending its 
language and culture to all its neighbours. That is a common 
and a precious heritage for all of us in India. 

Pride in the past achievements of Islamic races and countries 
is probably one of the strongest of Islamic bonds. Does any 
one grudge the Muslims this noble record of various races? 
No one can take it away from them so long as they choose to 
reniember it and cherish it. As a matter of fact, this past 
record is also to a large extent a common heritage for all of 
us, perhaps because we feel as Asiatics a common bond uniting 



COMMUNALISM AND REACTION 471 

US against the aggression of Europe. I know that whenever I 
have read of the conflicts of the Arabs in Spain or during the 
Crusades, my sympathies have always been with them. I try 
to be impartial and objective, but, try as I will, the Asiatic 
in me influences my judgment when an Asiatic people are 
concerned. 

I have tried hard to understand what this ‘ Muslim culture ’ 
is, but I confess that I have not succeeded. I find a tiny handful 
of middle-class Muslims as well as Hindus in north India in- 
fluenced by the Persian language and traditions. And looking 
to the masses the most obvious symbols of ‘Muslim culture' 
seem to be; a particular type of pyjamas, not too long and 
not too short, a particular way of shaving or clipping the mous- 
tache but allowing the beard to grow, and a lota with a special 
kind of snout, just as the corresponding Hindu customs are 
the wearing of a dhoti, the possession of a topknot, and a lota 
of a different kind. As a matter of fact, even these distinctions 
arc largely urban and they tend to disappear. The Muslim 
peasantry and industrial workers are hardly distinguishable 
from the Hindu. The Muslim intelligentsia seldom sports a 
beard, though Aligarh still fancies a red Turkish cap with a 
fez (Turkish it is called, although Turkey will have none of it). 
Muslim women have taken to the sari and are emerging rather 
slowly from the purdah. My own tastes do not harmonise with 
some of those habits, and I do not fancy beards or moustaches 
or topknots, but I have no desire to impose my canons of taste 
on others, though I must confess, in regard to beards, that I 
rejoiced when Amanullah began to deal with them in sum- 
mary fashion in Kabul. 

I must say that those Hindus and Muslims who are always 
looking backward, always clutching at things which are slip- 
ping away from their grasp, are a singularly pathetic sight. I 
do not wish to damn the past or to reject it, for there is so 
much that is singularly beautiful in our past. 'iTiat will endure 
I have no doubt. But it is not the beautiful that these people 
clutch at, but something that is seldom worth while and is often 
harmful. 

In recent years Indian Muslims have had repeated shocks, 
and many of their deeply cherished notions have been shat- 
tered. Turkey, that champion of Islam, has not onl;^ ended 
the Khilafat, for which In<fia put up such a brave fight in igsw, 
but has taken step after step away from religion. In the new 
Turkish Constitution an article stated that Turkey was a 
Moslem ‘State, but, lest there be any mistake, Kemal Pasha 



JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


470 

said in 1937 : “ The provision in the Constitution that Turkey 
is a Moslem State is a compromise destined to be done away 
with at the first opportunity.” And I believe he acted up to 
this hint later on. Egypt, though much more cautiously, is 
going the same way and keeping her politics quite apart from 
religion. So also the Arab countries, except Arabia itself, which 
is more backward. Persia is looking back 'to pre-Islamic days 
for her cultural inspiration. Everywhere religion recedes into 
the background and nationalism appears in aggressive garbs, 
and behind nationalism other isms which talk in social and 
economic terms. What of the ‘ Muslim nation ’ and ‘ Muslim 
culture ’? Are they to be found in the future only in northern 
India, rejoicing under the benign rule of the British? 

If progress consists in the individual taking a broader view 
of what constitutes politics, our communalists as well as our 
Government have deliberately and consistently aimed at the 
opposite of this — the narrowing of this view.