DEMOCRACY IN EAST AND WEST 

I WAS surprised to iind in Alipore that no daily paper would be 
allowed to me after my conviction. As an under-trial prisoner I 
received the daily Statesman, of Calcutta, but this was stopped 
the day after my trial was over. In the U.P., ever since 193a, a 
daily (chosen by the Government) was permitted to A Class or 
first division prisoners. So also in most other provinces, and I 
was fully under the impression that the same rule was appli- 
cable in Bengal. Instead of the daily, however, I was supplied 
with the weekly Statesman. This was evidently meant for retired 
English officials or business men who had gone back to 
England, and it contained a summary of Indian news likely to 
interest them. No foreign news at all was given and I missed it 
very much, as I used to follow it closely. Fortunately I was 
allowed to have the Manchester Guardian Weekly, and this kept 
me in touch with Europe and international affairs. 

My arrest and trial in February coincided with upheavals 
and bitter conflicts in Europe. There was the ferment in 
France resulting in Fascist riots and the formation of a 
‘ National ’ Government. And, far worse, in Austria Chancellor 
Dolfuss was shooting down workers and putting an end to the 
great edifice of social democracy there. The news of the Aus- 
trian bloodshed depressed me greatly. What an awful and 
bloody place this world was and how barbarous was man when 
he wanted to protect his vested interests I All over Europe and 
America Fasasm seemed to be advancing. When Hitler came 
into power in Germany I had imagined that his regime could 
not possibly last long, as he was offering no solution of Ger- 
many’s economic troubles. So also, as Fascism spread elsewhere, 
I consoled myself that it represented the last ditch of reaction. 
After it must come the breaking of the shacldes. But I began 
to wonder if my wish was not father to my thought. Was it so 
obvious that this Fascist wave would retire so easily or so 
quickly? And even if conditions became intolerable for the 
Fascist dictatorships, would they not rather hurl their countries 
into devastating war rather than give in? What would be the 
result of such a conflict? 

Meanwhile, Fascism of various kinds and shapes spread. 
Spain, that new ‘Republic of Honest Men ’ — los hombres 

498 



DEMOCRACY IN EAST AND WEST 499 

honrados — the very Manchester Guardian of governments, as 
some one called it, had gone far back and deep into reaction. 
All the fine phrases of its honest Liberal leaders bad not kept 
it from sliding down. Everywhere Liberalism showed its utter 
ineffectiveness to face modern conditions. It dung to words and 
phrases, and thought that they could take the place of action. 
When d crisis came it simply faded off like the end of a film 
that is over. 

]^read the leading articles of the Manchester Guardian on the 
Austrian tragedy with deep interest and appreciation. “And 
what sort of Austria emerges fi:om this bloody struggle? An 
Austria ruled with rifles and machine-guns by the most reac- 
tionary clique in Europe.” “But why, if England stands for 
liberty, has its Prime Minister so little to say? We have heard 
his praises of dictatorships : we have heard him say how they 
‘ mdte the soul of a nation live ’ and ‘ bestow a new vision and 
a new energy.’ But a Prime Minister of England should have 
something to say of the tyrannies, in whatever country, which 
kill often the body, but more often, and with a worse death, the 
soul.” 

And why, if the Manchester Guardian stands for liberty, has 
it so little to jsay when liberty is crushed in India? We also 
have known not only bodily suffering, but that far worse ordeal 
of the soul. 

“Austrian democracy has been de.stroyed, although to its 
everlasting glory it went dovra fighting and so created a legend 
that may re-kindle the spirit of European freedom some day in 
years to come.” 

“ The Europe that is unfree has ceased to breathe; there is no 
flow or counterflow of healthy spirits; a gradual suffocation has 
set in, and only some violent convulsion or inner paroxysm 
and a striking out to the right and left can avert the maital 
coma that is approaching. . . . Europe from the Rhine to the 
Urals is one great prison.” 

Moving passages which found an echo in my heart. But I 
wondered: what of India? How can it be that the Manchester 
Guardian or the many lovers of freedom who undoubtedly exist 
in England should be so oblivious to our fate? How can they 
miss seeing here what they condemn with such fervour else- 
where? It was a great English Liberal leader, trained in the 
nineteenth-century tradition, cautious by temperament,, res- 
trained in his language, who said twenty years ago, on the eve 
of the Great War: “Sooner than be a silent witness of the 
tragic triumph of force over law, I would see this country of 



500 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

ours blotted out of the page of history.” A brave thought, 
eloquently put, and the gallant youth of England went in their 
millions to vindicate it. But if an Indian ventures to make a 
statement similar to Mr. Asquith’s, what fate is his? 

National psychology is a complicated affair. Most of us 
imagine how fair and impartial we are; it is always the other 
fellow, the other country that is wrong. Somewhere at the back 
of our minds we are convinced that we are not as others are : 
there U a difference which good breeding usually prevents us 
from emphasising. And if we are fortunate enough to be an 
imperial race controlling the destinies of other countries, it is 
difficult not to believe that all is for the best in this best of all 
possible worlds, and those who agitate for change are self- 
seekers or deluded fools, ungrateful for the benefits they have 
received from us. 

The British are. an insular race, and long success and pros- 
perity has made them look down on almost all others. For 
them, as some one has said, “ les ncgres commenccnt a Calais ”. 
But that is too general a statement. Perhaps the British upper- 
class division of the world would be somewhat as follows: (i) 
Britain — a long gap, and then (a) the British Dominions (white 
populations only) and America (Anglo-Saxons only, and not 
dagoes, wops, etc.), (3) Western Europe, (4) Rest of Europe, (5) 
South America (Latin races), a long gap, and then (6) the brown, 
yellow and black races of Asia and Africa, all bunched up more 
or less together. 

How far we of the last of these classes arc from the heights 
where our rulers live I Is it any wonder that their vision grows 
dim when they look towards us, and that we should irritate 
them when we talk of democracy and liberty? These words 
were not coined for our use. Was it not a great Liberal states- 
man, John Morley, who had declared that he could not conceive 
of democratic institutions in India even in the far, dim future? 
Democracy for India was, like Canada’s fur coat, unsuited to her 
climate. And, later on, Britain’s Labour Party, the standard- 
bearers of Socialism, the champions of the under-dog, presented 
us, in the flush of their triumph, with a revival of the Bengal 
Ordinance in 1924, and during their second government our 
fate was even worse. I am quite sure that none of them mean 
us ill, and when they address us in their best pulpit manner — 
‘ Dearly beloved brethren ’ — ^they feel a glow of conscious virtue. 
But, to them, we are not as they are and must be judged by 
other standards. It is diflicult enough for an Englishman and a 
Frenchman to think alike because of linguistic and cultural 



DEMOCRACY IN EAST AND WEST 5OI 

differences; how much vaster must be the difference between an 
Englishman and an Asiatic? 

Recently the House of Lords has been debating the question 
of Indian reform, and many illuminating speeches were de- 
livered by noble lords. Among these was one by Lord Lytton, a 
fbrmer Governor of an Indian Province, who acted as Viceroy 
for a while. He has often been referred to as a liberal and sym- 
pathetic Governor. He is reported to have said^ that “the 
Government of India was far more representative of India as a 
whole than the Congress politicians. The Government of India 
was able to speak in the name of officials, the Army, the Police, 
the Princes, the fighting regiments and both Moslems and 
Hindus, whereas the Congress politicians could not even speak 
on behalf of one of the great Indian communities.” He went 
on to make his meaning quite clear: “Wlien I speak of Indian 
opinion I am thinking of those on whose co-operation I had to 
rely and on whose co-operation the future Governors and Vice- 
roys will have to rely.” 

Two interesting points emerge firom his speech : the India that 
counts means those who help the British; and the British 
Government of India is the most representative and, therefore, 
democratic body in the country. That this argument should be 
advanced seriously shows that English words seem to change 
their meaning when they cross the Suez Canal. The next and 
obvious step in reasoning would be, that autocratic government 
is the most representative and democratic form because the 
King represents everybody. We get back to the divine right of 
kings and " V 6 tat, cVs# moi! ” 

As a matter of fact, even pure autocracy has had a distin- 
guished advocate recently. Sir Malcolm Hailey, that ornament 
of the Indian Civil Service, speaking as Governor of the United 
Provinces at Benares on November 5, 1934, pleaded for auto- 
cracy in the Indian States. The advice was hardly needed, for 
no Indian State is at all likely.fo part with autocracy of its own 
free will. An interesting development has been the attempt to 
preserve this autocracy on the plea that democracy is failing in 
Europe. Sir Mirza Ismail, the Dewan of Mysore, lias expressed 
his "surprise that radical reforms are advocated when parlia- 
.mentary democracy is decaying everywhere.” "I am sure the 
conscience of the State feels that our present constitution is 
quite democratic enough for all practical purposes.'’ * The * con- 
science ’ of Mysore presumably is a metaphysical abstraction for 

* House of Lords, December 17. 1934. 

® Mysore: June ai, 1934. See also note on page 530, post. 



JAVMHARLAL NEHRU 


503 

the Ruler and his Dewan. The democracy that prevails in 
Mysore at present is indistinguishable from autocracy. 

If democracy is not suited to India, it appears to be equally 
unsuitable for Egypt. I have just read a long despatch from 
Cairo in the Statesman ^ (for this daily is supplied to me now in 
my present gaol). We are told that the Premier, Nessim Pasha, 
" has now aroused no little alarm in responsible-minded quarters 
owing to his declaration that he hoped to get the political parties 
to co-operate, especially the Wa£d, and either to have a national 
conference or elections for a constituent assembly, in cither case 
for the elaboration of a new Constitution. This can only mean 
in the end ... a return to the regime of the popular democratic 
government which history shows has always been disastrous for 
Egypt, since in the past it has ever pandered to the worst 
passions of the mob. . . . No one knowing anything of the inner 
Working of Egyptian politics and of the people, doubts for one 
moment that elections will again result in the return of the 
Wafd with a majority. Unless something is done, therefore, to 
prevent this procedure, we shall within a short time be again 
saddled with an ultra-democratic anti-foreign revolutionary 
regime.” 

It is suggested that the elections should be “ run ” by adminis- 
trative pressure “as a counterpoise to the Wafd,” but, un- 
happily, the Premier " has too much the legal mind ” to do any 
such thing. The only other course that remains, we are told, is 
for Whitehall to intervene and to “ let it be known that it will 
not tolerate the return of a regime ” of this kind. 

What steps Whitehall may or may not take, or what will 
happen in Egypt I do not know.* But this argument put for- 
ward by presumably a liberty-loving Englishman does help us 
to understand a little, some of the complexities of the Egyptian 
and Indian situation. As the Statesman points out in a leading 
article : “ The root evil has been that the way of life and atti- 
tude of mind of an ordinary Egyptian voter are inharmonious 
with the sort of way of life and attitude of mind out of whieli 
democracy is developed." This want of harmony is illustrated 
further on : “ In Europe, democracies have often been brought 
down because there were too many parties; in Egypt the diffi- 
culty has been there only being one party, the Ward.” 

In India we are told that our communal divisions come in the 
way of our democratic progress and, therefore, with incontro- 

* December 19, 1934. 

*' There were widespread political riots in Egypt against the 
British occupation in November 1935. 



DEMOCRACY IN EAST AND WEST 503 

vertible logic, those divisions are perpetuated. We are further 
told that we are not united enough. In Egypt there are no com- 
munal divisions and it appears that the most perfect political 
unity prevails. And yet, this very unity becomes an obstacle in 
the way of democracy and freedom! Truly the path of demo- 
cracy is straight and narrow. Democracy for an Eastern country 
seems to mean only one thing : to carry out the behests of the 
imperialist ruling power and not to touch any of its interests. 
Subject to that proviso, democratic freedom can flourish un- 
checked. 