SOME RECENT HAPPENINGS 

Dawn reddens in the wake of night, but the days of our life 
return not. 

The eye contains a far horizon, but the wound of spring lies 
deep in the heart. 

Li Tai-Po. 

I FOLLOWED from the newspapers supplied to me the proceed- 
ings of the Bombay session of the Congress. I was naturally 
interested in its politics and personalities. Twenty years’ in- 
timate association had tied me up so closely with it that my 
individuality had almost become merged in it, and far stronger 
than the claims of office and responsibility were the invisible 
bonds that tied me to that great organisation and to thousands 
of my old comrades. And yet I felt it difficult to get excited 
over its proceedings; in spite of some important decisions the 
whole session seemed to me a dull affair. The subjects that in- 
terested me were hardly discussed. What would I have done if 
I had been there, I wondered. I did not know for certain; I 
could not say how I would have reacted to the new conditions 
and my surroundings. And I saw no reason why I should force 
my mind to come to a difficult decision in prison when such a 
decision was wholly unnecessary then. The time would come 
when I would have to face the problems of the day and decide 
on my course of action. It was needless foUy to anticipate that 
decision, even in the recesses of my mind, for circumstances 
would change before that choice was forced on me. 

The two outstanding features of the (^n gres s. as fer as I 
could make out from my distant and secluded abode cn the 
mountains, were; the dominant personality of Gandhiji and 
the exceedingly poor show that the communal opposition under 
Pandit Madan Mohan Malaviya and Mr. Aney put up. To all 
who have knowledge of the inner workings of the Indian mass- 
mind, as well as me middle-class mind, it was no surprise to 
find that Gandhiji continues to be far and away the master 
figure in India. Government officials and some secluded 
politicians often imagine, making the wish the father to the 
thought, that he is pkyed out in the political field or, at least, 
that his influence has greatly declined. And then when he 

573 



574 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

emerges again with all his old energy and influence they are 
taken aback and search for fresh reasons for this apparent 
change. He dominates the Congress dnd the country not so 
much because of any opinions he holds, and which are gener- 
ally accepted, but because of his unique personality. Person- 
ality counts for much everywhere; in India it plays an even 
more dominant role than elsewhere. 

His retirement from the Congress was a striking feature of 
the session and outwardly it marked the end of a great chapter 
in Congress and Indian history. But, essentially, its significance 
was not great for he cannot rid himself, even if he wanted to, 
of his dominating position. He did not owe that position to 
any office or other tangible tie. The Congress to-day reflects 
almost as much his view-point as it has ever done before, and 
even if it should wander away from his path, Gandhiji, even 
unconsciously, would continue to influence it and the country 
to a very great extent. He cannot divest himself of that 
burden and responsibility. In considering the objective condi- 
tions prevailing in India his personality forces itself on one’s 
attention and cannot be ignored. 

He has, for the present, retired from the Congress presumably 
to avoid embarrassing the Congress. Perhaps he contemplates 
some kind of individual direct action which will necessarily 
lead to a conflict with Government. He does not want to make 
this a Congress issue. 

I was glad that the Congress had adopted the idea of a Con 
.tdi tuent As^- mhly for settling the constitution of the country. 
It seemed to me that there was no other way of solving the 
problem, and I am sure that sometime or other some such 
Assembly will have to meet. Manifestly it cannot do so without 
the consent of the British Government, unless there has been 
a successful revolution. It is equally manifest that this consent 
is not likely to be forthcoming under present circumstances. A 
real Assembly can therefore not meet till enough strength has 
been evolved in the country to force the pace. This inevitably 
means that even the political problem will remain unsolved till 
then. Some of the Congress leaders, while accepting the idea 
of the Constituent Assembly, have tried to tone it down and 
made it not very unlike a large All-Parties Conference after the 
old model. This would be an utterly futile proceeding and the 
same old people, selfchosen mostly, would meet and disagree. 
The whole idea behind the Constituent Assembly is that 
it should be elected on a veiy wide mass basis, drawing 
Its strength and inspiration from the masses. Such a gather- 



SOME RECENT HAPPENINGS 


575 

ing will immediately face real problems, and will not remain 
in the communal and other ruts in which we have so often 
stuck. 

It was interesting to watch the reactions of Simla and London 
to this idea. It was made known semi-officially that Govern- 
ment would have no objection; they gave it a patronising ap- 
proval, evidently looking upon it as an old type of All-Parties 
Conference, foredoomed to failure, which would strengthen 
their hands. Later they seem to have realised the dangers 
and possibilities of the idea, and they began opposing it vigor- 
ously. 

Soon after the Bombay Congress came the Assembly elections. 
With all my lack of en&usiasm for the Congress parliamentary 
programme, I was greatly interested and I ivished the Congress 
candidates success, or to put it more correctly, I hoped for the 
defeat of their opponents. Among these opponents was a curi- 
ous assortment of careerists, communalists, renegades, and 
people who had staunchly supported the Government in its 
policy of repression. There was little doubt that most of these 
people would be swept away, but unfortunately the Communal 
Award obscured the issue and many of them took shelter under 
the widespread wings of the communal organisations. Despite 
this the Congress met with remarkable success, and I was 
pleased that a good number of undesirables had been kept 
out. 

The attitude of the so-called Congress Nationalist Party 
struck me as particularly deplorable. One could understand 
their vehement opposition to the Cnmimmal Award but, in 
order to strengthen their position, they allied themselves with 
the extreme communal organisations, even the Sanatanists, than 
whom there is no more reactionary group in India, both politi- 
cally and socially, as well as numerous political reactionaries of 
the most notorious kind. Except in Bengal, where for special 
reasons a strong Congress group supported them, many of 
them were largely anti-Congress in every way. Indeed they 
were the most prominent opponents of the Congress. In spite 
of this varied assortment of forces opposed to it, which included 
landlords, liberals and, of course, omcials, the Congress candi- 
dates succeeded to a remarkable extent. 

The Congress attitude to the Communal Award was extraor- 
diniuy, and yet under the circumstances it could hardly have 
been very different. It was the inevitable outcome of their past 
neutral and rather feeble policy. A strong line adopted at an 
earlier stage and followed regarmess of immediate consequences 



JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


51 ^ 

would have been more dignified and correct. But as the Con- 
gress had been unwilling to take that up there was no other 
course open to it except the one it took. The Communal Award 
was a patent absurdity, and it was impossible of acceptance 
because, so long as it existed, any kind of freedom was unat- 
tainable. This was not because it gave too much to the Mus- 
lims. It was perhaps possible to give them, in a different way, 
almost all they wanted. As it was, the British Government 
divided up Inma into any number of mutually exclusive com- 
partments, each balancing and neutralising the other, so that 
the foreign British element could remain supreme. It made 
dependence on the British Government inevitable. 

In Bengal especially, where heavy weightage had been given 
to the small European element, the position was exceedingly 
unfair to the Hindus. Such an award or decision, or whatever 
it might be called (objection has been taken to its being called 
an award), was bound to be bitterly resented, and even though 
it might be imposed, or for political reasons tolerated tem- 
porarily, it is likely to be a continuing source of friction. Per- 
sonally I think that its very badness is a thing in its favour, for 
as such it can never become the permanent basis for anything. 

The Nationalist Party, and even more so the Hindu Maha- 
sabha and other communal organisations, naturally resented 
this infliction, but their criticism was really based, as that of 
the supporters, on an acceptance of the British Government’s 
ideology. This led them, and is leading them further, to the 
adoption of a strange policy, which must be very pleasing to 
the Government. Obsessed by the Award, they are toning dovm 
their opposition to other vital matters, in the hope of bribing 
or cajoling the Government into varying the Award in their 
favour. The Hindu Mahasabha has gone farthest in’ this direc- 
tion. It does not seem to strike them that this is not only a 
/humiliating position to take up, but is calculated to make any 
alteration of the Award most difficult, for it merely irritates 
the Muslims and drives them farther away. It is impossible for 
the British Government to win over the nationalist elements; 
the distance is too great and the conflict of interests too 
marked. It is also impossible for them, on the narrower issue 
of communal interests, to please both the Hindu and the 
Myslim communalists. They had to choose and, from their 
points of view, they chose rightly in favouring Muslim com- 
munalism. Are they to upset this well-settled and .profitable 
policy and offend the Muslims for the sake of winning over 
a handful of Hindu comnuin‘»li«-t*i? 



SOME RECENT HAPPENtNdS 

The very fact that the Hindus, as a group, are more advanced 
politically and more clamant for national freedom is bound to 
go against them. For petty communal concessions (and they 
cannot be other than petty) will not make much difference to 
their political hostility; such concessions will however make a 
temporary difference to the Muslim attitude. 

The Assembly elections threw a revealing light on the people 
at the back of the Hindu Mabasabha and the Muslim Con- 
ference — ^the two most reactionary communal bodies. Their 
candidates and supporters were drawn from the big landlords 
or the rich banker class. The Mahasabha also showed its soli- 
citude to the banker class by its. vehement opposition to the 
recent Relief from Indebtedness Bills. These small sections at 
the top of the Hindu social strata constitute the Hindu Maha- 
sabha, and a fraction of them, together with some professional 
people, form the Liberals. They do not carry great weight 
among the Hindus because the lower middle class is politically 
awake. The industrial leaders also stand apart &om them 
because there is some clash between the demands of rising 
industry and the semi-feudal elements. Industrialists, not daring 
to indulge in direct action or other risky methods, try to keep 
on good terms with both nationalism and the Government. 
They do not pay much attention to the liberal or communal 
groups. Industrial advance and profits are their governing 
motives. 

Among the Muslims this lower middle-class awakening is 
still to come, and industrially also they are backward. Thus 
we find the most hopelessly reactionary and feudal and 
ex-official elements not only controlling their communal 
organisations, but exercising considerable influence over the 
co mmuni ty. The Muslim Conference is quite a galaxy of 
knights, ex-ministers and big landlords. And yet I think that 
the Muslim rank and file has more potentialily in it, perhaps 
because of a certain freedom in social relations, than the Hindu 
masses, and is likely to go ahead faster in a socialist direction, 
once it gets moving. Just at present the Muslim intelligentsia 
seems to be paralysed, intellectually as well as physically, and 
has no push in it. It dare not challenge its old guard. 

Even the leadership of the Congress, politically the most 
advanced big group, is flir more cautious than the condition of 
the masses might necessitate. They ask the masses for support, 
but seldom them for their opinion or set about enquiring 
what ails them. Prior to the Assembly elections they made 
every effort to tone down their programme in an attempt to win 



5^5 JAWAHARI.AT, NEHRU 

over various moderate non-Congress elements. Even their atti- 
tude to such measures as the Temple Entry Bill was varied, and 
assurances were given to soothe the more orthodox in Madras. 
A straightforward, aggressive election programme would have 
created more enthusiasm and helped greatly in educating the 
masses. Now that the Congress has committed itself to a par- 
liamentary programme there will be still more accommodation 
of politically and socially reactionary interests, in the hope of 
getting a few odd votes in a division, and a greater widening of 
the breach between the Congress leadership and the masses. 
Eloquent speeches will be delivered, and the best pirliamentary 
etiquette followed, and from time to time the Government will 
be defeated — defeats which the Government will calmly ignore 
as it has previously done. 

During the past few years, when Congress was boycotting the 
Legislatures, we were often told by official spokesmen that the 
Assembly and the Provincial Councils were truly representative 
of the people and mirrored public opinion. It is interesting to 
find that now, when more advanced elements dominate the 
Assembly, the official view-point has changed. Whenever a 
reference is made to the Congress success at the elections, we 
are told that the electorate is a very small one, only three 
millions out of nearly three hundred or thereabouts. The dis- 
franchised millions apparently, according to official opinion, 
stand solidly behind the British Government. The remedy is 
obvious. Give adult suffrage and then we shall know at least 
what these people think. 

Soon after the Assembly elections the Report of the Joint 
Parliamentary Committee on Indian Constitufional Reform was 
issued. Among the varied and widespread critidsims to which 
it was_ subjected, stress was often laid on tlie fact that it showed 
‘ distrust ' and ‘ suspicion ’ of the Indian people. This seemed 
to me a very strange way of looking at our national and sodal 
problems. Were there no vital conflicts of interests between 
British imperial policy and our national interests? The 
question was which was to prevail. Did we want freedom 
merely to continue that imperial policy? Apparently that was 
the British Government’s notion, for we were informed that 
the ‘ safeguards ’ would not be used so long as we behaved and 
demonstrated our fitness for self-rule by doing just what British 
policy required. If British policy was to be continued in India, 
w]^ all this shouting about getting the reins in our own hands? 
/ Tlte Ottawa agreements, it is well known, have not been of 
great benefit to England economically except in regard to 



SOME RECENT HAPPENINGS 579 

Indian trade. ‘ British trade with India has certainly benefited, 
at the cost, according to Indian political and commercial 
opinion, of India’s wider interests. The position is reversed in 
regard to the Dominions, especially Canada and Australia.® 
They struck a hard bargain with Britain and got most of the 
advantages at Britain’s expense. In spite of this fact, continuous 
attempts are being made by them to get away from Ottawa 
and its entanglements in order to develop their own industries 
as well as their trade with other countries.* In Canada a leading 
political party, the Liberals, who are likely to be in power before 
long, are definitely committed to ending the Ottawa pact."* In 

* “Referring to Indian trade. Sir William Currie said that the 
Ottawa agreements had been a definite advantage to Britain.’’ Sir 
William was presiding over the meeting of the P. and O. Shipping 
Company in London on Dec. 5, 1934. 

* The London Economist (June ipjA says that the Ottawa Con- 
ference " could only have been justified if it had increased the 
value of inter-imperial trade without diminishing the value of the 
Empire’s trade with the rest of the world. In fact, it has merely 
increased very slightly the proportion that inter-imperial trade 
hears to the dwindling total of the Empire’s trade. And this diver- 
sion has been much more in the interests of the Dominions than 
of Great Britain. Our imports from the Empire increased from 
^247,000,000 in 1931 to ;f249,ooo,ooo in 1933, but our exports de- 
creased from 1 70,600,000 to jCi63,joo,odo. And the fact remains 
that between 1929 and 1933 our exports to the Empire declined by 

50.9 per cent., while our imports from the Empire declined only 

32.9 per cent. The decline in our exports to foreign countries was 
not quite so great, but the decline in our imports from these 
countries was much greater.” 

* The Melbourne Age does not like the Ottawa Agreement. In 
its view Ottawa is “ acting as a constant irritant and is being in- 
creasing^ recognised as an egregious blunder." (Quoted in Man- 
Chester Guardian Weekly, October 19, 1934.) 

* Even Mr. Bennett, the present Conservative Prime Minister 
of Canada, has been a thorn in ihe side of the British Government 
in trade matters. He is talking now in terms of ‘ New Deals ’ and 
records a surprising conversion. Owing to the dangerous influence 
of Mr. Litvinov, Sir Stafford Cripps and Mr. John Strachey, he has 
turned collectivist. This should be a sign and a warning to all 
Conservatives, Liberals, I.C.S. men, etc., to avoid thinking or asso- 
ciating with those who do so, or else they might themselves become 
converts to dangerous doctrines. (Since writing the above, the 
Liberal Party in Canada, under the leadership of Mr. King, has 
swept the polls and come into power.) 



580 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

Australia strained interpretations of Ottawa have led to an 
increase of tariffs on certain classes of piece goods and yarns, 
and this has been bitterly resented by the Lancashire cotton 
industry and denounced by them as a breach of the Ottawa 
Agreement. As a protest and a reprisal, a movement for the 
boycott of Australian goods was inaugurated in Lancashire. 
This threat had little effect on Australia, where an aggressive 
attitude was taken up.’ 

The economic conflicts are obviously not due to any ill-will 
that the people of Canada and Australia may have for Britain, 
though in Ireland's case that ill-will is apparent. Conflicts 
occur because interests clash, and wherever such clashes might 
take place, the object of ' safeguards ’ in India is to see that 
British interests prevail. The recent Indo-British Trade Agree- 
ment, arrived at secretly over the heads and despite the protests 
of Indian business and industry, although British industrialists 
were kept informed, rejected by the Legislative Assembly and 
yet persisted in by the Government, is a gentle indication of 
what ' safeguards ' would lead to. Such ‘ safeguards ' seem to be 
urgently needed in Canada, Australia and South Africa to pre- 
vent the people of those Dominions from going astray not only 
in trade matters but in matters of greater concern to the safety 
and cohesion of the Empire.’* 

Empire, it has been said, is Debt, and the ‘ safeguards ’ have 
been devised to enable the imperial moneylender to keep his 
stranglehold on his unfortunate debtor, and to keep all his 
.special interests and powers intact. A curious doctrine, often 


’ The Melbourne Age declared that if the proposed Lancashire 
boycott is not dropped, Australia must hit harder at whatever 
trade with Lancashire still remains. Lancashire is to be answered 
"with unwavering reiteration.” (Quoted in Manchester Guardian 
Weekly, November 9, 1934.) 

® Mr, O. Pirow, Minister for Defence of the Union of South Africa, 
stated that the Union would not take part in any general scheme of 
Imperial Defence, nor would it participate in an overseas war even 
though Britain might be at war. "If the Government attempted 
rashly to commit South Africa to participate in another overseas 
war there would be large-scale disturbances, possibly civil war. 
Hence Government would not participate in any general scheme 
of Imperial Defence.” (Reuter message dated Cape Town, February 
5> *935'), General Hertzog, the Prime Minister, has confirmed this 
declaration and stated that it represents the Union Government’s 
policy. 



SOME RECENT HAPPENINGS 581 

repeated officially, is that Gandhiji and the Congress have 
agreed to the idea of such safeguards because ‘ safeguards in 
the interests of India ’ were accepted in the Delhi Pact of 1931. 

Ottawa and the safeguards dealing with trade and commerce 
are after all relatively minor matters/ What is far more im- 
portant is the series of provisions which aim at perpetuating 
every vital political and economic hold on the Indian people 
which has in the past and present helped in the exploitation of 
the country. So long as these provisions and ' safeguards ’ re- 
main, real progress in any direction is impossible, and there is 
no place left for constitutional attempts at change. Every such 
attempt will come up against the blank wall of the ‘safe- 
guards ’, and make it more and more clear that the only possible 
course is not constitutional. From the point of view of political 
changes this proposed constitution, with its monstrous Federa- 
tion, is an absurdity: it is far worse from the social and eco- 
nomic view-point. The way to socialism is deliberately barred. 
A great deal of responsibility has apparently been transferred 
(but even that largely to ‘ safe ’ classes) but not the power or 
means to do anything worth while. Britain retains the power 
without the responsibility. There is not even the proverbial 
fig-leaf to cover the nakedness of autocracy. Everybody knows 
that the essential need in these times is extreme flexibility and 
adaptation in constitutions to meet a rapidly changing situation. 
Quick decisions are necessary, and the power to enforce them. 
Even so it is doubtful if parliamentary democracy, as it func- 
tions in a few of the Western countries to-day, is capable of 
bringing about the changes essential for the proper functioning 
of the modern world. But that question does not arise here, 
for movement is deliberately checked by chains and fetters, and 
a barred and bolted door confronts us. We are provided with 
a car, all brakes and no. pngines. It is a constitution designed 
by people whose ever-present background is Martial Law. To 
a man of force there is no real alternative to Martial Law 
except collapse. 

The measure of liberty that this proposed gift of Britain 
offers to India can be taken from the fact that even the most 
moderate and politically backward groups in India have 

‘The London Economist (October 1934) has pointed out: "But 
for the future it appears that among the benefits of British rule the 
doubtful privilege of buying expensively from Lancashire is to be 
forced upon the 'native' in many corners of the globe." Ceylon 
has been the most flagrant recent example of this. 



582 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

condemned it as reactionary. The habitual and persistent 
supporters of Government have had to combine criticisms 
of it with their usual genuflections. Others have been more 
vehement. 

In view of these proposals the Liberals found it difficult to 
retain in full measure their abiding faith in the inscrutable 
wisdom of Providence in placing India under British dominion. 
They offered strong criticism, but disdainful of reality and 
enamoured of phrases and fine ‘ gestures they laid the greatest 
stress on the absence of the words “Dominion Status” from 
the Report and the Bill. There was a great outcry about this, 
and now that Sir Samuel Hoare has made some kind of a state- 
ment on the subject, honour will largely be satisfied. The 
Dominion Status may be an insubstantial shadow haunting an 
unknown future — a Never-Never land which we may never 
reach, but we can dream about it at least and grow eloquent 
over its many beauties. Sir Tej Bahadur Sapru, troubled per- 
haps by doubts about the British Parliament and the British 
people, has sought refuge in the Crown. Eminent lawyer that 
he is, he has laid down a novel constitutional doctrine : “ What- 
ever the British Parliament and people may or may not do for 
India,” he said, “ over and above them stood the Crown that 
looks after the interests of Indian subjects and India’s peace 
and prosperity.” * It is a comforting doctrine which saves us 
from troubling ourselves about constitutions, laws, and political 
and social changes. 

But it would be unfair to suggest that the Liberals have 
lessened their opposition to the scheme. Most of them have 
made it perfectly clear that they prefer present conditions, bad 
as they are, to this imwanted gift that is being thrust on India. 
Bejrond stressing that, their very principles forbid them from 
doing anything, and it may be presumed that they will go on 
laying stress. For their motto they might well have that 
modern adaptation of an ancient saying: " If at first you don’t 
succeed, cry again! ” 

A certain hopeful reliance is placed by Liberal leaders, and 
probably by many others including some’ Congressmen, on the 
victory of the Labour Party in Britain and the formation of 
a Labour Government there. There is absolutely no reason why 
India should not endeavour to go ahead with the co-operation 
of advanced groups in Britain, or should not try to profit by 
the advent of a Labour Government. But to rely helplessly on 

’ Speaking at a public meeting at Lucknow on January 29, 1935. 



SOME RECENT HAPPENINGS 


5«3 

a change in fortune’s wheel in England is hardly dignified or 
in consonance with national honour. Dignity apart, it is not 
good common sense. Why should we expect much from the 
British Labour Party? We have had two Labour Governments 
already, and we are not likely to forget their gifts to India. Mr. 
Ramsay MacDonald may have left the Labour ranks, but his 
old colleagues do not seem to have changed much. At the 
Southport Labour Party Conference held in October 1934, a 
resolution was submitted by Mr. V. K. Krishna Menon “ex- 
pressing the conviction that it is imperative that the principle 
of self-determination for the establishment of full self-govern- 
ment for India should be implemented forthwith.” Mr. Arthur 
Henderson urged the withdrawal of the resolution and, very 
frankly, refused to give an undertaking on behalf of the 
Executive to carry out its policy of self-determination for India. 
He said : “ We have laid down very clearly that we are going 
to consult if possible all sections of the Indian people. That 
ought to satisfy anybody.” The satisfaction will perhaps be 
tempered by the fact that exactly this was the declared policy 
of the last Labour Government and the National Government, 
resulting in the Round Table Conference, the White Paper, the 
Joint Committee Report, and the India Act. 

It is perfectly dear that in matters of imperial policy there 
is little to choose between Tory or Labour in England. It is 
true that the Labour rank and file is far more advanced, but it 
has little influence on its very conservative leadership. It may 
be that the Labour Left wing gather strength, for conditions 
change rapidly nowadays, but do national or social movements 
curl themselves up and go to sleep, waiting for problematical 
changes elsewhere? 

There is a curious aspect to this reliance of our Liberals on 
the British Labour Party. If, by any chance, this Party went 
Left and gave effect in England to its socialistic programme, 
what would be the reactions in India and on the Liberals and 
other Moderate groups here? Most of them are sodally Con- 
servatives of the deepest dye. They will dislike Labour’s social 
and economic changes, and fear their introduction in India. 
It may even happen that their love of the British connection 
may undergo a sea-change, when this connection becomes a 
symbol of social upsets. It may also happen then that persons 
like me, who want national independence and severance of that 
connection, may change their minds and prefer close association 
with a socialist Britain. None of us surely has any objection 
to co-operating with the British people; it is their imperialism 



JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


584 

that we object to, and once they have shed this, the way to 
co-operation will he open. Wliat of the Moderates then? Prob- 
ably they will accept the new order as another indication of 
the inscrutable wisdom of Providence. 

One of the notable consequences of the Round Table Con- 
ference and the proposal to have a Federation, is to push the 
Indian Princes very much to the forefront. The solicitude of 
the Tory die-hards for them and their ‘ independence ’ has put 
new life into them. Never before have they had so much im- 
portance thrust on them. Previously they dared not say no to 
a hint from the British Resident, and the Government of 
India’s attitude to the numerous highnesses was openly dis- 
dainful. There was continual interference in their internal 
affairs, and often this was justified. Even to-day a large number 
of the States are directly or indirectly being governed by British 
officers ‘lent’ to the States. But Mr. Churchill’s and Lord 
Rothermere’s campaign seems to have unnerved the Govern- 
ment of India a little, and it has CTOwn cautious about inter- 
fering with their decisions. The Princes also now talk in a 
much more superior way. 

I have tried to follow these superficial developments in the 
Indian political scene, but I cannot help feeling that they are 
unreal, and the background in India oppresses me. The back- 
ground is one of continual repression of every kind of free- 
dom, of enormous suffering and frustration, of distortion of 
goodwill, and encouragement of many evil tendencies. Large 
numbers lie in prison and spend their young lives, year after 
year, eating their hearts out.* Their families and friends and 
connections and thousands of others grow bitter, and a 
nauseating sense of humiliation and powerlessness before brute 
strength takes possession of them. Numerous organisations are 
outlawed even in normal times, and ‘ Emergency Powers ’ and 
'Tranquillity Acts’ make for themselves almost a permanent 

* Sir Han-y Haig, Home Member, stated in the Legislative As- 
sembly on July 23, 1934, that the total number of detenus in 
-gaols and special camps were: in Bengal, 1500 to i6oo; in Deoli 
camp, 500. Total, aooo to aioo. This is the figure for detenus; that 
is, untried and unconvicted prisoners. It does not include political 
convicts. In the case of convicts sentences are usually very heavy. 
In a recent Calcutta case the Associated Press (Dec. 17, 1934) states 
that the High Court gave a sentence of nine years’ rigorous im- 
prisonment, the offence being the unlicensed possession of arms 
and ammunition. The accused had been arrested with a revolver 
and six cartridges. 



SOME RECENT HAPPENINGS 585 

home in the Government’s armoury. Exceptions in the matter 
of restrictions of liberties rapidly becomes the general rule. Large 
numbers of books and periodicals are proscribed or prevented 
entry by a ‘ Sea Customs Act and the possession of ' danger- 
ous ' literature may lead to a long term of imprisonment. A 
frank expression of opinion on the political or economic prob- 
lems of the day, or a favourable report of social and cultural 
conditions in Russia meets with the strong disapproval of the 
censor. The Modem Review was warned by the Bengal Govern- 
ment because it published an article by Dr. Rabindra Nath 
Tagore on Russia, an article written after a personal visit to that 
country. We are informed by the Under-Secretary for India in 
Parliament that “the article gave a distorted view of the 
achievements of British rule in India,” and hence action was 
taken against it.* The judge of these achievements is the 
censor, and we may not have a contrary opinion or give ex- 
pression to it. Objection was also taken by Government to the 
publication of a brief message from Rabindra Nath Tagore to 
the Dublin Society of Friends. If a sage like Tagore, interested 
in cultural matters and deliberately keeping aloof from politics, 
revered in India and world famous, is suppressed in this way, 
what of humble folkj; Worse even than the actual instances of 
suppression' is the atmosphere of fear they create- It is not 
possible to have honest journalism under these circumstances, 
or a proper consideration or teaching of history, economics, 
politics or current affairs. This is a strange background for the 
introduction of reforms and responsible government and the 
like. 

Every intelligent person knows that the world is in a state of 
intellectual turmoil to-day, and that there is a vague or acutely- 

* November 12, 1934. 

* On September 4, 1935, an official statement was made in 
the Legislative Assembly regarding the working of the Press laws 
in India. It was stated that from 1930 onwards 514 newspapers had 
been affected by Government demands for securities and by con- 
fiscations. Of these, 348 newspapers stopped publication because 
they could not give further securities; 166 newspapers gave securi- 
ties amounting to Rs. 252,852. 

Recently (in the latter hdf of 1935) a number of laws suppressing 
dvil liberties have again been enacted for a further long period. 
The prindpal one— The Criminal Law Amendment Act— applies 
to the whole of India. It was thrown out by the Legislative As- 
sembly and later certified by the Governor-General. Many pro- 
vinces have also passed such laws. 



586 JAWAHAKLAL NEHRU 

felt, but in any case a tremendous, dissatisfaction with existing 
conditions. Far-reaching changes are taking place before our 
eyes, and the future, whatever shape it might take, is not a 
remote, far-off thing which arouses a purely academic interest 
in the detached minds of philosophers, sociologists and econo- 
mists. It is a matter which affects every human being for better 
or for worse, and surely it is every citizen’s duty to try to under- 
stand the various forces at play and decide on his own course 
of action. A world is coming to an end, and a new world is 
taking shape. To find an answer to a problem it is necessary 
to know what it is. Indeed it is as important to know the 
problem as to seek a solution for it. 

Unhappily there is an astonishing ignorance or indifference 
to world happenings among our politicians. Probably this 
ignorance extends to the great majority of the official element 
in India, for the Civil Service lives happily and complacently in 
a narrow world of its own. Only the topmost of our officials 
have to consider these problems. The British Government of 
course has to keep world events in view and to develop its policy 
accordingly. It is common knowledge that British foreign 
policy has been considerably influenced by the possession and 

5 rocection of India. How many Indian politicians consider that 
apanese imperialism, or the growing strength of the Soviet 
Union, or the Anglo-Russo-Japanese intrigues in Sinkiang, or 
the events in Central Asia or Afghanistan or Persia, have an 
intimate bearing on Indian politics? The Central Asian situa- 
tion obviously affects the position of Kashmir and makes it a 
pivot of British policy and defence. 

Even more important are the economic changes that are 
rapidly taking place the world over. We must realise that the 
nineteenth-century system has passed away, and has no appli- 
cation to present-day needs. The lawyer’s view, so prevalent in 
India, of proceeding from precedent to precedent is of little 
use when there are no precedents. We cannot put a bullock- 
cart on rails and call it a railway train. It has to give way and 
be scrapped as obsolescent material. Even apart ftom Russia, 
there is talk of New Deals and vast changes. President Roose- 
velt, with every desire to retain and strengthen the capitalist 
system, has with great courage inaugurated enormous schemes 
which may change American life. He talks of “ weeding out 
the over-privileged and effectively lifting, up the under-privi- 
leged ”. He may or may not succeed, but the courage of the 
man and his desire to pull his country out of the ruts are 
undeniable. He is not afraid of changing his policy or of 



SOME RECENT HAPPENINGS 587 

admitting mistakes. In England Mr. Lloyd George has come 
out with his ‘ New Deal ’. We want many New Deals in India 
too. The old assumption that “ whatever is worth knowing is 
already known, and whatever is worth doing has already been 
done,” is perilous nonsense. 

We have to face many questions, and we must face them 
boldly. Has the present social or economic system a right to 
exist if it is unable to improve greatly the condition of the 
masses? Does any other system give promise of this wide- 
spread betterment? How far will a mere political change bring 
radical improvement? If vested interests come in the way of 
an eminently desirable change, is it wise or moral to attempt 
to preserve them at the cost of mass misery and poverty? 
Surely the object is not to injure vested interests, but to prevent 
them from injuring others. If it was possible to come to terms 
with these vested interests, it would be most desirable to do so. 
People may disagree with the justice or injustice of this, but 
few will doubt the expediency of a settlement. Such a settlement 
obviously cannot be the removal of one vested interest by 
the creation of another. Whenever possible and desirable, 
reasonable compensation might be given, for a conflict is likely 
to cost far more. But, unhappily, all history shows that vested 
interests do not accept such compromises. Classes that have 
ceased to play a vital part in society are singularly lacking 
in wisdom. They gamble for all or nothing, and so they fade 
away. 

There is a great deal of ' loose talk ’ (as the Congress Working 
Committee put it) about confiscation and the like. Confiscation, 
persistent and continual, is the basis of the existing system, and 
it is to put an end to this that social changes are proposed. 
There is the daily confiscation of part of the labour product of 
the worker; 'a peasant’s holding is ultimately confiscated by 
raising his rent or revenue to such an extent that he cannot 
pay it. Formerly common lands were confiscated by individuals 
and made into big estates; peasant proprietors were also wiped 
out in this way. Confiscation is the basis and life-breath of the 
present system. 

To remedy this partly, society tries various expedients which 
are themselves of the nature of confiscation — ^heavy taxes, 
death-duties, laws for the relief firom indebtedness, inflation, etc. 
Recently we have seen national repudiation of debt on an enor- 
mous scale, not only by the Soviet Union but by leading 
capitalist countries; the most notable instance of this being the 
British repudiation of their debt to the United States— a 



588 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

dangerous example to place before India! But all these con- 
fiscations and repudiations help only to a minor extent, and do 
not get rid of 'the basic cause. To build anew, that root cause 
has to be removed. 

In considering a method for changing the existing order we 
have to weigh the costs of it in material as well as spiritual 
terms. We cannot afford to be too shortsighted. We have to 
see how far it helps ultimately in the development of human 
happiness and human progress, material and spiritual. But we 
have always to bear in mind the terrible costs of not changing 
the existing order, of carrying on as we do to-day with our 
enormous burden of frustrated and distorted lives, starvation 
and misery, and spiritual and moral degradation. Like an 
ever-recurring flood this present economic system is continually 
overwhelming and carrying away to destruction vast numbers 
of human beings. We cannot check the flood or save these 
people by some of us carrying water away in a bucket. Em- 
bankments have to be built and canals, and the destructive 
power of the waters has to be converted and used for human 
betterment. 

It is obvious that the vast changes that socialism envisages 
cannot be brought about by the sudden passing of a few laws. 
But the basic laws and power are necessary to give the direction 
of advance and to lay the foundation of the structure. If the 
great building-up of a socialised society is to proceed, it cannot 
be left to chance nor can it be done in fits and starts with 
intervals of destruction of what has been built. The major 
obstructions have thus to be removed. The object is not to 
deprive, but to provide; to change the present scarcity to future 
abundance. But in doing so the path must necessarily be 
cleared of impediments and selfish interests which want to hold 
society back. And the path we take is not merely a question of 
what we like or dislike or even of abstract justice, but what is 
economically sound, capable of progress and adaptation to 
changing conditions, and likely to do good to the largest num- 
ber of ‘human beings. 

A clash of interests ■seems inevitable. There is no middle path. 
Each one of us will have to choose our side. Before we can 
choose, we must know and understand. The emotional appeal 
of socialism is not enough. Thia.must be supplemented by an 
intellectual and reasoned appeal based on facts and arguments 
and detailed criticism. In the West a great deal of this kind 
of literature exists, hut in India there is a tremendous lack of 
it, and many good books are not ‘allowed entry here. But to 



SOME RECENT HAPPENINGS 589 

read books from other countries is not enough. If socialism is 
to be built up in India it will have to grow out of Indian con- 
ditions, and the closest study of these conditions is essential. 
We want experts in the job who study, and prepare detailed 
plans. Unfortunately our experts arc mostly in Government 
service or in the semi-official universities, and they dare not go 
far in this direction. 

An intellectual background is not enough to bring socialism. 
Other forces are necessary. But I do feel that without that 
background we can never have a grip of the subject or create 
a powerful movement. At the present moment the agrarian 
problem is far the most important in India, and it is likely to 
remain so. _ But industry is of little less importance, and it 
grows. What is our objective : a peasant State or an industrial 
one? Of course we are bound to remain predominantly agri- 
cultural, but one can and, I think, must push on industry. 

Our captains of industry are quite amazingly backward in 
their ideas; they are not even up-to-date capitalists. The masses 
are so poor that they do not look upon them as potential con- 
sumers, and fight bitterly against any proposal to increase wages 
or lower hours of work. Recently hours of work have been 
reduced from ten to nine in the cotton mills. This has led the 
Ahmedabad mill-owners to reduce the wages of labour, even 
piece-work labour. Thus the reduction of hours of work has 
meant a lower income and a yet lower standard for the poor 
worker. Rationalisation, however, proceeds apace, increasing the 
pressure on the worker and his fiitigue, without any propor- 
tionate increase in wages. The whole outlook of the industry is 
an early nineteenth-century one. They make stupendous profits 
when they have the chance and the worker continues as before; 
if there is a slump the owners complain that they cannot carry 
on without reducing wages. Not only have they the help of the 
State, but also usually the sympathy of our middle-class 
politicians. And yet the lot of the cotton worker in Ahmedabad 
is better than that of a similar worker in Bombay and else- 
where. The cotton workers, on the whole, arc better off than 
the jute workers of Bengal and the miners. The workers of the 
small disorganised industries are lowest in the industrial scale. 
To compare the magnificent palaces of the jute millionaires and 
the cotton lords, with their ostentatious display of pomp and 
luxury, with the wretched hovels where their semi-naked 
workers live, should be an education of the most impressive 
kind. But we take these contrasts for granted and pass them by, 
nnaflFected and unimpressed. 



590 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

Bad as is the lot of the Indian industrial worker, it is, from 
the income point of view, far better than the peasant’s lot. The 
peasant has one advantage ; he lives in fresh air and escapes the 
degradation of the slums. But so low has he sunk that he often 
converts even his open-air village into a ‘ dung-heap ’, as Gand- 
hiji has called it. There is no sense of co-operation in him or 
of joint effort for the good of the community. It is easy to 
condemn him for this, hut what is the unhappy creature to do 
when life presents itself to him as a bitter and unceasing indi- 
vidual struggle with every man’s hand raised against him? How 
he lives at all is an almost incredible wonder. It has been found 
that the average daily income of typical farmers in the Punjab 
was about nine annas (roughly ninepence) per head in 1928-29. 
This fell in 1930-31 to nine pies (three farthings) per head! 
The Punjab peasant is considered to be far more prosperous 
than the peasantry of the U.P. Behar and Bengal. In some of 
the eastern districts of the U.P. (Gorakhpur, etc.) in prosperous 
times before the slump, the daily field wage was two annas (two- 
pence). To talk of improving these staggering conditions by 
philanthropy or local efforts in rural uplift is a mockery of the 
peasant and his misery. 

How are we to get out of this qupgmire? Means can no doubt 
be devised, although it is a difficult task to raise masses of 
people who have sunk so low. But the real difficulty comes from 
interested groups who oppose change, and under imperialist 
domination the change seems to be out of the question. In 
what direction will India look in the coming years? Com- 
munism and fascism seem to be the major tendencies of the 
age, and intermediate tendencies and vacillating groups are 
gradually being eliminated. Sir Malcolm Hailey has prophesied 
that India will take to National Socialism, that is, some form of 
fascism. Perhaps he is right so far as the near future is con- 
cerned. There are already clearly marked fascist tendencies in 
India’s young men and women, especially in Bengal, but to 
some extent in every province, and the Congress is beginning 
to reflect them. Because of fascism’s close connection with 
extreme forms of violence, the elders of the Congress, wedded 
as they are to non-violence, have a natural horror of it. But the 
so-caUed philosophical background of fascism — the Corporate 
State with private property preserved and vested interests curbed 
but not done away -with— will probably appeal to them. It 
seems to be at first sight a golden way of reta inin g the old and 
yet having the new. Whether it is possible both to have the 
cake and eat it is another matter. 



ROME RECENT HAPPENINGS 


J9I 

But the real drive towards fascism will naturally come from 
the younger members of the middle class. Actually, at present, 
it is part of the middle class in India that is revolutionary, not 
so much the workers or the peasantry, though no doubt the 
industrial workers are potentially more so. This nationalist 
middle class is a favourable field for the spread of fascist ideas. 
But fascism cannot spread here in the European sense so long 
as there is a foreim government. Indian fascism must neces- 
sarily stand for Indian independence, and cannot therefore ally 
itself with British imperialism. It will have to seek support 
from the masses. If British control were wholly removed, 
fascism would probably grow rapidly, supported as it would 
certainly be by the upper middle class and the vested interests. 

But British control is not likely to go soon, and meanwhile 
socialistic and communistic ideas are also spreading in spite of 
severe repression by the British Government. The Communist 
Party is illegal in India, and the term is interpreted in 'a loose 
way to include even sympathisers and labour unions with 
advanced programmes. 

As between fascism and communism my sympathies are 
entirely with communism. As these pages will show, I am very 
far from being a communist. My roots are still perhaps partly 
in the nineteenth century, and I have been too much influenced 
bj^'the humanist liberal tradition to get out of it completely. 
This bourgeois background follows me about and is naturally a 
source of irritation to many communists. I dislike dogmatism, 
and the treatment of Karl Marx’s writings or any other books 
as revealed scripture which cannot be ch^lenged, and the regi- 
mentation and heresy hunts which seem to be a feature of 
modem communism. I dislike also much that has happened in 
Russia, and especially the excessive use of violence in normal 
times. But still I incline more and more towards a communist 
philosophy. 

Marx may be wrong in some of his statements, or his theory 
of ‘yalue; this I am not competent to judge. But he seems to 
me to. have possessed quite an extraordinary degree of insight 
'in^jylocial phenomena, and this insight was apparently due to 
pHe scientific method he adopted. This method, applied to past 
history as well as current events, helps us in understanding 
them far more than any other method of approach, and it is 
because of this that the most revealing and keen analysis of the 
changes that are taking place in the world to-day come fi:om 
Marxist writers. It is easy to point out that Marx ignored or 
underrated certain subsequent tendencies, like the rise of a revo- 



593 JAWAHABLAL NEHRU 

lutionary element in the middle class, which is so notable to- 
day. But the whole value of Marxism seems to me to lie in its 
absence of dogmatism, in its stress on a certain outlook and 
mode of approach, and in its attitude to action. That outlook 
helps us in understanding the social phenomena of our own 
times, and points out the way of action and escape. 

Even that method of action was no fixed and unchangeable 
road, but had to be suited to circumstances. That, at any rate, 
was Lenin's view, and he justified it brilliantly by fitting his 
action to changing circumstances. He tells us that: “To at- 
tempt to answer ' yes ’ or ‘ no ’ to the question of the definite 
means of struggle, without examining in detail the concrete 
situation of a given moment at a given stage of its develop- 
ment, means to depart altogether from the Marxian ground.” 
And again he said ; “ Nothing is final; we must always learn 
from circumstances.” 

Because of this wide and comprehensive outlook, the real 
understanding communist develops to some extent an organic 
sense of social life. Politics for him cease to be a mere record of 
opportunism or a groping in the dark. The ideals and objectives 
he works for give a meaning to the struggle and to the sacrifices 
he willing^ faces. He feels that he is part of a grand army 
marching forward to realise human fate and destiny, and he has 
the sense of ' marching step by step with history ’. 

Probably most communists are far from reeling all this. 
Perhaps only a Lenin had this organic sense of life in its fullness 
which made his action so effective. But to a small extent every 
communist, who has understood the philosophy of his move- 
ment, has it. 

It is difficult to be patient with many communists; they have 
developed a peculiar method of irritating others. But they are 
a sorely tried people and, outside the Soviet Union, they have to 
contend against enormous difficulties. I have always admired 
their great courage and capacity for sacrifice. 'They suffer 
greatly, as unhappily untold millions suffer in various ways, but 
not blindly before a malign and all-powerful fate. They suffer 
as human beings, and there is a tragic nobility about such 
suffering. 

The success or failure of the Russian social experiments do 
not directly affect the validity of the Marxian theory. It is con- 
ceivable, though it is highly unlikely, that a set of untoward 
circumstances or a combination of powers mighf upset those 
experiments! But the value of those mighty social upheavals 
will still remain. "With all my instinctive dislike for much that 



SOME RECENT HAPPENINGS 593 

has happened there, I feel that they offer the greatest hope to 
the world. I do not know enough and I am not in a position to 
judge their actions. My chief fear is that the background of 
too much violence and suppression might bring an evil trail 
behind them which it may be difhcult to get nd of. But the 
greatest thing in favour of the present directors of Russia’s 
destiny is that they are not afraid to learn from their mistakes. 
They can retrace their steps and build anew. And always they 
keep their ideal before them. Their activities in other countries, 
through the Communist International, have been singularly 
futile, but apparently those activities have been reduced to a 
minimum now. 

Coming back to India, communism and socialism seem a far 
cry, unless the rush of external events force the pace here. We 
have to deal not with communism but, with the addition of an 
extra syllable, with communalism. And communally India is in 
a dark age. Men of action waste their energies on trivial thin gs 
and intngue and manoeuvre and try to overreach each other. 
Few of them are interested in tr 5 dng to make the world a better, 
brighter place. Perhaps this is a temporary phase that will pass 
soon. 

The Congress has at least largely kept out of this communal 
darkness, but its outlook is petty oourgeois, and the remedy it 
seeks for this as for other problems is in terms of the petty 
bourgeoisie. It is not likely so succeed that way. It represents to- 
day this lower middle-class, fr>r that is the most voceu and revo- 
lutionary at present. But it is nevertheless not as vital as it 
appears to be. It is pressed on either side by two forces— one 
entrenched, the other still weak but growing rapidly. It is pass- 
ing through a crisis of its existence at present; what wiU happen 
to it in the future it is difficult to say. It cannot go over to thfe 
side of the entrenched forces before it has fulfilled its historic 
mission of attaining national freedom. But before it succeeds 
in that, other forces may grow powerful and influence it in their 
direction, or gradually msplace it. It seems likely, however, that 
so long as a large measure of national freedom is not obtained, 
the Congress w2l play a dominant rfile in India. 

Any violent activity seems to be out of the question, injurious 
and waste of effort. That, I think, is generally recognised in 
India, in spite of rare instances of futile and sporadic violence. 
That way cannot lead us anywhere except into a hopeless maze 
of violence and counter-violence out of which it will be difficult 
to emerge. 

We are often told that we must unite among ourselves and 

QO 



594 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

present a ‘united front’. Mrs. Sarojini Naidu pleads for it 
eloquently with all her poetic ardour. She is a poet and entitled 
to lay stress on the beauty of harmony and concord. Obviously 
a ‘ unjted front ’ is always desirable, provided it is a front. An 
analysis of this phrase leads one to the conclusion that what is 
aimed at is a pact or compromise between various individuals at 
the top. Such a combination will necessarily mean that the 
most cautious and moderate will determine the objective and 
lay down the pace. As some of them are well known to dislike 
all movement, the result will be a united standstill. Instead of 
a united front there will be a united and extensive display of 
back. 

It is, of course, absurd to say that we will not co-operate with 
or compromise with others. Life and politics are much too 
complex for us always to think in straight lines. Even the 
implacable Lenin said that “to march forward without com- 
promise, without turning frona the path” was "intellectual 
childishness and not the serious tactics of a revolutionary 
class.” Compromises there are boimd to be, and we should not 
worry too much about them. But whether we compromise or 
refuse to do so, what matters is that primary things should 
come first always and secondary things should never take pre- 
cedence over them. If we are dear about our principles and 
objectives, temporary compromises will not harm. But danger 
lies in our slurrini; oyer those prin^les and objectives for fear 
of offending our weaker brethren. To mislead is far worse than 
to ofrend. 

I write vaguely and somewhat academically about current 
events, and try to play the part of a detached onlooker. I am 
not usually considered a looker-on when action beckons; my 
offence, I am often told, is that I rush in foolishly without 
sufficient provocation. VS^at would I do now? What would I 
suggest to my countrymen to do? Perhaps the instinctive 
caution of a person who dabbles in public affairs comes in the 
way of my committing myself prematurely. But, if I may 
confess the truth, I really do not know and I do not try to 
find out. When I cannot act, why should I worry? I do worry 
to a large extent, but that is inevitable. At least, so long as 
I am in prison, I try to save myself from coming to grips with 
the problem of immediate action. 

All activity seems to be far away in prison. One becomes the 
object of events, not the subject of action. And one waits and 
waits for something to happen. I write of political and social 
problems of India and the world, but what are they to this 



SOME RECENT HAPPENINGS J95 

little self-contained world of gaol which has long been my 
home? Prisoners have only one major interest: the date of 
their release. 

In Naini Prison and here in Almora many prisoners have 
come to me to enquire anxiomly about the jugli. I could not 
at first make out what it was, but then I discovered that the 
word was jubilee. They were referring to the rumours of 
King George’s Silver Jubilee celebrations, but they did not 
know this. For them past associations had invested the word 
with one meaning only : it was a partial gaol delivery or a 
substantial reduction of sentences. Every prisoner, and especi- 
ally the long-term ones, are therefore interested in the coming 
jugli. For them the jugli is far more important than constitu- 
tional reforms and Acts of Parliament and Socialism and 
Communism. 