THE ‘DUAL POLICY’ OF THE BRITISH 
GOVERNMENT 

The Harijan movement was going on, guided by Gandhiji from 
Yeravda Prison and later from outside. There was a great 
agitation for removing the barriers to temple entry, and a Bill 
to that cflFect was introduced in the Legislative Assembly. And 
then the remarkable spectacle was witnessed of an outstanding 
leader of the Congress going from house to house in Delhi, 
visiting the members of the Assembly and canvassing for their 
votes for this Temple Entry Bill. Gandhiji himself sent an 
appeal through him to the Assembly members. And yet civil 
disobedience was still going on and people were going to prison, 
and the Assembly had been boycotted by the Congress and all 
our members had withdrawn from it. The rump that remained 
and the others who had filled the vacancies had distinguished 
themselves in this crisis by opposition to the Congress and 
support of the Government, A majority of them had helped 
the Government to pass repressive legislation giving some per- 
manence to the extraordinary provisions of the Ordinances. 
They had swallowed the Ottawa Pact, they had fed and feasted 
with the great ones in Delhi and Simla and London, and joined 
in the thank-offerings for British rule in India, and prayed for 
the success of what was called the ‘Dual Policy ’ in India. 

I was amazed at Gandhiji’s appeal, under the circumstances 
then existing, and even more so by the strenuous efforts of 
Rajagopalachariar, who, a few weeks before, had been the act- 
ing-President of the Congress. Civil Disobedience, of course, 
suffered by these activities, but what hurt me more was the 
moral side. To me, for Gandhiji or any Congress 'leader to 
countenance such activities appeared immoral and almost a 
breach of faith with the large numbers of people in gaol or 
carryhig on the struggle. But I knew that his way of looking at 
it was different. 

The Government attitude to this Temple Entry Bill, then and 
subsequently, was very revealing. It put every possible diffimlty 
in the way of its promoters, went on postponing it and en- 
couraging opposition to it, and then finally declared its own 
opposition to it, and killed it. That, to a greater or lesser extent, 
has been its attitude to all, measures of social reform in India, 

38 * 



382 JAWAHARLAL N£HRU 

and on the plea of non-interference with religion, it has pre- 
vented social progress. But this, it need hardly be said, has not 
prevented it from criticising our social evils and encouraging 
others to do so. By a fluke, the Sarda Child Marriage Restraint 
Bill became law, but the subsequent history of this unhappy 
Act showed more than anything else how much averse to en- 
forcing any such measure the Government was. The Govern- 
ment that could produce ordinances overnight, creating novel 
oftcnces and providing for vicarious punishment, and could send 
scores of thousands of people to prison for breach of their pro- 
visions, apparently quailed at the prospect of enforcing one of 
its regular laws like the Sarda Act. The effect of the Act was 
first to increase tremendously the very evil it was intended to 
combat, for people rushed to take advantage of the intervening 
six months of grace which .the Act very foolishly allowed. And 
then it was discovered that the Act was more or less of a joke 
and could be easily ignored without any steps being taken by 
Government. Not eyen the slightest attempt at propaganda was 
made officially, and most people in the villages never knew 
what the Act was. They heard distorted accounts of it from 
Hindu and Muslim village preachers, who themselves seldom 
knew the correct facts. 

This extraordinary spirit of toleration of social evils in India 
which the British Government has shown is obviously not due 
to any partiality for them. It is true that they do not very much 
care about their removal, for these evils do not interfere with 
their business of governing India and exploiting her resources. 
There is also always the danger of irritating various people by 
proposing social reforms, and, having to face enough anger and 
irritation on the political plane, the British Government has no 
desire whatever to add to its troubles. But latterly the position 
has become worse from the point of view of the social reformer, 
for the British are becoming more and more the silent bulwarks 
of these evils. This is due to their close association with the 
most reactionary elements in India. As opposition to their rule 
increases they have to seek strange allies, and to-day the firmest 
champions of British rule in India are the extreme communal- 
ists and the religious reactionaries and obscurantists. The 
Muslim communal organisations are notoriously reactionary 
from every point of view— political, economic, social. The 
Hindu Mahasabha rivals them, but it is left far behind in this 
backward-moving race by the Sanatanists, who combine reli- 
gious obscurantism of an extreme type with fervent, or at any 
rate loudly expressed, loyalty to British rule. 



'dual policy' of BRITISH GOVERNMENT 383 

If the British Government was quiescent and took no steps to 
popularise the Sarda Act and to enforce it, why did not the 
Congress or other non-official organisations carry on propaganda 
in favour of it? This question is often put by British and other 
foreign critics. So far as the Congress is concerned, it has been 
engaged during the last fifteen years, and especially since 1930, 
in a fierce life-and-death struggle for national freedom with the 
British rulers. The other organisations have no .real strength 
or contact with the masses. Men and women of ideals and 
force of character and influence among the masses were drawn 
into the Congress and spent mucli of their time in British 
prisons. 

Other organisations could seldom go beyond the passing of 
resolutions by select people who feared the mass touch. They 
functioned in a gentlemanly way or, like the All-India Women’s 
Association, in a lady-like way, and the spirit of aggressive 
propaganda was not theirs. Besides, they too were paralysed by 
the terrible repression of all public activities by the Ordinances 
and the laws that followed them. Martial law may crush revolu- 
tionary activity, but at the same time it paralyses civilisation 
and most civilised activities. 

Btit the real reason why the Congress and other non-official 
organisations cannot do much for social reform goes deeper. We 
suffer from the disease of nadonalism, and that absorbs our 
attention and it will continue to do so till we get political free- 
dom. As Bernard Shaw has said: "A conquered nation is like 
a man with cancer; he can think of nothing else. . . . There is 
indeed no greater curse to a nation than a nationalist move- 
ment, which is only the agonising symptom of a suppressed 
natural function. Conquered nations lose their place in the 
world’s march because they can do nothing but strive to get rid 
of their nationalist movements by recovering their national 
liberty.” 

Past experience shows us that we can make little social pro- 
gress under present conditions, in spite of apparent transfers of 
subjerts to elected ministers. The tremeiidous inertia of the 
Government is always helpful to the conservative elements, and 
for generations past the British Government has crushed initia- 
tive and ruled despotically, or paternally, ^ it has itself called 
it. It does not approve of any big oj^hised effort by iibn- 
bfficials, and suspects ulterior motives. 'Ae Harijan movement, 
in spite of every precaution taken by its organisers, has occa- 
sionally come in conflict with officials. I am sure that if the 
Congress started a nation-wide propaganda for the greater use 



384 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

of soap it would come in conflict with Government in many 
places. 

I do not think it is very difficult to convert the masses to 
social reform if the State takes the matter in hand. But alien 
rulers are always suspect, and they cannot go far in the process 
of conversion. If the alien element was removed and economic 
changes were given precedence, an energetic administration 
could easily introduce far-reaching social reforms. 

But social reform and the Sarda Act and the Harijan Move- 
ment did not fill our minds in prison, except in so far as I felt 
a little irritated by the Harijan Movement because it had come 
in the way of civil disobedience. Early in May 1933 Civil Dis- 
obedience had been suspended for six weeks, and we waited 
anxiously for further developments. That suspension had given 
a final blow to the movement, for one cannot play fast and 
loose with a national struggle and switch it on and off at will. 
Even before the suspension the leadership of the movement 
had been singularly weak and ineffective. There were petty 
conferences being held, and all manner of rumours spread 
which militated against active work. Some of the acting-Presi- 
dents of the Congress were very estimable men, but it was 
unkindness to them to make them generals of an active cam- 
paign. There was too much of a hint of tiredness about them, 
of a desire to get out of a difficult position. There was some 
discontent against this vacillation and indecision in high quar- 
ters, but it was difficult to express it in an organised way, as all 
Congress bodies were unlawful. 

Then came Gandhiji’s twenty-one-day fast, his discharge from 
prison, and the suspension of dvil disobedience for six weeks. 
The fast was over, and very slowly he recovered from it. In the 
middle of June the period of suspension of civil disobedience 
was extended by another six weeks. Meanwhile the Govern- 
ment had in no way toned down its aggression. In the Anda- 
man Islands political prisoners (those convicted in Bengal for 
acts of revolutionary violence were sent there) were on hunger- 
strike on the question of treatment, and one or two of them 
died— starved to death. Others h-j dying. People who addressed 
meetings in India in protest of what was happening in the 
Andamans were themselves arrested and sentenced. We were 
not only to suffer, but we were not even to complain, even 
though prisoners died by the terrible ordeal of the hunger- 
strike, having no other means of protest open to them. Some 
months later, in September 1933 (when I was out of prison), an 
appeal was issued over a number of signatures including 



‘dual policy’ of BRITISH GOVERNMENT 385 

Rabindra Nath Tagore, C. F. Andrews, and many other well- 
known people, mostly unconnected with the Congress, asking 
for more humanitarian treatment of the Andamans’ prisoners, 
and preferably for their transfer to Indian gaols. The Home 
Member of the Government of India expressed his great dis- 
pleasure at this statement, and criticised the signatories strongly 
for their sympathy for the prisoners. Later, as far as I can 
remember, the expression of such sympathy was made a 
punishable offence in Bengal. 

Before the second six weeks of suspension of civil dis- 
obedience were over, news came to us in Dehra Dun Gaol that 
Gandhiji had called an informal conference at Poona. Two or 
three hundred people met there and, on Gandhiji’s advice, mass 
civil disobedience was suspended, but individual civil dis- 
obedience was permitted, and all secret methods were barred. 
The decisions were not very inspiring, but I did not particularly 
object to them so far as they went To stop mass civil dis- 
obedience was to recognise and stabilise existing conditions, for, 
in reality, there was no mass movement then. Secret work was 
merely a pretence that we were carrying on, and often it 
demoralised, having regard to the character of our movement 
To some extent it was necessary in order to send instructions 
and keep contacts, but civil disobedience itself could not be 
secret. 

What stirprised me and distressed me was the absence of 
any real discussion at Poona of the existing situation and of 
our objectives. Congressmen had met together after nearly two 
years of fierce conflict and repression, and much had hap- 
pened meanwhile in the world at large and in India, including 
the publication of the White Paper containing the British 
Government’s proposals for constitutional reform. We had to 
put up during this period with enforced silence, and on the 
other side there had been ceaseless and perverted propaganda 
to obscure the issues. It was frequently stated, not oiuy by 
supporters of the Government but by Liberals and others, that 
the Congress had g^ven up its objective of independence. The 
least that should have been done, I thought, was to lay stress 
on our political objective, to make it clear again, and, if pos- 
sible, to add to it social and economic objectives. Instead of 
this, the discussion seems to have been entirely confined to the 
relative merits of mass and individual civil disobedience, and 
the desirability or otherwise of secrecy. There was also some 
strange talk of ‘ peace ’ with the Government. Gandhiji sent 
a telegram to the Viceroy, as far as I remember, asking for an 



386 


JAWAHAHLAL NEHRU 


interview, to which the Viceroy replied with a ‘No’, and then 
Gandhiji sent a second telegram mentioning something about 
‘honourable peace*. Where was this elusive peace that was 
being sought, when the Government was triumphantly trying 
to crush the nation in every way, and people were starving to 
death in the Andamans? But I knew that, whatever happened, 
it was Gandhiji’s way always to offer the olive branch. 

Repression was going on in full swing, and all the special laws 
suppressing public activities were in force. In February 1933 
even a memorial meeting on my father’s death anniversary was 
prohibited by the police, although it was a non-Congress meet- 
ing, and such a good Moderate as Sir Tej Bahadur Sapru was 
to have presided over it. And as a vision of future favours to 
come we had been presented with the White Paper. 

This was a remarkable document, a perusal of which left one 
gasping for breath. India was to be converted into a glorified 
Indian State, with a dominating influence of the Statea feudal 
representatives in the Federation. But in the States themselves 
no outside interference would be tolerated, and undiluted 


autocracy would continue to prevail there. The real imperial 
links, the chains of debt, would- bind us for ever to the City of 
London, and the currency and monetary policy would also be 
controlled, through a Reserve Bank, by the Bank of England. 
There would he an impregnable defence of all vested rights, 
and additional vested interests were going' to be created. Our 
revenues were mortgaged up to the hilt for the benefit of these 
vested interests. The great imperial services, which we love so 
much, would continue uncontrolled and untouched, to train us 


for further instalments of self-government. There was going to 
be Provincial Autonomy, but the Governor would be a benevo- 
lent and all-powerful dictator keeping us in order. And high 
above all would sit the All-Highest, the supreme Dictator, ihe 
Viceroy, with conmlete powers to do what he will and check 
when he desires. Truly, the genius of the British ruling class 
for colonial government was never more in evidence, and well 
may the Hitlers and Mussolinis admire them and look with 
en'vy on the Viceroy of India. 

Having produced a constitution which tied up India hand 
and foot, a collection of ‘special responsibilities * and safeguards 
were added as additional fetters, making the unhappy country 
a prisoner incapable of movement. As Mr. Neville Chamber- 
lain said: “ They had done their best to surround the proposals 
with all the safeguards the wit of man could devise." 

Enrtherrwtr were informed that for these favours we would 



‘dual policy’ of BRITISH GOVERNMENT 387 

have to pay heavily — to begin with a lump sum of a few crores, 
and then annual payment. We could not have the blessings 
of Swaraj without adequate payment. We had been suffering 
under the delusion that India was poverty-stricken and already 
had too heavy a burden to carry, and we had looked to freedom 
to lighten it. That had been for the masses the urge for free- 
dom. But it now appeared that the burden was to become 
heavier. 

This Gilbertian solution of the Indian problem was ofiered 
with true British grace, and we were told how generous our 
rulers were. Never before had an imperial Power of its own 
free will offered such power and opportunities to a subject 
people. And a great debate arose in England between the 
donors and those who, horrified at such generosity, objected to 
it. This was the outcome of the many comings and goings 
between India and England during three years, of the- three 
Round Table Conferences, and innumerable committees and 
consultations. 

But the visits to England were not over yet. There was the 
Joint Select Committee of the British Parliament which was 
going to sit in judgment on the White Paper, and Indians went 
to it as a kind of assessors and as witnesses. There ivere also 
many other committees sitting in London, and there was an 
undignified scramble behind the scenes for membership of any 
committee which meant a free passage to and stay in the heart 
of the Empire. Brave men, undaunted by the petrifying pro- 
visions of the White Paper, undertook to face the perils of the 
sea voyage or the air journey, and the greater dangers of a 
stay in London city in order to attempt, with all the eloquence 
and power of persuasion at their command, to vary the pro-, 
visions of the White Paper. They knew and said that the task 
was an almost hopeless one, but they were no quitters, and 
would continue to have their say even though there was no 
one to listen to them. One of them, a leader of the .Responsi- 
vists, stuck on till the bitter end, when all others had left, 
probably having interview after interview and dinner after 
diimer with the men in authority in London, so that he might 
impress upon them what political changes he desired. When at 
last he returned to his native land, he infisrmed an expectant 
public that, with the well-known tenacity of the Marathas, he 
had refused to give up his job, and had stayed on in London 
to have his say to the very end. 

I remember a firequent complaint of my father’s that his 
Responsivist friends had no sense of humour. He often got 



388 JAWAHAHLAL NEHRU 

into trotible with them because of his humorous remarks, 
which were not appreciated by them at all, and then he had to 
explain and soothe — a tiring operation. And I thought of the 
fine fighting spirit of the Marathas, not only in the past but 
in the present during our national struggles, and of the great 
and indomitable Tilak, who would not bend though he break. 

The Liberals utterly disliked the White Paper. They also 
had no liking for the repression that was going on from day 
to day in India, and sometimes though rarely, even protested 
against it, always making it dear that they condemned the 
Congress and all its works. Tlicy would suggest to Govermnent 
occasionally to release some prominent Congressman firom 
prison — ^they could only think in terms of individuals they knew. 
The argument advanced, both by the Liberals and Responsi- 
visits, was that so-and-so should be released as there was no 
longer any danger to the public peace. And then it is always 
open to the Government to re-arrest that person if he mis- 
behaves, and Government could do so with more justification, 
Some people in England also were good enough to plead for the 
release of some members of the Working Committee, or special 
individuals, on these grounds. We could not help being grate- 
ful to people who were interested in us while we were in prison, 
but we felt also sometimes that it would be a good thing if 
we were saved from our well-meaning friends. We did not 
doubt their good intentions, but it was obvious that they had 
adopted completely the ideology of the British Government, 
and between them and us there was a wide chasm. 

The Liberals did not like much that was happening in India; 
they were unhappy about it, and yet what were they to do? 
It was unthinkable for them to take any effective action against 
Government. Merely to preserve themselves as a separate entity 
they had to retreat further away from the masses and the active 
elements in the population; to drift to the Right, till their 
ideology was hardly distinguishable from that of the Govern- 
ment. Small in numbers, and with no mass influence, they 
could not make any difference to a mass struggle. But among 
them were some distingxiished and well-knovm persons who 
were personally respected. And these leaders, as well as the 
Liberal and Responsivist groups as a whole, did an inestimable 
service to the British Government at a moment «of grave crisis 
by a moral support of the official policy. Even the coercion 
and lawlessness of Government profited by the lack of effective 
criticism and occasional acquiescence and approval of the 
_^Libemis,'‘Thus the Liberals and Responsivists gave a moral 



‘dual policy* of BRITISH GOVERNMENT 389 

sanction, to the fierce and unprecedented coercion that was 
going on in die country at a time when the Government was 
hard put to it to justify it. 

The White Paper was bad, very bad, so said the Liberal 
leaders. What was to be done about it? At the Liberal Federa- 
tion meeting held in Calcutta in April 1933, Mr. Srinivasa 
Sastri, the most eminent of the Liberal leadens, pleaded that 
however unsatisfactory the constitutional changes might be 
they should work them. “ This is no time to stand by and let 
things pass,” he said. The only action that apparently was 
conceivable to him was to accept what was given and to try to 
work it. The alternative to this was doing nothing. Further 
he added : “ If we have wisdom, experience, moderation, power 
of persuasion, quiet influence, and real efiiciency— if we have 
these virtues, this is the time to display them in the fullest 
strength.” ” Shining words ” was the Calcutta Statesman's com- 
ment on this eloquent appeal. 

Mr. Sastri is always eloquent, and has the orator’s love of 
fine words and their musical use. But he is apt to he carried 
away hj his enthtisiasms, and the word-magic that he creates 
blurs his meaning to others and perhaps to himself. It is worth 
while examining this appeal he m^de at Calcutta in April 1933 
during the continuance of the Civil Disobedience Movement. 
Fundamental principles and oHectives apart, two points seem 
to me worthy of note. The flrst is that whatever happens, 
however much we might be insulted, crushed, humiliated, and 
exploited by the British Government, we must submit to it. 
The line can never be drawn beyond which we must not go. 
A worm may turn, but not the Indian people if they followed 
Mr. Sastri’s advice. There is no other way according to him. 
'I'his means that, so far as he is concerned, submission to and 
acceptance of the British Government’s decisions is tantamount 
to a religion (if I may use that unfortunate word). It is the 
fate — Kismet — to which all of us have to bow whether we want 
to or not. 

It must be noted that he was not giving advice on a definite, 
known situation. The ' constiturional changes ’ were still in the 
making, though one had a fiiir notion that they would be very 
bad. K he had said that, bad as the White Paper proposals are, 
having regard to all the circumstances, I am in fevour of work- 
ing them, should they be enacted, his advice might have been 
good, or bad, but it had relation to existing fiicts. Mr. Sastri 
went much further, and said that however unsatisfecto^ the 
constitutional changes nu^t be his advice would hold. Ite was 



390 jawaharlal nehru 

prepared to give a blank cheque to the British Government on 
the most vital matter from the nation’s view-point. It is a little 
difficult for me to understand how any individual, group, or 
party, can talce up this attitude of commitment to an unforeseen 
future, unless it has no principles or moral and political stan- 
dards whatever, and has for its creed and policy invariable 
subservience to the ruler’s mandates. 

The second point that strikes me is one of pure tactics. The 
White Paper was one stage in the long march to the enactment 
of the new reforms. It was, from Government’s point of view, 
an important stage, but many stages remained, and it was 
possible that it might be altered for better or worse during its 
subsequent journey. These alterations would obviously depend 
on the pressure brought to bear on the British Government 
and Parliament from various interests. In this tug-of-war it 
was conceivable that the desire to win over the Indian Liberals 
to its side might have influenced the Government and induced 
it to liberalise the proposals, or at least to resist encroachments. 
But Mr. Sastri’s emphatic declaration, long before the question 
of acceptance or rejection, workix^ or not working the new 
reforms arose, made it clear to the Government that they could 
completely ignore the Indian Liberals. There was no cmestion 
of winning them over. They would not desert the Govern- 
ment, even if they were pushed out. Looking at the matter' 
from the Liberal view-point, as far as I can, Mr. Sastri’s speech 
at Calcutta seems to me to have been extraordinarily bad tactics 
and injurious to the Liberal cause. 

I have ventured to write so much on Mr. Sastri’s old speech, 
not because of any intrinsic importance of that speech or the 
Liberal Federation meeting, but because of my desire to under- 
stand the mentality and psychology of the Liberal leaders. 
They are able and estimable men, and yet, with the best will 
in the world, I have been whoUy unable to appreciate why they 
act as they do. Another speech of Mr. Sastri’s, which I rei^d in 
prison, influenced me greatly. He was addressir^ the Servants 
of Inffia Society, of which he is president, at Riona in June 
1933. He is reported to have pointed the danger in India 
if British influence were suddenly vrithdrawn, of political 
movements being marked by acute hatred, persecution, and 
oppression of one party by another. On the other hand, tolera- 
tion having throughout been a feature of British political life, 
the more India’s future is worked out in co-operation with 
Britain, the greater the likelihood of toleration prevailing in. 
India. Being in prison, I have to rely on the summary of 



‘dual policy’ of BRITISH GOVERNMENT 391 

Mr. Sastri’s speech given by the Statesman of Calcutta. The 
Statesman added : “ It is a pleasant doctrine, and we note that 
Doctor Moonje has been speaking in the same sense.” Mr. 
Sastri is further reported to have referred to the suppression 
of freedom in Russia, Italy, and Germany, and to the in- 
humanities and savageries that were being perpetrated there. 

It struck me, when I read this, how extraordinarily similar 
was Mr. Sastri’s outlook in regard to Britain and India to that 
of the ‘diehard’ British Conservative. In matters of detail 
there were no doubt differences, but fundamentally the ideology 
was the same. Mr. Winston Churchill could have expressed 
himself in identical language without doing any violence to his 
convictions. And yet Mr. Sastri belongs to the Left wing of the 
Liberal party, and is the ablest of its leaders. 

I am afraid I am wholly unable to accept Mr. Sastri’s reading 
of history, or his views on world affairs, and more particularly 
on Britain and India. Probably no foreigner, who is not an 
Englishman, will accept them; possibly many Englishmen of 
advanced views will msagree with him. It is his happy gift 
to see the world and his ovra country through the tinted glasses 
of the British ruling class. Nevertheless, it is remarkable that 
he should ignore in this speech the very imusual occurrence 
which had taken place from day to day in India during the 
previous eighteen months, and were taking place at the time 
the speech was delivered. He referred to Russia, Italy, and 
Germany, but not to the fierce repression and suppression of all 
liberties in his own country. He may not have known of all 
the terrible occurrences in the Frontier Province and in Bengal 
—the ‘ rape of Bengal ’ as Rajendra Babu has called it in his 
recent Congress presidential address — as the heavy veil of cen- 
sorship hid much of what was happening. But was he oblivious 
to the agony of India and the struggle for life and freedom 
that his people were waging against a powerful adversary? Did 
he not know of the ponce raj that prevailed over large areas, 
of conditions resembling martial law, of the Ordinances, of 
the hunger-strikes, and other sufferings in prison? Did he not 
realise that the veiy toleration and freedom for which he 
praised Britain had been crushed by Britain herself in India? 

It did not matter whether he agreed with the Congress or 
not. He was perfectly entitled to critidse and condemn Con- 
gress policy. But as an Indian, as a lover of freedom, as a 
sensitive man, what were his reactions to the wonderful courage 
and sacrifice of his countrymen and countrywomen? Did he 
not feel any pain and anguish when our rulers played with a 



393 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

hatchet on India’s heart? Was it nothing to him that scores 
of thousands were refusing to bend before the physical might 
of a proud empire, and preferred to see their bodies crushed, 
their homes broken, their dear ones suffer, rather than yield 
their souls? We put on a brave face in gaol or outside, and 
smiled and laughed, but we smiled often through our tears, and 
our laughter was sometimes near to crying. 

Mr. Verrier Elwin, a brave and generous Englishing, tells 
us what his reactions were. “ It was a wonderful experience,” 
he says of 1930, “ to watch a whole nation throwing oJff its 
mental bonds of servitude and rising to its true dignity of 
fearless determination.” And again: "The amazing discipline 
exhibited by most of the Congress volunteers during the 
Satyagraha struggle, a discipline to which one of the provincial 
Governors has borne generous testimony. . . .” 

Mr. Srinivasa Sastri is an able and sensitive man who is widely 
respected by his countrymen, and it seems impossible that he 
would not react in the same way and feel for his countrymen 
during such a struggle. One would have expeaed him to raise 
his voice in denunciation of the suppression of all civil liberty 
and all public activities by the Government. One would further 
have hoped that he and his colleagues would personally visit 
the worst affected areas — ^Bengal and the Frontier— not m any 
way to help the Congress or. civil disobedience, but to expose 
and thus check official and police excesses. This is usually done 
by the lovers of freedom and civil liberty in other countries. 
But instead of acting in this way, instead of trying to check 
the executive when it was riding rough-shod over India’s men 
* and women and had done away with even the usual liberties; 
instead at least of finding out what was happening, he diose 
to give a certificate to the British for toleration and freedom 

S * ist when both of these virtues were completely lacking under 
rifish rule in India. He gave them his moral backing and 
thus heartened and encouraged them in their task of repression. 

I am quite sure that he could not have meant this or realised 
the consequences of his action. But that his speech must have 
had this effect cannot be doubted. Why, then, should he think 
and act in this manner? 

I have found no adequate answer to this question except that 
the Liberal leaders have cut themselves completely aloof firom 
their countrymen as well as fi:om all modem thought. The 
musty books that they read have shut out the people of India 
from their view, and they have developed a kind of narcissism. 
We went to gaol and our bodies were locked up in cells, but 



'dual policy’ of BKITISH government 393 

our minds ranged free and our spirits were undismayed. But 
they created mental prisons of their own fashioning, where 
they went round and round and from which they feund no 
escape. They worshipped the God of Things as they are; and 
when things changed, as they do in this changing world, they 
were without rudder and compass, helpless in mind and body, 
without ideals or moral values. The choice for each one of us 
always is to go forward or be pushed; we cannot remain static 
in a dynamic universe. Afraid of change and movement, the 
Liberals were frightened at the tempests that surrotmded them; 
weak of limb, mey could not go forward, and so they were 
tossed hither and thither, clutching at every straw that came 
fheir way. They became the Hamlets of Indian politics, 
" sicklied o’er with the pale cast of thought ”, ever doubting, 
hesitating, and irresolute. 

“ The dme is out of joint. O cursed spite! 

That ever I was bom to set it right." 

The Servant of India, a Liberal weekly, accused Congress- 
men, during the latter days of the Civil Disobedience Move- 
ment, of waiting to go to P^on, and when they got there 
wanting to come out again. Ihat, it said with some irritation, 
was the sole Congress policy. The Liberal alternative to that, 
apparently, was to send a deputation to England to wait on the 
British ministers, or to wait and pray for a change of Govern- 
ment in England. 

It was true, to some extent, that the Congress policy then was 
mainly one of defiance of the Ordinance laws and other re- 
pressive measures, and this led to gaol. It was also true that 
the Congress and the nation were exhausted after the long 
struggle and could not bring any effective pressure on the 
Government. But there was a practical and moral consideratira. 

Naked coerdon, as India was experiencing is an expensive 
affair for the rulers. Even for them it is a painful nerve- 
shaking ordeal, and they know well that ultimately it weakens 
their foxmdations. It exposes continually the real character of 
their rule, both to the people coerced and the world at large. 
They infinitely prefer to put on the velvet glove to hide me 
iron fist. Nothing is more irritating and, in die_ final analysis, 
harmful to a Government than to have to deal with people who 
vrill not hend to ite will, whatever the consequences. So even 
sporadic defiance of the repressive measures had value; it 
strengthened the people and sapped the morale of Government, 



JAWAHARLAL NKHRU 


394 

The moral consideration was even more important. In a 
famous passage Thoreau has said: “At a time when men and 
women are unjustly imprisoned the place for just men and 
women is also in prison.” This advice may not appeal to 
Liberals and others, but many of us often feel that a moral life 
under existing conditions is intolerable, when, even apart from 
civil disobedience, many of our colleagues are always in prison 
and the coercive apparatus of the State is continually repress- 
ing us and humUiating us, as well as helping in the exploitation 
of our people. In our own country we move about as suspects, 
shadowed and watched, our words recorded lest they infringe 
the all-pervading law of sedition, our correspondence, opened, 
the possibility of some executive prohibition or arrest always 
facing us. For us the choice is ; abject submission to the power 
of the State, spiritual degradation, the denial of the truth that 
is in us, and our moral prostitution for purposes that we con- 
sider base — or opposition with all the consequences thereof. No 
one likes to go to gaol or to invite trouble. But often gaol is 
preferable to the other alternative. “ The only real tragedy in 
life,” as Bernard Shaw has written, “ is the being used by per- 
sonally minded men for purposes which you know to be base. 
All the rest is at the worst mere misfortune and mortality : this 
alone is misery, slavery, hell on earth.” 