AGRARIAN TROUBLES IN THE 
UNITED PROVINCES 

As one of the General Secretaries of the Congress and a mem- 
ber of the Working Committee, I was in touch with All-India 
politics and occasionally had to do some touring also, though 
I avoided this as far as possible. As our burdens and respon- 
sibilities grew, the meetings of the Working Committee became 
longer and longer, till they developed into a regular sessions of 
two weeks at a time, It was no longer a question of merely 
passing resolutions of criticism, but of controlling numerous 
different kinds of constructive activities of a vast and many- 
sided organisation, and of tackling, from day to day, difficult 
problems on whose handling depended conflict or otherwise 
on a nation-wide scale. 

My chief activities, however, lay in the United Provinces 
where the agrarian situation absorbed Congress attention. The 
U.P. Provincial Congress Committee consisted of over a 
hundred and fifty members, and met every two or three 
months. Its Executive Council, consisting of about fifteen 
members, met frequently and was in charge of its agrarian 
department. 

In the second half of the year 1931, a special Agrarian Com- 
mittee was appointed by this Coimcil. It is interesting to find 
that several zamindars were prominently associated with the 
Council and this Committee throughout, and all steps were 
taken with their approval. Indeed, the President of our Pro- 
vincial Committee for the year (and consequently the ex-officio 
head of the Executive Council and the Agrarian Committee) was 
Tasadduq Ahmad Khan Sherwani, who belong to a well-known 
zamindari family. The General Secretary, Sri Prakasa, as well 
as several leading members of the Council were also zamiridars, 
or were members of zamindari families. The remaining mem- 
bers were middle-class professional people. There was not a 
single tenant or poor peasant representative in our provincial 
executive. Peasants were to be found in our District Com- 
mittees, but they seldom sxywived the various elections which 
ultimately resulted in the formation of the Executive Council 
for the province, which was a body entirely dominated by the 
middle-class intelligentsia with a strong zamindari leaven in it. 

*97 



298 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

It was thus far from being an extreme body in any sense of the 
word, and certainly not so on the agrarian issue. 

My own position in the province was that of a member of 
the Executive Council and its Agrarian Committee, and 
nothing more. I took a prominent part in our consultations 
and our other work, but in no sense did I take the leading 
part. Indeed no one can be said to have played the leading 
part in our province, as we had long accustomed ourselves to 
corporate and joint action, stress being always laid on the 
organisation and not on the individual. The president for the 
year was our temporary head, and represented us, but even he 
had no special authority. 

I also functioned locally as a member of the Allahabad 
District Congress Committee. This Committee, under the 
leadership of its president, Purushottan Das Tandon, played an 
important part in the development of the agrarian situation. 
In 1930 it had given the lead in starting the no-tax campaign 
in the province. This was not because Allahabad district was 
the area affected most by the agricultural depression; the 
Taluqadari districts of Oudh were much worse 'off. But Alla- 
habad district was better organised and more politically con- 
scious, because Allahabad city was a centre of political activity 
and many prominent workers were frequently visiting the sur- 
rounding villages. 

Immediately after the Delhi Pact of March 1931, we had 
hastened to send workers and notices to the rural areas, inform- 
ing the peasantry that civil disobediepce and the movement 
were off. On political grounds there was no bar to their pay- 
ment of rent, and we advised them to pay. But we added that 
in view of the tremendous fall in prices we were of opinion that 
big remissions should be given to them, and we proposed that 
we should jointly try to obtain these. Even in normal times the 
rent was often an almost unbearable burden; with the slump 
in prices it was im|)ossible to make full payment or even any- 
thing approaching it. We held conferences with representatives 
of the peasantry and, as a tentative proposal, suggested a 
general remission of fifty per cent., and in some cases more 
man that. 

We tried to separate the agrarian issue entirely from the 
general question of civil disobedience. We wanted, at any rate 
m 1931, to consider it from the eeonomic plane only, divorced 
from the political. This was difficult, as the two were anyhow 
intimate^ connected, and in the past had been closely asso- 
ciated. We, as a Congress organisation, were also definitely 



AGRARIAN TROUBLES IN THE UNITED PROVINCES 2gg 

political. For the moment we tried to function as a kind of 
peasants' Union (with non-peasants and even zamindars in con- 
troll) but we could not and did not desire to give up our 
political character, and the Government looked upon everything 
we did as political. The shadow of future civil disobedience 
also lay ahead of us, and if this materialised there could be 
no doubt that economics and politics would march together, 
hand in hand. 

In spite of all these obvious hindrances, it was our effort 
throughout, fi:om the time of the Delhi Pact onwards, to keep 
the agrarian question apart from the political struggle. The 
real reason for this was mat the Delhi Pact did not put an end 
to it, and we wanted to make this perfectly clear to the Govern- 
ment as well as the people. In the course of the Delhi con- 
versations, Gandhiji had, I believe, assured Lord Irwin that 
even if he did not go to the Round Table Conference he would 
not resume civil disobedience while the Conference was sitting. 
He would ask the Congress to give the Conference every chance, 
and to a'wait its result. But even then Gandhiji made it clear 
that this assurance did not apply to any local economic struggle 
that might be forced on us. The U.P. agrarian situation was 
before us all then, because organised action had been taken in 
the U.P.; as a matter of fact the peasantry all over India had 
been similarljr affected. During Ae Simla talks Gandhiji re- 
peated this point, and mention was made of it in the published 
correspondence.^ On the very eve of sailing for Europe, he 


^ The following letters were integral parts of the Simla Agree- 
ment of August 37, 1931 : 


Mr, Gandhi to Mr. 
Government of India. 


Emerson, Secretary, Home Department, 
Simla, 

August 37, 1931. 


“ Dear Mr. JSmerson, 

" I have to acknowledge with thanks your letter of even date, 
enclosing a new , draft. Sir Cowasji has also communicated to me 
the amendments suggested by you. My colleagues and I have care- 
fully considered the amended draft, which we are prepared to 
accept, subject to the following remarks : 

“In paragraph 4, it is not possible for me on behalf of the 
Congress to subscribe to the position taken up by the Government, 
For we feel that where, in the opinion of the Congress, a grievance 
arising out of the working of me Setdeifient is not redressed, an 
inquiry is a necessity of the case, because of the fact that rivil 
disobedience remains under suspension during the pendency of the 



300 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

made it clear that, quite apart from the Round Table Confer- 
ence and the political issues, it might be necessary for 
•the Congress to protect the people’s, and especially the 
peasantry’s, rights in economic struggles. He had no desire to 


Delhi Pact. But if the Government of India and Local Govern- 
ments are not prepared to grant an inquiry, my colleagues and I 
have no objection to the clause remaining. The result will be that, 
whilst the Congress will not press for an inquiry in regard to ‘ the 
other matters hitherto raised* on its behalf, if unfortunately any 
grievance is so acutely felt that it becomes the paramount duty 
of the Congress to seek some method of relief, in the absence of 
an inquiry, in the shape of defensive riirect action, the Congress 
should be held free to adopt such remedy, notwithstanding the 
suspension of dvil disobedience. 

“I need hardly assure the Government that it would be the 
constant endeavour of the Congress to avoid direct action and to 
gain relief by discussion, persuasion, and the like. The statement 
of the Congress position given here has become necessary in order 
to avoid any possible misunderatandhig in the future or a charge 
of breach of faith on the part of the Congress. In the event of a 
successful issue to the present discussions, I assume that the 
communique, this letter, and your reply would be simultaneously 
published. 

" Yours sincerely, 

" M. K. Gandhi.” 

Mr, Emerson to Mr. Gandhi. 

Simla, 

August 37, 1931. 

" Dear Mr. Gandhi, 

" I write to thank you for your letter of to-day’s date, in which 
you accept the draft communique, subject to the observations con- 
tained in your letter. The Govemor-General-in-Coundl has noted 
that it is not the intention of the Congress to press for any inquiry 
into those matters hitherto raised by them, but that while you give 
an assurance that it will be the constant endeavour of the Congress 
to avoid direct action, and to gain relief by discussion, persuasion, 
and the like, you wish to make dear the position of the Congress 
in regard to any future action that they may decide to take. I am 
to say that the Governor-General-in-Coundl shares your hope that 
no resort to direct action will be taken. In regard to the general 
position of Government, I am to refer you to the letter of His 
Excellency the Viceroy dated August 19 to your address. I am to 
say that the communique, your letter of to-day’s date, and this 
reply ■will be published simultaneously by Government. 

“ Yours sincerely, 

«H. W Pm- --on” 



AGRARIAN TROUBLES IN THE UNITED PROVINCES 3OI 

indulge in such a struggle; he wanted to avoid it; but, if it 
became inevitable, it must be undertaken. We could not desert 
the masses. His point was that the Delhi Pact, which applied 
to general and political civil disobedience, did not bar this. 

I mention this because the charge has been repeatedly brought 
against the U.P. Provincial Congress Committee and its leaders 
that they broke the Delhi Pact by re-starting a no-tax campaign. 
Conveniently for its makers, this charge was brought when 
those who were charged and could have answered it were all 
locked up in gaol and every newspaper and press was strictly 
censored. Quite apart from the tact that the U.P. Committee 
never started a no-tax campaign in 1931, the point which I wish 
to make clear is that even such a campaign for an economic 
purpose, and apart firom civil disobedience, would have been 
no breach of the Delhi Pact. Whether it was justified or not 
on the merits was another matter; but the peasantry were as 
much entitled to start it as the workers of a factory are to strike 
for an economic grievance. This was our posidon throughout 
from Delhi to Simla, and it was not only understood but appre- 
ciated by the Government. 

The agricultural slump of 1929 and onwards came as a climax 
to a steadily worsening situadon. For many years past world 
agricultural prices had tended to go up, and Indian agriculture, 
tacked on to the world market, had shared in this tendency. 
The disproportion in the development of industry and agricul- 
ture aU over the world had everywhere sent up agricultural 
prices. As these prices went up in India, the Government 
revenue and the landlord’s rent went up also, so that the actual 
cultivator hardly profited by this upward tendency. On the 
whole, the peasantry, except in some favoured areas, deterio- 
rated. In the United Provinces rent went up much faster than 
revenue, the proportion of relative increase of these two during 
the first thirty years of this century being nearly (to quote 
firom memory) five to one. Thus while the Government’s 
income from land increased substantially, the landlord’s income 
increased far more, and the tenant remained, as ever, at starva- 
tion level. Even where prices fell or there were local natural 
calamities— drought, floods, locusts, haU, etc. — ^the rent and 
revenue remained at the original figures, some remissions being 
granted very hesitatingly, for the season only. The level of the 
rents was at the best of times much too high; at other times it 
became xmbearable without recourse to the money-lender. Agri- 
cultural .debt grew. 

All the agncultural classes— landlords, peasant proprietors, 



303 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

tenants — ^became the victims of the money-lender, who fulfilled, 
under existing conditions, an indispensable function in the 
primitive village economy. He exploited that function very 
much to his own advantage, and his stranglehold grew on the 
land and those connected with it. There were few checks on 
him. The law helped him, and he stuck to the letter of his 
bond and claimed, and received, his pound of flesh. Gradually 
land passed to him both from many of the smaller landlords 
and the peasant proprietors, and the money-lender blossomed 
out himself as a proprietor of land on a large scale, a big 
zamindar, one of the landed gentry. The peasant proprietor, 
who had so far cultivated his own land, now became almost a 
serf of the bania-zamindar or sahukar. The tenant’s position 
was even worse. He was also a sahukar^s serf or he joined the 
increasing army of the dispossessed landless proletariat. The 
financier or banker who thus developed into a landowner had 
no living contacts with the soil or the tenantry. He was usually 
a city dweller, where he carried on his banking business, and he 
delegated the collection of rent to agents who did the work 
with the callousness and inhumanity of machines. 

The progressive growth of agricultural indebtedness was in 
itself evidence of the unsoundness and instability of the land 
system. The vast majority of the population had no reserves 
of any kind, physical or material, no power of resistance, and 
lived on the verge of starvation. They could not stand any 
unusual occurrence of an unfavourable character. An epidemic 
would sweep away millions. In 1939 and 1930 it was estimated 
by the officially-appointed Provincial BanMng Inquiry Com- 
mittee that the agricultural indebtedness of India (including 
Burma) was 860 crores of rupees. This figure included the debts 
of landlords, peasant proprietors and tenants, but it was mainly 
the debt of actual cultivators. Government currency policy has 
entirely favoured the creditor classes, and this has added to the 
heavy burden of the debt. Thus the fixing of the rupee ratio 
at one shilling and sixpence, instead of sixteen pence, in spite 
of vehement Indian opposition, meant increasing the agricultural 
debt by 13 j 4 per cent., or by about 107 crores.^ 

* The figure of 860 crores for ’the agricultural indebtedness of 
India is probably a gross under-estimate, and, in any event, it must 
have gone up considerably during the last four or five years. The 
Punjab part of the figure, estimated by the Punjab Provincial Bank- 
ing Inquiry Committee in 1939, was ,135 crores. The report of the 
Select Committee on the Punjab Relief from Indebtedness Bill 
(presented in October 1934) states that “the debt burden of the 



AGRARIAN TROUBLES IN THE UNITED PROVINCES 303 

After the post-war spurt in prices there was a gradual but 
continuing decline, and agrarian conditions worsened. On top 
of this came the catastrophe of 1929 and after. 

Our contention in the United Provinces in 1931 was that rents 
should correspond with prices; that is to say, that rent should 
be reduced to a figure which prevailed in the past when prices 
were as low as in 1931. Approximately this was so thirty years 
earlier, about 1901. This was a rough test and its application 
was not easy as there were many classes of tenants — occupancy, 
non-occupancy, sub-tenants, etc. — and the worst sufferers were 
the lowest grade of tenants. The only other test— and this was 
undoubtedly the fairest— was to find out the capacity of the 
tenant to pay after making allowances for his cost of produc- 
tion and living wage. But according to this latter test, however 
low the living expenses are kept, a very large number of hold- 
ings in India become wholly uneconomic, and, as we showed 
by some instances in the U.P. in 1931, many could not pay any 
rent at aU without selling property (if there was any to be sold) 
or borrowing money at a high rate of interest. 

Our U.P. Congress Committee’s first and tentative proposal 
was a general remission of 50 per cent, for all occupancy tenants 
and a higher percentage for ^e other tenants who were worse 
off. When Gandhi ji came to the U.P. in May 1931 and visited 
the Governor, Sir Malcolm Hailey, there was some difference 
of opinion between them and they could not agree. Soon 
afterwards he (Gandhiji) issued appeals to the zamindars and 
tenants of the U.P. In the latter appeal he asked the tenants 
to pay as much as they could and suggested some figure, which’ 
was a somewhat higher figure than the one we had previously 

f iven. Our Provincial Committee accepted Gandhiji’s figure, 
ut that did not help matters much, as Government would not 
agree to it. 

The Provindal Government was in a difficult position. The 
land tax was its chief source of income, and it could not permit 
this to vanish away or reduce it very greatly without facing 
bankruptcy. On the other hand, it had a wholesome. fear of 
an agrarian upheaval and wanted to soothe the tenantry, as ftir 


agriculturists is stupendous, being modestly estimated at Rs.aoo 
crores.” This new figure is almost 50 per cent, in excess of the 
Banking Inquiry Committee’s estimate. If tiiis rate of increare 
holds good for the other provinces also, the present (1934) all-India 
figure for agricultural indebtedness should be over 1200 crores of 
rupees (a crore=>ten Bullions). 



304 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

as it could, by substantial rent remissions. It was not easy to 
have it both w^s. Between the State and the cultivator stood 
the zamindar, from the economic point of view a useless and 
unnecessary addition, and it might have been possible to pro- 
tect and help both the State and the cultivator at his expense. 
But the British Government, constituted as it is, could not for 
political reasons alienate one of the few classes which clung on 
to it. 

At last the Provincial Government announced the remissions 
both for the landlords and the tenants, These were based on 
some complicated system, and it was not easy at first to make 
out what they were. It was clear, however, that they were far 
firom enough. Besides, they related to the current demand and 
said nothing at all about the arrears due from the tenant or his 
debts. It was obvious that if the tenant was not in a position to 
pay the rent for the current half-year, much less could he pay 
arrears for past years or old debts. As a rule, it was the land- 
lord’s custom to credit all realisations to past arrears. This pro- 
cedure was dangerous from the tenant’s point, of view, for he 
could always be proceeded against and dispossessed of his land 
on the ground of non-payment of some part of the amount due 
from him. 

The Provincial Congress Executive was put in an extraordi- 
narily difficult position. We were convinced that the tenants 
were being treated very unfeirly and yet we were helpless in 
the matter. We did not want to take the responsibility of advis- 
ing the tenants not to pay. We went on repeating that they 
should pay as much as they could and generally sympathising 
with them in their misfortunes and trying to hearten them. We 
agreed with them that the demand, even after the remissions, 
was too much for them. 

The machinery of coercion, legal as well as illegal, began to 
move. Ejectment suits brought against thousands, attachments 
of cows, bullocks, personal property, beatings by agents of 
landlords. Large numbers of tenants paid part of the demand; 
according to them, this was as much as they could pay then. 
Very probably in some instances they could have paid more, 
but it was quite obvious that for the great majority this was a 
heavy burden. These part payments did not save them. The 
steam-roller of the law went on advancing, pitilessly crushing 
aU that came in its way. Ejectment suits were decreed, even 
though part payment had taken place; attachments and sale of 
cattle and personal property continued. The tenants could not 
have been worse off if they had not paid at all. Indeed, they 



AGRARIAN TROUBLES IN THE UNITED PROVINCES 305 

would have been slightly better off, for they would have saved 
that much money at least. 

They came to us in large numbers, complaining bitterly, tell- 
ing us that they had followed our advice and paid what they 
could, and this was the consequence. In Allahabad district 
alone many thousands had been dispossessed, and some pro- 
ceeding or other had been launched against many thousands of 
others. The District Congress Committee office was surrounded 
all day by a distraught crowd. My own house was equally be- 
sieged, and often I felt like running away and hiding myself 
somewhere, anywhere, to escape this dreadful predicament. 
Many tenants who came to us bore marks of injury, said to 
have been inflicted by aamindars’ agents. We had them treated 
in hospital. What could they do? What could we do? We sent 
long letters to the U.P. Government. Our Committee had ap- 
pointed Govind BaUabh Pant as our liaison officer to keep in 
touch with the Provincial Government at Naini Tal or Luck- 
now. He was constantly writing to the Government. Our pro- 
vincial President, Tasadduq A. K. Sherwani, also wrote ftom 
time to time, and so did 1. 

Another c^culty arose with the ^proach of the monsoon 
in June-July. That was the tilling an<i sowing season. Were the 
tenants, who had been dispossessed, to sit idle and watch their 
land lie fallow in front of them? This was very difficult for a 
peasant; it went against the grain. The dispossession in many 
cases was legal and technical and not an actual moving away. 
A court decree had been passed and nothing else had been 
done. Or were they to plough the land and thereby commit an 
offence of criminal trespass, perhaps leading to a petty riot? To 
watch others till their old land was also very difficult for the 
peasants to tolerate. They came to us for advice. What advice 
could we give? 

I put this difficulty to a high official in the Government of 
India, when I visited Simla with Gandhiji during that summer, 
and I asked him what advice he would give if he was in our 
position. His answer was a revealing one. He said that if a 
peasant who had been dispossessed asked him this question he 
would simply refuse to answer him! Even he was' not prepared 
to tell the peasant straight off not to till his land, although he 
had been legally dispossessed. It was easy for hint, sitting on 
the Simla heights, to pass orders on files as if he was dealing 
with an abtract problem in mathematics. He, or the provincim 
bosses at Naini Tal, were not brought into touch with the 
human factor, nor did they see the human misery involved. 



3o6 jaavaharlal nemrv 

We were also told at Simla that we should give only one 
advice to the peasantry : that they should pay the lull demand 
or as much as they could. We should in fact act almost as the 
agents of the landlords. As a matter of fact we had said some- 
thing like it when we asked them to pay as much as they 
could. We had added no doubt that they should not sell up 
their cattle or incur additional debt. And we had seen the 
result. 

It was a terrible summer for all of us, and the strain of it 
was great. The Indian peasant has an amazing capacity to bear 
misfortune, and he has always had more than his share of it — 
famine, flood, disease, and continuous grinding poverty— and 
when he could endure it no longer, he would quietly and almost 
uncomplainingly lie down in his thousands or millions and die. 
That was his way of escape. Nothii^ happened in 1931 to 
compare with the periodical great misrortunes that had visited 
him. But, somehow, the events of 1931 did not seem to him 
part of Nature’s inscrutable plans, and, therefore, to be patiently 
endured; they were the work of man, he thought, and so he 
resented them. His new political education was bearing fruit. 
For us, too, these happenings of 1931 were especially painful 
because we held ourselves partly responsible for them. Had not 
the peasants largely followed our advice in the matter? And 
yet I am quite convmced that, but for our constant help, the con- 
dition of the peasantry would have been far worse. We held 
them together and they remained a force to be reckoned with, 
and because of this they obtained greater remissions than they 
otherwise would have done. Even the coercion and ill-treatment 
to which they were subjected, bad as it was, was not unusual for 
these unhappy people. The ^fference was partly one of degree 
(as there was much more of it now) and partly a question of 
publicity. Ordinarily, ill-treatment and even torture of a tenant 
by a zamindar’s agent in a village is almost taken for granted, 
and few persons outside that area hear of it, unless the victim 
dies. It was difierent now because of our organisation and the 
new consciousness of the peasantry which made them hang 
together and report aU mishaps to the Congress- offices. 

As the summer advanced, the attempts at forcible collections 
toned down and coercive proceedings lessened. What troubled 
us now was the question of the great number of the ejected 
tenants. What was to be done to them? We were pressing the 
Government to help them to get back their holdings, whidi, in 
the majority of cases, were lying vacant. More important still 
was the question of ^e future. The remissions that had been 



AGRARIAN TROUBLES IN THE UNITED PROVINCES 307 

SO far granted were for the. past season only, and nothing had 
yet been decided about the future. From October onwards the 
season for the next collections would begin. What would 
happen then? Would we have to go through the same terrible 
round again? The Provincial Government appointed a small 
committee, consisting of its own officials and some zamindar 
members of the local Council, to consider this. There tvas no 
representative of the peasantry on it. At the last moment, when 
the Committee had actually begun its work, Govind Ballabh 
Pant was asked by Government to join it on our behalf. He did 
not think it worth while to join at that late stage, when impor- 
tant decisions had already been made. 

The U.P. Provincial Congress Committee had also appointed 
a small committee to collect various agrarian data, past and 
present, and to report on the existing situation. This committee 
submitted a long report containing an able survey of agrarian 
conditions in the U.P. and an analysis of the havoc caused by 
the agricultural slump in prices. Their recommendations were 
far-reaching. The report, which was published in book form, 
was signed Govind Ballabh Pant, Rafi Ahmad Kidwai, and 
Venkatesh Narayan Tewary. 

Long before this report came out, Gandhiji had gone to 
London for the Round Table Conference. He had gone with 

g reat hesitation, and one of the reasons for this hesitation was 
le U.P. agrarian situation. He had in fact almost decided that, 
in the event of not going to London for the Round Table 
Conference, he would come to the U.P, and devote himself to 
this complex problem. The last Simla conversations with the 
Government dealt, inter alia, with the UJP. After his departure 
for England we kept him folly informed of developments. I 
used to write to him, during the first month or two, every week 
both by tile air mail and the ordinary mail. During the latter 
part of his stay I was not so regular, as we expected him to 
return soon. He had given us to understand that, at the very 
latest, he would be back within three months, tiiat is, some 
time in November, and we had hoped that no crisis would arise 
in India till then. Above all, we wanted to avoid crises and 
conflicts with Government in his absence. When, however, his 
return was delayed and the agrarian situation began to develop 
rapidly, we sent him a long cablegram informing him of the 
latest develtmments and pointing out to him how our hands 
were being forced. He replied by cable that he was helpless in 
the matter and could not do anything for us then, and told us 
to go ahead according to our lights. 



3o8 jawaharlal nehru 

The Working Committee was also kept fully informed by the 
Provincial Congress Executive. I was always there to give them 
first-hand information, but, as matters were taking a serious 
turn, the Committee also conferred with our Provincial Presi- 
dent, Tasadduq Sherwani, and the Allahabad District President, 
Purushottam Das Tandon. 

The Government Agrarian Committee issued its report and 
made certain recommendations, which were both complicated 
and vague, and left a great deal to local officers. On the whole, 
the proposed remissions were bigger than in the past season, but 
we felt that they were not enough. We objected to the prin- 
ciples underlying the recommendations as well as to their appli- 
cation. Also, the report dealt with the future only and ignored 
past arrears, debt, and the question of the large number of dis- 
possessed tenants. What were we to do? Just advise the 
peasantry to pay as much as they could, as we had done in the 
spring and summer, and face the same consequences? That 
advice, we had seen, was the most foolish of all and could not 
be repeated. Either the peasants should make a great effort and 
pay the revised demand in fuU, if they could at all do so, or 
they should not pay at all for the present and await develop- 
ments. To pay part of the rent demanded was neither here nor 
there; the tenants exhausted their financial resources and, at 
the same time, lost their land. 

Our Provincial Congress Executive considered the position 
long and earnestly and decided that the Government proposals 
were not fevourable enough to be accepted as they were, al- 
though they were an improvement on the summer’s remissions. 
There was still a possibility of their being varied to the 
peasantry’s advantage, and we pressed Government accordingly. 
But we felt that there was little hope, and the conflict we had 
tried to avoid seemed to approach with some rapidity. The 
attitude of the Provincial Government as well as the Govern- 
ment of India towards the Congress organisation had been pro- 
gressively changing and becoming more frigid. To our loi^ 
letters we received brief replies referring us to local officials, fi 
was obvious that the pohcy of Government was not to en- 
courage us in any way. One grievance and difficulty of the 
Government was the possibility of Congress prestige going up 
because of the grant of remissions to the peasantry. Through 
long habit, it could only think in terms of prestige, and the idea 
that the masses might give the credit for the remissions to the 
Congress irritated it, and it wanted to avoid this as fer as pos- 
sihlft 



AGRARIAN TROUBLES IN THE UNITED PROVINCES 309 

Meanwhile, reports were coming to us from Delhi and else- 
where that the Government of India were on the point of 
launching a big offensive against the whole Congress movement. 
The little finger was going to function more vigorously now 
and the scorpions were going to chastise us. We even received 
many details of the proposed action. Some time in November, 
I think. Dr. Ansari sent me (as well as separately to Vallabhbhai 
Patel, the Congress President) a message confirming many of 
the previous reports received by us, and especially giving details 
of the proposed ordinances for the Frontier and the United 
Provinces. Bengal had, I believe, already received the gift of a 
new ordinance or, perhaps, was about to receive it. Dr. Ansari’s 
message was amply confirmed even in its details many weeks 
later, when the new ordinances appeared as if to meet a 
new situation. It was generally supposed that Government 
had delayed action because of the unforeseen prolongation of 
the Round Table Conference. They wished to avoid whole- 
sale repression in India while the members of the Round 
Table Conference whispered sweet nothings into each other's 
ears. 

So tension grew, and aU of us had a feeling that events were 
marching ahead despite our little selves, ana none could stop 
them from their predestined course. All we could do was to 
prepare ourselves to face them and to play our parts, individu- 
dly and together, in the drama — ^more likely the tragedy — of 
life. But we hoped still that Gandhiji would be back before the 
curtain went up on this clash of forces, and would take the 
responsibility on his shoulders for peace or war. None of us 
was prepared to shoulder that burden in his absence. 

In the United Provinces, the Government took another step 
which produced a commotion in the rural areas. Remission 
slips were distributed to the tenants, stating how much remis- 
sion had been allowed, and containing a threat that unless the 
amount now due was paid up within a month (sometimes the 
period mentioned was shorter), the remission would be cancelled 
and the full sum realised by legal process, which meant eject- 
ment, attachment of property, etc. In normal years the tenants 
usually paid up iheir rent in instalments in the course of two 
or three months. Even this usual period was thus, not allowed. 
The whole countryside was suddenly friced by a crisis, and, slip in 
hand, the tenant8.xushed about protesring- and complaining and 
asking for advice. It was a very foolish threat on the part of 
the Government or their local officials, and it was not, we were 
told later, meant seriously. But it lessened the chances of a 



310 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

peaceful settlement very greatly and led inevitably, step by step, 
to conflict. 

The choice had to be made very soon now by the peasants 
and by the Congress; we could not postpone our decision till 
Gandhiji’s return. What were we to do? What advice to give? 
Could we reasonably ask the peasants to pay up the sum de- 
manded within the short period allowed when we knew that 
many of them could not possibly do so? And then what of the 
arrears due from them? Would they not run the risk of dis- 
possession even if they paid a large part of the sum demanded, 
or even the full current demand, which might be credited to 
arrears? 

The Allahabad District Congress Committee, with its strong 
peasant contingent, showed fight. It decided that it could not 
possibly advise the peasants to pay. It was told, however, that 
it could not take any aggressive step without the formal permis- 
sion of ’the Provincial Executive as well as of the All-India 
Working Committee. The matter was, therefore, referred to the 
Working Committee, and both Tasadduq Sherw^ni and Puru- 
shottam Das Tandon were present to place the case for the 
province and the district. The quesdon befiire us related to 
Allahabad district only and it was a purely economic issue, but 
we realised that, in the state of political tension then existing, 
it might have far-reaching consequences. Should the Allahabad 
District Committee be permitted to advise the peasants in the 
district to withhold payment of rent or revenue for the time 
being and pending further negotiation and better terms? This 
was the narrow issue and we wanted to confine ourselves to it, 
but could we do so? The Working Committee wanted to strain 
every nerve to prevent a break with Government before Gand- 
hiji’s return, and, in particular, it wanted to avoid a break on an 
economic issue which might develop into a class issue. The 
Committee, though politically advanced, was not so socially, and 
it disliked , the raising of the tenant versus zamindar question. 

Being socialistically inclined, I was not considered a veiy safe 
person to advise on economic and social matters. I myself felt 
that tile Working Committee should realise that the U.P. situa- 
tion was such mat even our more moderate and right wing 
members were being forced by events to take action, in spite of 
all their disinclination for it. I welcomed, therefore, the pre- 
sence of Sherwani and others firom our province at our Com- 
mittee meeting, for Sherwani (our Provincial President) was by 
no means a fire-brand. Constitutionally he was a right winger 
in the Congress, both politically and socially, and, at tile be^- 



AGRARIAN TROUBLES IN THE UNITED PROVINCES 3II 

ning of the year, he had been prejudiced against the agrarian 
policy of the U.P. Congress Committee. But when he became 
the head of that Committee himself and had to shoulder the 
burden, he realised that there was no other alternative for us. 
Every subsequent step taken by the Provincial Committee was 
in the closest co-operation with him and, indeed, often through 
him, as President. 

Tasadduq Sherwani’s pleading before the Working Commit- 
tee, therefore, produced great effect on the members — a much 
greater effect than mine would have done. With great hesita- 
tion, but feeling that they could not refuse it, they gave the 
U.P. Committee authority to permit in any area the suspension 
of payment of rent and revenue. But, at the same time, they 
pressed the U.P. people to avoid this step if they could and to 
carry on negotiations with the Provincial Government. 

These negotiations were carried on for a while with little 
result. Some improvement was made, I believe, in the Allaha- 
bad district figures for remissions. It might have been possible, 
under ordiiiary circumstances, to arrive at a settlement or at 
least to avoid open conflict. The differences were being nar- 
rowed down. But the circumstances were very imusual, and on 
both sides — ^the Government and the Congress — there was the 
feeling of the inevitability of an approaching conflict, and there 
was no reality behind our negotiations. Every step taken by 
either party seemed to indicate a desire to manoeuvre for a posi- 
tion. The Government's preparations for this could be and were 
in fact carried on and perfected in secret. Our strength lay 
entirely in the morale of the people, and this could not be pre- 
pared or raised by secret activiries. Some of us — and I was one 
of the guilty ones— had often repeated in our public speeches 
that the struggle for fireedom was far from over, and that we 
would have to face many trials and difficulties in the near 
future. We had asked our peirole to keep themselves in readi- 
ness for them, and because of this we had been criticised as 
war-mongers. As a matter of fact, there was a marked reluc- 
tance on the part of our middle-class Congress workers to face 
facts, and thw hoped that somehow or omer a conflict would 
be avoided. Gandhiji’s presence in London also distracted the 
attention of the newspaper-reading classes. And yet in spite of 
this passivity of the intelligentsia, events marched ahead, 
especially in Bengal, the Frontier Province and the U.P., and in 
November it began to dawn on many people that a crisis was 
approaching. 

The U.P. Provincial Congress Committee, afraid of being 



312 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

forestalled by events, made some domestic arrangements in the 
event of conflict taking place. The Allahabad Committee held 
a big Peasant Conference, which passed a tentative resolution 
stating that, in case better terms were not obtained, they would 
have to advise the peasants to withhold payment of rent and 
revenue. This resolution irritated the Provincial Government 
greatly, and, treating it as a casus belli, it refused to have any 
further dealings with us. That attitude again produced its re- 
actions on the Provincial Congress, which interpreted it as a 
sign of the coming storm and hastened its own preparations. 
In Allahabad there was yet another Peasant Conference, when 
a stronger and more definite resolution asking the peasantry to 
withhold payment pending further negotiations and better 
terms, was passed. The attitude taken up even then, and to the 
end, was not one of a * no-rent’ campaign but a ‘ fair-rent ’ 
campaign, and we went on asking for negotiations, though the 
other party had ostentatiously walked away. The Allahabad 
resolution applied to zamindar and tenant alike, but we knew 
that in effect it applied to tenants and some petty zamindars 
only. 

This was the position in the U.P. towards the en'd of Novem- 
ber and the beginning of December 1931. Meanwhile in Bengal 
and the Frontier Province matters had also marched to a head, 
and in Bengal a new and terribly comprehensive ordinance had 
been applied. All these were signs of war, not of peace, and the 
question arose: when would Gandhiji return? Would he reach 
India before the Government started its great offensive, for 
which it had prepared so long? Or would he return to find 
many of his colleagues in prison and the struggle launched? 
We learnt that he was on his way back and would reach Bom- 
bay in the last week of the year. Each one of us, every 
prominent worker in the Congress at headquarters or in the 
provinces, wanted to avoid that struggle till his return. Even 
firom the point of view of the struggle itself it was desirable for 
us to meet him, to have his advice and his directions. It was a 
race in which we were helpless. The initiative lay with the 
British Government. 



