BALLYHOO 

Those early months of 1932 were remarkable, among other 
things, for an extraordinary exhibition of ballyhoo on the part 
of the British authorities. Officials, high and low, shouted out 
how virtuous and peaceful they were, and how sinful and pug- 
nacious was the Congress. They stood for democracy w'hile the 
Congress favoured dictatorships. Was not its President called a 
dictator? In their enthusiasm for a righteous cause they forgot 
trifles like Ordinances, and suppression of all liberties, and muz- 
zling of newspapers and presses, imprisonment of people 
without trial, seizure of properties and monies, and the 
many other odd things that were happening from day to day. 
They forgot also the basic character of British rule in India. 
Ministers of Government (our own countrymen) grew eloquent 
on how Congressmen were ‘ grinding their axes ’—in jjrison— 
while they lamoured for the public good on paltry salaries of a 
few thousand rupees per month. The lower magistracy not only 
sentenced us to heavy terms but lectured to us in tire process, 
and sometimes abused the Congress and individuals connected 
with it. Even' Sir Samuel Hoare, from the serene dignity of his 
high office as Secretary of State for India, announced that 
though dogs barked the caravan moved on. He forgot for the 
moment that the dogs were in gaol and could not easily bark 
there, and those left outside were effectively muzzled. 

Most surprising of all, the Cawnpore Communal Riots were 
laid at the door of the Congress. The horrors of these truly 
horrible riots were laid bare, and it was repeatedly stated that 
the Congress was responsible for them. As it happened, the 
Congress had played the only decent part in them, and one of 
its noblest sons lay dead, mourned by every group and com- 
munity in Cawnpore. The Karachi session of the Congress, 
immemately on hearing of the riots, appointed an Enquiry 
Committee, and this Committee made a most exhaustive en- 
quiry. After many months of labour, it issued a voluminous 
report, which was promptly proscribed by the Government, and 
printed copies were seized and, I suppose, destroyed. This at- 
tempt to suppress the results of an enquiry has not prevented 
our official critics and the British-owned Press from repeating 
from time to time that the riots were due to Congress work. 

3*5 



3*6 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

No doiibtj in this and other matters, the truth will prevail in 
the end, but sometimes the lie has a long start. 

“ When all its work is done, the lie shall rot; 

The truth is great and shall prevail. 

When none cares whether it prevails or not.” 

It was all very natural, I suppose, this exhibition of a hys- 
terical war mentality, and no one could expect truth or restraint 
under the circumstances. But it did seem to go beyond expec- 
tation, and was surprising in its intensity and abandon. It was 
some indication of the state of nerves of the ruling group in 
India, and of how they had been repressing themselves in the 
past. Probably the anger was not caused by anything we had 
done or said, but by the realisation of their own previous fear 
of losing their empire. Rulers who are confident of their ovra 
strength do not give way in this manner. The contrast between 
this picture and the other was very marked. For on the other 
side silence reigned, not the silence of voluntary and dignified 
restraint, but the silence of prison and of &ar and an all- 
pervasive censorship. But for this enforced gagging, no doubt 
the other side would have also excelled in hysterical outbursts 
and exaggeration and abuse. One outlet, however, there was — 
unauthorised news sheets whidh were issued in various towns 
from time to time. 

The British-owned Anglo-In(fian newspapers in India joined 
in this game of ballyhoo with p;usto, and gave utterance and 
publicity to many a mought wl^h perhaps they had mutured 
and repressed in secret tor long. Ordinarily they have to be 
a little careful of what they say, for many of their readers are 
Indians, but the crisis in India swept away these restraints and 
gave ys a glimpse of the minds of all, English and Indian 
alike. There are few Anglo-Indian newspapers left in India; 
one by one they have dropped out. Several of those that remain 
are high-class journals, both in the news they supply and thdr 
general get-up. Their leading articles on world anairs, though 
always representing the conservative view-point, are able and 
show knowledge and grasp. Undoubtedly as newspapers they 
are probably the best in India. But on Indian political problems 
there is a sudden fall, and their treatment of them is amazingly 
one-sided; and, in times of crisis, this partiality often becomes 
hysteria and vulgarity. They represent faithfully the Govern- 
ment of India, and the continuous propaganda they do for it 
has not the merit of being imobtrusive. 



uALLi HUU 


3^7 

Compared to these selected few Anglo-Indian newspapers, the 
Indian newspapers are usually poor stuff. Their financial re- 
sources are limited, and there is litde attempt on the part of 
their owners to improve them. They carry on their day-to-day 
life with difficulty, and the unhappy editorial staff has no easy 
time. Their get-up is poor, their advertisements often of the 
most objectionable kind, and their general attitude to life and 
politics sentimental and hysterical. Partly, I suppose, this is 
due to the fact that vft are a sentimental race; partly because 
the medium (of the English newspapers) is a foreign tongue 
and it is not easy to write simply and, at the same time, force- 
fully. But the real reason is mat all of us suffer from any 
number of complexes due to long repression and subjection, 
and every outlet is apt to be surcharged with emotion. 

Among the Indian-owned English newspapers. The Hindu of 
Madras is probably the best, so far as get-up and news service 
are concerned. It always reminds me of an old maiden lady, 
very prim and proper, who is shocked if. a naughty word is 
used in her presence. It is eminently the paper of the Bourgeois, 
comfortably settled in life. Not for it is the shady side of 
existence, me rough and tumble and conflict of life. Several 
other newspapers of moderate views have also this 'old maiden 
lady ’ stan(urd. They achieve it, but without the distinction of 
The Hindu and, as a result, they become astonishingly dull in 
every respect. 

It was evident that the Government had long prepared its 
blow, and it wanted it to be as ffiorough and staggering as 
possible right at the beginning. In 1930 it was always at- 
tempting, by fresh Ordinances, to catch up an ever-worsening 
situation. The initiaiive remained then with the Congress. The 
1932 methods were ffifferent, and Government began with an 
offensive all along ffie line. Every conceivable power was given 
and take under a batdi of all-India and provincial Ordinances ; 
organisations were outlawed; buildings, property, automobiles, 
bs^ accounts were seized; public gatherings and processions 
forbidden, and newspapers and printing presses fuUy controlled. 
On the other hand, unlike 1930, Gandhiji was definitely desirous 
of avoiding civil ffisobedience just then, and most of the mem- 
bers of the Working Committee thought likewise. Some of 
them, including myself, thought mat a struggle was inevitable, 
however much we disliked it, and should merefore be prepared 
for, and m the United Provinces and the Frontier Province 
a growii^ tension had directed people's minds to me approadi- 
ing conffict. But, on ffie whole, the middle classes and me 



328 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

intelligentsia were not thinking then in terms of struggle 
although they could not wholly ignore the possibility. Some- 
how, they hoped that this struggle would be avoided on 
Gandhiji’s return; the wish was obviously father to the thought. 

Thus the initiative early in 1933 was definitely with the 
Government, and Congress was always on the defensive. Local 
Congress leaders in many places were taken by surprise by the 
rapid devolpments leading to the Ordinances and civil diso- 
bedience. In spite of this there was a remarkable response to 
the Congress call, and there was no lack of civil resisiers. 
Indeed I think that there can be litde doubt that the resistance 
offered to the British Government in 1932 was far greater than 
in 1930, although in 1930 there was more show and publicity, 
especially in the big cities. In spite of this greater endurance 
shown by the people in 1932, and their remaining overwhelm- 
ingly peaceful, the initial push of inspiration was far less than 
in 1930. It was as if we entered unwillingly to battle. There 
was a glory about it in 1930 which had faded a little two years 
later. The Government countered Congress with every resource 
at its command; India lived pracdcally under martial law, and 
Congress never really got back the initiative or any fi'eedom 
of action. The first blows stunned it, and most of its bourgeois 
sympathisers who had been its principal supporters in the past. 
Their pockets were hit, and it became obvious that those who 
joined the civil disobedience movement, or were known to help 
it in any way, stood to lose not only their liberty, but perhaps 
all their property. This did not matter so much to us in the 
U.P., where the Congress was a poor man’s concern; but in the 
big cities, like Bombay, it made a great deal of difference. It 
meant absolute ruin lor the merefa^t class and great loss to 
professional people. The mere threat of this (and it was some- 
times carried out) paralysed these well-to-do city classes. I 
learnt later of a timid but prosperous merchant, who had little 
to do with politics, except perhaps to give an occasional dona- 
tion, being threatened by the police with a fine of five lakhs of 
rupees, besides a long term of imprisonment. Such threats 
were fairly common, and were by no means empty talk, for the 
police were all-powerful then and instances occurred daily of 
threats being translated into action. 

I do not think any Congressman has a right to object to the 
procedure adopted by the Government, although the violence 
and coercion used by the Government against an overwhelm- 
ingly non-violent movement was certainly most objectionable 
firom any civilised standards. If we choose to adopt revolu- 



BALLYHOO 


329 

tionary direct action methods, however non-violent they might 
be, we must expect every resistance. We cannot play at revolu- 
tion in a drawing-room, but many people want to have the 
advantage of both. For a person to dabble in revolutionary 
methods, he must be prepared to lose everything he possesses. 
The prosperous and the well-to-do are therefore seldom revolu- 
tionaries, though individuals may play the fool in the eyes 
of dte worldly-wise and he dubbed traitors to their own class. 

Other methods had to be adopted, of course, to deal with 
the masses, who had no cars or banking accounts or other 
property worth seizing, and on whom the real burden of the 
struggle lay. One interesting result of the ruthlcssness of 
Government action in all directions was to whip up that crowd 
of people, who might be called (to borrow a word from a recent 
book) ‘ Governmentarians into activity. Some of them had 
recently begun to flirt with the Congress, not knowing what 
the future might bring. But Government could not tolerate 
this, and no passive loyalty was enough. In the words of 
Frederick Cooper of Mutiny fame the authorities “ would brook 
nothing short of absolute, active, and positive loyalty. Govern- 
ment could not condescend to exist upon the moral sufferance 
of its subjects.” A year ago Mr. Lloyd George referred to his 
old colleagues, the leaders of the British Lmeral Party who 
had joined the National Government, as “ specimens or those 
changeable reptiles who adapt their hue to their environments.” 
The new environment in India tolerated no neutral hues, and 
so some of our countrymen appeared in the brightest of ap- 
proved colours and, with song and feasting, they declared their 
love and admiration for our rulers. They had nothing to fear 
from the Ordinances and the numerous prohibitions and inhi- 
bitions and curfew orders and sunset laws; for had it not been 
officially stated that all this was meant for the disloyal and 
the seditious, and the loyal need have no cause for alarm? And 
so they could view the turmoil and conflict all round them 
with a measure of equanimity, devoid of that fear that gripped 
many of their countrymen. With Chloe (in The Faithful Shep- 
herdess) they might perhaps have agreed when she said: 

“ For from one cause of fear I am most free, 

It is impossible to ravish me, 

I am so willing.” 

The Government had somehow got hold of the idea that 
Congress was going to exploit women in the stru^le by filling 



JAWAHARLAL NjiJHRU 


330 

the gaols with them, in the hope that women would be well 
treated or would get light sentences. It was a fantastic notion, 
as if any one likes to push his womenfolk into prison. Usually 
when girls or women took an active part in the campaign, it 
was in spite of their fathers or brothers or husbands, or at any 
rate not with their full co-operation. Government, however, 
decided to discourage women by long sentences and bad treat- 
ment in prison. Soon after my sisters’ arrest and conviction, a 
number of young girls, mostly 15 or 16 years old, met in Alla- 
habad to discuss what they could do. They had no experience, 
but were full of enthusiasm and wanted advice. They were 
arrested as they were meeting in a private house, and ea'ch of 
them was sentenced to two years’ rigorous imprisonment. This 
was a minor incident, one of many that were occurring all over 
India ftom day to day. Most of the girls and women who were 
sentenced had a very bad time in prison, even worse than the 
men had. I heard of many painful instances, but the most extra- 
ordinary account that I saw was one prepared by Miraben 
(Madeleine Slade) giving her experiences, together with those of 
other civil disobedience prisoners, in a Bombay gaoL 

In the United Provinces our struggle was centred in the rural 
areas. Owing to the unceasing pressure of the Congress, as repre- 
senting the pet^antry, ftiirly substantial remissions had been 
promised, though we did not think them enough.’ Immediately 
after our arrest additional remissions were announced. It was 
curious that this announcement did not come earlier, for it could 
have made a great deal of difference. It would have been difficult 
for us to reject it offhand. But then Government was very 
anxious that the Congress should not get the credit for these 
remissions, and so on the one side they wanted to crush the 
Congress, and on the other to give as much as possible remissions 
to the peasants to keep them quiet. It was noticeable that the 
remissions were highest wherever the Congress pressure had been 
greatest. 

These remissions, considerable as they were, did not solve the 
agrarian problem, but -they did ease the situation greatly. They 
took the edge off the peasantry’s resistance, and from the point 
of view of our larger struggle, weakened us at the moment, ^at 
struggle brought suffering to scores of thousands of peasants in 
the U.P., and many were completely ruined by it. But the pres- 
sure of that struggle brought millions of peasants almost the 
highest possible remissions under the existing system, and saved 
them (the consequences of civil disobedience and its offihoots 
apart) ftom a tremendous amount of harassment. These petty 



BALLYHOO 


331 

seasonal gains for the peasants do not amount to much, but I 
have no doubt that, such as they were, they were largely due to 
the persistent eiForts of the U.P. Congress Committee on behalf 
of the peasantry. The general body of the peasantry benefited 
temporarily, but the bravest of them were among the casualties 
in that struggle. 

When the U.P. Special Ordinance was issued in December 1931 
an explanatory statement accompanied it. This statement, as 
well as the statements accompanying other Ordinances, contained 
many half-truths and untruths which were to serve as propa- 
ganda. It was all part of the initial ballyhoo, and we had no 
chance to answer them or even contradict their glaring errors. 
One particularly glaring attempt, in which a falsehood was 
sought to be fastened on Sherwani, was corrected by him just 
before his arrest. These various statements and apologies of 
Government made curious reading. They showed how rattled 
Government was, how its nerve was shaken. Reading the other 
day of a decree issued by the Bourbon Charles HI of Spain, 
banishing the Jesuits from his realm, I was forcibly reminded of 
these decrees and ordinances of the British Government in 
India and of the reasons given fer them. In this decree, issued 
in February 1767, the King justified his action by “extremely 
grave reasons relative to my duty to maintain subordination, 
tranquillity, and justice among my subjects, and other urgent, 
just, and necessary reasons which 1 reserve in my royal breast.” 

So the real reasons fijr the Ordinances remained locked up in 
the Viceregal breast or in the imperialist breasts of his coun- 
sellors, though they were obvious enough. The reasons given 
out officially helped us to understand the new technique of 
propaganda which the British Government in India was per- 
fecting. Some months later we learnt of semi-official 
pamphlets and leaflets being widdy distributed all over the 
rural areas containing quite an astonishing number of mis- 
representations and, in particular, hinting at the fiict that the 
Congress had caused the fall in agricultural prices which had 
hurt the peasantry so much. This was a remarkable tribute to 
the power of the Congress, which could bring about a world 
depression! But the lie was spread persistently and assiduously, 
in the hope that the prestige of the Congress might suffer. 

In spite of aU this, the response of the peasantry in some of 
the principal districts of the’ U.P. to the call for civil diso- 
bedience, which inevitably got mixed up with the dispute about 
fair rent and remissions, was very fine. It was a far bigger and 
more disciplihcd response than in 1930. To begin whn there 



333 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

was good humour about it too. A delightful story came to us 
of a visit of a police party to the village Bakulia in Rae Bareli 
district. They had gone to attach goods for non-payment of 
rent. The village was relatively prosperous, and its residents 
were men of some spirit. They received the revenue and police 
officials with all courtesy and, leaving the doors of all the 
houses open, invited them to go wherever they wanted to. Some 
attachments of cattle, etc., were made. The villagers then 
offered pan supari to the police and revenue officials, who 
retired looking very small and rather shamefaced! But this 
was a rare and unusual occurrence, and very soon there was 
little of humour or charity or human kindness to be seen. 
Poor Bakulia could not escape pimishment for its spirit because 
of its humour. 

For many months in these particular districts rent was vrith- 
held by the tenantry, and it was only early in summer probably 
that collections began to dribble in. Large numbers of arrests 
were of course made, but this was almost in spite of Govern- 
ment’s policy. Generally arrests were confined to special workers 
and village leaders. The others were merely beaten. Beating 
was found to be superior to prison as well as shooting. It could 
be repeated whenever necessary and, taking place in remote 
rural areas, attracted little outside attention; nor did it add to 
the swelling number of prisoners. There were of course large 
numbers of ejectments, attachments and sale of cattle and 
property. With terrible anguish, the peasants watched the 
little they possessed being taken away and disposed of for 
ridiculous prices. 

Swaraj Bhawan had been seized by the Government, in com- 
mon with numerous other buildings all over the country. All 
the valuable equipment and materm belonging to the Congress 
Hospital, whidh was functioning in Swaraj Bhawan, was also 
seized. For a few days the hospital ceased functioning alto- 
gether, but then an open-air dispensary was established in a 
park near by. Later the ho^ital, or rather dispensary, moved 
to a small house adjoining Swaraj Bhawan, and there it func- 
tioned &r nearly two and a half years. 

There was some talk of our dwelling-house, Anand Bhawan, 
also being taken possession of by the Government, for I had 
refused to pay a large amount due as inepme tax. This tax had 
been assessed on father’s income in 1930, and he had not paid 
it that year because of civil disobedience. In 1931, after the 
Delhi Pact, I had an argument with the income tax authorities 
about it, but ultimately I agreed to pay and did pay an instal- 



BALLYHOO 


333 

ment. Just tlien came the Ordinances, and I decided to pay no 
more. It seemed to me utterly wrong, and even immoral, for 
me to ask the peasants to withhold payment of rent and 
revenue and to pay income fax myself. I expected, therefore, 
that our house would he attached by the Goventment. I dis- 
liked this idea intensely, as it would have meant my mother 
being turned out: our books, papers, goods and chattels and 
many things that we valued for personal and sentimental 
reasons going into strange hands and perhaps being lost; and 
our National Flag being pulled down and the Union Jack put 
up instead. At the same time I was attracted to the idea of 
losing the house. I felt that this would bring me nearer to the 
peasantry, who were being dispossessed, and would hearten 
them. From the point of view of our movement it was cer- 
tainly a desirable thing. But the Government decided otherwise 
and did not touch the house, perhaps because of consideration 
for my mother, perhaps because they judged rightly that it 
would give an impetus to civil disobedience. Many months 
afterwards some odd railway shares of mine were discovered 
and attached, for non-payment of income tax. My motor-car, 
as well as my brother-in-law's, had been previously attached 
and sold. 

One feature of these early months pained me greatly. This 
was the hauling down of our National Flag by various muni- 
cipalities and public bodies, and especially by the Calcutta 
Corporation which was said to have a majority of Congress 
members. The flag was taken down under pressure from the 
police and the Government, which threatened severe action in 
case of non-compliance. This action would have probably 
meant a suspension of the municipality or punishment of its 
members. Organisations with vested interests are apt to be 
timid, and perhaps it was inevitable that they should act as 
they did, but nevertheless it hurt. That flag had become a 
symbol to us of much that we held dear, and under its shadow 
we had taken many a pledge to protect its honour. To pull 
it down with our own hands, or to have it pulled down at our 
behest, seemed not only a breaking of that pledge but almost 
a sacrilege. It was a submission of the spirit, a denial of the 
truth in one; an affirmation, in the face of superior physical 
might, of the false. And those who submitted in this way low- 
ered the morale of the nation, and injured its self-respect. 

It was not that they were expected to behave a& heroes, and 
rush into the fire. It was wrong and absurd to blame any one 
for not being in the front rank and courting prison, or oth<:r 



334 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

suffering or loss. Each one had many duties and responsi* 
bilities to shoulder, and no one else had a right to sit in 
judgment on him. But to sit or work in the background is 
one thing; to deny the truth, or what one conceives to be the 
truth, is a more serious matter. It was open to members of 
municipalities, when called upon to do anything against the 
national interest, to resign from their seats. As a rule they 
preferred to remain in those seats. 

“ But bees, on flowers alighting, cease their hum — 

So, settling upon places, Whigs grow dumb 1 ” ^ 

Perhaps it is unjust to criticise any one for his behaviour 
during a sudden crisis which threatens to overwhelm him. The 
nerve of the bravest fails them sometimes, as the World War 
demonstrated over and again. Earlier still, in the great Titanic 
disaster of 191a, famous people, who could never have been 
associated with cowardice, escaped by bribing the crew, leaving 
others to drown. Very recen^ the fire on the Morro Castle 
revealed a shameful state of afrairs. No one knows how he will 
behave in a similar crisis when the primeval instincts over- 
power reason and restraint. So we may not blame. But that 
should not prevent us from noting that falling away from right 
conduct, and from taking care in future that the steering-wheel 
of the ship of the nation is not put in hands that tremble and 
fail when the need is greatest. Worse still is the attempt to 
justify this failure and call it right conduct. That, surely, is 
a greater offence than the failure itself. 

All struggles between rival forces depend greatly on morale 
and nerve. Even the bloodiest war depends upon them : “ In 
the final event battles are won by nerves,” said Marshal Foch. 
Much more so are nerve and morale necessary in a non-violent 
struggle, and any one who, by his conduct, impairs that morale 
and shakes the nation’s nerve, does a serious disservice to the 
cause. 

The months went by bringing their daily toll of good news 
and bad, and we adapted ourselves in our respective prisons, to 
our dull and monotonous routine. The National Week came— 
April 6th to 13th— and we knew that this would witness many 
an unusual happening. Much, indeed, happened then; but for 
me everything else paled before one occurrence. In Allahabad 
my mother was in a procession which was stopped by the police 

* Thomas Moore. 



BALLYHOO 


335 

and later charged with lathis. When the procession had been 
halted some one brought her a chair, and she was sitting on 
this on the road at the head of the procession. Some people 
who were especially looking after her, including my secretary, 
were arrested and removed, and then came the police charge. 
My mother was knocked down from her chair, and was hit 
repeatedly on the head with canes. Blood came out of an open 
wound in the head; she fainted, and lay on the roadside, which 
had now been cleared of the processionists and public. After 
some time she was picked up and brought by a police officer 
in his car to Anand Bhawan. 

That night a false rumour spread in Allahabad that my 
mother had died. Angry crowds gathered together, forgot 
about peace and non-violence, and attacked the police. There 
was firing by the police, resulting in the death of some people. 

When the news of all this came to me some days after the 
occurrence (for we had a weekly paper), the thought of my frail 
old mother lying bleeding on the dusty road obsessed me, and 
I wondered how I would have behaved if I had been there. 
How far would my non-violence have carried me? Not very 
far, I fear, for that sight would have made me forget the long 
lesson I had tried to learn for more than a dozen years; and 
I would have recked little of the consequences, personal or 
national. 

Slowly she recovered, and when she came to see me next 
month m Bareilly Gaol she tvas still bandaged up. But she was 
full of joy and pride at having shared with our volunteer boys 
and girls the privilege of reedving cane and lathi blows. Her 
recovery, however, was more apparent than real, and it seems 
that the tremendous shaking that she received at her age upset 
her system entirely and brought into prominence deep-seated 
troubles, which a year later assumed dangerous proportions.' 