DESOLATION 

“ And I yearn to lay my head 

Where the grass is cool and sweet. 

Mother, all the dreams are fled 
From the tired child at thy feet.” 

April came. Rumours reached me in my cell in Alipore of 
happenings outside, rumours that were unpleasant and disturb- 
ing. The Superintendent of the gaol informed me casually one 
day that Mr. Gandhi had withdrawn Civil Disobedience. I 
knew no more. The news was not welcome, and I felt sad at 
this winding-up of something that had meant so much to me 
for many years. And yet I reasoned with myself that the end 
was bound to come. I knew in my heart that some time or other 
Civil Disobedience would have to be wound up, for the time 
being at least. Individuals may hold out almost indefinitely, 
regardless of the consequences, but national organisations do 
not behave in this manner. I had no doubt that Gandhiji had 
interpreted correctly the mind of the country and of the great 
majority of Congressmen, and I tried to reconcile myself to the 
new development, unpleasant as it was. 

I heard also vaguely of the new move to revive the old Swaraj 
Party in order to enter the legislatures. Thar too seemed inevit- 
able, and I had long been of opinion that the Congress could 
not keep aloof from future elections. During the five months 
of my freedom outside prison I had tried to discourage this 
tendency, for I thought it premature and likely to divert atten- 
tion both from direct action and from the development of new 
ideas of social change which were fermenting in the Congress 
ranks. The longer the crisis continued, I thought, the more 
would these ideas spread among our masses and intelligentsia 
and the realities underlying our political and economic situa- 
tion be laid bare. As Lenin has said somewhere: “Any and 
every political crisis is useful bccaysc it brings to the light what 
was hidden, reveals the actual forces involved in politics; it 
exposes lies and deceptive phrases and fictions; it demonstrates 
comprehensively the facts, and forces on the people the under- 
standing of what is the reality.” I had hoped that this process 
would result in making the Congress a clearer-minded and a 

504 



DliSOLATION 


5OJ 

more compact body with a definite goal. Probably some of 
its weaker elements might drop out. That would be no loss. 
And when the time came for the ending of even theoretical 
direct action and a reversion to so-called constitutional and 
legal methods, the advanced and really active wing of the Con- 
gress would utilise even these methods from the larger point 
of view of our final objective. 

That time apparently had come. But to my dismay I found 
that the people who had been the backbone of Civil Dis- 
obedience and efltective work in the Congress were receding into 
the background, and others, who had taken no such part, were 
taking command. 

Some days later the weekly Statesman came to me, and I read 
in it the statement which Gandhiji had issued when withdraw- 
ing Civil Disobedience. I read it with amazement and sinking 
of heart. Again and again I read it, and Civil Disobedience and 
much else vanished from my mind and other doubts and con- 
flicts filled it. “This statement," wrote Gandhiji, “owes its 
inspiration to a personal chat with the inmates and associates 
of the Satyagraha Ashram. . . . More especially is it due to a 
revealing information I got in the course of a conversation 
about a valued companion of long standing who was found 
reluctant to perform the full prison task, preferring his private 
studies to the allotted task. This was undoubtedly contrary 
to the rules of Satyagraha. More than the imperfection of 
the friend whom I love, more tlian ever it brought home to me 
my own imperfections. The fi'iend said he had thought that 
I was aware of his weakness. I was blind. Blindness in a 
leader is unpardonable. I saw at once that I must for the 
time being remain the sole representative of civil resistance in 
action.” 

The imperfection or fault, if such it was, of the ‘ friend ’ was 
a very trivial aflair. I confess that I have often been guilty of it 
and I am wholly unrepentant. But even if it was a serious 
matter, was a vast national movement involving scores of thou- 
sands directly and millions indirectly to be thrown out of gear 
because an individual had erred? This seemed to me a mon- 
strous proposition and an immoral one. I cannot presume to 
speak of what is and what is not Satyagraha, but in my own 
little way I have endeavoured to follow certain standards of 
conduct, and all those standards were shocked and upset by 
this statement of Gandhiji’s. I knew that Gandhiji usumly acts 
on instinct (I prefer to call it that than the ‘inner voice ’ or an 
answer to prayer), and very often that instinct is right. He has 



5o6 jawaharlal nehru 

repeatedly shown what a wonderful knack he has of sensing the 
mass mind and of acting at the psychological moment. The 
reasons which he afterwards adduces to justify his action are 
usually afterthoughts and seldom carry one very far. A leader 
or a man of action in a crisis almost always acts subconsciously 
and then thinks of the reasons for his action. I felt also that 
Gandhiji had acted rightly in suspending civil resistance. But 
the reason he had given seemed to me an insult to intelligence 
and an amazing performance for a leader of a national move- 
ment. He was perfectly entitled to treat his ashram inmates 
in any manner he liked; they had taken all kinds of pledges 
and accepted a certain regime. But the Congress had not done 
so; I had not done so. Why should we he tossed hither and 
thither for, what seemed to me, metaphysical and mystical 
reasons in which I was not interested? Was it conceivable to 
have any political movement on this basis? I had willingly 
accepted the moral aspect of Satyagraha as I understood it 
(within certain limits T admit). That basic aspect appealed 
to me and it seemed to raise politics to a higher and nobler 
level. I was prepared to agree that the end does not justify all 
kinds of means. But this new development or interpretation 
was something much more far-reaching and it held forth some 
possibilities which frightened me. 

The whole statement frightened and oppressed me tremen- 
dously. And then finally the advice he gave to Congressmen 
was that “they must learn the art and beauty of self-denial 
and voluntary poverty. They must engage themselves in 
nation-building activities, the spread of khaddar through per- 
sonal hand-spinning and hand-weaving, the spread of com- 
munal unity of hearts by irreproachable personal conduct 
towards one another in every walk of life, the banishing of 
untouchability in every shape or form in one’s own person, the 
spread of total abstinence from intoxicating drinks and drugs 
by personal contact with individual addicts and generally by 
cultivating personal purity. These arc services which provide 
maintenance on the poor man’s scale. Those for whom the 
poor man’s scale is not feasible should find a place in small 
unorganised industries of national importance which give a 
better wage.” 

This was the political programme that we were to follow. A 
vast distance seemed to separate him from me. With a stab 
of pain I felt that the chords of allegiance that had bound me 
to him for many years had snapped. For long a mental tussle 
had been going on within me. I had not understood or ap- 



DESOLATION 


507 


predated much that Gandhiji had done. His fasts and his con- 
centration on other issues during the continuance of Civil 
Disobedience, when his comrades were in the grip of the 
struggle, his personal and selPcreated entanglements, which led 
him to the extraordinary position that, while out of prison, he 
was yet pledged to himself not to take part in the political 
movement, his new loyalties and pledges which put in the 
shade the old loyalty and pledge and job, undertaken together 
with many colleagues, while yet that job was unfinished, had 
all oppressed me. During my short period out of prison I had 
felt these and other differences more than ever. Gandhiji had 
stated that there were temperamental differences between us. 
They were perhaps more than temperamental, and I realised 
that I held clear and definite views about many matters which 
were opposed to his. And yet in the past I had tried to sub- 
ordinate them, as far as I could, to what I conceived to be the 
larger loyalty — the cause of national freedom for which the 
Congress seemed to be working. I tried to be loyal and faithful 
to my leader and my colleagues, for in my spiritual make-up 
loyalty to a cause and to one’s colleagues holds a high place. 
I fought many a battle within myself when I felt that T was 
being dragged away from the anchor of my spiritual faith. 
Somehow I managed to compromise. Perhaps I did wrong, for 
it can never be right for any one to let go of that anchor. But 
in the conflict of ideals I clung to my loyalty to my colleagues, 
and hoped that the rush of events and the development of our 
struggle might dissolve the difficulties that troubled ire and 
bring my colleagues nearer to my view-point. 

And now? Suddenly I felt very lonely in that cell of Alipore 
Gaol, Life seemed to be a dreary affair, a very wilderness of 
desolation. Of the many hard lessons that I had learnt, the 
hardest and the most painful how faced me; that it is not 
possible in any vital matter to rely on any one. One .must 
journey through life alone; to rely on others is to invite heart- 
break. 

Some of my accumulated irritation turned to religion and 
the religious outlook; What an enemy this was to clearness of 
tliought and fixity of purpose, I thought; for was it not based 
on emotion and passion? Presuming to be spiritual, how far 
removed it was from real spirituality and things of the spirit. 
Thinking in terms of some other world, it had little conception 
of human values and social values and social justice. With its 
preconceived notions it deliberately shut its eyes to reality for 
fear that this might not fit in with them. It based itself on 



5o8 jawaharlal nehru 

truth, and yet so sure was it of having discovered it, and the 
whole of it, that it did not take the trouble to search for it; all 
that concerned it was to tell others of it. The will to truth was 
not the same thing as the will to believe. It talked of peace and 
yet supported systems and organisations that could not exist 
but for violence. It condemned the violence of the sword, but 
what of the violence that comes quietly and often in peaceful 
garb and starves and kills; or worse still, without doing any 
outward physical injury, outrages the mind and crushes the 
spirit and breaks the heart? 

And then I thought of him again who was the cause of this 
commotion within me. What a wonderful man was Gandhiji 
after all, with his amazing and almost irresistible charm and 
subtle power over people. His writings and his sayings conveyed 
little enough impression of the man behind; his personality was 
far bigger than they would lead one to think. And his services 
to India, how vast they had been. He had instilled courage and 
manhood in her people, and discipline and endurance, and the 
power of joyful sacrifice for a cause, and, with all his humility, 
pride. Courage is the one sure foundation of character, he had 
said, without courage there is no" morality, no religion, no love. 
“ One cannot follow truth or love so long as one is subject to 
fear.” With all his horror of violence, he had told us that 
“ cowardice is a thing even more hateful than violence ”. And 
" discipline is the pledge and guarantee that a man means busi- 
ness. There is no deliverance and no hope without sacrifice, 
discipline, and self-control. Mere sacrifice without discipline will 
be unavailing.” Words only and pious phrases perhaps, rather 
platitudinous, but there was power behind the words, and India 
knew that this little man meant business.,.. 

He came to represent India to an amazing degree and to ex- 
press the very spirit of that ancient and tortured land. Almost 
he was India, and his very failings were Indian failings. A slight 
to him was hardly a personal matter, it was an insult to the 
nation; and "Viceroys and others who indulged in these dis- 
dainful gestures little realised what a dangerous crop they were 
sowing, i remember how hurt I was when I first learnt that the 
Pope had refused an interview to Gandhiji when he was retum- 
■'ing from the Round Table Conference in December 1931. That 
remsal seemed to me an affront to India, and there can be no 
doubt that the refusal was intentional, though the afifont was 
probably not thought of. The Catholic Church does not ap- 
prove of saints or mahatmas outside its fold, and because some 
Protestant churchmen had called Gandhiji a great man of 



UbaULAl'luN 


509 

religion and a real- Christian, it became all the more necessary 
for Rome to dissociate itself from this heresy. 

Just about that time in Aliporc Gaol, in April 1934, I read 
Bernard Shaw’s new plays, and the preface to On the Rocks, 
with its debate between Christ and Pilate, fascinated me. It 
seemed to have a modern significance, when another empire 
faced another man of religion. “I say to you,” Jesus says to 
Pilate in this preface, " cast out fear. Speak no more vain things 
to me about the greatness of Rome. The greatness of Rome, 
as you call it, is nothing but fear; fear of the past and fear 
of the future, fear of the poor, fear of the rich, fear of the 
High Priests, fear of the Jews and Greeks, who are learned, 
fear of the Gauls and Goths and Hiins, who are barbarians, 
fear of the Carthage you destroyed to save you from fear of it, 
and now fear worse than ever, fear of Imperial Caesar, the idol 
you have yourself created, and fear of me, the penniless vag- 
rant, buffeted and mocked, fear of everything except the rule 
of God; faith in nothing but blood and iron and gold. You, 
standing for Rome, are the universal coward; I, standing for the 
Kingdom of God, have braved everything, lost everything, and 
won an eternal crown.” 

But Gandhiji’s greatness or his services to India or the tre- 
mendous debt I personally owed to him were not in question. 
In spite of all that, he might be hopelessly in the wrong in 
many matters. What, after all, was he aiming at? In spite of 
the closest association with him for many years I am not clear 
in my own mind about his objective. I doubt if he is clear 
himself. One step enough for me, he says, and he does not 
try to peep into the future or to have a clearly conceived end 
before him. Look after the means and the end will take care 
of itself, he is never tired of repeating. Be good in your per- 
sonal individual lives and all else will follow. That is not a 
political or scientific attitude, nor is it perhaps even an ethical 
attitude. It is narrowly moralist, and it begs the question ; What 
is goodness? Is it merely an individual affair or a social afl^ir? 
Gandhiji lays all sfress on character and attaches little impor- 
tance to intellectual traming and deveropiricnt. Intellect without 
character is likely to be dangerous, but what is character with- 
out intellect? How, indeed, docs character develop? Gandhiji 
has been compared to the medieval Christain saints, and much 
that he says seems to fit in with this. It does not fit in at all 
with modem psychological experience and method. 

But however this may be, vagueness in an objective seems 
to me deplorable. Action to be effective must be directed tq 



JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 


5JO 

clearly conceived ends. Life is not all logic, and those ends will 
have to be varied from time to time to fit in with it, but soma 
end must always be clearly envisaged. 

I imagine that Gandhiji is not so vague about the objective 
as he sometimes appears to be. He is passionately desirous of 
going in a certain direction, but this is wholly at variance with 
modern ideas and conditions, and he has so far been unable to, 
fit the two, or to chalk out all the intermediate steps leading 
to his goal. Hence, the appearance of vagueness and avoidance 
of clarity. But his general inclination has been clear enough 
for a quarter of a century, ever since he started formulating 
his philosophy in South Africa. I do not know if those early 
writings still represent his views. I doubt if they do so in their 
entirety, but they do help us to understand the background of 
his thought. 

“ India’s salvation consists,” he wrote in 1909. " in unlearning 
what she has learnt during the last fifty years. The railways, 
telegraphs, hospitals, lawyers, doctors, and such-like have all to 
go; and the so-called upper classes have to learn consciously, 
religiously, and deliberately the simple peasant life, knowing 
it to be a life giving true happiness.” And again : " Every time 
I get into a railway car or use a motor-bus I know that I am 
doing violence to my sense of what is right “ to attempt to 
reform the W'orld by means of highly artificial and speedy 
locomotion is to attempt the impossible.” 

All this seems to me utterly wrong and harmful doctrine, and 
impossible of achievement. Behind it lies Gandhiji’s love and 
praise of poverty and sufl'ering and the ascetic life. For him 
progress and civilisation consist not in the multiplication of 
wants, of higher standards of living, “but in the deliberate 
and voluntary restriction of wants, which promotes real happi- 
ness and cqntentment, and increases the capacity for service.” 
If these premises are once accepted it becomes easy to follow 
the rest of Gandhiji’s thought and to have a better under- 
standing of his activities. But most of us do not accept those 
premises and yet we complain later on when we find that his 
activities are not to our liking. 

Personally I dislike the praise of poverty and suffering. I do 
not think they are at all d«irable, and they ought to be 
abolished. Nor do I appreciate the ascetic life as a social ideal, 
though it may suit individuals. I understand and appreciate 
simplicity, equality, self-control, but not the mortification of 
the flesh. Just as an athlete requires to train his body, I 
believe that the mind and h^hifo h^ve aho rn be trained and 



lJ^!,t>OLAilO^ 


5 ” 

brought under control. It would be absurd to expect that a 
person who is given to too much self-indulgence can endure 
much suffering or show unusual self-control or behave like a 
hero when the crisis comes. To be in good moral condition 
requires at least as much training as to be in good physical 
condition. But that certainly does not mean asceticism or self- 
mortification. 

Nor do I appreciate in the least the idealisation of the ‘ simple 
peasant life’. I have almost a horror of it, and instead of 
submitting to it myself I want to drag out even the peasantry 
from it, not to urbanisation, but to the spread of urban cultural 
facilities to rural areas. Far from this life giving me true happi- 
ness, it would be almost as bad as imprisonment for me. What 
is there in the " Man with the Hoe ” to idealise over? Crushed 
and exploited for innumerable generations he is only little 
removed from the animals who keep him company. 

“ Who made him dead to rapture and despair, 

A thing that grieves not and that never hopes. 

Stolid and stunned, a brother to the ox? ” 

This desire to get away from the mind of man to primitive 
conditions where mind docs not count, seems to me quite incom- 
prehensible. The very thing that is the glory and triumph of 
man is decried and discouraged, and a physical environment 
which will oppress the mind and prevent its growth is con- 
sidered desirable. Present-day civilisation is full of evils, but it 
is also full of good; and it has the capacity in it to rid mself 
of those evils. To destroy it root and branch is to remove that 
capacity from it and revert to a dull, sunless and miserable ex- 
istence. But even if that were desirable it is an impossible un- 
dertaking. We cannot stop the river of change or cut ourselves 
adrift from it, and psychologically we who have eaten of the 
apple of Eden cannot forget that taste and go back to primi- 
tiveness. 

It is difficult to argue this, for the two standpoints are utterly 
different. Gandhiji is always thinking in terms of personal 
salvation and of sin, while most of us have society’s welfare 
uppermost in our minds. I find it difficult to grasp the idea of 
sin, and perhaps it is because of this that I cannot appreciate 
Gandhijrs general outlook. He is not out to change, society or 
the social structure, he devotes himself to the eradication of 
sin from individuals. “The follower of swadeshi,” he has 
written, " never takes upon himself the vain task of trying to 
reform the world, for he believes that the World is moved and 



£12 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

always will be moved according to the rules set by God.’’ And 
yet he is aggressive enough in his attempts to reform the world; 
but the reform he aims at is individual reform, the conquest 
over the senses and the desire to indulge them, which is sin. 
Probably he will agree with the definition of liberty which an 
able Roman Cathdic writer on Fascism has given: “Liberty 
is no more than freedom from the bondage of sin.” How 
almost identical this is with the words of the Bishop of London 
written, two hundred years ago: “The Freedom which Chris- 
tianity gives is Freedom from the Bondage of sin and Satan 
and mom the Dominion of Men’s Lusts and Passions and 
inordinate Desires.” ^ 

If this standpoint is once appreciated then one begins to 
understand a little Gandhiji's attitude to sex, extraordinary as 
that seems to the average person to-day. For him “ any union is 
a crime when the desire for progeny is absent ”, and “ the adop- 
tion of artificial methods must result in imbecility and nervous 
prostration.” “ It is wrong and immoral to seek to escape the 
consequences of one’s acts. ... It is bad for him to indulge 
his appetite and then escape the consequences by taking tonics 
or other medicines. It is still worse for a person to indulge his 
animal passions and escape the consequences of his acts.” 

Personally I find this altitude unnatural and shocking, and 
if he is right, then I am a criminal on the verge of imbecility 
and nervous prostration. The Roman Catholics have also 
vigorously opposed birth-control, but they have not carried their 
argument to the logical limit as Gandhiji has done. They have 
temporised and compromised with what they considered to be 
human nature.^ But Gandhiji has gone to the extreme limit of 
his argument and does not recognise the validity or necessity 
of the sexual act at any time except for the sake of children; 
he refuses to recognise any natural sex attraction between man 
and woman. "But I am told,” he says, "that this is an im- 
possible ideal, that I do not take account of the natural attrac- 
tion between man and woman. I refuse to believe that the 
sensual affinity, referred to here, can be at all regarded as 

^ Tins letter is quoted on page 378, ante. 

* Pope Pius XI in his Encyclical on ChrisUan Marriage, issued on 
December 31, 1931, says: “ Nor must married people be considered 
to act against the order of nature if they make use of their rights 
according to sound and natural reason, even though no new life 
can thence arise on account of circumstance of time or the existence 
of some defect,” The “ circumstance of time ” apparently refers to 
the so-called “ safe period ” when conception is unlikely. 



DESOLATION 


SI3 

natural; in that case the deluge would soon be over us. The 
natural affinity between man and woman is the attraction 
between brother and sister, mother and son, or father and 
daughter. It is this natural attraction that sustains the world.” 
And more emphatically stiU : “ No, I must declare with all the 
power I can command that sensual attraction, even between 
husband and wife, is unnatural.” 

In these days of the Oedipus complex and Freud and the 
spread of psychoanalytical ideas this emphatic statement of 
belief sounds strange and distant. One can accept it as an act 
of faith or reject it. There is no half-way house, for -it- is -a - 
question of faith, not of reason. For my part I think Gandhiji 
is absolutely wrong in this matter. His advice may fit in with 
some cases, but as a general policy it can only lead to frustra- 
tion, inhibition, neurosis, and all manner of physical and 
nervous ills. Sexual restraint is certainly desirable, but I doubt 
if Gandhiji’s doctrine is likely to result in this to any wide- 
spread extent. It is too extreme, and most people decide that 
it is beyond their capacity and go their usual ways, or there 
is friction between husband and wife. Evidently Gandhiji 
thinks that birth-control methods necessarily mean inordinate 
indulgence in the sex act, and that if the sexual affinity between 
man and woman is admitted, every man will run after every 
woman, and vice versa. Neither inference is justified, and I do 
not know why he is so obsessed by this problem of sex, im- 
portant as it is. For him it is a ‘ soot or whitewash ’ question, 
there are no intermediate shades. At either end he takes up an 
extreme position which seems to me most abnormal and un- 
natural. Perhaps this is a reaction from the deluge of literature 
on sexology that is descending on us in these days. I presume 
I am a normal individual and sex has played its part in my life, 
but it has not obsessed me or diverted me firom my other 
activities. It has been a subordinate part. 

Essentially, his attitude is that of the ascetic who has turned 
his back to the world and its ways, who denies life and con- 
siders it evil. For an ascetic that is natural, but it seems far, 
fetched to apply it to men and women of the world who 
accept life and try to make the most of it. And in avoiding one 
evil he puts up with many other and graver evils. 

I have drifted to other topics, but in those distressful days in 
AUpore Gaol all these ideas crowded in my mind, not in 
logical order or sequence, but in a wild jumble which confused 
me and oppressed me. Above all there was the feeling of 
loneliness and desolation, heightened by the stifling atmosjrtiere 



514 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

of the gaol and my lonely little cell. If I had been outside the 
shock would have been more momentary, and I would have 
adjusted myself sooner to new conditions, and found relief in 
expression and action. Inside the prison there was no such 
relief, and I spent some miserable days. Fortunately for myself 
I am resilient and recover soon from attacks of pessimism. I 
began to grow out of my depression, and then I had an inter- 
view in gaol with Kamala. That cheered me up tremendously, 
and my feeling of isolation left me. Whatever happened, I felt, 
we had one another. 