DESCENT FROM KASHMIR 

“ It is a hard and nice subject for a man to write of himself : 
it grates his own heart to say anything of disparagement, and 
the reader’s ears to hear anything of praise for him.’* 

— Abraham- Cowley. 

An only son of prosperous parents is apt to be spoilt, especially 
so in India. And when that son happens to have been an only 
child for the first eleven years of his existence there is little hope 
for him to escape this spoiling. My two sisters are very much 
younger than I am, and between each two of us there is a long 
stretch of years. And so I grew up and spent my early years as a 
somewhat lonely child with no companions of my age. I did not 
even have the companionship of children at school for I was not 
sent to any kindergarten or primary school. Governesses or 
private tutors were supposed to be in charge of my education. 

Our house itself was far from being a lonely place, fi)r it shel- 
tered a large family of cousins and near relations, after the 
manner of Hindu families. But all my cousins were much older 
than I was and were students at the high school or the university 
and considered me far too young for their work or their play. 
And so in the midst of that big family I felt rather lonely andtj 
was left a great deal to my own fancies and solitary games. 

We were Kashmiris. Over two hundred years ago, early in the 
eighteenth century, our ancestor came down from that mountain 
valley to seek fame and fortune in the rich plains below. Those 
were the days of the decline of the Moghal Empire after the 
death of Aurungzeb, and Farrukhsiar was the Emperor. Raj 
Kaul was the name of that ancestor of ours and he had gained 
eminence as a Sanskrit and Persian scholar in Kashmir. He 
attracted the notice of Farrukhsiar during the latter’s visit to 
Kashmir, and, probably at the Emperor’s instance, the family 
migrated to Demi, the imperial capital, about the year 1716. A 
jagtr with a house situated on the banks of a canal had been 
granted to Raj Kaul, and, firom the fact of. this residence, 
°Nehru ’ (firom nahar, a canal) came to be attached to his name. 
Kaul had been the family name; this changed to Kaul-Nehru; 
and, in later years, Kaul dropped out and we became simply 
Nehrus. 

B 


1 



2 JAVnAitARLAL NtHBU 

The family experienced many vicissitudes of fortune during 
the unsettled times that followed and the ja^r dwindled and 
vanished away. My great grandfather, Lakshmi Narayan Nehru, 
became the first Vakil of the ‘ Sarkar Company ’ at the shadow 
court of the Emperor of Delhi. My grandfather, Ganga Dhar 
Nehru, was Kotwal of Delhi for some time before the great 
Revolt of 1857. He died at the early age of 34 in i Sd i . 

The Revolt of 1857 put an end to our family’s connection with 
Delhi, and all our old family papers and documents were de- 
stroyed in the course of it. TTie family, having lost nearly all it 
possessed, joined the numerous fugitives who were leaving the old 
imperial city and went to Agra. My father was not bom then 
but my two uncles were already young men and possessed some 
knowledge of English. This knowledge saved the younger of the 
two uncles, as well as some other members of the family, from a 
sudden and ignominious end. He was journeying from Delhi 
with some family members, among whom was his young sister, 
a little girl who was very fair, as some Kashmiri children are. 
Some English soldiers met them on the way and they suspected 
this little aunt of mine to be an English girl and accused my 
uncle of kidnapping her. From an accusation, to summary justice 
and punishment, was usually a matter of minutes in those days, 
and my uncle and others of the family might well have found 
themselves hanging on the nearest tree. Fortunately for them, 
my xmcle’s knowledge of English delayed matters a Uttle and 
then some one who knew him passed that way and rescued him 
and the others. 

For some years the family lived in Agra, and it was in Agra on 
the sixth qf May 1861 that my father was born.* But he was a 
posthumous child as my grandfather had died three months 
earlier. In a little painting that we have of my grandfather, he 
' wears the Moghal court dress with a curved sword in his hand, 
and might w^ be taken for a Moghal nobleman, although his 
features are distinctly Kashmiri. 

The burden of the family then fell on my two uncles who were 
very much older than my fiither. The elder unde. Bans! Dhar 
Nehru, soon after entered the judicial department of the British 
Government and, being appointed successively to various places, 
was .partly cut off ftom the rest of the family. The, younger 
uncle, Nand Lai Nehru, entered the service of an Indian State 
and was Diwan of Khepri State in Rajputana for ten years. Later 
he studied law and settled down as a practising lawyer in Agra. 

* A curious and interesting coinddence; The poet Rabindranath 
Tagore was also bom on this very day, month and year. 



UtSCttNT FROM KASHMIR 


3 

My father lived with him and grew up under his sheltering care. 
The two were greatly attached to each other and their relation 
with each other was a strange mixture of the brotherly and the 
paternal and filial. My father, being the last comer, was of 
course my grandmother’s favourite son, and she was an old lady 
with a tremendous will of her own who was not accustomed to be 
ignored. It is now nearly half a century since her death but she is 
still remembered amongst old Kashmiri ladies as a most dominat- 
ing old woman and quite a terror if her will was flouted. 

My uncle attached himself to the newly established High 
Court and when this court moved to Allahabad from Agra, the 
famUy moved with it. Since then Allahabad has been our home 
and it was there, many years later, that I was born. My uncle 
gradually developed an extensive practice and became one of the 
leaders of the High Court Bar. Meanwhile my father was going 
through school and college in Cawnpore and A l lahabad. His 
early education was confined entirely to Persian and Arabic and 
he only began learning English in his early ’teens. But at that 
age he was considered to be a good Persian scholar, and knew 
some Arabic also, and because of this knowledge was treated with 
respect by much older people. But in spite of this early precocity 
his school and college career was chiefly notable for his numerous 
pranks and escapades. He was very far from being a model pupil 
and took more interest in games and novel adventures than in 
study. He was looked upon as one of the leaders of the rowdy 
element in the college. He was attracted to Western dress and 
other Western ways at a time when it was uncommon for Indians 
to take to them except in big cities like Calcutta and Bombay. 
Though he was a little wild in his behaviour, his Englisl^ro- 
fessors were fond of him and often got him out of a scrape. 'Iney 
liked his spirit and he was intelligent, and with an occasionsu 
spurt he managed to do fairly well even in class. In later years, 
long afterwards, he used to talk to us of one of these professors, 
Mr. Harrison, the principal of the Muir Central College at 
Allahabad, with affection, and had carefully preserved a letter of 
his, dating from the old student days. 

He got through his various university examinations without 
any special distinction, and then he appeared for his final, the 
B.A. He had not taken the trouble to work much for it and he 
was greatly dissatisfied with the way he had done the first paper. 
Not expecting to pass the examination, as he thought he had 
spoiled the first paper, he decided to boycott the rest of the ex- 
amination and he spent his time instead at the Taj Mahal. (The 
university examinations were held then at Agra.) Subsequently 



4 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

his professor sent for him and was very angry with him for he 
said that he (my father) had done the first paper fairly well and 
he had been a fool for not appearing for the other papers. Any- 
how this ended my father’s university career. He never Gradu- 
ated. 

He was keen on getting on in life and establishing himself in a 
profession. Naturally he looked to the law as that was the only 
profession then, in India, which offered any opening for talent and 
prizes for the successful. He also had his brother’s example be- 
fore him. He appeared for the High Court Vakils’ examination 
and not only passed it but topped the list and got a gold medal 
for it. He had found the subject after his own heart, or rather, he 
was intent on succe.s.s in the profession of his choice. 

He started practice in the district courts of Cawnpore and, 
being eager to succeed, worked hard at it and soon got on well. 
But his love for games and other amusements and diversions con- 
tinued and still took up part of his time. In particular, he was 
keen on wrestling and dangals. Cawnpore was famous for these 
public wrestling matches in those days. 

After serving his apprenticeship for three years at Cawnpore, 
father inoved to Allahabad to work in the High Court. Not long 
after this his brother, Pandit Nand Lai, suddenly died. That 
was a terrible blow for my father; it was a personal loss of a 
dearly loved brother who had almost been a father to him, and 
the removal of the head and principal earning member of the 
family. Henceforward the burden of carrying on a large family 
mainly fell on his young shoulders. 

He plunged into his work, bent on success, and for many 
months cut himself off fi:om everything else. Nearly all of my 
uncle’s briefs came to him, and as he happened to do well in them 
the professional success that he so ardently desired soon came 
his tvay and brought him both additional work and money. At 
an early age he had established himself as a successful lawyer and 
he paid the price for this by becoming more and more a slave 
to his jealous mistress — ^the law. He had no time for any other 
activity, public or private, and even his vacations and holidays 
were devoted to his legal pracdt^. The National Congress was 
just then attracting the attention of the English-knowing init i dio 
classes and he visited some of its early sessions and gave it a 
theoretical allegiance. But in those days he took no great interest 
in its work. He was too busy with his profession. Besides, he felt 
unsure of his ground in politics and public affairs; he had paid 
no great attention to these subjects till then and knew little aWt 
thcnif He had no wish to join any nxovement or organization 



UjiiaUJSNl cjvUM is.A>3HMIR 


where he would have to play second fiddle. The aggressive spirit 
of his childhood and early youth had been outwardly curbed, 
but it had taken a new form, a new will to power. Directed to his 
profession it brought success and increased his pride and self- 
reliance. He loved a fight, a struggle against odds and yet, 
curiously, in those days he avoided the political field. It is true 
that there was little of fight then in the politics of the National 
Congress. However, the groimd was unfamiliar, and his mind 
was full of the hard work that his profession involved. He had 
taken firm grip of the ladder of success and rung by rung he 
mounted higher, not by any one’s favour, as he felt, not by any 
service of another, but by his own will and intellect. 

He was, of course, a nationalist in a vague sense of tire word, 
but he admired Englishmen and their ways. He had a feeling 
that his own countrymen had fallen low and almost deserved 
what they had got. And there was just a trace of contempt in his 
mind for the politicians who talked and talked without doing 
anything, though he had no idea at all as to what else they could 
do. Also there was the thought, bom in the pride of his own 
success, that many— certainlj not all— of those who took to 
politics had been inures in Ine. 

An ever-increasing income brought many changes in our ways 
of living, for an increasing income meant increasing expenditure. 
The idea of hoarding money seemed to my father a slight on his 
own edacity ,to earn whenever he liked and as much as he de- 
sired. Full of the spirit of play and fond of good living in every 
way, he found no difficulty in spending what he earned. And 
gradually our ways became more and more Westernized. 

Such was our home in the early days of my childhood.* 

* I was bom in Allahabad on the 14th November 1889, or, accord- 
ing to the Samvat calendar, Margshirsh Badi 7, 1946. 

