STRUGGLE 

Outside, the struggle went on, and brave men and women 
continued to defy peacefully a powerful and entrenched govern- 
ment, though they knew that it was not for them to achieve in 
the present or the near future. And repression without break 
and with ever-increasing intensity, demonstrated the basis of 
British rule in India. There was no camouflage about it now, 
and this at least was some satisfaction to us. Bayonets were 
triumphant, but a great warrior had once said that “ you can 
do everything with bayonets save sit on them.” It was better 
that we should be governed thus, we thought, than that we 
should sell our souls and submit to spiritual prostitution. We 
were physically helpless in prison, but we felt we served our 
cause even there, and served it better than many outside. 
Should we, because of our weakness, sacrifice the future of 
India to save ourselves? It was true that the limits of human 
vitality and human strength were narrow, and many an indi- 
vidual was physically disabled, or died, or fell out of the ranks, 
or even betrayed the cause. But the cause went on despite set- 
backs; there could be no failure if ideals remained undimmed 
and spirits undaunted. Real failure was a desertion of principle, 
a denial of our right, and an ignoble submission to wrong. 
Self-made wounds always took longer to heal than those caused 
by an adversary. 

There was often a weariness at our weaknesses and at a world 
gone awry, and yet there was a measure of pride for our 
achievement. For our people had indeed behaved splendidly, 
and it was good to feel oneself to be a member of a gallant 
band. 

During those years of dvil disobedience two attempts were 
made to hold open Congress sessions, one at Delhi and the 
other at Calcutta. It was obvious that an illegal organisation 
could not meet normally and in peace, and any attempt at an 
open session meant conflict with the police. The meetings were 
in fact dispersed forcibly with the help of the lathi by the 
police, and large numbers of people were arrested. The extra- 
ordinary thing about these gatherings was the fact that 
thousands came firom all parts of India as delegates to these il- 
legal gatherings. I was glad to learn that people from the United 



STRUGGLE 


361 

Provinces played a prominent part in both of them. My 
mother also insisted on^ going to the Calcutta session at the 
end of March 1933. She was 'arrested, however, together with 
Pandit Malaviya and others, and detained in prison for a few 
days at Asansol, on the way to Calcutta. I was amazed at the 
energy and vitality she showed, frail and ailing as she was. 
Prison was really of little consequence to her; she had gone 
through a harder ordeal. Her son and both her daughters 
and others whom she loved spent long periods in prison, 
and the empty house where she lived had become a nightmare 
to her. 

As our struggle toned down and stabilised itself at a low 
level there was little of excitement in it, except at long inter- 
vals. My thoughts travelled more to other countries, and I 
watched and studied, as far as I could in gaol, the world 
situation in the grip of the great depression. I read as many 
books as I could find on the subject, and the more I read the 
more fascinated I grew. India with her problems and struggles 
became just a part of this mighty w'orld drama, of the great-- 
struggle of political and economic forces that was going on 
everywhere, nationally and internationally. In that struggle 
my own syifipathies went increasingly towards the communist 
side. 

I had long been drawn to socialism and communism, and 
Russia had appealed to me. Much in Soviet Russia I dislike — 
the ruthless suppression of all contrary opinion, the wholesale 
regimentation, the unnecessary violence (as I thought) in carry- 
ing out various policies. But there was no lack of violence and 
suppression in the capitalist world, and I realised more and 
more how the very basis and foundation of our acquisitive 
society and property was violence. Without violence it could 
not continue fer many days. A measure of political liberty 
meant little indeed when the fear of starvation was always 
compelling the vast majority of people everywhere to submit 
to the will of the few, to the greater glory and advantage of 
the latter. 

Violence was common in both places, but the violence 
of the capitalist order seemed inherent in it; whilst the 
violence of Russia, bad though it was, aimed at a new 
order based on peace and co-operation and real freedom fer the 
masses. With all her blunders, Soviet Russia had triumphed 
over enormous difficulties and taken great strides towards this 
new order.. While the rest of the world was in the grip of the 
depression and going backward in some ways, in the Soviet 



363 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

country a great new world was being built up before our eyes. 
Russia, following the great Lenin, looked into the future and 
thought only of what was to be, while other countries lay 
numbed under the dead hand of the past and spent their 
energy in preserving the useless relics of a bygone age. In 
particular, I was impressed by the reports of the great progress 
made by the backward regions of Central Asia under the 
Soviet regime. In the balance, therefore, I was all in favour of 
Russia, and the presence and example of the Soviets was a 
bright and heartening phenonaenon in a dark and dismal 
world. 

But Soviet Russia’s success or failure, vastly important as it 
was as a practical, experiment in establishing a communist 
state, did not affect the soundness of the theory of communism. 
The Bolsheviks may blunder or even fail because of national 
or international reasons, and yet the communist theory may 
be correct. On the basis of that very theory it was absurd to 
copy blindly what had taken place in Russia, for its application 
depended on the particular conditions prevailing in the country 
in question and the stage of its historical development. Besides, 
India, or any other country, could profit by the triumphs as well 
as the inevitable mistakes of the Bolsheviks. Perhaps the Bol- 
sheviks had tried to go too fast because, surrounded as they 
were by a world of enemies, they feared external aggression. 
A slower tempo might avoid much of the misery caused in 
the rural areas. But then the question arose if really radical 
results could be obtained by slowing down the rate of change. 
Reformism was an impossible solution of any vital problem at 
a critical moment when the basic structure had to be changed, 
and however slow the progress might be later on, the initial 
step must be a complete break with the existing order, which 
had fulfilled its purpose and was now only a drag on future 
progress. 

In India, only a revolutionary plan could solve the two 
related questions of the land and industry as weU as almost 
every other major problem before the country. “There is no 
graver mistake,” as Mr. Lloyd George says in his War Memoirs, 
“ than to leap the abyss in two Jumps.” 

Russia apart, the theory and philosophy of Marxism 
lightened up many a dark corner of my mind. History came to 
have a new meaning for me. The Marxist interpretation threw 
a flood of light on it, and it became an unfolding drama with 
some order and purpose, howsoever unconscious, behind it. In 
spite of the appalling waste and misery of the past and the 



STRUGGLE 


363 

present, the future was bright tYi^h hope, though many dangers 
intervened. It was the essential freedom from dogma and the 
scientific outlook of Marxism that appealed to me. It was 
true that there was plenty of dogma in official communism in 
Russia and elsewhere, and frequently heresy hunts were or- 
ganised. That seemed to be deplorable, though it was not 
difficult to understand in view of the tremendous changes 
taking place rapidly in the Soviet countries when effective oppo- 
sition might have resulted in catastrophic failure. 

The great world crisis and slump seemed to justify the 
Marxist analysis. While all odier systems and theories were 
groping about in the dark, Marxism alone explained it more or 
less satisfactorily and offered a real solution. 

As this conviction grew upon me, I was filled with a new 
excitement and my depression at the non-success of civil diso- 
bedience grew much less. Was not the world marching rapidly 
towards the desired consummation? There were grave dangers 
of wars and catastrophes, but at any rate we were moving. 
There was no stagnation. Our national struggle became a stage 
in the longer journey, and it was as w'cll that repression and 
suffering were tempering our people for future struggles and 
forcing them to consider the new ideas that were stirring the 
world. We would be the stronger and the more disciplined and 
hardened by the elimination of the weaker elements. Time was 
in our favour. 

And so I studied carefully what was happening in Russia, 
Germany, England, America, Japan, China, France, Spain, Italy 
and Central Europe, and tried to understand the tangled web 
of current affairs. I followed with interest the attempts of each 
country separately, and of all of them together, to weather 
the storm. The repeated failures of international conferences 
to find a solution for political and economic ills and the 
problem of disarmament reminded me forcibly of a little, but 
sufficiently troublesome, problem of our own— the communal 
problem. With all the goodwill in the world, we have so far 
not solved the problem; and, in spite of a widespread belief 
that failure would lead to world catastrophe, the great states- 
men of Europe and America have failed to pull together. In 
either case the approach was wrong, and the people concerned 
did not dare to go the right way. 

In thinking over the troubles and conflicts of the world, I 
forgot to some extent my own personal and national troubles. 
I would even feel b uoyant occasionally at the fact that I was 
alive at this great revolutionary period of the world's history. 



364 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

Perhaps I might also have to play some little part in my own 
corner of the world in the great changes that were to come. 
At other times I would find the atmosphere of conflict and 
violence all over the world very depressing. Worse still was the 
sight of intelligent men and women who had become so accus- 
tomed to human degradation and slavery that their minds were 
too coarsened to resent suffering and poverty and inhumanity. 
Noisy vulgarity and organised humbug flourished in this stifling 
moral atmosphere, and good men were silent. The triumph 
of Hitler and the Brown Terror that followed was a great 
shock, though I consoled myself that it could only be tem- 
porary. Almost one had the feeling of the futility of human 
endeavour. The machine went on blindly, what could a little 
cog in it do? 

But still the communist philosophy of life gave me comfort 
and hope. How was it to be applied to India? We had not 
solved yet the problem of political freedom, and the national- 
istic outlook filled our minds. Were we to jump to economic 
freedom at the same time or take them in turn, however short 
the interval might be? World events as well as happenings 
in India were foi-cing the social issue to the front, and it 
seemed that political freedom could no longer be separated 
from it 

The policy of the British Government in India had resulted in 
ranging the socially reactionary classes in opposition to political 
independence. That was inevitable, and I welcomed the clearer 
demarcation of the various classes and groups in India. But 
was this fact appreciated by others? Apparently not by many. 
It was true that there were a handful of orthodox Commuiusts 
in some of the big cities and they were hostile to, and bitterly 
critical of, the national movement. The organised Labour 
movement, especially in Bombay and, to a lesser extent, in 
Calcutta, was also socialistic in a loose kind of way, but it was 
broken up into bits and suffering from the depression. Vague 
communistic and socialistic ideas had spread among the intel- 
ligentsia, even among intelligent Government officials. The 
younger men and women of the Congress, who used to read 
Bryce on Democracies and Morley and Keith and Mazzini, 
were now reading, when they could get them, books on social- 
ism and communism and Russia. The Meerut Conspiracy 
Case had helped greatly in directing people’s minds to these 
new ideas, and the world crisis had compelled attention. Every- 
where there was in evidence a new spirit of enquiry, a 
questioning, and a challenge to existing institutions. The 



STRUGGLE 


365 

general direction of the mental wind was obvious, but still it 
was a gentle breeze, unsure of itself. Some people flirted with 
Fascist ideas. A clear and definite ideology was lacking. 
Nationalism still was the dominating thought. 

It seemed clear to me that nationalism would remain the 
outstanding urge, till some measure of political freedom was 
attained. Because of this the Congress had been, and was still 
(apart from certain Labour circles), the most advanced organisa- 
tion in India, as it was far the most powerful. During the past 
thirteen years, under Gandhiji’s leadership, it had produced 
a wonderful awakening of the masses and, in spite of its vague 
bourgeois ideology, it had served a revolutionary purpose. It 
had not exhausted its utility yet, and was not likely to do so till 
the nationalist urge gave place to a social one. Future progress, 
both ideological and in action, must therefore be largely asso- 
ciated with the Congress, though other avenues could also be 
used. 

To desert the Congress seemed to me thus to cut oneself 
adrift from the vital urge of the nation, to blunt the most 
powerful weapon we had, and perhaps to waste energy in 
ineffective adventurism. And yet, was the Congress, constimted 
as it was, ever likely to adopt a really radical social solution? 
If such an issue was placed before it, the result was bound to 
be to split it into two or more parts, or at least to drive away 
large sections from it. That in itself was not undesirable or 
unwelcome if the issues became clearer and a strongly-knit 
group, either a majority or minority in the Congress, stood for 
a radical social programme. 

But Congress at present meant Gandhiji. What would he 
do? Ideologically he was sometimes amazingly backward, and 
yet in action he had been the greatest revolutionary of recent 
times in India. He was a unique personality, and it was im- 
possible to judge him by the usual standards, or even to apply 
the ordinary canons of logic to him. But because he was a 
revolutionary at bottom and was pledged to political inde- 
pendence for India, he was bound to play an uncompromising 
r61e till that independence was achieved. And in this very 
process he would release tremendous mass energies and would 
nimselfj I half hoped, advance step by step towards the social 
goal. 

The orthodox Communists in India and outside have fi>r 
many years past attacked Gandhiji and the Congress bitterly, 
and imputed all manner of base motives to the Congress 
.leaders. , Many of their theoretical criticisms of Congress, 



366 JAWAI-IARLAL NEHRU 

ideology were able and pointed, and subsequent events partly 
justified them. Some of the earlier Communist analyses of the 
general Indian political situation turned out to be remarkably 
correct. But as soon as they leave their general principles and 
enter into details, and especially when they consider the role 
of the Congress, they go hopelessly astray. One of the reasons 
for the weakness in numbers as well as influence of the Com- 
munists in India is that, instead of spreading a scientific know- 
ledge of communism and trying to convert people’s minds to 
it, they have largely concentrated on abuse of others. This 
has reacted on them and done them great injury. Most of 
them are used to working in labour areas, where a few slogans 
are usually enough to win over the workers. But mere slogans 
are- not enough for the intellectual, and they have not realised 
that in India to-day the middle-class intellectual is the most 
revolutionary force. Almost in spite of the orthodox Com- 
munists, many intellectuals have been drawn to communism, 
but even so there is a gulf between them. 

According to the Communists, the objective of the Congress 
leaders has been to bring mass pressure on the Government in 
order to obtain industrial and commercial concessions in the 
interests of Indian capitalists and zamindars. The task of the 
Congress is "to harness the economic and political discontent 
of the peasantry, the lower middle-class and the industrial 
working-class to the chariot of the mill-owners and financiers 
of Bombay, Ahmedabad and Calcutta.” The Indian capitalists 
are supposed to sit behind the scenes and issue orders to the 
Congress Working Committee first to organise a mass move- 
ment and, when it becomes too vast and dangerous, to suspend 
it or side-track it. Further, that the Congress leaders really do 
not want the British to go away, as they are retjuired to control 
and exploit a starving population, and the Indian middle class 
do not feel themselves equal to this. 

It is surprising that able Communists should believe this 
fantastic analysis, but believing this as they apparently do, it 
is not surprising that they should fail so remarkably in 
India. Their basic error seems to be that they judge the Indian 
National Movement fi:om European Labour standards, and 
used as they are to the repeated betrayals of the labour move- 
ment by the labour leaders, they apply the analogy to India. 
The Indian National Movement is obviously not a labour or 
proletarian movement. It is a bourgeois movement, as its very 
name implies, and its objective so far has been, not a change 
of the social order, but political independence. This objective 



STRUGGLE 


367 

may be criticised as not far-reaching enough, and nationalism 
itself may be condemned as out of date. But accepting the 
fundamental basis of the movement, it is absurd to say that 
the leaders betray the masses because tliey do not try to 
upset the land system or the capitalist system. They never 
claimed to do so. Some people in the Congress, and they are 
a growing number, want to change the land system and the 
capitalist system, but they cannot speak in the name of the 
Congress. 

It is true that the Indian capitalist classes (not the big zamin- 
dars and taluqadars) have profited greatly by the national 
movement because of British and other foreign boycotts, and 
the push given to swadeshi. This was inevitable, as every 
national movement encourages home industries and preaches 
boycotts. As a matter of fact the Bombay mill industry in a 
body, during tlic continuance of civil disobedience and when 
we were preaching the boycott of British goods, had the 
temerity to conclude a pact wdth Lancashire. From the point 
of view of the Congress, this was a gross betrayal of the 
national cause, and it was characterised as such. The repre- 
sentative of the Bombay mill-owners in the Assembly also 
consistently ran down the Congress and ‘ extremists ’ while most 
of us were in gaol. 

The part that many capitalist elements have played in India 
during the past few years has been scandalous, even from the 
Congress and nationalist view-point. Ottawa may have benefited 
temporarily some small groups, but it was bad in the interest 
of Indian industry as a whole, and made it even more sub- 
servient to British capital and industry. It was harmful to the 
masses, and it was negotiated while our struggle was being 
carried on, and many thousands were in prison. Every 
Dominion wrung out the hardest terms firom England, but 
India had the privilege of making almost a gift to her. During 
the last few years also financial adventurers have trafficked in 
gold and silver at India’s expense. 

As for the big zamindars and taluqadars, they ranged them- 
selves completdy against the Congress in the Round Table 
Conference, and they openly and aggressively declared them- 
selves on the side of the Government right through civil diso- 
bedience. It was with their help that Government passed 
repressive legislation in various provinces embodying the 
Ordinances. And in the United Provinces Council the great 
majority of the zamindar members voted against the release of 
civil disobedience prisoners. ' 



368 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

The idea that Gandhiji was forced to launch seemingly 
aggressive movements in 1921 and 1930 because of mass pres- 
sure, is also absolutely wrong. Mass stirrings there were, of 
course, but on both occasions it was Gandhiji who forced 
the pace. In 1921 he carried the Congress almost single- 
handed, and plunged it into non-co-operation. In 1930 it 
would have been ^uite impossible to have any aggressive and 
effective direct action movement if he had resisted it in any 
way. 

It is very unfortunate that foolish and ill-informed criticisms 
of a personal nature are made, because they divert attention 
from the real issues. To attack Gandhiji’s hona fides is to injure 
onself and one’s own cause, for to the millions of India he 
stands as the embodiment of truth, and any one who know.s 
him at all realises the passionate earnestness with which he is 
always seeking to do right. 

Communists in India have associated with the industrial 
workers of the big towns. They have little knowledge of, or 
contact with, the rural areas. The industrial workers, important 
as they are, and likely to be more so in the future, must take 
second place before the peasants, for the problem of to-day in 
India is the problem of the peasantry. Congress workers, on 
the other hand, have spread all over these rural areas and, 
in the ordinary course, the Congress must develop into a 
vast peasant organisation. Peasants are seldom revolutionary 
after their immediate objective is attained, and it is likely 
that some time in the future the usual problem of city versus 
village and industrial worker versus peasant will rise in India 
also. 

It has been my privilege to be associated very closely with 
a large number of Congress leaders and workers, and I could 
not wish for a finer set of men and women. And yet I have 
differed from them on vital issues, and often I have felt a little 
weary at finding that they do not appreciate or understand 
something that seems to me quite obvious. It was not due to 
want of intelligence, somehow we moved in different ideo- 
logical grooves. I realised how difficult it is to cross these 
boundaries suddenly. They constitute different philosophies of 
life, and we grow into them gradually and unconsciously. It 
is fiitile to blame the other pariy. Socialism involves a certain 
psychological outlook on life and its problems. It is more than 
mere logic. So also are the other outlooks based on heredity, 
upbringing, the unseen influences of the past and our present 
environments. Only life itself with its bitter lessons forces, us 



STRUGGLE 


369 

along new paths and ultimately, which is far harder, makes us 
think differently. Perhaps we may help a little in this process. 
And perhaps 

" On rencontre sa destinde 
Souvent par les chemins q’on prend pour I’eviier." 