MUNICIPAL WORK 

For two years I carried on, but with an ever-increasing reluc- 
tance, with the Allahabad Municipality. My term of office as 
chairman was for three years. Before the second year was well 
begun, I was trying to rid myself of the responsibility. I had 
liked the work, and given a great deal of my time and thought 
to it. I had met with a measure of success and gained the good- 
will of all my colleagues. Even the Provincial Government had 
overcome its political dislike of me to the extent of commend- 
ing some of my municipal activities. And yet I found myself 
hedged in, obstructed and prevented from doing anything really 
worth while. 

It was not deliberate obstruction on anybody’s part; indeed, 
I had a surprising amount of willing co-operation. But 
on the one side, there was the Government machine; on the 
other, the apathy of the members of the municipality as 
well as the public. The whole steel-frame of municipal adminis- 
tration, as erected by Government, prevented radical growth or 
innovation. The financial policy was such that the municipality 
was always dependent on the Government. Most radical schemes 
of taxation or social development were not permissible under 
the existing municipal laws. Even such schemes as were legally 
permissible had to be sanctioned by Government, and only the 
optimists, vnth a long stretch of years before them, could con- 
fidently ask for and await this sanction. It amazed me to find 
out how slowly and laboriously and inefficiently the machinery 
of Government moved when any job of social construction, or 
of nation building was concerned. There was no slowness or 
inefficiency, however, when a political opponent had to be 
curbed or struck down. The contrast was marked. 

The d^aftment of the Provindal Government dealing with 
Local Self-government was presided over by a Minister; but, as 
a rule, this presiding genius was supremely ignorant of muui- 
apal a^irs or, indeed, of any public afiTaixs. Indeed, he counted 
for little and was largely ignored by his own department, which 
ws run by the permanent officials of the Indian Civil Service, 
^ese officials were influenced by the prevailing conception of 
high officials in India that government was primarily a police 
function. Some idea of authoritarian paternalism coloured this 

* 4 * 



MUNICIPAL VSfOiv.*. 


H3 

conception, but there was hardly any appreciation of the neces- 
sity of social services on a large scale. 

Government is always a creditor of the municipalities, and, 
next to the police view, it is the creditor’s view that it takes of 
them. Are the debt instalments paid regularly? Is the munici- 
pality thoroughly solvent, and has it got a substantial balance in 
hand? All very necessary and relevant questions, but it is often 
overlooked that the municipality has some positive functions to 
perform— education, sanitation, etc.— and that it is not merely 
an organisation for borrowing money and paying it back at 
regular intervals. The social services provided by Indian muni- 
cipalities are few enough, but even these are curtailed where 
there is financial stringency, and usually the first to suffer is 
education. The ruling classes are not personally interested in 
municipal schools ; their children go to more up-to-date and 
expensive private schools, often receiving grants-in-aid from the 
State. 

Most Indian cities can be divided into two parts : the densely 
crowded city proper, and the widespread area with bungalows 
and cottages, each with a fairly extensive compound or garden, 
usually referred to by the English as the ‘ Civil Lines It is in 
these Civil Lines that the English offidals and business-men, as 
well as many upper middle-class Indians, professional men, 
officials, etc., live. The income of the municipality from the 
city proper is greater than that from the Civil Line.s, but the 
expenditure on the latter far exceeds the city expenditure. For 
the far wider area covered by the Civil Lines requires more 
roads, and they have to he repaired, cleaned-up, watered, and 
lighted; and the drainage, the water supply, and the sanitation 
system have to he more widespread. The city part is always 
grossly neglected, and, of course, the poorer parts of the '•ity 
are almost ignored; it has few good roads, and most of the 
narrow lanes are ill-lit and have no proper drainage or sanitation 
system. It puts up with all these disabilities patiently and seldom 
complains; and when it does complain, nothing much happens. 
Nearly all the Big Noises and Little Noises live in the Civil 
lines. 

To equalise the burden a little and to encourage improvements, 
I wanted to introduce a tax on land values. But- hardly had I 
made the suggestion when a protest came from a Government 
official, I think it was the Distria Magistrate, who pointed our 
that this would be in contravention of various enactments or. 
conditions of land tenure. Such a tax would obviously have 
fallen more heavily on the owners of the bungalows in the Civil 



144 jawahahlal nehru 

Lines. But Government approves thoroughly of an indirect 
tax like the octroi which crushes trade, raises prices of all goods, 
including foodstuffs, and falls most heavily on the poor. And 
this most unsocial and harmful levy has been the mainstay of 
most Indian municipalities, though, I believe, it is very slowly 
disappearing in the larger cities. ^ 

As chairman of the Municipality I had thus to deal with, on 
the one side, an impersonal authoritarian government machine 
which jogged along laboriously in the old ruts and obstinately 
refused either to move faster or in a different direction; and on 
the other, were my colleagues, the members, most of whom 
were equally in the ruts. Some of them were idealists, and took 
to their work with enthusiasm, but taken as a whole there was 
no vision, no passion for change or betterment. The old ways 
were good enough, why try experiments which might not come 
off? Even the idealists and enthusiasts gradually succumbed to 
the narcotic effects of dull routine. But one subject could alwa5rs 
be relied upon to infuse vigour into the members — ^the subject 
of patronage and appointments. This interest did not always 
result in greater efficiency. 

Year after year government resolutions and officials and some 
newspapers criticise municipalities and local boards, and point 
out their many failings. And from this the moral is drawn that 
democratic institutions are not suited to India. Their failings 
are obvious enough, but little attention is mid to the frame- 
work within whioi they have to function. This framework is 
neither democratic nor autocratic; it is a cross between the 
two, and has the disadvantages of both. That a central govern- 
ment should have certain powers of supervision and control may 
be admitted, but this can only fit in with a popular local body 
if the central government itsdf is democratic and responsive to 
public needs. Where this is not so, there will either be a tussle 
between the two or a tame submission to the will of the central 
authority, which thus exercises power without in any way 
shouldering responsibility. This is obviously unsatisfactory, and 
it takes away from the reality of popular control. Even the 
members of the Municipal Board look more to the central 
authority than to their constituents, and the public also often 
ignores the Board. Real social issues hardly ever come before 
the Board, chiefly because they lie outside its functions, and its 
most obvious activities are tax-collecting, which do not maV^ it 
excessively popular. 

The franchise for flbie focal bodies is also limited, and should 
be greatly lowered and extended. Even a great city corporation 



MUNiCIPAL WORK 


H5 

like the Bombay Corporation is, I believe, elected on a very re- 
stricted franchise. Some time back a resolution asking for wider 
franchise was actually defeated in the Corporation itself. Evi- 
dently the majority of councillors were satisfied with their lot 
and saw no reason to change it or risk it. 

Whatever the reasons, the fact remains that our local bodies 
are not, as a rule, shining examples of success and efficiency, 
though they might, even so, compare with some municipalities 
in advanced democratic countries. They are not usually corrupt ; 
they are just inefficient, and their weak point is nepotism, and 
their perspectives are all wrong. All this is natural enough ; for, 
democracy to be successful, must have a background of in- 
formed public opinion and a sense of responsibility. Instead, we 
have an aU-pervading atmosphere of authoritarianism, and the 
accompaniments of democracy are lacking. There is no mass 
educational system, no effort to build up public opinion based 
on knowledge. Inevitably public attention turns to personal or 
communal or other petty issues. 

The main interest of Government in municipal administra- 
tion is that ‘ politics ’ should be kept out. Any resolution of 
sympathy with the national movement is frowned upon; text- 
boolu which might have a nationalist flavour are not permitted 
in the municipal schools, even pictures of national leaders are 
not allowed there. A national fla^ has to be pulled down on pain 
of suppression of the municipality. Lately a concerted attempt ■ 
seems to have been made by several Provincial Governments to 
hound out Congressmen from the service of the municipal cor- 
porations and boards. Usually, pressure was enough to bring this 
about, accompanied as it was with the threat of withholding 
various Government grants for municipal education or other 
purposes. But in some cases, notably that of the Calcutta Cor- 
poration,^ l^slation has been promoted to keep out all persons 
who may have gone to prison in connection with civil dis- 
obedience or any other political movement against the Govern- 
ment. The object was purely political ; there was no question 
of incompetence or unfimess for the job. 

These few instances show how much freedom our municipal 
and district boards have, how little democratic they are. The 
attempt to keep out political opponents from all municipal and 
local services — of course they dxd not go in for direct govern- 
ment service — deserves a little attention. It is esrimated that 
about three htmdred thousand persons have gone to prison at 
various times during the past fourteen years; and there can he 
no doubt that, politics apart, these three hundred thousand 

i 



146 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

included some of the most dynamic and idealistic, the most 
socially minded and selfless people in India. They had push 
and energy and the ideal of service to a cause. They were thus 
the best material from which a public department or utility 
service could draw its employees. And yet Government has 
made every effort, even to the extent of passing laws, to keep 
out these people, and so to punish them and those who sym- 
pathised with them. It prefers and pushes on the lap-dog breed, 
and then complains of the inefficiency of our local bodies. And 
although politics are said to be outside the province of local 
bodies, Government has no objection whatever to their indulg- 
ing in politics in support of itself. Teachers in local board schools 
have been practically compelled, for fear of losing their jobs, 
to go out in the villages to do propaganda on behalf of Govern- 
ment. 

During the last fifteen years Congress workers have had to face 
many difficult positions; they have shouldered heavy responsi- 
bilities; they have, after all, combated, not without success, a 
powerful and entrenched Government. This hard course of 
training has given them self-reliance and efficiency and strength 
to persevere; it has provided them with the very qualities of 
which a long and emasculating course of authoritarian govern- 
ment had deprived the Indian people. Of course, the Congress 
movement, like all mass movements, had, and has, many un- 
desirables— fixils, inefficients, and worse people. But I have no 
doubt whatevCT that an average Congress worker is likely to be 
far more efficient and dynamic than another person of aitnil^ir 
qualifications. 

There is one aspect of this matter which Government and its 
advisers perhaps do not appreciate. The attempt to deprive 
Congress workers of all jobs and to shut avenues of employ- 
ment to them is welcomed by the real revolutionary. The 
average Congressman is notoriously not a revolutionary, and 
after a period of semi-revolutionary action he resumes his hum- 
drum life ^d activities. He gets entangled either in his business 
or profession or in the mazes of local politics. Larger issues 
^m to fade off in his mind, and revolutionary ardour, such as 
it was, subsides. Muscle turns to fat, and spirit to a love of 
security. Because of this inevitable tendency of middle-class 
workers, it has always been the effort of advanced and revolu- 
tiona^-minded Congressmen to prevent their comrades ftom 
entering the constitutional mazes of the legislatures and the 
meal bodies, or accepting whole-time jobs which prevent them 
from effective action. The Government has, however, now romp 



MUNICIPAL WORK 


147 

to their help to some extent by making it a little more difEcult 
for the Congress worker to get a job^ and it is thus likely that he 
will retain some of his revolutionary ardour or even add to it. 

After a year or more of fnunidpal work I felt that I was not 
utilising my energies to the best advantage there. The most I 
could do was to speed-up work and make it a little more efficient. 
I could not push through any worth-while change. I wanted to 
resign from the chairmanship, but all the members of the Board 
pressed me to stay. I had received uniform kindness and courtesy 
from them, and I found it hard to refuse. At the end of my 
second year, however, I finally resigned. 

This was in 1925. In the autumn of that year my wife fell 
seriously ill, and for many months she lay in a Lucknow hospital. 
The Congress was held that year at Cawnpore, and, somewhat 
distracted, I rushed backwards and forwards between Allahabad, 
Cawnpore, and Lucknow. (I was still General Secretary of the 
Congress.) 

Further treatment in Switzerland was recommended for my 
wife. I welcomed the idea, for I wanted an excuse to go out of 
India myself. My mind was befogged, and no dear path was 
visible; and I thought that, perhaps, if I was far from India I 
could see .things in better perspective and lighten up the dark 
comers of my mind. 

At the beginning of March 1926 we sailed, my wife, our 
daughter and I, from Bombay for Venice. With us on the same 
boat went also my sister and brother-in-law, Ranjit S. Pandit. 
They had planned thdr European trip long before the question 
of our going had arisen. 