THEOSOPHY 

When I was ten years old we changed over to a new and much 
bigger house which my father named ' Anand Bhawan This 
house had a big garden and a swimming pool and I was full of 
excitement at the fresh discoveries I was continually making. 
Additional buildings were put up and there was a great deal of 
digging and construction and I loved to watch the labourers at 
work. 

There was a large swimming pool in the house and. soon I 
learnt to swim and felt completely at home in and under the 
water. During the long and hot summer days I would go for a 
dip at all odd hours, many times a day. In the evening many 
fiiends of my father’s came to the pool. It was a novelty, and the 
electric light that had been installed there and in the house was an 
innovation for Allahabad in those days. I enjoyed myself hugely 
during these bathing parties and an unfailing joy was to frighten, 
by pushing or pullmg, those who did not know how to swim. 
I remember, particularly. Dr. Tej Bahadur Sapru who was then 
a junior at Ae Allahabad Bar. He knew no swimming and had 
no intention of learning it. He would sit on the first step in 
fifteen inches of water, refusing absolutely to go forward even to 
the second step, and shouting loudly if anyone tried to move him. 
My father himsdf was no swimmer, but he could just manage 
to go the length of the pool with set teeth and violent and 
exhausting effort. 

The Boer War was then going on and this interested me and 
all my sympathies were with the Boers. I began to read .the 
newspapers to get news of the fighting. 

A domestic event, however, just then absorbed my attention. 
This was the birth of a little sister. I had long n ou ri s hed a secret 
grievance at not having any brothers or sisters when everybody 
else seemed to have them, and the prospect of having at last a 
baby brother or sister all to myself was exhilarating. Father was 
then in Europe. I remember waiting anxiously in the verandah 
for the event. One of the doctors came and told me of it and 
added, presumably as a jokfe, that I must be glad that it was not 
a boy who would have taken a share in my patrimony., I felt 
bitter and angry at the thought that any one should imagine 
that I could harbour such a vile notion. 

19 



THEOSOPHY 


13 

Father's visits to Europe led to an internal storm in the Kash- 
miri Brahman comm-unity in india. He refused to perform any 
prayashchit or purification ceremony on his return. Some years 
previously another Kashmiri Brahman, Pandit Bishan Narayan 
Dar, who later became a President of the Congress, had gone 
to England to be called to the Bar. On his return the orthodox 
members of the community had refused to have anything to 
do with him and he was outcast, although he performed the 
prayashchit ceremony. This had resulted in the splitting up of 
the community into two more or less equal halves. Many Kash- 
miri young men went subsequently to Europe for their studies 
and on their return joined the reformist section, but only after 
a formal ceremony of purification. This ceremony itself was a 
bit of a farce and there was little of religion in it. It merely 
signified an outward conformity and a submission to the group 
will. Having done so, each person indulged in all manner of 
heterodox activities and mixed and fed with non-Brahmans and 
non-Hindus. 

Father went a step further and refused to go through any 
ceremony or to submit in any way, even outwartfiy and formally, 
to a so-called purification. A great deal of beat was generated, 
chiefly becaiae of father’s aggressive and rather disd^mfiil atti- 
tude, and ultimately a consid^ble number of Kashmiris joined 
father and so a third group was formed. .Within a few years 
these groups gradually merged into one another as ideas changed 
and the old restrictions fell. Large numbers of Kashmiri young 
men and girls have visited Europe or America for their studies 
and no question has arisen of their performing any ceremonies 
on their return. Food restrictions have almost entirely gone, 
except in the case of a handful of orthodox people, chiefly old 
ladies, and inter-dining with non-Kashmiris, Muslims and non- 
Indians is conunon. Purdah, the seclusion of women, has dis- 
appeared among Kashmiris even as regards other communities. 
The last push to this was given by the political upheaval of 1930. 
Inter-marriage with other communities is still not popular, 
although (increasingly) instances occur. Both my sisters have 
married non-Kashn^s and a young member of our family has 
recently married a Hungarian girl. The objection to inter- 
marriage with others is not based on rdigion; it is largely racial. 
There is a desire among many Kashimris to preserve our group 
identity and our distinctive Aryan features, and a fear that we 
shall lose these in the sea of Indian and non-Indian humanity. 
We are small in numbers in this vast country. 

Probably the first Kashmiri Brahman in modem times to visit 



H JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

Western countries was Mirza Mohan Lai ‘ Kashmerian ’ (as he 
called himself) about a hundred years ago. He was a bright and 
handsome young man, a student of the Mission College at Delhi, 
and he was chosen to accompany a British mission to Kabul as 
Persian interpreter. Later he travelled all over Central Asia and 
Persia and wherever he went he managed to take a new wife 
unto himself, usually marrying in the highest circles. He became 
a Muslim and in Persia married a girl of the royal family, hence 
his title of Mirza. He visited Europe also and was presented to 
the young Queen Victoria. He has written delightful memoirs 
and accounts of his travels. 

When I was about eleven a new resident tutor, Ferdinand T. 
Brooks, came and took charge of me. He was partly Irish (on his 
father’s side) and his mother had been a Frenchwoman or a 
Belgian. He was a keen theosophist who had been recommended 
to my father by Mrs. Annie Besant. For nearly three years he 
was with me and in many ways he influenced me greatly. The 
only other tutor I had at the time was a dear old Pandit who was 
sMposed to teach me Hindi and Sanskrit. After many years’ 
effort the Pandit managed to teach me extraordinarily little, so 
little that I can only measure my pitiful knowledge of Sanskrit 
with the Latin I learnt subsequently at Harrow. The fault no 
doubt was mine. I am not good at languages, and grammar has 
had no attraction for me whatever. 

F. T. Brooks developed in me a taste for reading and I read a 
great many English books, though rather aimlessly. I was well 
up m children’s and boys’ literature; the Lewis Carroll books 
were great favourites, and The Jungle Books and Kim. I was 
^_mated by Gustave Dora’s illustrations to Don Quixote, and 
Fridtjof hJansens Farthest North opened out a new realm of 
adventure to me. I remember reading many of the novels of 
wott, Dickens and Thackeray, H. G. Wells’s romances, Mark 
Twain, and the Sherlock Hohnes stories. I was thrilled by the 
Prtsoner of Zenda, and Jerome K. Jerome’.s Three Men in a Boat 
WM for me the last word in humour. Another book stands out 
niemory; it was Du Maurier’s Trilby, also Peter 
Ibbetson. I also developed a liking for poetry, a liking which has 
to S(^e extent radured and survived the many other changes 
to which I have been subject. ° 

Brooks also initiated me into the mysteries of science. Wc 
rigged up a little laboratory and there I used to spend long and 
SASdst^*^* working out experiments in elementary physics 

Apart from my studies, F. T. Brooks brought a new influence 



THEOSOPHY 


*5 

to bear upon me which affected me powerfully for a while. This 
was Theosophy. He used to have weekly meetings of theoso- 
phists in his rooms and I attended them and gradually imbibed 
theosophical phraseology and ideas. There were metaphysical 
arguments, and discussions about reincarnation and the astral 
and other super-natural bodies, and auras, and the doctrine of 
Karma, and references not only to big books by Madame 
Blavatsky and other Theoaophists but to the Hindu scriptures, 
the Buddhist “ Dhamma-pada’*, Pythagoras, Apollonius of 
Tyana, and various philosophers and mystics. I did not under- 
stand much that was said but it all sounded very mysterious and 
fascinating and I felt that here was the key to the secrets of the 
tmiverse. For the first time I began to think, consciously and 
deliberately, of religion and other worlds. The Hindu religion 
especially went up in my estimation; not the ritual or ceremonial 
part, but its great books, the " Upanishads" and the "Bhagavad 
Gita ”. I did not understand them, of course, but they seemed very 
wonderful. I dreamt of astral bodies and imagined myself flying 
vast distances. This dream of flying high up in the air (without 
any appliance) has indeed been a frequent one throughout my 
life; and sometimes it has been vivid and realistic and the country- 
side seemed to lie underneath me in a vast panorama. I do not 
know how the modem interpreters of dreams, Freud and others, 
would interpret this dream. 

Mrs. Annie Besant visited Allahabad in those days and 
delivered several addresses on theosophical subjects. I was deeply 
moved by her oratory and returned from her speeches dazed 
and as in a dream. I decided to join the Theosophical Society, 
although I was only thirteen then. When I went to ask father’s 
permission he laughingly gave it; he did not seem to attach 
importance to the subject either way. I was a little hurt by his 
lack of feeling. Great as he was in many ways in my eyes, I felt 
that he was lacking in spirituality. As a matter of fact he was 
an old theosophist, having joined the Sodety in its early days 
when Madame Blavatsky was in India. Curiosity probably led 
him to it more than religion, and he soon dropped out of it, but 
some of his friends, who had joined with him, persevered and 
rose high in the spiritual hierarchy of the Society. 

So I became a member of the Theosophical Sodety at thirteen 
and Mrs. Besant herself performed the ceremony of initiation, 
which consisted of good advice and instruction in some mys- 
terious signs, pmbably a relic of freemasonry. I was thrilled. I 
attended the Theosophical Convention at Benares and saw old 
Colonel Olrott with hi® fine beard. 



l6 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

It is difficult to realise what one looked like or felt like in one’s 
boyhood, thirty years ago. But I have a fairly strong impression 
that during these theosophical days of mine I developed the 
flat and insipid look which sometimes denotes piety and which 
is (or was) often to be seen among theosophist men and women. 
I was smug, with a feeUng of being one-of-the-elect, and alto- 
gether I must have been a thoroughly undesirable and unpleasant 
companion for any boy or girl of my age. 

Soon after F. T. Brooks left me I lost touch with Theosophy, 
and in a remarkably short time (partly because I went to school 
in England) Theosophy left my life completely. But I have no 
doubt that those years with F. T. Brooks left a deep impress upon 
me and I feel that I owe a debt to him and to Theosophy. But 
I am afraid that theosophists have since then gone down in my 
estimation. Instead of the chosen ones they seem to be very 
ordinary folk, liking security better than risk, a soft job more 
than the martyr’s lot. But, for Mrs. Besant, I always had the 
warmest admiration. 

The next important event that I remember affecting me was 
the Russo-Japanese War. Japanese victories stirred up my 
enthusiasm and I waited eagerly for the papers for fresh news 
daily. I invested in a large number of books on Japan and tried 
to read some of them. I felt rather lost in Japanese history, but 
I liked the knightly tales of old Japan and the pleasant prose of 
Lafeadio Hearn. 

Nationalistic ideas filled my mind. I mused of Indian freedom 
and Asiatic freedom fi:om the thraldom of Europe. I dreamt of 
brave deeds, of how, sword in hand, I would fight for India and 
help in fireeing her. 

I was fourteen. Changes were taking place in our house. My 
older cousins, having become professional men, were leaving the 
common home and setting up their own households separately. 
Fresh thoughts and vague fandes were floating in my mind and 
I began to take a little more interest in the opposite sex. I still 
preferred the company of boys and tliought it a little beneath 
my dignity to mix with groups of girls. But sometimes at 
Kashmiti parties, where pretty girls were not lacking, or else- 
where, a glance or a touch would thrill me. 

In May 1905, when I was fifteen, we set sail for England. 
Father and mother, my baby sister and I, we all went together. 