NEGOTIATIONS AT YERAVDA 

My father’s arrest was accompanied by, or immediately preceded 
by, the declaration of the Congress Working Committee as an 
unlawful body. This led to a new development outside — the 
Committee would be arrested en bloc when it was having a 
meeting. Substitute members were added to it, under the 
authority given to the Acting-Presidents, and in this way 
several women became acting members. Kamala was one of 
them. 

Father was in very poor health when he came to gaol, and 
the conditions in which he was kept there were of extreme 
discomfort. This was not intentional on the part of the Govern- 
ment, for they were prepared to do what they could to lessen 
those discomforts. But they could not do much in Naini Prison. 
Four of us were now crowded together in the four tiny cells of 
my barrack. It was suggested by the superintendent of the 
prison that father might be kept in some other part of the gaol 
where he might have a little more room, but we preferred to 
be together, so that some of us could attend personally to his 
comforts. 

The monsoon was just beginning and it wa.H not particularly 
easy to keep perfectly dry even inside the cells, for the raim 
water came through the roof occasionally and dripped in 
various places. At night it was alw^s a problem where to put 
father’s bed, in the little loft. by jft. veranda attached to our 
cell, in order to avoid the rain. Sometimes he had fever. The 
gaol authorities ultimately decided to build an additional 
veranda, a fine broad one, attached to our cell. This veranda 
was built and it was a great improvement, but father did not 
profit by it much, as he was disenarged soon after it was ready. 
Those of us who continued to live in that barrack took full 
advantage of it later. 

Towards the end of July there was a great deal of talk about 
Sir Tej Bahadur Sapru and Mr, M. R. Jayakar, endeavouring 
to bnng about peace between the Congress and the Goverm 
ment. We read about it in a daily newspaper, which was sup- 
plied as a special favour to father. We read in this paper the 
correspondence that had passed between the Viceroy, Lord 
Irwm, and Messrs. Sapru and Jayakar, and then we learnt that 

»a6 



NEGOTIATIONS AT YERAVDA 2*7 

the so-called ‘ peacemakers ’ had visited Gandhiji. We did not 
know at all what had induced them to take this initiative, or 
what they were driving at. Later we were told by them that 
they had been encouraged to proceed in the matter because of 
a brief statement that father had agreed to in Bombay a few 
days before his arrest. The statement had been drafted by Mr. 
Slocombe (a correspondent of the London Daily Herald then 
in India) after a conversation with my father, and had been 
approved by the latter. This statement^ considered the possi- 
bility of the Congress withdrawing the civil disobedience cam- 
paign, subject to the Government agreeing to a number of 
conditions. It was a vague and tentative affair, and it made it 
quite clear that even those vague conditions could not be con- 
sidered till father had a chance of consulting Gandhiji and me. 
I came in as the President of the Congress for the year. I 
remember father mentioning it to me in Naini, after his arrest, 
and adding that he was rather sorry that he had given such a 
vague statement in a huriy, as it was possible that it might be 
misunderstood. It was indeed misunderstood, as even the most 
exact and explicit statements are likely to be, by people whose 
way of thinking is entirely different. 

Sir Tej Bahadur Sapru and Mr. Jayakar suddenly descended 
on us in Naini Prison, on July 27th, with a note from Gandhiji. 

* Statement, dated Bombay, June 25, 1930, agreed to by Pandit 
Motilal Nehru: “If in certain drcurastances die British Govern- 
ment and the Government of India, although unable to anticipate 
the recommendations that may in perfect freedom be made by the 
Round Table Conference or the attitude which the British Parlia- 
ment may reserve for such recommendations, would nevertheless 
be willing to give a private assurance that they would support 'the 
demand for full responsible government for India, subject to such 
mutual adjustments and terms of transfer as are required by the 
special needs ^nd conditions of India and by her long association 
with Great Britain and as may be decided by the Round Table 
Conference! Pandit Motilal Nehru would undertake to take per- 
sonally stich an assurance — or the indication rcceiv^ from a 
responsible third party that such an assurance wouldbe forth- 
coming — to Mr. Gandhi and to Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru. If such 
an assurance were offered and accepted it would render possible 
a general measure of conciliation which would entail the simul- 
taneous calling off of the dvil disobedience movement, the cessation 
of the Government’s present repressive policy and a general 
measure of amnesty for political prisoners, and would be followed 
by Congress participation in the Round Table Conference on terms 
to be mutually agreed upon.” '' 



228 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

On that day and the next we had long interviews with them, 
which were very exhausting for father as he was actually 
feverish then. We talked and argued in a circle, hardly under- 
standing each other’s language or thought, so great was the 
difference in political outlook. It was obvious to us that there 
was not the faintest chance of any peace between the Congress 
. and the Government as matters stood. We refused to make any 
suggestions without first consulting our colleagues of the Work- 
ing Committee, especially Gandhiji. And we wrote something 
to this effect to Gandhiji. 

Eleven days later, on August 8th, Dr. Saprii came to see us 
again with the Viceroy’s reply. The Viceroy had no objection 
to our going to Yeravda (the prison in Poona where Gandhiji 
was kept) but he and his Council could not allow us to meet 
Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel, Maulana Abul Kalam Azad and other 
members of the Working Committee who were outside and 
were still carrying on an active campaign against the Govern- 
ment. Dr. Sapru asked us if we were prepared to go to Yeravda 
under these circumstances. We told him that we had and could 
have no objection to going to see Gandhiji at any time, but as 
we could not meet our other colleagues there was no chance of 
our deciding anything finally. That very day’s paper (or perhaps 
that of the day before) had given the news of a fierce lathi 
charge in Bombay, and the arrest there of Vallabhbhai Patel, 
Malaviyaji, Tasadduk Sherwani and others as permanent or 
acting members of the Working Committee. We pointed out 
to Dr. Sapru that this had not improved matters, and we asked 
him to make the position quite clear to the Viceroy. Dr. Sapru, 
however, said that there would be no harm, in our meeting 
Gandhiji as soon as possible. Wc had previously pointed out 
to him that in case we were sent to Yeravda, our colleague. 
Dr. Syed Mahmud, who was with us at Naini, should also go 
there as he was the Congress secretary. 

Two days later, on August loth, the three of us— father, 
Mahmud and I— were sent by a special train from Naini to 
Poon^ Our train did not stop at the big stations; we rushed 
past them, stopping at the small wayside ones. Still news of us 
travelled ahead, and large crowds gathered both at the stations 
where we stopped and at those where we did not stop. We 
reached Kirkee, near Poona, late at night on the i ith. 

We expected to be kept in the same barrack as Gandhiji or, at 
least, to see him soon. That was the arrangement made by the 
Supenntendent of Yeravda prison, but at the last moment he 
had to change his arrangements because of some instructions 



NEGOTIATIONS AT YERAVDA 


329 


received through the police officer who had accompanied us 
from Naini. Lt.-Col. Martin, the Superintendent, would not 
tell us the secret, but a little subtle questioning by fatlier made 
it clear to us that the idea was that we should not meet Gand- 
hiji (for the first time, at least) except in the presence of Messrs. 
Sapru and Jayakar. It was feared that a previous meeting 
between us might stiffen our attitude, or make us hold together 
more firmly than otherwise. So that night and the whole of 
the next day and night, we were kept apart in a separate 
barrack, and father was exceedingly irritated at this. It was 
tantalising and annoying to be there and not to be allowed to 
see Candhiji, to meet whom he had come all the way from 
Naini. On the forenoon of the 13th we were told that Sir Tej 
Bahadur Sapru and Mr. Jayakar had arrived, and Mr. Gandhi 
had joined them in the prison office, and we were asked to go 
there ourselves. Father refused to go, and only agreed after 
various explanations and apologies, and on condition that we 
should see Gandhiji alone first. At our joint request later, 
Vallabhbhai Patel and Jairamdas Doulatram, who had both 
been brought to Yeravda, as well as Sarojini Naidu, who was 
kept in the Women’s Prison opposite, were allowed to join our 
conference. Tliat evening father, Mahmud and I were moved 
to Gandhiji’s enclosure and there we remained for the rest of 
our stay in Yeravda. Vallabhbhai Patel and Jairamdas Doulat* 
ram were also brought there for those few days to enable us to 
consult together. 

Our conferences in the prison office with Messrs. Sapru and 
Jayakar lasted three days, the 13th, 14th and 15th August, and 
we exchanged letters giving expression to our views and indi- 
cating the minimum conditions necessary to enable us to 
withmaw civil disobedience and offer co-operation to the 
Government. Thbse letters were subsequently published in the 
newspapers.^ 

The strain of these conferences had told on father, and on 
the 1 6th he suddenly got high fever. This delayed our return, 
and we started back on the night of the rpth, again by special 
train, for Naini. Every effort was made by the Boinbay Govern- 
ment to provide a comfortable journey for father, and even in 
Yeravda, during our brief stay there, his comforts were studied. 
I remember an amusing incident on the night of our arrival at 
Yeravda, Colonel Martin, the Superintendent, asked ffither 

^ The letter containing these nunimum conditions is given in 
Appendix B. (p. 603). 



230 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

what kind of food he would like. Father told him that he look 
very simple and light food, and then he enumerated his various 
requirements from early morning tea in bed to dinner at night. 
(In Naini we used to get food for him daily from home.) The 
list father gave in all innocence and simplicity consisted cer- 
tainly of light foods, but it was impressive. Very probably at 
the Ritz or the Savoy it would have been considered simple 
and ordinary food, as father himself was convinced that it was. 
But in Yeravda Prison it seemed strange and far away and most 
inappropriate. Mahmud and I were highly amused to watch 
the expression on Colonel Martin’s face as he listened to father’s 
numerous and expensive requirements in the way of food. For 
a long time he had had in his keeping the greatest and most 
famous of India’s leaders, and all that he had required in the 
way of food was goat’s milk, dates, and perhaps oranges occa- 
sionally. The new type of leader that had come to him was 
very dilferent. 

During our journey back from Poona to Naini we again 
rushed by the big stations and stopped in out-of-the-way places. 
But the crowds were larger still, filling the platfo'rms and some- 
times even swarming over the railway lines, especially at Harda, 
Itarsi and SohagpUr. Accidents were narrowly averted. 

Father’s condition was rapidly deteriorating. Many doctors 
came to examine him, his own doctors as well as doctors sent 
on behalf of ^e Provincial Government. It was obvious that 
gaol was the worst place for him and there could be no proper 
treatment there. And yet, when a suggestion was made by 
some friend in the Press that he should be released because of 
his illness, he was irritated, as he thought that people might 
think that the suggestion came from him. He even went to the 
length of sending a telegram to Lord Irwin, saying that he did 
hot want to be released as a special favour. But his condition 
was growing worse from day to day; he was losing weight 
rapidly, and , physically he was a shadow of himself On the 
8th September he was discharged after exactly ten weeks of 
prison. 

Our barrack became a dull and Ufrless place after his depar- 
ture. There was so much to be done when he was with us, 
little services to add to his comfort, and all of us— -Mahmud, 
Narmada. Prasad and I — filled our days with this joyful service, 
I had given up newar weaving, I spun very little, and I did not 
have much time for books either. And now that he was gone, 
we reverted rather heavily and joylessly to the old routine. 
Even the daily newspaper stopped after father's release. Four 



NEGOTIATIONS AT YERAVDA 331 

or five days later my brother-in-law, Ranjit S. Pandit, was 
arrested, and he joined us in our barrack. 

A month later, on October iith, I was discharged on the 
expiry of six months’ sentence. I knew I would have little fi^ee- 
dom, for the struggle was going on and becoming more intense. 
The attempts of the ' peacemakers ’ — ^Messrs. Sapru and Jaya- 
kar — ^had failed. On the very day I was discharged one or two 
more ordinances were announced. I was glad to be out and 
eager to do something effective during my short spell of free- 
dom. 

Kamala was in Allahabad then, busy with her Congress work; 
father was under treatment at Mussoorie, and my mother and 
sisters were with him. I spent a busy day and a half in Alla- 
habad before going up to Mussoorie myself with Kamala. The 
great question before us then, was whether a no-tax campaign . 
in the rural areas should be started or not. The time for rent 
collection and payment of revenue was close at hand, and, in 
any event, collections were going to be difficult because of the 
tremendous fall in the prices of agricultural produce. The 
world slump was now very evident in India. 

It seemed an ideal opjjortunity for a no-tax campaign, both as 
a part of the general civil disobedience movement and, iridepen- 
dently, on its own merits. It was manifestly impossible both for 
landlords and tenants to pay up the full demand out of that 
year’s produce. They had to fell back on old reserves, if they 
had any, or borrow. The zamindars usually had something to 
fell back upon, or could borrow more easily. The average 
tenant, always on the verge of destitution and starvation, had 
nothing to fall back upon. In any democratic country, or where 
the agriculturists were properly organised and had influence, it 
would have been quite impossible, under those circumstances, 
to make them pay much. In India their influence was negli- 
gible, except in so far as the Congress, in some parts of me 
country, stood for them; and except, of course, for the ever- 
present fear of peasant risings when the situation became in- 
tolerable for them. But they had been trained for generations 
past to stand almost anything without much murmuring. 

In Gujrat, and in some other parts, there were no-tax cam- 
paigns in progress at the time, but they were almost wholly , 
political canmaigns, started as parts of the civil disobedience' 
movement. 'These were areas where the ryotwari system pre- 
,. vailed and the peasant proprietors dealt directly with the 
Government. Their non-payment of revenue affected the State 
immediately. The United Provinces were different, for we were 



JAWAHARLAL NICIIRU 


■> no 
"J" 

a zamindari and tahiqadari area, and there were middlemen 
between the cultivator and the State. If the tenants stopped 
paying their rent the landlord suffered immediately. A class 
issue also was thus raised. The Congress, as a whole, was a 
purely nationalist body, and included many middling zamin- 
dars and a few of the larger ones also. Its leaders were terribly 
afraid of doing anything which might raise this class issue or 
irritate the zamindar elements. So, right through the first six 
months of civil disobedience, they avoided calling for a general 
no-tax campaign in the rural areas, although conditions for this 
seemed to me to be ripe. I was not afraid of raising the class 
issue in this way or any other way, but I recognised that the 
Congress, being what it was, could not then patronise class 
conflict. It could, however, call upon both parties, zamindars 
and tenants, not to pay. The average zamindar would probably 
pay up the revenue demanded from him by the Government, 
but that would be his fault. 

When I came out of gaol in October, both political and 
economic conditions seemed to me to be crying out for a no-tax 
campaign in rural areas. The economic difliculties of the agri- 
culturists were obvious enough. Politically, our civil disobedi- 
ence activities, though still flourishing everywhere, were getting 
a bit stale. People went on going to gaol in small numbers, and 
sometimes in large groups, but the sting had gone from the 
atmosphere. The cities and the middle classes were a bit tired 
of the hartals and processions. Obviously something was needed 
to liven things up, a fresh infusion of blood was necessary. 
Where could this come from except from the peasantry?— and 
the reserve stocks there were enormous. It would again become 
a mass movement touching the vital interests of the masses, 
and, what was to me very important, would raise social issues. 

We discussed these matters, my colleagues and I, during tlte 
brief day and a half I was at Allahabad. At short notice we 
convened a meeting there of the executive of our Provincial 
Congress Committee, and, after long debate, we decided to 
^nction a^no-tax campaign, making it permissive for any dis- 
trict to take it up. We did not declare it ourselves in any part 
of the province, and the Executive Council made it apply to 
zammdars as well as tenants, to avoid the class issue if possible. 
We knew, of course, that the main response would come from 
, the peasantry. 

Having got this permission to go ahead, our district of Alla- 
habad wanted to take the first step. We decided to convene a 
representative kisan or peasants’ conference of the district a 



NEGOTIATIONS AT YERAVDA 


333 

week later, to give the new campaign a push. I felt that I had 
done a good first day’s work alter release from gaol. I added to 
it a big mass meeting in Allahabad city, where I spoke at 
length. It was for this speech that I was subsequently convicted 
again. 

And then, on October 13th, Kamala and I went off to Mus- 
soorie to spend three days with father. He was looking just a 
little better, and I was happy to think that he had turned the 
corner and was getting well. I. remember those quiet and de- 
lightful three days well; it was good to be back in the family. 
Indira, my daughter, was there; and my three little nieces, my 
sister’s daughters. I would play with the children and some- 
times we would march bravely round the house in a stately 
procession, led, flag in hand, Ijy the youngest, aged three or 
four, singing Jhanda uncha rahe hamara, our flag song. And 
those three days were the last I was to have with father before 
his fatal illness came to snatch him away from me. 

Expecting my re-arrest soon, and desiring perhaps to see a 
little more pf me, father suddenly decided to return to Alla- 
habad also. Kamala and I were going down from Mussoorie on 
the 17 th October to be in time for the Peasant Conference at 
Allahabad on the 19th. Father arranged to start with the 
others on the i8th, the day after us. 

We had a somewhat exciting journey back, Kamala and I. 
At Dchra Dun an order under Section 144 Criminal Procedure 
Code was served on me almost as I was leaving. At Lucknow 
we got off for a few hours, and I learnt that another order under 
Section 144 awaited me there, but it was not actually served on 
me, as the police officer could not reach me owing to the large 
crowds. I was presented with an address by the Municipality, 
and then we left by car for Allahabad, stopping at various places 
en route to address some peasant gatherings. We reached Alla- 
habad on the night of the i8th. 

The morning of the 19th brought yet another order under 
Section 144 for me I The Government was evidently hot on my 
trail and my hours were numbered. I was anxious to attend 
the kisan conference before my re-arrest. We called this confer- 
ence a private one of delegates only, and so it was, and did 
not allow outsiders to come in. It was very representative of 
Allahabad District, and, as far as I remember, about 1,600 dele- 
gates were present. The conference decided very enthusiastic- 
ally to start the no-tax campaign in the district. There was 
some hesitation among our prinapal workers, some doubt about 
the success of such a yenture, for the influence and the power 



334 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

of the big zamiudars to terrorise, backed as this was by the 
Government, was very great, and they wondered if the 
peasantry would be able to withstand this. But there was no 
hesitation or doubt in the minds of the sixteen hundred and 
odd peasants of all degrees who were present, or at any rate it 
was not apparent. I was one of the speakers at the conference. 
I do not know if thereby I committed a breach of the Section 
144 order which had forbidden me from speaking in public. 

I then went to the station to receive my father and the rest 
of the famhy. The train was late, and, immediately after their 
arrival, I left them to attend a public meeting, a joint affair of 
the peasants, who had come from the surrounding villages, and 
the townspeople. Kamala and I were returning from this meet- 
ing, thoroughly tired out, after 8 p,m. I was looking forward 
to a talk with father, and I knew that he was waiting for me, 
for we had hardly spoken to each other since his return. On 
our way back our car was stopped almost in sight of our 
house, and I was arrested and carried off across the river Jumna 
to my old quarters in Naini. Kamala went on, alqne, to Anand 
Bhawan to inform the waiting family of this new development; 
and, at the stroke of nine, I re-entered the great gate of Naini 
Prison. 