COMMUNALISM RAMPANT 

My illness in the autumn of 1923. after my return from Nabha 
prison, when I had a bout with the typhus germ, was a novel 
experience for me. I was unused to illness or lying in bed with 
fever or physical weakness. I was a little proud of my health, 
and I objected to the general valetudinarian attitude that was 
fairly common in India. My youth aiid good constitution pulled 
me through, but, after the crisis was over, I lay long in bed in an 
enfeebled condition, slowly working my way to health. And 
during this period I felt a strange detachment from my surround- 
ings and my day-to-day work, and I' viewed all this from a 
distance, apart. I felt as if I had extricated myself from the trees 
and could see the wood as a whole; my mind seemed clearer and 
more peaceful than it had previously been. I suppose this experi- 
ence, or something like it, is common enough to those who have 
passed through severe illness. But for me it was in the nature of 
a spiritual experiencc-^I use the word not in a narrow religious 
sense — and it influenced me considerably. I felt lifted out or the 
emotional atmosphere of our politics and could view the objec- 
tives and the springs that had moved me to action more clearly. 
With this clarification came further questioning for which I had 
no satisfactory answer. But more and more I moved away from 
the religious outlook on life and politics. I cannot write much 
about that experience of mine; it was a feeling I cannot easily 
express. It was eleven years ago, and only a faded impression 
of it remains in the mind now. But I remember'well that it 
had 'a lasting effect on me and on my way of thinking, and for 
the next two years or more I went about my work with some-' 
thing of that aif of detachment. 

Pardy, no doubt, this was due to developments which were 
wholly outside my control and with which I did not fit in. I have 
referred already to some of the political dianges. Far more im- 
portant was die progressive deterioration of Hindu-Mudim 
relations, in North India especially. In the bigger cities a nunaber 
of riots took place, brutal and callous in die extreme. The 
atmosphere of distrust and anger bred new causes of dispute 
which most of us had never heard of before. Previously a fruitful 
source of discord had been the question of cow sacrifice, especi- 
ally on the Baki^id day. There was also tension when Hindu and 

m 



COMMUNALISM RAMPANT 135 

Muslim festivals clashed, as, for instance, when the Moharrara 
fell on the days when the Ram Lila was celebrated. The Mohar- 
ram revived the memory of a past tragedy and brought sorrow 
and tears; the Ram Lila was a festival of joy and the celebration 
of the victory of good over evil. The two did not fit in. For- 
tunately they came together only once in about thirty years, for 
the Ram Lila is celebrated according to the solar calendar at a 
fixed time of the year, while the Moharram moves round the 
seasons, following a lunar year. 

But now a fresh cause of fnction arose, something that was 
ever present, ever recurring. This was the question of music 
before mosques. Objection was taken by the Muslims to music 
or any noise which interfered with their prayers in their 
mosques. In every city there are many mosques, and five times 
every day they have prayers, and there is no lack of noises and 
processions (including marriage and funeral processions). So the 
chances of friction were always present. In particular, objection 
was taken to processions and noises at the time of the sunset 
prayer in the mosques. As it happens, this is just the time when 
evening worship takes place in the Hindu temples, and gongs 
are sounded and the temple bells ring. Arti, this is called, and 
arti-namaz disputes now assumed major proportions. 

It seems amazing that a question which could be settled with 
mutual consideration for each other’s feelings and a little adjust- 
ment should give rise to great bitterness and rioting. But reli- 
gious passions have little to do with reason or consideration or 
adjustments, and they are easy to fan when a third party in 
control can play oflT one group against another. 

One is apt to exaggerate the sigiuficance of these riots in a few 
northern cities. Most of the towns and cities and the whole of 
rural India carried on peacefully, little affected by these happen- 
ings, but the newspapers, naturally gave great prominence to 
every petty communal disturbance. It is perfectly true, however, 
that communal tension and bitterness increased in the city 
masses. This was pushed on by the communal leaders at the 
top, and it was reflected in the stiffening up of the political 
communal demands. Because of the communal tension, Muslim 
political reactionaries, who had taken a back seat during all these 
years of non-co-operation, emerged into prominence, helped in 
the process by the British Government. From day to day new 
and more fer-reaching communal demands appeared on their 
behalf, striking at the very root of national unitf and Indian 
freedom. On the Hindu side also political reactionaries were 
among the principal communal leaders, and, iik the name of 



1^6 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

guarding Hindu interests, they played definitely into the hands 
of the Government. They did not succeed, and indeed they 
could not, however much they tried by. their methods, in gaining 
any of the points on which they laid stress ; they succeeded only 
in raising the communal temper of the country. 

The Congress was in a quandary. Sensitive to and represen- 
tative of national feeling as it was, these communal passions were 
bound to affect it. Many a Congressman was a communalist 
under his national cloak. But the Congress leadership stood firm 
and, on the whole, refused to side with either communal party, 
or rather with any communal group, for now the Sikhs and other 
smaller minorities were also loudly voicing their particular 
demands. Inevitably this led to denunciation from both the 
extremes. 

Long ago, right at the commencement of non-co-operation or 
even earlier, Gandhiji had laid down his formula for solving the 
communal problem. According to hiiti, it could only be solved 
by goodwill and the generosity of the majority group, and so he 
was prepared to agree to everything that the Muslims might 
demand. He wanted to win them over, not to bargain with them. 
With foresight and a true sense of values he grasped at the 
reality that was worth while; but others who thought they knew 
the market price of everything, and were ignorant of the true 
value of anything, stuck to the methods of the market-place. 
They saw the cost of purchase tvith painful clearness, but they 
had no appreciation of the worth of the article they might have 
bought. 

It is easy to criticise and blame others, and the temptation is 
almost irresistible to find some excuse for the failure of one’s 
plans. Was not the failure due to the deliberate thwarting of 
others, rather than to an error in one’s own way of thinking or 
acting? We cast the blame on the Govenmient and the com- 
mtmalists, the latter blame tlie Congress. Of course, there was 
thwarting of us, deliberate and persistent thwarting, by the 
Government and their allies. Of course, British governments in 
the' past and the present have based their policy on creating 
divisions in our raius. Divide and rule has always been the way 
of empires, and the measure of their success in this policy has 
been also the measure of their superiority over those whom they 
thus exploit. We cannot complain of this or, at any rate, w« 
ought not to be surprised at it. To ignore it and not to provide 
against it is in itself a mistake in one's thought. 

How are we to provide against it? Not surely by bargaining 
and haggling and generally adopting ihe tactics of the market 



COMMUNALISM RAMPANT J37 

place, for whatever oiFer we make, however high our bid might 
be, there is always a third party which can bid higher and, what 
is more, give substance to its w’ords. If there is no common 
national or social outlook, there will not be common action 
against the common adversary. If we think in terms of the 
existing political and economic structure and merely wish to 
tamper with it here and there, to reform it, to 'Indianise’ it, 
then all real inducement for joint action is lacking. The object 
then becomes one of sharing in the spoils, and the third and 
controlling party inevitably plays the dominant r 61 e and hands 
out its gifts to the prize boys of its choice. Only by thinking in 
terms of a different political framework — ^and even more so a 
different social framework — can we build up a stable foundation 
for joint action. The whole idea underlying the demand for in- 
dependence was this: to make people realise that we were 
struggling for an entirely different political structure and not just 
an Indianised edition (with British control behind the scenes) of 
the present order, which Dominion Status signifies. Political in- 
pendence meant, of course, political freedom only, and did not 
include any social change or economic freedom for the masses. 
But it did dgnify the removal of the financial and economic 
chains which bind us to the City of London, and this would 
have made it easier for us to change the social structure. So I 
thought then. I would add now that I do not think it is likely 
that real political freedom will come to us by itself. When it 
comes it will bring a large measure of social freedom also. 

But almost all our leaders continued to think within the narrow 
steel frame of the existing political, and of course the social, 
structure. They faced every problem — communal or constitu- 
tional— with this background and, inevitably, they played into 
the hands of the British Government, which controlled com- 
pletely that struemre. They could not do otherwise, for their 
whole outlook was essentially reformist and not revolutionary, 
in spite of occasional experiments with direct action. But the 
time had gone by when any political or economic or communal 
problem in India could be satisfactorily solved by reformist 
methods. Revolutionary outlook and planning and revolutionary 
solutions were demanded by the situation. But there was no one 
among the leaders to ofrer these. 

The want of dear ideals and objectives in our struggle for 
freedom undoubtedly helped the spread of communalism. The 
masses saw no clear connection between their day-to-day suffer- 
ings and the fight for swaraj. They fought well enough at times 
by instinct, but that was a feeble weapon whidi could be easily 



138 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

blunted or even turned aside for other purposes. There was no 
reason behind it, and in peribds of reaction it was not difficult 
for the communalists to play upon this feeling and exploit it in 
the name of religion. It is nevertheless extraordinary how the 
bourgeois classes, both among the Hindus and the Muslims, suc- 
ceeded, in the sacred name of religion, in getting a measure of 
mass sympathy and support for programmes and demands 
which had absolutely nothing to do with the masses, or even the 
lower middle class. Every one of the communal demands put 
forward by any communal group is, in the final analysis, a 
demand for jobs, and these jobs could only go to a handful of 
the upper middle class. There is also, of course, the demand for 
special and additional seats in the legislatures, as symbolising 
political power, but this too is looked upon chiefly as the power 
to exercise patronage. These narrow political demands, benefit- 
ing at the most a small number of the upper middle classes, and 
often creating barriers in the way of national unity and progress, 
were cleverly made to appear the demands of the masses of that 
particular religious group. Religious passion was hitched on to 
them in order to hide their barrenness. 

In this way political reactionaries came back to the political 
field in the guise of communal leaders, and the real explanation 
of the various steps they took was not so much their communal 
bias as their desire to obstruct political advance. We could only 
expect opposition from them politically, but still it was a pecu- 
liarly distressing feature of an unsavoury situation to find to 
what lengths they would go in this respect. Muslim communal 
leaders said the most amazing things and seemed to care not at 
all for Indian nationalism or Indian freedom; Hindu communal 
leaders, though always speaking apparently in the name of 
nationalism, had little to do with it in practice and, incapable of 
any real action, sought to humble themselves before the Govern- 
ment, and did that too in vain. Both agreed in condemning 
socialistic and such-like "subversive” movements; there was a 
touching unanimity in regard to any proposal affecting vested 
interests. Muslim communal leaders said and did many things, 
harmful to political and econormc freedom, but as a group and 
individually they conducted themselves before the Government 
and the public with some dignity. That could hardly be said of 
the Hindu communal leaders. 

There were many Muslims in the Congress, Thdr numbers 
were large, and included many able men, and the best-known 
and mopt popular Muslim leaders in India were in it. Many of 
those Congress Muslims organised themselves into a group called 



communalism rampant 139 

the * Nationalist Muslim Party and they combated the com- 
munal Muslim leaders. They did so with some success to begin 
with, and a large part of the Muslim intelligentsia seemed to be 
with them. But they were all upper middle-class folk, and there 
were no dynamic personalities amongst them. They took to their 
professions and their businesses, and lost touch with the masses. 
Indeed, they never went to their masses. Their method was one 
of drawing-room meetings and mutual arrangements and pacts, 
and at this game their rivals, the communal leaders, were greater 
adepts. Slowly the latter drove the Nationalist Muslims from 
one position to another, made them give up, one by one, the 
principles for which they stood. Always the Nationalist Muslims 
tried to ward oiF further retreat and to consolidate their position 
by adopting the policy of the ‘ lesser evil ’, but always this led 
to another retreat and another choice of the ‘ lesser evil There 
came a time when they had nothing left to call their own, no 
fundamental principle on which they stood except one, and 
that had been the very sheet-anchor of their group: joint 
electorates. But again the policy of the lesser evil presented the 
fatal choice to them, and they emerged from the ordeal minus 
that sheet-anchor. So to-day they stand divested of every shred 
of principle or practice on the basis of which they formed their 
group, and which they had proudly nailed to their masthead— 
of everything, all, except their namel 

The collapse and elimination of the Nationalist Muslims as 
a group — as individuals they are, of course, still important 
leaders of the Congress — ^forms a pitiful story. It took many 
years, and the last chapter has only been written this year 
(1934). In 1933 and subsequent years they were a strong group, 
and they took up an aggressive attitude against the Muslim 
communalists. Indeed, on several occasions, Gandhiji was pre- 
pared to agree to some of the latter’s demands, much as he 
disliked them, but his own collea^es, the Muslim Nationalist 
leaders, prevented this and were bitter in their opposition. 

During the .middle 'twenties many attempts were made to 
settle the communal problem by mutual talks and discussions — 
‘Unity Conferences' they were called. The most notable of 
these was the conference convened by M. Moham&d Ali, the 
Congress president for the year, in 1924, and held in Delhi under 
the shadow of Gandhiji’s twenty-one-day fast. There were many 
earnest and well-meaning people at these conferences, and they 
tried hard to come to an agreement. Some pious and good 
resolutions were passed, .but the basic problem remained un- 
solved. It could hot be solved by those conferences, for a solution 



140 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

could not be reached by a majority of votes but by virtual 
unanimity, and there were always extremists of various groups 
present whose idea of a solution was a complete submission of 
all others to their views. Indeed, one was led to doubt whether 
some of the prominent communalists desired a solution at all. 
Many of them were political reactionaries, and there was no 
common ground between them and those who desired radical 
political change. 

But the real difficulties went deeper and were not just the 
result of Individual back-sliding. The Sikhs were now loudly 
advancing their communal demands, and an extraordinarily 
complicated triangle was created in the Punjab. The Punjab, 
indeed, became the crux of the matter, and the fear of each 
group of the others produced a background of passion and 
prejudice. In some provinces agrarian trouble — Hindu zamin- 
dars and Muslim tenants in Bengal— appeared under communal 
guise. In the Punjab and Sind, the banker and richer classes' 
generally were Hindus, the debtors were Muslim agriculturists, 
and all the feeling of the impoverished debtors against the 
creditor, out for his pound of flesh, went to swell the com- 
munal tide. As a rule, the Muslims were the poorer com- 
munity, and the Muslim communal leaders managed to exploit 
the antagonism of the have-nots against the haves ior communal 
purposes, though, strangely enough, these purposes had nothing 
whatever to do with the betterment of those have-nots. Because 
of this, these Muslim communal leaders did represent some 
mass elements, and gained strength thereby. The Hindu com- 
munal leaders, in an economic sense, represented the rich banker 
and professional classes; they had little backing among the 
Hindu masses although, on occasions, they had their sympathy. 

The problem, therefore, is getting a little mixed up with 
economic groupings, though uMappuy this fact is not realised. 
It may develop into more obvious conflicts between economic 
classes, but if that time comes, the present-day communal 
leaders, representing the upper classes of all groups, will hasten 
to patch up their differences in order to face jointly the common 
class foe. Even under [present conditions it should not he dif- 
ficult to arrive at a political solution, but only if, and it is a big 
if, the third party was not present. 

The Delhi Uiiity Conference of 1924 was hardly over when a 
I^du-Muslim riot broke out in Allahabad, It was not a big 
riot, as such riots go, in so far as casualties were concerned, hut 
it was pamful to have these troubles in one’s home town. I 
rushed back with ot 3 \ers from Delhi to find that the actu*'l riot- 



communalism rampant 141 

ing was over; but the aftermath, in the shape of bad blood 
and court cases, lasted a long time. I forget why the riot had 
begun. That year, or perhaps later, there was also some trouble 
over the Ram Lila celebrations at Allahabad. Probably because 
of restrictions about music before mosques, these celebrations, 
involving huge processions as they did, were abandoned as a 
protest. For about eight years now the Ram Lila has not been 
held in Allahabad, and the greatest festival of the year for htm- 
dreds of thousands in the Allahabad district has almost become 
a painful memory. How well I remember my visits to it when 
I was a child I How excited we used to get I And the vast crowds 
that came to see it from all over the district and even from other 
towns. It was a Hindu festival, but it was an open-air affair, 
and Muslims also swelled the crowds, and there was joy and 
lightheartedness everywhere. Trade flourished. Many years 
afterwards when, as a grown-up, I visited it I was not excited, 
and the procession and the tableaux rather bored me. My 
standards of art and amusement had gone up. But even then, 
I saw how the great crowds appreciated and enjoyed the show. 
It was carnival time for them. And now, for eight or nine years, 
the children of Allahabad, not to mention the grown-ups, have 
had no chance of seeing this show and having a bright day of 
joyful excitement in the dull routine of their lives. And all be- 
cause of trivial disputes and conflicts I Surely religion and the 
spirit of religion have much to answer for. What kill-joys they 
have beenl 