TRADE UNION CONGRESS 

The Simon Commission boycott and the All Parties Conference 
bulked largely politically in the country that year, but my own 
interest and activities lay largely in other directions. As working 
General Secretary of the Confess, I was busy in looking after 
and strengthening its organisation, and I was particularly in- 
terested in directmg people’s attention to social and economic 
changes. The position gained in Madras in regard to Inde- 
pendence had also to be consolidated, especially as the tendency 
of the All Parties Conference was to pull us back. With this 
purpose in view I travelled a great deal and addressed many im- 
portant gatherings. I presided, I think, over four provincial 
conferences in igaS — ^in the Punjab, in Nl^abar in the South, in 
Delhi, and in the United Provinces — as well as over Youth 
Leagues and Students’ Conferences in Bengal and Bombay. From 
time to time I visited rural areas in the U.P. and occasionally I 
addressed industrial workers. The burden of my speeches was 
always much the same though the fiirm varied according to local 
circumstances and the stress draended on the kind of audience I 
happened to be addressing. Everywhere I spoke on political 
.hidependence and social freedom and made the former a step 
towards the attainment of the latter. I wanted to spread the 
ideology^f .socia lism especially among Congress workers and 
the intelligentsia, for these people, who were the backbone of the 
national movement, thought largely in terms of the narrowest 
nationalism. Their speeches laid stress on the glories of old 
times; the injuries, material and spiritual, caused by alien rule; 
the sufrerings of our people; the indignity of foreign domination 
over us and our national honour demanding that we should be 
free; the necessi^ for sacrifice at the altar of the motherland. 
They were familiar themes which found an echo in every Indian 
heart, and the nationalist in me responded to them and was 
moved by them (though I was never a blind admirer of ancient 
times in India or elsewhere). But though the truth in them re- 
mained, they seemed to grow a little thin and thread-bare with 
ranstant use, and their ceaseless repetition prevented the con- 
sideration of other problems and vital aspects of our struggle. 
They only fostered emotion and did not encourage thought. 
y I was by no means a pioneer in the socialist field in India. In- 



TRADE UNION CONGRESS 183 

deed I was rather backward and I had only advanced painfully, 
step by step, where many others had gone ahead blazing a trail. 
The workers' trade union movement was, ideologically, definitely 
socialist, and so were the majority of the Youth Leagues. A 
vague confused socialism was already part of the atmosphere of 
India when I returned from Europe in December 1927, and even 
earlier than that there were many individual soci^sts. Mostly 
they thought along utopian lines, but Marxian theory was in* 
fluencing them increasingly, and a few considered themselves as 
hundred per cent. Marxists. This tendency was strengthened in 
India, as in Europe and America, by developments in the Soviet 
Union, and particularly the Five-Year Plan. 

Such inmortance as I possessed as a socialist worker lay in the 
fact that X happened to be a prominent Congressman holding 
important Congress offices. There were many other well-known 
Congressmen who were beginning to think likewise. This was 
most marked in the U.P. Provincial Congress Committee, and in 
this Committee we even tried, as early as 1936, to draw up a mild 
socialist programme. We are a zamindari and taluqadari pro- 
vince, and the first question we had to face was that of the 
land. We declared that the existing land system must go and 
that there should be no intermediaries between the State and the 
cultivator. We had to proceed cautiously, as we were moving in 
an atmosphere which was, till then, unusued to such ideas. 

The next year, 1939, the U.P. Provincial Congress Committee 
went a step further and made a recommendation, definitdy on 
socialist lines, to the All-India Congress Committee. This latter 
Committee, meeting in Bombay in the summer of 1939, adopted 
the preamble of the U.P. resolution and thus accepted the prin- 
ciple of socialism underlying the whole resolution. The con- 
sideration of the detailed programme given in the UJP. resolution 
was postponed for a later date. Most people seem to have for- 
gotten these resolutions of the A.I.C.C. and the U.P.P.C.G. and 
imagine that the subject of socialism has suddenly cropped up in 
the Congress during the last year or so. It is true, however, that 
the A.I.C,C. passed that resolution without giving much thought 
to it and most members probably did not realise what they were 
doing. 

The U.P. branch of the Independence for India League (con- 
sisting entirely of principal Congress workers in the province) 
was definitely sociahstic and it went a little further than a mixed 
body like the Congress Conunittee could go. Indeed one of the 
objects of the Independence League was socialfisedom. We had 
hoped to build up a strong League organisation all over India 



184 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

and utilize it for propaganda in favour of independence and 
socialism. Unhappily, and much to my disappointment, the 
League never got going except to some extent in the U,P. This 
was not because of lack of support in the country. But most of 
our workers were also prominent workers in the Congress, and, 
the Congress having adopted Independence in theory at least, 
they could always work through the Congress organisation. 
Another reason was that some of the original sponsors of the 
League did not take it seriously enough as an organisation to be 
developed. They looked upon it as something to be used for 
bringing pressure to bear on the Congress executive, or even for 
influencing the elections for the Congress Working Committee. 
So the Independence League languished, and as the Congress 
grew more aggressive, it drew all the dynamic elements towards 
Itself and the League grew weaker. With the coming of the Civil 
Disobedience struggle in J930, the League got merged into the 
Congress and disappeared. 

In the second hilf of 1918 and in 1939 there was frequent talk 
of my arrest. I do not know what reality lay behind the press 
references and the numerous private warnings I received from 
friends who seemed to be in the know, but the warnings pro- 
duced a feeling of uncertainty in me and I felt I was always on 
the verge of it. I did not mind this parricularly as I knew that, 
whatever the fiimre held for me, it could not be a settled life of 
routine. The sooner I got used to uncertainty and sudden changes 
and visits to prison the better. And I think that on the whole I 
succeeded in getting used to the idea (and to a much lesser extent 
my people also succeeded) and whenever arrest came I took it 
more casually than I might otherwise have done. So rumours of 
arrest were not without compensation; they gave a certain ex- 
citement and a bite to my daily existence. Every day of freedom 
was something precious, a day gained. As a matter of fact I 
had a long innings in 1928 and 1929, and arrest came at last as 
Tate as April 1930. Since then my brief periods outside prison 
have had a measure of unreality about them, and I have lived in 
my house as a stranger on a short visit, or moved about uncer- 
tamly, not knowing what the morrow would hold for me, and 
with the constant expectation of a call back, to gaol. 

As 1928 approached its appointed end, the Calcutta Congress 
drew near. My fether was to preside over it. He was full of the 
All Parties Conference and of his Report to it and wanted to 
push this through the Congress. To this he knew that I was not 
agreeable, because I , was not prepared to compromise on the 
Independence issue, and this irritated him. We did not argue 



TRADE UNION CONGRESS 1S5 

about the matter much, but there was a definite feeling of mental 
conflict between us, an attempt to pull tlifFerent w'ays. Dif- 
ferences of opinion we had often had before, vital differences 
which had kept us in different political camps. But I do not 
think that at any previous or subsequent occasion the tension had 
been so great. Both of us were rather unhappy about it. In 
Calcutta matters came to this, that my father made it known 
that if he could not have his way in the Congress — ^that is, if he 
could not have a majority for the resolution in favour of the 
All Parties Report — ^he would refuse to preside over the Congress, 
That was a perfectly reasonable and constitutional course to 
adopt. None the less it was disconcerting to many of his oppo- 
nents who did not wish to force the issue to this extent. There 
has often been a tendency in the Congress, and elsewhere, I 
suppose, to criticise and condemn and yet shrink from accepting 
responsibility; there is always a hope that the criticism will make 
the other party change its course to our advantage without cast- 
ing on us the burden of piloting the boat. Where responsibility 
is withheld from us and there is an irremovable and irresponsible 
executive, as there is in the Government of India to-day, criticism 
is all that is open to us (apart, of course, from action), and that 
criticism is bound to be negative criticism. Even so, if that 
negative criticism is to be effective, there must he behind it 
the mental preparation and preparedness to assume full con- 
trol and responsibility whenever the opportunity offers itself 
— control over every department of government, civil and mili- 
tary, internal and foreign. To ask for partial control only, as, 
for instance, the Liberals do in the matter of the army, is to 
confess our inability to run the show and to take the sting out 
of the criticism. 

This attitude of criticism and condemnation and yet a shrink- 
ing back fiom the natural consequences thereof, has been frequent 
in the case of Gandhiji’s critics. There have been a number of 
people in the Congress who dislike many of his activities and 
criticise them strongly but who are not prepared to drive him out 
of the Congress. This attitude is easy to understand but it is 
hardly fair to either party. 

Some such difficulties arose at the Calcutta Congress. There 
were negotiations between the two groups, and a compromise 
formula was announced, and then this fell through. It was all 
rather confusing and not very edifying. The main resolution of 
the Congress, as it was finally adopted, accepted the All Parties 
Report -but intimated that if the British Government did not 
agree to that constitution within a year, the Congress would 



l86 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

revert to Independence. It was an otter of a year’s grace and a 
' polite ultimatum. The resolution was no doubt a come-down 
from the ideal of independence, for the All Parties Report did 
not even ask for full Dominion Status. And yet it was probably 
a wise resolution in the sense that it prevented a split when no 
one was ready for it, and kept the Congress together for the 
struggle that began in 1930. It was clear enough that the British 
Government were not going to accept the All Parties Constitu- 
tion within a year. The struggle was inevitable and, as matters 
stood in the country, no such struggle could be at all effective 
without Gandhiji’s lead. 

I had opposed the resolution in the open Congress, though I 
did so half-heartedly. And yet I was again elected General 
Secretary 1 Whatever happened I managed to stick on to the 
secretaryship, and in the Congress sphere I seemed to act the 
part of the famous Vicar of Bray. Whatever president sat on 
the Congress throne, still I was secretary in charge of the organi- 
sation. 

A few days before the Calcutta Congress, the All-India Trade 
Union Congress was held at Jhaiia, the centre of the coal mine 
area. I attended and participated in it for the first two days and 
then had to go away to Calcutta. It was my first Trade Union 
Congress and I was practically an outsider, though my activities 
amonrat the peasantry, and lately amongst the workers, had 
gained for me a measure of popularity with the masses. I found 
the old tussle going on between the reformists and the more 
advanced and revolutionary elements. The main points in issue 
were the question of afiiliation to one of the Internationals, as 
well as to the League against Imperialism and the Pan-Pacific 
Union, and the desirabuity of sending representatives to the 
International Labour Office Conference at Geneva. More impor- 
tant than these questions was the vast difference in outlook 
between the two sections of the Congress. There was the old 
trade union group, moderate in politics and indeed disprusting 
ihe intrusion of politics in industrial matters. They believed in 
industrial action only and that too of a cautious character, and 
aimed at the gradual betterment of workers’ conditions. „The 
leader of this grotro was N. M. Joshi, who had often represented 
In^an labour at Geneva. Hie other group was more militant, 
believed in political action, and opemy proclaimed its revolu- 
tionary outlook. It was influencea, though by no means con- 
trolled, by some Communists and near-Communists. Bombay 
textile labour had been captured by this group, and under their 
leadership there, had been a great, and partly successful, textile 



TRADE UNION CONGRESS 187 

Strike in Bombay. A new and powerful textile union had risen 
in Bombay, the Girni Kamgar Union, which dominated the 
labour situation in Bombay. Another powerful imion under 
the influence of the advanced group was the G.I.P. Railway 
Union. 

Ever since the inception of the Trade Union Congress the 
executive and the office had been in the control of N. M. Joshi 
and his close colleagues, and Joshi had been responsible for 
building up the movement. The radical group, though more 
powerful in the rank and file, had little opportunity of in- 
fluencing policy at the top. This was an unsatisfactory position 
and it did not reflect the true state of affairs. There was dissatis- 
faction and friction and a desire on the part of the radical 
elements to seize power in the T.U.C. At the same time there 
was a disinclination to carry matters too far, for a split was 
feared. The trade union movement was still in its early youth in 
India; it was weak and was largely being run by non-worker 
leaders. Always, under such circumstances, there is a tendency 
for outsiders to exploit workers and this was obvious enough in 
the Indian T.U.C. and labour unions. N. M. Joshi had, however, 
proved himself, by years of work, a sound and earnest trade 
unionist, and even those who considered him politically back- 
ward and moderate, acknowledged the worth or his services to 
the Indian Labour movement. This could be said of few others, 
moderate or advanced. 

My own sympathies at Jharia were with the advanced group 
but, being a newcomer, I felt a little at sea in these domestic 
conflicts of the T.U.C. and I decided to keep aloof from them. 
After I had left Jharia the annual T.U.C, elections took place, 
and I learnt at Cdcutta that I had been elected president for the 
next year. I had been put forward by the moderate group, 
probably because they felt that I stood the best chance of defeat- 
ing the other candidate who was an actual worker (on the 
railways) and who had been put forward by the radical group. 
If I had bem present at Jharia on the day of the election I 
am sure that I would have withdrawn in favour of the worker 
candidate. It seemed to me positively indecent that a newcomer 
and a non-worker should be suddenly thrust into the president- 
ship. , This was in itself a measure ot the infancy and weakness 
of the trade union movement in India. 

Nineteen twenty-eight had been full of labour disputes and 
strikes; nineteen twenty-nine carried on likewise. Bombay textile 
labour, miserable and militant, took the lead in these strikes. 
There was a big general strike in the Bengal Jute Mills. There? 



j88 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 

were also strikes in the Iron Works at Jamshedpur, and, I think, 
on the railways. A long drawn out struggle, bravely carried on 
for many months, took place in the Tin Plate Works in Jam- 
shedpur. In spite of great public sympathy, the workers were 
crushed by the powerful company (connected with the Burma 
Oil Company) ow'ning these works. 

Altogether the two years were fiiU of industrial unrest, and 
the conditions of labour were deteriorating. The post-war years 
had been boom years for industry in India and the most 
stupendous profits had been made. For five or six years the 
average dividend in the jute or cotton mills exceeded a hundred 
per cent, and was often 1 50 per cent, per annum. All these huge 
profits went to the owners and shareholders, and the workers 
continued as before. The slight rise in wages was usually counter- 
balanced by a rise in prices. During these days when millions 
were being made feverishly, most of the workers continued to 
live in the most miserable of hovels, and even their women- 
folk had hardly clothes to wear. The conditions in Bombay 
were bad enough, but perhaps even worse was the lot of the 
jute workers, within an hour’s drive of the palaces of Calcutta. 
Semi-naked women, wild and unkempt, working away for the 
barest pittance, so that a broad river of wealth should flow 
ceaselessly to Glasgow and Dundee, as well as to some pockets 
in India. 

In the boom years all went well for industry, though the 
workers carried on as before and profited little. But when the 
boom passed and it was not so easy to make large profits, the 
burden, of course, fell on thC' workers. The old profits were 
forgotten; they had been consumed. And if profits were not now 
sufficient, how could industry run? And so there was industrial 
unrest and labour troubles and the gigantic strikes in Bombay 
which impressed everybody and fidghtened both the employers 
and Government. The Labour Movement was becoming class- 
conscious, militant and dangerous, both in ideology and in 
organisation. The political situation was also developing fast, 
and, though the two were separate and unconnected, they were 
partly parallel, and the Government could not contemplate the 
future with any satisfaaion. 

In March 1939 the Government struck suddenly at organised 
labour by arresting some of its most prominent workers firom the 
advanced groups. The leaders of the Bombay Girni Kamgar 
Union were taken, as well as labour leaders horn Bengal, the 
U.P. and the Punjab. Some of these were communists, others 
were near-communists, yet others were just trade unionists. This 



TRADE UNION CONGRESS 1S9 

was the beginning of the famous Meerut trial which lasted for 
four years and a half. 

A defence committee was formed for the Meerut accused, of 
which my father was chairman. Dr. Ansari and others, including 
myself, were members. We had a difficult task. Money 
was not easy to collect; it seemed that the moneyed people had 
no great .sympathy for commtmists and socialists and labour 
agitators. And lawyers would only sell their services for a full 
pound of somebody’s flesh. We had some eminent lawyers on 
our Committee, my father and others, and they were always 
available for consultation and general guidance. That did not 
cost us anything, but it was not possible for them to sit down in 
Meerut for months at a time. The other lawyers whom we 
approached seemed to look upon the case as a means of making 
as much money as possible. 

Apart firom the Meerut Case I have been connected with some 
other defence com m ittees — ^in M. N. Roy’s case and others. On 
each occasion I have marvelled at the cupidity of men of my own 
profession. My first big shock came during the Punjab Martial 
Law trials in 1919 when a very eminent leader of the profession 
insisted on his full fee—and it was a huge fee — firom the victims 
of Martial Law, one of them even a fdlow-lawyer, and many 
of these people had to borrow money or sell property to pay him. 
My later experiences were even more painful. We had to collect 
money, often in coppers from the poorest workers, and pay 
out ftit cheques to lawyers. It went against the grain. And 
the whole process seemed so futile for, whether we defended a 
political or labour case or not, the result was likely to be the 
same. In a case like the Meerut trial a defence was, of course, 
obviously called for from many points of view. 

The Meerut Case Defence Committee did not have an easy 
time with the accused. There were different kinds of people 
among these, with different types of defences, and often there was 
an utter absence of harmony among them. After some months 
we wound up the formal committee, but we continued to help 
in our individual capacities. The development of the political 
situation was absorbing more and more of our attention, and in 
1930 all of us were ourselves in gaol. 