CHAPTER XV 


PROLOGUE 

G andhi moved into battle very slowly. Unlike most rebels he 
did not get ammunition from his adversary. The British 
merely provided him with an opportunity to use his special, 
self-made weapons: civil disobedience. 

The savage massacre of policemen in Chauri Ghaura in Febru¬ 
ary 1922, by a Congress mob, had induced Gandhi to suspend 
civil disobedience in the county of Bardoli. But he did not forget. 
He waited six years, and on February 12th, 1928, he gave the 
signal for Satygraha in the same place: Bardoli. 

Gandhi did not conduct it himself. He watched from afar, 
wrote lengthy articles about it, and supplied xhe general direction 
and inspiration. The actual leader was Vallabhbhai Patel, 
assisted by a Moslem named Abbas Tyebji. 

In 1915, Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel, a prosperous Ahmedabad 
lawyer, was playing bridge in his club when Gandhi entered. 
Patel looked at the visitor with a side glance of his heavy-lidded 
eyes, smiled under his thick moustache at the little man with the 
big, bulbous, loose turban and the long Kathiawar coat with the 
sleeves rolled up, and turned back to his cards. He had heard of 
Gandhi’s South African exploits but was not impressed by this 
first view. 

A week later, however, he dropped in at a conference on peasant 
taxation convened by Gandhi and stayed to admire the new¬ 
comer’s logic. Patel had a precise, scientific, steel-trap mind. In 
later years, his clean-shaven pouchy face, his round, nut-brown 
bald head, and his broad body wrapped down to the knees in 
white khadi gave him the appearance of a classic Roman senator. 
If he had any sentiments, he hid them successfully. He became 
the ‘Jim Farley’, as Americans called him, of the Congress party, 
the machine ‘box’ who remembered everybody’s name and navi¬ 
gated with supreme confidence among the numerous jutting reefs 
of Indian politics. 

Gandhi won Patel’s loyalty by the common sense of his position: 

277 


GANDHI IN INDIA 


to win freedom you needed peasant backing, for India was more 
than 80 per cent peasant. To win peasant backing you had to 
speak the peasant’s language, dress like him, and know his economic 
needs. 

In 1928 Patel was mayor of Ahmedabad. At Gandhi’s sugges¬ 
tion, he left the post and went to Bardoli, in Bombay province, 
to guide the 87,000 peasants in a peaceful revolt against a 22 per 
cent increase in taxes decreed by the British government. 

The villagers, responding to Patel’s leadership, refused to pay 
taxes. The collector seized their water buffaloes which worked 
and gave milk. Cultivators were driven off their farms. Kitchens 
were invaded and pots and pans confiscated for delinquency. 
Carts and horses were also taken. The peasants remained non¬ 
violent. 

‘At the rate the forfeitures are being served,’ Gandhi observed 
in Young India , ‘practically the whole of the county of Bardoli 
should soon be in the government’s possession, and they can pay 
themselves a thousand times over for their precious assessments. 
The people of Bardoli, if they are brave, will be none the worse 
for dispossession. They will have lost their possessions but kept 
what must be the dearest of all to good men and women — their 
honour. Those who have stout hearts and hands need never fear 
loss of belongings.’ 

Apparently, the Mahatma thought every hungry peasant was a 
Gandhi. Strangely enough, the judgment did not err. A spark of 
Gandhism lifted the peasantry into a mood of sacrifice. 

Months passed. Bardoli stood its ground. Hundreds were 
arrested. The Government was accused of‘lawlessness’; no one 
called it terror, for no one was terrorized. 

India began to take notice. Voluntary contributions flowed in 
for the maintenance of the struggle. 

Government officials drove through the countryside in motor¬ 
cars. ‘Why not barricade the roads,’ some peasants whispered 
to Sardar Patel, ‘or place spikes on them to burst the tyres of the 
officials’ cars and give a “non-violent” shake-up to some fellow 
who has made himself a veritable nightmare to the people?’ 

‘No,’ Patel admonished, ‘your fight is not for a few' hundred 
thousand rupees, but for a principle ... You are fighting for self- 
respect which ultimately leads to Swaraj.’ 

278 


PROLOGUE 


The Government undertook to denude whole villages of movable 
property. The peasants barricaded themselves in their huts with 
their animals. The collectors then made off with carts. Tull your 
carts to pieces,’ the Sardar ordered. ‘Keep the body in one place 
and the wheels in another. Bury the shaft.’ 

The Government stated in a public announcement that some 
seized land had been sold to new occupants and that all farms in 
Bardoli would be auctioned if taxes remained unpaid. Vallabh- 
bhai Patel’s elder brother Vithalbhai, president of the national 
Legislative Assembly, wrote to the Viceroy with the charge that 
‘the measures adopted have crossed in several instances the bounds 
of law, order and decency’. Gandhi hailed the letter as breaking 
‘that unhealthy and slavish tradition’ of neutrality when the 
people defied the Government. 

At the instance of Gandhi, India celebrated a hartal, or cessa¬ 
tion of work and business, on June 12th, in honour of Bardoli. 
Huge sums were thrust upon Sardar Patel by Indians at home 
and abroad. 

Gandhi went on a brief visit to Bardoli. Processions greeted him 
everywhere. 

Indians of national importance, Sir Tej Bahadur Sapru, the 
great constitutional lawyer, K. M. Munshi, a member of the 
Legislative Council of Bombay, and others expressed sympathy 
with the Bardoli resisters and demanded that justice be done by 
the Government. On July 13th, with the Satyagraha movement 
at its height, the Governor of the province of Bombay went to 
Simla to consult Lord Irwin. He returned five days later and 
summoned Vallabhbhai Patel, Abbas Tyebji and four other lead¬ 
ing Satyagrahis to a conference. Negotiation is always welcome 
to the civil resister; it may lead to compromise. No compromise on 
Bardoli was possible, however, and on July 23rd, Sir Leslie Wilson, 
opening the session of the Bombay Legislative Council, declared 
the issue was ‘whether the writ of his Majesty the King-Emperor 
is to run in a portion of His Majesty’s dominions’. 

The press in England awoke to the Bardoli revolt. Questions 
were asked in the House of Commons where Lord Winterton was 
firmly in favour of ‘enforcing compliance with law and crushing 
the movement. . .’ The Satyagrahis and Patel ignored this ‘sabre 
rattling’. 


279 


GANDHI IN INDIA 


From all over India, Gandhi was urged to start civil disobedi¬ 
ence in other provinces. He counselled patience. ‘The time has 
not yet come for even limited sympathetic Satyagraha. Bardoli 
has still to prove its mettle. If it can stand the last heat and if 
the Government go to the farthest limit, nothing I or Vallabhbhai 
can do will stop the spread of Satyagraha or limit the issue . . . 
The limit: will then be prescribed by the capacity of India as a 
whole for self-sacrifice and self-suffering.’ Meanwhile, the people 
of Bardoli ‘are safe in God’s hands’. 

The arrest of Patel was expected hourly. On August 2nd, 
accordingly, Gandhi moved to Bardoli. On August 6th, the 
Government capitulated. It promised to release all prisoners, 
return all confiscated land, return the confiscated animals or their 
equivalent, and, the essence, to cancel the rise in taxes. Patel 
promised that the peasants would pay their taxes at the old rates. 
Both sides kept the agreement. 

Gandhi had shown Irwin and India that the weapon worked. 

Would he use it on a vaster scale? 

India was in turmoil. From February 3rd, 1928, when the 
Simon Commission landed at Bombay, India boycotted it. 
Gandhi’s boycott was so complete that he never mentioned the 
commission. For him, it did not exist. But others demonstrated 
against it. At a huge anti-Simon meeting in Lahore, Lajpat Rai, 
the chief political figure of the Punjab, a man of sixty-four whom 
Gandhi called the ‘Lion of the Punjab’, was struck with a lathi 
or four-foot wooden staff swung by the policeman in a charge, 
and died soon afterwards. About the same time, Jawaharlal 
Nehru was beaten with lathis during an anti-Simon protest meet¬ 
ing in Lucknow. In December 1928, several weeks after Lajpat 
Rai’s death, Assistant Police Superintendent Saunders of Lahore 
was assassinated. Gandhi branded the assassination ‘a dastardly 
act’. Bhagat Singh, the suspected assassin, eluded arrest and 
quickly achieved the status of hero. 

During the autumn of 1928, the Government moved against the 
growing labour organizations of India. Trade union leaders, and 
Socialists and Communists, were arrested en masse. Labour was 
unhappy and anti-British for nationalist as well as class reasons. 

In Bengal, always the hearth of turbulence and of opposition 
to the Government as well as to the Congress leadership, Subhas 

280 


PROLOGUE 


Chandra Bose, a stormy petrel whose philosophy was, ‘Give me 
blood and I promise you freedom’, had won great popularity and 
a big, restive following. 

Gandhi sensed the crisis atmosphere. The existing British system 
was, he said, ‘an unmitigated evil’. One word from him and a 
thousand Bardolis would spring into action throughout India. 
But as a good field-commander, Gandhi was always careful to 
choose the right time and place for battle. He knew India’s 
strength; he also knew its weakness, and the weaknesses of Con¬ 
gress. Perhaps, if he was patient, the battle could be avoided; 
even a non-violent contest should not be undertaken before every 
possibility of averting it had been exhausted. 

In this mood of uncertainty, Gandhi approached the annual 
Congress session which met in Calcutta in December 1928. En 
route to the meeting, friends put some searching and significant 
questions to him when the train stopped at Nagpur. 

‘What would be your attitude towards a political war of inde¬ 
pendence?’ they asked. 

‘I would decline to take part in it,’ Gandhi answered. 

‘Then you would not support a national militia?’ 

‘I would support the formation of a national militia under 
Swaraj,’ Gandhi said, ‘if only because I realize that people cannot 
be made non-violent by compulsion. Today I am teaching the 
people how to meet a national crisis by non-violent means.’ 

The Congress session demanded action. But Gandhi had an 
eye for organization and a nose for reality. Congress talked war. 
Was it an effective army? Gandhi wanted Congress ‘overhauled’. 
‘The delegates to the Congress’, he wrote, ‘are mostly self- 
appointed ... As at present constituted, the Congress is unable 
to put forth real united and unbreakable resistance.’ 

The Congress, however, would not be gainsaid. Caution was 
not on its agenda. Subhas Chandra Bose and Jawaharlal Nehru, 
leading the young men, wanted a declaration of immediate inde¬ 
pendence to be followed, implicitly, by a war of independence. 
Gandhi suggested a two years’ warning to the British. Under 
pressure, he finally cut it down to one year. If by December 31st, 
1929, India had not achieved freedom under Dominion Status, 
‘I must declare myself an Independence-walla. 

‘I have burnt my boats,’ Gandhi announced. 

281 


GANDHI IN INDIA 

The year 1929 would be crucial and decisive. 

As preparation for 1930, Gandhi toured India in 1929. He no 
longer allowed himself to be cooped up in first or second class, 
however. He travelled third again and found that the passengers 
were just as slovenly about personal sanitation as they were five 
years before. 

While touring in the west-of-India province of Sindh, in Febru¬ 
ary, Gandhi was summoned to New Delhi to accept the chairman¬ 
ship of the Congress Committee for the Boycott of Foreign Cloth. 
He did not believe in boycotting British books or surgical instru¬ 
ments, etc. Nor would he countenance a boycott of British cloth 
only. Imported textiles from any country must be boycotted in 
favour, not of Indian mill products, but of khadi. He regarded 
the universal use of khadi as a prime requisite for the battle of 
1930. Indians would go into that struggle wearing uniforms of 
homespun. 

During his days in Delhi, Gandhi went to a tea party, and it 
became the subject of much rumour. The party was given by 
Speaker Patel of the Legislative Assembly, and among the guests 
were Gandhi, Lord Irwin, Jinnah, Motilal Nehru, Pandit Mala- 
viya, the Maharaja of Bikaner and the Maharaja of Kashmir. 
Surely, press and politicians speculated, the tea party was arranged 
to initiate conversations between Indians and Englishmen with a 
view to avoiding the 1930 clash. Speculation became so lush that 
Gandhi honoured the afternoon party with an inimitable para¬ 
graph in Young India. Gandhi admitted that Patel, a partisan of 
Swaraj, staged the tea party ‘to break the ice as it were. But there 
cannot be much breaking of ice at a private, informal tea party. 
And in my opinion it cannot lead to any real advance or action 
unless both are ready. We know that we are not yet ready. 
England will never make any advance so as to satisfy India’s 
aspirations till she is forced to it. British rule is no philanthropic 
job, it is a terribly earnest business proposition worked out from 
day to day with deadly precision. The coating of benevolence that 
is periodically given to it merely prolongs the agony. Such 
occasional parties are therefore good only to the extent of showing 
that the bringing together of parties will be easy enough when 
both are ready for business. Meanwhile let the reader rest satisfied 
with the assurance that no political significance attaches to 

282 


PROLOGUE 


the event. The party was one of Speaker Patel’s creditable 
freaks.’ 

During the first four months of 1929, while Gandhi was lighting 
bonfires of foreign textiles in Calcutta and keeping longstanding 
speaking engagements in Burma, no longer a part of India, Irwin, 
according to his biographer, ‘was largely absorbed with finding 
administrative remedies to meet the perils of political terrorism 
and industrial strife’. Alas, the remedy did not lie in administrative 
measures. It required statesmanship. 

On April 8th, Bhagat Singh, the Sikh who killed Assistant Police 
Superintendent Saunders in Lahore in December 1928, walked 
into the Legislative Assembly in New Delhi while the chamber 
was filled with its British and Indian members, tossed two bombs 
into their midst, and then began firing from an automatic pistol. 
The bombs exploded with a mighty impact but burst into large 
fragments instead of small splinters, and only one legislator was 
seriously wounded. Sir John Simon saw the outrage from the 
gallery. It was his last big impression of India; that month the 
commission went home. 

In May 1929, national elections in Britain gave Labour a 
minority in the House of Commons, but as the largest party it 
took office and Ramsay Macdonald became Prime Minister. In 
June, Irwin sailed for England to consult the new government 
and especially the new Secretary of State for India, Mr. Wedg¬ 
wood Benn. Gandhi, who had said, ‘You know, there is one thing 
in me, and that is that I love to see the bright side of things and 
not the seamy side,’ hoped for a change that would obviate the 
expected showdown in I930- 

But though he looked for the silver lining, his head was never 
in the clouds; he kept his bare feet on the earth of India. In an 
unconditional condemnation of terrorist acts, Gandhi reiterated 
that the Government could stop them by ‘conceding the national 
demand gracefully and in time. But that is hoping against hope. 
For the Government to do so would be a change of heart, not 
merely of policy. And there is nothing on the horizon to warrant 
the hope that any such change is imminent’. 

He feared a bloody clash. ‘If India attains what will be to me 
so-called freedom by violent means she will cease to be the country 
of my pride,’ he wrote in Young India of May 9th, 1929. Pro- 

283 


GANDHI IN INDIA 


phetically, he pictured the ideal: freedom should come non- 
violently ‘through a gentlemanly understanding with Great 
Britain. But then/ he added, ‘it will not be an imperialistic 
haughty Britain manoeuvring for world supremacy but a Britain 
humbly trying to serve the common end of humanity’. 

That day was not yet. 

With the fateful test of strength only a few months away, 
Gandhi continued to concern himself with the things that normally 
concerned him. In a leading article entitled ‘A National Defect’, 
the Mahatma returned to the question of cleanliness. He was 
travelling by car through the country and crossed the Krishna 
River. ‘The car’, he wrote, ‘practically passed by hundreds of 
men and women evacuating themselves not many yards from the 
river bank. It is the stream in which people bathe and from 
which they drink. Here there was a breach of the code of decency 
and a criminal disregard of the most elementary laws of health. 
Add to this the economic waste of the precious manure, which 
they would save if these evacuations were made in a field and 
buried in the living surface of the earth and well mixed with 
loosened soil . . . Here is work for the municipalities.’ 

He worried about the expenses of his party while on tour. He 
asked for an accounting and found that ‘these expenses do not 
amount to more than 5 per cent of the collections . . . Having said 
this in defence of the expense, I must confess that even though the 
sums collected may be large, we cannot afford to fly from place 
to place and pay high motor charges’. (He never flew in his life. 
‘Fly’ meant move fast in cars.) 

Editorial offices and homes were being searched, presumably 
for seditious material. Individuals sent Gandhi reports of such 
measures. ‘Let us thank the police,’ he commented, ‘that they 
were courteous.’ The purpose of the raids, he declared, was ‘to 
overawe and humiliate a whole people. This studied humiliation 
is one of the chosen methods which the ruling race consider 
necessary in order that they — though less than one hundred 
thousand — may rule three hundred million people. It is a state 
of things we must strain every nerve to remedy. To command 
respect is the first step to Swaraj’. 

This was Gandhi’s refrain: dignity, discipline and restraint would 
bring Indians self-respect, therefore respect, therefore freedom. 

284 


PROLOGUE 


January ist,~ 1930, was not far off. 

Irwin returned to India in October after conferences lasting 
several months with members of the Labour government, his 
predecessor Lord Reading, Lloyd George, Churchill, Stanley 
Baldwin, Sir John Simon and many others. The Viceroy found 
the situation in India ‘bordering on a state of alarm’. Everything 
was ready for the great challenge of 1930. 

On the last day of October 1929* accordingly, Irwin made 
‘his momentous statement’ envisaging a Round Table Conference 
in which British government representatives would sit with dele¬ 
gates from British India and from the native states. (The idea of 
such a conference with Indian participants had been broached 
before the Simon Commission was appointed, but Irwin would 
not listen to it.) The statement declared that ‘the natural issue of 
India’s constitutional progress ... is tlm attainment of Dominion 
Status’. 

By thus anticipating the recommendations of the Simon Com¬ 
mission, Irwin suggested in effect that its labours were vain and 
its life ended. Indians, to whom it had become a red flag, were 
expected to appreciate this aspect of the Viceroy’s move. 

A few days later, in Delhi, Gandhi met Dr. Ansari, Mrs. 
Annie Besant, Motilal Nehru, Sir Tej Bahadur Sapru, Pandit 
Malaviya, Srinivasa Sastri and others, and issued a ‘Leaders’ 
Manifesto’. Their response to the Viceroy’s announcement was 
favourable, but, they said, steps should be taken to induce ‘a 
calmer atmosphere’, political prisoners should be released and 
the Indian National Congress should have the largest representa¬ 
tion at the forthcoming Round Table Conference. They added 
a gloss: they understood the Viceroy to have said that the purpose 
of the conference was not to determine whether or when Dominion 
Status would be introduced but rather to draft a constitution for 
the Dominion. 

The conciliatory attitude of Gandhi and the elder statesmen 
precipitated a storm of protest, especially from Jawaharlal Nehru, 
president-elect of the Congress party for 1930, and Subhas Chan¬ 
dra Bose. Undeterred, confident that a peaceful agreement with 
the British would be accepted by the nation, Gandhi and his 
colleagues continued their probings. They made an appointment 
with Lord Irwin for the afternoon of December 23rd. 

285 


GANDHI IN INDIA 


That morning, Irwin returned by train from a tour of south 
India. At 7.40 a.m. the white cars of the Viceroy’s train appeared 
out of the mist and approached New Delhi station. Three miles 
from the terminus, where the track is single, a bomb exploded 
under the train. Only one person was hurt, and Irwin did not 
know what happened until informed by his aide-de-camp. 

A far deadlier bomb had been prepared for the Viceroy in 
Westminster. Lord Reading led the attack in the House of 
Lords, and the Tories and Liberals combined in the House of 
Commons to condemn Irwin’s promise of a Round Table Con¬ 
ference and Dominion Status. Wedgwood Benn and other 
Labourites defended the Viceroy, but the result of the debate 
was to bring majority parliamentary pressure to bear against any 
commitment in favour of Dominion Status. 

When Jinnah, Gandhi, Sapru, Motilal Nehru and Vithalbhai 
Patel entered the Viceroy’s office on the afternoon of December 
23rd, Gandhi congratulated the Viceroy on his escape and then 
proceeded to detonate the long-fuse torpedo made in Parliament. 
The audience lasted for two and a half hours; Irwin and Gandhi 
did most of the talking. 

Could his Excellency, Gandhi demanded, promise a Round 
Table Conference which would draft a constitution giving India 
full and immediate Dominion Status including the right to secede 
from the Empire? 

Reflecting the Parliamentary debate, Irwin replied, in the 
words of his biographer, ‘that he was unable to prejudge or com¬ 
mit the [Round Table] Conference at all to any particular line... 

These events formed the overture to the historic annual Con¬ 
gress party convention which met, late in December, in Lahore, 
under the presidency of Jawaharlal Nehru who had celebrated his 
fortieth birthday the month before. 

At the second of time when the year 1929 ended and 1930 was 
born, the Congress, with Gandhi as stage director, unfurled the 
flag of freedom and acclaimed a resolution in favour of unabridged 
independence and secession. ‘Swaraj,’ Gandhi declared, ‘is now 
to mean complete independence.’ The Congress convention in¬ 
structed its members and friends to withdraw from all legislatures, 
and sanctioned civil disobedience including the non-payment of 
taxes. The All-India Congress Committee was authorized to 

286 


PROLOGUE 


decide when Satyagraha would commence but, as Gandhi said, 
4 I know that it is a duty devolving primarily on me.’ Everyone 
realized that Gandhi would have to be the brain, heart and direct¬ 
ing hand of any civil disobedience movement, and it was therefore 
left to him to choose the hour, the place and the precise issue. 


287 


 

