CHAPTER VI 


TRAGIC VICTORY* 

I T was very hot in Bihar in April, and Gandhi could not stand 
the strain of extensive travel among the villages. But he 
would have to go if the Hindus did not repent and bring back 
the Moslems who had fled in fear. He received a letter suggesting 
that he should retire to the forest as Krishna had done; the country 
had lost faith in non-violence, the correspondent stated, and the 
Bhagavad Gita , moreover, did not teach non-violence. He reported 
this to his prayer meeting in Patna. 

He heard of renewed rioting in Noakhali. 

Yet several developments encouraged him. At Gandhi’s 
request General Shah Nawaz, a Moslem and hero of the Indian 
National Army, had remained in Bihar. Shah Nawaz now said 
that Moslems were returning to their villages and that Hindus 
and Sikhs were helping them. A Sikh had been invited to a 
mosque. 

This information made Gandhi feel that c if the Hindus were 
true Hindus and befriended the Moslems the present all-envelop¬ 
ing fire would be extinguished 5 . Bihar was a big province. Its 
example would inspire others. Peace in Bihar would ‘dissolve 5 
the trouble in Calcutta and elsewhere. His mother, ‘an illiterate 
village woman 5 , Gandhi said, had taught him that the atom 
reflected the universe; if he took care of his immediate surround¬ 
ings the universe would take care of itself. 

Nehru telegraphed Gandhi to come back to Delhi. The Con¬ 
gress Working Committee was convening on May ist for a great 
historic decision. Gandhi made the five-hundred-mile trip by 
hot train. 

Mountbatten had been extremely active, visiting provinces, 
talking to leaders, steeping himself in the problem of India’s 
future. As his thoughts crystallized he saw no escape from 
Pakistan. 

Mountbatten accordingly put the question to the Congress 
party: Would they accept the partition of India? Nehru had 

501 


THE BIRTH OF TWO NATIONS 

already told a United Provinces Political Conference on April 
21 st that ‘The Moslem League can have Pakistan if they wish to 
have it, but on condition that they do not take away other parts 
of India which do not wish to join Pakistan.’ 

Would the Working Committee take the same stand? 

Gandhi was opposed to it. Patel wavered; he would have put 
Jinnah’s threats to the test of force. He would have used the cen¬ 
tral government to suppress Moslem violence. But in the end he 
too acquiesced. T agreed to partition as a last resort when we 
reached a stage when we would have lost all,’ he revealed two 
and a half years later. Rather than risk a civil war or the loss of 
independence, Congress was reconciled to Pakistan. 

Pakistan was the high price they paid for freedom. 

Gandhi made no secret of his chagrin. ‘The Congress’, he told 
his prayer meeting in the untouchables’ colony in Delhi on May 
7th, ‘has accepted Pakistan and demanded the division of the 
Punjab and Bengal. I am opposed to any division of India now 
as I always have been. But what can I do? The only thing I can 
do is to dissociate myself from such a scheme. Nobody can force 
me to accept it except God.’ 

Gandhi went to see Mountbatten. His advice to the British 
was to leave with their troops and ‘take the risk of leaving India 
to chaos or anarchy’. If the British left India, Gandhi explained, 
there might be chaos for a while; ‘We would still go through the 
fire no doubt but that fire would purify us.’ 

Mountbatten’s mind was too precise and military to build the 
future on a chance. Yet not only do most individuals do exactly 
that; in a war, nations often gamble with their lives. Every battle 
is a ‘calculated risk’ in which the calculation is quite theoretical. 
To Gandhi, the division of India was an absolute evil, as evil as 
Britain’s submission to Hitler would have been in 1940, and rather 
than resign himself to it he would have accepted all the possible 
material losses. 

This, however, was only the abstract aspect of Gandhi’s 
suggestion. In concrete form, its simplicity concealed its astute¬ 
ness. The British could not abandon India without a govern¬ 
ment. Gandhi’s advice to England to leave India to chaos meant 
give India to Congress. If England refused, Gandhi wanted 
Congress to leave the Government. The burden of maintaining 

502 


TRAGIC VICTORY 


peace in the country would then have rested solely on the British, 
who sought no such responsibility. 

The choice that Gandhi put to the British therefore was: Let 
Congress rule India or rule it yourself in these troubled times. 

Gandhi saw that no Pakistan was possible unless the British 
created it, and the British would not create Pakistan until Congress 
accepted it; they could not split India and antagonize the majority 
in order to placate Jinnah and the minority. Therefore Congress 
should not accept it. 

Nobody listened to Gandhi. c Our leaders were tired and short¬ 
sighted,’ writes an intimate collaborator of Gandhi. The Congress 
leaders were afraid to delay independence. Gandhi would have 
delayed it in the hope of ultimately winning freedom for a united 
country instead of independence for two hostile Indias. 

In the summer of 1948, I asked Nehru, Patel and others in 
India why Gandhi had not attempted to prevent Congress from 
accepting Pakistan; if nothing less had availed he might have 
coerced them by fasting. 

It was not Gandhi’s way, their composite reply ran, to compel 
agreement even on the most crucial issue. That is true, but the 
complete answer goes deeper. Congress acquiesced in Pakistan 
and stayed in the Government. The only alternative would have 
been to reject Pakistan, leave the Government and stake every¬ 
thing on a restoration of the people’s sanity and peaceful inclina¬ 
tions. But Gandhi saw that the leaders had no faith in this 
alternative. He might have induced them to vote for his view in 
committee; he could not have infused them with faith in it except 
by proving that Hindus and Moslems could live together amicably. 
The burden of proof was on Gandhi. And time was running out 
fast. 

Gandhi hurried across the continent to Calcutta. To get Pakis¬ 
tan, Bengal would have to be partitioned between Pakistan and 
Hindustan. If he could impress the Bengal Moslems with the 
painful results of such vivisection and if he could check the rising 
Hindu sentiment for the division of Bengal, he might prevent 
Pakistan. 

‘When everything goes wrong at the top,’ Gandhi asked in 
Calcutta, ‘can the goodness of the people at the bottom assert 
itself against the mischievous influence?’ This was his hope. 

503 


THE BIRTH OF TWO NATIONS 


Bengal has one culture, one language, he argued. Let it stay 
united. They had reunited Bengal after Lord Curzon partitioned 
it; could they not rebuff Jinnah before he partitioned it? 

After six days in Calcutta, Gandhi went to Bihar. Despite the 
torrid heat, he travelled to the villages. His refrain was the same: 
‘If the Hindus showed the spirit of brotherliness, it would be good 
for Bihar, for India and for the world.’ 

On May 25th, in response to a summons from Nehru, Gandhi 
again returned to New Delhi. Mountbatten, his mind made up, 
had flown to London. Rumour had it that India would be 
partitioned, that the plan would be announced soon. But why, 
Gandhi wondered. The Cabinet Mission had rejected partition 
and Pakistan on May 16th, 1946. What had happened since 
then to alter the situation? The riots? Were they yielding to 
hooliganism? T must cling to the hope,’ Gandhi said, That 
Britain will not depart a hair’s breadth from the spirit and letter 
of the Cabinet Mission’s statement of May 16th of last year. . . .’ 

‘He is burning the candle at both ends,’ Dr. Sushila Nayyar 
reported. He was still striving to reverse the tide towards partition. 
If the effort killed him what did it matter? ‘In the India that is 
shaping today there is no place for me,’ he said; his voice shook 
with emotion. ‘I have given up the hope of living 125 years. I 
may last a year or two. That is a different matter. But I have no 
wish to live if India is to be submerged in a deluge of violence as 
it is threatening to do.’ 

Yet he could not be a pessimist for long. Nehru brought Dr. 
Lo Chia-luen, the Chinese Ambassador, to Gandhi’s untouchable 
hut. ‘How do you think things will shape themselves?’ Dr. Lo 
asked. 

‘I am an irrepressible optimist,’ Gandhi said. ‘We have not 
lived and toiled all these years that we should become barbarians 
as we appear to be becoming, looking at all the senseless bloodshed 
in Bengal, Bihar and the Punjab. But I feel that it is just an indica¬ 
tion that, as we are throwing off the foreign yoke, all the dirt and 
froth is coming to the surface. When the Ganges is in flood, the 
water is turbid; the dirt comes to the surface. When the flood 
subsides, you see the clear, blue water which soothes the eye. 
That is what I hope for and live for. I do not wish to see Indian 
humanity becoming barbarian.’ 

504 


TRAGIC VICTORY 


Mountbatten, meantime, had been working in London on a 
plan to divide India. 

The Mountbatten plan provided for the division not only of 
India but of Bengal, the Punjab and Assam if their people wished. 
In the case of Bengal and the Punjab, the recently elected pro¬ 
vincial legislatures would decide. If Bengal voted to partition 
itself, then the Moslem-majority district of Sylhet in Assam would 
determine by popular referendum whether to join the Moslem 
part of Bengal. 

‘Nor is there anything in this plan’, the text read, ‘to preclude 
negotiations between communities for a united India. 5 

The scheme was thus permissive and involved no legal com¬ 
pulsion by Britain. Bengal and the Punjab might vote to remain 
united, in which case there would be no partition and no Pakistan. 
But even if Pakistan came into being, it and the other India 
could subsequently unite. 

Before leaving England, Mountbatten saw Churchill who 
promised to support the plan in the House of Commons. • 

On June 2nd, 1947, Herbert L. Matthews, telegraphing to the 
New fork Times on the eve of the announcement of the plan, said, 
‘Mr. Gandhi is a very real worry, since if he decides to go on a 
“fast unto death 55 it would well wreck the whole plan. 5 

The next day, Prime Minister Attlee announced the plan in the 
House of Commons and Mountbatten revealed it on the New 
Delhi radio. In his broadcast, the last Viceroy said frankly, ‘I am, 
of course, just as much opposed to the partition of provinces as I 
am to the partition of India herself. 5 The plan, he knew, was 
imperfect, especially because of its effect on the five million 
fighting Sikhs of the Punjab. Any conceivable line through that 
province would leave some Sikhs in Pakistan against their 
wishes. 

Nehru, Patel and the Working Committee had approved the 
plan; their approval became official when the All-India Congress 
Committee, sitting in New Delhi, on June 15th voted 153 for the 
plan, 29 against, with some abstentions. 

After the resolution had been adopted, Professor J. B. Kripalani, 
the president of Congress, delivered a brief speech which explained 
why Congress had abandoned Gandhi. 

The Hindu and Moslem ‘communities’, Kripalani said, ‘have 

505 


* 


THE BIRTH OF TWO NATIONS 


vied with each other in the worst orgies of violence ... I have 
seen a well where women with their children, 107 in all, threw 
themselves to save their honour. In another place, a place of 
worship, fifty young women were killed by their menfolk for the 
same reason . . . These ghastly experiences have no doubt affected 
my approach to the question. Some members have accused us 
that we have taken this decision out of fear. I must admit the 
truth of this charge, but not in the sense in which it is made. The 
fear is not for the lives lost or of the widows’ wail or the orphans’ 
cry or of the many houses burned. The fear is that if we go on like 
this, retaliating and heaping indignities on each other, we shall 
progressively reduce ourselves to a state of cannibalism and worse. 
In every fresh communal fight the most brutal and degraded acts 
of the previous fight become the norm.’ This is the cruel truth of 
all violence. 

T have been with Gandhiji for the last thirty years,’ Kripalani 
continued. T joined him in Champaran. I have never swayed 
in my loyalty to him. It is not a personal but a political loyalty. 
Even when I have differed with him I have considered his political 
instinct to be more correct than my elaborately reasoned attitudes. 
Today also I feel that he with his supreme fearlessness is correct 
and my stand defective. 

‘Why then am I not with him? It is because I feel that he has as 
yet found no way of tackling the problem on a mass basis.’ The 
nation was not responding to Gandhi’s plea for peace and 
brotherhood. 

Gandhi knew this. ‘If only non-Moslem India were with me,’ 
he declared, ‘I could show the way to undo the proposed partition 
. . . Many have invited me to head the opposition. But there is 
nothing in common between them and me except the opposition 
. . . Can love and hate combine?’ 

Ninety-five per cent of Gandhi’s mail was abusive and hateful. 
The Hindu letters asked why he was partial to Moslems and the 
Moslem letters demanded that he stop obstructing the creation of 
Pakistan. 

A Marathi couple from the Tilak country came up to Delhi, 
camped near the untouchables’ quarter and announced to Gandhi 
that they had begun a fast which would last until Pakistan was 
abandoned. He addressed them at two successive prayer meetings. 

506 


TRAGIC VICTORY 


Are you fasting against Pakistan, he asked, because you hate 
Moslems or love Moslems? If you hate Moslems you may not 
fast. If you love Moslems, you should go and teach other Hindus 
to love them. The young couple abandoned the fast. 

The Hindus did not love Moslems enough and the Moslems did 
not love Hindus enough. India would therefore be divided 
between them. 

Gandhi considered partition ‘a spiritual tragedy’. He noted 
preparations for bloody strife. He saw the possibility of a ‘military 
dictatorship’ and then ‘goodbye to freedom’. ‘I do not agree with 
what my closest friends have done or are doing,’ he said. 

Thirty-two years of work, Gandhi stated, have come to ‘an 
inglorious end’. On August 15th, 1947, India would become 
independent. But the victory was a cold, political arrangement: 
Indians would sit where Englishmen had sat; a tricolour would 
wave in place of the Union Jack. That was the hollow husk of 
freedom. It was victory with tragedy, victory that found the 
army defeating its own general. 

‘I cannot participate in the celebrations of August 15th,’ 
Gandhi announced. 

Independence brought sadness to the architect of independence. 
The Father of his Country was disappointed with his country. ‘I 
deceived myself into the belief that people were wedded to non¬ 
violence . . .’ he said. Indians had betrayed non-violence which 
was more important to him than Indian independence. 

Mountbatten told the Royal Empire Society on October 6th, 
1948, that in India Gandhi ‘was not compared with some great 
statesman like Roosevelt or Churchill. They classified him simply 
in their minds with Mohammed and with Christ’. Millions adored 
the Mahatma, multitudes tried to kiss his feet or the dust of his 
footsteps. They paid him homage and rejected his teachings. 
They held his person holy and desecrated his personality. They 
glorified the shell and trampled the essence. They believed in 
him but not in his principles. 

Independence Day, August 15th, found Gandhi in Calcutta 
fighting riots. He fasted all day and prayed. He issued no 
message to the nation. Invited to the capital to participate in the 
formal inauguration of the nation’s life, he refused to attend. 
‘There is disturbance within,’ he wrote to Rajkumari Amrit Kaur 

507 


THE BIRTH OF TWO NATIONS 


the next day. In the midst of festivities, he was sad. ‘Is there 
something wrong with me, 5 he asked, ‘or are tilings really going 
wrong? 5 

Freedom had come to India and Gandhi was perplexed and 
perturbed; his Gita detachment was impaired. T am far away 
from the condition of equipoise, 5 he declared. 

But faith never left him, nor did he contemplate retiring to a 
cave or a wood. ‘No cause that is intrinsically just can ever be 
described as forlorn, 5 he asserted. 

‘You must not lose faith in humanity, 5 he wrote Amrit Kaur on 
August 29th. ‘Humanity is an ocean. If a few drops of the ocean 
are dirty, the ocean does not become dirty. 5 

He had kept his faith in man. He had kept his faith in God. 
He had kept therefore his faith in himself. ‘I am a born fighter 
who does not know failure, 5 he assured a prayer-meeting audience. 

Partition was a fact, but ‘it is always possible by correct conduct 
to lessen an evil and eventually even to bring good out of evil 5 , 
Gandhi said. 

He still hoped his faith would move people, but how? ‘I am 
groping today, 5 he declared. He was full of ‘searching questions 5 
about himself. ‘Have I led the country astray? 5 

A lesser man might have sulked or grown bitter or plotted the 
discomfiture of those who thwarted him. Gandhi turned the 
searchlight inward; perhaps it was his fault. 

‘I can echo your prayer that I may realize peace and find my¬ 
self, 5 he wrote in a letter to Kurshed Naoroji. ‘It is a difficult task 
but I am after it. 5 

‘O Lord, 5 he exclaimed, ‘Lead us from darkness into light. 5 

He was approaching his seventy-eighth birthday. The world he 
had built lay partly in ruins all around him. He must begin 
building anew. Congress was too much a political party; it must 
become an instrument for the constructive uplift of the people. 
He wrote two articles in Harijan on the virtues of non-violent, non¬ 
revolutionary, God-loving, equalitarian Socialism. He was seek¬ 
ing new directions. He was old in body and young in spirit, old 
in experience and young in faith. Future plans lifted past troubles 
from his back. 

He had gone to Calcutta and been taken into a Moslem house 
in an area where the stones were slippery with fresh blood and the 

5° 8 


TRAGIC VICTORY 


air acrid with the smoke of burning homes. The Moslem family 
to whom the house belonged were friendly to him. Tor the 
moment I am no enemy,’ he wrote Amrit Kaur. He rejoiced 
more in the smallest triumph of brotherhood than in the political 
independence of a country. 

The bereaved came to him in the lowly house and he wiped 
their tears. He found solace in the balm he gave others. He had 
discovered his new task. It was his old task: to assuage pain, to 
spread love, to make all men brothers. 

St. Francis of Assisi, hoeing his garden, was asked what he 
would do if he were suddenly to learn that he was to die at sunset 
that day. 

He said: T would finish hoeing my garden.’ 

Gandhi continued to hoe the garden in which he had worked 
all his days. Sinners had thrown stones and filth into the garden. 
He continued to hoe. 

Pertinacity was Gandhi’s antidote to frustration and tragedy. 
Action gave him inner peace. 


509 


 

