CHAPTER V 


ASIA’S MESSAGE TO THE WEST 

L a t e in November 1946 Prime Minister Attlee summoned 
Nehru, Defence Minister Baldev Singh, Jinnah and Liaquat 
iKhan to 10 Downing Street for an extraordinary conference. 
The Constituent Assembly was to meet in New Delhi on 
December 9th; Jinnah had repeatedly declared that the Moslem 
League would boycott it. The object of the Downing Street 
conference was to bring the Moslem League into the Constituent 
Assembly. For if the Assembly was a predominantly Congress 
affair, with the Moslems outside, how, the argument ran, could 
England transfer power to it and leave India? 

Originally, the Moslem League had accepted the Cabinet 
Mission’s plan of May 16th, 1946, and thereby agreed to go into 
the Constituent Assembly. Later, however, it had withdrawn. 

The issue on which Jinnah withdrew from the Assembly pro¬ 
voked hot discussions and fierce hatreds. What was it? 

Article 19 of the Cabinet Mission’s plan stipulated that the 
Constituent Assembly would first meet in New Delhi for a short, 
formal session and then break up into three sections corresponding 
to three groups of provinces: Group A comprised the centre, the 
heart of India and was overwhelmingly Hindu; Group B included 
the North-west Frontier Province, Sind and the Punjab and was 
largely Moslem in population; Group C, in the north-east, 
consisted of Bengal and Assam. 

Each section would draft a constitution for its group of pro¬ 
vinces. But if a province did not like the constitution it could stay 
out of the group. 

Thus Hindu Assam would be required to sit in Section C with 
Moslem Bengal and participate in the drafting of a constitution 
for Group C. But should Assam dislike the final constitution it 
could secede from Group C and stand alone, or, possibly, join 
Group A. The sections were compulsory, the groups voluntary. 

Gandhi objected. He said it was compulsion and a waste of 
effort. Suppose Bengal, which would have a big majority in 

490 


ASIA’S MESSAGE TO THE WEST 


Section C, drew up a constitution that tied Assam to Group C. 
And why should the North-west Frontier Province, which, though 
predominantly Moslem had always been anti-Jinnah, be forced 
to sit with the Punjab and Sind? 

The sections and groups were introduced into the Cabinet 
Mission’s plan in order to satisfy Jinnah; they were a half-way or 
perhaps quarter-way house to Pakistan. They divided India into 
three federated units. For that very reason Gandhi rejected them. 

While Gandhi was in Noakhali, the Congress organizations of 
neighbouring Assam sent emissaries to him to ask for guidance. 
He told them bluntly to refuse to go into the sections even if the 
national Congress leaders told them to go in. 

It was to resolve this difficulty that Nehru, Baldev Singh, 
Jinnah and Liaquat Ali Khan made their hasty aeroplane trip 
to London early in December. 

During his stay in London, Jinnah declared publicly that he 
expected India to be divided into a Hindu state and a Moslem 
state. He shared Mr. Churchill’s apprehensions, he added, 
‘regarding the possibility of civil strife and riots in India’. Both 
halves of the declarations were programme rather than prophecy. 

There had already been enough riots to lead the British to 
expect more unless Jinnah got the half-Pajkistan or quarter- 
Pakistan implicit in the sections and groups. But although Attlee 
succeeded, after great exertion, in bringing the Congress and 
League ministers into his Downing Street office, the conference 
ended in disagreement. 

Attlee thereupon announced on December 6th that if the 
Constituent Assembly adopted a constitution without the co¬ 
operation of the Moslem League ‘His Majesty’s Government 
could not, of course, contemplate . . . forcing such a constitution 
upon any unwilling parts of the country.’ 

This meant that one part of India would accept the constitution 
and another part might reject it. Again India faced partition. 

Soon after Nehru’s return from London he made the long 
journey from New Delhi to the village of Srirampur in Noakhali 
and, on December 27th, 1946, reported to the Mahatma on the 
historic failure to agree in Downing Street. 

But Gandhi repeated his advice to Assam and to the Sikhs, to 
remain aloof from the constitutional sections and groups. He 

49 1 , 


i 


THE BIRTH OF TWO NATIONS 


regarded them as devices to split India and refused to countenance 
anything that contributed to division. 

The All India Congress Committee, however, resolved on 
January 6th, 1947, by a vote of 99 against 52, to accept the sections. 

Gandhi’s influence in Congress was waning. 

Gandhi had gone to Noakhali to reinforce the human bond 
between Hindus and Moslems before politics and legal enactments 
tore it asunder. He dreaded the consequences of the bisection of 
India. In New York, on October 16th, 1949, Prime Minister 
Nehru stated that he would have fought to the end against the 
establishment of Pakistan if he had foreseen the dire results that 
flowed from it. 

Perhaps Gandhi intuitively anticipated these results. The 
division of India caused the violent death of hundreds of thousands 
of Indians. It caused fifteen million refugees to wander un¬ 
happily from their homes into distant uncertainty. It provoked 
the war in Kashmir. It brought gigantic economic losses to all 
parts of the country. It fed a continuing religious-nationalistic 
bitterness with disastrous potentialities. 

Even though the Congress leaders were not as perceptive as 
Gandhi they knew that no good could come of partition. Why 
then did they acquiesce in Attlee’s December 6th statement? 

In 1942, Congress President Maulana Azad said to me in 
Nehru’s presence that Congress abhorred the idea of the division 
of India but could not reject it indefinitely if the Moslems wanted 
it. He was opposed, however, he said, to ‘divorce before marriage’. 
First they must try to live together in a united independent India 
and if it did not work then there would be time enough to separate. 

Now Nehru, Patel, Azad and the other Congress members had 
had a taste of marriage; they had been sitting in the Government 
with Moslem Leaguers who obviously entered the Cabinet to 
disrupt it. The experience was a harrowing one. It frayed the 
nerves of the Congress leaders. It destroyed their faith in Congress- 
League collaboration. 

Gandhi still believed in Hindu-Moslem friendship. Nehru and 
Patel were reconciled to the constitutional sections knowing that 
this might be the beginning of Pakistan but seeing no way out 
except civil war. They hoped Jinnah would be happy with the 
division into three federated states and forgo Pakistan. 

492 


ASIA’S MESSAGE TO THE WEST 


The next step was a statement by Prime Minister Attlee in the 
House of Commons on February 20th, 1947, that England would 
leave India ‘by a date not later than June 1948’. Simultaneously, 
it became known that Lord (Admiral Louis) Mountbatten, a 
great-grandson of Queen Victoria, would succeed Lord Wavell as 
Viceroy; he would be the twentieth and last British Viceroy 
of India. 

To whom would Britain transfer power? On this key question 
Attlee, according to Lord Pethick-Lawrence, ‘was less precise’. 
His Majesty’s Government, Attlee asserted, would have to 
determine whether power should be handed over ‘to some form 
of central government’ or in some areas ‘to the existing provincial 
governments’ or ‘in some other way as may seem most reasonable 
and in the best interests of the Indian people’. 

Nehru found this rather vague but he welcomed the whole 
statement as ‘wise and courageous’; it removed ‘all misconception 
and suspicion’. 

The Working Committee, in its session during the first week of 
March, officially approved of Attlee’s new utterance and, in view 
of the impending ‘swift transfer of power’, invited the Moslem 
League to talks. Simultaneously, the Committee took cognizance 
of the widespread bloodshed in the populous Punjab. Indeed, it 
took such a sombre and serious view of events there that it en¬ 
visaged ‘a division of the Punjab into two provinces, so that the 
predominantly Moslem part may be separated from the pre¬ 
dominantly non-Moslem part’. 

The Punjab situation was ominous. According to a reply given 
on May 21st, 1946, in the House of Commons by the Earl of 
Listowel, the Secretary of State for India and Burma, 4014 persons 
had been killed in disturbances in India between November 
18th, 1946, and May 18th, 1947, and of these, 3024 were killed in 
fighting between Moslems and Sikhs and Hindus in the Punjab. 

Disturbed by events further west, Gandhi left east Bengal for 
Bihar. Without a day’s respite, he began a tour of the province. 
In village and city, he chastised the Bihari Hindus. They ‘had 
forgotten in a fit of insanity that they were human beings’. 

One day he listened for hours to reports by Moslems and 
Hindus about continued tension. Nobody could assure him ‘that 
things had completely settled down to complete normality’. The 

493 


THE BIRTH OF TWO NATIONS 

recital so tired him mentally that he had to take a brief nap before 
services. 

Another day he apologized for coming to prayers in a car; 
the Biharis ‘should know the art of welcoming people in a quiet 
and dignified manner instead of the present embarrassing manner’. 
Thousands had tried to come near enough to touch him or kiss 
his feet. 

Wherever he went he preached repentance and restitution. All 
kidnapped Moslem women should be returned. Compensation 
should be paid for property looted or destroyed. 

A telegram arrived from a Hindu warning the Mahatma not 
to condemn Hindus for what they had done. Gandhi mentioned 
the telegram at his prayer meeting and said, T would forfeit my 
claim to being a Hindu if I bolstered the wrongdoing of fellow 
Hindus or of any other fellow being.’ He cautioned them against 
avenging the killings of Hindus in the Punjab. 

He knew that even worshipful Hindus were irritated by his 
message of love. Nevertheless, he began collecting money at all 
his meetings for the relief of aggrieved Moslems. In Patna, two 
thousand rupees were gathered at one assembly and a number of 
women contributed their personal jewellery. 

Before he spoke in any locality, Gandhi visited the ruined homes 
of Moslems or Moslem families who had suffered death or physical 
injury. The deeper he penetrated into the Bihar tragedy the 
more it obsessed him; he would not leave the province until ‘both 
the communities had become friendly with one another and no 
longer needed his services’. He insisted that Hindus should call 
back the Moslems who had fled and rebuild their huts and re¬ 
establish them in business. He summoned Hindus guilty of atrocities 
to surrender. 

The day Gandhi arrived in the town of Masurhi ‘fifty persons’ 
he reported, ‘who were wanted in connection with the riot cases’ 
surrendered to the police. He welcomed that, and hoped others 
would follow suit. If the criminals lacked the courage to sur¬ 
render to the authorities they should come to him or to Ghaffar 
Khan, ‘the Frontier Gandhi’, or to General Shaw Nawaz of the 
Indian National Army, who were accompanying him on the tour, 
and confess. 

As his car moved across the countryside, groups of Hindus 

494 


ASIA’S MESSAGE TO THE WEST 


signalled him to stop and gave him purses for Moslems. This was 
the way to stop violence, not with the aid of the military and the 
police. 

Hindus were boycotting Moslem stores and firms. He begged 
them to abandon such intolerance. He asked them to recant 
publicly in order to reassure the Moslems. ‘But he was sorry to 
say that not one Hindu got up to give the needed assurance . . . 
There was little cause for wonder, therefore, if the Moslems were 
afraid to return to their villages.’ He warned them that ‘Indians 
might lose the golden apple of independence’. There was re¬ 
newed agitation among Biharis to avenge the Moslem attacks on 
Hindus and Sikhs in the Punjab. ‘If ever you become mad 
again,’ he cried out, ‘you must destroy me first.’ It was his fourth 
week in Bihar. 

On March 22nd, 1947, Lord Mountbatten, handsome in white 
naval uniform, arrived in New Delhi with his wife, Edwina, the 
Vicereine; their charm and informality and his first political 
declaration made a fine impression. Twenty-four hours later, 
Jinnah stated publicly that partition was the only solution; 
otherwise there would be ‘terrific disasters’. 

Within four days of his arrival, Mountbatten invited Gandhi 
and Jinnah to the palace. Gandhi was deep in Bihar. Mount¬ 
batten offered to bring him out by aeroplane. Gandhi said he 
preferred a means of locomotion used by the millions. At the 
station, before the train left Patna, the Mahatma collected 
money for Harijan relief. 

Gandhi conferred with Mountbatten for two and a quarter 
hours on March 31st. 

The next day Gandhi visited the Asian Relations Conference 
which had been sitting in New Delhi since March 23rd; delegates 
attended from most countries of Asia and from five constituent 
republics of the Soviet Union. Asked to speak, he said he would 
deliver an address at the closing session the next day, but if there 
were any questions now he would try to answer them. 

Did he believe in One World and could it succeed under present 
conditions? 

‘I will not like to live in this world if it is not to be one,’ Gandhi 
replied. ‘Certainly I should like to see this dream realized in my 
lifetime. I hope that all the representatives who have come here 

495 


THE BIRTH OF TWO NATIONS 


from the Asian countries will strive their level best to have only 
one world. 5 If they worked with ‘fixed determination 5 the dream 
could come true. 

Answering a Chinese delegate’s question about a permanent 
Asia Institute, he drifted far from the subject and discussed what 
was uppermost in his mind. ‘I am sorry, 5 he said, ‘that I have to 
refer to the conditions we see today [in India], We do not know 
how to keep peace between ourselves . . . We think we must 
resort to the law of the jungle. It is an experience which I would 
not like you to carry to your respective countries. 5 

He turned to the problem of Asia. ‘All the Asian representatives 
have come together, 5 he began. ‘Is it in order to wage a 
war against Europe, against America, or against other non-Asia¬ 
tics? I say most emphatically, “No, 55 this is not India’s mission 
. . . It will be a sorry thing if we go away from this conference 
without a fixed determination that Asia shall live and live as free 
as every Western nation. I just wanted to say that conferences 
like the present should meet regularly and if you ask me where, 
India is the place. 5 

The next day he delivered his promised address before the 
conference. He first apologized for speaking English. He ad¬ 
mitted that he had hoped to collect his thoughts but had no time. 
On the way to the meeting he had asked Ghaffar Khan for a 
piece of paper and pencil to make some notes. ‘I got a pen instead 
of a pencil. I tried to scribble a few words. You will be sorry to 
hear that that piece of paper is not by my side though I remember 
what I wanted to say. 5 

Then he rambled: They were assembled in a city, but cities 
were not India. The real truth was in the villages and in the 
untouchable homes of the villages. The villages, to be sure, were 
dungheaps full of ‘miserable specimens of humanity with lustreless 
eyes’. But in them was wisdom. 

The East, he proceeded, had submitted to a cultural conquest 
by the West. Yet the West had originally received its wisdom from 
the East: Zoroaster, Buddha, Moses, Jesus, Mohammed, Krishna, 
Rama and lesser lights. 

He asked the conference to understand the message of Asia. ‘It 
is not to be learned through Western spectacles or through the 
atomic bomb. If you want to give a message to the West it must 

496 


ASIA’S MESSAGE TO THE WEST 


be the message of love and the message of truth. I do not want 
merely to appeal to your head/ he said suddenly. ‘I want to 
capture your heart.’ 

He hoped Asia’s message of love and truth would conquer the 
West. ‘This conquest will be loved by the West itself. The West 
is today pining for wisdom.’ 

It was -structurally a poor speech but full of essential wisdom and 
of the essence of Gandhi. Most of the delegates had probably not 
heard such simple, sincere words for many years. 

Between March 31st and April 12th Gandhi conferred with 
Mountbatten six times. Jinnah had an equal number of talks 
with the hard-working Viceroy. 

What did they talk about? ‘Before I would get down to any 
actual solution of the problem,’ Mountbatten said in an address 
before the Council of the Royal Empire Society in London on 
October 6th, 1948, when his task in India was done, ‘I just wanted 
to talk to them to get to know them, to get together and gossip. 
Thus Gandhi told me about his early life in South Africa, Mr. 
Jinnah about his early life in London and I told them a bit about 
my early life. Then, when I felt I had some sort of understanding 
with the men I was dealing with, I started talking to them about 
the problem before us.’ 

The problem was the fate of 400,000,000 people* the fate of 
India, perhaps the fate of Asia. Mountbatten’s assignment was 
to take Britain out of India by June 1948. The schedule required 
him to propose a solution by the end of 1947. This would allow 
the British Parliament enough time to pass the necessary legisla¬ 
tion for the liberation of India by June 1948. But on the spot, he 
told the Royal Empire Society, he and his advisers agreed that 
this would be too slow. Trouble had started, he said, on August 
16th, 1946, Jinnah’s Direct Action Day. There followed the 
massacres of Hindus in Noakhali and Hindu reprisals in Bihar; 
then ‘the Moslems massacred the Sikhs at Rawalpindi [in the 
Punjab]’ and a rising took place in the North-west Frontier 
Province. ‘I arrived out there,’ Mountbatten stated, ‘to find this 
terrible pendulum of massacres swinging wider and wider; if it 
was not stopped there was no telling where India might end. . . . 

‘Personally,’ Mountbatten continued, ‘I was convinced that 
the right solution for them would have been to keep a United 

497 


THE BIRTH OF TWO NATIONS 


India* under the May 16th, 1946, plan of the British Cabinet 
Mission. But the plan presupposed the co-operation and goodwill 
of all parties. ‘Mr. Jinnah,’ however, Lord Mountbatten told the 
Royal Empire Society, ‘made it abundantly clear from the first 
moment that so long as he lived he would never accept a United 
India. He demanded partition, he insisted on Pakistan.* Con¬ 
gress, on the other hand, favoured an undivided India. But, 
Mountbatten stated, the Congress leaders agreed that they would 
accept partition in order to avoid a civil war. The Viceroy ‘was 
convinced that the Moslem League would have fought*. 

But how was India to be divided? Congress refused to let large 
non-Moslem areas go to Pakistan. ‘That automatically meant,’ 
Mountbatten explained, ‘a partition of the great provinces of the 
Punjab and Bengal.’ 

‘When I told Mr. Jinnah,’ Mountbatten said in his historic 
review before the Royal Empire Society, ‘that I had their pro¬ 
visional agreement to partition he was overjoyed. When I said 
that it logically followed that this would involve partition of the 
Punjab and Bengal he was horrified. He produced the strongest 
arguments why these provinces should not be partitioned. He 
said that they had national characteristics and that partition 
would be disastrous. I agreed, but I said how much more must I 
now feel that the same considerations applied to the partitioning 
of the whole of India. He did not like that and started explaining 
why India had to be partitioned and so we went round and round 
the mulberry bush until finally he realized that either he could 
have a United India with an unpartitioned Punjab and Bengal or 
a divided India with a partitioned Punjab and Bengal and he 
finally accepted the latter solution.’ 

Gandhi did not approve of any kind of partition in April 1947 
and refused until his death to approve of it. 

On April 15th, at the request of Mountbatten, Gandhi and 
Jinnah issued a joint statement deploring the ‘recent acts of law¬ 
lessness and violence that have brought the utmost disgrace on 
the fair name of India’ and denouncing ‘for all time the use of 
force to achieve political ends’. This came at the end of a fort¬ 
night in which Jinnah had convinced Mountbatten that if he did 
not achieve his political ends India would be rent by civil war. 

During that fortnight, Gandhi lived in the untouchables’ 

496 


ASIA’S MESSAGE TO THE WEST 


quarter on Kingsway, Delhi, and conducted a public prayer 
meeting there every evening. The first evening he asked those 
present whether they would object to the recitation of some verses 
from the Koran. Several objectors raised their hands. They said 
he had no authority to intone an Islamic holy book at Hindu 
services. Gandhi thereupon broke off the meeting. He put the 
same question the second evening. Again there were objectors; 
again he refused to pray with the congregation. The same thing 
happened the third evening. 

The fourth evening nobody objected. The objectors had 
withdrawn. If all members of the congregation on the previous 
three days had objected, Gandhi explained, he would have read 
from the Koran and been prepared ‘to die at their hands with the 
name of God on his lips if they wanted to kill him. But he wished 
to avoid a clash on the prayer ground between those who wanted 
the prayers to be held and those who objected. In the end non¬ 
violence prevailed’. 

He received angry letters, threatening letters, some of them 
anonymous. He was a bad Hindu, one said. He was a Moslem 
‘fifth columnist’ in Hinduism, another said. A third was addressed 
to ‘Mohamed Gandhi’. 

‘How can it be a sin to chant God’s name in Arabic?’ he argued. 
Hindu-Moslem unity was his life’s goal. ‘If Hindustan meant a 
land only for the Hindus and Pakistan only for Moslems, Pakistan 
and Hindustan would then be lands flowing with poison.’ 

On April 13th Gandhi returned to Bihar. 

Action for non-violence and against hate was now the only 
political work that made sense. Unless Gandhi could prove that 
Hindus and Moslems lived in peace, Jinnah was right and Pakistan 
inevitable. Mountbatten would not succumb to the most brilliant 
debating points; Hindu-Moslem tolerance 'had to be demon¬ 
strated in life. 

A victory for non-violence in Bihar or Bengal or the Punjab 
would spell success in the battle for the mind of Mountbatten and 
Britain and of those in Congress who had lost faith in a united 
India. This was a case where the people would really decide a 
major issue — not by their votes but by their behaviour, and Gandhi 
still hoped to alter their behaviour. The question was: Is India a 
nation or a country inhabited by warring religious communities? 


499 


11 


M.G. 


THE BIRTH OF TWO NATIONS 

One of the world's worst curses is the influence of past centuries. 
In India, the seventeenth, eighteenth and nineteenth centuries have 
survived to plague the twentieth. Religious passions, provincial 
loyalties and princely states exercised the same debilitating, 
divisive influence they had in Europe before the modern age of 
industrialism and nationalism. India, with four hundred million 
inhabitants, had only three million industrial workers. The 
country lacked cohesion because nobody possessed enough unify¬ 
ing power or a sufficiently attractive unifying idea to overcome 
the centrifugal trends of a backward land. Gandhi, the towering- 
symbol of unifying nationalism, was himself a mingling of an 
obsolete past, a struggling present and the unborn world of his 
high ideals. 

Jinnah’s strength was the threat of civil war. The riots were a 
preview. The only hope of preserving the unity of India was to 
pacify the people and thus prove Jinnah’s threat an empty one. 

Gandhi approached this task without flinching and alone. 

History was asking whether India was a nation. 


5°o 


 

