CHAPTER VIII 


THE FUTURE OF INDIA 

G andhi seldom made an adverse criticism without suggest¬ 
ing a concrete cure. He had criticized the Congress party 
and the new government of independent India. What did 
he propose? 

Gandhi was quick to see that the freedom of India raised the 
question of freedom in India. How could India remain a 
democracy? 

There was only one major party, the Congress party, and it 
enjoyed vast prestige as the party of Gandhi, Nehru and Patel, 
the party which had fought and won the battle for liberation from 
Britain. Other parties like the Hindu Mahasabha and the 
Communists were insignificant. 

The question Gandhi pondered was: Could the Congress party 
guide and curb the Government? He had not studied political 
conditions in the Soviet Union or Franco Spain or other totalita¬ 
rian countries, but by intuition he arrived at conclusions which 
others had reached after long experience and analysis: he realized 
that a one-party system could actually be a no-party system, for 
when the Government and party are one, the party is a rubber 
stamp and leads only a fictitious existence. 

If the one important party of India, the Congress, did not 
maintain an independent, critical attitude towards the Govern¬ 
ment, who could act as a brake on any autocratic tendencies that 
might develop in the Government? 

Without free criticism and potent opposition, democracy dies. 
Without political criticism and opposition, a nation’s intellect, 
culture and public morality stagnate; big men are purged and 
small men become kowtowing pygmies. The leaders surround 
themselves with cowards, sycophants and grovelling yes-men 
whose automatic approval is misread as a tribute to great¬ 
ness. 

Could the Congress party, with aid from Gandhi and from the 
free press, prevent such a development in India? 

522 


THE FUTURE OF INDIA 


On November 15th, 1947, in the presence of Gandhi, Professor 
J. B. Kripalani, president of Congress, informed the All-India 
Congress Committee that he was resigning his position. He had 
not been consulted by the Government nor been taken into its 
full confidence. Although ‘it is the party from which the govern¬ 
ment of the day derives its power 5 , Kripalani said, the Government 
ignored the party. Gandhi, Kripalani revealed, felt that in these 
circumstances the resignation was justified. 

Nehru and Patel were the heads of the Government. They were 
also leaders of the Congress party. Their popularity and hold on 
the Congress machine enabled them to dominate the party. 
They identified themselves with the party. Why then should they 
accept the Congress president as a curb on their power? Why 
should they give him a veto on their proposals? 

The choice of a successor to Kripalani assumed key importance. 
The election of a puppet who obeyed the Government would 
signalize the elimination of effective political opposition. 

Gandhi attended the meeting of the Congress Working Com¬ 
mittee which was to elect the new president. It was the Mahatma’s 
day of silence. When nominations were opened, he wrote the 
name of his candidate on a small piece of paper and passed it to 
Nehru. Nehru read the name aloud: Narendra Dev, the Socialist 
leader. Nehru supported Narendra Dev’s candidature. Others 
opposed it. 

The Socialists were then still inside the Congress party. But 
their ideological, political and personal differences with right- 
wing Congressmen presumably encouraged Gandhi in the belief 
that they might be able to control and check certain trends within 
the Government. 

The morning session of the Working Committee closed at 
10 a.m.; no vote was taken. 

At noon, Nehru and Patel summoned Rajendra Prasad and,, 
without consulting Gandhi, urged him to be a candidate for the 
presidency of Congress. Dr. Prasad, a member of the Working 
Committee, was a lawyer who first met Gandhi in Champaran in 
1917 during the struggle for the indigo sharecroppers. 

Prasad went to Gandhi in Birla House at 1 p.m. and told the 
Mahatma about the offer. ‘I don’t like it,’ Gandhi said. 

‘I cannot remember ever having dared to oppose Gandhi,’ Dr. 

523 


THE BIRTH OF TWO NATIONS 

Prasad stated in recounting these events. ‘Even when I differed 
with him I felt he must be right and followed him.’ 

On this occasion, too, Prasad agreed with Gandhi and promised 
to withdraw his candidacy. 

Subsequently, however, Prasad was persuaded to change his 
mind. He became the new Congress president. He was a gentle, 
modest, compliant, retiring, well-intentioned, high-minded per¬ 
son more inclined to serve than to lead. He was sixty-three. 

Gandhi had been defeated by the Congress machine and by the 
key men in the Government. 

Gandhi now tried a different approach. 

During the first half of December 1947 he held a series of 
conferences with his most trusted collaborators outside the 
Government. They were the Constructive Workers, the men and 
women who directed the several organizations set up by Gandhi 
over the years to remove untouchability, spread the use of 
Hindustani as the national language, extend basic education, 
improve food cultivation, develop village industries and encourage 
hand spinning. The Constructive Workers were devoted to non¬ 
violence; they believed in Gandhi not merely because he was the 
chief instrument of India’s political independence but because 
they considered him the chief agent for India’s social reform. 

Gandhi wanted all these organizations to combine. But he did 
not want the Constructive Workers ‘to go into power politics; it 
would spell ruin. Or else why,’ Gandhi asked, ‘should not I 
myself have gone into politics and tried to run the Government 
my way? Those who are holding the reins of power today would 
easily have stepped aside and made room for me, but whilst they 
are in charge they carry on only according to their own lights. 

‘But I do not want to take power into my hands,’ Gandhi 
assured his friends. ‘By abjuring power and devoting ourselves 
to pure, selfless sendee of the voters we can guide and influence 
them. It would give us far more real power than we shall have by 
going into the government. A stage may come when the people 
themselves may feel and say that they want us and no one else 
to wield power. The question could then be considered. I shall 
most probably not be alive then.’ 

Unable to guide Congress, Gandhi planned to build a new 
vehicle which would push the Government and, in an emergency, 

524 


THE FUTURE OF INDIA 


carry the Government’s load. It would be in politics without 
seeking political power except as a last resort. Instead of trying 
to win votes it would teach the masses ‘to use their votes intel¬ 
ligently’, Gandhi said. 

‘Under adult suffrage,’ he declared, ‘if we are worth our salt, 
we should have such a hold on the people that whomsoever we 
choose would be returned.’ To assist in this task Gandhi wanted 
to attract more intellectuals. ‘Our intelligentsia’, he told the 
conference of Constructive Workers, ‘are not lacking in sympathy. 
Reason, as a rule, follows in the footsteps of feeling. We have not 
sufficiently penetrated their hearts to convince their reason.’ That 
is a key to Gandhi: heart and mind were one, but heart ruled. 

Why could not the constructive welfare work be done by the 
Congress party or by the Government? a delegate asked. 

‘Because Congressmen aren’t sufficiently interested in con¬ 
structive work,’ Gandhi replied simply. ‘We must recognize the 
fact that the social order of our dreams cannot come through the 
Congress party of today. . . . 

‘There is so much corruption today,’ Gandhi asserted, ‘that it 
frightens me. Everybody wants to carry so many votes in his 
pocket, because votes give power.’ (Kripalani described the 
trouble as ‘red-tapism, jobbery, corruption, bribery, black¬ 
marketing and profiteering’.) Therefore, Gandhi emphasized, 
‘banish the idea of the capture of power and you will be able to 
guide power and keep it on the right path . . . There is no other 
way of removing the corruption that threatens to strangle our 
independence at its very birth’. 

He w'ho is immune to the temptation of power can best oppose 
the men in power, Gandhi felt. His limited experience told him 
that legislators and judges were too close to the machinery of 
power to check-and-balance the executive; only those outside 
government, he contended, could check-and-balance those in 
government. 

Yet even his own high authority was no match for the power of 
a government born of his efforts and whose members touched his 
feet in obeisance. 


525 


 

