CHAPTER XI 


OPERATION AND FAST 
N the evening of January 12th, 1924, Mahatma Gandhi 



was hastily carried from Yeravda Central Prison, where he 


V-/ was lodged on March 20th, 1922, to Sassoon Hospital in 
the city of Poona. He had developed acute appendicitis. The 
Government was ready to wait for Indian physicians to arrive 
from Bombay, three hours’ distance by train, but shortly before 
midnight Colonel Maddock, the British surgeon, informed Gandhi 
that he would have to operate immediately. Gandhi consented. 

While the operating theatre was being prepared, V. S. Srinivasa 
Sastri, head of the Servants of India Society, and Dr. Phatak, 
Poona friend of the Mahatma, were summoned at his request. 
Together, they drafted a public statement which declared that he 
had agreed to the operation, that the physicians had treated him 
well and that, whatever happened, there must be no anti-govern¬ 
ment agitation. The hospital authorities, and Gandhi, knew that 
if the operation went badly India might burst into flames. 

When the declaration was ready, Gandhi drew up his knees and 
signed it in pencil. ‘See how my hand trembles,’ he remarked to 
Colonel Maddock with a laugh. ‘You will have to put this right.’ 

‘Oh,’ replied the surgeon, ‘we will put tons and tons of strength 
into it.’ 

Chloroform was administered and a photograph taken. During 
the operation, a thunderstorm cut off the supply of electricity. 
Then the flashlight which one of the three nurses had been holding 
went out, and the operation had to be finished by the light of a 
hurricane lamp. 

The appendicectomy was successful and the Mahatma thanked 
the surgeon profusely. An abscess formed locally, however, and 
the patient’s progress was too slow. The Government thought it 
wise or generous in these circumstances to release Gandhi on 
February 5th. 

The operation piqued Gandhi’s curiosity, and when Manu 
Gandhi, the granddaughter of his cousin, had to undergo an 


237 


GANDHI IN INDIA 


appendicectomy at Patna, in Bihar province, during a tour, the 
Mahatma asked the surgeon, Dr. D. P. Bhargava, the same who 
was first to reach Gandhi’s side after the assassination, whether 
he could be present. Dr. Bhargava assented on condition that 
Gandhi wore a gauze mask, and two snapshots taken during the 
operation show Gandhi sitting on a chair, an unusual perch, with 
a white mask covering the lower half of his face and tied around 
the back of his head. Dr. Bhargava says Gandhi did not utter a 
word during the entire hour. (This was on May 15th, 1947, at 
9.30 p.m.) 

‘The West’, Gandhi once wrote to Miss Slade, ‘has always com¬ 
manded my admiration for its surgical inventions and all-round 
progress in that direction.’ 

Nevertheless, Gandhi never quite cast off his prejudices against 
physicians. Once Gandhi resisted a penicillin injection. 

‘If I give you penicillin’, the doctor said, ‘you will recover in 
three days. Otherwise it will take three weeks.’ 

‘That’s all right,’ Gandhi replied. ‘I’m in no hurry.’ 

The doctor said he might infect others. 

‘Then give them penicillin’, Gandhi advised. 

In an unguarded moment, the same physician told Gandhi that 
if all sick people simply went to bed they’d get well. 

‘Don’t say that aloud,’ Gandhi cautioned. ‘You will lose all 
your patients.’ 

Gandhi liked to be his own doctor. Mahadev Desai, who knew 
him well, said, ‘But for his fundamental objection to vivisection, 
he might have been a physician and a surgeon.’ Gandhi wrote a 
book on health, and loved to recommend ‘quack’ remedies to 
friends, callers and all of India. Accordingly, when he received 
his unconditional discharge from Yeravda Jail and went to the 
beach at Juhu, near Bombay, to recuperate in the home of 
Shantikumar Morarjee, an industrialist, he decided that since 
he would be doctoring himself he might as well doctor others too; 
he converted the seaside villa into a temporary hospital where 
ailing associates, summoned from near and far, gave Gandhi 
pleasure by submitting to his mud packs, water baths, food fads 
and massage. Chiefly, however, he advanced his and their con¬ 
valescence with the medicine of laughter and companionship. 

Others came to Juhu too — unasked — and Gandhi appealed to 

238 


OPERATION AND FAST 


them through the press to come, if they must, between 4 and 5 in 
the evening for prayers on the sands. But ‘seeing me 5 , he explained, 
‘is not likely to be of benefit to you. It is an indication of your 
love for me, but it is an exaggerated indication’. It would be much 
better to spend the money and time on spinning. If they gave him 
peace he could husband his ‘very small . . . capital of energy’ and 
resume the active editorship of Young India , his ‘viewspaper’, and 
Navajivan , which he did on April 3rd, 1924. 

To Juhu, too, came G. R. Das and Motilal Nehru for discussions 
on the ugly situation that had arisen during the twenty-two 
months Gandhi spent in prison. 

First, Hindu-Moslem friendship, the firm rock on which Gandhi 
hoped to build a united, free India, had been all but submerged 
in an angry tide of hostility between the two communities. The 
Khilafat movement was dead, killed not by Britain, but by Kemal 
Pasha (Ataturk), the master of Moslem Turkey. Wiser than most 
of his Indian co-religionists, Kemal had created a secular republic, 
Latinized the cursive Arabic script, proscribed the fez and other 
Oriental head-dress and, having deposed the Caliph, allowed him 
to flee to the island of Malta in a British man-of-war in November 
1922. A weak heir clung to the illusion of the Caliph’s religious 
primacy, but in March 1924 he too became a refugee. 

Left without a cause, the Khilafat movement disintegrated. 
Therewith, large-scale Hindu-Moslem political collaboration 
came to an end. 

Second, the non-co-operation movement was dead. ‘Scores of 
lawyers have resumed practice,’ Gandhi said, summarizing what 
he was told at Juhu and what he learned first-hand. ‘Some even 
regret having given it up . . . Hundreds of boys and girls who 
gave up government schools and colleges have repented of their 
action and returned to them.’ Moreover, Motilal Nehru, C. R. 
Das and their many adherents favoured a return to the municipal, 
provincial and national legislative councils. This, they main¬ 
tained, would enable them to participate in elections, keep in 
touch with the people, air grievances in the deliberative assem¬ 
blies and obstruct the British government. Indeed, in some cases 
the Government might lack a majority in the councils and be 
forced to rule by administrative fiat, thus unmasking the sham 
of dyarchy and showing the British nation that their imperialist 

239 


GANDHI IN INDIA 


leaders were not ready to share power with Indians. This demon¬ 
stration might induce England to alter the system in India. 

To carry out their programme, Das and the elder Nehru had, at 
the end of 1922, launched the Swaraj (Home-Rule) Party whose 
‘immediate’ aim was Dominion Status within the Empire. 

Those who continued to uphold Gandhi’s non-violent non-co- 
operation were called No-Changers. The two factions wanted 
Swaraj but had been fighting like bitter enemies. A compromise 
giving them freedom of action kept both inside the Congress. 

Confronted with this picture at Juhu, Gandhi entered into the 
Gandhi-Das Pact which confirmed the live-and-let-live arrange¬ 
ment between the Gandhians and the Swaraj party. He did not 
want to split Congress. 

Gandhi was still a non-co-operator, still a champion of civil 
disobedience and ‘a strong disbeliever in this government’, he 
declared in Young India of April 10th, 1924. He would therefore 
have pressed the boycott of the courts, schools and government 
jobs and titles. But the Gandhians had grown discouraged during 
his absence in jail. The boycott involved tremendous personal 
sacrifice which few could bear. The Swaraj party’s policy, on the 
other hand, was alluring. It meant election victories, membership 
in legislatures, speech-making, etc. Gandhi had no short-range 
programme to match it. He accordingly withdrew from Indian 
politics for several years and devoted himself to purifying India. 
Swaraj depended on how good India was, not how bad the British 
were. ‘My belief is that the instant India is purified India be¬ 
comes free and not a moment earlier,’ he wrote ‘Charlie’ Andrews. 

Gandhi’s purpose, during this period of withdrawal from 
politics, was to foster the brotherhood of man among Indians. 
Looking around, it soon became obvious to him that ‘the only 
question for immediate solution before the country is the Hindu- 
Moslem question. I agree with Mr. Jinnah,’ he added, ‘that 
Hindu-Moslem unity means Swaraj . . . There is no question 
more important and more pressing than this’. 

Great editor that he was, Gandhi dedicated the entire May 29th, 
1924, issue of Young India to his 6ooo-word article on ‘Hindu- 
Moslem Tension, its Causes and Cure’. After recording the Hindu 
charges against Moslems (‘Mussulmans’, he called them) and the 
Moslem countercharges and noting the growth of quarrels, 

240 


OPERATION AND FAST 

disputes and riots between the communities, he expressed the 
opinion that all this was ‘a reaction against the spread of non¬ 
violence. I feel the wave of violence coming. The Hindu-Moslem 
tension is an acute phase of this tiredness’. 

What would cure this loss of faith in non-violence, Gandhi 
asked. Non-violence, he answered. 

Gandhi’s lengthy article was advocacy rather than analysis. 
He believed in the immediate possibility of Hindu-Moslem 
friendship ‘because it is so natural, so necessary for both and 
because I believe in human nature’. That is almost all of Gandhi 
in one sentence. 

‘The key to the situation lies with the Hindus,’ he wrote. The 
‘two constant causes of friction’ with the Moslems were cow- 
slaughter and music. 

‘Though I regard cow protection as the central fact of Hinduism 
[Gandhi declared], I have never been able to understand the 
antipathy towards the Mussulmans on that score. We say nothing 
about the slaughter [of cows] that daily takes place on behalf of 
Englishmen. Our anger becomes red-hot when a Mussulman 
slaughters a cow. All the riots that have taken place in the name 
of the cow have been an insane waste of effort. They have not 
saved a single cow, but they have on the contrary stiffened the 
backs of the Mussulmans and resulted in more slaughter. I am 
satisfied that during 1921 more cows were saved through the 
voluntary and generous effort of the Mussulmans than through 
the Hindu effort during all the previous twenty years, say. Cow 
protection should commence with ourselves. In no part of the 
world are cattle worse treated than in India . . . The half-starved 
condition of the majority of our cattle are a disgrace to us. The 
cows find their necks under the butcher’s knife because Hindus 
sell them. The only effective and honourable way is to befriend 
the Mussulmans and leave it to their honour to save the cow. Cow 
protection societies must turn their attention to the feeding of 
cattle, prevention of cruelty, preservation of the fast disappearing 
pasture land, improving the breed of cattle. . . .’ 

Then there was the music played in Hindu religious processions 
as they passed mosques at prayer time. Somehow, the processions 
contrived to arrive in front of mosques just when the followers of 
the Prophet were supplicating Allah. Gandhi had heard that 

241 


GANDHI IN INDIA 

Hindus sometimes did this ‘with the deliberate intention of irri? 
tating Mussulmans’. This was as wrong as the Moslem resort 
to violence in angry retaliation. 

Gandhi’s long article ignored the social-economic reasons for 
the exacerbation of intercommunity relations except in one 
reference to the Moslem demand that a percentage of jobs in the 
Government be reserved for them. A Moslem middle class was 
beginning to emerge in India (and throughout the Arab world); 
it found itself handicapped in competing with Hindus, Parsis and 
Christians who had the advantages of better education and 
better connections. The Moslems therefore wanted a certain 
number of jobs kept for them irrespective of their qualifications. 
Gandhi objected. He said, 

Tor administration to be efficient it must be in the hands of the 
fittest. There should certainly be no favouritism. If we want 
five engineers we must not take one from each community but we 
must take the fittest five even if they were all Mussulmans or all 
Parsis . . . The educationally backward communities will have a 
right to favoured treatment in the matter of education at the 
hands of the national government. . . But those who aspire to 
occupy responsible posts in the government of the country can 
only do so if they pass the required test.’ 

This was logical, fair and sensible, but completely unsatisfactory 
to the Moslems. And since the economic backwardness of India 
made government employment one of the major, if not the major, 
industries of the country, the reservation of official jobs for Moham¬ 
medans remained a sore point as long as British rule lasted. 

In the seven hundred thousand villages of India, Hindus and 
Moslems had always lived together in peace. The Hindu-Moslem 
tension of the twentieth century was a man-made, middle-class, 
urban disease. Indians are often ambitious and dynamic. A 
city like Bombay throbs with vitality. The inhumanly crowded 
towns, with their herring-barrel tenements and the frustration 
which comes from animal-like poverty and the very limited 
opportunities to earn, learn and advance, make urban Indians 
easily excitable — especially in the maddening heat of the long 
summer. In cities, Gandhi’s non-violence contended with nature 
as well as human nature. 

Gandhi, the optimistic Karma yogi, regarded difficulties as 

242 


OPERATION AND FAST 


spurs to greater exertions of will. The editor who gave an entire 
issue of his magazine to a problem was the doer who would give 
his whole life to solve it. On September 18th, 1924, therefore, 
Gandhi started a twenty-one-day fast for Hindu-Moslem friendship. 

Gandhi had been ill for months in jail. Then came the urgent 
appendicectomy. The wound suppurated and healed slowly. 
Convalescence was retarded. Weeks of tense talks followed by 
weeks of strenuous touring wore him out. The political situation 
depressed him; years of work seemed to have been lost. At a 
conference of the All-India Congress Committee in June, when he 
realized how many , of his associates really did not believe in non¬ 
violence, he wept in public. The steady stream of reports on 
Hindu-Moslem fighting and the atmosphere of bickering, hate and 
gloom weighed heavily on his body and spirit. He was fifty-five. 
He knew that a twenty-one-day fast might be fatal. He did not 
want to die. There were too many unfinished tasks. He revelled 
in life. Suicide was religiously and physically repugnant to him. 
The fast was no tryst with death. It gave him no pleasure to 
suffer. The fast was dictated by duty to the highest cause — the 
universal brotherhood of man. 

For Gandhi, an act had to be right and true. Then he never 
counted the cost to himself or even to others; in this sense, he was 
without mercy. Service meant sacrifice, renunciation and detach¬ 
ment. You detach yourself from yourself. All that remains is 
duty. On September 18th, 1924, Gandhi felt it his duty to fast. 

Gandhi always kept his eye on his objective and when he could 
not see it he kept his eye on the spot where he thought it would 
appear. He also had an eye for drama. He fasted in the home 
of a Moslem, Mohamed Ali, the younger brother of Shaukat. 
Mohamed Ali was a staunch Congress supporter, a champion 
of Hindu-Moslem friendship. But the Moslem community was 
moving away from him. Gandhi had said in his article that ‘the 
key to the situation lies with the Hindus’, but with his heart, 
the senior partner of his mind, he knew that Moslems were the 
offenders; conditions, he said, were making the Moslem ‘a bully’. 
Gandhi wished to strengthen Mohamed Ali’s hand. ‘It is our 
duty’, he once wrote, ‘to strengthen by our fasting those who hold 
the same ideals but are likely to weaken under pressure.’ For 
twenty-one days India’s attention would be focused on the house 

q, m.g. 243 


GANDHI IN INDIA 


where Gandhi lay fasting. Moslems would see that Mohandas 
and Mohamed were brothers. Hindus, moreover, would note 
that their saint had confided his life to a Moslem. 

No personal benefit could come to Gandhi from the fast; on 
the contrary. Nor was there any element of compulsion in it. 
The Moslem in Calcutta or Agra, the Hindu in Amritsar or 
Allahabad would not be compelled to change their conduct be¬ 
cause Gandhi was dying for Hindu-Moslem amity. They would 
change, if at all, because the Mahatma’s great sacrifice established 
a spiritual bond between him and them, a kind of common wave¬ 
length, a means of communication over which he conveyed to 
them the importance, the necessity, the urgency, the sacredness 
of the cause for which he was fasting. It was his way of going out 
to them, of entering their hearts, of uniting himself with them. 

In part, this is Eastern, Indian. The bridges of the West are 
made of concrete, steel, wire, words. Eastern bridges are of spirit. 
To communicate, the West moves or talks. The East sits, con¬ 
templates, suffers. Gandhi partook of West and East. When 
Western methods failed him, he used Eastern methods. 

The fast was an adventure in goodness. The stake was one man’s 
life. The prize was a nation’s freedom. If Indians were united as 
brothers, no outsider could long be their master. The British 
official report on conditions in India in 1919 remarked, £ One 
noticeable feature of the general excitement was the unpre¬ 
cedented fraternization between the Hindus and the Moham¬ 
medans.’ In 1924, Gandhi felt that the fraternization, and with it 
freedom, was ebbing away. Hence the ordeal under his Moslem 
brother’s roof. 

‘Nothing evidently which I say or write can bring the two 
communities together,’ he declared in announcing the fast. T am 
therefore imposing on myself a twenty-one-day fast from today 
and ending Wednesday October 6th. I reserve the liberty to 
drink water with or without salt. It is both a penance and a 
prayer ... I respectfully invite the heads of all communities, 
including Englishmen, to meet and end this quarrel which is a 
disgrace to religion and to humanity. It seems as if God has been 
dethroned. Let us reinstate Him in our hearts.’ 

Two Moslem physicians were in constant attendance. Charles 
Freer Andrews, the Christian missionary, served as nurse. 

244 


OPERATION AND FAST 


On the second day of the fast, Gandhi wrote a page-long plea 
for Young India on ‘unity in diversity 5 . ‘The need of the moment 5 , 
he stressed, ‘is not one religion but mutual respect and tolerance 
of the devotees of the different religions. 5 On the sixth day with¬ 
out food he wrote a page article which ended, ‘To paraphrase a 
Biblical verse, if it is no profanation, “Seek you first Hindu-Moslem 
unity, removal of untouchability and the spinning wheel and 
Khaddar [homespun] and everything will be added unto you 55 . 5 

Twelve days after the fast commenced he wrote 112 words for 
publication: ‘Hitherto it has been a struggle and a yearning for a 
change of heart among Englishmen who compose the government 
of India. That change has still to come. But the struggle must for 
the moment be transferred to a change of heart among the Hindus 
and the Mussulmans. Before they dare think of freedom they 
must be brave enough to love one another, to tolerate one an¬ 
other’s religion, even prejudices and superstitions, and to trust 
one another. This requires faith in oneself. And faith in oneself 
is faith in God. If we have that faith we shall cease to fear one 
another. 5 

The twentieth day he dictated a prayer: ‘Presently from the 
world of peace I shall enter the world of strife. The more I think 
of it the more helpless I feel ... I know that I can do nothing. 
God can do everything. O! God, make me Thy instrument and 
use me as Thou wilt. Man is nothing. Napoleon planned much 
and found himself a prisoner in St. Helena. The mighty Kaiser 
aimed at the crown of Europe and is reduced to the status of a 
private gentleman. God has so willed it. Let us contemplate 
such examples and be humble. 5 The twenty days had been ‘days 
of grace, privilege and peace 5 . 

That evening ‘Mahatma Gandhi was wonderfully bright and 
cheerful, 5 Andrews wrote. ‘Many of his most intimate friends 
came to see him as he lay upon his bed on the open roof of the 
house, which was flooded by the moonlight. 5 They prayed. 
‘Then followed a long silence. The friends parted one by one and 
he was left alone. 5 

The twenty-first day: ‘Before four o’clock in the morning . . . 
we were called for the morning prayers, 5 Andrews recorded. 
‘There was no moon and it was very dark. A chili breeze was 
blowing from the east . . . Bapu was wrapped warmly in a dark 

245 


GANDHI IN INDIA 


shawl and I asked him whether he had slept well. He replied, 
“Yes, very well indeed.” It was a happiness to notice at once 
that his voice was stronger than the morning before, instead of 
weaker.’ After prayers, many people came for darshan, a sight 
that blesses. 

At about io a.m. (Andrews writes), Mahatmaji called for me 
and said, ‘Can you remember the words of my favourite Christian 
hymn?’ 

I sajd, ‘Yes, shall I sing it to you now?’ 

‘Not now,’ he answered, ‘but I have in mind that when I 
break my fast, we might have a little ceremony expressing religious 
unity. I should like the Imam Sahib to recite the opening verses 
of the Koran. Then I would like you to sing the Christian hymn, 
you know the one I mean, it begins, “When I survey the wondrous 
Cross” and ends with the words, 

Love so amazing, so divine, 

Demands my soul, my life, my all. 

And then last of all I should like Vinoba to recite from the 
Upanishads and Balkrishna to sing the Vaishnava hymn . . .’ He 
wanted all the servants present. 

Now at last the midday hour had come and the fast was to be 
broken. 

The doctors went to Gandhi’s room; the Ali brothers, Maulana 
Abu! Kalam Azad, Motilal Nehru, C. R. Das and many others 
sat on the floor near the bed. Before the actual breaking of the 
fast, Gandhi spoke, ‘and as he spoke his emotion was so deep that 
in his bodily weakness his voice could hardly be heard except by 
those who were nearest of all to him’. He asked them to lay down 
their lives, if need be, for the cause of brotherhood. The Moslem 
leaders renewed their pledge. Then the hymns were sung. ‘Dr. 
Ansari brought forward some orange juice and Mahatma Gandhi 
drank it. So the fast was broken.’ 


246 


 

