‘O
7
The Last Phase (1)
Consolidation of British Rule and Rise of Nationalist
Movement The Ideology of Empire. The New Caste
ur writing of India’s history is perhaps resented more than anything else
we have done’—so writes an Englishman well acquainted with India and
her history It is difficult to say what Indians have resented most in the record of
British rule in India; the list is long and varied. But it is true that British accounts
of India’s history, more especially of what is called the British period, are
bitterly resented. History is almost always written by the victors and conquerors
and gives their viewpoint; or, at any rate the victors’ version is given prominence
and holds the field. Very probably all the early records we have of the Aryans in
India, their epics and traditions, glorify the Aryans and are unfair to the people
of the country whom they subdued. No individual can wholly rid himself of his
racial outlook and cultural limitations and when there is conflict between races
and countries even an attempt at impartiality is considered a betrayal of one’s
own people. War, which is an extreme example of this conflict, results in a
deliberate throwing overboard of all fairness and impartiality so far as the enemy
nation is concerned; the mind coarsens and becomes closed to almost all avenues
of approach except one. The overpowering need of the moment is to justify
one’s own actions and condemn and blacken those of the enemy. Truth hides
somewhere at the bottom of the deepest well and falsehood, naked and
unashamed, reigns almost supreme.
Even when actual war is not being waged there is often potential war and
conflicts between rival countries and interests. In a country dominated by an
alien power that conflict is inherent and continuous and affects and prevents
people’s thoughts and actions; the war mentality is never wholly absent. In the
old days when war and its consequences, brutality and conquest and enslavement
of a people, were accepted as belonging to the natural order of events, there was
no particular need to cover them or justify them from some other point of view.
With the growth of higher standards the need for justification has arisen, and this
leads to a perversion of facts, sometimes deliberate, often unconscious. Thus
hypocrisy pays its tribute to virtue, and a false and sickening piety allies itself to
evil deeds.
In any country, and especially in a huge country like India with its
complicated history and mixed culture, it is always possible to find facts and
trends to justify a particular thesis, and then this becomes the accepted basis for
a new argument. America, it is said, is a land of contradictions, in spite of its
standardization and uniformity. How much more then must India be full of
contradictions and incongruities. We shall find there, as elsewhere, what we
seek, and on this preconceived basis we can build up a structure of belief and
opinion. And yet that structure will have untrue foundations and will give a false
picture of reality.
Recent Indian history, that is the history of the British period, is so connected
with present-day happenings that the passions and prejudices of today
powerfully influence our interpretation of it. Englishmen and Indians are both
likely to err, though their errors will lie in opposite directions. Far the greater
part of the records and papers out of which history takes shape and is written
comes from British sources and inevitably represents to British point of view.
The very circumstances of defeat and disruption prevented the Indian side of the
story from being properly recorded, and many of the records that existed
suffered destruction during the great Revolt of 1857. The papers that survived
were hidden away in family archives and could not be published for fear of
consequences. They remained dispersed, little known, and many perished in the
manuscript stage from the incursion of termites and other insects which abound
in the country. At a later stage when some of these papers were discovered they
threw a new light on many historical incidents. Even British-written Indian
history had to be somewhat modified, and the Indian conception, often very
different from the British, took shape. Behind this conception lay also a mass of
tradition and memories, not of the remote past but of a period when our
grandfathers and great-grandfathers were the living witnesses and often the
victims of events. As history this tradition may have little value, but it is
important as it enables us to understand the background of the Indian mind
today.
The villain of the British in India is often a hero to Indians, and those whom
the British have delighted to honour and reward are often traitors and quislings
in the eyes of the great majority of the Indian people. That taint clings to their
descendants.
The history of the American Revolution has been differently written by
Englishmen and Americans, and even today when old passions have subsided
and there is friendship between the two peoples each version is resented by the
other party. In our own day Lenin was a monster and a brigand to many English
stateman of high repute, yet millions have considered him as a saviour and the
greatest man of the age. These comparisons will give us some faint idea of the
resentment felt by Indians at being forced to study in their schools and colleges
so-called histories which disparage India’s past in every way, vilify those whose
memory they cherish, and honour and glorify the achievement of British rule in
India.
Gopal Krishna Gokhale once wrote in his gently ironical way of the
inscrutable wisdom of Providence which had ordained the British connection for
India. Whether it was due to this inscrutable wisdom or to some process of
historic destiny or just chance, the coming of the British to India brought two
very different races together; or, at any rate, it should have brought them
together, but as it happened they seldom approached each other and their
contacts were indirect. English literature and English political thought influenced
a tiny fringe of those who had learned English. But this political thought, though
dynamic in its context, had no reality in India then. The British who came to
India were not political or social revolutionaries; they were conservatives
representing the most reactionary social class in England, and England was in
some ways one of the most conservative countries in Europe.
The impact of western culture on India was the impact of a dynamic society,
of a ‘modern’ consciousness, on a static society wedded to medieval habits of
thought which, however sophisticated and advanced in its own way, could not
progress because of its inherent limitations. And, yet curiously enough the
agents of this historic process were not only wholly unconscious of their mission
in India but, as a class, actually represented no such process. In England their
class fought this historic process but the forces opposed to them were too strong
and could not be held back. In India they had a free field and were successful in
applying the brakes to that very change and progress which, in the larger
context, they represented. They encouraged and consolidated the position of the
socially reactionary groups in India, and opposed all those who worked for
political and social change. If change came it was in spite of them or as an
incidental and unexpected consequence of their activities. The introduction of
the steam engine and the railway was a big step towards a change of the
medieval structure, but it was intended to consolidate their rule and facilitate the
exploitation for their own benefit of the interior of the country. This
contradiction between the deliberate policy of the British authorities in India and
some of its unintended consequences produces a certain confusion and masks
that policy itself. Change came to India because of this impact of the West, but it
came almost in spite of the British in India. They succeeded in slowing down the
pace of that change to such an extent that even today the transition is very far
from complete.
The feudal landlords and their kind who came from England to rule over India
had the landlord’s view of the world. To them India was a vast estate belonging
to the East India Company, and the landlord was the best and the natural
representative of his estate and his tenants. That view continued even after the
East India Company handed over its estate of India to the British Crown, being
paid very handsome compensation at India’s cost (Thus began the public debt of
India. It was India’s purchase money, paid by India.) The British Government of
India then became the landlords (or landlords’ agents). For all practical purposes
they considered themselves ‘India’, just as the Duke of Devonshire might be
considered ‘Devonshire’ by his peers. The millions of people who lived and
functioned in India were just some kind of landlord’s tenants who had to pay
their rents and cesses and to keep their place in the natural feudal order. For
them a challenge to that order was an offence against the very moral basis of the
universe and a denial of a divine dispensation.
This somewhat metaphysical conception of British rule in India has not
changed fundamentally, though it is expressed differently now. The old method
of obvious rack-renting gave place to more subtle and devious devices. It was
admitted that the landlord should be benevolent towards his tenantry and should
seek to advance their interests. It was even agreed that some of the more loyal
and faithful among the tenants should be promoted to the estate office and share
in a subordinate way in the administration. But no challenge to the system of
landlordism could be tolerated. The estate must continue to function as it used to
even when it changed hands. When pressure of events made some such change
inevitable, it was stipulated that all the faithful employees in the estate office
should continue, all the old and new friends, followers and dependents of the
landlord should be provided for, the old age pensioners should continue to drawn
their pensions, the old landlord himself should now function as a benevolent
patron and adviser of the estate, and thus all attempts to bring about essential
changes should be frustrated.
This sense of identifying India with their own interests was strongest in the
higher administrative service, which were entirely British. In later years these
developed in that close and well-knit corporation called the Indian Civil Service
—‘the world’s most tenacious trade union,’ as it has been called by an English
writer. They ran India, they were India, and anything that was harmful to their
interests must of necessity be injurious to India. From the Indian Civil Service
and the kind of history and record of current events that was placed before them,
this conception spread in varying degrees to the different strata of the British
people. The ruling class naturally shared it in full measure, but even the worker
and the farmer were influenced by it to some slight extent, and felt, in spite of
their own subordinate position in their own country, the pride of possession and
empire. That same worker or farmer if he came to India inevitably belonged to
the ruling class here. He was totally ignorant of India’s history and culture and
he accepted the prevailing ideology of the British in India, for he had no other
standards to judge by or apply. At the most a vague benevolence filled him, but
that was strictly conditioned within that framework. For a hundred years this
ideology permeated all sections of the British people, and became, as it were, a
national heritage, a fixed and almost unalterable notion, which governed their
outlook on India and imperceptibly affected even their domestic outlook. In our
own day that curious group which has no fixed standards or principles or much
knowledge of the outside world, the leaders of the British Labour Party, have
usually been the staunchest supporters of the existing order in India. Sometimes
a vague sense of uneasiness fills them at a seeming contradiction between their
domestic and colonial policy, between their professions and practice, but,
considering themselves above all as practical men of commonsense, they sternly
repress all these stirrings of conscience. Practical men must necessarily base
themselves on established and known practice, on existing conditions, and not
take a leap into the dark unknown merely because of some principle or untested
theory.
Viceroys who come to India direct from England have to fit in with and rely
upon the Indian Civil Service structure. Belonging to the possessing and ruling
class in England, they have no difficulty whatever in accepting the prevailing
I.C.S. outlook, and their unique position of absolute authority, unparalleled
elsewhere, leads to subtle changes in their ways and methods of expression.
Authority corrupts and absolute authority corrupts absolutely, and no man in the
wide world today has had or has such absolute authority over such large
numbers of people as the British Viceroy of India. The Viceroy speaks in a
manner such as no Prime Minister of England or President of the United States
can adopt. The only possible parallel would be that of Hitler. And not the
Viceroy only, but the British members of his Council, the Governors, and even
the smaller fry who function as secretaries of departments or magistrates. They
speak from a noble and unattainable height, secure not only in the conviction
that what they say and do is right, but that it will have to be accepted as right
whatever lesser mortals may imagine, for theirs is the power and the glory.
Some members of the Viceroy’s Council are appointed direct from England
and do not belong to the Indian Civil Service. There is usually a marked
difference in their ways and utterances from those of the Civil Service. They
function easily enough in that framework, but they cannot quite develop that
superior and self-satisfied air of assumed authority. Much less can the Indian
members of the Council (a fairly recent addition), who are obvious supers,
whatever their numbers or intelligence. Indians belonging to the Civil Service,
whatever their rank in the official hierarchy, do not belong to the charmed circle.
A few of them try to ape the manners of their colleagues without much success;
they become rather pompous and ridiculous.
The new generation of British members of the Indian Civil Service are, I
believe, somewhat different in mind and texture from their predecessors. They
do not easily fit into the old framework, but all authority and policy flow from
the senior members and the newcomers make no difference. They have either to
accept the established order or, as has sometimes happened, resign and return to
their homeland.
I remember that when I was a boy the British-owned newspapers in India
were full of official news and utterances; of service news, transfers and
promotions; of the doings of English society, of polo, races, dances, and amateur
theatricals. There was hardly a word about the people of India, about their
political, cultural, social, or economic life. Reading them one would hardly
suspect that they existed.
In Bombay there used to be quadrangular cricket matches between the four
elevens made up respectively of Hindus, Muslims, Parsees, and Europeans. The
European eleven was called Bombay Presidency; the others were just Hindus,
Muslims, Parsees. Bombay was thus essentially represented by the Europeans;
the others, one would imagine, were foreign elements who were recognized for
this purpose. These quadrangular matches still take place, though there is much
argument about them, and a demand that elevens should not be chosen on
religious lines. I believe that the ‘Bombay Presidency’ team is now called
‘European’.
English clubs in India usually have territorial names—the Bengal Club, the
Allahabad Club, etc. They are confined to Britishers, or rather to Europeans.
There need be no objection to territorial designation, or even to a group of
persons having a club for themselves and not approving of outsiders joining it.
But this designation is derived from the old British habit of considering that they
are the real India that counts, the real Bengal, the real Allahabad. Others are just
excrescences, useful in their own way if they know their places, but otherwise a
nuisance. The exclusion of non-Europeans is far more a racial affair than a
justifiable means for people with cultural affinities to meet together in their
leisure moments for play and social intercourse, without the intrusion of other
elements. For my part I have no objection to exclusive English or European
clubs, and very few Indian would care to join them; but when this social
exclusiveness is clearly based on racialism and on a ruling class always
exhibiting its superiority and unapproachability, it bears another aspect. In
Bombay there is a well-known club which did not allow and so far as I know,
does not allow, an Indian (except as a servant) even in its visitors’ room, even
though he might be a ruling prince or a captain of industry.
Racialism in India is not so much English versus Indian; it is European as
opposed to Asiatic. In India every European, be he German, or Pole, or
Rumanian, is automatically a member of the ruling race. Railway carriages,
station retiring-rooms, benches in parks, etc., are marked ‘For Europeans Only.’
This is bad enough in South Africa or elsewhere, but to have to put up with it in
one’s own country is a humiliating and exasperating reminder of one’s enslaved
condition.
It is true that a gradual change has been taking place in these external
manifestations of racial superiority and imperial arrogance, but the process is
slow and frequent instances occur to show how superficial it is. Political
pressure and the rise of a militant nationalism enforce change and lead to a
deliberate attempt to tone down the former racialism and aggressiveness; and yet
that very political movement, when it reaches a stage of crisis and is sought to be
crushed, leads to a resurgence of all the old imperialist and racial arrogance in its
extremest form.
The English are a sensitive people, and yet when they go to foreign countries
there is a strange lack of awareness about them. In India, where the relation of
ruler and ruled makes mutual understanding difficult, this lack of awareness is
peculiarly evident. Almost one would think that it is deliberate, so that they may
see only what they want to see and be blind to all else; but facts do not vanish
because they are ignored, and when they compel attention there is a feeling of
displeasure and resentment at the unexpected happening, as of some trick having
been played.
In this land of caste the British, and more especially the Indian Civil Service,
have built up a caste which is rigid and exclusive. Even the Indian members of
the service do not really belong to that caste, though they wear the insignia and
conform to its rides. That caste has developed something in the nature of a
religious faith in its own paramount importance, and round that faith has grown
an appropriate mythology which helps to maintain it. A combination of faith and
vested interests is a powerful one, and any challenge to it arouses the deepest
passions and fierce indignation.
The Plunder of Bengal Helps the Industrial Revolution in
England
The East India Company had received permission from the Mughal Emperor to
start a factory at Surat early in the seventeenth century. Some years later they
purchased a patch of land in the south and founded Madras. In 1662 the island of
Bombay was presented to Charles II of England by way of dowry from Portugal,
and he transferred it to the Company. In 1690 the city of Calcutta was founded.
Thus by the end of the seventeenth century the British had gained a number of
footholds in India and established some bridge-heads on the Indian coast-line.
They spread inland slowly. The battle of Plassey in 1757 for the first time
brought a vast area under their control, and within a few years Bengal, Bihar,
Orissa, and the east coast were subject to them. The next big step forward was
taken about forty years later, at the beginning of the nineteenth century. This
brought them to the gates of Delhi. The third major advance took place after the
last defeat of the Marathas in 1818; the fourth in 1849, after the Sikh wars,
completed the picture.
Thus the British have been in the city of Madras a little over 300 years; they
have ruled Bengal, Bihar, etc., for 187 years; they extended their domination
over the south 145 years ago; they established themselves in the United
Provinces (as they are now called), central and western India about 125 years
ago; and they spread to the Punjab ninety-five years ago. (This is being written
in June, 1944). Leaving out the city of Madras as too small an area, there is a
difference of nearly 100 years between their occupation of Bengal and that of the
Punjab. During this period British policy and administrative methods changed
repeatedly. These changes were dictated by new developments in England as
well as the consolidation of British rule in India. The treatment of each newly
acquired area varied according to these changes, and depended also on the
character of the riding group which had been defeated by the British. Thus in
Bengal, where the victory had been very easy, the Muslim landed gentry were
looked upon as the ruling classes and a policy was pursued to break their power.
In the Punjab, on the other hand, power was seized from the Sikhs and there was
no initial antagonism between the British and the Muslims. In the greater part of
India the Marathas had been opponents of the British.
A significant fact which stands out is that those parts of India which have been
longest under British rule are the poorest today. Indeed some kind of chart might
be drawn up to indicate the close connection between length of British rule and
progressive growth of poverty. A few large cities and some new industrial areas
do not make any essential difference to this survey. What is noteworthy is the
condition of the masses as a whole, and there can be no doubt that the poorest
parts of India are Bengal, Bihar, Orissa, and parts of the Madras presidency; the
mass level and standards of living are highest in the Punjab. Bengal certainly
was a very rich and prosperous province before the British came. There may be
many reasons for these contrasts and differences. But it is difficult to get over
the fact that Bengal, once so rich and flourishing, after 187 years of British rule,
accompanied, as we are told, by strenuous attempts on the part of the British to
improve its condition and to teach its people the art of self-government, is today
a miserable mass of poverty-stricken and dying people.
Bengal had the first full experience of British rule in India. That rule began
with outright plunder and a land revenue system which extracted the uttermost
farthing not only from the living but also from the dead cultivators. The English
historians of India, Edward Thompson and G.T. Garrett, tell us that ‘a gold-lust
unequalled since the hysteria that took hold of the Spaniards of Cortes’ and
Pizarro’s age filled the English mind. Bengal in particular was not to know peace
again until she has been bled white.’ ‘For the monstrous financial immorality of
the English conduct in India for many a year after this, Clive was largely
responsible.’1 Clive, the great empire-builder, whose statue faces the India
Office in London today. It was pure loot. The ‘Pagoda tree’ was shaken again
and again till the most terrible famines ravaged Bengal. This process was called
trade later on but that made little difference. Government was this so-called
trade, and trade was plunder. There are few instances in history of anything like
it. And it must be remembered that this lasted, under various names and under
different forms, not for a few years but for generations. The outright plunder
gradually took the shape of legalized exploitation which, though not so obvious,
was in reality worse. The corruption, venality, nepotism, violence, and greed of
money of these early generations of British rule in India is something which
passes comprehension. It is significant that one of the Hindustani words which
has become part of the English language is ‘loot’. Says Edward Thompson, and
this does not refer to Bengal only, ‘one remembers the early history of British
India which is perhaps the world’s high-water mark of graft.’
The result of all this, even in its early stages, was the famine of 1770, which
swept away over a third of the population of Bengal and Bihar. But it was all in
the cause of progress, and Bengal can take pride in the fact that she helped
greatly in giving birth to the industrial revolution in England. The American
writer, Brooke Adams, tells us exactly how this happened:
The influx of Indian treasure, by adding considerably to the nation’s cash capital, not only
increased its stock of energy, but added much to its flexibility and the rapidity of its
movement. Very soon after Plassey, the Bengal plunder began to arrive in London, and the
effect appears to have been instantaneous, for all authorities agree that the ‘industrial
revolution’ began with the year 1770… Plassey was fought in 1757, and probably nothing has
ever equalled the rapidity of the change that followed. In 1760 the flying shuttle appeared,
and coal began to replace wood in smelting. In 1764 Hargreaves invented the spinning jenny,
in 1776 Crompton contrived the mule, in 1785 Cartwright patented the power loom and in
1768 Watt matured the steam engine … But though these machines served as outlets for the
accelerating movements of the time, they did not cause the acceleration. In themselves
inventions are passive … waiting for a sufficient store of force to have accumulated to set
them working. That store must always take the shape of money, and money not hoarded but
in motion. Before the influx of the Indian treasure, and the expansion of credit which
followed, no force sufficient for this purpose existed … Possibly since the world began, no
investment has ever yielded the profit reaped from the Indian plunder, because for nearly fifty
years Great Britain stood without a competitor.2
The Destruction of India’s Industry and the Decay of Her
Agriculture
The chief business of the East India Company in its early period, the very object
for which it was started, was to carry Indian manufactured goods, textiles, etc.,
as well as spices and the like from the East to Europe, where there was a great
demand for these articles. With the developments in industrial techniques in
England a new class of industrial capitalists rose there, demanding a change in
this policy. The British market was to be closed to Indian products and the
Indian market opened to British manufactures. The British Parliament,
influenced by this new class, began to take a greater interest in India and the
working of the East India Company. To begin with, Indian goods were excluded
from Britain by legislation, and as the East India Company held a monopoly in
the Indian export business, this exclusion influenced other foreign markets also.
This was followed by vigorous attempts to restrict and crush Indian
manufacturers by various measures and internal duties which prevented the flow
of Indian goods within the country itself. British goods meanwhile had free
entry. The Indian textile industry collapsed, affecting vast numbers of weavers
and artisans. The process was rapid in Bengal and Bihar, elsewhere it spread
gradually with the expansion of British rule and the building of railways. It
continued throughout the nineteenth century, breaking up other old industries
also, ship-building, metal working, glass, paper, and many crafts.
To some extent this was inevitable as the old manufacturing came into conflict
with the new industrial technique. But it was hastened by political and economic
pressure and no attempt was made to apply the new techniques to India. Indeed
every attempt was made to prevent this happening, and thus the economic
development of India was arrested and the growth of the new industry prevented.
Machinery could not be imported into India. A vacuum was created which could
only be filled by British goods, and which led to rapidly increasing
unemployment and poverty. The classic type of modern colonial economy was
built up, India becoming an agricultural colony of industrial England, supplying
raw materials and providing markets for England’s industrial goods.
The liquidation of the artisan class led to unemployment on a prodigious
scale. What were all these scores of millions, who had so far been engaged in
industry and manufacture, to do now? Where were they to go? Their old
profession was no longer open to them, the way to a new one was barred. They
could die of course; that way of escape from an intolerable situation is always
open. They did die in tens of millions. The English Governor-General of India,
Lord Bentinck, reported in 1834 that ‘the misery hardly finds a parallel in the
history of commerce. The bones of the cotton weavers are bleaching the plains
of India.’
But still vast numbers of them remained, and these increased from year to year
as British policy affected remoter areas of the country and created more
unemployment. All these hordes of artisans and craftsmen had no job, no work,
and all their ancient skill was useless. They drifted to the land, for the land was
still there. But the land was fully occupied and could not possibly absorb them
profitably. So they became a burden on the land and the burden grew, and with it
grew the poverty of the country, and the standard of living fell to incredibly low
levels. This compulsory back-to-the-land movement of artisans and craftsmen
led to an ever-growing disproportion between agriculture and industry;
agriculture became more and more the sole business of the people because of the
lack of occupations and wealth-producing activities.
India became progressively ruralized. In every progressive country there has
been, during the past century, a shift of population from agriculture to industry;
from village to town; in India this process was reversed, as a result of British
policy. The figures are instructive and significant. In the middle of the nineteenth
century about fifty-five per cent of the population is said to have been dependent
on agriculture; recently this proportion was estimated to be seventy-four per
cent. (This is a pre-war figure). Though there has been greater industrial
employment during the war, the number of those dependent on agriculture
actually went up in the census of 1941 owing to increase of population. The
growth of a few large cities (chiefly at the expense of the small town) is apt to
mislead the superficial observer and give him a false idea of Indian conditions.
This then is the real, the fundamental, cause of the appalling poverty of the
Indian people, and it is of comparatively recent origin. Other causes that
contribute to it are themselves the result of this poverty and chronic starvation
and under-nourishment—like disease and illiteracy. Excessive population is
unfortunate, and steps should be taken to curb it wherever necessary, but it still
compares favourably with the density of population of many industrialized
countries. It is only excessive for a predominately agricultural community, and
under a proper economic system the entire population can be made productive
and should add to the wealth of the country. As a matter of fact great density of
population exists only in special areas, like Bengal and the Gangetic Valley, and
vast areas are still sparsely populated. It is worth remembering that Great Britain
is more than twice as densely populated as India.
The crisis in industry spread rapidly to the land and become a permanent crisis
in agriculture. Holdings became smaller and smaller, and fragmentation
proceeded to an absurd and fantastic degree. The burden of agricultural debt
grew and ownership of the land often passed to moneylenders. The number of
landless labourers increased by the million. India was under an industrialcapitalist
regime, but her economy was largely that of the pre-capitalist period,
minus many of the wealth-producing elements of that pre-capitalist economy.
She became a passive agent of modern industrial capitalism, suffering all its ills
and with hardly any of its advantages.
The transition from a pre-industrialist economy to an economy of capitalist
industrialization involves great hardship and heavy cost in human suffering
borne by masses of people. This was especially so in the early days when no
efforts were made to plan such a transition or to lessen its evil results, and
everything was left to individual initiative. There was this hardship in England
during the period of transition but, taken as a whole, it was not great as the
change-over was rapid and the unemployment caused was soon absorbed by the
new industries. But that did not mean that the cost in human suffering was not
paid. It was indeed paid, and paid in full by others, particularly by the people of
India, by famine and death and vast unemployment. It may be said that a great
part of the costs of transition to industrialism in western Europe were paid for by
India, China, and the other colonial countries, whose economy was dominated
by the European powers.
It is obvious that there has been all along abundant material in India for
industrial development—managerial and technical ability, skilled workers, even
some capital in spite of the continuous drain from India. The historian,
Montgomery Martin, giving evidence before an Inquiry Committee of the British
Parliament in 1840, said: ‘India is as much a manufacturing country as an
agriculturist; and he who would seek to reduce her to the position of an
agricultural country, seeks to lower her in the scale of civilization.’ That is
exactly what the British in India sought to do, continuously and persistently, and
the measure of their success is the present condition of India, after they have
held despotic sway there for a century and a half. Ever since the demand for the
development of modern industry arose in India (and this, I imagine, is at least
100 years old) we have been told that India is pre-eminently an agricultural
country and it is in her interest to stick to agriculture. Industrial development
may upset the balance and prove harmful to her main business—agriculture. The
solicitude which British industrialists and economists have shown for the Indian
peasant has been truly gratifying. In view of this, as well as of the tender care
lavished upon him by the British Government in India, one can only conclude
that some ad-powerful and malign fate, some supernatural agency, has countered
their intentions and measures and made that peasant one of the poorest and most
miserable beings on earth.
It is difficult now for anyone to oppose industrial development in India but,
even now, when any extensive and far-reaching plan is drawn up, we are warned
by our British friends, who continue to shower their advice upon us, that
agriculture must not be neglected and must have first place. As if any Indian
with an iota of intelligence can ignore or neglect agriculture or forget the
peasant. The Indian peasant is India more than anyone else, and it is on his
progress and betterment that India’s progress will depend. But our crisis in
agriculture, grave as it is, is interlinked with the crisis in industry, out of which it
arose. The two cannot be disconnected and dealt with separately, and it is
essential for the disproportion between the two to be remedied.
India’s ability to develop modern industry can be seen by her success in it
whenever she has had the chance to build it up. Indeed, such success has been
achieved in spite of the strenuous opposition of the British Government in India
and of vested interests in Britain. Her first real chance came during the war of
1914-18 when the inflow of British goods was interrupted. She profited by it,
though only to a relatively small extent because of British policy. Ever since
then there has been continuous pressure on the Government to facilitate the
growth of Indian industry by removing the various barriers and special interests
that come in the way. While apparently accepting this as its policy, the
Government has obstructed all real growth, especially of basic industries. Even
in the Constitution Act of 1935 it was specifically laid down that Indian
legislatures could not interfere with the vested interests of British industry in
India. The pre-war years witnessed repeated and vigorous attempts to build up
basic and heavy industries, all scotched by official policy. But the most amazing
instances of official obstruction have been during the present war, when war
needs for production were paramount. Even those vital needs were not sufficient
to overcome British dislike of Indian industry. That industry has grown because
of the force of events, but its growth is trivial compared to what it could have
been or to the growth of industry in many other countries.
The direct opposition of the earlier periods to the growth of Indian industry
gave place to indirect methods, which have been equally effective, just as direct
tribute gave place to manipulation of customs and excise duties and financial and
currency policies, which benefited Britain at the expense of India.
Long subjection of a people and the denial of freedom bring many evils, and
perhaps the greatest of these lies in the spiritual sphere—demoralization and
sapping of the spirit of the people. It is hard to measure this, though it may be
obvious. It is easier to trace and measure the economic decay of a nation, and as
we look back on British economic policy in India, it seems that the present
poverty of the Indian people is the ineluctable consequence of it. There is no
mystery about this poverty; we can see the causes and follow the processes
which have led to the present condition.
India Becomes for the First Time a Political and
Economic Appendage of Another Country
The establishment of British rule in India was an entirely novel phenomenon for
her, not comparable with any other invasion or political or economic change.
‘India had been conquered before, but by invaders who settled within her
frontiers and made themselves part of her life.’ (Like the Normans in England or
the Manchus in China.) ‘She had never lost her independence, never been
enslaved. That is to say, she had never been drawn into a political and economic
system whose centre of gravity lay outside her soil, never been subjected to a
ruling class which was, and which remained, permanently alien in origin and
character.’3
Every previous ruling class, whether it had originally come from outside or
was indigenous, had accepted the structural unity of India’s social and economic
life and tried to fit into it. It had become Indianised and had struck roots in the
soil of the country. The new rulers were entirely different, with their base
elsewhere, and between them and the average Indian there was a vast and
unbridgeable gulf—a difference in tradition, in outlook, in income, and ways of
living. The early Britishers in India, rather cut off from England, adopted many
Indian ways of living. But it was a superficial approach and even this was
deliberately abandoned with the improvement in communications between India
and England. It was felt that the British ruling class must maintain its prestige in
India by keeping aloof, exclusive, apart from Indians, living in a superior world
of its own. There were two worlds: the world of British officials and the world of
India’s millions, and there was nothing in common between them except a
common dislike for each other. Previously races had merged into one another, or
at least fitted into an originally interdependent structure. Now racialism became
the acknowledged creed and this was intensified by the fact that the dominant
race had both political and economic power, without check or hindrance.
The world market that the new capitalism was building up would have, in any
event, affected India’s economic system. The self-sufficient village community,
with its traditional division of labour, could not have continued in its old form.
But the change that took place was not a normal development and it
disintegrated the whole economic and structural basis of Indian society. A
system which had social sanctions and controls behind it and was a part of the
people’s cultural heritage was suddenly and forcibly changed and another
system, administered from outside the group, was imposed. India did not come
into a world market but became a colonial and agricultural appendage of the
British structure.
The village community, which had so far been the basis of the Indian
economy, was disintegrated, losing both its economic and administrative
functions. In 1830, Sir Charles Metcalfe, one of the ablest of British officials in
India, described these communities in words which have often been quoted:
The village communities are little republics having nearly everything they want within
themselves; and almost independent of foreign relations. They seem to last where nothing
else lasts. This union of the village communities, each one forming a separate little state in
itself … is in a high degree conducive to their happiness, and to the enjoyment of a great
portion of freedom and independence.
The destruction of village industries was a powerful blow to these
communities. The balance between industry and agriculture was upset, the
traditional division of labour was broken up, and numerous stray individuals
could not be easily fitted into any group activity. A more direct blow came from
the introduction of the landlord system, changing the whole conception of
ownership of land. This conception had been one of communal ownership, not
so much of the land as of the produce of the land. Possibly not fully appreciating
this, but more probably taking the step deliberately for reasons of their own, the
British governors, themselves representing the English landlord class introduced
something resembling the English system in India. At first they appointed
revenue-farmers for short terms, that is persons who were made responsible for
the collection of the revenue or land tax and payment of it to the Government.
Later these revenue-farmers developed into landlords. The village community
was deprived of all control over the land and its produce; what had always been
considered as the chief interest and concern of that community now became the
private property of the newly created landowner. This led to the breakdown of
the joint life and corporate character of the community, and the co-operative
system of services and functions began to disappear gradually.
The introduction of this type of property in land was not only a great
economic change, but it went deeper and struck at the whole Indian conception
of a co-operative group social structure. A new class, the owners of land,
appeared; a class created by, and therefore to a large extent identified with, the
British Government. The break-up of the old system created new problems and
probably the beginnings of the new Hindu-Muslim problem can be traced to it.
The landlord system was first introduced in Bengal and Bihar where big
landowners were created under the system known as the Permanent Settlement.
It was later realized that this was not advantageous to the state as the land
revenue had been fixed and could not be enhanced. Fresh settlements in other
parts of India were therefore made for a period only and enhancements in
revenue took place from time to time. In some provinces a kind of peasant
proprietorship was established. The extreme rigour applied to the collection of
revenue resulted, especially in Bengal, in the ruin of the old landed gentry, and
new people from the monied and business classes took their place. Thus Bengal
became a province predominantly of Hindu landlords, while their tenants,
though both Hindu and Muslim, were chiefly the latter.
Big landowners were created by the British after their own English pattern,
chiefly because it was far easier to deal with a few individuals than with a vast
peasantry. The objective was to collect as much money in the shape of revenue,
and as speedily, as possible. If an owner failed at the stipulated time he was
immediately pushed out and another took his place. It was also considered
necessary to create a class whose interests were identified with the British. The
fear of revolt filled the minds of British officials in India and they referred to this
repeatedly in their papers. Governor-General Lord William Bentinck said in
1829: ‘If security was wanting against extensive popular tumult or revolution, I
should say that the Permanent Settlement, though a failure in many other
respects, has this great advantage at least, of having created a vast body of rich
landed proprietors deeply interested in the continuance of British Dominion and
having complete command over the mass of the people.’
British rule thus consolidated itself by creating new classes and vested
interests which were tied up with that rule and privileges which depended on its
continuance. There were the landowners and the princes, and there was a large
number of subordinate members of the services in various departments of
government, from the patwari, the village headman, upwards. The two essential
branches of government were the revenue system and the police. At the head of
both of these in each district was the collector or district magistrate who was the
linchpin of the administration. He functioned as an autocrat in his district,
combining in himself executive, judicial, revenue, and police functions. If there
were any small Indian states adjoining the area under his control, he was also the
British agent for them.
Then there was the Indian Army, consisting of British and Indian troops but
officered entirely by Englishmen. This was reorganized repeatedly, especially
after the mutiny of 1857, and ultimately became organizationally linked up with
the British Army. This was so arranged as to balance its different elements and
keep the British troops in key positions. ‘Next to the grand counterpoise of a
sufficient European force comes the counterpoise of natives against natives,’
says the official report on reorganization of 1858. The primary function of these
forces was to serve as an army of occupation—‘Internal Security Troops’ they
were called, and a majority of these was British. The Frontier Province served as
a training ground for the British Army at India’s expense. The Field Army
(chiefly Indian) was meant for service abroad and it took part in numerous
British imperial wars and expeditions, India always bearing the cost. Steps were
taken to segregate Indian troops from the rest of the population.
Thus India had to bear the cost of her own conquest, and then of her transfer
(or sale) from the East India Company to the British Crown, for the extension of
the British Empire to Burma and elsewhere, for expeditions to Africa, Persia,
etc., and for her defence against Indians themselves. She was not only used as a
base for imperial purposes, without any reimbursement for this, but she had
further to pay for the training of part of the British Army in England
—‘capitation’ charges these were called. Indeed India was charged for all
manner of other expenses incurred by Britain, such as the maintenance of British
diplomatic and consular establishments in China and Persia, the entire cost of the
telegraph line from England to India, part of the expenses of the British
Mediterranean fleet, and even the receptions given to the sultan of Turkey in
London.
The building of railways in India, undoubtedly desirable and necessary, was
done in an enormously wasteful way. The Government of India guaranteed 5 per
cent interest on all capital invested and there was no need to check or estimate
what was necessary. All purchases were made in England.
The civil establishment of government was also run on a lavish and
extravagant scale, all the highly paid positions being reserved for Europeans.
The process of Indianization of the administrative machine was very slow and
only became noticeable in the twentieth century. This process, far from
transferring any power to Indian hands, proved yet another method of
strengthening British rule. The really key positions remained in British hands,
and Indians in the administration could only function as the agents of British
rule.
To all these methods must be added the deliberate policy, pursued throughout
the period of British rule, of creating divisions among Indians, of encouraging
one group at the cost of another. This policy was openly admitted in the early
days of their rule, and indeed it was a natural one for an imperial power. With
the growth of the nationalist movement that policy took subtler and more
dangerous forms and, though denied, functioned more intensively than ever.
Nearly all our major problems today have grown up during British rule and as
a direct result of British policy: the princes; the minority problem; various vested
interests, foreign and Indian; the lack of industry and the neglect of agriculture;
the extreme backwardness in the social services; and, above all, the tragic
poverty of the people. The attitude to education has been significant. In Kaye’s
Life of Metcalfe it is stated that ‘this dread of the free diffusion of knowledge
became a chronic disease … continually afflicting the members of Government
with all sorts of hypochondriacal day-dreams and nightmares, in which visions
of the printing press and the Bible were making their flesh creep, and their hair
to stand erect with horror. It was our policy in those days to keep the natives of
India in the profoundest state of barbarism and darkness, and every attempt to
diffuse the light of knowledge among the people, either of our own or of the
independent states, was vehemently opposed and resented.’4
Imperialism must function in this way or else it ceases to be imperialism. The
modern type of finance-imperialism added new kinds of economic exploitation
which were unknown in earlier ages. The record of British rule in India during
the nineteenth century must necessarily depress and anger an Indian, and yet it
illustrates the superiority of the British in many fields, not least in their capacity
to profit by our disunity and weaknesses. A people who are weak and who are
left behind in the march of time invite trouble and ultimately have only
themselves to blame. If British imperialism with all its consequences was, in the
circumstances, to be expected in the natural order of events, so also was the
growth of opposition to it inevitable, and the final crisis between the two.
The Growth of the Indian States System
One of our major problems in India today is that of the Princes of the Indian
states. These states are unique of their kind in the world and they vary greatly in
size and political and social conditions. Their number is 601. About fifteen of
these may be considered major states, the biggest of these being Hyderabad,
Kashmir, Mysore, Travancore, Baroda, Gwalior, Indore, Cochin, Jaipur,
Jodhpur, Bikaner, Bhopal and Patiala. Then follow a number of middling states
and, lastly, several hundreds of very small areas, some not bigger than a pin’s
point on the map. Most of these tiny states are in Kathiawar, western India, and
the Punjab.
These states not only vary in size from that of France to almost that of an
average farmer’s holding, but also differ in every other way. Mysore is
industrially the most advanced; Mysore, Travancore, and Cochin are
educationally far ahead of British India.5 Most of the states are, however, very
backward and some are completely feudal. All of them are autocracies, though
some have started elected councils whose powers are strictly limited. Hyderabad,
the premier state, still carries on with a typical feudal regime supported by an
almost complete denial of civil liberties. So also most of the states in Rajputana
and the Punjab. A lack of civil liberties is a common feature of the states.
These states do not form compact blocks; they are spread out all over India,
islands surrounded by non-state areas. The vast majority of them are totally
unable to support even a semi-independent economy; even the largest, situated
as they are, can hardly hope to do so without the full co-operation of the
surrounding areas. If there was any economic conflict between a state and nonstate
India, the former could be easily reduced to submission by tariff barriers
and other economic sanctions. It is manifest that both politically and
economically these states, even the largest of them, cannot be separated and
treated as independent entities. As such they would not survive and the rest of
India would also suffer greatly. They would become hostile enclaves all over
India, and if they relied on some external power for protection, this in itself
would be a continuous and serious menace to a free India. Indeed they would not
have survived till today but for the fact that politically and economically the
whole of India, including the states, is under one dominant power which protects
them. Apart from the possible conflicts between a state and non-state India, it
must be remembered that there is continuous pressure on the autocratic ruler of
the state from his own people, who demand free institutions. Attempts to achieve
this freedom are suppressed and kept back with the aid of the British power.
Even in the nineteenth century, these states, as constituted, became
anachronisms. Under modern conditions it is impossible to conceive of India
being split up into scores of separate independent entities. Not only would there
be perpetual conflict but all planned economic and cultural progress would
become impossible. We must remember that when these states took shape and
entered into treaties with the East India Company, at the beginning of the
nineteenth century, Europe was divided up into numerous small principalities.
Many wars and revolutions have changed the face of Europe since then and are
changing it today, but the face of India was set and petrified by external pressure
imposed upon it and not allowed to change. It seems absurd to hold up some
treaty drawn up 140 years ago, usually on the field of battle or immediately
afterwards, between two rival commanders or their chiefs, and to say that this
temporary settlement must last for ever. The people of the state of course had no
say in that settlement, and the other party at the time was a commercial
corporation concerned only with its own interests and profits. This commercial
corporation, the East India Company, acted not as the agent of the British Crown
or Parliament but, in theory, as the agent of the Delhi Emperor, from whom
power and authority were supposed to flow, although he was himself quite
powerless. The British Crown or Parliament had nothing whatever to do with
these treaties. Parliament only considered Indian affairs when the charter of the
East India Company came up for discussion from time to time. The fact that the
East India Company was functioning in India under the authority conferred on it
by the Diwani grant of the Mughal Emperor made it independent of any direct
interference by the British Crown or Parliament. Indirectly Parliament could, if it
so chose, cancel the charter or impose new conditions at the time of renewal.
The idea that the English King or Parliament should even in theory function as
agents and therefore, as subordinates of the shadowy Emperor at Delhi was not
liked in England and so they studiously kept aloof from the activities of the East
India Company. The money spent in the Indian wars was Indian money raised
and disposed of by the East India Company.
Subsequently, as the territory under the control of the East India Company
increased in area and its rule was consolidated, the British Parliament began to
take greater interest in Indian affairs. In 1858, after the shock of the Indian
mutiny and revolt, the East Indian Company transferred its domain of India (for
money paid by India) to the British Crown. That transfer did not involve a
separate transfer of the Indian states apart from the rest of India. The whole of
India was treated as a unit and the British Parliament functioned in India through
the Government of India which exercised a suzerainty over the states. The states
had no separate relations with the British Crown or Parliament. They were part
and parcel of the system of government, direct and indirect, represented by the
Government of India. This government in later years ignored those old treaties
whenever it suited its changing policy to do so, and exercised a very effective
suzerainty over the states.
Thus the British Crown was not in the picture at all so far as the Indian states
were concerned. It is only in recent years that the claim to some kind of
independence has been raised on behalf of the states, and it has been further
claimed that they have some special relations with the British Crown, apart from
the Government of India. These treaties, it should be noted, are with very few of
the states; there are only forty treaty states, the rest have ‘engagements and
sanads’. These forty states have three-fourths of the total Indian state population,
and six of them have considerably more than one-third of this population.6
In the Government of India Act of 1935, for the first time, some distinction
was made between the relations of the states and the rest of India with the British
Parliament. The states were removed from the supervisory authority and
direction of the Government of India and placed directly under the Viceroy who,
for this purpose, was called the Crown representative. The Viceroy continued to
be, at the same time, the head of the Government of India. The political
department of the Government of India, which used to be responsible for the
states, was now placed directly under the Viceroy and was no longer under his
executive council.
How did these states come into existence? Some are quite new, created by the
British; others were the viceroyalties of the Mughal Emperor, and their rulers
were permitted to continue as feudatory chiefs by the British; yet others, notably
the Maratha chiefs, were defeated by British armies and then made into
feudatories. Nearly all these can be traced back to the beginnings of British rule;
they have no earlier history. If some of them functioned independently for a
while, that independence was of brief duration and ended in defeat in war or
threat of war. Only a few of the states, and these are chiefly in Rajputana, date
back to pre-Mughal times. Travancore has an ancient, 1,000-year-old historical
continuity. Some of the proud Rajput clans trace back their genealogy to
prehistoric times. The Maharana of Udaipur, of the Suryavansh or race of the
sun, has a family tree comparable to that of the Mikado of Japan. But these
Rajput chiefs became Mughal feudatories and then submitted to the Marathas,
and finally to the British. The representatives of the East India Company, writes
Edward Thompson, ‘now set the princes in their positions, lifting them out of the
chaos in which they were submerged. When thus picked up and re-established,
“the princes” were as completely helpless and derelict as any powers since the
beginning of the world. Had the British Government not intervened, nothing but
extinction lay before the Rajput states, and disintegration before the Maratha
states. As for such states as Oudh and the Nizam’s dominions, their very
existence was bogus; they were kept in a semblance of life, only by means of the
breath blown through them by the protecting power.’7
Hyderabad, the premier state today, was small in area to begin with. Its
boundaries were extended twice, after Tipu Sultan’s defeat by the British and the
Maratha wars. These additions were at the instance of the British, and on the
express stipulation that the Nizam was to function in a subordinate capacity to
them. Indeed, on Tipu’s defeat, the offer of part of his territory was first made to
the Peshwa, the Maratha leader, but he refused to accept it on those conditions.
Kashmir, the next largest state, was sold by the East India Company after the
Sikh wars to the great-grandfather of the present ruler. It was subsequently taken
under direct British control on a plea of misgovernment. Later the rulers’ powers
were restored to them. The present state of Mysore was created by the British
after Tipu’s wars. It was also under direct British rule for a lengthy period.
The only truly independent kingdom in India is Nepal on the northeastern
frontier, which occupies a position analogous to that of Afghanistan, though it is
rather isolated. All the rest came within the scope of what was called the
‘subsidiary system’, under which all real power lay with the British Government,
exercised through a resident or agent. Often even the ministers of the ruler were
British officials imposed upon him. But the entire responsibility for good
government and reform lay with the ruler, who with the best will in the world
(and he usually lacked that will as well as competence) could do little in the
circumstances. Henry Lawrence wrote in 1846 about the Indian states system: ‘If
there was a device for ensuring mal-government it is that of a native ruler and
minister both relying on foreign bayonets, and directed by a British Resident;
even if all these were able, virtuous, and considerate, still the wheels of
Government could hardly move smoothly. If it be difficult to select one man,
European or native, with all the requisites of a just administrator, where are three
who can or will work together to be found? Each of the three may work
incalculable mischief, but no one of them can do good if thwarted by the other.’
Earlier still, in 1817, Sir Thomas Munro wrote to the Governor-General:
There are many weighty objections to the employment of a subsidiary force. It has natural
tendency to render the government of every country in which it exists weak and oppressive,
to extinguish all honourable spirit among the higher classes of society, and to degrade and
impoverish the whole people. The usual remedy of a bad government in India is a quiet
revolution in the palace, or a violent one by rebellion or foreign conquests. But the presence
of a British force cuts off every chance of remedy, by supporting the prince on the throne
against every foreign and domestic enemy. It renders him indolent, by teaching him to trust to
strangers for his security, and cruel and avaricious, by showing him that he has nothing to
fear from the hatred of his subjects. Wherever the subsidiary system is introduced, unless the
reigning prince be a man of great abilities, the country will soon bear the marks of it in
decaying villages and decreasing population … Even if the prince himself were disposed to
adhere rigidly to the (British) alliance, there will always be some amongst his principal
officers who will urge him to break it. As long as there remains in the country any highminded
independence, which seeks to throw off the control of strangers, such counsellors will
be found. I have a better opinion of the natives of India than to think that this spirit will ever
be completely extinguished; and I can therefore have no doubt that the subsidiary system
must everywhere run its full course and destroy every government which it undertakes to
protect.8
In spite of such protests the subsidiary Indian state system was built up, and it
brought, inevitably, corruption and tyranny in its train. The governments of these
states were often bad enough, but, in any event, they were almost powerless; a
few of the British residents or agents in these states, like Metcalfe, were honest
and conscientious, but more often they were neither, and they exercised the
harlot’s privilege of having power without responsibility. Private English
adventurers, secure in the knowledge of their race and of official backing, played
havoc with the funds of the state. Some of the accounts of what took place in
these states during the first half of the nineteenth century, especially in Oudh and
Hyderabad, are almost incredible. Oudh was annexed to British India a little
before the Mutiny of 1857.
British policy was then in favour of such annexations, and every pretext was
taken advantage of for a ‘lapse’ of the state to British authority. But the Mutiny
and great Revolt of 1857 demonstrated the value of the subsidiary state system
to the British Government. Except for some minor defections the Indian princes
not only remained aloof from the rising, but, in some instances, actually helped
the British to crush it. This brought about a change in British policy towards
them, and it was decided to keep them and even to strengthen them.
The doctrine of British ‘paramountcy’ was proclaimed, and in practice the
control of the political department of the Government of India over the states has
been strict and continuous. Rulers have been removed or deprived of their
powers; ministers have been imposed upon them for the British services. Quite a
large number of such ministers are functioning now in the states, and they
consider themselves answerable far more to British authority that to their
nominal head, the prince.
Some of the princes are good, some are bad; even the good ones are thwarted
and checked at every turn. As a class they are of necessity backward, feudal in
outlook, and authoritarian in methods, except in their dealings with the British
Government, when they show a becoming subservience. Shelvankar has rightly
called the Indian states ‘Britain’s fifth column in India.’
Contradictions of British Rule in India.
Ram Mohan Roy. The Press
Sir William Jones. English Education in Bengal
One remarkable contradiction meets us at every turn in considering the record of
British rule in India. The British became dominant in India, and the foremost
power in the world, because they were the heralds of the new big-machine
industrial civilization. They represented a new historic force which was going to
change the world, and were thus, unknown to themselves, the forerunners and
representatives of change and revolution; and yet they deliberately tried to
prevent change, except in so far as this was necessary to consolidate their
position and help them in exploiting the country and its people to their own
advantage. Their outlook and objectives were reactionary, partly because of the
background of the social class that came here, but chiefly because of a deliberate
desire to check changes in a progressive direction, as these might strengthen the
Indian people and thus ultimately weaken the British hold on India. The fear of
the people runs through all their thought and policy, for they did not want to and
could not merge with them, and were destined to remain an isolated foreign
ruling group, surrounded by an entirely different and hostile humanity. Changes,
and some in a progressive direction, did come, but they came in spite of British
policy, although their impetus was the impact of the new West through the
British.
Individual Englishmen, educationists, orientalists, journalists, missionaries,
and others played an important part in bringing Western culture to India, and in
their attempts to do so often came into conflict with their own Government. That
Government feared the effects of the spread of modern education and put many
obstacles in its way, and yet it was due to the pioneering efforts of able and
earnest Englishmen, who gathered enthusiastic groups of Indian students around
them, that English thought and literature and political tradition were introduced
to India. (When I say Englishmen I include, of course, people from the whole of
Great Britain and Ireland, though I know this is improper and incorrect. But I
dislike the word Britisher, and even that probably does not include the Irish. My
apologies to the Irish, the Scots, and the Welsh. In India they have all functioned
alike and have been looked upon as one indistinguishable group.) Even the
British Government, in spite of its dislike of education, was compelled by
circumstances to arrange for the training and production of clerks for its growing
establishment. It could not afford to bring out from England large numbers of
people to serve in this subordinate capacity. So education grew slowly and,
though it was limited and perverted education, it opened the doors and windows
of the mind to new ideas and dynamic thoughts.
The printing press and indeed all machinery were also considered dangerous
and explosive for the Indian mind, not to be encouraged in any way lest they led
to the spread of sedition and industrial growth. There is a story that the Nizam of
Hyderabad once expressed a desire to see European machinery and thereupon
the British Resident procured for him an air pump and a printing press. The
Nizam’s momentary curiosity having been satisfied, these were stored away with
other gifts and curiosities. But when the Government in Calcutta heard of this
they expressed their displeasure to their Resident and rebuked him especially for
introducing a printing press in an Indian state. The Resident offered to get it
broken up secretly if the Government so desired.
But while private printing presses were not encouraged, Government could
not carry on its work without printing, and official presses were therefore started
in Calcutta and Madras and elsewhere.
The first private printing press was started by the Baptist Missionaries in
Serampore, and the first newspaper was started by an Englishman in Calcutta in
1780.
All these and other like changes crept in gradually, influencing the Indian
mind and giving rise to the ‘modern’ consciousness. Only a small group was
directly influenced by the thought of Europe, for India clung to her own
philosophic background, considering it superior to that of the West. The real
impact and influence of the West were on the practical side of life which was
obviously superior to the Eastern. The new techniques—the railway train, the
printing press, other machinery, more efficient ways of warfare—could not be
ignored, and these came up against old methods of thought almost unawares, by
indirect approaches, creating a conflict in the mind of India. The most obvious
and far-reaching change was the break-up of the agrarian system and the
introduction of conceptions of private property and landlordism. Money
economy had crept in and ‘land became a marketable commodity. What had
once been held rigid by custom was dissolved by money.’
Bengal witnessed and experienced all these agrarian, technical, educational,
and intellectual changes long before any other considerable part of India, for
Bengal had a clear half-century of British rule before it spread over wider areas.
During the second half of the eighteenth century and the first half of the
nineteenth, Bengal therefore played a dominant role in British Indian life. Not
only was Bengal the centre and heart of the British administration, but it also
produced the first groups of English-educated Indians who spread out to other
parts of India under the shadow of the British power. A number of very
remarkable men rose in Bengal in the nineteenth century, who gave the lead to
the rest of India in cultural and political matters, and out of whose efforts the
new nationalist movement ultimately took shape. Bengal not only had a much
longer acquaintance with British rule but it experienced it in its earliest phases
when it was both harsher and more exuberant, more fluid and less set in rigid
frames. It had accepted that rule, adapted itself to it, long before northern and
central India submitted. The great Revolt of 1857 had little effect on Bengal,
although the first spark appeared accidentally at Barrackpore near Calcutta.
Previous to British rule Bengal had been an outlying province of the Mughal
Empire, important but still rather cut off from the centre. During the early
medieval period many debased forms of worship and of Tantric philosophy and
practices had flourished among the Hindus there. Then came many Hindu reform
movements affecting social customs and laws and even changing somewhat the
well-recognized rules of inheritance elsewhere. Chaitanya, a great scholar who
became a man of faith and emotion, established a form of Vaishnavism, based
on faith, and influenced greatly the people of Bengal. The Bengalis developed a
curious mixture of high intellectual attainments and equally strong
emotionalism. This tradition of loving faith and service of humanity was
represented in Bengal in the second half of the nineteenth century by another
remarkable man of saintly character, Ramakrishna Paramahansa; in his name an
order of service was established which has an unequaled record in humanitarian
relief and social work. Full of the ideal of the patient loving service of the
Franciscans of old, and quiet, unostentatious, efficient, rather like the Quakers,
the members of the Ramakrishna Mission carry on their hospitals and
educational establishments and engage in relief work, whenever any calamity
occurs, all over India and even outside.
Ramakrishna represented the old Indian tradition. Before him, in the
eighteenth century, another towering personality had risen in Bengal, Raja Ram
Mohan Roy, who was a new type combining in himself the old learning and the
new. Deeply versed in Indian thought and philosophy, a scholar in Sanskrit,
Persian, and Arabic, he was a product of the mixed Hindu-Muslim culture that
was then dominant among the cultured classes of India. The coming of the
British to India and their superiority in many ways led his curious and
adventurous mind to find out what their cultural roots were. He learnt English
but this was not enough; he learnt Greek, Latin, and Hebrew also to discover the
sources of the religion and culture of the West. He was also attracted by science
and the technical aspects of Western civilization, though at that time these
technical changes were not so obvious as they subsequently became. Being of a
philosophical and scholarly bent, Ram Mohan Roy inevitably went to the older
literatures. Describing him, Monier-Williams, the Orientalist, has said that he
was ‘perhaps the first earnest-minded investigator of the science of Comparative
Religion that the world has produced’; and yet, at the same time, he was anxious
to modernize education and take it out of the grip of the old scholasticism. Even
in those early days he was in favour of the scientific method, and he wrote to the
Governor-General emphasizing the need for education in ‘mathematics, natural
philosophy, chemistry, anatomy, and other useful sciences.’
He was more than a scholar and an investigator; he was a reformer above all.
Influenced in his earlier days by Islam and later, to some extent, by Christianity,
he stuck nevertheless to the foundations of his own faith. But he tried to reform
that faith and rid it of abuses and the evil practices that had become associated
with it. It was largely because of his agitation for the abolition of suttee that the
British Government prohibited it. This suttee, or the immolation of women on
the funeral pyre of their husbands, was never widespread. But rare instances
continued to occur among the upper classes. Probably the practice was brought
to India originally by the Scytho-Tartars, among whom the custom prevailed of
vassals and liegemen killing themselves on the death of their lord. In early
Sanskrit literature the suttee custom is denounced. Akbar tried hard to stop it,
and the Marathas also were opposed to it.
Ram Mohan Roy was one of the founders of the Indian press. From 1780
onwards a number of newspapers had been published by Englishmen in India.
These were usually very critical of the Government and led to conflict and the
establishment of a strict censorship. Among the earliest champions of the
freedom of the press in India were Englishmen and one of them, James Silk
Buckingham, who is still remembered, was deported from the country. The first
Indian-owned and edited newspaper was issued (in English) in 1818, and in the
same year the Baptist Missionaries of Serampore brought out a Bengali monthly
and a weekly, the first periodicals published in an Indian language. Newspapers
and periodicals in English and the Indian languages followed in quick succession
in Calcutta, Madras, and Bombay.
Meanwhile the struggle for a free press had already begun, to continue with
many ups and downs till today. The year 1818 also saw the birth of the famous
Regulation III, which provided for the first time for detention without trial. This
regulation is still in force today, and a number of people are kept in prison under
this 126-year-old decree.
Ram Mohan Roy was associated with several newspapers. He brought out a
bi-lingual, Bengali-English magazine, and later, desiring an all-India circulation,
he published a weekly in Persian, which was recognized then as the language of
the cultured classes all over India. But this came to grief soon after the
enactment in 1823 of new measures for the control of the press. Ram Mohan and
others protested vigorously against these measures and even addressed a petition
to the King-in-Council in England.
Ram Mohan Roy’s journalistic activities were intimately connected with his
reform movements. His synthetic and universalist points of view were resented
by orthodox sections who also opposed many of the reforms he advocated. But
he also had staunch supporters, among them the Tagore family which played an
outstanding part later in the renaissance in Bengal. Ram Mohan went to England
on behalf of the Delhi Emperor and died in Bristol in the early thirties of the
nineteenth century.
Ram Mohan Roy and others studied English privately. There were no English
schools or colleges outside Calcutta and the Government’s policy was definitely
opposed to the teaching of English to Indians. In 1781, the Calcutta Madrasa was
started by the Government in Calcutta for Arabic studies. In 1817, a group of
Indians and Europeans started the Hindu College in Calcutta, now called the
Presidency College. In 1791, a Sanskrit College was started in Benares. Probably
in the second decade of the nineteenth century some missionary schools were
teaching English. During the twenties a school of thought arose in government
circles in favour of the teaching of English, but this was opposed. However, as
an experimental measure some English classes were attached to the Arabic
school in Delhi and to some institutions in Calcutta. The final decision in favour
of the teaching of English was embodied in Macaulay’s Minute on Education of
February, 1835. In 1857, the Universities of Calcutta, Madras and Bombay
began their career.
If the British Government in India was reluctant to teach English to Indians,
Brahmin scholars objected even more, but for different reasons, to teaching
Sanskrit to Englishmen. When Sir William Jones, already a linguist and a
scholar, came to India as a judge of the Supreme Court, he expressed his desire
to learn Sanskrit. But no Brahmin would agree to teach the sacred language to a
foreigner and an intruder, even though handsome rewards were offered. Jones
ultimately, with considerable difficulty, got hold of a non-Brahmin Vaidya or
medical practitioner who agreed to teach, but on his own peculiar and stringent
conditions. Jones agreed to every stipulation, so great was his eagerness to learn
the ancient language of India. Sanskrit fascinated him and especially the
discovery of the old Indian drama. It was through his writings and translations
that Europe first had a glimpse of some of the treasures of Sanskrit literature. In
1784 Sir William Jones established the Bengal Asiatic Society which later
became the Royal Asiatic Society. To Jones, and to the many other European
scholars, India owes a deep debt of gratitude for the rediscovery of her past
literature. Much of it was known of course throughout every age, but the
knowledge had become more and more confined to select and exclusive groups,
and the dominance of Persian as the language of culture had diverted people’s
minds from it. The search for manuscripts brought out many a little-known work
and the application of modern critical methods of scholarship gave a new
background to the vast literature that was revealed.
The advent and use of the printing press gave a great stimulus to the
development of the popular Indian languages. Some of these languages—Hindi,
Bengali, Gujrati, Marathi, Urdu, Tamil, Telugu—had not only long been in use,
but had also developed literatures. Many of the books in them were widely
known among the masses. Almost always these books were epic in form, poems,
or collection of songs and verses, which could easily be memorized. There was
practically no prose literature in them at the time. Serious writing was almost
confined to Sanskrit and Persian, and every cultured person was supposed to
know one of them. These two classical languages played a dominating role and
prevented the growth of the popular provincial languages. The printing of books
and newspapers broke the hold of the classics and immediately prose literatures
in the provincial languages began to develop. The early Christian missionaries,
especially of the Baptist Mission at Serampore, helped in this process greatly.
The first private printing presses were set up by them and their efforts to
translate the Bible into prose versions of the Indian languages met with
considerable success.
There was no difficulty in dealing with the well-known and established
languages, but the missionaries went further and tackled some of the minor and
undeveloped languages and gave them shape and form, compiling grammars and
dictionaries for them. They even laboured at the dialects of the primitive hill and
forest tribes and reduced them to writing. The desire of the Christian
Missionaries to translate the Bible into every possible language thus resulted in
the development of many Indian languages. Christian mission work in India has
not always been admirable or praiseworthy, but in this respect, as well as in the
collection of folklore, it has undoubtedly been of great service to India.
The reluctance of the East India Company to spread education was justified,
for as early as 1830 a batch of students of the Hindu College of Calcutta (where
Sanskrit and English were taught) demanded certain reforms. They asked for
restrictions on the political power of the Company and provision for free and
compulsory education. Free education was well-known in India from the most
ancient times. That education was traditional, not very good or profitable, but it
was available to poor students without any payment, except some personal
service to the teacher. In this respect both the Hindu and Muslim traditions were
similar.
While the new education was deliberately prevented from spreading, the old
education had been largely liquidated in Bengal. When the British seized power
in Bengal there were a very large number of muafis, that is tax-free grants of
land. Many of these were personal, but most were in the shape of endowments
for educational institutions. A vast number of elementary schools of the old type
subsisted on them, as well as some institutions for higher education, which was
chiefly imparted in Persian. The East India Company was anxious to make
money rapidly in order to pay dividends to its shareholders in England, and the
demands of its directors were continuous and pressing. A deliberate policy was
therefore adopted to resume and confiscate these muafi lands. Strict proof was
demanded of the original grant, but the old sanads and papers had long been lost
or eaten up by termites; so the muafis were resumed and the old holders were
ejected, and the schools and colleges lost their endowments. Huge areas were
involved in this way and many old families were ruined. The educational
establishments, which had been supported by these muafis, ceased to function,
and a vast number of teachers and others connected with them were thrown out
of employment. This process helped in ruining the old feudal classes in Bengal,
both Muslim and Hindu, as well as those classes who were dependent on them.
Muslims were especially affected as they were, as a group, more feudal than the
Hindus and were also the chief beneficiaries of the muafis. Among the Hindus
there were far larger numbers of middle class people engaged in trade and
commerce and the professions. These people were more adaptable and took to
English education more readily. They were also more useful to the British for
their subordinate services. Muslims avoided English education and, in Bengal,
they were not looked upon with favour by the British rulers, who were afraid
that the remnants of the old ruling class might give trouble. Bengali Hindus thus
acquired almost a monopoly in the beginning in the subordinate government
service and were sent to the northern provinces. A few Muslims, relics of the old
families, were later taken into this service.
English education brought a widening of the Indian horizon, an admiration for
English literature and institutions, a revolt against some customs and aspects of
Indian life, and a growing demand for political reform. The new professional
classes took the lead in political agitation, which consisted chiefly in sending
representations to Government. English-educated people in the professions and
the services formed in effect a new class, which was to grow all over India, a
class influenced by western thought and ways and rather cut off from the mass of
the population. In 1852 the British Indian Association was started in Calcutta.
This was one of the forerunners of the Indian National Congress, and yet a
whole generation was to pass before the Congress was started in 1885. This gap
represents the period of the Revolt of 1857-58, its suppression and its
consequences. The great difference between the state of Bengal and that of
northern and central India in the middle of the century is brought out by the fact
that while in Bengal the new intelligentsia (chiefly Hindu) had been influenced
by English thought and literature and looked to England for political
constitutional reform, the other areas were seething with the spirit of revolt.
In Bengal one can see more clearly than elsewhere the early effects of British
rule and Western influence. The break-up of the agrarian economy was complete
and the old feudal classes had almost been eliminated. In their place had come
new landowners whose organic and traditional contacts with the land were far
less, and who had few of the virtues and most of the failings of the old feudal
landlords. The peasantry suffered famine and spoliation in many ways and were
reduced to extreme poverty. The artisan class was almost wiped out. Over these
disjointed and broken-up foundations rose new groups and classes, the products
of British rule and connected with it in many ways. There were the merchants
who were really middlemen of British trade and industry, profiting by the
leavings of that industry. There were also the English-educated classes in the
subordinate services and the learned professions, both looking to the British
power for advancement and both influenced in varying degree by Western
thought. Among these grew up a spirit of revolt against the rigid conventions and
social framework of Hindu society. They looked to English liberalism and
institutions for inspiration.
This was the effect on the upper fringe of the Hindus of Bengal. The mass of
the Hindus there were not directly affected and even the Hindu leaders probably
seldom thought of the masses. The Muslims were not affected at all, some
individuals apart, and they kept deliberately aloof from the new education. They
had been previously backward economically and they became even more so. The
nineteenth century produced a galaxy of brilliant Hindus in Bengal, and yet there
is hardly a single Muslim Bengali leader of any note who stands out there during
this period. So far as the masses were concerned there was hardly any
appreciable difference between the Hindu and Muslims; they were
indistinguishable in habits, ways of living, language, and in their common
poverty and misery. Indeed, nowhere in India were the religious and other
differences between Hindus and Muslims of all classes so little marked as in
Bengal. Probably 98 per cent of the Muslims were converts from Hinduism,
usually from the lowest strata of society. In population figures there was
probably a slight majority of Muslims over Hindus. (Today the proportions in
Bengal are: 53 per cent Muslims, 46 per cent Hindus, 1 per cent others.)
All these early consequences of the British connection, and the various
economic, social, intellectual, and political movements that they gave rise to in
Bengal, are noticeable elsewhere in India, but in lesser and varying degrees. The
break-up of the old feudal order and economy was less complete and more
gradual elsewhere. In fact that order rose in rebellion and even when crushed,
survived to some extent. The Muslims in upper India were culturally and
economically far superior to their co-religionists of Bengal, but even they kept
aloof from Western education.
The Hindus took to this education more easily and were more influenced by
Western ideas. The subordinate Government services and the professions had far
more Hindus than Muslims. Only in the Punjab this difference was less marked.
The Revolt of 1857-58 dared up and was crushed, but Bengal was hardly
touched by it. Throughout the nineteenth century the new English-educated
class, mainly Hindu, looked up with admiration towards England and hoped to
advance with her help and in co-operation with her. There was a cultural
renaissance and a remarkable growth of the Bengali language, and the leaders of
Bengal stood out as the leaders of political India.
Some glimpse of that faith in England which filled the mind of Bengal in
those days, as well as of the revolt against old-established social codes, may be
had from that moving message of Rabindranath Tagore, which he gave on his
eightieth birthday (May, 1941), a few months before his death. ‘As I look back,’
he says,
on the vast stretch of years that lie behind me and see in clear perspective the history of my
early development, I am struck by the change that has taken place both in my own attitude
and in the psychology of my countrymen—a change that carries within it a cause of profound
tragedy.
Our direct contact with the larger world of men was linked up with the contemporary
history of the English people whom we came to know in those earlier days. It was mainly
through their mighty literature that we formed our ideas with regard to these newcomers to
our Indian shores. In those days the type of learning that was served out to us was neither
plentiful nor diverse, nor was the spirit of scientific inquiry very much in evidence. Thus their
scope being strictly limited, the educated of those days had recourse to English language and
literature. Their days and nights were eloquent with the stately declamations of Burke, with
Macaulay’s long-rolling sentences; discussions centred upon Shakespeare’s drama and
Byron’s poetry and above all upon the large-hearted liberalism of the nineteenth century
English politics.
At the time though tentative attempts were being made to gain our national
independence, at heart we had not lost faith in the generosity of the English race. This belief
was so firmly rooted in the sentiments of our leaders as to lead them to hope that the victor
would of his own grace pave the path to freedom for the vanquished. This belief was based
upon the fact that England at the time provided a shelter to all those who had to flee from
persecution in their own country. Political martyrs who had suffered for the honour of their
people were accorded unreserved welcome at the hands of the English. I was impressed by
this evidence of liberal humanity in the character of the English and thus I was led to set them
on the pedestal of my highest respect. This generosity in their national character had not yet
been vitiated by imperialist pride. About this time, as a boy in England, I had the opportunity
of listening to the speeches of John Bright, both in and outside Parliament. The large-hearted
radical liberalism of those speeches, overflowing all narrow national bounds, had made so
deep an impression on my mind that something of it lingers even today, even in these days of
graceless disillusionment.
Certainly that spirit of abject dependence upon the charity of our rulers was no matter of
pride. What was remarkable, however, was the whole-hearted way in which we gave our
recognition to human greatness even when it revealed itself in the foreigner. The best and
noblest gifts of humanity cannot be the monopoly of a particular race or country; its scope
may not be limited nor may it be regarded as the miser’s hoard buried underground. That is
why English literature which nourished our minds in the past, does even now convey its deep
resonance to the recesses of our heart.
Tagore proceeds to refer to the Indian ideal of proper conduct prescribed by
the tradition of the race.
Narrow in themselves these time-honoured social conventions originated and held good in
circumscribed geographical area, in that strip of land, Brahmavarta by name, bound on either
side by the rivers Saraswati and Drisadvati. That is how a pharisaic formalism gradually got
the upper hand of free thought and the idea ‘proper conduct’ which Manu found established
in Brahmavarta steadily degenerated into socialized tyranny.
During my boyhood days the attitude of the cultured and educated section of Bengal,
nurtured on English learning, was charged with a feeling of revolt against these rigid
regulations of society … In place of these set codes of conduct we accepted the ideal of
‘civilization’ as represented by the English term.
In our own family this change of spirit was welcomed for the sake of its sheer rational
and moral force and its influence was felt in every sphere of our life. Born in that atmosphere,
which was moreover coloured by our intuitive bias for literature, I naturally set the English on
the throne of my heart. Thus passed the first chapters of my life. Then came the parting of
ways, accompanied with a painful feeling of disillusion, when I began increasingly to
discover how easily those who accepted the highest truths of civilization disowned them with
impunity whenever questions of national self-interest were involved.
The Great Revolt of 1857. Racialism
After nearly a century of British rule, Bengal had accommodated itself to it; the
peasantry devastated by famine and crushed by new economic burdens, the new
intelligentsia looking to the West and hoping that progress would come through
English liberalism. So also, more or less in the south and in western India, in
Madras and Bombay. But in the upper provinces there was no such submission
or accommodation and the spirit of revolt was growing, especially among the
feudal chiefs and their followers. Even in the masses discontent and an intense
anti-British feeling were widespread. The upper classes keenly resented the
insulting and overbearing manners of the foreigners, the people generally
suffered from the rapacity and ignorance of the officials of the East India
Company, who ignored their time-honoured customs and paid no heed to what
the people of the country thought. Absolute power over vast numbers of people
had turned their heads and they suffered no check or hindrance. Even the new
judicial system they introduced became a thing of terror because of its
complications and the ignorance of the judges of both the language and customs
of the country.
As early as 1817, Sir Thomas Munro, writing to the Governor-General, Lord
Hastings, after pointing out the advantages of British rule, said:
but these advantages are dearly bought. They are purchased by the sacrifice of independence,
of national character, and of whatever renders a people respectable … The consequence,
therefore, of the conquest of India by the British arms would be, in place of raising, to debase
a whole people. There is perhaps no example of any conquest in which the natives have been
so completely excluded from all share of the government of their country as in British India.
Munro was pleading for the employment of Indians in the administration. A
year later he wrote again:
Foreign conquerors have treated the natives with violence, and often with great cruelty, but
none has treated them with so much scorn as we; none has stigmatized the whole people as
unworthy of trust, as incapable of honesty, and as fit to be employed only where we cannot do
without them. It seems to be not only ungenerous, but impolitic, to debase the character of a
people fallen under our dominion.9
British dominion was extended to the Punjab by 1850 after two Sikh wars.
Maharaja Ranjit Singh, who had held and extended the Sikh state in the Punjab,
had died in 1839. In 1856 Oudh was annexed. Oudh had been virtually under
British rule for half a century, for it was a vassal state, its nominal ruler being
both helpless and degenerate, and the British Resident all powerful. It had sunk
to the very depths of misery and illustrated all the evils of the subsidiary state
system.
In May, 1857, the Indian army at Meerut mutinied. The revolt had been
secretly and well organized but a premature outburst rather upset the plans of the
leaders. It was much more than a military mutiny and it spread rapidly and
assumed the character of a popular rebellion and a war of Indian independence.
As such a popular rebellion of the masses it was confined to Delhi, the United
Provinces (as they are now called), and parts of central India and Bihar.
Essentially it was a feudal outburst, headed by feudal chiefs and their followers
and aided by the widespread anti-foreign sentiment. Inevitably it looked up to
the relic of the Mughal dynasty, still sitting in the Delhi palace, but feeble and
old and powerless. Both Hindus and Muslims took full part in the Revolt.
This Revolt strained British rule to the utmost and it was ultimately
suppressed with Indian help. It brought out all the inherent weaknesses of the old
regime, which was making its last despairing effort to drive out foreign rule. The
feudal chiefs had the sympathy of the masses over large areas, but they were
incapable, unorganized and with no constructive ideal or community of interest.
They had already played their role in history and there was no place for them in
the future. Many of their number, in spite of their sympathies, thought discretion
the better part of valour, and stood apart waiting to see on which side victory lay.
Many played the part of quislings. The Indian princes as a whole kept aloof or
helped the British, fearing to risk what they had acquired or managed to retain.
There was hardly any national and unifying sentiment among the leaders and a
mere anti-foreign feeling, coupled with a desire to maintain their feudal
privileges, was a poor substitute for this.
The British got the support of the Gurkhas and, what is much more surprising,
of the Sikhs also, for the Sikhs had been their enemies and had been defeated by
them only a few years before. It is certainly to the credit of the British that they
could win over the Sikhs in this way; whether it is to the credit or discredit of the
Sikhs of those days depends upon one’s point of view. It is clear, however, that
there was a lack of nationalist feeling which might have bound the people of
India together. Nationalism of the modern type was yet to come; India had still
to go through much sorrow and travail before she learnt the lesson which would
give her real freedom. Not by fighting for a lost cause, the feudal order, would
freedom come.
The Revolt threw up some fine guerrilla leaders. Feroz Shah, a relative of
Bahadur Shah, of Delhi, was one of them, but, most brilliant of all was Tantia
Topi who harassed the British for many months even when defeat stared him in
the face. Ultimately when he crossed the Narbada river into the Maratha regions,
hoping to receive aid and welcome from his own people, there was no welcome,
and he was betrayed. One name stands out above others and is revered still in
popular memory, the name of Lakshmi Bai, Rani of Jhansi, a girl of twenty years
of age, who died fighting. ‘Best and bravest’ of the rebel leaders, she was called
by the English general who opposed her.
British memorials of the Mutiny have been put up in Cawnpore and
elsewhere. There is no memorial for the Indians who died. The rebel Indians
sometimes indulged in cruel and barbarous behaviour; they were unorganized,
suppressed, and often angered by reports of British excesses. But there is another
side to the picture also that impressed itself on the mind of India, and in my own
province especially the memory of it persists in town and village. One would
like to forget all this, for it is a ghastly and horrible picture showing man at his
worst, even according to the new standards of barbarity set up by Nazism and
modern war. But it can only be forgotten, or remembered in a detached
impersonal way, when it becomes truly the past with nothing to connect it with
the present. So long as the connecting links and reminders are present, and the
spirit behind those events survives and shows itself, that memory also will
endure and influence our people. Attempts to suppress that picture do not
destroy it but drive it deeper in the mind. Only by dealing with it normally can
its effect be lessened.
A great deal of false and perverted history has been written about the Revolt
and its suppression. What the Indians think about it seldom finds its way to the
printed page. Savarkar wrote The History of the War of Indian Independence
some thirty years ago, but his book was promptly banned and is banned still.
Some frank and honourable English historians have occasionally lifted the veil
and allowed us a glimpse of the race mania and lynching mentality which
prevailed on an enormous scale. The accounts given in Kaye and Malleson’s
History of the Mutiny and in Thompson and Garrett’s Rise and Fulfilment of
British Rule in India make one sick with horror. ‘Every Indian who was not
actually fighting for the British became a “murderer of women and children”… a
general massacre of the inhabitants of Delhi, a large number of whom were
known to wish us success, was openly proclaimed.’ The days of Timur and
Nadir Shah were remembered, but their exploits were eclipsed by the new terror,
both in extent and the length of time it lasted. Looting was officially allowed for
a week, but it actually lasted for a month, and in was accompanied by wholesale
massacre.
In my own city and district of Allahabad and in the neighbourhood, General
Neill held his ‘Bloody Assizes.’
Soldiers and civilians alike were holding Bloody Assize, or slaying natives without any assize
at all, regardless of age or sex. It is on the records of our British Parliament, in papers sent
home by the Governor-General in Council, that ‘the aged, women, and children are sacrificed
as well as those guilty of rebellion.’ They were not deliberately hanged, but burnt to death in
villages—perhaps now and then accidentally shot.’
Volunteer hanging parties went into the districts and amateur executioners were not
wanting to the occasion. One gentleman boasted of the numbers he had finished off quite ‘in
an artistic manner,’ with mango trees as gibbets and elephants for drops, the victims of this
wild justice being strung up, as though for pastime, in the form of figures of eight.
And so in Cawnpore and Lucknow and all over the place.
It is hateful to have to refer to this past history, but the spirit behind those
events did not end with them. It survived, and whenever a crisis comes or nerves
give way, it is in evidence again. The world knows about Amritsar and
Jallianwala Bagh, but it does not know of much that has happened since the days
of the Mutiny, much that has taken place even in recent years and in our time,
which has embittered the present generation. Imperialism and the domination of
one people over another is bad, and so is racialism. But imperialism plus
racialism can only lead to horror and ultimately to the degradation of all
concerned with them. The future historians of England will have to consider how
far England’s decline from her proud eminence was due to her imperialism and
racialism, which corrupted her public life and made her forget the lessons of her
own history and literature.
Since Hitler emerged from obscurity and became the Fuehrer of Germany, we
have heard a great deal about racialism and the nazi theory of the herrenvolk.
That doctrine has been condemned and is today condemned by the leaders of the
United Nations. Biologists ted us that racialism is a myth and there is no such
thing as a master race. But we in India have known racialism in all its forms ever
since the commencement of British rule. The whole ideology of this rule was
that of the herrenvolk and the master race, and the structure of government was
based upon it; indeed the idea of a master race is inherent in imperialism. There
was no subterfuge about it; it was proclaimed in unambiguous language by those
in authority. More powerful than words was the practice that accompanied them
and, generation after generation and year after year, India as a nation and Indians
as individuals were subjected to insult, humiliation, and contemptuous treatment.
The English were an imperial race, we were told, with the God-given right to
govern us and keep us in subjection; if we protested we were reminded of the
‘tiger qualities of an imperial race.’ As an Indian, I am ashamed to write all this,
for the memory of it hurts, and what hurts still more is the fact that we submitted
for so long to this degradation. I would have preferred any kind of resistance to
this, whatever the consequences, rather than that our people should endure this
treatment. And yet it is better that both Indians and Englishmen should know it,
for that is the psychological background of England’s connection with India, and
psychology counts and racial memories are long.
One rather typical quotation will make us realize how most of the English in
India have felt and acted. At the time of the Ilbert Bill agitation in 1883, Seton
Kerr, who had been Foreign Secretary to the Government of India, declared that
this Bid outraged
the cherished conviction which was shared by every Englishman in India, from the highest to
the lowest, by the planter’s assistant in his lowly bungalow and by the editor in the full light
of the Presidency town—from those to the Chief Commissioner in charge of an important
province and to the Viceroy on his throne—the conviction in every man that he belongs to a
race whom God has destined to govern and subdue.10
The Techniques of British Rule: Balance and
Counterpoise
The Revolt of 1857-58 was essentially a feudal rising, though there were some
nationalistic elements in it. Yet, at the same time, it was due to the abstention or
active help of the princes and other feudal chiefs that the British succeeded in
crushing it. Those who had joined the Revolt were as a rule the disinherited and
those deprived of their power and privileges by the British authority, or those
who feared that some such fate was in store for them. British policy after some
hesitation had decided in favour of a gradual elimination of the princes and the
establishment of direct British rule. The Revolt brought about a change in this
policy in favour not only of the princes but of the taluqdars or big landlords. It
was felt that it was easier to control the masses through these feudal or semifeudal
chiefs. These taluqdars of Oudh had been the tax-farmers of the Mughals
but, owing to the weakness of the central authority, they had begun to function
as feudal landlords. Nearly all of them joined the Revolt, though some took care
to keep a way of escape open. In spite of their rebellion the British authority
offered to reinstate them (with a few exceptions) and confirm them in their
estates on conditions of ‘loyalty and good service.’ Thus these taluqdars, who
take pride in calling themselves the ‘Barons of Oudh,’ became one of the pillars
of British rule.
Though the Revolt had directly affected only certain parts of the country, it
had shaken up the whole of India and, particularly, the British administration.
The Government set about reorganizing their entire system; the British Crown,
that is the Parliament, took over the country from the East India Company; the
Indian army, which had begun the Revolt by its mutiny, was organized afresh.
The techniques of British rule, which had already been well-established, were
now clarified and confirmed and deliberately acted upon. Essentially these were:
the creation and protection of vested interests bound up with British rule; a
policy of balancing and counterpoise of different elements, and the
encouragement of fissiparous tendencies and division amongst them.
The princes and the big landlords were the basic vested interests thus created
and encouraged; but now a new class, even more tied up with British rule, grew
in importance. This consisted of the Indian members of the services, usually in
subordinate positions. Previously the employment of Indians had been avoided
except when this could not be helped, and Munro had pleaded for such
employment. Experience had now demonstrated that Indians employed were so
dependent on the British administration and rule that they could be relied upon
and treated as agents of that rule. In the pre-mutiny days most of the Indian
members of the subordinate services had been Bengalis. These had spread out
over the upper provinces wherever the British administration needed clerks and
the like in its civil or military establishments. Regular colonies of Bengalis had
thus grown up at the administrative or military centres in the United Provinces,
Delhi, and even in the Punjab. These Bengalis accompanied the British armies
and proved faithful employees to them. They became associated in the minds of
the rebels with the British power and were greatly disliked by them and given
uncomplimentary tides.
Thus began the process of the Indianization of the administrative machine in
its subordinate ranks, all real power and initiative being, however, concentrated
in the hands of the English personnel. As English education spread, the Bengalis
had no longer a virtual monopoly of service and other Indians came in, both on
the judicial and executive sides of the administration. This Indianization became
the most effective method of strengthening British rule. It created a civil army
and garrison everywhere, which was more important even than the military army
of occupation. There were some members of this civil army who were able and
patriotic and nationalistically inclined, but like the soldier, who also may be
patriotic in his individual capacity, they were bound up by the army code and
discipline, and the price of disobedience, desertion, and revolt was heavy. Not
only was this civil army created but the hope and prospect of employment in it
affected and demoralized a vast and growing number of others. There was a
measure of prestige and security in it and a pension at the end of the term of
service, and if a sufficient subservience was shown to one’s superior officers,
other failings did not count. These civil employees were the intermediaries
between the British authorities and the people, and if they had to be obsequious
to their superiors they could be arrogant to and exact obedience from their own
inferiors and the people at large.
The lack of other avenues of employment, other ways of making a living,
added additional importance to government service. A few could become
lawyers or doctors, but even so, success was by no means assured. Industry
hardly existed. Trade was largely in the hands of certain hereditary classes who
had a peculiar aptitude for it and who helped each other. The new education did
not fit anyone for trade or industry; its chief aim was government service.
Education was so limited as to offer few openings for a professional career;
other social services were almost non-existent. So government service remained
and, as the colleges poured out their graduates, even the growing government
services could not absorb them all, and a fierce competition arose. The
unemployed graduates and others formed a pool from which government could
always draw; they were a potential threat to the security of even the employed.
Thus the British Government in India became, not only the biggest employer,
but, for all practical purposes, the sole big employer (including railways), and a
vast bureaucratic machine was built up, strictly managed and controlled at the
top. This enormous patronage was exercised to strengthen the British hold on the
country, to crush discordant and disagreeable elements and to promote rivalry
and discord amongst various groups anxiously looking forward to employment
in government service. It led to demoralization and conflict, and the government
could play one group against the other.
The policy of balance and counterpoise was deliberately furthered in the
Indian army. Various groups were so arranged as to prevent any sentiment of
national unity growing up amongst them, and tribal and communal loyalties and
slogans were encouraged. Every effort was made to isolate the army from the
people and even ordinary newspapers were not allowed to reach the Indian
troops. All the key positions were kept in the hands of Englishmen and no Indian
could hold the King’s commission. A raw English subaltern was senior to the
oldest and most experienced Indian non-commissioned officer or those holding
the so-called Viceroy’s commissions. No Indian could be employed at army
headquarters except as a petty clerk in the accounts department. For additional
protection the more effective weapons of warfare were not given to the Indian
forces; they were reserved for the British troops in India. These British troops
were always kept with the Indian regiments in all the vital centres of India to
serve as ‘Internal Security Troops’ for suppression of disorder and to overawe
the people. While this internal army, with a predominance of British personnel,
served as an army of occupation for the country, the greater portion of the Indian
troops were part of the field army organized for service abroad The Indian troops
were recruited from special classes only, chiefly in northern India, which were
called martial classes.
Again we notice in India that inherent contradiction in British rule. Having
brought about the political unification of the country and thus let loose new
dynamic forces which thought not only in terms of that unity, but aimed at the
freedom of India, the British Government tried to disrupt that very unity it had
helped to create. That disruption was not thought of in political terms then as a
splitting up of India; it was aimed at the weakening of nationalist elements so
that British rule might continue over the whole country. But it was nonetheless
an attempt at disruption, by giving greater importance to the Indian states than
they had ever had before, by encouraging reactionary elements and looking to
them for support, by promoting divisions and encouraging one group against
another, by encouraging fissiparous tendencies due to religion or province, and
by organizing quisling classes which were afraid of a change which might engulf
them. All this was a natural understandable policy for a foreign imperialist
power to pursue, and it is a little naive to be surprised at it, harmful from the
Indian nationalist point of view though it was. But the fact that it was so must be
remembered if we are to understand subsequent developments. Out of this policy
arose those ‘important elements in India’s national life’ of which we are
reminded so often today; which were created and encouraged to disagree and
disrupt, and are now called upon to agree among themselves.
Because of this natural alliance of the British power with the reactionaries in
India, it became the guardian and upholder of many an evil custom and practice
which it otherwise condemned. India was custom-ridden when the British came,
and the tyranny of old custom is often a terrible thing. Yet customs change and
are forced to adapt themselves to some extent to a changing environment. Hindu
law was largely custom, and as custom changed the law also was applied in a
different way. Indeed, there was no provision of Hindu law which could not be
changed by custom. The British replaced this elastic customary law by judicial
decisions based on the old texts, and these decisions became precedents which
had to be rigidly followed. That was, in theory, an advantage, as it produced
greater uniformity and certainty. But, in the manner it was done, it resulted in the
perpetuation of the ancient law unmodified by subsequent customs. Thus the old
law which, in some particulars and in various places, had been changed by
custom and was thus out of date, was petrified, and every tendency to change it
in the well-known customary way was suppressed. It was still open to a group to
prove a custom overriding the law, but this was extraordinarily difficult in the
law courts. Change could only come by positive legislation, but the British
Government, which was the legislating authority, had no wish to antagonize the
conservative elements on whose support it counted. When later some legislative
powers were given to partially elected assemblies, every attempt to promote
social reform legislation was frowned upon by the authorities and sternly
discouraged.
Growth of Industry: Provincial Differences
Slowly India recovered from the after-effects of the revolt of 1857-58. Despite
British policy, powerful forces were at work changing India, and a new social
consciousness was arising. The political unity of India, contact with the West,
technological advances, and even the misfortune of a common subjection, led to
new currents of thought, the slow development of industry, and the rise of a new
movement for national freedom. The awakening of India was two-fold: she
looked to the west and, at the same time, she looked at herself and her own past.
The coming of the railway to India brought the industrial age on its positive
side; so far only the negative aspect, in the shape of manufactured goods from
Britain, had been in evidence. In 1860 the duty on imported machinery, imposed
so as to prevent the industrialization of India, was removed, and large-scale
industry began to develop, chiefly with British capital. First came the jute
industry of Bengal, with its nerve centre at Dundee in Scotland; much later
cotton mills grew up in Ahmedabad and Bombay, largely with Indian capital and
under Indian ownership; then came mining. Obstruction from the British
Government in India continued, and an excise duty was put on Indian cotton
goods to prevent them from competing with Lancashire textiles, even in India.
Nothing, perhaps, reveals the police-state policy of the Government of India
more than the fact that they had no department of agriculture and no department
of commerce and industry till the twentieth century. It was, I believe, chiefly due
to the donation of an American visitor, given for agricultural improvement in
India, that a department of agriculture was started in the Central Government.
(Even now this department is a very small affair). A department for commerce
and industry followed soon after, in 1905. Even then these departments
functioned in a very small way. The growth of industry was artificially restricted
and India’s natural economic development was arrested.
Though the masses of India were desperately poor and growing poorer, a tiny
fringe at the top was prospering under the new conditions and accumulating
capital. It was this fringe that demanded political reform as well as opportunities
for investment. On the political side, the Indian National Congress was started in
1885. Commerce and industry grew slowly, and it is interesting to note that the
classes who took to them were predominantly those whose hereditary
occupations for hundreds of years had been trade and commerce. Ahmedabad,
the new centre of the textile industry, had been a famous manufacturing and
trade centre during the Mughal period and even earlier, exporting its products to
foreign countries. The big merchants of Ahmedabad had their own ships for this
seaborne trade to Africa and the Persian Gulf. Broach, the seaport near by, was
well known in Graeco-Roman times.
The people of Gujrat, Kathiawar, and Cutch were traders, manufacturers,
merchants, and seafaring folk from ancient times. Many changes took place in
India, but they carried on with their old business, adapting them to new
conditions. They are now among the most prominent leaders in industry and
commerce. Religion or a change of religion made no difference. The Parsees,
who originally settled in Gujrat thirteen hundred years ago, may be considered
as Gujratis for this purpose. (Their language has long been Gujrati.) Among the
Muslims the most prominent sects in business and industry are the Khojas,
Memons, and Bohras. All of these are converts from Hinduism, and all come
from Gujrat, Kathiawar, or Cutch. All these Gujratis not only dominate industry
and business in India, but have spread out to Burma, Ceylon, East Africa, South
Africa, and other foreign countries.
The Marwaris from Rajputana used to control internal trade and finance, and
were to be found at all the nerve centres of India. They were the big financiers as
well as the small village bankers; a note from a well-known Marwari financial
house would be honoured anywhere in India, and even abroad. The Marwaris
still represent big finance in India but have added industry to it now.
The Sindhis in the north-west have also an old commercial tradition, and with
their headquarters at Shikarpur or Hyderabad they used to spread out over
Central and western Asia and elsewhere. Today (that is before the war) there is
hardly a port anywhere in the world where one or more Sindhi shops cannot be
found. Some of the Punjabis also have been traditionally in business.
The Chettys of Madras have also been leaders in business, and banking
especially, from ancient times. The word ‘Chetty’ is derived from the Sanskrit
‘Shreshthi,’ the leader of a merchant guild. The common appellation ‘Seth’ is
also derived from ‘Shreshthi’. The Madras Chettys have not only played an
important part in south India, but they spread out all over Burma, even in the
remoter villages.
Within each province also trade and commerce were largely in the hands of
the old vaishya class, who had been engaged in business for untold generations.
They were the retail and wholesale dealers and moneylenders. In each village
there was a bania’s shop, which dealt in the necessaries of village life and
advanced loans, on very profitable terms, to the villagers. The rural credit system
was almost entirely in the hands of these banias. They spread even to the tribal
and independent territories of the north-west and performed important functions
there. As poverty grew agricultural indebtedness also grew rapidly, and the
money-lending establishments held mortgages on the land and eventually
acquired much of it. Thus the moneylender became the landlord also.
These demarcations of commercial, trading and banking classes from others
became less clearly defined as newcomers crept into various businesses; but they
continued and are still marked. Whether they are due to the caste system, or the
hold of tradition, or inherited capacity, or all of these together, it is difficult to
specify. Undoubtedly among Brahmins and Kshatriyas business was looked
down upon, and even the accumulation of money, though agreeable enough, was
not a sufficient recompense. The possession of land was a symbol of social
position, as in feudal times, and scholarship and learning were respected, even
apart from possession. Under British rule government service gave prestige,
security, and status, and later, when Indians were allowed to enter the Indian
Civil Service, this service, called the ‘heaven born service’— heaven being some
pale shadow of Whitehall—became the Elysium of the English-educated classes.
The professional classes, especially lawyers, some of whom earned large
incomes in the new law courts, also had prestige and high status and attracted
young men. Inevitably these lawyers took the lead in political and social reform
movements.
The Bengalis were the first to take to the law, and some of them flourished
exceedingly and cast a glamour over their profession. They were also the
political leaders. They did not fit into the growing industry, either because of
lack of aptitude or other reasons. They result has been that when industry began
to play an important part in the country’s life and to influence politics, Bengal
lost its pre-eminence in the political field. The old current, when Bengalis
poured out of their province as Government servants and in other capacities, was
reversed and people from other provinces poured into Bengal, especially in
Calcutta, and permeated the commercial and industrial life there. Calcutta had
been and continues to be the chief centre of British capital and industry, and the
English and the Scotch dominate business there; but they are being caught up by
Marwaris and Gujratis. Even petty trades in Calcutta are often in non-Bengali
hands. All the thousands of taxi-drivers in Calcutta, almost without an exception,
are Sikhs from the Punjab.
Bombay became the centre and headquarters of Indian-owned industry,
commerce, banking, insurance, etc. The Parsees, the Gujratis, and Marwaris,
were the leaders in all these activities, and it is significant to note that the
Maharashtrians or Marathas have played very little part in them. Bombay is a
huge cosmopolitan city now but its population consists mainly of Marathas and
Gujratis. The Marathas have distinguished themselves in the professions and in
scholarship; they make, as one would expect, good soldiers; and large numbers
of them are employed as workers in the textile mills. They are hardy and wiry
and, as a province, poor; they are proud of the Shivaji tradition and of the
achievements of their forefathers. The Gujratis are soft in body, gender, richer,
and perfectly at home in trade and commerce. Perhaps these differences are
largely due to geography, for the Maratha country is bare and hard and
mountainous while Gujarat is rich and fertile.
It is interesting to observe these and other differences in various parts of India
which continue to persist, though they tend to grow less. Madras, highly
intellectual, has produced and still produces distinguished philosophers,
mathematicians, and scientists. Bombay is now almost entirely devoted to
business with all its advantages and disadvantages. Bengal, rather backward in
industry and business, has produced some fine scientists, and has especially
distinguished itself in art and literature. The Punjab has produced no outstanding
personalities but is a go-ahead province advancing in many fields; its people are
hard-headed, make good mechanics, and are successful in small trades and petty
industries. The United Provinces (including Delhi) are a curious amalgam, and
in some ways an epitome of India. They are the seat of the old Hindu culture as
well as of the Persian culture that came in Afghan and Mughal times, and hence
the mixture of the two is most in evidence there, intermingled with the culture of
the west. There is less of provincialism there than in any other part of India. For
long they have considered themselves and have been looked upon by others, as
the heart of India. Indeed, in popular parlance, they are often referred to as
Hindustan.
These differences, it must be noted, are geographical and not religious. A
Bengali Muslim is far nearer to a Bengali Hindu than he is to a Punjabi Muslim;
so also with others. If a number of Hindu and Muslim Bengalis happen to meet
anywhere, in India or elsewhere, they will immediately congregate together and
feel at home with each other. Punjabis, whether Muslim or Hindu or Sikh, will
do likewise. The Muslims of the Bombay presidency (Khojas, Memons, and
Bohras) have many Hindu customs; the Khojas (they are the followers of the
Aga Khan) and the Bohras are not looked upon as orthodox by the Muslims of
the north.
Muslims, as a whole, especially in Bengal and the north, not only kept away
from English education for a long time, but also took little part in the growth of
industry. Partly this was due to feudal modes of thought, partly (as in Roman
Catholicism) to Islam’s prohibition against usury and interest on money. But,
curiously enough, among the notorious moneylenders are a particular tribe of
Pathans, who come from near the frontier. Muslims were thus, in the second half
of the nineteenth century, backward in English education and therefore in
contacts with Western thought, as also in government service and in industry.
The growth of industry in India, slow and arrested as it was, gave the
impression of progress and attracted attention. And yet it made practically no
difference to the problem of the poverty of the masses and the overburden on the
land. A few hundred thousand workers were transferred to industry out of the
scores of millions of the unemployed and partially employed. This change-over
was so extremely small that it did not affect the increasing ruralization of the
country. Widespread unemployment and the pressure on land led to emigration
of workers on a substantial scale to foreign countries, often under humiliating
conditions. They went to South Africa, Fiji, Trinidad, Jamaica, Guiana,
Mauritius, Ceylon, Burma and Malaya. The small groups or individuals who
found opportunities for growth and betterment under foreign rule were divorced
from the masses, whose condition continued to worsen. Some capital
accumulated in the hands of these groups and conditions were gradually created
for further growth. But the basic problems of poverty and unemployment
remained untouched.
Reform and Other Movements among Hindus and
Muslims
The real impact of the West came to India in the nineteenth century through
technical changes and their dynamic consequences. In the realm of ideas also
there was shock and change, a widening of the horizon which had so long been
confined within a narrow shell. The first reaction, limited to the small Englisheducated
class, was one of admiration and acceptance of almost everything
Western. Repelled by some of the social customs and practices of Hinduism,
many Hindus were attracted towards Christianity, and some notable conversions
took place in Bengal. An attempt was therefore made by Raja Ram Mohan Roy
to adapt Hinduism to this new environment and he started the Brahmo Samaj on
a more or less rationalist and social reform basis. His successor, Keshab Chander
Sen, gave it a more Christian outlook. The Brahmo Samaj influenced the rising
middle classes of Bengal but as a religious faith it remained confined to few,
among whom, however, were some outstanding persons and families. But even
these families, though ardently interested in social and religious reform, tended
to go back to the old Indian philosophic ideals of the Vedanta.
Elsewhere in India also the same tendencies were at work and dissatisfaction
arose at the rigid social forms and protean character of Hinduism as practised.
One of the most notable reform movements was started in the second half of the
nineteenth century by a Gujrati, Swami Dayananda Saraswati, but it took root
among the Hindus of the Punjab. This was the Arya Samaj and its slogan was
‘Back to the Vedas.’ This slogan really meant an elimination of developments of
the Aryan faith since the Vedas; the Vedanta philosophy as it subsequently
developed, the central conception of monism, the pantheistic outlook, as well as
popular and cruder developments, were all alike severely condemned. Even the
Vedas were interpreted in a particular way. The Arya Samaj was a reaction to
the influence of Islam and Christianity, more especially the former. It was a
crusading and reforming movement from within, as well as a defensive
organization for protection against external attacks. It introduced proselytization
into Hinduism and thus tended to come into conflict with other proselytizing
religions. The Arya Samaj, which had been a close approach to Islam, tended to
become a defender of everything Hindu, against what it considered as the
encroachments of other faiths. It is significant that it spread chiefly among the
middle-class Hindus of the Punjab and the United Provinces. At one time it was
considered by the Government as a politically revolutionary movement, but the
large numbers of Government servants in it made it thoroughly respectable. It
has done very good work in the spread of education both among boys and girls,
in improving the condition of women, and in raising the status and standards of
the depressed classes.
About the same period as Swami Dayananda, a different type of person lived
in Bengal and his life influenced many of the new English-educated classes. He
was Shri Ramakrishna Paramahansa, a simple man, no scholar but a man of
faith, and not interested in social reform as such. He was in direct line with
Chaitanya and other Indian saints. Essentially religious and yet broad-minded, in
his search for self-realization he had even met Muslim and Christian mystics
some of whom lived with him for some time. He settled down at Dakshineshwar
near Calcutta, and his extraordinary personality and character gradually attracted
attention. People who went to visit him, and some who were even inclined to
scoff at this simple man of faith, were powerfully influenced and many who had
been completely Westernized felt that here was something they had missed.
Stressing the essentials of religious faith, he linked up the various aspects of the
Hindu religion and philosophy and seemed to represent all of them in his own
person. Indeed he brought within his fold other religions also. Opposed to all
sectarianism, he emphasized that all roads lead to truth. He was like some of the
saints we read about in the past records of Asia and Europe, difficult to
understand in the context of modern life, and yet fitting into India’s manycoloured
pattern and accepted and revered by many of her people as a man with
a touch of the divine fire about him. His personality impressed itself on all who
saw him and many who never saw him have been influenced by the story of his
life. Among these latter is Romain Rolland who has written a story of his life
and that of his chief disciple, Swami Vivekananda.
Vivekananda, together with his brother disciples, founded the nonsectarian
Ramakrishna Mission of service. Rooted in the past and full of pride in India’s
heritage, Vivekananda was yet modern in his approach to life’s problems and
was a kind of bridge between the past of India and her present. He was a
powerful orator in Bengali and English and a graceful writer of Bengali prose
and poetry. He was a fine figure of a man, imposing, full of poise and dignity,
sure of himself and his mission, and at the same time full of a dynamic and fiery
energy and a passion to push India forward. He came as a tonic to the depressed
and demoralized Hindu mind and gave it self-reliance and some roots in the past.
He attended the Parliament of Religions in Chicago in 1893, spent over a year in
the U.S.A., travelled across Europe, going as far as Athens and Constantinople,
and visited Egypt, China and Japan. Wherever he went, he created a minor
sensation not only by his presence but by what he said and how he said it.
Having seen this Hindu Sanyasin once it was difficult to forget him or his
message. In America he was called the ‘cyclonic Hindu.’ He was himself greatly
influenced by his travels in Western countries; he admired British perseverence
and the vitality and spirit of equality of the American people. ‘America is the
best field in the world to carry on any idea’, he wrote to a friend in India. But he
was not impressed by the manifestations of religion in the West and his faith in
the Indian philosophical and spiritual background became firmer. India, in spite
of her degradation, still represented to him the Light.
He preached the monism of the Advaita philosophy of the Vedanta and was
convinced that only this could be the future religion of thinking humanity. For
the Vedanta was not only spiritual but rational and in harmony with scientific
investigations of external nature. ‘This universe has not been created by any
extra-cosmic God, nor is it the work of any outside genius. It is self-creating,
self-dissolving, self-manifesting, One Infinite Existence, the Brahma.’ The
Vedanta ideal was of the solidarity of man and his inborn divine nature; to see
God in man is the real God-vision; man is the greatest of all beings. But ‘the
abstract Vedanta must become living—poetic—in everyday life; out of
hopelessly intricate mythology must come concrete moral forms; and out of
bewildering Yogi-ism must come the most scientific and practical psychology.’
India had fallen because she had narrowed herself, gone into her shell and lost
touch with other nations, and thus sunk into a state of ‘mummified’ and
‘crystallized’ civilization. Caste, which was necessary and desirable in its early
forms, and meant to develop individuality and freedom, had become a monstrous
degradation, the opposite of what it was meant to be, and had crushed the
masses. Caste was a form of social organization which was and should be kept
separate from religion. Social organizations should change with the changing
times. Passionately, Vivekananda condemned the meaningless metaphysical
discussions and arguments about ceremonials, and especially the touch-menotism
of the upper caste. ‘Our religion is in the kitchen. Our God is the
cooking-pot, and our religion is: “don’t touch me, I am holy.’”
He kept away from politics and disapproved of the politicians of his day. But
again and again he laid stress on the necessity for liberty and equality and the
raising of the masses. ‘Liberty of thought and action is the only condition in life,
of growth and well-being. Where it does not exist, the man, the race, the nation
must go.’ ‘The only hope of India is from the masses. The upper classes are
physically and morally dead’. He wanted to combine Western progress with
India’s spiritual background. ‘Make a European society with India’s religion.’
‘Become an occidental of occidentals in your spirit of equality, freedom, work,
and energy, and at the same time a Hindu to the very backbone in religious
culture, and instincts.’ Progressively, Vivekananda grew more international in
outlook:
Even in politics and sociology, problems that were only national twenty years ago can no
longer be solved on national grounds only. They are assuming huge proportions, gigantic
shapes. They can only be solved when looked at in the broader light of international grounds.
International organizations, international combinations, international laws are the cry of the
day. That shows solidarity. In science, every day they are coming to a similar broad view of
matter.
And again:
There cannot be any progress without the whole world following in the wake, and it is
becoming every day clearer that the solution of any problem can never be attained on racial,
or national, or narrow grounds. Every idea has to become broad till it covers the whole of this
world, every aspiration must go on increasing till it has engulfed the whole of humanity, nay
the whole of life, within its scope.
All this fitted in with Vivekananda’s view of the Vedanta philosophy, and he
preached this from end to end of India. ‘I am thoroughly convinced that no
individual or nation can live by holding itself apart from the community of
others, and wherever such an attempt has been made under false ideas of
greatness, policy or holiness—the result has always been disastrous to the
secluding one.’ ‘The fact of our isolation from all the other nations of the world
is the cause of our degeneration and its only remedy is getting back into the
current of the rest of the world. Motion is the sign of life.’
He once wrote: ‘I am a socialist not because I think it is a perfect system, but
half a loaf is better than no bread. The other systems have been tried and found
wanting. Let this one be tried—if for nothing else, for the novelty of the thing.’
Vivekananda spoke of many things but the one constant refrain of his speech
and writing was abhay—be fearless, be strong. For him man was no miserable
sinner but a part of divinity; why should he be afraid of anything? ‘If there is a
sin in the world it is weakness; avoid all weakness, weakness is sin, weakness is
death.’ That had been the great lesson of the Upanishads. Fear breeds evil and
weeping and wailing. There had been enough of that, enough of softness.
What our country now wants are muscles of iron and nerves of steel, gigantic wills which
nothing can resist, which can penetrate into the mysteries and the secrets of the universe, and
will accomplish their purpose in any fashion, even if it meant going down to the bottom of the
ocean and meeting death face to face.
He condemned
occultism and mysticism … these creepy things; there may be great truths in them, but they
have nearly destroyed us …And here is the test of truth—anything that makes you weak
physically, intellectually, and spiritually, reject as poison, there is no life in it, it cannot be
true. Truth is strengthening. Truth is purity, truth is all-knowledge … These mysticisms, in
spite of some grains of truth in them, are generally weakening … Go back to your
Upanishads, the shining, the strengthening, the bright philosophy; and part from all these
mysterious things, all these weakening things. Take up this philosophy; the greatest truths are
the simplest things in the world, simple as your own existence.’ And beware of superstition.
‘I would rather see everyone of you rank atheists than superstitious fools, for the atheist is
alive, and you can make something of him. But if superstition enters, the brain is gone, the
brain is softening, degradation has seized upon the life … Mystery-mongering and
superstition are always signs of weakness.11
So Vivekananda thundered from Cape Comorin on the southern tip of India to
the Himalayas, and he wore himself out in the process, dying in 1902 when he
was thirty-nine years of age.
A contemporary of Vivekananda, and yet belonging much more to a later
generation, was Rabindranath Tagore. The Tagore family had played a leading
part in various reform movements in Bengal during the nineteenth century.
There were men of spiritual stature in it and fine writers and artists, but
Rabindranath towered above them all, and indeed all over India his position
gradually became one of unchallenged supremacy. His long life of creative
activity covered two entire generations and he seems almost of our present day.
He was no politician, but he was too sensitive and devoted to the freedom of the
Indian people to remain always in his ivory tower of poetry and song. Again and
again he stepped out of it, when he could tolerate some development no longer,
and in prophetic language warned the British Government or his own people. He
played a prominent part in the Swadeshi movement that swept through Bengal in
the first decade of the twentieth century, and again when he gave up his
knighthood at the time of the Amritsar massacre. His constructive work in the
field of education, quietly begun, has already made Shantiniketan one of the
focal points of Indian culture. His influence over the mind of India, and specially
of successive rising generations, has been tremendous. Not Bengali only, the
language in which he himself wrote, but all the modern languages of India have
been moulded partly by his writings. More than any other Indian, he has helped
to bring into harmony the ideals of the East and the West, and broadened the
bases of Indian nationalism. He has been India’s internationalist par excellence,
believing and working for international co-operation, taking India’s message to
other countries and bringing their message to his own people. And yet with all
his internationalism, his feet have always been planted firmly on India’s soil and
his mind has been saturated with the wisdom of the Upanishads. Contrary to the
usual course of development, as he grew older he became more radical in his
outlook and views. Strong individualist as he was, he became an admirer of the
great achievements of the Russian Revolution, especially in the spread of
education, culture, health, and the spirit of equality Nationalism is a narrowing
creed, and nationalism in conflict with a dominating imperialism produces all
manner of frustrations and complexes. It was Tagore’s immense service to India,
as it has been Gandhi’s in a different plane, that he forced the people in some
measure out of their narrow grooves of thought and made them think of broader
issues affecting humanity. Tagore was the great humanist of India.
Tagore and Gandhi have undoubtedly been the two outstanding and
dominating figures of India in this first half of the twentieth century. It is
instructive to compare and contrast them. No two persons could be so different
from one another in their make up or temperaments. Tagore, the aristocratic
artist, turned democrat with proletarian sympathies, represented essentially the
cultural tradition of India, the tradition of accepting life in the fullness thereof
and going through it with song and dance. Gandhi, more a man of the people,
almost the embodiment of the Indian peasant, represented the other ancient
tradition of India, that of renunciation and asceticism. And yet Tagore was
primarily the man of thought, Gandhi of concentrated and ceaseless activity.
Both, in their different ways had a world outlook, and both were at the same
time wholly Indian. They seemed to present different but harmonious aspects of
India and to complement one another.
Tagore and Gandhi bring us to our present age. But we were considering an
earlier period and the effect produced on the people, and especially the Hindus,
by the stress laid by Vivekananda and others on the past greatness of India and
their pride in it. Vivekananda himself was careful to warn his people not to dwell
too much on the past, but to look to the future. ‘When, O Lord,’ he wrote, ‘shall
our land be free from this eternal dwelling upon the past?’ But he himself and
others had evoked that past, and there was a glamour in it, and no getting away
from it.
This looking back to the past and finding comfort and sustenance there was
helped by a renewed study of ancient literature and history, and later by the story
of the Indian colonies in the eastern seas, as this unfolded itself. Mrs. Annie
Besant was a powerful influence in adding to the confidence of the Hindu
middle classes in their spiritual and national heritage. There was a spiritual and
religious element about all this, and yet there was a strong political background
to it. The rising middle classes were politically inclined and were not so much in
search of a religion; but they wanted some cultural roots to cling on to,
something that gave them assurance of their own worth, something that would
reduce the sense of frustration and humiliation that foreign conquest and rule had
produced. In every country with a growing nationalism there is this search apart
from religion, this tendency to go to the past. Iran, without in any way
weakening in its religious faith, has deliberately gone back to its pre-Islamic
days of greatness and utilized this memory to strengthen its present-day
nationalism. So also in other countries. The past of India, with all its cultural
variety and greatness, was a common heritage of all the Indian people, Hindu,
Muslim, Christian, and others, and their ancestors had helped to build it. The fact
of subsequent conversion to other faiths did not deprive them of this heritage;
just as the Greeks, after their conversion to Christianity, did not lose their pride
in the mighty achievements of their ancestors, or the Italians in the great days of
the Roman Republic and early empire. If all the people of India had been
converted to Islam or Christianity, her cultural heritage would still have
remained to inspire them and give them that poise and dignity, which a long
record of civilized existence with all its mental struggles with the problems of
life gives a people.
If we had been an independent nation, all of us in this country working
together in the present for a common future would no doubt have looked to our
common past with equal pride. Indeed, during the Mughal period, the emperors
and their chief associates, newcomers as they were, wanted to identify
themselves with that past and to share it with others. But the accidents and
processes of history, helped no doubt by man’s policy and weaknesses, worked
differently, and the changes which came prevented normal development. One
would have expected that the new middle class, which was the product of the
impact from the West and of technological and economic changes, would have a
common background in Hindu and Muslim alike. To some extent this was so,
and yet differences arose which were not present, or were present in far lesser
degree, in the feudal and semi-feudal classes and the masses. The Hindu and
Muslim masses were hardly distinguishable from each other, the old aristocracy
had developed common ways and standards. They yet followed a common
culture and had common customs and festivals. The middle classes began to
diverge psychologically and later in other ways.
To begin with, the new middle classes were almost absent among the
Muslims. Their avoidance of Western education, their keeping away from trade
and industry, and their adherence to feudal ways, gave a start to the Hindus
which they profited by and retained. British policy was inclined to be pro-Hindu
and anti-Muslim, except in the Punjab, where Muslims took more easily to
Western education than elsewhere. But the Hindus had got a big start long before
the British took possession of the Punjab. Even in the Punjab, though conditions
were more equal for the Hindu and Muslim, the Hindus had an economic
advantage. Anti-foreign sentiment was shared alike by the Hindu and Muslim
aristocracy and the masses. The Revolt of 1857 was a joint affair, but in its
suppression Muslims felt strongly, and to some extent rightly, that they were the
greater sufferers. This Revolt also put an end finally to any dreams or fantasies
of the revival of the Delhi empire. That empire had vanished long ago, even
before the British arrived upon the scene. The Marathas had smashed it and
controlled Delhi itself. Ranjit Singh ruled in the Punjab. Mughal rule had ended
in the north without any intervention of the British, and in the south also it had
disintegrated. Yet the shadow emperor sat in the Delhi Palace, and though he
had become a dependent and pensioner of the Marathas and the British
successively, still he was a symbol of a famous dynasty. Inevitably, during the
Revolt the rebels tried to take advantage of this symbol, in spite of his weakness
and unwillingness. The ending of the Revolt meant also the smashing of the
symbol.
As the people recovered slowly from the horror of the Mutiny days, there was
a blank in their minds, a vacuum which sought for something to fill it. Of
necessity, British rule had to be accepted, but the break with the past had brought
something more than a new Government; it had brought doubt and confusion
and a loss of faith in themselves. That break indeed had come long before the
Mutiny, and had led to the many movements of thought in Bengal and elsewhere
to which I have already referred. But the Muslims generally had then retired into
their shells far more than the Hindus, avoided Western education, and lived in
day-dreams of a restoration of the old order. There could be no more dreaming
now, but there had to be something to which they could cling on. They still kept
away from the new education. Gradually and after much debate and difficulty,
Sir Syed Ahmad Khan turned their minds towards English education and started
the Aligarh College. That was the only avenue leading to Government service,
and the lure of that service proved powerful enough to overcome old resentments
and prejudices. The fact that Hindus had gone far ahead in education and service
was disliked, and proved a powerful argument to do likewise. Parsees and
Hindus were also going ahead in industry, but Muslim attention was directed to
Government service alone.
But even this new direction to their activities, which was really confined to
comparatively few, did not resolve the doubt and confusion of their minds.
Hindus, in like straits, had looked back and sought consolation in ancient times.
Old philosophy and literature, art and history, had brought some comfort. Ram
Mohan Roy, Dayananda, Vivekananda, and others had started new movements
of thought. While they drank from the rich streams of English literature their
minds were also full of ancient sages and heroes of India, their thoughts and
deeds, and of the myths and traditions which they had imbibed from their
childhood.
Much of this was common to the Muslim masses, who were well acquainted
with these traditions. But it began to be felt, especially by the Muslim upper
classes, that is was not quite proper for them to associate themselves with these
semi-religious traditions, that any encouragement of them would be against the
spirit of Islam. They searched for their national roots elsewhere. To some extent
they found them in the Afghan and Mughal periods of India, but this was not
quite enough to fill the vacuum. Those periods were common for Hindus and
Muslims alike, and the sense of foreign intrusion had disappeared from Hindu
minds. The Mughal rulers were looked upon as Indian national rulers, though in
the case of Aurungzeb there was a difference of opinion. It is significant that
Akbar, whom the Hindus especially admired, has not been approved of in recent
years by some Muslims. Last year the 400th anniversary of his birth was
celebrated in India. All classes of people, including many Muslims, joined, but
the Muslim League kept aloof because Akbar was a symbol of India’s unity.
This search for cultural roots led Indian Muslims (that is, some of them of the
middle class) to Islamic history, and to the periods when Islam was a conquering
and creative force in Baghdad, Spain, Constantinople, Central Asia, and
elsewhere. There had always been interest in this history and some contacts with
neighbouring Islamic countries. There was also the Haj pilgrimage to Mecca,
which brought Muslims from various countries together. But all such contacts
were limited and superficial and did not really affect the general outlook of
Indian Muslims, which was confined to India. The Afghan kings of Delhi,
especially Muhammad Tughlaq, had acknowledged the Khalifa (Caliph) at
Cairo. The Ottoman emperors at Constantinople subsequently became the
Khalifas, but they were not recognized as such in India. The Mughal Emperors
in India recognized no Khalifa or spiritual superiors outside India. It was only
after the complete collapse of the Mughal power early in the nineteenth century
that the name of the Turkish Sultan began to be mentioned in Indian mosques.
This practice was confirmed after the Mutiny.
Thus Indian Muslims sought to derive some psychological satisfaction from a
contemplation of Islam’s past greatness, chiefly in other countries, and in the
fact of the continuance of Turkey as an independent Muslim power, practically
the only one left. This feeling was not opposed to or in conflict with Indian
nationalism; indeed, many Hindus admired and were well acquainted with
Islamic history. They sympathized with Turkey because they considered the
Turks as Asiatic victims of European aggression. Yet the emphasis was
different, and in their case that feeling did not supply a psychological need as it
did in the case of the Muslims.
After the Mutiny the Indian Muslims had hesitated which way to turn. The
British Government had deliberately repressed them to an even greater degree
than it had repressed the Hindus, and this repression had especially affected
those sections of the Muslims from which the new middle class, the bourgeoise,
might have been drawn. They felt down and out and were intensely anti-British
as well as conservative. British policy towards them underwent a gradual change
in the seventies and became more favourable. This change was essentially due to
the policy of balance and counterpoise which the British Government had
consistently pursued. Still, in this process, Sir Syed Ahmad Khan played an
important part. He was convinced that he could only raise the Muslims through
co-operation with the British authorities. He was anxious to make them accept
English education and thus to draw them out of their conservative sheds. He had
been much impressed by what he had seen of European civilization, and, indeed,
some of his letters from Europe indicate that he was so dazed that he had rather
lost his balance.
Sir Syed was an ardent reformer and he wanted to reconcile modern scientific
thought with Islam. This was to be done, of course, not by attacking any basic
belief, but by a rationalistic interpretation of scripture. He pointed out the basic
similarities between Islam and Christianity. He attacked purdah (the seclusion of
women) among the Muslims. He was opposed to any allegiance to the Turkish
Khilafat. Above all, he was anxious to push a new type of education. The
beginnings of the national movement frightened him, for he thought that any
opposition to the British authorities would deprive him of their help in his
educational programme. That help appeared to him to be essential, and so he
tried to tone down anti-British sentiments among the Muslims and to turn them
away from the National Congress which was taking shape then. One of the
declared objects of the Aligarh College he founded was ‘to make the
Mussulmans of India worthy and useful subjects of the British crown’. He was
not opposed to the National Congress because he considered it predominantly a
Hindu organization; he opposed it because he thought it was politically too
aggressive (though it was mild enough in those days), and he wanted British help
and co-operation. He tried to show that Muslims as a whole had not rebelled
during the Mutiny and that many had remained loyal to the British power. He
was in no way anti-Hindu or communally separatist. Repeatedly he emphasized
that religious differences should have no political or national significance. ‘Do
you not inhabit the same land?’ he said. ‘Remember that the words Hindu and
Mohammedan are only meant for religious distinction; otherwise all persons,
whether Hindu or Mohammedan, even the Christians who reside in this country,
are all in this particular respect belonging to one and the same nation.’
Sir Syed Ahmad Khan’s influence was confined to certain sections of the
upper classes among the Muslims; he did not touch the urban or rural masses.
These masses were almost completely cut off from their upper classes and were
far nearer to the Hindu masses. While some among the Muslim upper classes
were descendants of the riding groups during Mughal times, the masses had no
such background or tradition. Most of them had been converted from the lowest
strata of Hindu society and were most unhappily situated, being among the
poorest and the most exploited.
Sir Syed had a number of able and notable colleagues. In his rationalistic
approach he was supported, among others, by Syed Chirag Ali and Nawab
Mohsin-ul-Mulk. His educational activities attracted Munshi Karamat Ali,
Munshi Zakaullah of Delhi, Dr Nazir Ahmad, Maulana Shibli Nomani, and the
poet Hali, who is one of the outstanding figures of Urdu literature. Sir Syed
succeeded in so far as the beginnings of English education among the Muslims
were concerned, and in diverting the Muslim mind from the political movement.
A Mohammedan educational conference was started and this attracted the rising
Muslim middle class in the professions and services.
None the less many prominent Muslims joined the National Congress. British
policy became definitely pro-Muslim, or rather in favour of those elements
among the Muslims who were opposed to the national movement. But early in
the twentieth century the tendency towards nationalism and political activity
became more noticeable among the younger generation of Muslims. To divert
this and provide a safe channel for it, the Muslim League was started in 1906
under the inspiration of the British Government and the leadership of one of its
chief supporters, the Aga Khan. The League had two principal objects: loyalty to
the British Government and the safeguarding of Muslim interests.
It is worth noting that during the post-Mutiny period all the leading men
among Indian Muslims, including Sir Syed Ahmad Khan, were products of the
old traditional education, although some of them added knowledge of English
later and were influenced by new ideas. The new Western education had yet
produced no notable figure among them. The leading poet in Urdu and one of
the outstanding literary figures of the century in India, was Ghalib, who was in
his prime before the Mutiny.
In the early years of the twentieth century there were two trends among the
Muslim intelligentsia: one, chiefly among the younger element, was towards
nationalism, the other was a deviation from India’s past and even, to some
extent, her present, and a greater interest in Islamic countries, especially Turkey,
the seat of the Khilafat. The Pan-Islamic movement, encouraged by Sultan
Abdul Hamid of Turkey, had found some response in the upper strata of Indian
Muslims, and yet Sir Syed had opposed this and written against Indians
interesting themselves in Turkey and the Sultanate. The young Turk movement
produced mixed reactions. It was looked upon with some suspicion by most
Muslims in India to begin with, and there was general sympathy for the Sultan
who was considered a bulwark against the intrigues of European powers in
Turkey. But there were others, among them Abul Kalam Azad, who eagerly
welcomed the young Turks and the promise of constitutional and social reform
that they brought. When Italy suddenly attacked Turkey in the Tripoli War of
1911, and subsequently, during the Balkan Wars of 1912 and 1913, an
astonishing wave of sympathy for Turkey roused Indian Muslims. All Indians
felt that sympathy and anxiety but in the case of Muslims this was keener and
something almost personal. The last remaining Muslim power was threatened
with extinction; the sheet-anchor of their faith in the future was being destroyed.
Dr M.A. Ansari led a strong medical mission to Turkey and even the poor
subscribed; money came more rapidly than for any proposal for the uplift of the
Indian Muslims themselves. World War I was a time of trial for the Muslims
because Turkey was on the other side. They felt helpless and could do nothing.
When the war ended their pent-up feelings were to break out in the Khilafat
movement.
The year 1912 was notable also in the development of the Muslim mind in
India because of the appearance of two new weeklies, the Al-Hilal in Urdu and
The Comrade in English. The Al-Hilal was started by Abul Kalam Azad (the
present Congress President), a brilliant young man of twenty-four, who had
received his early education in Al Azhar University of Cairo and, while yet in
his teens, had become wed-known for his Arabic and Persian scholarship and
deep learning. To this he added a knowledge of the Islamic world outside India
and of the reform movements that were coursing through it, as well as of
European developments. Rationalist in outlook and yet profoundly versed in
Islamic lore and history, he interpreted scripture from a rationalist point of view.
Soaked in Islamic tradition and with many personal contracts with prominent
Muslim leaders and reformers in Egypt, Turkey, Syria, Palestine, Iraq and Iran,
he was powerfully affected by political and cultural developments in these
countries. Because of his writings he was known in the Islamic countries
probably more than any other Indian Muslim. The wars in which Turkey became
involved aroused his intense interest and sympathy; and yet his approach was
different from that of the older Muslim leaders. He had a wider and more
rationalist outlook which kept him away from the feudal and narrowly religious
and separatist approach of these older leaders, and inevitably made him an
Indian nationalist. He had himself seen nationalism growing in Turkey and the
other Islamic countries and he applied that knowledge to India and saw in the
Indian national movement a similar development. Other Muslims in India were
hardly aware of these movements elsewhere and, wrapped up in their own feudal
atmosphere, had little appreciation of what was happening there. They thought in
religious terms only and if they sympathised with Turkey it was chiefly because
of that religious bond. In spite of that intense sympathy, they were not in tune
with the nationalist and rather secular movements in Turkey.
Abul Kalam Azad spoke in a new language to them in his weekly Al-Hilal. It
was not only a new language in thought and approach, even its texture was
different, for Azad’s style was tense and virile, though sometimes a little
difficult because of its Persian background. He used new phrases for new ideas
and was a definite influence in giving shape to the Urdu language, as it is today.
The older conservative leaders among the Muslims did not react favourably to
all this and criticized Azad’s opinions and approach. Yet not even the most
learned of them could easily meet Azad in debate and argument, even on the
basis of scripture and old tradition, for Azad’s knowledge of these happened to
be greater than theirs. He was a strange mixture of medieval scholasticism,
eighteenth century rationalism, and the modern outlook.
There were a few among the older generation who approved of Azad’s
writings, among them being the learned Maulana Shibli Nomani, who had
himself visited Turkey, and who had been associated with Sir Syed Ahmad Khan
in Aligarh College. The tradition of Aligarh College was, however, different and
conservative, both politically and socially. Its trustees came from among the
princes and big landlords, typical representatives of the feudal order. Under a
succession of English principals, closely associated with government circles, it
had fostered separatist tendencies and an anti-nationalist and anti-Congress
outlook. The chief aim kept before its students was to enter government service
in the subordinate ranks. For that a pro-government attitude was necessary and
no truck with nationalism and sedition. The Aligarh College group had become
the leaders of the new Muslim intelligentsia and influenced sometimes openly,
more often from behind the scenes, almost every Muslim movement. The
Muslim League came into existence largely through their efforts.
Abul Kalam Azad attacked this stronghold of conservatism and antinationalism
not directly but by spreading ideas which undermined the Aligarh
tradition. This very youthful writer and journalist caused a sensation in Muslim
intellectual circles and, though the elders frowned upon him, his words created a
ferment in the minds of the younger generation. That ferment had already started
because of events in Turkey, Egypt, and Iran, as well as the development of the
Indian nationalist movement. Azad gave a definite trend to it by pointing out that
there was no conflict between Islam and sympathy for Islamic countries and
Indian nationalism. This helped in bringing the Muslim League nearer to the
Congress. Azad had himself joined the League, whilst yet a boy, at its first
session in 1906.
The Al-Hilal was not approved of by the representatives of the British
Government. Securities were demanded from it under the Press Act and
ultimately its press was confiscated in 1914.
Thus ended the Al-Hilal after a brief existence of two years. Azad thereupon
brought out another weekly, the Al-Balagh, but this, too, ended in 1916 when
Azad was interned by the British Government. For nearly four years he was kept
in internment, and when he came out at last he took his place immediately
among the leaders of the National Congress. Ever since then he has been
continuously in the higher Congress Executive, looked upon, in spite of his
youthful years, as one of the elders of the Congress, whose advice both in
national and political matters as well as in regard to the communal and minority
questions is highly valued. Twice he had been Congress President, and
repeatedly he has spent long terms in prison.
The other weekly that was started in 1912, some months before the Al-Hilal
was The Comrade. This was in English and it influenced especially the younger
English-educated generation of Muslims. It was edited by Maulana Mohammad
AH, who was an odd mixture of Islamic tradition and an Oxford education. He
began as an adherent of the Aligarh tradition and was opposed to any aggressive
politics. But he was far too able and dynamic a personality to remain confined in
that static framework, and his language was always vigorous and striking. The
annulment of the Partition of Bengal in 1911 had given him a shock and his faith
in the bona fides of the British Government had been shaken. The Balkan wars
moved him and he wrote passionately in favour of Turkey and the Islamic
tradition it represented. Progressively he grew more anti-British and the entry of
Turkey in World War I completed the process. A famous and enormously long
article of his (his speeches and writings did not err on the side of brevity or
conciseness) in The Comrade entitled “The Choice of the Turks’ put an end to
The Comrade which was stopped by the government. Soon after, government
arrested him and his brother Shaukat Ali and interned them for the duration of
the war and a year after. They were released at the end of 1919 and both
immediately joined the National Congress. The Ali Brothers played a very
prominent part in the Khilafat agitation and in Congress politics in the early
twenties and suffered prison for it. Mohammad Ali presided over an annual
session of the Congress and was for many years a member of its highest
executive committee. He died in 1930.
The change that took place in Mohammad Ali was symbolic of the changing
mentality of the Indian Muslims. Even the Muslim League, founded to isolate
the Muslims from nationalist currents and completely controlled by reactionary
and semi-feudal elements, was forced to recognize the pressure from the younger
generation. It was drifting, though somewhat unwillingly, with the tide of
nationalism and coming nearer to the Congress. In 1913 it changed its creed of
loyalty to government to a demand for self-government for India. Maulana
Abdul Kalam Azad had advocated this change in his forceful writings in the Al-
Hilal.
Kemal Pasha. Nationalism in Asia. Iqbal
Kemal Pasha was naturally popular in India with Muslims and Hindus alike. He
had not only rescued Turkey from foreign domination and disruption but had
foiled the machinations of European imperialist powers, especially England. But
as the Ataturk’s policy unfolded itself—his lack of religion, his abolition of the
Sultanate and Khilafat, the building up of a secular state, and his disbandment of
religious orders—that popularity waned so far as the more orthodox Muslims
were concerned and a silent resentment against his modernist policy rose among
them. This very policy, however, made him more popular among the younger
generation of both Hindus and Muslims. The Ataturk partly destroyed the dream
structure that had gradually grown up in the Indian Muslim mind ever since the
days of the Mutiny. Again a kind of vacuum was created. Many Muslims idled
this vacuum by joining the nationalist movement, many had of course already
joined it previously; others stood aloof, hesitant and doubtful. The real conflict
was between feudal modes of thought and modern tendencies. The feudal
leadership had for the moment been swept away by the mass Khilafat
movement, but that movement itself had no solid basis in social and economic
conditions or in the needs of the masses. It had its centre elsewhere, and when
the core itself was eliminated by the Ataturk the superstructure collapsed,
leaving the Muslim masses bewildered and disinclined to any political action.
The old feudal leaders, who had lain low, crept back into prominence, helped by
British policy, which had always supported them. But they could not come back
to their old position of unquestioned leadership for conditions had changed. The
Muslims were also throwing up, rather belatedly, a middle class, and the very
experience of a mass political movement, under the leadership of the National
Congress, had made a vital difference.
Though the mentality of the Muslim masses and the new growing middle class
was shaped essentially by events, Sir Mohammad Iqbal played an important part
in influencing the latter and especially the younger generation. The masses were
hardly affected by him. Iqbal had begun by writing powerful nationalist poems
in Urdu which had become popular. During the Balkan Wars he turned to
Islamic subjects. He was influenced by the circumstances then prevailing and the
mass feeling among the Muslims, and he himself influenced and added to the
intensity of these sentiments. Yet he was very far from being a mass leader; he
was a poet, an intellectual and a philosopher with affiliations to the old feudal
order; he came from Kashmiri Brahmin stock. He supplied fine poetry, which
was written both in Persian and Urdu, and a philosophic background to the
Muslim intelligentsia and thus diverted its mind in a separatist direction. His
popularity was no doubt due to the quality of his poetry, but even more so it was
due to his having fulfilled a need when the Muslim mind was searching for some
anchor to hold on to. The old pan-Islamic ideal had ceased to have any meaning;
there was no Khilafat and every Islamic country, Turkey most of all, was
intensely nationalist, caring little for other Islamic peoples. Nationalism was in
fact the dominant force in Asia as elsewhere, and in India the nationalist
movement had grown powerful and challenged British rule repeatedly. That
nationalism had a strong appeal to the Muslim mind in India, and large numbers
of Muslims had played a leading part in the struggle for freedom. Yet Indian
nationalism was dominated by Hindus and had a Hinduised look. So a conflict
arose in the Muslim mind; many accepted that nationalism, trying to influence it
in the direction of their choice; many sympathised with it and yet remained
aloof, uncertain; and yet many others began to drift in a separatist direction for
which Iqbal’s poetic and philosophic approach had prepared them.
This, I imagine, was the background out of which, in recent years, arose the
cry for a division of India. There were many reasons, many contributory causes,
errors and mistakes on every side, and especially the deliberate separatist policy
of the British Government. But behind all these was this psychological
background, which itself was produced, apart from certain historical causes, by
the delay in the development of a Muslim middle class in India. Essentially the
internal conflict in India, apart from the nationalist struggle against foreign
domination, is between the remnants of the feudal order and modernist ideas and
institutions. That conflict exists on the national plane as well as within each
major group, Hindu, Muslim, and others. The national movement, as represented
essentially by the National Congress, undoubtedly represents the historic process
of growth towards these new ideas and institutions, though it tries to adapt these
to some of the old foundations. Because of this, it has attracted to its fold all
manner of people, differing widely among themselves. On the Hindu side, an
exclusive and rigid social order has come in the way of growth, and what is
more, frightened other groups. But this social order itself has been undermined
and is fast losing its rigidity and, in any event, is not strong enough to obstruct
the growth of the national movement in its widest political and social sense,
which has developed enough impetus to go ahead in spite of obstacles. On the
Muslim side, feudal elements have continued to be strong and have usually
succeeded in imposing their leadership on their masses. There has been a
difference of a generation or more in the development of the Hindu and Muslim
middle classes, and that difference continues to show itself in many directions,
political, economic, and other. It is this lag which produces a psychology of fear
among the Muslims.
Pakistan, the proposal to divide India, however much it may appeal
emotionally to some, is of course no solution for this backwardness, and it is
much more likely to strengthen the hold of feudal elements for some time longer
and delay the economic progress of the Muslims. Iqbal was one of the early
advocates of Pakistan and yet he appears to have realized its inherent danger and
absurdity. Edward Thompson has written that, in the course of a conversation,
Iqbal told him that he had advocated Pakistan because of his position as
president of the Muslim League session, but he felt sure that it would be
injurious to India as a whole and to Muslims specially. Probably he had changed
his mind, or he had not given much thought to the question previously, as it had
assumed no importance then. His whole outlook on life does not fit in with the
subsequent developments of the idea of Pakistan or division of India.
During his last years Iqbal turned more and more towards socialism. The great
progress that Soviet Russia had made attracted him. Even his poetry took a
different turn. A few months before his death, as he lay on his sick bed, he sent
for me and I gladly obeyed the summons. As I talked to him about many things I
felt that how much we had in common, in spite of differences, and how easy it
would be to get on with him. He was in reminiscent mood and wandered from
one subject to another, and I listened to him, talking little myself. I admired him
and his poetry, and it pleased me greatly to feel that he liked me and had a good
opinion of me. A little before I left him he said to me: ‘What is there in common
between Jinnah and you? He is a politician, you are a patriot.’ I hope there is still
much in common between Mr Jinnah and me. As for my being a patriot I do not
know that this is a particular qualification in these days, as least in the limited
sense of the word. Greatly attached as I am to India, I have long felt that
something more than national attachment is necessary for us in order to
understand and solve even our own problems, and much more so those of the
world as a whole. But Iqbal was certainly right in holding that I was not much of
a politician, although politics had seized me and made me its victim.
Heavy Industry Begins. Tilak and Gokhale. Separate
Electorates
In my desire to explore the background of the Hindu-Muslim problems and
understand what lay behind the new demand for Pakistan and separation, I have
jumped over half a century. During this period many changes came, not so much
in the external apparatus of government as in the temper of the people. Some
trivial constitutional developments took place and these are often paraded, but
they made no difference whatsoever to the authoritarian and ad-pervasive
character of British rule; nor did they touch the problems of poverty and
unemployment. In 1911 Jamshedji Tata laid the foundations of heavy industry in
India by starting steel and iron works in what came to be known as Jamshedpur.
Government looked with disfavour on this and other attempts to start industries
and in no way encouraged them. It was chiefly with American expert help that
the steel industry was started. It had a precarious childhood but the war of 1914-
18 came to its help. Again it languished and was in danger of passing into the
hands of British debenture holders, but nationalist pressure saved it.
An industrial proletariat was growing up in India; it was unorganized and
helpless, and the terribly low standards of the peasantry, from which it came,
prevented wage increases and improvement. So far as unskilled labour was
concerned, there were millions of unemployed persons who could be drawn
upon and no strike could succeed in these conditions. The first Trade Union
Congress was organised round about 1920. The numbers of this new proletariat
were not sufficient to make any difference to the Indian political scene; they
were a bucketful in a sea of peasants and workers on the land. In the ’twenties
the voice of industrial labour began to be heard, but it was feeble. It might have
been ignored but for the fact that the Russian Revolution had forced people to
attach importance to the industrial proletariat. Some big and well-organized
strikes also compelled attention.
The peasant, though he was everywhere and his problem was the supreme
problem of India, was even more silent and forgotten by the political leaders and
Government alike. The early stages of the political movement were dominated
by the ideological urges of the upper middle classes, chiefly the professional
classes and those looking forward to a place in the administrative machine. With
the coming-of-age of the National Congress, which had been founded in 1885, a
new type of leadership appeared, more aggressive and defiant and representing
the much larger numbers of the lower middle classes as well as students and
young men. The powerful agitation against the partition of Bengal had thrown
up many able and aggressive leaders there of this type, but the real symbol of the
new age was Bal Gangadhar Tilak, from Maharashtra. The old leadership was
represented also by a Maratha, a very able and a younger man, Gopal Krishna
Gokhale. Revolutionary slogans were in the air, tempers ran high and conflict
was inevitable. To avoid this the old patriarch of the Congress, Dadabhai
Naoroji, universally respected and regarded as the father of the country, was
brought out of his retirement. The respite was brief and in 1907 the clash came,
resulting apparently in a victory for the old moderate section. But this had been
won because of organizational control and the then narrow franchise of the
Congress. There was no doubt that the vast majority of politically minded people
in India favoured Tilak and his group. The Congress lost much of its importance
and interest shifted to other activities. Terroristic activity appeared in Bengal.
The example set by Russian and Irish revolutionaries was being followed.
Muslim young men were also being affected by these revolutionary ideas. The
Aligarh College had tried to check this tendency and now, under Government
inspiration, the Aga Khan and others started the Muslim League to provide a
political platform for Muslims and thus keep them away from the Congress.
More important still, and of vital significance to India’s future development, it
was decided to introduce separate electorates for Muslims. Henceforward
Muslims could only stand for election and be elected by separate Muslim
electorates. A political barrier was created round them, isolating them from the
rest of India and reversing the unifying and amalgamating process which had
been going on for centuries, and which was inevitably being speeded up by
technological developments. This barrier was a small one at first, for the
electorates were very limited, but with every extension of the franchise it grew
and affected the whole structure of public and social life, like some canker which
corrupted the entire system. It poisoned municipal and local self-government and
ultimately it led to fantastic divisions. There came into existence (much later)
separate Muslim trade unions and students’ organizations and merchants’
chambers. Because the Muslims were backward in all these activities, these
organizations were not real organic growths from below, but were artificially
created from above, and their leadership was held by the old semi-feudal type of
person. Thus, to some extent, the Muslim middle classes and even the masses
were isolated from the currents of growth which were influencing the rest of
India. There were vested interests enough in India created or preserved by the
British Government. Now an additional and powerful vested interest was created
by separate electorates.
It was not a temporary evil which tended to fade away with developing
political consciousness. Nurtured by official policy, it grew and spread and
obscured the real problems before the country, whether political, social, or
economic. It created divisions and ill-feeling where there had been none
previously, and it actually weakened the favoured group by increasing a
tendency to depend on artificial props and not to think in terms of self-reliance.
The obvious policy in dealing with groups or minorities which were backward
educationally and economically was to help them in every way to grow and
make up these deficiencies, especially by a forward educational policy. Nothing
of this kind was done either for the Muslims or for other backward minorities, or
for the depressed classes who needed it most. The whole argument centered in
petty appointments in the subordinate public services, and instead of raising
standards all round merit was often sacrificed.
Separate electorates thus weakened the groups that were already weak or
backward, they encouraged separatist tendencies and prevented the growth of
national unity, they were the negation of democracy, they created new vested
interests of the most reactionary kind, they lowered standards, and they diverted
attention from the real economic problems of the country which were common
to all. These electorates, first introduced among the Muslims, spread to other
minorities and groups till India became a mosaic of these separate
compartments. Possibly they may have done some good for a little while, though
I am unable to spot it, but undoubtedly the injury they have caused to every
department of Indian life has been prodigious. Out of them have grown all
manner of separatist tendencies and finally the demand for a splitting up of
India.
Lord Morley was the Secretary of State for India when these separate
electorates were introduced. He resisted them, but ultimately agreed under
pressure from the Viceroy. He has pointed out in his diary the dangers inherent
in such a method and how they would inevitably delay the development of
representative institutions. Probably this was exactly what the Viceroy and his
colleagues intended. In the Montague-Chelmsford Report on Indian
Constitutional Reform (1918) the dangers of these communal electorates were
again emphasized: ‘Division by creeds and classes means the creation of
political camps organized against each other, and teaches men to think as
partisans and not as citizens …We regard any system of communal electorates,
therefore, as a very serious hindrance to the development of the self-governing
principle.’