D
3
The Quest
The Panorama of India’s Past
uring these years of thought and activity my mind has been full of India,
trying to understand her and to analyse my own reactions towards her. I
went back to my childhood days and tried to remember what I felt like then,
what vague shape this conception took in my growing mind, and how it was
moulded by fresh experience. Sometimes it receded into the background, but it
was always there, slowly changing, a queer mixture derived from old story and
legend and modern fact. It produced a sensation of pride in me as well as that of
shame, for I was ashamed of much that I saw around me, of superstitious
practices, of outworn ideas, and, above all, our subject and poverty-stricken
state.
As I grew up and became engaged in activities which promised to lead to
India’s freedom, I became obsessed with the thought of India. What was this
India that possessed me and beckoned to me continually, urging me to action so
that we might realize some vague but deeply-felt desire of our hearts? The initial
urge came to me, I suppose, through pride, both individual and national, and the
desire, common to all men, to resist another’s domination and have freedom to
live the life of our choice. It seemed monstrous to me that a great country like
India, with a rich and immemorial past, should be bound hand and foot to a faraway
island which imposed its will upon her. It was still more monstrous that
this forcible union had resulted in poverty and degradation beyond measure.
That was reason enough for me and for others to act.
But it was not enough to satisfy the questioning that arose within me. What is
this India, apart from her physical and geographical aspects? What did she
represent in the past? What gave strength to her then? How did she lose that old
strength? And has she lost it completely? Does she represent anything vital now,
apart from being the home of a vast number of human beings? How does she fit
into the modern world?
This wider international aspect of the problem grew upon me as I realized
more and more how isolation was both undesirable and impossible. The future
that took shape in my mind was one of intimate co-operation politically,
economically, and culturally, between India and the other countries of the world.
But before the future came there was the present, and behind the present lay the
long and tangled past, out of which the present had grown. So to the past I
looked for understanding.
India was in my blood and there was much in her that instinctively thrilled
me. And yet I approached her almost as an alien critic, full of dislike for the
present as well as for many of the relics of the past that I saw. To some extent I
came to her via the West, and looked at her as a friendly Westerner might have
done. I was eager and anxious to change her outlook and appearance and give
her the garb of modernity. And yet doubts arose within me. Did I know India?—
I who presumed to scrap much of her past heritage? There was a great deal that
had to be scrapped, that must be scrapped; but surely India could not have been
what she undoubtedly was, and could not have continued a cultured existence for
thousands of years, if she had not possessed something very vital and enduring,
something that was worthwhile. What was this something?
I stood on a mound of Mohenjo Daro in the Indus Valley in the north-west of
India, and all around me lay the houses and streets of this ancient city that is said
to have existed over five thousand years ago; and even then it was an old and
well-developed civilization. ‘The Indus civilization,’ writes Professor Childe,
‘represents a very perfect adjustment of human life to a specific environment
that can only have resulted from years of patient effort. And it has endured; it is
already specifically Indian and forms the basis of modern Indian culture.’
Astonishing thought: that any culture or civilization should have this continuity
for five or six thousand years or more; and not in a static, unchanging sense, for
India was changing and progressing all the time. She was coming into intimate
contact with the Persians, the Egyptians, the Greeks, the Chinese, the Arabs, the
Central Asians, and the peoples of the Mediterranean. But though she influenced
them and was influenced by them, her cultural basis was strong enough to
endure. What was the secret of this strength? Where did it come from?
I read her history and read also a part of her abundant ancient literature, and
was powerfully impressed by the vigour of the thought, the clarity of the
language, and the richness of the mind that lay behind it. I journeyed through
India in the company of mighty travellers from China and Western and Central
Asia who came here in the remote past and left records of their travels. I thought
of what India had accomplished in Eastern Asia, in Angkor, Borobudur, and
many other places. I wandered over the Himalayas, which are closely connected
with old myth and legend, and which have influenced so much our thought and
literature. My love of the mountains and my kinship with Kashmir especially
drew me to them, and I saw there not only the life and vigour and beauty of the
present, but also the memoried loveliness of ages past. The mighty rivers of
India that flow from this great mountain barrier into the plains of India attracted
me and reminded me of innumerable phases of our history. The Indus or Sindhu,
from which our country came to be called India and Hindustan, and across which
races and tribes and caravans and armies have come for thousands of years; the
Brahmaputra, rather cut off from the main current of history, but living in old
stories, forcing its way into India through deep chasms cut in the heart of the
northeastern mountains, and then flowing calmly in a gracious sweep between
mountain and wooded plain; the Jumna, round which cluster so many legends of
dance and fun and play; and the Ganges, above all the river of India, which has
held India’s heart captive and drawn uncounted millions to her banks since the
dawn of history. The story of the Ganges, from her source to the sea, from old
times to new, is the story of India’s civilization and culture, of the rise and fall of
empires, of great and proud cities, of the adventure of man and the quest of the
mind which has so occupied India’s thinkers, of the richness and fulfilment of
life as well as its denial and renunciation, of ups and downs, of growth and
decay, of life and death.
I visited old monuments and ruins and ancient sculptures and frescoes—
Ajanta, Ellora, the Elephanta Caves, and other places—and I also saw the lovely
buildings of a later age in Agra and Delhi, where every stone told its story of
India’s past.
In my own city of Allahabad or in Hardwar I would go to the great bathing
festivals, the Kumbh Mela, and see hundreds of thousands of people come, as
their forebears had come for thousands of years from all over India, to bathe in
the Ganges. I would remember descriptions of these festivals written thirteen
hundred years ago by Chinese pilgrims and others, and even then these melas
were ancient and lost in an unknown antiquity. What was the tremendous faith, I
wondered, that had drawn our people for untold generations to this famous river
of India?
These journeys and visits of mine, with the background of my reading, gave
me an insight into the past. To a somewhat bare intellectual understanding was
added an emotional appreciation, and gradually a sense of reality began to creep
into my mental picture of India, and the land of my forefathers became peopled
with living beings, who laughed and wept, loved and suffered; and among them
were men who seemed to know life and understand it, and out of their wisdom
they had built a structure which gave India a cultural stability which lasted for
thousands of years. Hundreds of vivid pictures of this past filled my mind, and
they would stand out as soon as I visited a particular place associated with them.
At Sarnath, near Benares, I would almost see the Buddha preaching his first
sermon, and some of his recorded words would come like a distant echo to me
through two thousand five hundred years. Ashoka’s pillars of stone with their
inscriptions would speak to me in their magnificent language and tell me of a
man who, though an emperor, was greater than any king or emperor. At
Fatehpur-Sikri, Akbar, forgetful of his empire, was seated holding converse and
debate with the learned of all faiths, curious to learn something new and seeking
an answer to the eternal problem of man.
Thus slowly the long panorama of India’s history unfolded itself before me,
with its ups and downs, its triumphs and defeats. There seemed to me something
unique about the continuity of a cultural tradition through five thousand years of
history, of invasion and upheaval, a tradition which was widespread among the
masses and powerfully influenced them. Only China has had such a continuity of
tradition and cultural life. And this panorama of the past gradually merged into
the unhappy present, when India, for all her past greatness and stability, was a
slave country, an appendage of Britain, and all over the world terrible and
devastating war was raging and brutalizing humanity. But that vision of five
thousand years gave me a new perspective, and the burden of the present seemed
to grow lighter.
The hundred and eighty years of British rule in India were just one of the
unhappy interludes in her long story; she would find herself again; already the
last page of this chapter was being written. The world also will survive the
horror of today and build itself anew on fresh foundations.
Nationalism and Internationalism
My reaction to India thus was often an emotional one, conditioned and limited in
many ways. It took the form of nationalism. In the case of many people the
conditioning and limiting factors are absent. But nationalism was and is
inevitable in the India of my day; it is a natural and healthy growth. For any
subject country national freedom must be the first and dominant urge; for India,
with her intense sense of individuality and a past heritage, it was doubly so.
Recent events all over the world have demonstrated that the notion that
nationalism is fading away before the impact of internationalism and proletarian
movements has little truth. It is still one of the most powerful urges that move a
people, and round it cluster sentiments and traditions and a sense of common
living and common purpose. While the intellectual strata of the middle classes
were gradually moving away from nationalism, or so they thought, labour and
proletarian movements, deliberately based on internationalism, were drifting
towards nationalism. The coming of war swept everybody everywhere into the
net of nationalism. This remarkable resurgence of nationalism, or rather a rediscovery
of it and a new realization of its vital significance, has raised new
problems and altered the form and shape of old problems. Old established
traditions cannot be easily scrapped or dispensed with; in moments of crisis they
rise and dominate the minds of men, and often, as we have seen, a deliberate
attempt is made to use those traditions to rouse a people to a high pitch of effort
and sacrifice. Traditions have to be accepted to a large extent and adapted and
transformed to meet new conditions and ways of thought, and at the same time
new traditions have to be built up. The nationalist ideal is deep and strong; it is
not a thing of the past with no future significance. But other ideals, more based
on the ineluctable facts of today, have arisen, the international ideal and the
proletarian ideal, and there must be some kind of fusion between these various
ideals if we are to have a world equilibrium and a lessening of conflict. The
abiding appeal of nationalism to the spirit of man has to be recognized and
provided for, but its sway limited to a narrower sphere.
If nationalism is still so universal in its influence, even in countries powerfully
affected by new ideas and international forces, how much more must it dominate
the mind of India. Sometimes we are told that our nationalism is a sign of our
backwardness and even our demand for independence indicates our narrowmindedness.
Those who tell us so seem to imagine that true internationalism
would triumph if we agreed to remain as junior partners in the British Empire or
Commonwealth of Nations. They do not appear to realize that this particular
type of so-called internationalism is only an extension of a narrow British
nationalism, which could not have appealed to us even if the logical
consequences of Anglo-Indian history had not utterly rooted out its possibility
from our minds. Nevertheless, India, for all her intense nationalistic fervour, has
gone further than many nations in her acceptance of real internationalism and the
co-ordination, and even to some extent the subordination, of the independent
nation state to a world organization.
India’s Strength and Weakness
The search for the sources of India’s strength and for her deterioration and decay
is long and intricate. Yet the recent causes of that decay are obvious enough. She
fell behind in the march of technique, and Europe, which had long been
backward in many matters, took the lead in technical progress. Behind this
technical progress was the spirit of science and a bubbing life and spirit which
displayed itself in many activities and in adventurous voyages of discovery. New
techniques gave military strength to the countries of western Europe, and it was
easy for them to spread out and dominate the East. That is the story not only of
India, but of almost the whole of Asia.
Why this should have happened so is more difficult to unravel, for India was
not lacking in mental alertness and technical skill in earlier times. One senses a
progressive deterioration during centuries. The urge to life and endeavour
becomes less, the creative spirit fades away and gives place to the imitative.
Where triumphant and rebellious thought had tried to pierce the mysteries of
nature and the universe, the wordy commentator comes with his glosses and long
explanations. Magnificent art and sculpture give way to meticulous carving of
intricate detail without nobility of conception or design. The vigour and richness
of language, powerful yet simple, are followed by highly ornate and complex
literary forms. The urge to adventure and the overflowing life which led to vast
schemes of distant colonization and the transplantation of Indian culture in far
lands: all these fade away and a narrow orthodoxy taboos even the crossing of
the high seas. A rational spirit of inquiry, so evident in earlier times, which
might well have led to the further growth of science, is replaced by irrationalism
and a blind idolatory of the past. Indian life becomes a sluggish stream, living in
the past, moving slowly through the accumulations of dead centuries. The heavy
burden of the past crushes it and a kind of coma seizes it. It is not surprising that
in this condition of mental stupor and physical weariness India should have
deteriorated and remained rigid and immobile, while other parts of the world
marched ahead.
Yet this is not a complete or wholly correct survey. If there had only been a
long and unrelieved period of rigidity and stagnation, this might well have
resulted in a complete break with the past, the death of an era, and the erection of
something new on its ruins. There has not been such a break and there is a
definite continuity. Also, from time to time, vivid periods of renascence have
occurred, and some of them have been long and brilliant. Always there is visible
an attempt to understand and adapt the new and harmonize it with the old, or at
any rate with parts of the old which were considered worth preserving. Often
that old retains an external form only, as a kind of symbol, and changes its inner
content. But something vital and living continues, some urge driving the people
in a direction not wholly realized, and always a desire for synthesis between the
old and the new. It was this urge and desire that kept them going and enabled
them to absorb new ideas while retaining much of the old. Whether there was
such a thing as an Indian dream through the ages, vivid and full of life or
sometimes reduced to the murmurings of troubled sleep, I do not know. Every
people and every nation has some such belief or myth of national destiny and
perhaps it is partly true in each case. Being an Indian I am myself influenced by
this reality or myth about India, and I feel that anything that had the power to
mould hundreds of generations, without a break, must have drawn its enduring
vitality from some deep well of strength, and have had the capacity to renew that
vitality from age to age.
Was there some such well of strength? And if so, did it dry up, or did it have
hidden springs to replenish it? What of today? Are there any springs still
functioning from which we can refresh and strengthen ourselves? We are an old
race, or rather an odd mixture of many races, and our racial memories go back to
the dawn of history. Have we had our day and are we now living in the late
afternoon or evening of our existence, just carrying on after the manner of the
aged, quiescent, devitalized, uncreative, desiring peace and sleep above all else?
No people, no races remain unchanged. Continually they are mixing with
others and slowly changing; they may appear to die almost and then rise again as
a new people or just a variation of the old. There may be a definite break
between the old people and the new, or vital links of thought and ideals may join
them.
History has numerous instances of old and well-established civilizations
fading away or being ended suddenly, and vigorous new cultures taking their
place. Is it some vital energy, some inner source of strength that gives life to a
civilization or a people, without which all effort is ineffective, like the vain
attempt of an aged person to play the part of a youth?
Among the peoples of the world today I have sensed this vital energy chiefly
in three—Americans, Russians, and the Chinese; a queer combination!
Americans, in spite of having their roots in the old world, are a new people,
uninhibited and without the burdens and complexes of old races, and it is easy to
understand their abounding vitality. So also are the Canadians, Australians, and
New Zealanders, all of them largely cut off from the old world and facing life in
all its newness.
Russians are not a new people, and yet there has been a complete break from
the old, like that of death, and they have been reincarnated anew, in a manner for
which there is no example in history. They have become youthful again with an
energy and vitality that are amazing. They are searching for some of their old
roots again, but for all practical purposes they are a new people, a new race and a
new civilization.
The Russian example shows how a people can revitalize itself, become
youthful again, if it is prepared to pay the price for it, and tap the springs of
suppressed strength and energy among the masses. Perhaps this war, with all its
horror and frightfulness, might result in the rejuvenation of other peoples also,
such as survive from the holocaust.
The Chinese stand apart from all these. They are not a new race, nor have they
gone through that shock of change, from top to bottom, which came to Russia.
Undoubtedly, seven years of cruel war has changed them, as it must. How far
this change is due to the war or to more abiding causes, or whether it is a mixture
of the two, I do not know, but the vitality of the Chinese people astonishes me. I
cannot imagine a people endowed with such bed-rock strength going under.
Something of that vitality which I saw in China I have sensed at times in the
Indian people also. Not always, and anyway it is difficult for me to take an
objective view. Perhaps my wishes distort my thinking. But always I was in
search for this in my wanderings among the Indian people. If they had this
vitality, then it was well with them and they would make good. If they lacked it
completely, then our political efforts and shouting were all make believe and
would not carry us far. I was not interested in making some political
arrangement which would enable our people to carry on more or less as before,
only a little better. I felt they had vast stores of suppressed energy and ability,
and I wanted to release these and make them feel young and vital again. India,
constituted as she is, cannot play a secondary part in the world. She will either
count for a great deal or not count at all. No middle position attracted me. Nor
did I think any intermediate position feasible.
Behind the past quarter of a century’s struggle for India’s independence and
all our conflicts with British authority, lay in my mind, and that of many others,
the desire to revitalize India. We felt that through action and self-imposed
suffering and sacrifice, through voluntarily facing risk and danger, through
refusal to submit to what we considered evil and wrong, would we recharge the
battery of India’s spirit and waken her from her long slumber. Though we came
into conflict continually with the British Government in India, our eyes were
always turned towards our own people. Political advantage had value only in so
far as it helped in that fundamental purpose of ours. Because of this governing
motive, frequently we acted as no politician, moving in the narrow sphere of
politics only, would have done, and foreign and Indian critics expressed surprise
at the folly and intransigence of our ways. Whether we were foolish or not, the
historians of the future will judge. We aimed high and looked far. Probably we
were often foolish, from the point of view of opportunist politics, but at no time
did we forget that our main purpose was to raise the whole level of the Indian
people, psychologically and spiritually and also, of course, politically and
economically. It was the building up of that real inner strength of the people that
we were after, knowing that the rest would inevitably follow. We had to wipe
out some generations of shameful subservience and timid submission to an
arrogant alien authority.
The Search for India
Though books and old monuments and past cultural achievements helped to
produce some understanding of India, they did not satisfy me or give me the
answer I was looking for. Nor could they, for they dealt with a past age, and I
wanted to know if there was any real connection between that past and the
present. The present for me, and for many others like me, was an odd mixture of
medievalism, appalling poverty and misery and a somewhat superficial
modernism of the middle classes. I was not an admirer of my own class or kind,
and yet inevitably I looked to it for leadership in the struggle for India’s
salvation; that middle class felt caged and circumscribed and wanted to grow and
develop itself. Unable to do so within the framework of British rule, a spirit of
revolt grew against this rule, and yet this spirit was not directed against the
structure that crushed us. It sought to retain it and control it by displacing the
British. These middle classes were too much the product of that structure to
challenge it and seek to uproot it.
New forces arose that drove us to the masses in the villages, and for the first
time, a new and different India rose up before the young intellectuals who had
almost forgotten its existence or attached little importance to it. It was a
disturbing sight, not only because of its stark misery and the magnitude of its
problems, but because it began to upset some of our values and conclusions. So
began for us the discovery of India as it was, and it produced both understanding
and conflict within us. Our reactions varied and depended on our previous
environment and experience. Some were already sufficiently acquainted with
these village masses not to experience any new sensation; they took them for
granted. But for me it was a real voyage of discovery, and, while I was always
painfully conscious of the failings and weaknesses of my people, I found in
India’s countryfolk something, difficult to define, which attracted me. That
something I had missed in our middle classes.
I do not idealise the conception of the masses and, as far as possible, I try to
avoid thinking of them as a theoretical abstraction. The people of India are very
real to me in their great variety and, in spite of their vast numbers, I try to think
of them as individuals rather than as vague groups. Perhaps it was because I did
not expect much from them that I was not disappointed; I found more than I had
expected. It struck me that perhaps the reason for this, and for a certain stability
and potential strength that they possessed, was the old Indian cultural tradition
which was still retained by them in a small measure. Much had gone in the
battering they had received during the past 2000 years. Yet something remained
that was worthwhile, and with it so much that was worthless and evil.
During the ’twenties my work was largely confined to my own province and I
travelled extensively and intensively through the towns and villages of the fortyeight
districts of the United Provinces of Agra and Oudh, that heart of Hindustan
as it has so long been considered, the seat and centre of both ancient and
medieval civilization, the melting pot of so many races and cultures, the area
where the great revolt of 1857 blazed up and was later ruthlessly crushed. I grew
to know the sturdy Jat of the northern and western districts, that typical son of
the soil, brave and independent looking, relatively more prosperous; the Rajput
peasant and petty landholder, still proud of his race and ancestry, even though he
might have changed his faith and adopted Islam; the deft and skillful artisans and
cottage workers, both Hindu and Muslim; the poorer peasantry and tenants in
their vast numbers, especially in Oudh and the eastern districts, crushed and
ground down by generations of oppression and poverty, hardly daring to hope
that a change would come to better their lot, and yet hoping and full of faith.
During the ’thirties, in the intervals of my life out of prison, and especially
during the election campaign of 1936-37, I travelled more extensively
throughout India, in towns and cities and villages alike. Except for rural Bengal,
which unhappily I have only rarely visited, I toured in every province and went
deep into villages. I spoke of political and economic issues and judging from my
speech I was full of politics and elections. But all this while, in a corner of my
mind, lay something deeper and more vivid, and elections or the other
excitements of the passing day meant little to it. Another and a major excitement
had seized me, and I was again on a great voyage of discovery and the land of
India and the people of India lay spread out before me. India with all her infinite
charm and variety began to grow upon me more and more, and yet the more I
saw of her, the more I realized how very difficult it was for me or for anyone
else to grasp the ideas she had embodied. It was not her wide spaces that eluded
me, or even her diversity, but some depth of soul which I could not fathom,
though I had occasional and tantalizing glimpses of it. She was like some ancient
palimpsest on which layer upon layer of thought and reverie had been inscribed,
and yet no succeeding layer had completely hidden or erased what had been
written previously All of these existed in our conscious or subconscious selves,
though we may not have been aware of them, and they had gone to build up the
complex and mysterious personality of India. That sphinxlike face with its
elusive and sometimes mocking smile was to be seen throughout the length and
breadth of the land. Though outwardly there was diversity and infinite variety
among our people, everywhere there was that tremendous impress of oneness,
which had held all of us together for ages past, whatever political fate or
misfortune had befallen us. The unity of India was no longer merely an
intellectual conception for me: it was an emotional experience which
overpowered me. That essential unity had been so powerful that no political
division, no disaster or catastrophe, had been able to overcome it.
It was absurd, of course, to think of India or any country as a kind of
anthropomorphic entity. I did not do so. I was also fully aware of the diversities
and divisions of Indian life, of classes, castes, religious, races, different degrees
of cultural development. Yet I think that a country with a long cultural
background and a common outlook on life develops a spirit that is peculiar to it
and that is impressed on all its children, however much they may differ among
themselves. Can anyone fail to see this in China, whether he meets an oldfashioned
mandarin or a Communist who has apparently broken with the past? It
was this spirit of India that I was after, not through idle curiosity, though I was
curious enough, but because I felt that it might give me some key to the
understanding of my country and people, some guidance to thought and action.
Politics and elections were day-to-day affairs when we grew excited over
trumpery matters. But if we were going to build the house of India’s future,
strong and secure and beautiful, we would have to dig deep for the foundations.
‘Bharat Mata’
Often, as I wandered from meeting to meeting, I spoke to my audience of this
India of ours, of Hindustan and of Bharata, the old Sanskrit name derived from
the mythical founder of the race. I seldom did so in the cities, for there the
audiences were more sophisticated and wanted stronger fare. But to the peasant,
with his limited outlook, I spoke of this great country for whose freedom we
were struggling, of how each part differed from the other and yet was India, of
common problems of the peasants from north to south and east to west, of the
Swaraj that could only be for all and every part and not for some. I told them of
my journeying from the Khyber Pass in the far northwest to Kanya Kumari or
Cape Comorin in the distant south, and how everywhere the peasants put me
identical questions, for their troubles were the same—poverty, debt, vested
interests, landlords, moneylenders, heavy rents and taxes, police harassment, and
all these wrapped up in the structure that the foreign Government had imposed
upon us—and relief must also come for all. I tried to make them think of India as
a whole, and even to some little extent of this wide world of which we were a
part. I brought in the struggle in China, in Spain, in Abyssinia, in Central
Europe, in Egypt and the countries of Western Asia. I told them of the wonderful
changes in the Soviet Union and of the great progress made in America. The task
was not easy; yet it was not so difficult as I had imagined, for our ancient epics
and myths and legends, which they knew so well, had made them familiar with
the conception of their country, and some there were always who had travelled
far and wide to the great places of pilgrimage situated at the four corners of
India. Or there were old soldiers who had served in foreign parts in World War I
or other expeditions. Even my references to foreign countries were brought
home to them by the consequences of the great depression of the ’thirties.
Sometimes as I reached a gathering, a great roar of welcome would greet me:
Bharat Mata ki Jai—‘Victory to Mother India.’ I would ask them unexpectedly
what they meant by that cry, who was this Bharat Mata, Mother India, whose
victory they wanted? My question would amuse them and surprise them, and
then not knowing exactly what to answer, they would look at each other and at
me. I persisted in my questioning. At last a vigorous Jat, wedded to the soil from
immemorial generations, would say that it was the dharti, the good earth of
India, that they meant. What earth? Their particular village patch, or all the
patches in the district or province, or in the whole of India? And so question and
answer went on, till they would ask me impatiently to tell them all about it. I
would endeavour to do so and explain that India was all this that they had
thought, but it was much more. The mountains and the rivers of India, and the
forests and the broad fields, which gave us food, were all dear to us, but what
counted ultimately were the people of India, people like them and me, who were
spread out all over this vast land. Bharat Mata, Mother India, was essentially
these millions of people, and victory to her meant victory to these people. You
are parts of this Bharat Mata, I told them, you are in a manner yourselves Bharat
Mata, and as this idea slowly soaked into their brains, their eyes would light up
as if they had made a great discovery.
The Variety and Unity of India
The diversity of India is tremendous; it is obvious; it lies on the surface and
anybody can see it. It concerns itself with physical appearances as well as with
certain mental habits and traits. There is little in common, to outward seeming,
between the Pathan of the North-West and the Tamil in the far South. Their
racial stocks are not the same, though there may be common strands running
through them; they differ in face and figure, food and clothing, and, of course,
language. In the North-Western Frontier Province there is already the breath of
Central Asia, and many a custom there, as in Kashmir, reminds one of the
countries on the other side of the Himalayas. Pathan popular dances are
singularly like Russian Cossack dancing. Yet, with all these differences, there is
no mistaking the impress of India on the Pathan, as this is obvious on the Tamil.
This is not surprising, for these border lands, and indeed Afghanistan also, were
united with India for thousands of years. The old Turkish and other races who
inhabited Afghanistan and parts of Central Asia before the advent of Islam were
largely Buddhists, and earlier still, during the period of the Epics, Hindus. The
frontier area was one of the principal centres of old Indian culture and it abounds
still with ruins of monuments and monasteries and, especially, of the great
university of Taxila, which was at the height of its fame two thousand years ago,
attracting students from all over India as well as different parts of Asia. Changes
of religion made a difference, but could not change entirely the mental
backgrounds which the people of those areas had developed.
The Pathan and the Tamil are two extreme examples; the others lie
somewhere in between. All of them have their distinctive features, all of them
have still more the distinguishing mark of India. It is fascinating to find how the
Bengalis, the Marathas, the Gujratis, the Tamils, the Andhras, the Oriyas, the
Assamese, the Canarese, the Malayalis, the Sindhis, the Punjabis, the Pathans,
the Kashmiris, the Rajputs, and the great central block comprising the
Hindustani-speaking people, have retained their peculiar characteristics for
hundreds of years, have still more or less the same virtues and failings of which
old tradition or record tells us, and yet have been throughout these ages
distinctively Indian, with the same national heritage and the same set of moral
and mental qualities. There was something living and dynamic about this
heritage which showed itself in ways of living and a philosophical attitude to life
and its problems. Ancient India, like ancient China, was a world in itself, a
culture and a civilization which gave shape to all things. Foreign influences
poured in and often influenced that culture and were absorbed. Disruptive
tendencies gave rise immediately to an attempt to find a synthesis. Some kind of
a dream of unity has occupied the mind of India since the dawn of civilization.
That unity was not conceived as something imposed from outside, a
standardization of externals or even of beliefs. It was something deeper and,
within its fold, the widest tolerance of belief and custom was practiced and every
variety acknowledged and even encouraged.
Differences, big or small, can always be noticed even within a national group,
however closely bound together it may be. The essential unity of that group
becomes apparent when it is compared to another national group, though often
the differences between two adjoining groups fade out or intermingle near the
frontiers, and modern developments are tending to produce a certain uniformity
everywhere. In ancient and medieval times, the idea of the modern nation was
non-existent, and feudal, religious, racial, or cultural bonds had more
importance. Yet I think that at almost any time in recorded history an Indian
would have felt more or less at home in any part of India, and would have felt as
a stranger and alien in any other country. He would certainly have felt less of a
stranger in countries which had partly adopted his culture or religion. Those who
professed a religion of non-Indian origin or, coming to India, settled down there,
became distinctively Indian in the course of a few generations, such as
Christians, Jews, Parsees, Muslims. Indian converts to some of these religions
never ceased to be Indians on account of a change of their faith. They were
looked upon in other countries as Indians and foreigners, even though there
might have been a community of faith between them.
Today, when the conception of nationalism has developed much more, Indians
in foreign countries inevitably form a national group and hang together for
various purposes, in spite of their internal differences. An Indian Christian is
looked upon as an Indian wherever he may go. An Indian Muslim is considered
an Indian in Turkey or Arabia or Iran, or any other country where Islam is the
dominant religion.
All of us, I suppose, have varying pictures of our native land and no two
persons will think exactly alike. When I think of India, I think of many things: of
broad fields dotted with innumerable small villages; of towns and cities I have
visited; of the magic of the rainy season which pours life into the dry parched-up
land and converts it suddenly into a glistening expanse of beauty and greenery,
of great rivers and flowing water; of the Khyber Pass in all its bleak
surroundings; of the southern tip of India; of people, individually and in the
mass; and, above all, of the Himalayas, snow-capped, or some mountain valley
in Kashmir in the spring, covered with new flowers, and with a brook bubbling
and gurgling through it. We make and preserve the pictures of our choice, and so
I have chosen this mountain background rather than the more normal picture of a
hot, subtropical country. Both pictures would be correct, for India stretches from
the tropics right up to the temperate regions, from near the equator to the cold
heart of Asia.
Travelling through India
Towards the end of 1936 and in the early months of 1937 my touring
progressively gathered speed and became frantic. I passed through this vast
country like some hurricane, travelling night and day, always on the move,
hardly staying anywhere, hardly resting. There were urgent demands for me
from all parts and time was limited, for the general elections were approaching
and I was supposed to be an election-winner for others. I travelled mostly by
automobile, partly by aeroplane and railway. Occasionally I had to use, for short
distances, an elephant, a camel, or a horse; or travel by steamer, paddle-boat, or
canoe; or use a bicycle; or go on foot. These odd and varied methods of transport
sometimes became necessary in the interior, far from the beaten track. I carried a
double set of microphones and loud speakers with me, for it was not possible to
deal with the vast gatherings in any other way; nor indeed could I otherwise
retain my voice. Those microphones went with me to all manner of strange
places, from the frontiers of Tibet to the border of Baluchistan, where no such
thing had ever been seen or heard of previously.
From early morning till late at night I travelled from place to place where
great gatherings awaited me, and in between these there were numerous stops
where patient villagers stood to greet me. These were impromptu affairs, which
upset my heavy programme and delayed all subsequent engagements; and yet
how was it possible for me to rush by, unheeding and careless of these humble
folk? Delay was added to delay and, at the big open-air gatherings, it took many
minutes for me to pass through the crowds to the platform, and later to come
away. Every minute counted, and the minutes piled up on top of each other and
became hours; so that by the time evening came I was several hours late. But the
crowd was waiting patiently, though it was winter and they sat and shivered in
the open, insufficiently clad as they were. My day’s programme would thus
prolong itself to eighteen hours and we would reach our journey’s end for the
day at midnight or after. Once in Karnatak, in mid-February, we passed all
bounds and broke our own records. The day’s programme was a terribly heavy
one and we had to pass through a very beautiful mountain forest with winding
and none-too-good roads, which could only be tackled slowly. There were halfa-
dozen monster meetings and many smaller ones. We began the day by a
function at eight in the morning; our last engagement was at 4 a.m. (it should
have been seven hours earlier), and then we had to cover another seventy miles
before we reached our resting place for the night. We arrived at 7 a.m., having
covered 415 miles that day and night, apart from numerous meetings. It had been
a twenty-three-hour day and an hour later I had to begin my next day’s
programme.
Someone took the trouble to estimate that during these months some ten
million persons actually attended the meetings I addressed, while some
additional millions were brought into some kind of touch with me during my
journeys by road. The biggest gatherings would consist of about one hundred
thousand persons, while audiences of twenty thousand were fairly common.
Occasionally in passing through a small town I would be surprised to notice that
it was almost deserted and the shops were closed. The explanation came to me
when I saw that almost the entire population of the town, men, women, and even
children, had gathered at the meeting-place, on the other side of the town, and
were waiting patiently for my arrival.
How I managed to carry on in this way without physical collapse, I cannot
understand now, for it was a prodigious feat of physical endurance. Gradually, I
suppose, my system adapted itself to this vagrant life. I would sleep heavily in
the automobile for half an hour between two meetings and find it hard to wake
up. Yet I had to get up and the sight of a great cheering crowd would finally
wake me. I reduced my meals to a minimum and often dropped a meal,
especially in the evenings, feeling the better for it. But what kept me up and
filled me with vitality was the vast enthusiasm and affection that surrounded me
and met me everywhere I went. I was used to it, and yet I could never get quite
used to it, and every new day brought its surprises.
General Elections
My tour was especially concerned with the general elections all over India that
were approaching. But I did not take kindly to the usual methods and devices
that accompany electioneering. Elections were an essential and inseparable part
of the democratic process and there was no way of doing away with them. Yet,
often enough, elections brought out the evil side of man, and it was obvious that
they did not always lead to the success of the better man. Sensitive persons, and
those who were not prepared to adopt rough-and-ready methods to push
themselves forward, were at a disadvantage and preferred to avoid these
contests. Was democracy then to be a close preserve of those possessing thick
skins and loud voices and accommodating consciences?
Especially were these election evils most prevalent where the electorate was
small; many of them vanished, or at any rate were not so obvious, when the
electorate was a big one. It was possible for the biggest electorate to be swept off
its feet on a false issue, or in the name of religion (as we saw later), but there
were usually some balancing factors which helped to prevent the grosser evils.
My experience in this matter confirmed my faith in the widest possible
franchise. I was prepared to trust that wide electorate far more than a restricted
one, based on a property qualification or even an educational test. The property
qualification was anyhow bad; as for education it was obviously desirable and
necessary. But I have not discovered any special qualities in a literate or slightly
educated person which would entitle his opinion to greater respect than that of a
sturdy peasant, illiterate but full of a limited kind of common sense. In any
event, where the chief problem is that of the peasant, his opinion is far more
important. I am a convinced believer in adult franchise, for men and women,
and, though I realize the difficulties in the way, I am sure that the objections
raised to its adoption in India have no great force and are based on the fears of
privileged classes and interests.
The general elections in 1937 for the provincial assemblies were based on a
restricted franchise affecting about twelve per cent of the population. But even
this was a great improvement on the previous franchise, and nearly thirty
millions all over India, apart from the Indian States, were now entitled to vote.
The scope of these elections was vast and comprised the whole of India, minus
the States. Every province had to elect its Provincial Assembly, and in most
provinces there were two Houses, and there were thus two sets of elections. The
number of candidates ran into many thousands.
My approach to these elections, and to some extent the approach of most
Congressmen, was different from the usual one. I did not trouble myself about
the individual candidates, but wanted rather to create a country-wide atmosphere
in favour of our national movement for freedom as represented by the Congress,
and for the programme contained in our election manifesto. I felt that if we
succeeded in this, all would be well; if not, then it did not matter much if an odd
candidate won or lost.
My appeal was an ideological one and I hardly referred to the candidates,
except as standard-bearers of our cause. I knew many of them, but there were
many I did not know at all, and I saw no reason why I should burden my mind
with hundreds of names. I asked for votes for the Congress, for the independence
of India, and for the struggle for independence. I made no promises, except to
promise unceasing struggle till freedom was attained. I told people to vote for us
only if they understood and accepted our objective and our programme, and
were prepared to live up to them; not otherwise. I charged them not to vote for
the Congress if they disagreed with this objective or programme. We wanted no
false votes, no votes for particular persons because they liked them. Votes and
elections would not take us far; they were just small steps in a long journey, and
to delude us with votes, without intelligent acceptance of what they signified or
willingness for subsequent action, was to play us false and be untrue to our
country. Individuals did not count, though we wanted good and true individuals
to represent us; it was the cause that counted, the organization that represented it,
and the nation to whose freedom we were pledged. I analysed that freedom and
what it should mean to the hundreds of millions of our people. We wanted no
change of masters from white to brown, but a real people’s rule, by the people
and for the people, and an ending of our poverty and misery.
That was the burden of my speeches, and only in that impersonal way could I
fit myself into the election campaign. I was not greatly concerned with the
prospects of particular candidates. My concern was with a much bigger issue. As
a matter of fact that approach was the right one even from the narrower point of
view of a particular candidate’s success. For thus he and his election were lifted
up to a higher and more elemental level of a great nation’s fight for freedom, and
millions of poverty-stricken people striving to put an end to their ancient curse
of poverty. These idea, expressed by scores of leading Congressmen, came and
spread like a mighty wind fresh from the sea, sweeping away all petty ideas and
electioneering stunts. I knew my people and liked them, and their million eyes
had taught me much of mass psychology.
I was talking about the elections from day to day, and yet the elections seldom
occupied my mind; they floated about superficially on the surface. Nor was I
particularly concerned with the voters only. I was getting into touch with
something much bigger: the people of India in their millions; and such message
as I had was meant for them all, whether they were voters or not; for every
Indian man, woman, and child. The excitement of this adventure held me, this
physical and emotional communion with vast numbers of people. It was not the
feeling of being in a crowd, one among many, and being swayed by the impulses
of the crowd. My eyes held those thousands of eyes: we looked at each other, not
as strangers meeting for the first time, but with recognition, though of what this
was none could say. As I saluted them with a namaskar, the palms of my hands
joined together in front of me, a forest of hands went up in salutation, and a
friendly, personal smile appeared on their faces, and a murmur of greeting rose
from that assembled multitude and enveloped me in its warm embrace. I spoke
to them and my voice carried the message I had brought, and I wondered how far
they understood my words or the ideas that lay behind them. Whether they
understood all I said or not, I could not say, but there was a light of a deeper
understanding in their eyes, which seemed to go beyond spoken words.
The Culture of the Masses
Thus I saw the moving drama of the Indian people in the present, and could
often trace the threads which bound their lives to the past, even while their eyes
were turned towards the future. Everywhere I found a cultural background which
had exerted a powerful influence on their lives. This background was a mixture
of popular philosophy, tradition, history, myth, and legend, and it was not
possible to draw a line between any of these. Even the entirely uneducated and
illiterate shared this background. The old epics of India, the Ramayana and the
Mahabharata and other books, in popular translations and paraphrases, were
widely known among the masses, and every incident and story and moral in
them was engraved on the popular mind and gave a richness and content to it.
Illiterate villagers would know hundreds of verses by heart and their
conversation would be full of references to them or to some story with a moral,
enshrined in some old classic. Often I was surprised by some such literary turn
given by a group of villagers to a simple talk about present-day affairs. If my
mind was full of pictures from recorded history and more-or-less ascertained
fact, I realized that even the illiterate peasant had a picture gallery in his mind,
though this was largely drawn from myth and tradition and epic heroes and
heroines, and only very little from history. Nevertheless, it was vivid enough.
I looked at their faces and their figures and watched their movements. There
was many a sensitive face and many a sturdy body, straight and clean-limbed;
and among the women there was grace and suppleness and dignity and poise
and, very often, a look that was full of melancholy. Usually the finer physical
types were among the upper castes, who were just a little better off in the
economic sense. Sometimes, as I was passing along a country road, or through a
village, I would start with surprise on seeing a fine type of man, or a beautiful
woman, who reminded me of some fresco of ancient times. And I wondered how
the type endured and continued through ages, in spite of all the horror and
misery that India had gone through. What could we not do with these people
under better conditions and with greater opportunities opening out to them?
There was poverty and the innumerable progeny of poverty everywhere, and
the mark of this beast was on every forehead. Life had been crushed and
distorted and made into a thing of evil, and many vices had flowed from this
distortion and continuous lack and ever-present insecurity. All this was not
pleasant to see; yet that was the basic reality in India. There was far too much of
the spirit of resignation and acceptance of things as they were. But there was
also a mellowness and a gentleness, the cultural heritage of thousands of years,
which no amount of misfortune had been able to rub off.
Two Lives
In this and other ways I tried to discover India, the India of the past and of the
present, and I made my mood receptive to impressions and to the waves of
thought and feeling that came to me from living beings as well as those who had
long ceased to be. I tried to identify myself for a while with this unending
procession, at the tail end of which I, too, was struggling along. And then I
would separate myself and as from a hill-top, apart, look down at the valley
below.
To what purpose was all this long journeying? To what end these unending
processions? A feeling of tiredness and disillusion would sometimes invade my
being, and then I would seek escape from it in cultivating a certain detachment.
Slowly my mind had prepared itself for this, and I had ceased to attach much
value to myself or to what happened to me. Or so I thought, and to some extent I
succeeded, though not much, I fear, as there is too much of a volcano within me
for real detachment. Unexpectedly all my defenses are hurled away and all my
detachment goes.
But even the partial success I achieved was very helpful and, in the midst of
activity, I could separate myself from it and look at it as a thing apart.
Sometimes, I would steal an hour or two, and forgetting my usual
preoccupations, retire into that cloistered chamber of my mind and live, for a
while, another life. And so, in a way, these two lives marched together,
inseparably tied up with one another, and yet apart.