A
10
Ahmadnagar Fort Again
The Chain of Happening
hmadnagar Fort. August Thirteenth, Nineteen Forty-Four. It is just over two
years since we came here, two years of a dream life rooted in one spot, with
the same few individuals to see, the same limited environment, the same routine
from day to day. Sometime in the future we shall wake up from this dream and
go out into the wider world of life and activity, finding it a changed world. There
will be an air of unfamiliarity about the persons and things we see; we shall
remember them again and past memories will crowd into our minds, and yet they
will not be the same, nor will we be the same, and we many find it difficult to fit
in with them. Sometimes we may wonder whether this renewed experience of
everyday living is not itself a sleep and a dream from which we may suddenly
wake up. Which is the dream and which is the waking? Are they both real, for
we experience and feel them in all their intensity, or are they both unsubstantial
and of the nature of fleeting dreams which pass, leaving vague memories
behind?
Prison and its attendant solitude and passivity lead to thought and an attempt
to fill the vacuum of life with memories of past living, of one’s own life, and of
the long chain of history of human activity. So during the past four months, in
the course of this writing, I have occupied my mind with India’s past records and
experiences, and out of the multitude of ideas that came to me I have selected
some and made a book out of them. Looking back at what I have written, it
seems inadequate, disjointed and lacking in unity, a mixture of many things,
with the personal element dominant and giving its colour even to what was
intended to be an objective record and analysis. That personal element has
pushed itself forward almost against my will; often I checked it and held it back
but sometimes I loosened the reins and allowed it to flow out of my pen, and
mirror, to some extent, my mind.
By writing of the past I have tried to rid myself of the burden of the past. But
the present remains with all its complexity and irrationality and the dark future
that lies beyond, and the burden of these is no less than that of the past. The
vagrant mind, finding no haven, still wanders about restlessly, bringing
discomfort to its possessor as well as to others. There is some envy for those
virgin minds which have not been soiled or violated by thought’s assault, and on
which doubt has cast no shadow nor written a line. How easy is life for them in
spite of its occasional shock and pain.
Events take place one after the other and the uninterrupted and unending
stream of happenings goes on. We seek to understand a particular event by
isolating it and looking at it by itself, as if it were the beginning and the end, the
resultant of some cause immediately preceding it. Yet it has no beginning and is
but a link in an unending chain, caused by all that has preceded it, and resulting
from the wills, urges, and desires of innumerable human beings coalescing and
conflicting with each other, and producing something different from that which
any single individual intended to happen. Those wills, urges, and desires are
themselves largely conditioned by previous events and experiences, and the new
event in its turn becomes another conditioning factor for the future. The man of
destiny, the leader who influences the multitude, undoubtedly plays an important
part in this process, and yet he himself is the product of past events and forces
and his influence is conditioned by them.
The Two Backgrounds: Indian and British
What happened in India in August, 1942, was no sudden development but a
culmination of all that had gone before. Much has been written about it, in
attack, criticism or defence, and many explanations given. And yet most of this
writing misses the real meaning, for it applies purely political considerations to
something that was deeper than politics. Behind it all lay an intense feeling that
it was no longer possible to endure and live under foreign autocratic rule. All
other questions became secondary—whether under that rule it was possible to
make improvements or progress in some directions, or whether the consequences
of a challenge might be more harmful still. Only the overwhelming desire to be
rid of it and to pay any price for the riddance remained, only the feeling that
whatever happened this could not be endured.
That feeling was no new sensation; it had been there for many years. But
previously it had been restrained in many ways and disciplined to keep pace with
events. The war itself was both a restraining and releasing factor. It opened out
our minds to vast developments and revolutionary changes, to the possibility of
the realization of our hopes in the near future; and it put a brake on much that we
might otherwise have done because of our desire to help, and certainly not to
hinder in any way, the struggle against the Axis powers.
But, as the war developed, it became ever clearer that the Western
democracies were fighting not for a change but for a perpetuation of the old
order. Before the war they had appeased fascism, not only because of the fear of
its consequences but also because of a certain ideological sympathy with it and
an extreme dislike of some of the probable alternatives to it. Nazism and fascism
were no sudden growths or accidents of history. They were the natural
developments of the past course of events, of empire and racial discrimination,
of national struggles, of the growing concentration of power, of technological
growth which found no scope for its fulfilment within the existing framework of
society, of the inherent conflict between the democratic ideal and a social
structure opposed to it. Political democracy in western Europe and North
America, opening the door to national and individual progress, had also released
new forces and ideas, aiming inevitably at economic equality. Conflict was
inherent in the situation; there would either be an enlargement of that political
democracy or attempts to curb it and end it. Democracy grew in content and
area, in spite of constant opposition, and became the accepted ideal of political
organization. But a time came when a further expansion endangered the basis of
the social structure, and then the upholders of that structure became clamant and
aggressive and organized themselves to oppose change. In countries so
circumstanced that the crisis developed more rapidly, democracy was openly and
deliberately crushed and fascism and nazism appeared. In the democracies of
western Europe and North America the same processes were at play though
many other factors delayed the crisis and probably the much longer tradition of
peaceful and democratic government also helped. Behind some of these
democracies lay empires where there was no democracy at all and where the
same kind of authoritarianism which is associated with fascism prevailed. There
also, as in fascist countries, the governing class allied itself to reactionary and
opportunist groups and feudal survivals in order to suppress the demand for
freedom. And there also they began to assert that democracy, though good as an
ideal and desirable in their own homelands, was not suited to the peculiar
conditions prevailing in their colonial domains. So it was a natural consequence
for these Western democracies to feel some kind of an ideological bond with
fascism, even when they disliked many of its more brutal and vulgar
manifestations.
When they were forced to fight in self-defence, they looked forward to a
restoration of that very structure which had failed so dismally. The war was
looked upon and presented as a defensive war, and this was true enough in a
way. But there was another aspect of the war, a moral aspect which went beyond
military objectives and attacked aggressively the fascist creed and outlook. For it
was a war, as has been said, for the soul of the peoples of the world. In it lay the
seeds of change not only for the fascist countries but also for the United Nations.
This moral aspect of the war was obscured by powerful propaganda, and
emphasis was laid on defence and perpetuation of the past and not on creating a
new future. There were many people in the West who ardently believed in this
moral aspect and wanted to create a new world which would afford some
guarantees against that utter failure of human society which the World War
represented. There were vast numbers of people everywhere, including
especially the men who fought and died on the field of battle, who vaguely but
firmly hoped for this change. And there were those hundreds of millions of the
dispossessed and exploited and racially discriminated against in Europe and
America, and much more so in Asia and Africa, who could not isolate the war
from their memories of the past and their present misery, and passionately
hoped, even when hope was unreasonable, that the war would somehow lift the
burdens that crushed them.
But the eyes of the leaders of the United Nations were turned elsewhere; they
looked back to the past and not forward to the future. Sometimes they spoke
eloquently of the future to appease the hunger of their people, but their policy
had little to do with these fine phrases. For Mr Winston Churchill it was a war of
restoration and nothing more, a continuation, with minor changes, of both the
social structure of England and the imperial structure of her empire. President
Roosevelt spoke in terms of greater promise, but his policy had not been
radically different. Still many people all over the world looked to him with hope
as a man of vision and high statesmanship.
So the future for India and the rest of the world, in so far as the British ruling
class could help it, would be in line with the past, and the present had necessarily
to conform to it. In that very present the seeds of this future were being sown.
The Cripps proposals, for all their seeming advance, created new and dangerous
problems for us, which threatened to become insuperable barriers to freedom. To
some extent they have already had this result. The all-pervading autocracy and
authoritarianism of the British Government in India, and the widespread
suppression of the most ordinary civil rights and liberties, had reached their
further limits during, and under cover of, the war. No one in the present
generation had experienced the like of these. They were constant reminders of
our enslaved condition and continuing humiliation. They were also a presage of
the future, of the shape of things to come, for out of this present, the future
would grow. Anything seemed to be better than to submit to this degradation.
How many people out of India’s millions felt this way is impossible to say.
For most of those millions all conscious feeling has been deadened by poverty
and misery. Among the others were those who had been corrupted by office or
privilege or vested interest, or whose minds had been diverted by special claims.
Yet the feeling was very widespread, varying in intensity and sometimes
overlaid by other feelings. There were many gradations in it, from an intensity of
belief and a desire to brave all hazards, which led inevitably to action, to a vague
sympathy from a safe distance. Some, tragically inclined, felt suffocated and
strangled at the lack of air to breathe in the oppressive atmosphere that
surrounded them; others, living on the ordinary trivial plane, had more capacity
to adapt themselves to conditions they disliked.
The background of the British governing personnel in India was entirely
different. Indeed nothing is more striking than the vast gulf that separates the
mind of the British and the Indians and, whoever may be right or wrong, this
very fact demonstrates the utter incapacity of the British to function as a riding
class in India. For there must be some harmony, some common outlook, between
the rulers and the ruled if there is to be any advance; otherwise there can only be
conflict, actual or potential. The British in India have always represented the
most conservative elements of Britain; between them and the liberal tradition in
England there is little in common. The more years they spend in India, the more
rigid they grow in outlook, and when they retire and go back to England, they
become the experts who advise on Indian problems. They are convinced of their
own rectitude, of the benefits and necessity of British rule in India, of their own
high mission in being the representatives of the imperial tradition. Because the
national Congress has challenged the whole basis of this rule and sought to rid
India of it, it has become, in their eyes, Public Enemy No. 1. Sir Reginald
Maxwell, the then Home Member of the Government of India, speaking in the
Central Assembly in 1941, gave a revealing glimpse of his mind. He was
defending himself against the charge that Congressmen and socialists and
communists, detained without trial in prison, were subjected to inhuman
treatment, far worse than that given to German and Italian prisoners of war. He
said that Germans and Italians were, at any rate, fighting for their countries, but
these others were enemies of society who wanted to subvert the existing order.
Evidently, it seemed to him preposterous that an Indian should want freedom for
his country or should want to change the economic structure of India. As
between the two his sympathies were obviously for the Germans and Italians,
though his own country was engaged in a bitter war against them. This was
before Russia entered the war and it was safe then to condemn every attempt to
change the social order. Before World War II began, admiration for the fascist
regimes was frequently expressed. Had not Hitler himself said, in his Mein
Kampf and subsequently, that he wanted the British Empire to continue?
The Government of India certainly was anxious to help in every way in the
war against the Axis powers. But in its mind that victory would be incomplete if
it was not accompanied by another victory—the crushing of the nationalist
movements in India as represented mainly by the Congress. The Cripps
negotiations had perturbed it and it rejoiced at their failure. The way was now
open to deal the final blow at the Congress and all those who sided with it. The
moment was favourable, for at no previous time had there been such
concentration of unlimited power, both at the centre and in the provinces, in the
hands of the Viceroy and his principal subordinates. The war situation was a
difficult one and it was a feasible argument that no opposition or trouble could
be tolerated. Liberal elements in England and America, interested in India, had
been quietened by the Cripps affair and the propaganda that followed. In
England the ever-present feeling of self-righteousness in relation to India had
grown. Indians, or many of them, it was felt there, were intransigent,
troublesome persons, narrow in outlook, unable to appreciate the dangers of the
situation, and probably in sympathy with the Japanese. Mr Gandhi’s articles and
statements, it was said, had proved how impossible he was and the only way left
open was to put an end to all this by crushing Gandhi and the Congress once for
all.
Mass Upheavals and their Suppression
In the early morning of August 9th, 1942, numerous arrests were made all over
India. What happened then? Only scraps of news trickled through to us after
many weeks, and even now we can form only an incomplete picture of what
took place. All the prominent leaders had been suddenly removed and no one
seemed to know what should be done. Protests, of course, there had to be, and
there were spontaneous demonstrations. These were broken up and fired upon,
and tear-gas bombs were used; all the usual channels of giving expression to
public feeling were stopped. And then all these suppressed emotions broke out
and crowds gathered in cities and rural areas and came in conflict with the police
and the military. They attacked especially what seemed to them the symbols of
British authority and power, the police stations, post offices, and railway
stations; they cut the telegraph and telephone wires. These unarmed and
leaderless mobs faced police and military firing, according to official statements,
on 538 occasions, and they were also machine-gunned from low-flying aircraft.
For a month or two or more these disturbances continued in various parts of the
country and then they dwindled away and gave place to sporadic occurrences.
‘The disturbances,’ said Mr Churchill in the House of Commons, ‘were crushed
with all the weight of the Government,’ and he praised ‘the loyalty and
steadfastness of the brave Indian police as well as the Indian official class
generally whose behaviour has been deserving of the highest praise.’ He added
that ‘larger reinforcements have reached India and the number of white troops in
that country is larger than at any time in the British connection.’ These foreign
troops and the Indian police had won many a battle against the unarmed
peasantry of India and crushed their rebellion; and that other main prop of the
British Raj in India, the official class, had helped, actively or passively, in the
process.
This reaction in the country was extraordinarily widespread, both in towns and
villages. In almost all the provinces and in a large number of the Indian states
there were innumerable demonstrations, in spite of official prohibition. There
were hartals, closure of shops and markets and a stoppage of business
everywhere, varying in duration from a number of days to some weeks and, in a
few cases, to over a month. So also labour strikes. More organized and used to
disciplined group action, industrial workers in many important centres
spontaneously declared strikes in protest against Government action in arresting
national leaders. A notable instance of this was at the vital steel city of
Jamshedpur where the skilled workers, drawn from all over India, kept away
from work for a fortnight and only agreed to return on the management
promising that they would try their best to get the Congress leaders released and
a national government formed. In the great textile centre of Ahmedabad also
there was a sudden and complete stoppage of work in all the numerous factories
without any special cad from the trade union.1 This general strike in Ahmedabad
continued peacefully for over three months in spite of all attempts to break it. It
was a purely political and spontaneous reaction of the workers, and they suffered
greatly, for it was a time of relatively high wages. They received no financial
help whatever from outside during this long period. At other centres the strikes
were of briefer duration, lasting sometimes only for a few days. Cawnpore,
another big textile centre, had, so far as I know, no major strike, chiefly because
the communist leadership there succeeded in averting it. In the railways also,
which are Government-owned, there was no marked or general stoppage of
work, except such as was caused by the disturbances, and this latter was
considerable.
Among the provinces, the Punjab was probably the least affected, but there
were many hartals and strikes even there. The Northwest Frontier Province,
almost exclusively Muslim in population, occupied a peculiar position. To begin
with, there were no mass arrests or other provocative action there on the part of
the Government, as in the other provinces. This may have been partly due to the
fact that the frontier people were considered inflammable material, but also
partly to the policy of Government to show that Muslims were keeping apart
from the nationalist upheaval. But when news of happenings in the rest of India
reached the Frontier Province there were numerous demonstrations and even
aggressive challenges to British authority. There was firing on the demonstrators
and the usual methods of suppressing popular activities were adopted. Several
thousands of people were arrested, and even the great Pathan leader Badshah
Khan (as Abdul Ghaffar Khan is popularly known) was seriously injured by
police blows. This was extreme provocation and yet, surprisingly enough, the
excellent discipline, which Abdul Ghaffar Khan had established among his
people, held, and there were no violent disturbances there of the kind that
occurred in many parts of the country.
The sudden, unorganized demonstrations and outbreaks on the part of the
people, culminating in violent conflicts and destruction, and continued against
overwhelming and powerful armed forces, were a measure of the intensity of
their feelings. Those feelings had been there even before the arrest of their
leaders, but the arrests, and the frequent firings that followed them, roused the
people to anger and to the only course that an enraged mob can follow. For a
time there seems to have been a sense of uncertainty as to what should be done.
There was no direction, no programme. There was no well-known person to lead
them or tell them what to do, and yet they were too excited and angry to remain
quiescent. As often happens in these circumstances, local leaders sprang up and
were followed for the moment. But even the guidance they gave was little; it was
essentially a spontaneous mass upheaval. All over India, the younger generation,
especially university students, played an important part in both the violent and
peaceful activities of 1942. Many universities were closed. Some of the local
leaders attempted even then to pursue peaceful methods of action and civil
disobedience, but this was difficult in the prevailing atmosphere. The people
forgot the lesson of non-violence which had been dinned into their ears for more
than twenty years, and yet they were wholly unprepared, mentally or otherwise,
for any effective violence. That very teaching of non-violent methods produced
doubt and hesitation and came in the way of violent action. If the Congress,
forgetful of its creed, had previously given even a hint of violent action, there is
no doubt that the violence that actually took place would have increased a
hundred-fold.
But no such hint had been given, and, indeed, the last message of the
Congress had again emphasized the importance of non-violence in action. Yet
perhaps one fact had some effect on the public mind. If, as we had said, armed
defence was legitimate and desirable against an enemy aggressor, why should
that not apply to other forms of existing aggression? The prohibition of violent
methods of attack and defence once removed had unintended results, and it was
not easy for most people to draw fine distinctions. All over the world extreme
forms of violence were prevailing and incessant propaganda encouraged them. It
became then a question of expediency and of intensity of feeling. Then there
were also people, outside or in the Congress, who never had any belief in nonviolence
and who were troubled with no scruples in regard to violent action.
But in the excitement of the moment few people think; they act in accordance
with their long-suppressed urges which drive them forward. And so, for the first
time since the great revolt of 1857, vast numbers of people again rose to
challenge by force (but a force without arms!) the fabric of British rule in India.
It was a foolish and inopportune challenge, for all the organized and armed force
was on the other side, and in greater measure indeed than at any previous time in
history. However great the numbers of the crowd, it cannot prevail in a contest
of force against armed forces. It had to fail unless those armed forces themselves
changed their allegiance. But those crowds had not prepared for the contest or
chosen the time for it. It came upon them unawares and in their immediate
reaction to it, however unthinking and misdirected it was, they showed their love
of India’s freedom and their hatred of foreign domination.
Though the policy of non-violence went under, for the time being at least, the
long training that the people had received under it had one important and
desirable result. In spite of the passions aroused there was very little, if any,
racial feeling, and, on the whole, there was a deliberate attempt on the part of the
people to avoid causing bodily injury to their opponents. There was a great deal
of destruction of communications and governmental property, but even in the
midst of this destruction care was taken to avoid loss of life. This was not always
possible or always attempted, especially in actual conflicts with the police or
other armed forces. According to official reports, so far as I have been able to
find them, about 100 persons were kided by mobs in the course of the
disturbances all over India. This figure is very small considering the extent and
area of the disturbances and the conflicts with the police. One particularly brutal
and distressing case was the murder of two Canadian airmen by a mob
somewhere in Bihar. But, generally speaking, the absence of racial feeling was
very remarkable.2
Official estimates of the number of people kided and wounded by police or
military firing in the 1942 disturbances are: 1,028 killed and 3,200 wounded.
These figures are certainly gross under-estimates for it has been officially stated
that such firing took place on at least 538 occasions, and besides this people
were frequently shot at by the police or the military from moving lorries. It is
very difficult to arrive at even an approximately correct figure. Popular estimates
place the number of deaths at 25,000, but probably this is an exaggeration.
Perhaps 10,000 may be nearer the mark.
It was extraordinary how British authority ceased to function over many areas,
both rural and urban, and it took many days, and sometimes weeks, for a
‘reconquest’, as it was often termed. This happened particularly in Bihar, in the
Midnapur district of Bengal and in the south-eastern districts of the United
Provinces. It is note-worthy that in the district of Badia in the United Provinces
(which had to be ‘reconquered’) there have been no serious allegations of
physical violence and injury to human beings caused by the crowds, so far as
one can judge from the numerous subsequent trials by special tribunals. The
ordinary police proved incapable of meeting the situation. Early in 1942,
however, a new force called the Special Armed Constabulary (S.A.C.) had been
created and this had been especially trained to deal with popular demonstrations
and disturbances. This played an important part in curbing and suppressing the
people and often functioned after the manner of the ‘Black and Tans’ in Ireland.
The Indian army was not often used in this connection, except for certain groups
and classes in it. British soldiers were more often employed, and also the
Gurkhas. Sometimes Indian soldiers as well as the special police were sent to
distant parts of the country where they functioned more or less as strangers,
being unacquainted with the language.
If the reaction of the crowd was natural, so also, in the circumstances, was the
reaction of the government. It had to crush both the impromptu frenzy of the
mob and the peaceful demonstrations of other people and, in the interests of its
own self-preservation, attempt to destroy those whom it considered its enemies.
If it had the capacity or desire to understand and appreciate what moved the
people so powerfully, the crisis would not have risen at all and India’s problem
would have been nearer solution. The government had prepared carefully to
crush once for all, as it thought, any challenge to its authority; it had taken the
initiative and chosen the time for its first blow; it had removed to its prisons
thousands of men and women who had played a prominent part in the
nationalist, the labour, and the peasant movements. Yet it was surprised and
taken aback by the upheaval that suddenly convulsed the country and,
momentarily, its widespread apparatus of repression was disjoined. But it had
enormous resources at its command and it utilized them to crush both the violent
and non-violent manifestations of the rebellion. Many of the upper and richer
classes, timidly nationalist, and sometimes even critical of government, were
frightened by this exhibition of mass action on an all-India scale, which cared
little for vested interests and smelt not only of political revolution but also of
social change. As the success of the government in crushing the rebellion
became apparent, the waverers and the opportunists lined up with it and began to
curse all those who had dared to challenge authority.
The external evidences of rebellion having been crushed, its very roots had to
be pulled out, and so the whole apparatus of government was turned in this
direction in order to enforce complete submission to British domination. Laws
could be produced overnight by the Viceroy’s decree or ordinance, but even the
formalities of these laws were reduced to a minimum. The decisions of the
Federal Court and the High Courts, which were creations and emblems of British
authority, were flouted and ignored by the executive, or a new ordinance was
issued to override those decisions. Special tribunals (which were subsequently
held by the courts to be illegal) were established, functioning without the
trammels of the ordinary rules of procedure and evidence, and these sentenced
thousands to long terms of imprisonment and many even to death. The police
(and especially the Special Armed Constabulary) and the secret service were adpowerful
and became the chief organs of the state, and could indulge in any
illegalities or brutalities without criticism or hindrance. Corruption grew to giant
proportions. Vast numbers of students in schools and colleges were punished in
various ways and thousands of young men were flogged. Public activity of all
kinds was prohibited unless it was in favour of the government.
But the greatest sufferers were the simple-hearted, poverty-stricken villagers
of the rural areas. Suffering, for many generations, had been the badge of their
tribe; they had ventured to look up and hope, to dream of better times; they had
even roused themselves to action; whether they had been foolish or mistaken or
not, they had proved their loyalty to the cause of Indian freedom. Their effort
had failed, and the burden had fallen on their bent shoulders and broken bodies.
Cases were reported of whole villages being sentenced from flogging to death. It
was stated on behalf of the Bengal Government that ‘Government forces burnt
193 Congress camps and houses in the sub-divisions of Tamluk and Contai
before and after the cyclone of 1942’. The cyclone had worked havoc in that
area and created a wilderness but that made no difference to the official policy.
Huge sums were imposed on villages as a whole as punitive fines. According
to Mr Amery’s statement in the House of Commons, the total collective fines
amounted to Rs 90 lakhs, and out of this Rs 78,50,000 were realized. How these
vast sums were realized from starving wretches is another matter, and nothing
that took place in 1942 or after, not the shooting and the burning by the police,
caused such an intensity of suffering as this forcible realization. Not merely were
the fines imposed realized, but often much more, the excess vanishing in the
process of realization.
All the conventions and subterfuges that usually veil the activities of
governments were torn aside and only naked force remained as the symbol of
power and authority. There was no further need for subterfuge for the British
power had succeeded, at least for the time being, in crushing both the nonviolent
and violent attempts made to replace it by a national authority, and stood
supreme in India. India had failed in that final test when strength and power only
count and all else is mere quibbling and irrelevance. She had failed not only
because of British armed might and the confusion produced by the war situation
in people’s minds, but also because many of her own people were not prepared
for that last sacrifice which freedom requires. So the British felt they had firmly
re-established their rule in India and they saw no reason to loosen their hold
again.
Reactions Abroad
A strict censorship cast a heavy veil over the happenings in India. Even
newspapers in India were not permitted to give publicity to much that was daily
taking place, and messages to foreign countries were subject to an ever stricter
surveillance. At the same time official propaganda was let loose abroad and false
and tendentious accounts were circulated. The United States of America were
especially flooded with this propaganda, for opinion there was held to count, and
hundreds of lecturers and others, both English and Indian, were sent there to tour
the country.
Even apart from this propaganda, it was natural in England, suffering the
strain and anxiety of war, for resentment to be felt against Indians and especially
those who were adding to their troubles in time of crisis. One-sided propaganda
added to this and, even more so, the conviction of the British in their own
righteousness. Their very lack of awareness of others’ feelings had been their
strength and it continued to justify actions taken on their behalf, and to cast the
blame for any mishap on the iniquity of others who were so blind to the obvious
virtues of the British. Those virtues had now been justified afresh by the success
of British forces and the Indian police in crushing those in India who had
ventured to doubt them. Empire had been justified and Mr Winston Churchill
declared, with special reference to India: ‘I have not become the King’s first
minister in order to preside over the liquidation of the British Empire.’ In saying
so, Mr Churchill undoubtedly represented the viewpoint of the vast majority of
his people, and even of many who had previously criticized the theory and
practice of imperialism. The leaders of the British Labour Party, anxious to
demonstrate that they were behind no other group in their attachment to the
imperial tradition, supported Mr Churchill’s statement and ‘stressed the resolve
of the British people to keep the empire together after the war.’
In America, opinion, in so far as it was interested in the far away problem of
India, was divided, for people there were not equally convinced of the virtues of
the British ruling class and looked with some disapproval on other peoples’
empires. They were also anxious to gain India’s goodwill and utilize her
resources fully in the war against Japan. Yet one-sided and tendentious
propaganda inevitably produced results, and there was a feeling that the Indian
problem was far too complicated for them to tackle, and anyway it was difficult
for them to interfere in the affairs of their British ally.
In Russia, what those in authority, or people generally, thought about India it
was impossible to say. They were far too busy with their stupendous war effort,
and with driving the invader from their country, to think of matters of no
immediate concern to them. Yet they were used to thinking far ahead and they
were not likely to ignore India which touched their frontiers in Asia. What their
future policy would be no one could say, except that it would be realistic and
principally concerned with adding to the political and economic strength of the
U.S.S.R. They had carefully avoided all reference to India, but Stalin had
declared in November, 1942, on the occasion of the twenty-fifth anniversary of
the Soviet Revolution, that their general policy was:
Abolition of racial exclusiveness, equality of nations and integrity of their territories,
liberation of the enslaved nations and restoration of their sovereign rights, the right of every
nation to arrange its affairs as it wishes, economic aid to nations that have suffered and
assistance to them in attaining their material welfare, restoration of democratic liberties, the
destruction of the Hitlerite regime.
In China, it was evident that, whatever the reaction of the people to any
particular action of ours, their sympathies were entirely on the side of Indian
freedom. That sympathy had historical roots, but, even more so, it was based on
the realization that unless India was free, China’s freedom might be endangered.
It was not in China only but throughout Asia, Egypt, and the Middle East, Indian
freedom had become a symbol of a larger freedom for other subject and
dependent countries, a test in the present and a measuring rod for the future. Mr
Wendell Wilkie in his book—One World—says:
Many men and women I have talked with from Africa to Alaska asked me the question which
has become almost a symbol all through Asia: What about India?… From Cairo on, it
confronted me at every turn. The wisest man in China said to me: ‘When the aspiration of
India for freedom was put aside to some future date, it was not Great Britain that suffered in
public esteem in the Far East. It was the United States.’
What had happened in India had compelled the world to look at India for a
while, even in the midst of the war crisis, and to think of the basic problems of
the East; it had stirred the mind and heart of every country of Asia. Even though,
for the moment, the Indian people appeared helpless in the powerful grip of
British imperialism, they had demonstrated that there would be no peace in India
or Asia unless India was free.
Reactions in India
Foreign rule over a civilized community suffers from many disadvantages and
many ills follow in its train. One of these disadvantages is that it has to rely on
the less desirable elements in the population. The idealists, the proud, the
sensitive, the self-respecting, those who care sufficiently for freedom and are not
prepared to degrade themselves by an enforced submission to an alien authority,
keep aloof or come into conflict with it. The proportion of careerists and
opportunists in its ranks is much higher than it would normally be in a free
country. Even in an independent country with an autocratic form of government
many sensitive people are unable to co-operate in governmental activities, and
there are very few opportunities for the release of new talent.
An alien government, which must necessarily be authoritarian suffers from all
these disadvantages and adds to them, for it has always to function in an
atmosphere of hostility and suppression. Fear becomes the dominant motive of
both the government and the people, and the most important services are the
police and the secret service.
When there is an actual conflict between the Government and the people, this
tendency to rely on and encourage the undesirable elements in the population,
becomes even more strongly marked. Many conscientious people, of course,
through force of circumstances, have to continue functioning in the
governmental structure, whether they like it or not. But those who come to the
top and play the most important roles are chosen for their anti-nationalism, their
subservience, their capacity to crush and humiliate their own countrymen. The
highest merit is opposition, often the result of personal rivalries and
disappointments, to the sentiments and feelings of the great majority of the
people.
In this turgid and unwholesome atmosphere no idealism or noble sentiment
has any place, and the prizes held out are high positions and big salaries. The
incompetence or worse failings of the supporters of government have to be
tolerated, for the measure of everything is the active support given to that
government in crushing its opponents. This leads to government cohabiting with
strange groups and very odd persons. Corruption, cruelty, callousness, and a
complete disregard of the public welfare flourish and poison the air.3
While much that the Government does is bitterly resented, far greater
resentment is caused by those Indian supporters of it who become more royalist
than the king. The average Indian has a feeling of disgust and nausea at this
behaviour, and to him such people are comparable to the men of Vichy or the
puppet regimes set up by the German and Japanese governments. This feeling is
not confined to Congressmen but extends to members of the Muslim League and
other organizations, and is expressed even by the most moderate of our
politicians.4
The war afforded a sufficient excuse and was a cover for intense antinational
activities of the Government and novel forms of propaganda. Mushroom labour
groups were financed to build up ‘labour morale’, and newspapers containing
scurrilous attacks on Gandhi and the Congress were started and subsidized, in
spite of the paper shortage which came in the way of other newspapers
functioning. Official advertisements, supposed to be connected with the war
effort, were also utilized for this purpose. Information centres were opened in
foreign countries to carry on continuous propaganda on behalf of the
Government of India. Crowds of undistinguished and often unknown individuals
were sent on officially organized deputations, especially to the U.S.A., despite
the protest of the central assembly, to act as propaganda agents and stools of the
British Government. Persons holding independent views or critical of
Government policy had no chance of going abroad; they could neither got a
passport nor transport facilities.
All these and many other devices have been employed by the Government
during the last two years to create a semblance of what it considers ‘public
tranquility’. Political and public life becomes dormant, as, indeed, it must in a
country more or less under military occupation and rule. But this forcible
suppresssion of symptoms can only cause an aggravation of the disease, and
India is very sick. Prominent Indian conservatives, who have always tried to cooperate
with the Government, have been filed with anxiety at this volcano which
has been temporarily sealed at its mouth, and they have stated that they have
never known such bitterness against the British Government.
I do not know and cannot tell till I come into contact with my people how they
have changed during these two years and what feelings stir in their hearts, but I
have little doubt that these recent experiences have changed them in many ways.
I have looked into my own mind from time to time and examined its almost
involuntary reaction to events. I had always looked forward in the past to a visit
to England, because I have many friends there and old memories draw me. But
now I found that there was no such desire and the idea was distasteful. I wanted
to keep as far away from England as possible, and I had no wish even to discuss
India’s problems with Englishmen. And then I remembered some friends and
softened a little, and I told myself how wrong it was to judge a whole people in
this way I thought also of the terrible experiences that the English people had
gone through in this war, of the continuous strain in which they had lived, of the
loss of so many of their loved ones. All this helped to tone down my feelings,
but that basic reaction remained. Probably time and the future will lessen it and
give another perspective. But if I, with all my associations with England and the
English, could feel that way, what of others who had lacked those contacts?
India’s Sickness: Famine
India was very sick, both in mind and body. While some people had prospered
during the war, the burden on others had reached breaking point, and as an awful
reminder of this came famine, a famine of vast dimensions affecting Bengal and
east and south India. It was the biggest and most devastating famine in India
during the past 170 years of British dominion, comparable to those terrible
famines which occurred from 1766 to 1770 in Bengal and Bihar as an early
result of the establishment of British rule. Epidemics followed, especially
cholera and malaria, and spread to other provinces, and even today they are
taking their toll of scores of thousands of lives. Millions have died of famine and
disease and yet that spectre hovers over India and claims its victims.5
This famine unveiled the picture of India as it was below the thin veneer of
the prosperity of a small number of people at the top—a picture of poverty and
ugliness of British rule. That was the culmination and fulfilment of British rule
in India. It was no calamity of nature or play of the elements that brought this
famine, nor was it caused by actual war operations and enemy blockade. Every
competent observer is agreed that it was a man-made famine which could have
been foreseen and avoided. Everyone is agreed that there was amazing
indifference, incompetence, and complacency shown by all the authorities
concerned. Right up to the last moment, when thousands were dying daily in the
public streets, famine was denied and references to it in the Press were
suppressed by the censors. When the Statesman newspaper of Calcutta published
gruesome and ghastly pictures of starving and dying women and children in the
streets of Calcutta, a spokesman of the Government of India, speaking officially
in the central assembly, protested against the ‘dramatization’ of the situation; to
him apparently it was a normal occurrence for thousands to die daily from
starvation in India. Mr Amery, of the Indian Office in London, distinguished
himself especially by his denials and statements. And then, when it became
impossible to deny or cloak the existence of widespread famine, each group in
authority blamed some other group for it. The Government of India said it was
the fault of the provincial government, which itself was merely a puppet
government functioning under the Governor and through the civil service. They
were all to blame, but most of all inevitably that authoritarian government which
the Viceroy represented in his person and which could do what it chose
anywhere in India. In any democratic or semi-democratic country such a
calamity would have swept away all the governments concerned with it. Not so
in India where everything continued as before.
Considered even from the point of view of the war, this famine took place in
the very region which stood nearest to the theatre of war and possible invasion.
A widespread famine and collapse of the economic structure would inevitably
injure the capacity for defence and even more so for offence. Thus did the
Government of India discharge its responsibility for India’s defence and the
prosecution of the war against the Japanese aggressors. Not scorched earth but
scorched and starved and dead human beings by the million in this vital war area
were the emblems of the policy that Government had pursued.
Indian non-official organizations from all over the country did good work in
bringing relief, and so did those efficient humanitarians, the Quakers of England.
The central and provincial governments also at last woke up and realized the
immensity of the crisis and the army was utilized in the relief operations. For the
moment, something was done to check the spread of famine and mitigate its
after-effects. But the relief was temporary and those after-affects continue, and
no one knows when famine may not descend again on an even worse scale.
Bengal is broken up, her social and economic life shattered, and an enfeebled
generation left as survivors.
While all this was happening and the streets of Calcutta were strewn with
corpses, the social life of the upper ten thousand of Calcutta underwent no
change. There was dancing and feasting and a flaunting of luxury, and life was
gay. There was no rationing even till a much later period. The horse races in
Calcutta continued and attracted their usual fashionable throngs. Transport was
lacking for food, but racehorses came in special boxes by rail from other parts of
the country. In this gay life both Englishmen and Indians took part for both had
prospered in the business of war and money was plentiful. Sometimes that
money had been gained by profiteering in the very foodstuffs, the lack of which
was killing tens of thousands daily.
India, it is often said, is a land of contrasts, of some very rich and many very
poor, of modernism and medievalism, of rulers and ruled, of the British and
Indians. Never before had these contrasts been so much in evidence as in the city
of Calcutta during those terrible months of famine in the latter half of 1943. The
two worlds, normally living apart, almost ignorant of each other, were suddenly
brought physically together and existed side by side. The contrast was startling,
but even more startling was the fact that many people did not realize the horror
and astonishing incongruity of it and continued to function in their old grooves.
What they felt one cannot say; one can only judge them by their actions. For
most Englishmen this was perhaps easier for they had lived their life apart and,
caste-bound as they were, they could not vary their old routine, even if some
individuals felt the urge to do so. But those Indians who functioned in this way
showed the wide gulf that separated them from their own people, which no
considerations even of decency and humanity could bridge.
The famine, like every great crisis, brought out both the good qualities and the
failings of the Indian people. Large numbers of them, including the most vital
elements, were in prison and unable to help in any way. Still the relief works,
organized unofficially, drew men and women from every class who laboured
hard under discouraging circumstances, displaying ability, the spirit of mutual
help and co-operation and self-sacrifice. The failings were also evident in those
who were too full of their petty rivalries and jealousies to co-operate together,
those who remained passive and did nothing to help others, and those few who
were so denationalized and dehumanized as to care little for what was
happening.
The famine was a direct result of war conditions and the carelessness and
complete lack of foresight of those in authority. The indifference of the
authorities to the problem of the country’s food passes comprehension when
every intelligent man who gave thought to the matter knew that some such crisis
was approaching. The famine could have been avoided, given proper handling of
the food situation in the earlier years of the war. In every other country affected
by the war full attention was paid to this vital aspect of war economy even
before the war started.
In India, the Government of India started a food department three and a
quarter years after the war began in Europe and over a year after the Japanese
war started. And yet it was common knowledge that the Japanese occupation of
Burma vitally affected Bengal’s food supply. The Government of India had no
policy at all in regard to food till the middle of 1943 when famine was already
beginning its disastrous career. It is most extraordinary how inefficient the
Government always is in every matter other than the suppression of those who
challenge its administration. Or perhaps it is more correct to say that, constituted
as it is, its mind is completely occupied in its primary task of ensuring its own
continuance. Only an actual crisis forces it to think of other matters. That crisis
again is accentuated by the ever-present crisis of want of confidence in the
Government’s ability and bona fides.6
Though the famine was undoubtedly due to war conditions and could have
been prevented, it is equally true that its deeper causes lay in the basic policy
which was impoverishing India and under which millions lived on the verge of
starvation. In 1933 Major General Sir John Megaw, the Director-General of the
Indian Medical Service, wrote in the course of a report on public health in India:
‘Taking India as a whole the dispensary doctors regard 39 per cent of the people
as being well nourished, 41 per cent as poorly nourished, and 20 per cent as very
badly nourished. The most depressing picture is painted by the doctors of Bengal
who regard only 22 per cent of the people of the province as being well
nourished while 31 per cent are considered to be very badly nourished.’
The tragedy of Bengal and the famines of Orissa, Malabar, and other places
are the final judgment on British rule in India. The British will certainly leave
India, and their Indian Empire will become a memory, but what will they leave
when they have to go, what human degradation and accumulated sorrow? Tagore
saw this picture as he lay dying three years ago: ‘But what kind of India will
they leave behind, what stark misery? When the stream of their centuries’
administration runs dry at last, what a waste of mud and filth they will leave
behind them!’
India’s Dynamic Capacity
The stream of life goes on in spite of famine and war, full of its inherent
contradictions, and finding sustenance even in those contradictions and the
disasters that follow in their train. Nature renews itself and covers yesterday’s
battlefield with flowers and green grass, and the blood that was shed feeds the
soil and gives strength and colour to new life. Human beings with their unique
quality of possessing memory live in their storied and remembered pasts and
seldom catch up to the present in ‘The worlde that neweth every daie’. And that
present slips into the past before we are hardly aware of it; today, child of
yesterday, yields place to its own offspring, tomorrow. Winged victory ends in a
welter of blood and mud; and out of the heavy trials of seeming defeat the spirit
emerges with new strength and wider vision. The weak in spirit yield and are
eliminated, but others carry the torch forward and hand it to the standard-bearers
of tomorrow.
The famine in India brought some realization of the terrible urgency of India’s
problems, of the overwhelming disaster that hung over the country. What people
in England felt about it I do not know, but some of them, as is their way, cast the
blame on India and her people. There was lack of food, lack of doctors, lack of
sanitation and medical supplies, lack of transport, lack of everything except
human beings, for the population had grown and seemed to be growing. This
excessive population of an improvident race, growing without notice or warning
and upsetting the plans or planlessness of a benevolent Government, must be to
blame. And so, economic problems suddenly assumed a new importance and we
were told that politics and political problems had to be put aside, as if politics
has any meaning at all unless it can solve the major problems of the day. The
Government of India, one of the few representatives of the laissez-faire tradition
in the world, began to talk of planning, but of organized planning it had no
notion. It could only think in terms of preserving the existing structure and its
own and allied vested interests.
The reaction on the people of India was deeper and more powerful, though it
found little public expression owing to the widespread tentacles of the Defence
of India Act and its rides. There had been a complete collapse of the economic
structure of Bengal and tens of millions of people had been literally broken up.
Bengal was an extreme example of what was happening in many parts of India
and it seemed that there could be no going back to the old economy. Even the
industrialists who had prospered so much during the war were shaken up and
compelled to look beyond their narrow sphere. They were realists in their own
way, rather afraid of the idealism of some of the politicians, but that realism
itself led them to far-reaching conclusions. A number of Bombay industrialists,
chiefly connected with the Tata enterprises, produced a fifteen-year plan for
India’s development. That plan is still not complete and there are many lacunae
in it. Inevitably it is conditioned by the ways of thinking of big industry and tries
to avoid revolutionary changes as far as possible. Yet the very pressure of events
in India has forced them to think in a big way and to go out of many of their
accustomed grooves of thought. Revolutionary changes are inherent in the plan,
though the authors may themselves not like some of them. Some of these authors
of the plan were members of the national planning committee and they have
taken advantage of a part of its work. This plan will undoubtedly have to be
varied, added to and worked out in many ways, but, coming from conservative
quarters, it is a welcome and encouraging sign of the way India must go. It is
based on a free India and on the political and economic unity of India. The
conservative banker’s view of money is not allowed to dominate the scene, and
it is emphasized that the real capital of the country consists of its resources in
material and manpower. The success of this or any other plan must inevitably
depend not merely on production but on a proper and equitable distribution of
the national wealth created. Also, agrarian reform is a fundamental prerequisite.
The idea of planning and a planned society is accepted now in varying degrees
by almost everyone. But planning by itself has little meaning and need not
necessarily lead to good results. Everything depends on the objectives of the
plan and on the controlling authority, as well as, of course, the government
behind it. Does the plan aim definitely at the wed-being and advancement of the
people as a whole, at the opening out of opportunity to all and the growth of
freedom and methods of co-operative organization and action? Increase of
production is essential, but obviously by itself it does not take us far and may
even add to the complexity of our problems. An attempt to preserve oldestablished
privileges and vested interests cuts at the very root of planning. Real
planning must recognize that no such special interests can be allowed to come in
the way of any scheme designed to further the well-being of the community as a
whole. The Congress governments in the provinces were hampered and
restricted in all directions by the basic assumption of the Parliamentary statute
that most of these vested interests must not be touched. Even their partial
attempts to change the land tenure system and to impose an income-tax on
incomes from land were challenged in the law courts.
If planning is largely controlled by big industrialists, it will naturally be
envisaged within the framework of the system they are used to, and will be
essentially based on the profit motive of an acquisitive society. However wellintentioned
they might be, and some of them certainly are full of good
intentions, it is difficult for them to think on new lines. Even when they talk of
state control of industry they think of the state more or less as it is today.
We are sometimes told that the present Government of India, with its
ownership and control of railways, and a growing control of and interference in
industry, finance, and, indeed, life in general, is moving in a socialist direction.
But this is something utterly different from democratic state control, apart from
being essentially foreign control. Though there is a limitation of certain capitalist
functions, the system is based on the protection of privilege. The old
authoritarian colonial systems ignored economic problems except in so far as
certain special interests were concerned. Finding itself unable to meet the
necessities of the new situation by its old laissez-faire methods, and yet bent on
preserving its authoritarian character, it goes inevitably in a fascist direction. It
tries to control economic operations by fascist methods, suppresses such civil
liberties as exist, and adapts its own autocratic government as well as the
capitalist system, with some variations, to the new conditions. Thus the
endeavour is, as in fascist countries, to build up a monolithic state, with
considerable control of industry and national life, and with many limitations on
free enterprise, but based on the old foundations. This is very far from socialism;
indeed, it is absurd to talk of socialism in a country dominated by an alien
power. Whether such an attempt can succeed, even in a temporary sense, is very
doubtful, for it only aggravates the existing problems; but war conditions
certainly give it a favourable environment to work in. Even a complete
nationalization (so-called) of industry unaccompanied by political democracy
will lead only to a different kind of exploitation, for while industry will then
belong to the state, the state itself will not belong to the people.
Our major difficulties in India are due to the fact that we consider our
problems—economic, social, industrial, agricultural, communal, Indian states—
within the framework of existing conditions. Within that framework, and
retaining the privileges and special status that are part of it, they become
impossible of solution. Even if some patchwork solution is arrived at under
stress of circumstances, it does not and cannot last. The old problems continue
and new problems, or new aspects of old problems, are added to them. This
approach of ours is partly due to tradition and old habit, but essentially it is
caused by the steel-frame of the British Government which holds together the
ramshackle structure.
The war has accentuated the many contradictions existing in India—political,
economic, and social. Politically, there is a great deal of talk of Indian freedom
and independence, and yet her people have probably at no time in their long
history been subjected to such authoritarian rule and intensive and widespread
repression as exist today, and out of this today tomorrow will necessarily grow.
Economically, British domination is also paramount, and yet the expansive
tendency of the Indian economy is continually straining at the leash. There is
famine and widespread misery and, on the other hand, there is an accumulation
of capital. Poverty and riches go side by side, decay and building up, disruption
and unity, dead thought and new. Behind all the distressing features there is an
inner vitality which cannot be suppressed.
Outwardly the war has encouraged India’s industrial growth and production,
and yet it is doubtful how far this has led to the establishment of new industries,
or is merely an extension and diversion of old industries. The apparent stability
of the index of India’s industrial activity during war-time indicates that no
fundamental advance has been made. Indeed, some competent observers are of
the opinion that the war and British policy during it have actually had a
hampering effect on India’s industrial growth. Dr John Mathai, an eminent
economist and a director of Tata’s, said recently:
The general belief … that the war has tremendously accelerated India’s industrial progress is
a proposition which, to say the least, would need a lot of proving. While it is true that certain
established industries have increased their production in response to the war demand, several
new industries of fundamental importance to the country, which had been projected before
the war have, under stress of war conditions, been either abandoned or been unable to reach
completion. My personal view is that, on a careful balance of the various factors in the
situation, it will be found that, unlike countries such as Canada and Australia, the war has
been more a hampering than an accelerating influence in India. I agree, however … that India
has sufficient potential capacity to supply her basic manufactured needs.
Such statistical evidence of industrial activity as is available supports this view,
and indicates that if pre-war progress could have been maintained at the old rate
it would have led not only to the establishment of new industries, but also to far
greater production as a whole.7
What the war has demonstrated beyond a shadow of a doubt is India’s
capacity to convert this potential into actuality with remarkable speed, given the
opportunity to do so. Functioning as an economic unit, she has accumulated
large capital assets within five war years, in spite of all the obstructions placed in
her way. These assets are in the form of sterling securities which are not
available to her and which, it is stated, will be blocked in the future. These
sterling securities represent the expenditure incurred by the Government of India
on behalf of the British Government as well as the U.S.A. They also represent
the hunger, famine, epidemics, emasculation, weakened resistance, stunted
growth, and death by starvation and disease of vast numbers of human beings in
India.
Because of the accumulation of capital assets, India has paid off her big debt
to England and has become a creditor country. Owing to gross negligence and
mismanagement, tremendous suffering has been caused to the people of India,
but the fact remains that India can accumulate these huge sums in a short period
of time. The actual expenditure on the war incurred by India in five years greatly
exceeds the total British investments in India during more than 100 years. This
fact brings into proper perspective how little the progress made in India has been
during the past century of British administration—railways, irrigation works and
the like of which we hear so much. It also demonstrates the enormous capacity
of India to advance with rapidity on all fronts. If this striking effort can be made
under discouraging conditions and under a foreign Government which
disapproves of industrial growth in India, it is obvious that planned development
under a free national Government would completely change the face of India
within a few years.
There is a curious habit of the British of appraising their economic and social
achievement in present-day India by criteria derived from social achievement
here or elsewhere in the distant past. They compare, with evident satisfaction to
themselves, what they have done in India during their regime with changes made
some hundreds of years ago. The fact that the industrial revolution, and more
especially the vast technological improvements of the past fifty years or so, have
entirely changed the pace and tempo of life somehow escapes them when they
think of India. They forget also that India was not a barren, sterile, and barbarous
country when they came here, but a highly evolved and cultured nation which
had temporarily become static and backward in technical achievements.
What values and standards are we to apply in making such comparisons? The
Japanese made Manchukuo within eight years highly industrialized for their own
purposes; more coal was being produced there than in India after many
generations of British effort. Their material record in Korea compares well with
other colonial empires8 And yet behind these records there is slavery, cruelty,
humiliation, exploitation, and the attempt to destroy the soul of a people. The
nazis and the Japanese have created new records in the inhuman suppression of
subject peoples and races. We are often reminded of this and told that the British
have not treated us quite so badly. Is that to be the new measure and standard of
comparison and judgment?
There is a great deal of pessimism in India today and a sense of frustration,
and both can be understood, for events have dealt harshly with our people and
the future is not promising. But there is also below the surface a stirring and a
pushing, signs of a new life and vitality, and unknown forces are at work.
Leaders function at the top but they are driven in particular directions by the
anonymous and unthinking will of an awakening people, who seem to be
outgrowing their past.
India’s Growth Arrested
A nation, like an individual, has many personalities, many approaches to life. If
there is a sufficiently strong organic bond between these different personalities,
it is wed; otherwise those personalities split up and lead to disintegration and
trouble. Normally, there is a continuous process of adjustment going on and
some kind of an equilibrium is established. If normal development is arrested, or
sometimes if there is some rapid change which is not easily assimilated, then
conflict arises between those different personalities. In the mind and spirit of
India, below the surface of our superficial conflicts and divisions, there has been
this fundamental conflict due to a long period of arrested growth. A society, if it
is to be both stable and progressive, must have a certain more or less fixed
foundation of principles as well as a dynamic outlook. Both appear to be
necessary. Without the dynamic outlook there is stagnation and decay, without
some fixed basis of principle there is likely to be disintegration and destruction.
In India from the earliest days there was a search for those basic principles,
for the unchanging, the universal, the absolute. Yet the dynamic outlook was
also present and an appreciation of life and the changing world. On these two
foundations a stable and progressive society was built up, though the stress was
always more on stability and security and the survival of the race. In later years
the dynamic aspect began to fade away, and in the name of eternal principles the
social structure was made rigid and unchanging. It was, as a matter of fact, not
wholly rigid and it did change gradually and continuously. But the ideology
behind it and the general framework continued unchanged. The group idea as
represented by more or less autonomous castes, the joint family and the
communal self-governing life of the village were the main pillars of this system,
and all these survived for so long because, in spite of their failings, they fulfilled
some essential needs of human nature and society. They gave security, stability
to each group and a sense of group freedom. Caste survived because it continued
to represent the general power-relationships of society, and class privileges were
maintained, not only because of the prevailing ideology, but also because they
were supported by vigour, intelligence, and ability, as well as a capacity for selfsacrifice.
That ideology was not based on a conflict of rights but on the
individuals obligations to others and a satisfactory performance of his duties, on
cooperation within the group and between different groups, and essentially on
the idea of promoting peace rather than war. While the social system was rigid,
no limit was placed on the freedom of the mind.
Indian civilization achieved much that it was aiming at, but, in that very
achievement, life began to fade away, for it is too dynamic to exist for long in a
rigid, unchanging environment. Even those basic principles, which are said to be
unchanging, lose their freshness and reality when they are taken for granted and
the search for them ceases. Ideas of truth, beauty, and freedom decay, and we
become prisoners following a deadening routine.
The very thing India lacked, the modern West possessed, and possessed to
excess. It had the dynamic outlook. It was engrossed in the changing world,
caring little for ultimate principles, the unchanging, the universal. It paid little
attention to duties and obligations and emphasized rights. It was active,
aggressive, acquisitive, seeking power and domination, living in the present and
ignoring the future consequences of its actions. Because it was dynamic, it was
progressive and full of life, but that life was a fevered one and the temperature
kept on rising progressively.
If Indian civilization went to seed because it became static, self-absorbed and
inclined to narcissism, the civilization of the modern West, with all its great and
manifold achievements, does not appear to have been a conspicuous success or
to have thus far solved the basic problems of life. Conflict is inherent in it and
periodically it indulges in self-destruction on a colossal scale. It seems to lack
something to give it stability, some basic principles to give meaning to life
though what these are I cannot say. Yet because it is dynamic and full of life and
curiosity, there is hope for it.
India, as well as China, must learn from the West, for the modern West has
much to teach, and the spirit of the age is represented by the West. But the West
is also obviously in need of learning much and its advances in technology will
bring it little comfort if it does not learn some of the deeper lessons of life,
which have absorbed the minds of thinkers in all ages and in all countries.
India has become static and yet it would be utterly wrong to imagine that she
was unchanging. No change at all means death. Her very survival as a highly
evolved nation shows that there was some process of continuous adaptation
going on. When the British came to India, though technologically somewhat
backward, she was still among the advanced commercial nations of the world.
Technical changes would undoubtedly have come and changed India as they
have changed some Western countries. But her normal development was
arrested by the British power. Industrial growth was checked and as a
consequence social growth was also arrested. The normal power-relationships of
society could not adjust themselves and find an equilibrium, as all power was
concentrated in the alien authority, which based itself on force and encouraged
groups and classes which had ceased to have any real significance. Indian life
thus progressively became more artificial, for many of the individuals and
groups who seemed to play an important role in it had no vital functions left and
were there only because of the importance given to them by the alien power.
They had long ago finished their role in history and would have been pushed
aside by new forces if they had not been given foreign protection. They became
straw-stuffed symbols of protégés of foreign authority, thereby cutting
themselves still further away from the living currents of the nation. Normally,
they would have been weeded out or diverted to some more appropriate function
by revolution or democratic process. But so long as foreign authoritarian rule
continued, no such development could take place. And so India was cluttered up
with these emblems of the past and the real changes that were taking place were
hidden behind an artificial facade. No true social balances or power-relationships
within society could develop or become evident, and unreal problems assumed
an undue importance.
Most of our problems today are due to this arrested growth and the prevention
by British authority of normal adjustments taking place. The problem of the
Indian princes is easily capable of solution if the external factor is removed. The
minorities problem is utterly unlike any minority problem elsewhere; indeed it is
not a minority problem at all. There are many aspects of it and no doubt we are
to blame for it in the past and in the present. And yet, at the back of these and
other problems is the desire of the British Government to preserve, as far as
possible, the existing economy and political organization of the Indian people,
and, for this purpose, to encourage and preserve the socially backward groups in
their present condition. Political and economic progress has not only been
directly prevented, but also made dependent on the agreement of reactionary
groups and vested interests, and this may be purchased only by confirming them
in their privileged positions or giving them a dominating voice in future
arrangement, and thus putting formidable obstacles in the way of real change
and progress. A new constitution, in order to have strength and effectiveness
behind it, should not only represent the wishes of the vast majority of the people
but should also reflect the inter-relation of social forces and their power
relationships at the time. The main difficulty in India has been that constitutional
arrangements for the future suggested by the British, or even by many Indians,
ignore present social forces, and much more so potential ones which have long
been arrested and are now breaking out, and try to impose and make rigid an
order based on a past and vanishing relationship which has no real relevance
today.
The fundamental reality in India is British military occupation and the policy
which it supports. That policy has been expressed in many ways and has often
been cloaked in dubious phrases, but latterly, under a soldier Viceroy, it has been
expressed with clarity. That military occupation is to continue so long as the
British can help it. But there are certain limits to the application of force. It leads
not only to the growth of opposing forces but to many other consequences
unthought of by those who rely upon it too much.
We see the consequences of this enforced stunting of India’s growth and this
arresting of her progress. The most obvious fact is the sterility of British rule in
India and the thwarting of Indian life by it. Alien rule is inevitably cut off from
the creative energies of the people it dominates. When this alien rule has its own
economic and cultural centre far from the subject country and is further backed
by racialism, this divorce is complete, and leads to spiritual and cultural
starvation of the subject peoples. The only real scope that the nation’s creative
energy finds is in some kind of opposition to that rule, and yet that scope itself is
limited and the outlook becomes narrow and one-sided. That opposition
represents the conscious or unconscious effort of the living and growing forces
to break through the shell that confines them and is thus a progressive and
inevitable tendency. But it is too single-track and negative to have full touch
with many aspects of reality in our lives. Complexes and prejudices and phobias
grow and darken the mind, mental idols of the group and the community take
shape, and slogans and set phrases take the place of inquiry into real problems.
Within the framework of a sterile alien rule no effective solutions are possible,
and national problems, unable to find solution, become even more acute. We
have arrived in India at a stage when no half measures can solve our problems,
no advance on one sector is enough. There has to be a big jump and advance all
along the line, or the alternative may be overwhelming catastrophe.
As in the world as a whole, so in India, it is a race between the forces of
peaceful progress and construction and those of disruption and disaster, with
each succeeding disaster on a bigger scale than the previous one.
We can view this prospect as optimists or as pessimists, according to our
predilections and mental make-up. Those who have faith in a moral ordering of
the universe and of the ultimate triumph of virtue can, fortunately for them,
function as lookers on or as helpers, and cast the burden on God; others will
have to carry that burden on their own weak shoulders, hoping for the best and
preparing for the worst.
Religion, Philosophy, and Science
India must break with much of her past and not allow it to dominate the present.
Our lives are encumbered with the dead wood of this past; all that is dead and
has served its purpose has to go. But that does not mean a break with, or a
forgetting of, the vital and life-giving in that past. We can never forget the ideals
that have moved our race, the dreams of the Indian people through the ages, the
wisdom of the ancients, the buoyant energy and love of life and nature of our
forefathers, their spirit of curiosity and mental adventure, the daring of their
thought, their splendid achievements in literature, art and culture, their love of
truth and beauty and freedom, the basic values that they set up, their
understanding of life’s mysterious ways, their toleration of other ways than
theirs, their capacity to absorb other peoples and their cultural accomplishments,
to synthesize them and develop a varied and mixed culture; nor can we forget the
myriad experiences which have built up our ancient race and lie embedded in
our subconscious minds. We will never forget them or cease to take pride in that
noble heritage of ours. If India forgets them she will no longer remain India and
much that has made her our joy and pride will cease to be.
It is not this that we have to break with, but all the dust and dirt of ages that
have covered her up and hidden her inner beauty and significance, the
excrescences and abortions that have twisted and petrified her spirit, set it in
rigid frames, and stunted her growth. We have to cut away these excrescences
and remember afresh the core of that ancient wisdom and adapt it to our present
circumstances. We have to get out of traditional ways of thought and living
which, for all the good they may have done in a past age, and there was much
good in them, have ceased to have significance today. We have to make our own
all the achievements of the human race and join up with others in the exciting
adventure of man, more exciting today perhaps than in earlier ages, realizing that
this has ceased to be governed by national boundaries or old divisions and is
common to the race of man everywhere. We have to revive the passion for truth
and beauty and freedom which gives meaning to life, and develop afresh that
dynamic outlook and spirit of adventure which distinguished those of our race
who, in ages past, built our house on these strong and enduring foundations. Old
as we are, with memories stretching back to the early dawns of human history
and endeavour, we have to grow young again, in tune with our present time, with
the irrepressible spirit and joy of youth in the present and its faith in the future.
Truth as ultimate reality, if such there is, must be eternal, imperishable,
unchanging. But that infinite, eternal and unchanging truth cannot be
apprehended in its fullness by the finite mind of man which can only grasp, at
most, some small aspect of it limited by time and space, and by the state of
development of that mind and the prevailing ideology of the period. As the mind
develops and enlarges its scope, as ideologies change and new symbols are used
to express that truth, new aspects of it come to light, though the core of it may
yet be the same. And so, truth has ever to be sought and renewed, reshaped, and
developed, so that, as understood by man, it might keep in line with the growth
of his thought and the development of human life. Only then does it become a
living truth for humanity, supplying the essential need for which it craves, and
offering guidance in the present and for the future.
But if some one aspect of the truth has been petrified by dogma in a past age,
it ceases to grow and develop and adapt itself to the changing needs of humanity;
other aspects of it remain hidden and it fails to answer the urgent questions of a
succeeding age. It is no longer dynamic but static, no longer a life-giving
impulse but dead thought and ceremonial and a hindrance to the growth of the
mind and of humanity. Indeed, it is probably not even understood to the extent it
was understood in that past age when it grew up and was clothed in the language
and symbols of that age. For its context is different in a later age, the mental
climate has changed, new social habits and customs have grown up, and it is
often difficult to understand the sense, much less the spirit, of that ancient
writing. Moreover, as Aurobindo Ghose has pointed out, every truth, however
true in itself, yet taken apart from others which at once limit and complete it,
becomes a snare to bind the intellect and a misleading dogma; for in reality each
is one thread of a complex weft and no thread must be taken apart from the weft.
Religions have helped greatly in the development of humanity. They have laid
down values and standards and have pointed out principles for the guidance of
human life. But with all the good they have done, they have also tried to
imprison truth in set forms and dogmas, and encouraged ceremonials and
practices which soon lose all their original meaning and become mere routine.
While impressing upon man the awe and mystery of the unknown that surrounds
him on all sides, they have discouraged him from trying to understand not only
the unknown but what might come in the way of social effort. Instead of
encouraging curiosity and thought, they have preached a philosophy of
submission to nature, to established churches, to the prevailing social order, and
to everything that is. The belief in a supernatural agency which ordains
everything has led to a certain irresponsibility on the social plane, and emotion
and sentimentality have taken the place of reasoned thought and inquiry.
Religion, though it has undoubtedly brought comfort to innumerable human
beings and stabilized society by its values, has checked the tendency to change
and progress inherent in human society.
Philosophy has avoided many of these pitfalls and encouraged thought and
inquiry. But it has usually lived in its ivory tower, cut off from life and its daytoday
problems, concentrating on ultimate purposes and fading to link them with
the life of man. Logic and reason were its guides and they took it far in many
directions, but that logic was too much the product of the mind and unconcerned
with fact.
Science ignored the ultimate purposes and looked at fact alone. It made the
world jump forward with a leap, built up a glittering civilization, opened up
innumerable avenues for the growth of knowledge, and added to the power of
man to such an extent that for the first time it was possible to conceive that man
could triumph over and shape his physical environment. Man became almost a
geological force, changing the face of the planet earth chemically, physically,
and in many other ways. Yet when this sorry scheme of things entirely seemed
to be in his grasp, to mould it nearer to the heart’s desire, there was some
essential lack and some vital element was missing. There was no knowledge of
ultimate purpose and not even an understanding of the immediate purpose, for
science had told us nothing about any purpose in life. Nor did man, so powerful
in his control of nature, have the power to control himself, and the monster he
had created ran amok. Perhaps new developments in biology, psychology, and
similar sciences, and the interpretation of biology and physics, may help man to
understand and control himself more than he has done in the past. Or, before any
such advances influence human life sufficiently, man may destroy the
civilization he has built and have to start anew.
There is no visible limit to the advance of science, if it is given the chance to
advance. Yet it may be that the scientific method of observation is not always
applicable to all the varieties of human experience and cannot cross the
uncharted ocean that surrounds us. With the help of philosophy it may go a little
further and venture even on these high seas. And when both science and
philosophy fail us, we shall have to rely on such other powers of apprehension as
we may possess. For there appears to be a definite stopping place beyond which
reason, as the mind is at present constituted, cannot go. ‘La dérniere démarche
de la raison,’ says Pascal, ‘c’est de connaitre qu’il y a une infinite de choses qui
la surpassent. Elle est bien faible si elle ne va jusque-la.’
Realizing these limitations of reason and scientific method, we have still to
hold on to them with all our strength, for without that firm basis and background
we can have no grip on any kind of truth or reality. It is better to understand a
part of truth and apply it to our lives, than to understand nothing at all and
flounder helplessly in a vain attempt to pierce the mystery of existence. The
applications of science are inevitable and unavoidable for all countries and
peoples today. But something more than its application is necessary. It is the
scientific approach, the adventurous and yet critical temper of science, the search
for truth and new knowledge, the refusal to accept anything without testing and
trial, the capacity to change previous conclusions in the face of new evidence,
the reliance on observed fact and not on pre-conceived theory, the hard
discipline of the mind—all this is necessary, not merely for the application of
science but for life itself and the solution of its many problems. Too many
scientists today, who swear by science, forget all about it outside their particular
spheres. The scientific approach and temper are, or should be, a way of life, a
process of thinking, a method of acting and associating with our fellow men.
That is a large order and undoubtedly very few of us, if any at all, can function
in this way with even partial success. But this criticism applies in equal or even
greater measure to all the injunctions which philosophy and religion have laid
upon us. The scientific temper points out the way along which man should
travel. It is the temper of a free man. We live in a scientific age, so we are told,
but there is little evidence of this temper in the people anywhere or even in their
leaders.
Science deals with the domain of positive knowledge but the temper which it
should produce goes beyond that domain. The ultimate purposes of man may be
said to be to gain knowledge, to realize truth, to appreciate goodness and beauty.
The scientific method of objective inquiry is not applicable to all these, and
much that is vital in life seems to lie beyond its scope—the sensitiveness to art
and poetry, the emotion that beauty produces, the inner recognition of goodness.
The botanist and zoologist may never experience the charm and beauty of
nature; the sociologist may be wholly lacking in love for humanity. But even
when we go to the regions beyond the reach of the scientific method and visit the
mountain tops where philosophy dwells and high emotions fid us, or gaze at the
immensity beyond, that approach and temper are still necessary.
Very different is the method of religion. Concerned as it is principally with the
regions beyond the reach of objective inquiry, it relies on emotion and intuition.
And then it applies this method to everything in life, even to those things which
are capable of intellectual inquiry and observation: Organized religion, allying
itself to theology and often more concerned with its vested interests than with
things of the spirit, encourages a temper which is the very opposite to that of
science. It produces narrowness and intolerance, credulity and superstition,
emotionalism and irrationalism. It tends to close and limit the mind of man, and
to produce a temper of a dependent, unfree person.
Even if God did not exist, it would be necessary to invent Him, so Voltaire
said—‘si Dieu n’existait pas, d faudrait l’inventer.’ Perhaps that is true, and
indeed the mind of man has always been trying to fashion some such mental
image or conception which grew with the mind’s growth. But there is something
also in the reverse proposition: even if God exists, it may be desirable not to look
up to Him or to rely upon Him. Too much dependence on supernatural factors
may lead, and has often led, to a loss of self-reliance in man and to a blunting of
his capacity and creative ability. And yet some faith seems necessary in things of
the spirit which are beyond the scope of our physical world, some reliance on
moral, spiritual, and idealistic conceptions, or else we have no anchorage, no
objectives or purpose in life. Whether we believe in God or not, it is impossible
not to believe in something, whether we call it a creative life-giving force or
vital energy inherent in matter which gives it its capacity for self-movement and
change and growth, or by some other name, something that is as real, though
elusive, as life is real when contrasted with death. Whether we are conscious of
it or not most of us worship at the invisible altar of some unknown god and offer
sacrifices to it—some ideal, personal, national or international; some distant
objective that draws us on, though reason itself may find little substance in it;
some vague conception of a perfect man and a better world. Perfection may be
impossible of attainment, but the demon in us, some vital force, urges us on and
we tread that path from generation to generation.
As knowledge advances, the domain of religion, in the narrow sense of the
word, shrinks. The more we understand life and nature, the less we look for
supernatural causes. Whatever we can understand and control ceases to be a
mystery. The processes of agriculture, the food we eat, the clothes we wear, our
social relations, were all at one time under the domain of religion and its high
priests. Gradually they have passed out of its control and become subjects for
scientific study. Yet much of this is still powerfully affected by religious beliefs
and the superstitions that accompany them. The final mysteries still remain far
beyond the reach of the human mind and are likely to continue to remain so. But
so many of life’s mysteries are capable of and await solution, that an obsession
with the final mystery seems hardly necessary or justified. Life still offers not
only the loveliness of the world but also the exciting adventure of fresh and
never ceasing discoveries, of new panoramas opening out and new ways of
living, adding to its fullness and ever making it richer and more complete.
It is therefore with the temper and approach of science, allied to philosophy,
and with reverence for all that lies beyond, that we must face life. Thus we may
develop an integral vision of life which embraces in its wide scope the past and
the present, with all their heights and depths, and look with serenity towards the
future. The depths are there and cannot be ignored, and always by the side of the
loveliness that surrounds us is the misery of the world. Man’s journey through
life is an odd mixture of joy and sorrow; thus only can he learn and advance. The
travel of the soul is a tragic and lonely business. External events and their
consequences affect us powerfully, and yet the greatest shocks come to our
minds through inner fears and conflicts. While we advance on the external plane,
as we must if we are to survive, we have also to win peace with ourselves and
between ourselves and our environment, a peace which brings satisfaction not
only to our physical and material needs but also to those inner imaginative urges
and adventurous spirits that have distinguished man ever since he started on his
troubled journey in the realms of thought and action. Whether that journey has
any ultimate purpose or not we do not know, but it has its compensations, and it
points to many a nearer objective which appears attainable and which may again
become the starting point for a fresh advance.
Science has dominated the Western world and everyone there pays tribute to
it, and yet the West is still far from having developed the real temper of science.
It has still to bring the spirit and the flesh into creative harmony. In India in
many obvious ways we have a greater distance to travel. And yet there may be
fewer major obstructions on our way, for the essential basis of Indian thought for
ages past, though not its later manifestations, fits in with the scientific temper
and approach, as well as with internationalism. It is based on a fearless search
for truth, on the solidarity of man, even on the divinity of everything living, and
on the free and co-operative development of the individual and the species, ever
to greater freedom and higher stages of human growth.
The Importance of the National Idea. Changes Necessary
in India
A blind reverence for the past is bad and so also is a contempt for it, for no
future can be founded on either of these. The present and the future inevitably
grow out of the past and bear its stamp, and to forget this is to build without
foundations and to cut off the roots of national growth. It is to ignore one of the
most powerful forces that influence people. Nationalism is essentially a group
memory of past achievements, traditions, and experiences, and nationalism is
stronger today than it has ever been. Many people thought that nationalism had
had its day and must inevitably give place to the ever-growing international
tendencies of the modern world. Socialism with its proletarian background
derided national culture as something tied up with a decaying middle class.
Capitalism itself became progressively international with its cartels and
combines and overflowed national boundaries. Trade and commerce, easy
communications and rapid transport, the radio and cinema, all helped to create
an international atmosphere and to produce the delusion that nationalism was
doomed.
Yet whenever a crisis has arisen nationalism has emerged again and
dominated the scene, and people have sought comfort and strength in their old
traditions. One of the remarkable developments of the present age has been the
rediscovery of the past and of the nation. This going back to national traditions
has been most marked in the ranks of labour and the proletarian elements, who
were supposed to be the foremost champions of international action. War or
similar crisis dissolves their internationalism and they become subject to
nationalist hates and fears even more than other groups. The most striking
example of this is the recent development of the Soviet Union. Without giving
up in any way its essential social and economic structure, it has become more
nationalist-minded and the appeal of the fatherland is now much greater than the
appeal of the international proletariat. Famous figures in national history have
again been revived and have become heroes of the Soviet people. The inspiring
record of the Soviet people in this war, the strength and unity they have shown,
are no doubt due to a social and economic structure which has resulted in social
advances on a wide front, on planned production and consumption, on the
development of science and its functions, and on the release of a vast quantity of
new talent and capacity for leadership, as also on brilliant leadership. But it may
also be partly due to a revival of national memories and traditions and a new
awareness of the past, of which the present was felt to be a continuation. It
would be wrong to imagine that this nationalist outlook of Russia is just a
reversion to old-style nationalism. It is certainly not that. The tremendous
experiences of the revolution and all that followed it cannot be forgotten, and the
changes that resulted from it in social structure and mental adjustment must
remain. That social structure leads inevitably to a certain international outlook.
Nevertheless nationalism has reappeared in such a way as to fit in with the new
environment and add to the strength of the people.
It is instructive to compare the development of the Soviet state with the
varying fortunes of the Communist Parties in other countries. There was the first
flush of enthusiasm among many people in all countries, and especially in
proletarian ranks, soon after the Soviet Revolution. Out of this grew communist
groups and parties. Then conflicts arose between these groups and national
labour parties. During the Soviet five-year plans there was another wave of
interest and enthusiasm, and this probably affected middle-class intellectuals
even more than Labour. Again there was a reaction at the time of the purges in
the Soviet Union. In some countries Communist parties were suppressed, in
others they made progress. But almost everywhere they came into conflict with
organized national Labour. Partly this was due to the conservatism of Labour,
but more so to a feeling that the Communist Party represented a foreign group
and that they took their policies from Russia. The inherent nationalism of Labour
came in the way of its accepting the co-operation of the Communist Party even
when many were favourably inclined towards communism. The many changes
in Soviet policy, which could be understood in relation to Russia, became totally
incomprehensible as policies favoured by Communist parties elsewhere. They
could only be understood on the basis that what may be good for Russia must
necessarily be good for the rest of the world. These Communist parties, though
they consisted of some able and very earnest men and women, lost contact with
the nationalist sentiments of the people and weakened accordingly. While the
Soviet Union was forging new links with national tradition, the Communist
parties of other countries were drifting further away from it.
I cannot speak with much knowledge of what happened elsewhere, but I know
that in India the Communist Party is completely divorced from, and is ignorant
of, the national traditions that fid the minds of the people. It believes that
communism necessarily implies a contempt for the past. So far as it is
concerned, the history of the world began in November, 1917, and everything
that preceded this was preparatory and leading up to it. Normally speaking, in a
country like India with large numbers of people on the verge of starvation and
the economic structure cracking up, communism should have a wide appeal. In a
sense there is that vague appeal, but the Communist Party cannot take advantage
of it because it has cut itself off from the springs of national sentiment and
speaks in a language which finds no echo in the hearts of the people. It remains
an energetic but small group, with no real roots.
It is not only the Communist Party in India that has failed in this respect.
There are others who talk glibly of modernism and modern spirit and the essence
of Western culture, and are at the same time ignorant of their own culture.
Unlike the communists, they have no ideal that moves them and no driving force
that carries them forward. They take the external forms and outer trappings of
the West (and often some of the less desirable features), and imagine that they
are in the vanguard of an advancing civilization. Naïve and shallow and yet full
of their own conceits, they live, chiefly in a few large cities, an artificial life
which has no living contacts with the culture of the East or of the West.
National progress can, therefore, neither he in a repetition of the past nor in its
denial. New patterns must inevitably be adopted but they must be integrated with
the old. Sometimes the new, though very different, appears in terms of preexisting
patterns, and thus create a feeling of a continuous development from the
past, a link in the long chain of the history of the race. Indian history is a striking
record of changes introduced in this way, a continuous adaptation of old ideas to
a changing environment, of old patterns to new. Because of this there is no sense
of cultural break in it and there is that continuity, in spite of repeated change,
from the far distinct days of Mohenjo Daro to our own age. There was a
reverence for the past and for traditional forms, but there was also a freedom and
flexibility of the mind and a tolerance of the spirit. So while forms often
remained, the inner content continued to change. In no other way could that
society have survived for thousands of years. Only a living and growing mind
could overcome the rigidity of traditional forms, only those forms could give it
continuity and stability.
Yet this balance may become precarious and one aspect may overshadow, and
to some extent, suppress this other. In India there was an extraordinary freedom
of the mind allied to certain rigid social forms. These forms ultimately
influenced the freedom of the mind and made it in practice, if not in theory,
more rigid and limited. In western Europe there was no such freedom of the
mind and there was also much less rigidity in social forms. Europe had a long
struggle for the freedom of the mind and, as a consequence, social forms also
changed.
In China the flexibility of the mind was even greater than in India and for all
her love of, and attachment to, tradition, that mind never lost its flexibility and
essential tolerance. Tradition sometimes delayed changed but that mind was not
afraid of change, though it retained the old patterns. Even more than in India,
Chinese society built up a balance and an equilibrium which survived through
many changes for thousands of years. Perhaps one of the great advantages that
China has had over other countries is her entire freedom from dogma, from the
narrow and limited religious outlook, and her reliance on reason and common
sense. No other country has based its culture less on religion and more on
morality and ethics and a deep understanding of the variety of human life.
In India, because of the recognized freedom of the mind, howsoever limited in
practice, new ideas are not shut out. They are considered and can be accepted far
more than in countries which have a more rigid and dogmatic outlook on life.
The essential ideals of Indian culture are broad-based and can be adapted to
almost any environment. The bitter conflict between science and religion which
shook up Europe in the nineteenth century would have no reality in India, nor
would change based on the applications of science bring any conflict with those
ideals. Undoubtedly such changes would stir up, as they are stirring up, the mind
of India, but instead of combating them or rejecting them it would rationalize
them from its own ideological point of view and fit them into its mental
framework. It is probable that in this process many vital changes may be
introduced in the old outlook, but they will not be super-imposed from outside
and will seem rather to grow naturally from the cultural background of the
people. This is more difficult today than it might have been, because of the long
period of arrested growth and the urgent necessity for big and qualitative
changes.
Conflict, however, there will be, with much of the superstructure that has
grown up round those basic ideals and which exist and stifles us today. That
superstructure will inevitably have to go, because much of it is bad in itself and
is contrary to the spirit of the age. Those who seek to retain it do an id service to
the basic ideals of Indian culture, for they mix up the good and the bad and thus
endanger the former. It is no easy matter to separate the two or draw a hard and
fast line between them, and here opinions will differ widely. But it is not
necessary to draw any such theoretical and logical line; the logic of changing life
and the march of events will gradually draw that line for us. Every kind of
development—technological or philosophical—necessitates contact with life
itself, with social needs, with the living movements of the world. Lack of this
contact leads to stagnation and loss of vitality and creativeness. But if we
maintain these contacts and are receptive to them, we shall adapt ourselves to the
curve of life without losing the essential characteristic which we have valued.
Our approach to knowledge in the past was a synthetic one, but limited to
India. That limitation continued and the synthetic approach gave place gradually
to a more analytical one. We have now to lay greater stress on the synthetic
aspect and make the whole world our field of study. This emphasis on synthesis
is indeed necessary for every nation and individual if they are to grow out of the
narrow grooves of thought and action in which most people have lived for so
long. The development of science and its applications have made this possible
for us, and yet the very excess of new knowledge has added to its difficulty.
Specialization has led to a narrowing of individual life in a particular groove,
and man’s labour in industry is often confined to some infinitesimal part of the
whole product. Specialization in knowledge and work will have to continue, but
it seems more essential than ever that a synthetic view of human life and man’s
adventure through the ages should be encouraged. This view will have to take
into consideration the past and the present, and include in its scope all countries
and peoples. In this way perhaps we might develop, in addition to our own
national backgrounds and cultures, an appreciation of others and a capacity to
understand and cooperate with the peoples of other countries. Thus also we
might succeed to some extent in building up integrated personalities instead of
the lop-sided individuals of today. We might become, in Plato’s words,
‘spectators of all time and all being,’ drawing sustenance from the rich treasures
that humanity has accumulated, adding to them, and applying them in building
for the future.
It is a curious and significant act that, in spite of all modern scientific progress
and talk of internationalism, racialism and other separating factors are at least as
much in evidence today, if not more so, than at any previous time in history.
There is something lacking in all this progress, which can neither produce
harmony between nations nor within the spirit of man. Perhaps more synthesis
and a little humility towards the wisdom of the past, which, after all, is the
accumulated experience of the human race, would help us to gain a new
perspective and greater harmony. That is especially needed by those peoples
who live a fevered life in the present only and have almost forgotten the past.
But for countries like India a different emphasis is necessary, for we have too
much of the past about us and have ignored the present. We have to get rid of
that narrowing religious outlook, that obsession with the supernatural and
metaphysical speculations, that loosening of the mind’s discipline in religious
ceremonial and mystical emotionalism, which come in the way of our
understanding ourselves and the world. We have to come to grips with the
present, this life, this world, this nature which surrounds us in its infinite variety.
Some Hindus talk of going back to the Vedas; some Muslims dream of an
Islamic theocracy. Idle fancies, for there is no going back to the past; there is no
turning back even if this was thought desirable. There is only one-way traffic in
Time.
India must therefore lessen her religiosity and turn to science. She must get rid
of the exclusiveness in thought and social habit which has become like a prison
to her, stunting her spirit and preventing growth. The idea of ceremonial purity
has erected barriers against social intercourse and narrowed the sphere of social
action. The day-today religion of the orthodox Hindu is more concerned with
what to eat and what not to eat, who to eat with and from whom to keep away,
than with spiritual values. The rules and regulations of the kitchen dominate his
social life. The Muslim is fortunately free from these inhibitions, but he has his
own narrow codes and ceremonials, a routine which he rigorously follows,
forgetting the lesson of brotherhood which his religion taught him. His view of
life is, perhaps, even more limited and sterile than the Hindu view, though the
average Hindu today is a poor representative of the latter view, for he has lost
that traditional freedom of thought and the background that enriches life in many
ways.
Caste is the symbol and embodiment of this exclusiveness among the Hindus.
It is sometimes said that the basic idea of caste might remain, but its subsequent
harmful development and ramifications should go; that it should not depend on
birth but on merit. This approach is irrelevant and merely confuses the issue. In a
historical context a study of the growth of caste has some value, but we cannot
obviously go back to the period when caste began; in the social organization of
today it has no place left. If merit is the only criterion and opportunity is thrown
open to everybody, then caste loses all its present-day distinguishing features
and, in fact, ends. Caste has in the past not only led to the suppression of certain
groups, but to a separation of theoretical and scholastic learning from
craftsmanship, and a divorce of philosophy from actual life and its problems. It
was an aristocratic approach based on traditionalism. This outlook has to change
completely, for it is wholly opposed to modern conditions and the democratic
ideal. The functional organization of social groups in India may continue, but
even that will undergo a vast change as the nature of modern industry creates
new functions and puts an end to many old ones. The tendency today
everywhere is towards a functional organization of society, and the concept of
abstract rights is giving place to that of functions. This is in harmony with the
old Indian ideal.
The spirit of the age is in favour of equality, though practice denies it almost
everywhere. We have got rid of slavery in the narrow sense of the word, that a
man can be the property of another. But a new slavery, in some ways worse than
the old, has taken its place all over the world. In the name of individual freedom,
political and economic systems exploit human beings and treat them as
commodities. And again, though an individual cannot be the property of another,
a country and a nation can still be the property of another nation, and thus group
slavery is tolerated. Racialism also is a distinguishing feature of our times, and
we have not only master nations but also master races.
Yet the spirit of the age will triumph. In India, at any rate, we must aim at
equality. That does not and cannot mean that everybody is physically or
intellectually or spiritually equal or can be made so. But it does mean equal
opportunities for all and no political, economic, or social barrier in the way of
any individual or group. It means a faith in humanity and a belief that there is no
race or group that cannot advance and make good in its own way, given the
chance to do so. It means a realization of the fact that the backwardness or
degradation of any group is not due to inherent failings in it, but principally to
lack of opportunities and long suppression by other groups. It should mean an
understanding of the modern world wherein real progress and advance, whether
national or international, have become very much a joint affair and a backward
group pulls back others. Therefore, not only must equal opportunities be given to
all, but special opportunities for educational, economic and cultural growth must
be given to backward groups so as to enable them to catch up to those who are
ahead of them. Any such attempt to open the doors of opportunity to all in India
will release enormous energy and ability and transform the country with
amazing speed.
If the spirit of the age demands equality, it must necessarily also demand an
economic system which fits in with it and encourages it. The present colonial
system in India is the very antithesis of it. Absolutism is not only based on
inequality but must perpetuate it in every sphere of life. It suppresses the creative
and regenerative forces of a nation, bottles up talent and capacity, and
discourages the spirit of responsibility. Those who have to suffer under it lose
their sense of dignity and self-reliance. The problems of India, complicated as
they seem, are essentially due to an attempt to advance while preserving the
political and economic structure more or less intact. Political advance is made
subject to the preservation of this structure and existing vested interests. The two
are incompatible.
Political change there must be, but economic change is equally necessary.
That change will have to be in the direction of a democratically planned
collectivism. ‘The choice,’ says R.H. Tawney, ‘is not between competition and
monopoly, but between monopoly which is irresponsible and private and a
monopoly which is responsible and public.’ Public monopolies are growing even
in capitalist states and they will continue to grow. The conflict between the idea
underlying them and private monopoly will continue till the latter is liquidated.
A democratic collectivism need not mean an abolition of private property, but it
will mean the public ownership of the basic and major industries. It will mean
the co-operative or collective control of the land. In India especially it will be
necessary to have, in addition to the big industries, co-operatively controlled
small and village industries. Such a system of democratic collectivism will need
careful and continuous planning and adaptation to the changing needs of the
people. The aim should be the expansion of the productive capacity of the nation
in every possible way, at the same time absorbing all the labour power of the
nation in some activity or other and preventing unemployment. As far as
possible there should be freedom to choose one’s occupation. An equalization of
income will not result from all this, but there will be far more equitable sharing
and a progressive tendency towards equalization. In any event, the vast
differences that exist today will disappear completely, and class distinctions,
which are essentially based on differences in income, will begin to fade out.
Such a change would mean an upsetting of the present-day acquisitive society
based primarily on the profit motive. The profit motive may still continue to
some extent but it will not be the dominating urge, nor will it have the same
scope as it has today. It would be absurd to say that the profit motive does not
appeal to the average Indian, but it is nevertheless true that there is no such
admiration for it in India as there is in the West. The possessor of money may be
envied but he is not particularly respected or admired. Respect and admiration
still go to the man or woman who is considered good and wise, and especially to
those who sacrifice themselves or what they possess for the public good. The
Indian outlook, even of the masses, has never approved of the spirit of
acquisitiveness.
Collectivism involves communal undertakings and co-operative effort. This
again is fully in harmony with old Indian social conceptions which were all
based on the idea of the group. The decay of the group system under British rule,
and especially of the self-governing village, has caused deep injury to the Indian
masses, even more psychological than economic. Nothing positive came in its
place, and they lost their spirit of independence, their sense of responsibility, and
their capacity to co-operate together for common purposes. The village, which
used to be an organic and vital unit, became progressively a derelict area, just a
collection of mud huts and odd individuals. But still the village holds together by
some invisible link and old memories revive. It should be easily possible to take
advantage of these age-long traditions and to build up communal and cooperative
concerns in the land and in small industry. The village can no longer
be a self-contained economic unit (though it may often be intimately connected
with a collective or cooperative farm), but it can very well be a governmental
and electoral unit, each such unit functioning as a self governing community
within the larger political framework, and looking after the essential needs of the
village. If it is treated to some extent as an electoral unit, this will simplify
provincial and all-India elections considerably by reducing the number of direct
electors. The village council, itself chosen by all the adult men and women of the
village, could form these electors for the bigger elections. Indirect elections may
have some disadvantages but, having regard to the background in India, I feel
sure that the village should be treated as a unit. This will gave a truer and more
responsible representation.
In addition to this territorial representation, there should also be direct
representation of the collectives and co-operatives on the land and in industry.
Thus the democratic organization of the state will consist of both functional and
territorial representatives, and will be based on local autonomy. Some such
arrangement will be completely in harmony with India’s past as well as with her
present requirements. There will be no sense of break (except with the
conditions created by British rule) and the mass mind will accept it as a
continuation of the past which it still remembers and cherishes.
Such a development in India would be in tune with political and economic
internationalism. It would breed no conflicts with other nations and would be a
powerful factor for peace in Asia and the world. It would help in the realization
of that one world towards which we are inevitably being driven, even though our
passions delude us and our minds fail to understand it. The Indian people, freed
from the terrible sense of oppression and frustration, will grow in stature again
and lose their narrow nationalism and exclusiveness. Proud of their Indian
heritage, they will open their minds and hearts to other peoples and other
nations, and become citizens of this wide and fascinating world, marching
onwards with others in that ancient quest in which their forefathers were the
pioneers.
India: Partition or Strong National State or Centre of
Supra-national State?
It is difficult to discover a just balance between one’s hopes and fears or to
prevent one’s wishes colouring the thinking of one’s mind. Our desires seek out
supporting reasons and tend to ignore facts and arguments that do not fit in with
them. I try to reach that balance so that I may be able to judge correctly and find
out the true basis for action, and yet I know how far I am from success and how I
cannot get rid of the multitude of thoughts and feelings which have gone to build
me up and to fence me in with their invisible bars. So also others may err in
different directions. An Indian’s and an Englishman’s view of India and her
place in the world will inevitably diverge and differ, conditional as each is on a
different individual and national past. The individual and the national group
fashion their own destiny by their actions; these past actions lead to the present
and what they do today forms the basis of their tomorrows. Karma, they have
called this in India, the law of cause and effect, the destiny which our past
activities create for us. It is not an invariable destiny and many other factors go
to influence it, and the individual’s will is itself supposed to have some play. If
this freedom to vary the results of past action were not present, then indeed we
would all be mere robots in the iron grip of an unavoidable fate. Yet that past
Karma is a powerful factor in shaping the individual and the nation, and
nationalism itself is a shadow of it with all its good and bad memories of the
past.
Perhaps, this past inheritance influences the national group even more than the
individual, for large numbers of human beings are driven more by unconscious
and impersonal urges than the individual, and it is more difficult to divert them
from their course. Moral considerations may influence an individual but their
effect on a group is far less, and the larger the group the less is their effect on it.
And it is easier, especially in the modern world, to influence the group by
insidious propaganda. And yet sometimes, though rarely, the group itself rises to
a height of moral behaviour, forcing the individual to forget his narrow and
selfish ways. More often the group fads far below the individual standard.
War produces both these reactions, but the dominant tendency is a release
from moral responsibility and the collapse of the standards that civilization has
so laboriously built up. Successful war and aggression lead to a justification and
continuance of this policy, to imperialist domination and ideas of a master race.
Defeat results in frustration and the nursing of feelings of revenge. In either
event, hatred and the habit of violence grow. There is ruthlessness and brutality,
and a refusal even to try to understand the other’s viewpoint. And thus the future
is conditioned and more wars and conflicts follow with all their attendant
consequences.
The last 200 years of enforced relationship between India and England have
built up this Karma, this destiny, for both of them, and it continues to govern
their relations to each other. Entangled in its meshes, we have thus far struggled
in vain to rid ourselves of this past inheritance and start afresh on a different
basis. The last five years of war have unhappily added to that past evil Karma
and made reconciliation and a normal relationship more difficult. That record of
200 years, like all else, is a mixture of good and evil. To the Englishman the
good outweighs the evil, to the Indian the evil is so overwhelming that it darkens
the whole period. But whatever the balance of good and evil there might be, it is
obvious that any relationship that is enforced produces hatred and a bitter dislike
of each other, and out of these feelings only evil consequences can flow.
A revolutionary change, both political and economic, is not only needed in
India but would appear to be inevitable. At the end of 1939, soon after the war
started, and again in April, 1942, there seemed to be a faint possibility of such a
change taking place by consent between India and England. But those
possibilities and opportunities passed because every basic change was feared.
But the change will come. Has the stage of consent passed? In the presence of
common perils the past loses some of its obsessions and the present is viewed in
terms of the future. Now the past has returned and has been grievously added to.
The receptive mood has changed and become hard and bitter. Some settlement
will come sooner or later, after more conflict or without it, but it is far less likely
to be real, sincere, and co-operative. More probably it will be an unwilling
submission on both sides to overriding circumstances, with continuing ill-will
and distrust. No attempted solution which assumes even in principle the
retention of India as part of the British empire has the slightest chance of
acceptance or adoption. No solution which retains feudal relics in India can
possibly last.
Life is cheap in India and when this is so, life is empty and ugly and shoddy
and all the horrid brood of poverty envelop it. There is an enervating atmosphere
in India, due to many causes, imposed or inherent, but essentially the resultant of
poverty and want. We have a terribly low standard of living and a very high rate
of dying. Industrially developed and rich countries have a way of looking at
undeveloped and poor countries just as the rich man looks on the poor and
unfortunate.
The rich man, out of his abundant resources and opportunities, develops high
standards and fastillious tastes and blames the poor for their habits and lack of
culture. Having denied them the opportunity to better themselves, he makes their
poverty and its attendant evils justifications for a further denial.
India is not a poor country. She is abundantly supplied with everything that
makes a country rich, and yet her people are very poor. She has a noble heritage
of culture-forms and her culture-potential is very great; but many new
developments and the accessories of culture are lacking. This lack is due to
many causes and largely to deliberate deprivation. When this is so, the vital
energy of the people must overcome the obstacles in the way and fid the lack.
That is happening in India today. Nothing can be clearer than the fact that India
has the resources as well as the intelligence, skill, and capacity to advance
rapidly. She has the accumulated cultural and spiritual experience of ages behind
her. She can progress both in scientific theory and the applications of science
and become a great industrial nation. Her scientific record is already noteworthy,
in spite of the many limitations she suffers from and the lack of opportunity for
her young men and women to do scientific work. That record is not great
considering the size and possibilities of the country, but it is significant of what
will happen when the energies of the nation are released and opportunities are
provided.
Only two factors may come in the way: international developments and
external pressure on India, and lack of a common objective within the country.
Ultimately it is the latter alone that will count. If India is split up into two or
more parts and can no longer function as a political and economic unit, her
progress will be seriously affected. There will be the direct weakening effect, but
much worse will be the inner psychological conflict between those who wish to
reunite her and those who oppose this. New vested interests will be created
which will resist change and progress, a new evil Karma will pursue us in the
future. One wrong step leads to another; so it has been in the past and so it may
be in the future. And yet wrong steps have to be taken sometimes lest some
worse peril befall us; that is the great paradox of politics, and no man can say
with surety whether present wrong-doing is better and safer in the end than the
possibility of that imagined peril. Unity is always better than disunity, but an
enforced unity is a sham and dangerous affair, full of explosive possibilities.
Unity must be of the mind and heart, a sense of belonging together and of facing
together those who attack it. I am convinced that there is that basic unity in
India, but it has been overlaid and hidden to some extent by other forces. These
latter may be temporary and artificial and may pass off, but they count today and
no man can ignore them.
It is our fault, of course, and we must suffer for our failings. But I cannot
excuse or forgive the British authorities for the deliberate part they have played
in creating disruption in India. All other injuries will pass, but this will continue
to plague us for a much longer period. Often I am reminded of Ireland and China
when I think of India. Both differ from India and from each other in their past
and present problems, and yet there are many similarities. Shall we have to tread
that same path in the future?
Jim Phelan in his Jail Journey tells us of the effect of jail on human character,
and everyone who has spent a long time in prison knows how true his statement
is: ‘The jail … acts as a magnifying glass on human character. Every tiny
weakness is brought out, emphasized, wakened, until presently there is no more
of the convict with the weakness but only a weakness wearing convict clothes.’
Some such effect is produced on national character by foreign rule. That is not
the only effect, for noble qualities also develop and strength is gradually built up
through resistance. But foreign authority encourages the former and tries to
suppress the latter. Just as we have convict warders in prison whose chief
qualification is to spy on their fellow-convicts, so in a subject country there is no
lack of puppets and sycophants who put on the livery of authority and act on its
behalf. There are others also who do not consciously line up in this way but who
are nevertheless influenced by the policies and intrigues of the dominant power.
To accept the principle of division of India, or rather the principle that there
should be no enforced unity, may lead to a calm and dispassionate consideration
of its consequences and thus to a realization that unity is in the interest of ad. Yet
obviously there is the danger that once this wrong step is taken, other like ones
may follow in its train. The attempt to solve one problem in the wrong way may
well create new problems. If India is to be divided into two or more parts, then
the amalgamation of the major Indian states into India becomes more difficult,
for those states will find an additional reason, which they might not otherwise
have, for keeping aloof and holding on to their authoritarian regimes.9
Any division of India on a religious basis as between Hindus and Muslims, as
envisaged by the Muslim League today, cannot separate the followers of these
two principal religions of India, for they are spread out all over the country.
Even if the areas in which each group is in a majority are separated, huge
minorities belonging to the other group remain in each area. Thus instead of
solving the minority problem, we create several in place of one. Other religious
groups, like the Sikhs, are split up unfairly against their will and placed in two
different states. In giving freedom to separate to one group, other groups, though
in a minority, are denied that freedom and compelled to isolate themselves from
the rest of India against their emphatic and deeply felt wishes. If it is said that
the majority (religious) must prevail in each area, so far as the question of
separation is concerned, there is no particular reason why the majority view
should not decide the question for the whole of India. Or that each tiny area
should not decide its independent status for itself and thus create a vast number
of small states—an incredible and fantastic development. Even so it cannot be
done with any logic, for religious groups are intermingled and overlap in the
population all over the country.
It is difficult enough to solve such problems by separation where nationalities
are concerned. But where the test becomes a religious one it becomes impossible
of solution on any logical basis. It is reversion to some medieval conception
which cannot be fitted into the modern world.
If the economic aspects of separation are considered it is clear that India as a
whole is a strong and more-or-less self-sufficient economic unit. Any division
will naturally weaken her and one part will have to depend on the other. If the
division is made so as to separate the predominantly Hindu and Muslim areas,
the former will comprise far the greater part of the mineral resources and
industrial areas. The Hindu areas will not be so hard hit from this point of view.
The Muslim areas, on the other hand, will be the economically backward, and
often deficit, areas which cannot exist without a great deal of outside assistance.
Thus the odd fact emerges that those who today demand separation will be the
greatest sufferers from it. Because of a partial realization of this fact, it is now
stated on their behalf that separation should take place in such a way as to give
them an economically balanced region. Whether this is possible under any
circumstances I do not know, but I rather doubt it. In any event any such attempt
means forcibly attaching other large areas with a predominantly Hindu and Sikh
population to the separated area. That would be a curious way of giving effect to
the principle of self-determination. I am reminded of the story of the man who
killed his father and mother and then threw himself on the mercy of the court as
an orphan.
Another very curious contradiction emerges. While the principle of selfdetermination
is invoked, the idea of a plebiscite to decide this is not accepted,
or at most, it is said that the plebiscite should be limited to Muslims only in the
area. Thus in Bengal and the Punjab the Muslim population is about 54 per cent
or less. It is suggested that if there is to be voting only this 54 per cent should
vote and decide the fate of the remaining 46 per cent or more, who will have no
say in the matter. This might result in 28 per cent deciding the fate of the
remaining 72 per cent.
It is difficult to understand how any reasonable person can advance these
propositions or expect them to be agreed to. I do not know, and nobody can
know till an actual vote takes place on this issue, how many Muslims in the areas
concerned would vote for partition. I imagine that a large number of them,
possibly even a majority, would vote against it. Many Muslim organizations are
opposed to it. Every non-Muslim, whether he is a Hindu, or Sikh, or Christian,
or Parsee, is opposed to it. Essentially this sentiment in favour of partition has
grown in the areas where Muslims are in a small minority—areas which, in any
event, would remain undetached from the rest of India. Muslims in provinces
where they are in a majority have been less influenced by it; naturally, for they
can stand on their own feet and have no reason to fear other groups. It is least in
evidence in the Northwest Frontier Province (95 per cent Muslim), where the
Pathans are brave and self-reliant and have no fear complex. Thus, oddly
enough, the Muslim League’s proposal to partition India finds far less response
in the Muslim areas sought to be partitioned than in the Muslim minority areas
which are unaffected by it. Yet the fact remains that considerable numbers of
Muslims have become sentimentally attached to this idea of separation without
giving thought to its consequences, Indeed, the proposition has so far only been
vaguely stated and no attempt has been made to define it, in spite of repeated
requests.
I think this sentiment has been artificially created and has no roots in the
Muslim mind. But even a temporary sentiment may be strong enough to
influence events and create a new situation. Normally, adjustments would take
place from time to time, but in the peculiar position in which India is situated
today, with power concentrated in foreign hands, anything may happen. It is
clear that any real settlement must be based on the goodwill of the constituent
elements and on the desire of all parties to it to co-operate together for a
common objective. In order to gain that any sacrifice in reason is worthwhile.
Every group must not only be theoretically and actually free and have equal
opportunities of growth, but should have the sensation of freedom and equality.
It is not difficult, if passions and unreasoning emotions are set aside, to devise
such freedom with the largest autonomy for provinces and states and yet a strong
central bond. There could even be autonomous units within the larger provinces
or states, as in Soviet Russia. In addition to this, every conceivable protection
and safeguard for minority rights could be inserted into the constitution.
All this can be done, and yet I do not know how the future will take shape
under the influence of various indeterminate factors and forces, the chief of these
being British policy. It may be that some division of India is enforced, with some
tenuous bond joining the divided parts. Even if this happens, I am convinced that
the basic feeling of unity and world developments will later bring the divided
parts nearer to each other and result in a real unity.
That unity is geographical, historical, and cultural, and all that; but the most
powerful factor in its favour is the trend of world events. Many of us are of
opinion that India is essentially a nation; Mr Jinnah has advanced a two-nation
theory and has lately added to it and to political phraseology by describing some
religious groups as sub-nations, whatever these might be. His thought identifies
a nation with religion. That is not the usual approach today. But whether India is
properly to be described as one nation or two or more really does not matter, for
the modern idea of nationality has been almost divorced from statehood. The
national state is too small a unit today and small states can have no independent
existence. It is doubtfull if even many of the larger national states can have any
real independence. The national state is thus giving place to the multi-national
state or to large federations. The Soviet Union is typical of this development.
The United States of America, though bound together by strong national ties,
constitute essentially a multi-national State. Behind Hitler’s march across
Europe there was something more than the nazi lust for conquest. New forces
were working towards the liquidation of the small states system in Europe.
Hitler’s armies are now rapidly rolling back or are being destroyed, but the
conception of large federations remains.
Mr H.G. Wells has been telling the world, with all the fire of an old prophet,
that humanity is at the end of an age—an age of fragmentation in the
management of its affairs, fragmentation politically among separate sovereign
states and economically among unrestricted business organizations competing
for profit. He teds us that it is the system of nationalist individualism and uncoordinated
enterprise that is the world’s disease. We shad have to put an end to
the national state and devise a collectivism which neither degrades nor enslaves.
The prophets are ignored and sometimes even stoned by their generation. And so
Mr Weds’ warnings, and those of many others, are voices in the wilderness so
far as those in authority are concerned. Nevertheless, they point to inevitable
trends. These trends can be hastened or delayed, or if those who have power are
so blind, may even have to wait another and greater disaster before they take
actual shape.
In India, as elsewhere, we are too much under the bondage of slogans and set
phrases derived from past events, and ideologies which have little relevance
today, and their chief function is to prevent reasoned thought and a dispassionate
consideration of the situation as it exists. There is also the tendency towards
abstractions and vague ideals, which arouse emotional responses and are often
good in their way, but which also lead to a woodiness of the mind and unreality.
In recent years a great deal has been written and said on the future of India, and
especially on the partition or unity of India; and yet the astonishing fact remains
that those who propose ‘Pakistan’ or partition have consistently refused to define
what they mean, or to consider the implications of such a division. They move
on the emotional plane only, as also many of those who oppose them, a plane of
imagination and vague desire, behind which lie imagined interests. Inevitably,
between these two emotional and imaginative approaches there is no meeting
ground. And so ‘Pakistan’ and ‘Akhand Hindustan’ (undivided India) are
bandied about and hurled at each other. It is clear that group emotions and
conscious or subconscious urges count and must be attended to. It is at least
equally clear that facts and realities do not vanish by our ignoring them or
covering them up by a film of emotion; they have a way of emerging at awkward
moments and in unexpected ways. And decisions taken primarily on the basis of
emotions, or when emotions are the dominating consideration, are likely to be
wrong and to lead to dangerous developments.
It is obvious that whatever may be the future of India, and even if there is a
regular partition, the different parts of India will have to cooperate with each
other in a hundred different ways. Even independent nations have to co-operate
with each other, much more so must Indian provinces or such parts as emerge
from a partition, for these stand in an intimate relationship to each other and
must hang together or deteriorate, disintegrate, and lose their freedom. Thus the
very first practical question is: What are the essential common bonds which must
bind and cement various parts of India if she is to progress and remain free, and
which are equally necessary even for the autonomy and cultural growth of those
parts. Defence is an obvious and outstanding consideration, and behind that
defence lie the industries feeding it, transport and communications, and some
measure at least of economic planning. Customs, currency, and exchange also,
and the maintenance of the whole of India as an internally free-trade area, for
any internal tariff barriers would be fatal barriers to growth. And so on; there are
many other matters which would inevitably, both from the point of view of the
whole and the parts, have to be jointly and centrally directed. There is no getting
away from it whether we are in favour of Pakistan or not, unless we are blind to
everything except a momentary passion. The vast growth of air services today
has led to the demand for their internationalization, or to some form of
international control. Whether various countries are wise enough to accept this is
doubtful, but it is quite certain that air developments can only take place in India
on an all-India basis; it is inconceivable for a partitioned India to make progress
in regard to them in each part separately. This applies also to many other
activities which already tend to outgrow even national boundaries. India is big
enough as a whole to give them scope for development, but not so partitioned
India.
Thus we arrive at the inevitable and ineluctable conclusion that, whether
Pakistan comes or not, a number of important and basic functions of the state
must be exercised on an all-India basis if India is to survive as a free state and
progress. The alternative is stagnation, decay, and disintegration, leading to loss
of political and economic freedom, both for India as a whole and its various
separated parts. As has been said by an eminent authority: ‘The inexorable logic
of the age presents the country with radically different alternatives: union plus
independence or disunion plus dependence’. What form the union is to take, and
whether it is called union or by some other name, is not so important, though
names have their own significance and psychological value. The essential fact is
that a number of varied activities can only be conducted effectively on a joint
all-India basis. Probably many of these activities will soon be under the control
of international bodies. The world shrinks and its problems overlap. It takes less
than three days now to go right across the world by air, from any one place to
another, and tomorrow, with the development of stratosphere navigation, it may
take even less time. India must become a great world centre of air travel; India
will also be linked by rail to western Asia and Europe on the one side, and to
Burma and China on the other. Not far from India, across the Himalayas in the
north, lies in Soviet Asia one of the highly developed industrial areas, with an
enormous future potential. India will be affected by this and will react in many
ways.
The way of approach, therefore, to the problem of unity or Pakistan, is not in
the abstract and on the emotional level, but practically, and with our eyes on the
present-day world. That approach leads us to certain obvious conclusions, that a
binding cement in regard to certain important functions and matters is essential
for the whole of India. Apart from them there may be and should be the fullest
freedom to constituent units, and an intermediate sphere where there is both joint
and separate functioning. There may be differences of opinion as to where one
sphere ends, and the other begins, but such differences, when considered on a
practical basis, are generally fairly easy of adjustment.
But all this must necessarily be based on a spirit of willing cooperation, on the
absence of a feeling of compulsion, and on the sensation of freedom in each unit
and individual. Old vested interests have to go; it is equally important that no
new ones are created. Certain proposals, based on metaphysical conceptions of
groups and forgetting the individuals who comprise them, make one individual
politically equal to two or three others and thus create new vested interests. Any
such arrangement can only lead to grave dissatisfaction and instability.
The right of any well-constituted area to secede from the Indian federation or
union has often been put forward, and the argument of the U.S.S.R. advanced in
support of it. That argument has little application, for conditions there are wholly
different and the right has little practical value. In the emotional atmosphere in
India today it may be desirable to agree to this for the future in order to give that
sense of freedom from compulsion which is so necessary. The Congress has in
effect agreed to it. But even the exercise of that right evolves a pre-consideration
of all those common problems to which reference has been made. Also there is
grave danger in a possibility of partition and division to begin with, for such an
attempt might well scotch the very beginnings of freedom and the formation of a
free national state. Insuperable problems will rise and confuse all the real issues.
Disintegration will be in the air and all manner of groups, who are otherwise
agreeable to a joint and unified existence, will claim separate states for
themselves, or special privileges which are encroachments on others. The
problem of the Indian states will become far more difficult of solution, and the
states system, as it is today, will get a new lease of life. The social and economic
problems will be far harder to tackle. Indeed, it is difficult to conceive of any
free state emerging from such a turmoil, and if something does emerge, it will be
a pitiful caricature full of contradictions and insoluble problems. Before any
such right of secession is exercised there must be a properly constituted,
functioning, free India. It may be possible then, when external influences have
been removed and real problems face the country, to consider such questions
objectively and in a spirit of relative detachment, far removed from the
emotionalism of today, which can only lead to unfortunate consequences which
we may all have to regret later. Thus it may be desirable to fix a period, say ten
years after the establishment of the free Indian state, at the end of which the right
to secede may be exercised through proper constitutional process and in
accordance with the clearly expressed will of the inhabitants of the area
concerned.
Many of us are utterly weary of present conditions in India and are
passionately eager to find some way out. Some are even prepared to clutch at
any straw that floats their way in the vague hope that it may afford some
momentary relief, some breathing space to a system that has long felt strangled
and suffocated. That is very natural. And there is danger in these rather
hysterical and adventurist approaches to vital problems affecting the well-being
of hundreds of millions and the future peace of the world. We live continually on
the verge of disaster in India, and indeed the disaster sometimes overwhelms us,
as we saw in Bengal and elsewhere in India last year. The Bengal famine, and all
that followed it, were not tragic exceptions due to extraordinary and unlooked
for causes which could not be controlled or provided for. They were vivid,
frightful pictures of India as she is, suffering for generations past from a deepseated
organic disease which has eaten into her very vitals. That disease will take
more and more dangerous and disastrous forms unless we divert all our joint
energies to its uprooting and cure. A divided India, each part trying to help itself
and not caring for, or co-operating with, the rest, will lead to an aggravation of
the disease and to sinking into a welter of hopeless, helpless misery. It is terribly
late already and we have to make up for lost time. Must even the lesson of the
Bengal famine be lost upon us? There are still many people who can think only
in terms of political percentages, of weightage, of balancing, of checks, of the
preservation of privileged groups, of making new groups privileged, of
preventing others from advancing because they themselves are not anxious to, or
are incapable of, doing so, of vested interests, of avoiding major social and
economic changes, of holding on to the present picture of India with only
superficial alterations. That way lies supreme folly.
The problems of the moment seem big and engross our attention. And yet, in a
longer perspective, they may have no great importance and, under the surface of
superficial events, more vital forces may be at work. Forgetting present
problems then for a while and looking ahead, India emerges as a strong united
state, a federation of free units, intimately connected with her neighbours and
playing an important part in world affairs. She is one of the very few countries
which have the resources and capacity to stand on their own feet. Today
probably the only such countries are the United States of America and the Soviet
Union. Great Britain can only be reckoned as one of these if the resources of her
empire are added to her own, and even then a spread-out and disgruntled empire
is a source of weakness. China and India are potentially capable of joining that
group. Each of them is compact and homogeneous and full of natural wealth,
manpower, and human skill and capacity; indeed India’s potential industrial
resources are probably even more varied and extensive than China’s, and so also
her exportable commodities which may be required for the imports she needs.
No other country, taken singly, apart from these four, is actually or potentially in
such a position. It is possible of course that large federations or groups of nations
may emerge in Europe or elsewhere and form huge multi-national states.
The Pacific is likely to take the place of the Atlantic in the future as a nerve
centre of the world. Though not directly a Pacific state, India will inevitably
exercise an important influence there. India will also develop as the centre of
economic and political activity in the Indian Ocean area, in South-East Asia and
right up to the Middle East. Her position gives an economic and strategic
importance in a part of the world which is going to develop rapidly in the future.
If there is a regional grouping of the countries bordering on the Indian Ocean on
either side of India—Iran, Iraq, Afghanistan, India, Ceylon, Burma, Malaya,
Siam, Java, etc.—present-day minority problems will disappear, or at any rate
will have to be considered in an entirely different context.
Mr G.D.H. Cole considers India to be itself a supra-national area, and he
thinks that in the long run she is destined to be the centre of a mighty supranational
state covering the whole of the Middle East and lying between a Sino-
Japanese Soviet Republic, a new state based on Egypt, Arabia, and Turkey, and
the Soviet Union in the north. All this is pure conjecture and whether any such
development will ever take place no man can say. For my part I have no liking
for a division of the world into a few huge supra-national areas, unless these are
tied together by some strong world bond. But if people are foolish enough to
avoid world unity and some world organization, then these vast supra-national
regions, each functioning as one huge state but with local autonomy, are very
likely to take shape. For the small national state is doomed. It may survive as a
culturally autonomous area but not as an independent political unit.
Whatever happens it will be well for the world if India can make her influence
felt. For that influence will always be in favour of peace and co-operation and
against aggression.
Realism and Geopolitics. World Conquest or World
Association. The U.S.A. and the U.S.S.R.
The war has entered on its final stage in Europe and the nazi power collapses
before the advancing armies in the east and west. Paris, that lovely and gracious
city, so tied up with freedom’s struggle, is itself free again. The problems of
peace, more difficult than those of war, rise up to trouble men’s minds and
behind them lies the disturbing shadow of the great failure of the years that
followed World War I. Never again, it is said. So they said also in 1918.
Fifteen years ago, in 1929, Mr Winston Churchill said:
It is a tale that is told, from which we may draw the knowledge and comprehension needed
for the future. The disproportion between the quarrels of nations and the suffering which
fighting out those quarrels involves; the poor and barren prizes which reward sublime
endeavour on the battlefield; the fleeting triumph of war; the long, slow, rebuilding; the awful
risks so hardly run; the doom missed by a hair’s breadth, by the spin of a coin, by the accident
of an accident—all this should make the prevention of another great war the main
preoccupation of mankind.
Mr Churchill should know, for he has played a leading part in war and peace,
led his country with extraordinary courage at a time of distress and peril and, in
victory, nursed great ambitions on its behalf. After World War I, British armies
occupied the whole of western Asia from the borders of India across Iran and
Iraq and Palestine and Syria right up to Constantinople. Mr Churchill saw then a
vision of a new Middle Eastern empire for Britain, but fate decided otherwise.
What dreams does he cherish now for the future? ‘War is a strange alchemist,’
so wrote a gallant and distinguished colleague of mine, now in prison,
and in its hidden chambers are such forces and powers brewed and distilled that they tear
down the plans of the victorious and vanquished alike. No peace conference at the end of the
last war decided that four mighty empires of Europe and Asia should fall into dust—the
Russian, the German, the Austrian, and the Ottoman. Nor was the Russian, the German, the
Turkish revolution decreed by Lloyd George, Clemenceau, or Wilson.
What will the leaders of the victorious nations say when they meet together
after success in war has crowned their efforts? How is the future taking shape in
their minds, and how far do they agree or differ between themselves? What other
reactions will there be when the passion of war subsides and people try to return
to the scarce-remembered ways of peace? What of the underground resistance
movements of Europe and the new forces they have released? What will the
millions of war-hardened soldiers, returning home much older in mind and
experience, say and do? How will they fit into the life which has gone on
changing while they were away? What will happen to devastated and martyred
Europe, and what to Asia and Africa? What of the ‘overpowering surge for
freedom of Asia’s hundreds of millions,’ as Mr Wendell Wilkie describes it?
What of all this and more? And what, above all, of the strange trick that fate so
often plays, upsetting the well laid schemes of our leaders?
As the war has developed and the danger of a possible victory of the fascist
powers has receded, there has been a progressive hardening and a greater
conservatism in the leaders of the United Nations. The four freedoms and the
Atlantic charter, vague as they were and limited in scope, have faded into the
background, and the future has been envisaged more and more as a retention of
the past. The struggle has taken a purely military shape, of physical force against
force, and has ceased to be an attack on the philosophy of the nazis and fascists.
General Franco and petty or prospective authoritarian riders in Europe have been
encouraged. Mr Churchill still glories in the conception of empire. George
Bernard Shaw recently declared that: ‘There is no power in the world more
completely imbued with the idea of its dominance than the British empire. Even
the word “empire” sticks in Mr Churchill’s throat every time he tries to utter
it.’10
There are many people in England, America and elsewhere who want the
future to be different from the past and who fear that unless this is so, fresh wars
and disasters, on a more colossal scale, will follow this present war. But those
who have power and authority do not appear to be much influenced by these
considerations, or are themselves in the grip of forces beyond their control. In
England, America, and Russia we revert to the old game of power politics on a
gigantic scale. That is considered realism and practical politics. An American
authority on geopolitics, Professor N.J. Spykman, has written in a recent book:
The statesman who conducts foreign policy can concern himself with the values of justice,
fairness, and tolerance only to the extent that they contribute to, or do not interfere with, the
power objective. They can be used instrumentally as moral justification for the power quest,
but they must be discarded the moment their application brings weakness. The search for
power is not made for the achievement of moral values: moral values are used to facilitate the
attainment of power.11
This may not be representative of American thought, but it certainly
represents a powerful section of it. Mr Walter Lippman’s vision of the three or
four orbits encompassing the globe—the Atlantic community, the Russian, the
Chinese, and later the Hindu-Muslim in South Asia—is a continuation of power
politics on a vaster scale, and it is difficult to understand how he can see any
world peace or co-operation emerging out of it. America is a curious mixture of
what is considered hard-headed realism and a vague idealism and
humanitarianism. Which of these will be the dominating tendency of the future,
or what will result from their mixing together? Whatever the mass of the people
may think, foreign policy remains a preserve for the experts in charge of it and
they are usually wedded to a continuation of old traditions and fear any
innovations which might involve their countries in new risks. Realism of course
there must be, for no nation can base its domestic or foreign policy on mere
good-will and flights of the imagination. But it is a curious realism that sticks to
the empty shed of the past and ignores or refuses to understand the hard facts of
the present, which are not only political and economic but also include the
feelings and urges of vast numbers of people. Such realism is more imaginative
and divorced from today’s and tomorrow’s problems than much of the so-called
idealism of many people.
Geopolitics has now become the anchor of the realist and its jargon of
‘heartland’ and ‘rimland’ is supposed to throw light on the mystery of national
growth and decay. Originating in England (or was it Scotland?), it became the
guiding light of the nazis, fed their dreams and ambitions of world domination,
and led them to disaster. A partial truth is sometimes more dangerous than a
falsehood; a truth that has had its day blinds one to the reality of the present. H.J.
Mackinder’s theory of geopolitics, subsequently developed in Germany, was
based on the growth of civilization on the oceanic fringes of the continents (Asia
and Europe), which had to be defended from pressure from land invaders from
the ‘heartland,’ which was supposed to be the centre of the Eurasian block.
Control of this heartland meant world domination. But civilization is no longer
confined to the oceanic fringes and tends to become universal in its scope and
content. The growth of the Americas also does not fit in with a Eurasian
heartland dominating the world. And air-power has brought a new factor which
has upset the balance between sea-power and land-power.
Germany, nursing dreams of world conquest, was obsessed by fears of
encirclement. Soviet Russia feared a combination of her enemies. England’s
national policy has long been based on a balance of power in Europe and
opposition to any dominating power there. Always there has been fear of others,
and that fear has led to aggression and tortuous intrigues. An entirely new
situation will arise after the present war, with two dominating world powers—
the U.S.A. and the U.S.S.R.—and the rest a good distance behind them, unless
they form some kind of bloc. And now even the United States of America are
told by Professor Spykman, in his last testament, that they are in danger of
encirclement, that they should ally themselves with a ‘rimland’ nation, that in
any event they should not prevent the ‘heartland’ (which means now the
U.S.S.R.) from uniting with the rimland.
All this looks very clever and realistic and yet is supremely foolish, for it is
based on the old policy of expansion and empire and the balance of power,
which inevitably leads to conflict and war. Since the world happens to be round,
every country is encircled by others. To avoid such encirclements by the
methods of power politics, there must be alliances and counter-alliances,
expansion, and conquest. But, however huge a country’s domination or sphere of
influence becomes, there is always the danger of encirclement by those who
have been left out of it, and who, on their part, fear this abnormal growth of a
rival power. The only way to get rid of this danger is by world conquest or by
the eliminations of every possible rival. We are witnessing today the failure of
the latest attempt at world domination. Will that lesson be learnt or will there be
others, driven by ambition and pride of race and power, to try their fortunes on
this fatal field?
There really seems no alternative between world conquest and world
association; there is no choice of a middle course. The old divisions and the
quest of power politics have little meaning today and do not fit in with our
environment, yet they continue. The interests and activities of states overflow
their boundaries and are world-wide. No nation can isolate itself or be indifferent
to the political or economic fate of other nations. If there is no co-operation there
is bound to be friction with its inevitable results. Co-operation can only be on a
basis of equality and mutual welfare, on a pulling-up of the backward nations
and peoples to a common level of well-being and cultural advancement, on an
elimination of racialism and domination. No nation and no people are going to
tolerate domination and exploitation by another, even though this is given some
more pleasant name. Nor will they remain indifferent to their own poverty and
misery when other parts of the world are flourishing. That was only possible
when there was ignorance of what was happening elsewhere.
All this seems obvious, and yet the long record of past happenings ted us that
the mind of man lags far behind the course of events and adjusts itself only
slowly to them. Self-interest itself should drive every nation to this wider cooperation
in order to escape disaster in the future and build its own free life on
the basis of others’ freedom. But the self-interest of the ‘realist’ is far too limited
by past myths and dogmas, and regards ideas and social forms, suited to one age,
as immutable and as unchanging parts of human nature and society, forgetting
that nothing is so changeable as human nature and society. Religious forms and
notions take permanent shape, social institutions become petrified, war is looked
upon as a biological necessity, empire and expansion as the prerogatives of a
dynamic and progressive people, the profit motive as the central fact dominating
human relations, and ethnocentrism, a belief in racial superiority, becomes an
article of faith and, even when not proclaimed, it taken for granted. Some of
these ideas were common to the civilizations of East and West; many of them
form the background of modem Western civilization out of which fascism and
nazism grew. Ethically there is no great difference between them and the fascist
creed, though the latter went much further in its contempt for human life and all
that humanism stands for. Indeed, humanism, which coloured the outlook of
Europe for so long, is a vanishing tradition there. The seeds of fascism were
present in the political and economic structure of the West. Unless there is a
break from this past ideology, success in war brings no great change. The old
myths and fancies continue and, pursued as of old by the Furies, we go through
the self-same cycle again.
The two outstanding facts emerging from the war are the growth in power and
actual and potential wealth of the U.S.A and the U.S.S.R. The Soviet Union
actually is probably poorer than it was prior to the war, owing to enormous
destruction, but its potential is tremendous and it will rapidly make good and go
further ahead. In physical and economic power there will be none to challenge it
on the Eurasian continent. Already it is showing an expansionist tendency and is
extending its territories more or less on the basis of the Tsar’s Empire. How far
this process will go it is difficult to say. Its socialist economy does not
necessarily lead to expansion for it can be made self-sufficient. But other forces
and old suspicions are at play and again we notice the fear of so-called
encirclement. In any event the U.S.S.R. will be busy for many years in repairing
the ravages of war. Yet the tendency to expand, if not in territory then in other
ways, is evident. No other country today presents such a politically solid and
economically well-balanced picture as the Soviet Union, though some of the
developments there in recent years have come as a shock to many of its old
admirers. Its present leaders have an unchallengeable position, and everything
depends on their outlook for the future.
The United States of America have astonished the world by their stupendous
production and organizing capacity. They have thus not only played a leading
part in the war but have accelerated a process inherent in American economy
and produced a problem for themselves which will tax their wits and energies to
the utmost. Indeed it is not easy to foresee how they will solve it within the
limits of their existing economic structure without serious internal and external
friction. It is said that America has ceased to be isolationist. Inevitably so, for
she must now depend to an extent on her exports abroad. What was a marginal
factor in her pre-war economy, which could almost be ignored, will now be a
dominant consideration. Where will all these exports go to, without creating
friction and conflict, when production for peace takes the place of war
production? And how will the millions of armed men returning home be
absorbed? Every warring country will have to face this problem, but none to the
same extent as the U.S.A. The vast technological changes that have taken place
will lead to very great over-production or to mass unemployment, or possibly to
both. Unemployment on any major scale will be bitterly resented and has been
ruled out by the declared policy of the United States Government. Much thought
is already being given on the absorption of the returning soldiers, etc., in gainful
employment and to the prevention of unemployment. Whatever the domestic
aspect of all this may be, and it will be serious enough unless basic changes take
place, the international aspect is equally important.
Such is the curious nature of the present-day economy in these days of mass
production, that the U.S.A., the wealthiest and most powerful country in the
world, becomes dependent on other countries absorbing its surplus production.
For some years after the war there will be a big demand in Europe, China, and
India for machinery as well as manufactured goods. This will be of considerable
help to America to dispose of her surplus. But every country will rapidly develop
its own capacity to manufacture most of its needs, and exports will tend to be
limited to specialized goods not produced elsewhere. The consumption capacity
will also be limited by the purchasing power of the masses, and to raise this
fundamental economic changes will be needed. It is conceivable that with the
substantial raising of the standard of living all over the world, international trade
and exchange of goods will prosper and increase. But that raising itself requires
a removal of political and economic fetters on production and distribution in the
colonial and backward countries. That inevitably involves big changes, with
their consequent dislocation and adaptation to new systems.
England’s economy has been based in the past on a big export business, on
investments abroad, on the City of London’s financial leadership, and on a vast
maritime carrier trade. Before the war Britain depended on imports for nearly 50
per cent of her food supplies. Probably this dependence is less now owing to her
intensive food-growing campaign. These imports of food as well as raw
materials had to be paid for by exports of manufactured goods, investments,
shipping, financial services, and what are called ‘invisible’ exports. Foreign
trade and, in particular, a large volume of exports were thus an essential and vital
feature of the British economy. That economy was maintained by the exercise of
monopoly controls in the colonial areas and special arrangements within the
empire to maintain some kind of equilibrium. Those monopoly controls and
arrangements were much to the disadvantage of the colonies and dependencies
and it is hardly possible to maintain them in these old forms in future. Britain’s
foreign investments have disappeared and given place to huge debts, and
London’s financial supremacy has also gone. This means that in the post-war
years Britain will have to depend even more on her export business and her
carrier trade. And yet the possibilities of increasing exports, or even maintaining
them at the old level, are strictly limited.
Great Britain’s imports (less re-exports) in the pre-war years 1936-38
averaged £866,000,000. They were paid for as follows:
Instead of the substantial income from foreign investment there is going to be
a heavy burden of external debt, due to borrowings in goods and services (apart
from American Lend-Lease) from India, Egypt, Argentine, and other countries.
Lord Keynes has estimated that, at the end of the war, these frozen sterling
credits will amount to £3,000,000,000. At 5 per cent this will amount to £150
million per annum. Thus on a pre-war average basis Britain may have to face a
deficit of considerably over £300 millions annually. Unless this is made good by
additional income from exports and various services, it will lead to a marked
reduction in living standards.
This appears to be the governing factor in Britain’s post-war policy, and if she
is to maintain her present economy, she feels she must retain her colonial
empire, with only such minor changes as are unavoidable. Only as the dominant
partner of a group of countries, colonial and non-colonial, does she hope to play
a leading role, and to balance, politically and economically, the vast resources of
the two giant powers—the United States of America and the Soviet Union.
Hence the desire to continue her empire, to hold on to what she has got, as well
as to extend her sphere of influence over fresh territories, for instance over
Thailand. Hence also the aim of British policy to bring about a closer integration
with the Dominions, as well as some of the smaller countries of western Europe.
French and Dutch colonial policy generally support the British view in regard to
colonies and dependencies. The Dutch Empire is indeed very much a ‘satellite
empire’ and it could not continue to exist without the British Empire.
It is easy to understand these trends of British policy, based as they are on past
outlook and standards, and formulated by men tied up with that past. Yet, within
that past context of a nineteenth-century economy, the difficulties facing Britain
today are very great. In the long run, her position is weak, her economy unsuited
to present-day conditions, her economic resources are limited, and her industrial
and military strength cannot be maintained at the old level. There is an essential
instability in the methods suggested to maintain that old economy, for they lead
to unceasing conflict, to lack of security, and to the growth of ill-will in the
dependencies, which may make the future still more perilous for Britain. The
desire of the British, understandable enough, to maintain their living standards
on the old level and even to raise them, is thus made dependent upon protected
markets for British exports and controlled colonial and other areas for the supply
of raw materials and cheap food. This means that British living standards must
be kept up even at the cost of keeping down at subsistence level or less hundreds
of millions of peoples in Asia and Africa. No one wants to reduce British
standards, but it is obvious that the peoples of Asia and Africa are never going to
agree to the maintenance of this colonial economy which keeps them at a subhuman
level. The annual purchasing power (prewar) in Britain is said to have
been £97 per capita (in the U.S.A. it was much greater); in India it was less than
£6. These vast differences cannot be tolerated, and indeed the diminishing
returns of a colonial economy ultimately affect adversely even the dominating
power. In the U.S.A. this is vividly realized, and hence their desire to raise the
colonial peoples’ purchasing power through industrialization and selfgovernment.
Even in Britain there is some realization of the necessity of Indian
industrialization, and the Bengal famine made many people think furiously on
this subject. But British policy aims at industrial development in India under
British control with a privileged position for British industry. The
industrialization of India, as of other countries in Asia, is bound to take place;
the only question is one of pace. But it is very doubtful if it can be fitted in with
any form of colonial economy or foreign control.
The British Empire, as it is today, is not of course a geographical unit; nor is it
an effective economic or military unit. It is a historical and sentimental unit.
Sentiment and old bonds count still, but they are not likely to override, in the
long run, other more vital considerations. And even this sentiment applies only
to certain areas containing populations racially similar to the people of Britain. It
certainly does not apply to India or the rest of the dependent colonial empire,
where it is the other way about. It does not even apply to South Africa, so far as
the Boers are concerned. In the major Dominions subtle changes are taking place
which tend to weaken their traditional links with Britain. Canada, which has
grown greatly in industrial stature during the war, is an important power, closely
tied up with the U.S.A. She has developed an expanding economy which will, in
some respects, come in the way of British industry. Australia and New Zealand,
also with expanding economies, are realizing that they are not in the European
orbit of Great Britain but in the Asiatic-American orbit of the Pacific, where the
United States are likely to play a dominant role. Culturally, both Canada and
Australia are progressively drawn towards the U.S.A.
The British colonial outlook today does not fit in with American policy and
expansionist tendencies. The United States want open markets for their exports
and do not look with favour on attempts by other powers to limit or control
them. They want rapid industrialization of Asia’s millions and higher standards
everywhere, not for sentimental reasons but to dispose of their surplus goods.
Friction between American and British export businesses and maritime trade
seems to be inevitable. America’s desire to establish world air supremacy, for
which she has at present abundant resources, is resented in England. America
probably favours an independent Thailand while England would prefer to make
it a semi-colony. These opposing approaches based, in each case, on the nature
of the respective economy aimed at, run through the whole colonial sphere.
The aim of British policy to have a closer integration of the commonwealth
and empire is understandable in the peculiar circumstances in which Britain is
placed today. But against it is the logic of facts and world tendencies, as well as
the growth of dominion nationalism and the disruptive tendencies of the colonial
empire. To try to build on old foundations, to continue to think in terms of a
vanished age, to dream and talk still of an empire and of monopolies spread out
all over the globe, is for Britain an even more unwise and shortsighted policy
than it might be for some other nations; for most of the reasons which made her
a politically, industrially, and financially dominant nation have disappeared.
Nevertheless Britain has had in the past, and has still, remarkable qualities—
courage and the will to pull together, scientific and constructive ability and
capacity for adaptation. These qualities, and others which she possesses go a
long way to make a nation great and enable it to overcome the dangers and perils
that confront it. And so she may be able to face her vital and urgent problems by
changing over to a different and more balanced economic structure. But it is
highly unlikely that she will succeed if she tries to continue as of old, with an
empire tacked on to her and supporting her.
Much will inevitably depend on American and Soviet policy, and on the
degree of co-ordination or conflict between the two and Britain. Everybody talks
loudly about the necessity for the Big Three to pull together in the interests of
world peace and co-operation, yet rifts and differences peep out at every stage,
even during the course of the war. Whatever the future may hold, it is clear that
the economy of the U.S.A. after the war will be powerfully expansionist and
almost explosive in its consequences. Will this lead to some new kind of
imperialism? It would be yet another tragedy if it did so, for America has the
power and opportunity to set the pace for the future.
The future policy of the Soviet Union is yet shrouded in mystery, but there
have been some revealing glimpses of it already. It aims at having as many
friendly and dependent or semi-dependent countries near its borders as possible.
Though working with other powers for the establishment of some world
organization, it relies more in building up its own strength on an unassailable
basis. So, presumably, do other nations also, in so far as they can. That is not a
hopeful prelude to world cooperation. Between the Soviet Union and other
countries there is not the same struggle for export markets as between Britain
and the U.S.A. But the differences are deeper, their respective viewpoints further
apart, and mutual suspicions have not been allayed even by joint effort in the
war. If these differences grow, the U.S.A. and Britain will tend to seek each
other’s company and support as against the U.S.S.R. group of nations.
Where do the hundreds of millions of Asia and Africa come in this picture?
They have become increasingly conscious of themselves and their destiny, and at
the same time are also world conscious. Large numbers of them follow world
events with interest. For them, inevitably, the test of each move or happening is
this: Does it help towards our liberation? Does it end the domination of one
country over another? Will it enable us to live freely the life of our choice in cooperation
with others? Does it bring equality and equal opportunity for nations
as well as groups within each nation? Does it hold forth the promise of an early
liquidation of poverty and illiteracy and bring better living conditions? They are
nationalistic but this nationalism seeks no domination over, or interference with,
others. They welcome all attempts at world co-operation and the establishment
of an international order, but they wonder and suspect if this may not be another
device for continuing the old domination. Large parts of Asia and Africa consist
of an awakened, discontented, seething humanity, no longer prepared to tolerate
existing conditions. Conditions and problems differ greatly in the various
countries of Asia, but throughout this vast area, in China and India, in South-
East Asia, in western Asia, and the Arab world run common threads of sentiment
and invisible links which hold them together.
For a thousand years or more, while Europe was backward and often engulfed
in its dark ages, Asia represented the advancing spirit of man. Epoch after epoch
of a brilliant culture flourished there and great centres of civilization and power
grew up. About five hundred years ago Europe revived and slowly spread
eastward and westward till, in the course of centuries, it became the dominant
continent of the world in power, wealth, and culture. Was there some cycle about
this change and is that process now being reversed? Certainly, power and
authority have shifted more to America in the far west and to eastern Europe,
which was organically hardly part of the European heritage. And in the east also
there has been tremendous growth in Siberia, and other countries of the East are
ripe for change and rapid advance. Will there be conflict in the future or a new
equilibrium between the East and the West?
But only the distant future will decide that, and it serves little purpose to look
so far ahead. For the present we have to carry the burden of the day and face the
many problems which afflict us. Behind these problems in India, as in many
other countries, lies the real issue, which is not merely the establishment of
democracy of the nineteenth-century European type but also of far-reaching
social revolution. Democracy has itself become involved in that seemingly
inevitable change, and hence among those who disapprove of the latter, doubts
and denials arise about the feasibility of democracy, and this leads to fascist
tendencies and the continuation of an imperialist outlook. All our present-day
problems in India—the communal or minority problem, the Indian princes,
vested interests of religious groups and the big landowners, and the entrenched
interests of British authority and industry in India—ultimately resolve
themselves into opposition to social change. And because any real democracy is
likely to lead to such change, therefore democracy itself is objected to and
considered as unsuited to the peculiar conditions of India. So the problems of
India, for all their seeming variety and differences from others, are of the same
essential nature as the problems of China or Spain or many other countries of
Europe and elsewhere, which the war has brought to the surface. Many of the
resistance movements of Europe reflect these conflicts. Everywhere the old
equilibrium of social forces has been upset, and till a new equilibrium is
established there will be tension, trouble, and conflict. From these problems of
the moment we are led to one of the central problems of our time: how to
combine democracy with socialism, how to maintain individual freedom and
initiative and yet have centralized social control and planning of the economics
of the people, on the national as well as the international plane.
Freedom and Empire
The U.S.A. and the Soviet Union seem destined to play a vital part in the future.
They differ from each other almost as much as any two advanced countries can
differ and even their faults lie in opposite directions. All the evils of a purely
political democracy are evident in the U.S.A.; the evils of the lack of political
democracy are present in the U.S.S.R. And yet they have much in common—a
dynamic outlook and vast resources, a social fluidity, an absence of a medieval
background, a faith in science and its applications, and widespread education
and opportunities for the people. In America, in spite of vast differences in
income, there are no fixed classes as in most countries and there is a sense of
equity. In Russia, the outstanding event of the past twenty years has been the
tremendous educational and cultural achievements of the masses. Thus in both
countries the essential basis for a progressive, democratic society is present, for
no such society can be based on the rule of a small intellectual élite over an
ignorant and apathetic people. Nor can such an élite long continue to dominate
over an educationally and culturally advanced people.
A hundred years ago de Tocqueville, discussing the Americans of those days,
said:
If the democratic principle does not, on the one hand, induce men to cultivate science for its
own sake, on the other, it does enormously increase the number of those who do cultivate it
… Permanent inequality of conditions leads men to confine themselves to the arrogant and
sterile researches of abstract truths, whilst the social condition and institutions of democracy
prepare them to seek the immediate and useful practical results of the sciences. The tendency
is natural and inevitable.
Since then America has developed and changed and become an amalgam of
many races, but its essential characteristics continue.
Yet another common characteristic of both Americans and Russians is that
they do not carry that heavy burden of the past which has oppressed Asia and
Europe, and conditioned to a great extent their activities and conflicts. They
cannot, of course, escape, as none of us can, the terrible burden of this
generation. But they have a clearer past, so far as other people are concerned,
and are less encumbered for their journey into the future.
As a result of this they can approach other peoples without that background of
mutual distrust which always accompanies the contacts of well-established
imperialist nations with others. Not that their past is free of spots and stains and
suspicions. Americans have their negro problem which is a continuing reproach
to their professions of democracy and equality. Russians have yet to wipe out
memories of past hatreds in eastern Europe and the present war is adding to
them. Still Americans make friends easily in other countries. Russians are almost
totally devoid of racialism.
Most of the European nations are full of mutual hatreds and past conflicts and
injustices. The imperialist powers have inevitably added to this the intense
dislike for them of people over whom they have ruled. Because of England’s
long record of imperialist rule, her burden is the greatest. Because of this, or
because of racial characteristics, Englishmen are reserved and exclusive and do
not easily make friends with others. They are unfortunately judged abroad by
their official representatives who are seldom the standard-bearers of their
liberalism or culture, and who often combine snobbery with an apparent piety.
These officials have a peculiar knack of antagonising others. Some months ago a
secretary to the Government of India wrote an official letter to Mr Gandhi (in
detention) which was an example of studied insolence, and which was looked
upon by large numbers of people as a deliberate insult to the Indian people. For
Gandhi happens to be a symbol of India.
Another era of imperialism, or an age of international co-operation or world
commonwealth, which is it going to be in the future? The scales incline towards
the former and the old arguments are repeated but not with the old candour. The
moral urges of mankind and its sacrifices are used for base ends, and rulers
exploit the goodness and nobility of man for evil purposes and take advantage of
the fears, hatreds, and false ambitions of the people. They used to be more frank
about empire in the old days. Speaking of the Athenian empire, Thucydides
wrote: ‘We make no fine profession of having a right to our empire because we
overthrew the Barbarian single-handed, or because we risked our existence for
the sake of our dependents and of civilization. States, like men, cannot be
blamed for providing for their proper safety. If we are now here in Sicily, it is in
the interest of our own security … It is fear that forces us to cling to our empire
in Greece, and it is fear that drives us hither, with the help of our friends, to
order matters in Sicily.’ And again when he referred to the tribute of the
Athenian colonies: ‘It may seem wickedness to have won it; but it is certainly
folly to let it go.’
The history of Athens is full of lessons of the incompatibility of democracy
with empire, of the tyranny of a democratic state over its colonies, and the swift
deterioration and fall of that empire. No upholder of freedom and empire today
could state his case so well and so eloquently as Thucydides did:
We are the leaders of civilization, the pioneers of the human race. Our society and intercourse
is the highest blessing man can confer. To be within the circle of our influence is not
dependence but a privilege. Not all the wealth of the East can repay the riches we bestow. So
we can work on cheerfully, using the means and the money that flow into us, confident that,
try as they will, we shall still be creditors. For through effort and suffering and on many a
stricken field we have found the secret of human power, which is the secret of happiness.
Men have guessed at it under many names; but we alone have learnt to know it and to make it
at home in our city. And the name we know it by is freedom, for it has taught us that to serve
is to be free. Do you wonder why it is that alone among mankind we confer our benefits, not
on conditions of self-interest, but in the fearless confidence of freedom?
All this has a familiar ring in these days when freedom and democracy are so
loudly proclaimed and yet limited to some only. There is truth in it and a denial
of truth. Thucydides knew little of the rest of mankind and his vision was
confined to the Mediterranean countries. Proud of the freedom of his famous
city, praising this freedom as the secret of happiness and human power, yet he
did not realize that others also aspired to this freedom. Athens, lover of freedom,
sacked and destroyed Melos and put to death all the grown men there and sold
the women and children as slaves. Even while Thucydides was writing of the
empire and freedom of Athens, that empire had crumbled away and that freedom
was no more.
For it is not possible for long to combine freedom with domination and
slavery; one overcomes the other and only a little time divides the pride and
glory of empire from its fad. Today, much more than ever before, freedom is
indivisible. The splendid eulogy of Pericles for his beloved city was followed
soon after by its fall and the occupation of the Acropolis by a Spartan garrison.
Yet his words move us still for their love of beauty, wisdom, freedom and
courage, not merely in their application to the Athens of his day, but in the larger
context of the world:
We are lovers of beauty without extravagance, and lovers of wisdom without unmanliness.
Wealth to us is not mere material for vainglory but an opportunity for achievement; and
poverty we think it no disgrace to acknowledge but a real degradation to make no effort to
overcome … Let us draw strength, not merely from twice-told arguments—how fair and
noble a thing it is to show courage in battle—but from the busy spectacle of our great city’s
life as we have it before us day by day, falling in love with her as we see her, and
remembering that all this greatness she owes to men with the fighter’s daring, the wise man’s
understanding of his duty, and the good man’s self-discipline in its performance—to men
who, if they failed in any ordeal, disdained to deprive the city of their services, but sacrified
their lives as the best offerings on her behalf. So they gave their bodies to the commonwealth
and received, each for his own memory, praise that will never die, and with it the grandest of
all sepulchres, not that in which their mortal bones are laid, but a home in the minds of men,
where their glory remains fresh to stir to speech or action as the occasion comes by. For the
whole earth is a sepulchre of famous men; and their story is not graven only on stone over
their native earth, but lives on far away, without visible symbols, woven into the stuff of other
men’s lives. For you now it remains to rival what they have done and, knowing the secret of
happiness to be freedom and the secret of freedom a brave heart, not idly to stand aside from
the enemy’s onset.12
The Problem of Population. Falling Birth-Rates and
National Decay
Five years of war have brought about enormous changes and displacements of
population on a vaster scale probably than at any previous epoch of history.
Apart from the scores of millions of war casualties, more especially in China,
Russia, Poland, and Germany, masses of people have been uprooted from their
homes and countries. There have been military requirements, labour demands
and enforced evacuations, and swarms of refugees have fled before invading
armies. Even before the war the refugee problem in Europe, due to nazi policy,
had grown to formidable proportions. But these pale into insignificance when
compared to war developments. Apart from the direct consequences of the war,
the changes in Europe are largely due to a deliberate demographic policy
pursued by the nazis. They have apparently killed off million of Jews and broken
up the population integrity of many countries occupied by them. In the Soviet
Union many millions have moved east, forming new settlements on the other
side of the Urals, which are likely to be permanent. In China it is estimated that
fifty million people have been torn from their roots.
Attempts will, no doubt, be made to repatriate and rehabilitate these people, or
such as survive after the war, though the task is one of prodigious complexity.
Many will come back to their old homes, many may choose to remain in their
new environment. On the other hand, it seems also likely that, as a result of
political changes in Europe, there will be further displacement and exchange of
populations.
Of far deeper and more far-reaching significance are the changes, partly
physiological and biological, that are rapidly changing the population of the
world. The industrial revolution and the spread of modern technology resulted in
a rapid growth of population in Europe, and more especially in north-western
and central Europe. As this technology has spread eastwards to the Soviet Union,
aided by a new economic structure and other factors, there has been an even
more spectacular increase in population in these regions. This eastward sweep of
technology, accompanied by education, sanitation, and better public health, is
continuing and will cover many of the countries of Asia. Some of these
countries, like India, far from needing a bigger population, would be better off
with fewer people.
Meanwhile, in western Europe a reverse process has set in as regards
population and the problem of a fading birth-rate is growing in importance.
This tendency appears to be widespread and affects most countries in the
world, with some notable exceptions like China, India, Java and the U.S.S.R. It
is most marked in the industrially advanced countries. The population of France
ceased to grow many years ago and is now slowly declining. In England a steady
fall in the fertility rate has been noticeable since the ’eighties of the last century,
and it is the lowest now in Europe, except for France. Hitler’s and Mussolini’s
efforts to increase the birth-rate in Germany and Italy bore only temporary
results. In northern, western and central Europe the decline is more marked than
in southern and eastern Europe (exclusive of the U.S.S.R.), but similar
tendencies are observable in all these regions. Europe, apart from Russia,
reaches its maximum population, according to present trends, about 1955 and
then begins to decline. This has nothing to do with war losses which will
aggravate this downward tendency.
The Soviet Union, on the other hand, goes on rapidly increasing its population
and is likely to reach a figure exceeding 250 millions by 1970. This does not
include any additions due to territorial changes as a result of the war. This
growth of population taken together with technological and other kinds of
progress inevitably makes it the dominant power in Europe and Asia. In Asia
much depends on the industrial development of China and India. Their huge
populations are a burden and a weakness unless they are properly and
productively organized. In Europe the great colonial powers of the past appear to
have definitely passed the stage of expansion and aggression. Their economic
and political organization and the skill and ability of their people may still give
them an important place in world affairs, but they will progressively cease to
count as major powers, unless they function as a group. ‘It does not seem likely
that any nation of north-western and central Europe will challenge the world
again. Germany, like her western neighbours, has passed the period in which she
could become a dominant world power, owing to the diffusion of technological
civilization to peoples that are growing more rapidly.’13
Technological and industrial growth have brought power to a number of
Western peoples and countries. It is exceedingly unlikely that this source of
power will remain the monopoly of a few nations. Hence the political and
economic dominance of Europe over great parts of the world must inevitably
decline rapidly and it will cease to be the nerve-centre of the Eurasian continent
and Africa. Because of this basic reason the old European powers will think and
act more in terms of peace and international co-operation and will avoid war in
so far as they can. When aggression is almost certain to lead to disaster, it ceases
to attract. But those world powers that are still dominant have not the same urge
to co-operation with others, unless it is the moral urge, which is very seldom
associated with power.
What is the cause of this widespread phenomenon of falling birthrates? The
increasing use of contraceptives and the desire to have small regulated families
may have produced some effect, but it is generally recognized that this has not
made any great difference. In Ireland, which is a Catholic country and where
contraceptives are presumably little used, a fall in the birth-rate started earlier
than in other countries. Probably the increasing postponement of marriages in
the West is one of the causes. Economic factors may have some influence but
even that is hardly an important consideration. It is well-known that as a rule
fertility is higher among the poor than among the rich, as it also higher in rural
areas than in urban. A smaller group can maintain higher standards, and the
growth of individualism lessens the importance of the group and the race.
Professor J.B.S. Haldane teds us that it is a general rule that in a great many
civilized societies those types which are regarded in the particular society in
question as admirable are less fertile than the general run of the population. Thus
those societies would appear to be biologically unstable. Large families are often
associated with inferior intelligence. Economic success is also supposed to be
the opposite of biological success.
Little seems to be known about the basic causes behind the falling birth-rate,
though many subsidiary ones are suggested. It is possible, however, that certain
physiological and biological reasons lie at the back of it—the kind of life
industrialized communities lead and the environment in which they live. A
deficient diet, alcoholism, neurotic conditions or poor health generally, mental or
physical, affect reproduction. And yet disease-ridden and insufficiently-fed
communities, as in India, still reproduce themselves at a prodigious rate. Perhaps
the strain and stress of modern life, the ceaseless competition and worry, lessen
fertility. Probably the divorce from the life-giving soil is an important factor.
Even in America the fertility of farm labourers is considerably more than double
that of the professional classes.
It would seem that the kind of modern civilization that developed first in the
West and spread elsewhere, and especially the metropolitan life that has been its
chief feature, produces an unstable society which gradually losses its vitality
Life advances in many fields and yet it loses its grip; it becomes more artificial
and slowly ebbs away More and more stimulants are needed—drugs to enable us
to sleep or to perform our other natural functions, foods and drinks that tickle the
palate and produce a momentary exhilaration at the cost of weakening the
system, and special devices to give us a temporary sensation of pleasure and
excitement—and after the stimulation comes the reaction and a sense of
emptiness. With all its splendid manifestations and real achievements, we have
created a civilization which has something counterfeit about it. We eat ersatz
foods produced with the help of ersatz fertilizers; we indulge in ersatz emotions
and our human relations seldom go below the superficial plane. The advertiser is
one of the symbols of our age with his continuous and raucous attempts to
delude us and dull our powers of perception and induce us to buy unnecessary
and even harmful products. I am not blaming others for this state of affairs. We
are all products of this age with the characteristics of our generation, equally
entitled to credit or blame. Certainly I am as much part of this civilization, that I
both appreciate and criticize, as any one else, and my habits and ways of thought
are conditioned by it.
What is wrong with modern civilization which produces at the roots these
signs of sterility and racial decadence? But this is nothing new, it has happened
before and history is full of examples of it. Imperial Rome in its decline was far
worse. Is there a cycle governing this inner decay and can we seek out the causes
and eliminate them? Modern industrialism and the capitalist structure of society
cannot be the sole causes, for decadence has often occurred without them. It is
probable, however, that in their present forms they do create an environment, a
physical and mental climate, which is favourable for the functioning of those
causes. If the basic cause is something spiritual, something affecting the mind
and spirit of man, it is difficult to grasp though we may try to understand it or
intuitively feel it. But one fact seems to stand out: that a divorce from the soil,
from the good earth, is bad for the individual and the race.
The earth and the sun are the sources of life and if we keep away from them
for long life begins to ebb away. Modern industrialized communities have lost
touch with the soil and do not experience that joy which nature gives and the
rich glow of health which comes from contact with mother earth. They talk of
nature’s beauty and go to seek it in occasional week-ends, littering the
countryside with the product of their own artificial lives, but they cannot
commune with nature or feel part of it. It is something to look at and admire,
because they are told to do so, and then return with a sigh of relief to their
normal haunts; just as they might try to admire some classic poet or writer and
then, wearied by the attempt, return to their favourite novel or detective story,
where no effort of mind is necessary. They are not children of nature, like the
old Greeks or Indians, but strangers paying an embarrassing call on a scarceknown
distant relative. And so they do not experience that joy in nature’s rich
life and infinite variety and that feeling of being intensely alive which came so
naturally to our forefathers. Is it surprising then that nature treats them as
unwanted step-children?
We cannot go back to that old pantheistic outlook and yet perhaps we may
still sense the mystery of nature, listen to its song of life and beauty, and draw
vitality from it. That song is not sung in the chosen spots only, and we can hear
it, if we have the ears for it, almost everywhere. But there are some places where
it charms even those who are unprepared for it and comes like the deep notes of
a distant and powerful organ. Among these favoured spots is Kashmir where
loveliness dwells and an enchantment steals over the senses. Writing about
Kashmir, M. Foucher, the French savant, says:
May I go further and say what I believe to be the true reason for this special charm of
Kashmir, the charm which everybody seeks, even those who do not try to analyse it? It cannot
be only because of its magnificent woods, the pure limpidity of its lakes, the splendour of its
snowy mountain tops, or the happy murmur of its myriad brooks sounding in the cool soft air.
Nor can it be only the grace or majesty of its ancient buildings, though the ruins of Martand
rise at the prow of their Karewa as proudly as a Greek temple on a promontory, and the little
shrine of Payar, carved out of ten stones, has the prefect proportions of the choragic
monuments of Lysicrates. One cannot even say that it comes of the combination of art and
landscape, for fine buildings in a romantic setting are to be found in many other countries.
But what is found in Kashmir alone is the grouping of these two kinds of beauty in the midst
of a nature still animated with a mysterious life, which knows how to whisper close to our
ears and make the pagan depths of us quiver, which leads us back, consciously or
unconsciously, to those past days lamented by the poet, when the world was young, when
le del sur la terre
Marchait et respirait dans un peuple de dieux.14
But my purpose is not to praise Kashmir, though my partiality for it
occasionally leads me astray, nor to advance an argument in favour of
pantheism, though I am pagan enough to believe that a touch of paganism is
good for the mind and body. I do think that life cut off completely from the soil
will ultimately wither away. Of course there is seldom such a complete cutting
off and the processes of nature take their time. But it is a weakness of modern
civilization that it is progressively going further away from the life-giving
elements. The competitive and acquisitive characteristics of modern capitalist
society, the enthronement of wealth above everything else, the continuous strain
and the lack of security for many, add to the ill-health of the mind and produce
neurotic states. A saner and more balanced economic structure would lead to an
improvement of these conditions. Even so it will be necessary to have greater
and more living contacts with the land and nature. This does not mean a return to
the land in the old and limited sense of the word, or to a going back to primitive
ways of life. That remedy might well be worse than the disease. It should be
possible to organize modern industry in such a way as to keep men and women,
as far as possible, in touch with the land, and to raise the cultural level of the
rural areas. The village and the city should approach each other in regard to
life’s amenities, so that in both there should be full opportunities for bodily and
mental development and a full all-rounded life.
That this can be done I have little doubt, provided only that people want to do
it. At present there is no such widespread desire and our energies are diverted
(apart from killing each other) in producing ersatz products and ersatz
amusements. I have no basic objection to most of these, and some I think are
definitely desirable, but they absorb the time that might often be better employed
and give a wrong perspective to life. Artificial fertilizers are in great demand
today and I suppose they do good in their own way. But it does seem odd to me
that in their enthusiasm for the artificial product, people should forget natural
manure and even waste it and throw it away. Only China, as a nation, has had
the good sense to make full use of the natural stuff. Some experts say that
artificial fertilizers, though producing quick results, weaken the soil by depriving
it of some essential ingredients, and thus the land grows progressively more
sterile. With the earth, as with our individual lives, there is far too much of
burning the candle at both ends. We take her riches from her at a prodigious pace
and give little or nothing back.
We are proud of our increasing ability to produce almost anything in the
chemical laboratory. From the age of steam, we proceeded to that of electricity
and now we are in an age of biotechnics and electronics. The age of social
science, which we hope will solve many of the intimate problems that trouble us
so much, looms ahead. We are also told that we are on the threshold of the
magnesium-aluminum age and as both these metals are extremely abundant and
universally distributed, there can be no lack for anyone. The new chemistry is
building a new life for mankind. We seem to be on the verge of increasing
enormously the power resources of humanity and all manner of epoch-making
discoveries hover over the near future.
All this is very comforting and yet a doubt creeps into my mind. It is not lack
of power that we suffer from but a misuse of the power we possess or not a
proper application of it. Science gives power but remains impersonal,
purposeless, and almost unconcerned with our application of the knowledge it
puts at our disposal. It may continue its triumphs and yet, if it ignores nature too
much, nature may play a subtle revenge upon it. While life seems to grow in
outward stature, it may ebb away inside for lack of something yet undiscovered
by science.
The Modem Approach to an Old Problem
The modern mind, that is to say the better type of the modern mind, is practical
and pragmatic, ethical and social, altruistic and humanitarian. It is governed by a
practical idealism for social betterment. The ideals which move it represent the
spirit of the age, the Zeitgist, the Yugadharma. It has discarded to a large extent
the philosophic approach of the ancients, their search for ultimate reality, as well
as the devotionalism and mysticism of the medieval period. Humanity is its god
and social service its religion. This conception may be incomplete, as the mind
of every age has been limited by its environment, and every age has considered
some partial truth as the key to all truth. Every generation and every people
suffer from the illusion that their way of looking at things is the only right way,
or is, at any rate, the nearest approach to it. Every culture has certain values
attached to it, limited and conditioned by that culture. The people governed by
that culture take these values for granted and attribute a permanent validity to
them. So the values of our present-day culture may not be permanent and final;
nevertheless they have an essential importance for us for they represent the
thought and spirit of the age we live in. A few seers and geniuses, looking into
the future, may have a completer vision of humanity and the universe; they are
of the vital stuff out of which all real advance comes. The vast majority of
people do not even catch up to the present-day values, though they may talk
about them in the jargon of the day, and they live imprisoned in the past.
We have therefore to function in line with the highest ideals of the age we live
in, though we may add to them or seek to mould them in accordance with our
national genius. Those ideals may be classed under two heads: humanism and
the scientific spirit. Between these two there has been an apparent conflict but
the great upheaval of thought today, with its questioning of all values, is
removing the old boundaries between these two approaches, as well as between
the external world of science and the internal world of introspection. There is a
growing synthesis between humanism and the scientific spirit, resulting in a kind
of scientific humanism. Science also, while holding on to fact, is on the verge of
other domains, or at any rate, has ceased to deny them contemptuously Our five
senses and what they can perceive, obviously, do not exhaust the universe.
During the past twenty-five years there has been a profound change in the
scientist’s picture of the physical world. Science used to look at nature as
something almost apart from man. But now, Sir James Jeans tells us that the
essence of science is that ‘man no longer sees nature as something distinct from
himself.’ And then the old question arises which troubled the thinkers of the
Upanishads: how can the knower be known? How can the eyes that can see
external objects see themselves? And if the external is part and parcel of the
internal, what we perceive or conceive is but a projection of our minds, and the
universe and nature and the soul and mind and body, the transcendent and the
immanent are all essentially one, how then are we, within the limited framework
of our minds, to understand this mighty scheme of things objectively? Science
has begun to touch these problems and though they may elude it, still the earnest
scientist of today is the prototype of the philosopher and the man of religion of
earlier ages. ‘In this materialistic age of ours,’ says Professor Albert Einstein,
‘the serious scientific workers are the only profoundly religious people.’15
In all this there appears to be a firm belief in science and yet an apprehension
that purely factual and purposeless science is not enough. Was science, in
providing so much of life’s furniture, ignoring life’s significance? There is an
attempt to find a harmony between the world of fact and the world of spirit, for it
was becoming increasingly obvious that the over-emphasis on the former was
crushing the spirit of man. The question that troubled the philosophers of old has
come up again in a different form and context: How to reconcile the phenomenal
life of the world with the inner spiritual life of the individual. The physicians
have discovered that it is not enough to treat the body of the individual or of
society as a whole. In recent years, medical men, familiar with the finding of
modern psychopathology, have abandoned the antithesis between ‘organic’ and
‘functional’ diseases, and lay greater stress on the psychological factor. ‘This is
the greatest error in the treatment of sickness,’ wrote Plato, ‘that there are
physicians for the body and physicians for the soul, and yet the two are one and
indivisible.’
Einstein, most eminent among scientists, tells us that ‘the fate of the human
race was more than ever dependent on its moral strength today. The way to a
joyful and happy state is through renunciation and self-limitation everywhere.’
He takes us back suddenly from this proud age of science to the old
philosophers, from the lust for power and the profit motive to the spirit of
renunciation with which India has been so familiar. Probably most other
scientists of today will not agree with him in this or when he says: ‘I am
absolutely convinced that no wealth in the world can help humanity forward,
even in the hands of the most devoted worker in the cause. The example of great
and pure characters is the only thing that can produce fine ideas or noble deeds.
Money only appeals to selfishness and always tempts is owners irresistibly to
abuse it.’
In facing this question, that is as old as civilization itself, modern science has
many advantages denied to the old philosophers. It possesses stores of
accumulated knowledge and a method which has abundantly justified itself. It
has mapped and chartered many regions which were unknown to the ancients.
As it has enlarged man’s understanding and control over many things, they have
ceased to be mysteries to be exploited by the priests of religion. But it has some
disadvantages also. The very abundance of its accumulated knowledge has made
it difficult for man to take a synthetic view of the whole, and he loses himself in
some part of it, analyses it, studies it, partly understands it, and fads to see its
connection with the whole. The vast forces science has released overwhelm him
and carry him forward relentlessly, and often an unwilling victim, to unknown
shores. The pace of modern life, the succession of crisis after crisis, comes in the
way of a dispassionate search for truth. Wisdom itself is hustled and pushed
about and cannot easily discover that calm and detached outlook which is so
necessary for true understanding. ‘For still are the ways of wisdom and her
temper trembleth not.’
Perhaps we are living in one of the great ages of mankind and have to pay the
price for that privilege. The great ages have been full of conflict and instability,
of an attempt to change over from the old to something new. There is no
permanent stability or security or changelessness; if there were life itself would
cease. At the most we can seek a relative stability and a moving equilibrium.
Life is a continuous struggle of man against man, of man against his
surroundings, a struggle on the physical, intellectual, and moral plane out of
which new things take shape and fresh ideas are born. Destruction and
construction go side by side and both aspects of man and nature are ever evident.
Life is a principle of growth, not of standing still, a continuous becoming, which
does not permit static conditions.
Today, in the world of politics and economics there is a search for power and
yet when power is attained much else of value has gone. Political trickery and
intrigue take the place of idealism, and cowardice and selfishness the place of
disinterested courage. Form prevails over substance and power, so eagerly
sought after, somehow fails to achieve what it aimed at. For power has its
limitations, and force recoils on itself. Neither can control the spirit, though they
may harden and coarsen it. ‘You can rob an army of its general,’ says Confucius,
‘but not the least of men of his will.’
John Stuart Mill wrote in his autobiography: ‘I am now convinced that no
great improvements in the lot of mankind are possible, until a great change takes
place in the fundamental constitution of their modes of thought.’ And yet that
fundamental change in the modes of thought itself comes from a changing
environment and the pain and suffering that accompany life’s unceasing
struggles. And so, though we may try to change those modes of thought directly,
it is even more necessary to change the environment in which they grew and
found sustenance. Each depends on and influences the other. There is an endless
variety of men’s minds. Each one sees the truth in his own way and is often
unable to appreciate another’s viewpoint. Out of this comes conflict. Out of this
interaction also a fuller and more integrated truth emerges. For we have to
realize that truth is many-sided and is not the monopoly of any group or nation.
So also the way of doing things. There may be different ways for different
people in different situations. India and China, as well as other nations, evolved
their own ways of life and gave them an enduring foundation. They imagined,
and many among them vainly imagine still, that their way is the only way.
Today, Europe and America have evolved their own way of life which is
dominant in the world, and which, their people imagine, is the only way. But
probably none of these ways is the one and only desirable way and each may
learn something from the other. Certainly India and China must learn a great
deal, for they had become static and the West not only represents the spirit of the
age but is dynamic and changing and has the capacity for growth in it, even
though this functions through self-destruction and periodical human sacrifice.
In Indian, and perhaps in other countries also, there are alternating tendencies
for self-glorification and self-pity. Both are undesirable and ignoble. It is not
through sentimentality and emotional approaches that we can understand life,
but by a frank and courageous facing of realities. We cannot lose ourselves in
aimless and romantic quests unconnected with life’s problems, for destiny
marches on and does not wait for our leisure. Nor can we concern ourselves with
externals only, forgetting the significance of the inner life of man. There has to
be a balance, an attempt at harmony between them. ‘The greatest good’, wrote
Spinoza in the seventeenth century,
is the knowledge of the union which the mind has with the whole of nature … The more the
mind knows the better it understands its forces and the order of nature; the more it
understands its forces or strength, the better it will be able to direct itself and lay down rules
for itself; and the more it understands the order of nature the more easily it will be able to
liberate itself from useless things; this is the whole method.
In our individual lives also we have to discover a balance between the body
and the spirit, and between man as part of nature and man as part of society. ‘For
our perfection,’ says Tagore, ‘we have to be vitally savage and mentally
civilized; we should have the gift to be natural with nature and human with
human society.’ Perfection is beyond us for it means the end, and we are always
journeying, trying to approach something that is ever receding. And in each one
of us are many different human beings with their inconsistencies and
contradictions, each pulling in a different direction. There is the love of life and
the disgust with life the acceptance of all that life involves and the rejection of
much of it. It is difficult to harmonize these contrary tendencies, and sometimes
one of them is dominant and sometimes another.’
‘Oftentimes,’ says Lao Tzu:
Oftentimes, one strips oneself of passion
In order to see the Secret of life;
Oftentimes one regards life with passion,
In order to see its manifold results.
For all our powers of reason and understanding and all our accumulated
knowledge and experience we know little enough about life’s secrets, and can
only guess at its mysterious processes. But we can always admire its beauty and,
through art, exercise the god-like function of creation. Though we may be weak
and erring mortals, living a brief and uncertain span of life yet there is something
of the stuff of the immortal gods in us. ‘We must not,’ therefore, says Aristotle,
‘obey those who urge us, because we are human and mortal, to think human and
mortal thoughts; in so far as we may we should practise immortality, and omit
no effort to live in accordance with the best that is in us.’
Epilogue
Nearly five months have gone by since I took to this writing and I have covered
a thousand hand-written pages with this jumble of ideas in my mind. For five
months I have travelled in the past and peeped into the future and sometimes
tried to balance myself on that ‘point of intersection of the timeless with time.’
These months have been full of happenings in the world and the war has
advanced rapidly towards a triumphant conclusion, so far as military victories
go. In my own country also much has happened of which I could be only a
distant spectator, and waves of unhappiness have sometimes temporarily swept
over me and passed on. Because of this business of thinking and trying to give
some expression to my thoughts, I have drawn myself away from the piercing
edge of the present and moved along the wider expanses of the past and the
future.
But there must be an end to this wandering. If there was no other sufficient
reason for it, there is a very practical consideration which cannot be ignored. I
have almost exhausted the supply of paper that I had managed to secure after
considerable difficulty and it is not easy to get more of it.
The discovery of India—what have I discovered? It was presumptuous of me
to imagine that I could unveil her and find out what she is today and what she
was in the long past. Today she is four hundred million separate individual men
and women, each differing from the other, each living in a private universe of
thought and feeling. If this is so in the present, how much more difficult is it to
grasp that multitudinous past of innumerable successions of human beings. Yet
something has bound them together and binds them still. India is a geographical
and economic entity, a cultural unity amidst diversity, a bundle of contradictions
held together by strong but invisible threads. Overwhelmed again and again, her
spirit was never conquered, and today when she appears to be the plaything of a
proud conqueror, she remains unsubdued and unconquered. About her there is
the elusive quality of a legend of long ago; some enchantment seems to have
held her mind. She is a myth and an idea, a dream and a vision, and yet very real
and present and pervasive. There are terrifying glimpses of dark corridors which
seem to lead back to primeval night, but also there is the fullness and warmth of
the day about her. Shameful and repellent she is occasionally, perverse and
obstinate, sometimes even a little hysteric, this lady with a past, But she is very
lovable, and none of her children can forget her wherever they go or whatever
strange fate befalls them. For she is part of them in her greatness as well as her
failings, and they are mirrored in those deep eyes of hers that have seen so much
of life’s passion and joy and folly, and looked down into wisdom’s well. Each
one of them is drawn to her, though perhaps each has a different reason for that
attraction or can point to no reason at all, and each sees some different aspect of
her many-sided personality. From age to age she has produced great men and
women, carrying on the old tradition and yet ever adapting it to changing times.
Rabindranath Tagore, in line with that great succession, was full of the temper
and urges of the modem age and yet was rooted in India’s past, and in his own
self built up a synthesis of the old and the new. ‘I love India,’ he said, ‘not
because I cultivate the idolatry of geography, not because I have had the chance
to be born in her soil but because she has saved through tumultuous ages the
living words that have issued from the illuminated consciousness of her great
ones.’ So many will say, while others will explain their love for her in some
different way.
The old enchantment seems to be breaking today and she is looking around
and waking up to the present. But however she changes, as change she must, that
old witchery will continue and hold the hearts of her people. Though her attire
many change, she will continue as of old, and her store of wisdom will help her
to hold on to what is true and beautiful and good in this harsh, vindictive, and
grasping world.
The world of today has achieved much, but for all its declared love for
humanity, it has based itself far more on hatred and violence than on the virtues
that make man human. War is the negation of truth and humanity. War may be
unavoidable sometimes, but its progeny are terrible to contemplate. Not mere
killing, for man must die, but the deliberate and persistent propagation of hatred
and falsehood, which gradually become the normal habits of the people. It is
dangerous and harmful to be guided in our life’s course by hatreds and
aversions, for they are wasteful of energy and limit and twist the mind and
prevent it from perceiving the truth. Unhappily there is hatred today in India and
strong aversions, for the past pursues us and the present does not differ from it. It
is not easy to forget repeated affronts to the dignity of a proud race. Yet,
fortunately, Indians do not nourish hatred for long; they recover easily a more
benevolent mood.
India will find herself again when freedom opens out new horizons, and the
future will then fascinate her far more than the immediate past of frustration and
humiliation. She will go forward with confidence, rooted in herself and yet eager
to learn from others and co-operate with them. Today she swings between a
blind adherence to her old customs and a slavish imitation of foreign ways. In
neither of these can she find relief or life or growth. It is obvious that she has to
come out of her shell and take full part in the life and activities of the modern
age. It should be equally obvious that there can be no real cultural or spiritual
growth based on imitation. Such imitation can only be confined to a small
number which cuts itself off from the masses and the springs of national life.
True culture derives its inspiration from every corner of the world but it is homegrown
and has to be based on the wide mass of the people. Art and literature
remain lifeless if they are continually thinking of foreign models. The day of a
narrow culture confined to a small fastillious group is past. We have to think in
terms of the people generally, and their culture must be a continuation and
development of past trends, and must also represent their new urges and creative
tendencies.
Emerson, over 100 years ago, warned his countrymen in America not to
imitate or depend too much culturally on Europe. A new people as they were, he
wanted them not to look back on their European past but to draw inspiration
from the abounding life of their new country.
Our day of dependence, our long apprenticeship to the learning of other lands, draws to a
close. The millions that around us are rushing into life cannot always be fed on the sere
remains of foreign harvests. Events, actions arise, that must be sung, that will sing themselves
… there are creative manners, there are creative actions and creative words … that is,
indicative of no custom or authority, but springing spontaneous from the mind’s own sense of
good and fair.
And again in his essay on self-reliance:
It is for want of self-culture that the superstition of travelling, whose idols are Italy, England,
Egypt, retains its fascination for all educated Americans. They who made England, Italy, or
Greece venerable in the imagination did so by sticking fast where they were, like an axis of
the earth. In manly hours we feel that duty is our place. The soul is no traveller; the wise man
stays at home, and when his necessities, his duties, on any occasion call him from his house,
or into foreign fields, he is at home still, and shall make men sensible by the expression of his
countenance that he goes the missionary of wisdom and virtue, and visits cities and men like a
sovereign and not like an interloper or a valet.
‘I have no churlish objection,’ continues Emerson,
to the circumnavigation of the globe, for the purposes of art, of study, and benevolence, so
that man is first domesticated, or does not go abroad with the hope of finding something
greater than he knows. He who travels to be amused, or to get somewhat which he does not
carry, travels away from himself, and grows old even in youth among old things. In Thebes,
in Palmyra, his will and mind have become old and dilapidated as they. He carries ruins to
ruins.
But the rage for travelling is a symptom of a deeper unsoundness affecting the whole
intellectual action … We imitate … Our houses are built with foreign taste; our shelves are
garnished with foreign ornaments; our opinions, our tastes, our faculties, lean on and follow
the past and the distant. The soul created the arts wherever they have flourished. It was in his
own mind that the artist sought his model. It was an application of his own thought to the
thing to be done and the conditions to be observed … Insist on yourself; never imitate. Your
own gift you can present every moment with the cumulative force of a whole life’s
cultivation; but of the adopted talent of another you have only an extemporaneous half
possession.
We in India do not have to go abroad in search of the past and the distant. We
have them here in abundance. If we go to foreign countries it is in search of the
present. That search is necessary, for isolation from it means backwardness and
decay. The world of Emerson’s time has changed and old barriers are breaking
down; life becomes more international. We have to play our part in this coming
internationalism and, for this purpose, to travel, meet others, learn from them
and understand them. But a real internationalism is not something in the air
without roots or anchorage. It has to grow out of national cultures and can only
flourish today on a basis of freedom and equality and true internationalism.
Nevertheless Emerson’s warning holds today as it did in the past, and our search
can only be fruitful in the conditions mentioned by him. Not to go anywhere as
interlopers, but only if we are welcomed as equals and as comrades in a common
quest. There are countries, notably in the British dominions, which try to
humiliate our countrymen. They are not for us. We may, for the present, have to
suffer the enforced subjection to an alien yoke and to carry the grievous burdens
that this involves, but the day of our liberation cannot be distant. We are citizens
of no mean country and we are proud of the land of our birth, of our people, our
culture and traditions. That pride should not be for a romanticised past to which
we want to cling; nor should it encourage exclusiveness or a want of
appreciation of other ways than ours. It must never allow us to forget our many
weaknesses and failings or blunt our longing to be rid of them. We have a long
way to go and much leeway to make up before we can take our proper station
with others in the van of human civilization and progress. And we have to hurry,
for the time at our disposal is limited and the pace of the world grows ever
swifter. It was India’s way in the past to welcome and absorb other cultures.
That is much more necessary today, for we march to the one world of tomorrow
where national cultures will be intermingled with the international culture of the
human race. We shall therefore seek wisdom and knowledge and friendship and
comradeship wherever we can find them, and co-operate with others in common
tasks, but we are no suppliants for others’ favours and patronage. Thus we shall
remain true Indians and Asiatics, and become at the same time good
internationalists and world citizens.
My generation has been a troubled one in India and the world. We may carry
on for a little while longer, but our day will be over and we shall give place to
others, and they will live their lives and carry their burdens to the next stage of
the journey. How have we played our part in this brief interlude that draws to a
close? I do not know. Others of a later age will judge. By what standards do we
measure success or failure? That too I do not know. We can make no complaint
that life has treated us harshly, for ours has been a willing choice, and perhaps
life has not been so bad to us after ad. For only they can sense life who stand
often on the verge of it, only they whose lives are not governed by the fear of
death. In spite of all the mistakes that we may have made, we have saved
ourselves from triviality and an inner shame and cowardice. That, for our
individual selves, has been some achievement.
Man’s dearest possession is life, and since it is given to him to live but once, he must so live
as not to be seared with the shame of a cowardly and trivial past, so live as not to be tortured
for years without purpose, so live that dying he can say: ‘All my life and my strength were
given to the first cause of the world—the liberation of mankind.’16