Noah’s Ark

No institution can possibly survive if it needs geniuses or supermen to manage it. It must be
organized in such a way as to be able to get along under a leadership composed of average
human beings.
– Peter Drucker
Management consultant, educator and author

he story of Noah’s ark fascinated Kalam right from his days at Schwartz,
where it was taught to him. A question that niggled as he grew was how
Noah, living as he did more than a thousand years before the Iron Age, could
possibly have constructed a vessel of the size of the ark as described in the Bible.
He would have had to accomplish this task without iron hammers, axes or saws
with which to fell trees or cut to equal size those which nature had uprooted. To
hold them together without nails is another seemingly unimaginable task. The
history of shipbuilding tells of no vessel even remotely this size in the epoch in
which Noah lived. Nor does the biblical text intimate that Noah found a vessel
which had been constructed by heavenly sources; on the contrary, it says
specifically that he was to build it.
Equally hard for Kalam to imagine was how Noah could have harvested,
transported and stored enough food to keep himself, his family and a very large
assortment of animals – some of considerable size – alive for as long a period as
the ark was occupied. The question of the carnivorous species appeared to him
particularly problematic. Furthermore, archaeology had so far discovered no
evidence of a flood of this magnitude having occurred at the time when Noah
lived. What could be a reasonable way to understand the narrative of Noah but
as a metaphor? More importantly, what could be the lesson of this metaphor?
Kalam reasoned Noah as representing the link between two contrasting

T

worlds. He was born during the days of hamas (dishonesty), lived through the
recreation, and entered a world in which man recognized the need for law. It was
here that Kalam found the essence of this metaphorical tale. The Creator of the
world was the one who first brought about a man whose distinction was his
superiority over the animals, but who was still not fully aware that without law
he could not survive. Kalam interpreted Noah’s ark as the idea of living by
institutions, families, communities, schools, hospitals, courts, nations and so
forth.
Kalam’s whole world and achievements had been founded on living with
institutions – and his family. The scale of investment and manpower required for
the aeronautical industry mandated institutional support, which could only come
either from governmental or corporate sponsors. Kalam’s skills, honed by the
very best educational institutions of the era, had first been fostered by his family.
Now, his abilities were in demand, and were utilized for evermore important
projects for the nation. Kalam was prospering in a world in which man
recognized the need for law. But in his mind, he was reaching for a place beyond
this in evolution – his urge for a higher understanding that Prof. Sponder spoke
of had been awakened; and it could not be ignored.
In any event, Kalam’s career would continue to take him to new places, and
broaden his worldly horizons. A large number of aeronautical projects were
undertaken in the 1950s and 1960s, the most important of which were the
hovercraft, the Vertical Take-off and Landing (VTOL) Platform and the DART
target, a pilotless flying system using autonomous rendezvous technology. The
Aeronautical Development Establishment (ADE) was created in 1959 to provide
research and development support to HAL. Aeronautical engineers working in
various organizations dealing with military aviation were pooled to form the core
team of this new organization. Based in Bangalore, ADE was tasked with the
acquisition of aeronautical equipment for the Indian Air Force, and it was here
that Kalam would work, at least for the time being.
As Kalam was entering the ADE, Air India International was entering the jet
age. On 21 February 1960, Air India International acquired a Boeing 707–420
aircraft and became the first Asian airline to induct a jet aircraft in its fleet. Jet
services to New York International Airport, Anderson Field (later J.F.K.
International Airport) via London were inaugurated that same year on 14 May.

On 8 June 1962, the airline’s name was officially truncated to Air India, as it
remains to this day. On 11 June 1962, Air India became the world’s first all-jet
airline. India was now finding its feet as a technological nation, and the five
Indian Institutes of Technology (IITs) were grooming young engineers and
scientists such as Kalam to help propel the country forward into the final
decades of the century.
Kalam was charmed by Bangalore, the garden city of India. It was a contrast
to the crowded, polluted roughness of Kanpur and the high-born, overbearing
ambience of Delhi. Kalam had by now internalized the pluralism of Indian
society. He had long observed India’s uncanny inclination for bringing out
extremes in her people. He guessed that this was because Indians had been both
afflicted and enriched by centuries of invasion and migration. Loyalty to
different rulers and regional and caste sentiments had dulled the will of the
Indian people for a single national identity. As a survival strategy, Indian people
evolved an extraordinary ability to be alternately compassionate and cruel,
sensitive and callous, deep and fickle.
Already an inveterate student of human nature and behaviour, Kalam was
bemused by the affectations of the people he saw in the country’s cities. He felt
that city life had severed an essential attachment to the land, the soil. To the
untrained eye, Indian cities may appear colourful and picturesque; to the critical
eye, Indian city dwellers seemed but shoddy imitations of their various masters.
In Kanpur, Kalam saw paan-chewing imitations of Awadh kings, in Delhi there
were so many facsimiles of stiff-necked British rulers, and in Bangalore he could
see dog-walking sahibs. In none of India’s cities, though, did Kalam find the
depth and authenticity of Rameswaram. He concluded that the divided
sensibilities and existential pressures of city life seemed to have mutated the
relationship between the heart and the head of otherwise earthy Indians. The
transition from an almost composite system of values of pre-colonial India to a
modern unified system remained a pathetically slow work in progress.
By this time, Kalam had developed an even more voracious reading habit. He
tapered his visits to dargahs and started spending more time in libraries. At work,
the vagaries of bureaucratic organization meant that Kalam would have to rely
on his own initiative. Never one to sit idle, he decided to become proactive in
making a personal contribution to the aeronautics of the military. Kalam recalled

years later: ‘The workload at Aeronautical Development in its initial years was
not much. In fact, I had to generate work for myself at first, until the tempo
gradually built up.’1
Convinced of the versatile role a hovercraft could play in India’s defence
forces, Kalam advocated the idea to higher officials in ADE. Based on his
preliminary submissions, a project team was formed to design and develop an
indigenous hovercraft prototype. Dr O.P. Mediratta, director of ADE, asked
Kalam to lead a four-member team. They were given three years to realize the
working model.
On 3 November 1961, Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru received the 20,000tonne Majestic-class aircraft carrier HMS Hercules from Britain at Bombay’s
Ballard Pier. The ship, named INS Vikrant, under Captain Pritam Singh
Mahindroo, contained one squadron each of Sea Hawk fighters and French
Breguet Alize Anti-Submarine Warfare (ASW) planes. Kalam was called back to
Delhi to assist in the work on a Vertical Take-off and Landing Platform.
On 21 September 1962, a border dispute between China and India erupted
into full-scale war. It started in earnest with a major Chinese offensive across the
McMahon Line. The McMahon Line was a line on the map that had been agreed
by the British and Tibetan governments in 1914 as the territorial border. With the
annexation of Tibet by China, the McMahon Line was the effective border
between India and China. The Sino-Indian war was a national humiliation for
India, with China quickly advancing from the McMahon Line into Indian
territory. The Soviet Union, the United States and Great Britain pledged military
aid to India. China then withdrew its forces, and the war ended on 19 November
1962.
Prime Minister Nehru later told parliament:
I remember many a time when our senior generals came to us, and wrote to the defence ministry
saying that they wanted certain things … If we had had foresight, known exactly what would
happen, we would have done something else … what India has learnt from the Chinese invasion is
that in the world of today there is no place for weak nations … We have been living in an unreal
world of our own creation.2

Many Indians like Kalam viewed the war, though, as a conflict waged by parties
of wildly disparate effectiveness; and little of this related to the combat abilities

of the military personnel at the front line. India’s forces were led by
argumentative politicians and clashing generals under a philosopher prime
minister – who spouted fancy doctrines like Panchsheel (‘five virtues’, an
abortive 1954 treaty with China) – and a defence minister who delighted in
inflicting his acid tongue and rapier intelligence on those around him. Their
adversaries were a rugged revolutionary and a victorious military genius: Mao
Zedong and the prime minister, Zhou Enlai, the latter perhaps the finest strategist
of his generation. And the Chinese leadership had no parliamentary or media
pressure to divert their attention from their goals. It was a textbook war of the
prepared overwhelming the unprepared.
The Sino-Indian war coincided with the Cuban Missile Crisis. A direct and
dangerous confrontation between the United States and the Soviet Union
occurred in October 1962, in which the world’s two nuclear superpowers came
dangerously close to conflict. In July 1962, Soviet premier Nikita Khrushchev
reached a secret agreement with Cuban premier Fidel Castro to place Soviet
nuclear missiles in Cuba to deter any future invasion attempt by the US. Upon
receiving intelligence of the missiles’ deployment, the United States retaliated
with a navy embargo, effectively blocking Cuba by sea. The ensuing stand-off
led the world perilously close to a nuclear holocaust.
Around midnight Moscow time on 26 October 1962, Prime Minister
Khrushchev sent President Kennedy a long, emotional message that raised the
spectre of nuclear annihilation. ‘If there is no intention,’ he said, ‘to doom the
world to the catastrophe of thermonuclear war, then let us not only relax the
forces pulling on the ends of the rope, let us take measures to untie that knot. We
are ready for this.’3 With subsequent negotiation and concessions from both
sides, the crisis was over.
In an effort to avert a recurrence of this dangerous nuclear brinksmanship, a
direct telephone link between the White House and the Kremlin was established;
it became known as the ‘Hotline’ or ‘Molink’. Also, having approached the brink
of nuclear conflict, both superpowers began to reconsider the nuclear arms race
and took the first steps in agreeing to a nuclear test ban treaty.
Kalam’s take from this was the supremacy of morality. During this crisis,
military action was viable as a first response, but thankfully, the morality of
using weapons to reach a resolution was considered. The weighing of the likely

greater conflict and subsequent massive loss of human life against the efficacy of
military action led to a decision that proved correct. Kalam concluded that
leaders must consider the morality of the situation carefully before choosing
military action as a first response. This ensures that empathy remains. The
empathy preserved through the Cuban Missile Crisis by the parties’ restraint
allowed the moral questions to be examined. Leaders such as Kennedy and
Khrushchev knew that violent actions would receive violent reactions.
The hovercraft development project proved a tough nut to crack for Kalam
and his small team. None of the team members had any experience in designing
and building a machine from scratch, let alone a complex aeronautical craft
sturdy and reliable enough for military applications. Moreover, the practical
problems they faced were manifold, the most obvious being that there were no
designs or standard components available. Kalam tried to read as much literature
as he could find on hovercraft, but there was not much available. He tried to
consult people knowledgeable in that area, but could find none. He now
understood, through this disillusioning experience, the difference between a
developed country and a developing one. Only consistent work over years and
decades – even across generations – makes a country great. Meanwhile, Kalam
understood that he had no option but to proceed with whatever he knew and
whatever was at hand. He was also under no illusion that he would have to rely
on his own will and determination:
There is always the danger that a person with my kind of background – rural or small-town, middleclass, whose parents had limited education – will retreat into a corner and remain there struggling
for bare existence … I knew I had to create my own opportunities. After all, the Wright brothers
made the first aeroplane after fixing bicycles for seven years! 4

After spending a few months at the drawing board, Kalam proceeded straight to
hardware development. Part by part, subsystem by subsystem, stage by stage, his
vision began to materialize. Defence Minister V.K. Krishna Menon took a
special interest in the small project. He was very passionate about building a
capacity for developing indigenous weapon systems. Whenever he was in
Bangalore, he called Dr Mediratta and Kalam to apprise himself of their progress
and ask if they needed any help.
The project was completed to schedule. The hovercraft moved on a 40 mm

cushion of air, bearing a load of 550 kilograms, including the tare weight of the
vehicle. It was named Nandi, after the vahana (wagon) of Lord Shiva. But by
that time, Krishna Menon was out of office in the wake of the Sino-Indian war
debacle, and in the new order not many people shared his enthusiasm for the
military applications of an indigenous hovercraft. The project was shelved, and
indigenous hovercraft were never manufactured – though thousands were
required and imported regularly. Kalam was heartbroken.
So far, I had believed that the sky was the limit, but now it appeared that the limits were much
closer. There are boundaries that dictate life: you can only lift so much weight; you can learn only
so fast; you can work only so hard; you can only go so far!5

One evening, Kalam saw the book The Pushcart War in a bookshop window
while he was wandering on Brigade Road. It was an illustrated children’s novel
written by Jean Merrill. He was struck by the first sentence, ‘The Pushcart War
started on the afternoon of 15 March 1976 when a truck ran down a pushcart
belonging to a flower peddler.’ How could a flower peddler wage a war? Why
was the story set in the future? He decided to purchase the book.
The book narrated the story of a group of New York City pushcart peddlers,
led by Morris the Florist, who battled the tyrannical trucking companies. The
pushcart peddlers were armed only with pea-shooters – good for flattening tires
– and their wits. The theme of the book was the disadvantaged, the weak and the
outcasts rising up against their oppressors and, of course, winning the day.
Kalam started identifying himself as an underdog. He decided to change his style
and become more competitive. To come from behind and win is indeed a great
feeling, he concluded.
Many months had passed by when Dr Mediratta called Kalam, asking if
Nandi was functional. A few days later, he brought Prof. M.G.K. Menon,
director of the Tata Institute of Fundamental Research (TIFR), to meet Kalam.
Prof. Menon asked Kalam several questions about the machine and even took a
ten-minute ride. Finally, Kalam could see someone, at least, appreciating his toil
of many years. Prof. Menon gave Kalam a gentle hug and said that he would see
him soon.
A week later, Kalam received a letter asking him to come to Bombay for an
interview at TIFR, for the position of rocket engineer at the newly formed Indian

Committee for Space Research (INCOSPAR). Kalam took the next train with a
strange, calm feeling of certainty. Kalam reminded himself that the best way to
win was to not need to win. The best performances are accomplished when you
are relaxed and free of doubt. What if he is a pushcart peddler? What if he meets
the mightiest truckers in Bombay? After all, he did not apply for any post – and
yet he was called.