Cog in the Wheel

As the Wheel of Time turns, places wear many names. Men wear many faces. As the Wheel
weaves, we can only watch, and study, and hope.
– Robert Jordan
The Eye of the World

rom MIT, Kalam was selected as a graduate trainee at Hindustan Aircraft
Limited (HAL) in Bangalore, where his duties would involve the
overhauling of both piston and turbine engines. He felt proud to see the HF-24
Marut fighter-bomber, designed by his teacher at MIT, Prof. Kurt Tank. Kalam
was told that it was the first fighter aircraft made in India, and HAL had built the
first military aircraft in South Asia. He was at HAL for six months.
Actively encouraged by the young Maharaja of Mysore, Jayachamarajendra
Wadiyar, and the diwan of Mysore, Mirza Ismail, Walchand Hirachand had
established Hindustan Aircraft Limited in Bangalore in 1940 to repair and
overhaul foreign aircraft. William Pawley of the Intercontinental Aircraft
Corporation of New York set up the organization and equipment for the factory,
and a large number of machine tools and equipment were sourced from the
United States. To boost British military hardware supplies in Asia to counter the
increasing threat posed by imperial Japan during World War II, the British India
government bought a one-third stake in the company in 1941.
In 1943, the factory was handed over to the United States Air Force but
retained Hindustan Aircraft management. The factory expanded rapidly and
became the centre for major overhaul and repairs of American aircraft and was
known as the 84th Air Depot. The first aircraft to be overhauled was a
Consolidated PBY Catalina, followed by every type of aircraft operated in India
and Burma (now Myanmar). When it was returned to Indian control two years

F

later, the factory had become one of the largest overhaul and repair organizations
in the East. In the post-war reorganization, the company built railway carriages
as an interim activity. After India gained Independence in 1947, the management
of the company was passed over to the Government of India.
Kalam worked on the overhaul of engines for Blackburn Cirrus Majors, a
British in-line four-cylinder aircraft engine. The term ‘engine overhaul’ means to
strip down an engine and rebuild it as new. This entails the disassembly of the
engine, the inspection of its components, the replacement of defective or worn
parts, the repair or replacement of these parts and the reassembly of the engine.
Further, the engine is tested and subjected to trial run prior to its return to full
operating level.
Kalam learned that aircraft engines are only good while flying, the purpose
for which they are built. Aircraft must be flown at a minimum interval, and its
engine brought to its operating temperature on a regular basis. If an aircraft is
used less frequently than this suggested interval, its engine will become prone to
moisture build-up, and corrosives will accumulate in the engine oil. These would
shorten the service life of the motor. Also, some engines will be exposed to
extreme conditions, and this should be taken into account. An engine operating
primarily in dusty conditions, near salt water, in varied climates or any
combination of these is subject to extra wear.
The imperative for aviation is safety, and in performing his work of
overhauling aircraft engines, Kalam had to apply his utmost diligence.
Exactitude is crucial; the result of tardiness in this line of work can be
catastrophic. Nevertheless, he enjoyed his new job. His disciplined approach and
analytical bent stood him in good stead for its challenges, and he found it
exhilarating to be involved in sending a machine into the skies. He would notice
in the course of his time at HAL that disciplined and rigid though the demands of
the tasks were, even its most precise work would call on the intuition – an aspect
of the higher nature. He later recounted:
The demonstration of the delicate art of beta (blade angle control) by HAL technicians still lingers
in my memory. They had neither studied in major universities, nor were they merely implementing
what their engineer-in-charge was suggesting. They had been working hands on for years, and this
had given them something like an intuitive feel for the work.1

Two new employment opportunities presented themselves to Kalam, who was
now armed with an engineering degree and tested by practical experience. The
Indian Air Force was offering positions through short service commission, and
the Directorate of Technical Development and Production, DTD&P (Air), under
the Department of Defence Production, Ministry of Defence, was recruiting
engineers. Kalam applied for both and was called for the interview by the Indian
Air Force at Dehradun and DTD&P (Air) at New Delhi in January 1958. Kalam
had thus far never travelled beyond the southern regions of the subcontinent, and
he was now to venture out into the vastness of his country for the first time. He
boarded the Grand Trunk Express at Madras Central station and managed to
secure a window seat.
Ever a student of India’s cultural tradition, Kalam bought Discovery of India
by Jawaharlal Nehru to utilize the forty hours’ journey time. Nehru wrote it
during his imprisonment during 1942–46 at Ahmednagar Fort in the Deccan.
Between reading Nehru’s fine historical discourse and viewing for the first time
the length of this verdant, abundant land, Kalam garnered a new understanding
of his nation and its history. He understood the allure of the rich and fertile
plains of the Ganga and its numerous tributaries that invited invasion from the
people of hostile desert and mountain lands.
Moreover, Kalam could see for himself the geographical features that had
ensured that the land of his Tamil forefathers was mostly undisturbed by
invaders from the north. The part of India south of the Tropic of Cancer had been
shielded throughout the millennia by the Vindhya and the Satpura mountain
ranges. The Dravidian people thus had suffered invasions only by the most
determined of adversaries, until the time of British colonial rule.
After appearing for the interview at DTD&P (Air), Kalam had some free time
in Delhi, as the interview at Dehradun was still a week away. He visited the
dargah of Hazrat Sheikh Khwaja Syed Muhammad Nizamuddin Auliya. Hazrat
Nizamuddin was a famous Sufi saint of the Chishti order. Kalam found much
peace through his contemplation in mosques and dargahs. He found himself
drawn towards the Islamic Sufi tradition, with its emphasis on self-realization
through devotion and prayer. For him, the mystical facets of his religion were
becoming equally important as its everyday practices.
Kalam recalled his experience years earlier at the dargah of Nathar Vali in

Tiruchirappalli. That evening at the dargah of Nathar Vali initiated Kalam on his
destined path, and he could feel the divine energy once again while he sat
through the qawwali. In Sufi practice, music is a way of reaching the soul,
entrancing the listener by prayers wrought with the power of soaring vocals and
rhythmic accompaniments. Its purpose is to awaken a sense of devotion that our
mundane lives have buried deep within. While Kalam felt the power of qawwali,
he was unsure about the exact meaning of the lyrics; but the invocation of love
for Allah, Prophet Muhammad, Hazrat Ali, or the Khwaja was as plain to him as
it was heart-rending.
Kalam took a train to reach Dehradun for his much anticipated appointment
with the Air Force Selection Board. It passed through the historic city of Meerut,
where India’s First War of Independence began in 1857, and then Piran Kaliyar
near Roorkee, sanctified by the dargah of the thirteenth-century Sufi saint of the
Chishti order, Alauddin Ali Ahmed Sabir Kalyari. Kalam felt imbued with a
calm spiritual energy by the time he reported at 1 AFSB, or the Air Force
Selection Board, located in Clement Town of Dehradun.
Kalam easily cleared the stage one test of the selection process, consisting of
an IQ test and several other examinations conducted on the first day. Twenty-five
candidates were selected for the stage two test, which involved a psychological
evaluation and numerous group trials spread over five days. Kalam cleared all of
them. Finally, an interview was conducted on the last day. Kalam finished ninth
in the batch of twenty-five candidates examined through stage two, to select
eight officers. Kalam could barely contain his dejection: ‘I was deeply
disappointed. It took me some time to comprehend that the opportunity to join
the Air Force had just slipped through my fingers.’2
A despondent Kalam decided to spend sometime in Rishikesh. He bathed in
the Ganga and walked into the Sivananda Ashram situated a little way up the
hill. There, he met Swami Sivananda. His Muslim name aroused no reaction in
Swamiji, who inquired about the source of his sorrow, even before Kalam had
uttered a word. Kalam told him about his unsuccessful attempt to join the Indian
Air Force and his long-cherished desire to fly. Swamiji told him to take life in
his stride as it unfolds: ‘Accept your destiny and go ahead with your life. You are
not destined to become an air force pilot. What you are destined to become is not
clear to you now but it will be at the right time. Forget this failure, for it had its

own purpose to lead you to your destined path. Become one with yourself; that is
all you have to do, the rest is done to you.’
Kalam returned to Delhi and visited the DTD&P (Air) office to inquire about
the result of his interview. They handed him his appointment letter, and he joined
the very next day as a senior scientific assistant (SSA), with a basic salary of Rs
250 per month. He was posted at the Technical Centre (Civil Aviation), where he
would certify and inspect aircraft for airworthiness. If Kalam was not flying
aeroplanes, he would at least be helping to make them fit to fly.
Kalam attended to his work with the discipline of a soldier and equanimity of
a saint. But he would feel pangs of creative energy and wondered at times if
quality assurance was the correct line of work for him. After a few months,
Kalam was sent to the Aircraft and Armament Testing Unit (A&ATU) at Kanpur
to participate in the tropical evaluation of the British Folland Gnat. The Gnat
was a single-seat lightweight ground attack and interceptor fighter aircraft that
was to be inducted into the Indian Air Force. The first flight of an Indian Air
Force Gnat was in the United Kingdom on 11 January 1958. The craft was
delivered to India in the hold of an American military transport aircraft C-119,
and accepted by the Indian Air Force on 30 January 1958.
Even in those days, Kanpur was a crowded city. It was Kalam’s first exposure
to the north Indian winter, and for a young man accustomed to the year-round
warmth of the deep tropics, its chill was a rude shock. He was also troubled by
the ubiquitous potato dishes, served from breakfast to dinner. He felt
overwhelmed by the loneliness that pervaded the city. The people on the streets
had all come from their villages in search of jobs in factories in the city, leaving
behind the scent of their soil and the protection of their families.
Kalam befriended an elderly technician, Rajnath Pandey from Allahabad.
Their relationship started with Kalam enlisting Pandey’s help in buying a quilt to
survive the freezing December nights in Kanpur. Then one day, Pandey invited
Kalam to visit the dargah of Hazrat Sayed Badiuddin Zinda Shah Madar, at
nearby Makanpur. Pandey told Kalam that his family had been visiting the
dargah for more than a hundred years. Kalam was surprised at the devotion of a
Brahmin to a Muslim saint and gladly accepted the invitation. Pandey told
Kalam that Hazrat Madar was the descendant of Prophet Muhammad (peace be
upon him). Kalam was amazed to see thousands of people, particularly non-

Muslims, at the dargah.
Pandey told Kalam that whatever is wished at the dargah would manifest at
the right time. Clearly, people had faith in its power, given the sight of
multitudes of them offering ornate coverings (chadar) to drape the grave. Others
would tie red strings on the trellis around the tomb as wishes (mannat), with the
promise of giving in charity – the most popular kind of beneficence being
provisions for the community kitchen (langar), where the hungry were fed free
of charge and without any discrimination.
Pandey shared with Kalam the horrendous tales of the First War of
Independence. The siege of Cawnpore was a key episode in the war. The
besieged East India Company forces and civilians in Cawnpore surrendered to
rebel forces with assurances of safe passage to Allahabad. Under circumstances
that till now remain unclear and controversial, however, their evacuation from
Cawnpore turned into a brutal massacre in which most of the Company’s men
were killed. And there was further unnecessary carnage. As an East India
Company rescue force from Allahabad approached Cawnpore, 120 British
women and children who had survived the initial onslaught by the revolutionary
forces were killed in what came to be known as the Bibighar massacre.
Following the recapture of Cawnpore and the discovery of the massacre, the
outraged Company forces engaged in widespread retaliatory atrocities against
captured rebel soldiers and local civilians.
Kalam was more than sympathetic with the aims of the Independence
movement. But Pandey’s recounting this ghastly incident from the country’s
freedom struggles reaffirmed his views on war – it only engendered misery, and
there were surely more enlightened ways to solve grievances between peoples. A
domestic war was also brewing in the time that Kalam was in Kanpur. Having
long developed the habit of reading newspapers, particularly the editorial pages,
Kalam was thus aware of the simmering trouble between India and China.
Persecuted by the Chinese military, the Dalai Lama reached the Indian border on
30 March 1959. Indian guards escorted him to the town of Bomdila in the
present-day Arunachal Pradesh.
The Indian government had already agreed to provide asylum to the Dalai
Lama and his followers. Soon after his arrival in Mussoorie on 20 April 1959,
the Dalai Lama met with Prime Minister Nehru, and the two talked about the

Tibetan government in exile, which was to be headquartered at Dharamshala in
Himachal Pradesh. The Dalai Lama’s travails led Kalam to ponder the state of
the world. Why must people of peace and worship face brute military force? Had
evolution made humans more peaceful, or was mankind innately prone to
violence?
Kalam went to Sankisa in nearby Farrukhabad district when the Dalai Lama
visited there, some nine months after his exile to India. Historically known as
Sankasya, Sankisa is one of the four unchanging sacred Buddhist sites, the others
being Bodhgaya, where all Buddhas attain enlightenment; Sarnath, where they
begin their teachings; and Shravasti, where they extend the teaching and defeat
doctrinal opponents. At Sankisa, all Buddhas descend to earth after spending the
rainy season retreat in heaven. During his visit to Sankisa, the Dalai Lama spoke
about the kalachakra.
Kalam later read about the kalachakra tradition, which deals with cycles of
time. His avid reading of Western philosophy and Eastern wisdom was leading
him inevitably to an understanding that science is intrinsic to spirituality, and
vice versa. Moreover, the laws that govern the universe are not merely in
consonance with spiritual principles; they pertain as much to atoms as they do to
our experience of life.
Around this time, man was experimenting with science and the atom with the
reckless ignorance of a teenager. On 13 February 1960, France conducted its first
nuclear test, code named Gerboise Bleue (Blue Desert Rat) in the Sahara Desert
of Algeria. With an explosive yield of seventy kilotons, it was around four times
as powerful as the Hiroshima bomb; and it was exploded above ground, where it
would lay waste the surrounds. Army personnel were deployed at the site,
human guinea pigs for the scientists to gather a better understanding of the
effects of radiation on the human body. Lives were ruined here, not to mention
the massive environmental degradation and the eradication of numerous species
at the site. This was a sinister perversion of science, and a misuse of the powers
in the universe. How could man wreak such havoc on his own species and his
own planet?
Kalam spent many lonely nights pondering such existential questions. He was
not grown enough to know the answers; but the questions were agitating his
mind nonetheless. He could see that violence, reconciliation and cooperation are

all part of human nature. He felt that evolution didn’t just shape man to be
violent or peaceful: it shaped man to respond flexibly and adaptively to different
circumstances – and to risk violence only when it made adaptive sense to do so.
Kalam was pained that instead of competing for food, which had become
relatively easy to attain in most parts of the world, mankind was now competing
for material resources like oil and minerals.