No Free Lunch

Between stimulus and response there is a space. In that space is our power to choose our
response. In our response lies our growth and our freedom.
– Viktor E. Frankl
Neurologist and Holocaust survivor

pace research activities were initiated in India during the early 1960s, when
applications using satellites were in the experimental stages, even in the
United States. With the live transmission of the Tokyo Olympic Games across
the Pacific by the American Satellite ‘Syncom-3’ demonstrating the power of
communication satellites, Prime Minister Nehru quickly recognized the benefits
of space technology for India. The space programme, although originally the
private vision of a few scientists, was quickly elevated to one of the highestpriority programmes of the Indian state.
A new organization, INCOSPAR, was set up in 1962 under the Department of
Atomic Energy with Dr Vikram Sarabhai, director of the Physical Research
Laboratory (PRL) in Ahmedabad, at the helm. The organization was tasked with
formulating the Indian space programme. Dr Vikram Sarabhai was a playful,
Shri Krishna-like successor to the solemn and remote Dr Homi Bhabha. Like
Shri Krishna, Dr Sarabhai was versatile, playing several roles in his efforts to
nurture the inchoate space programme in its early years. He was a roving
diplomat, teacher, strategist, friend, counsellor, leader and system builder. Within
India, the unusual combination of his scientific eminence, aristocratic
background and disarming simplicity created a loving loyalty – often amounting
to devotion – among those who knew him.
The sheer force of Sarabhai’s personality subdued cluttering dissent, a typical
malady in Indian organizations. His reputation enabled him to slice through the

S

bureaucratic jungle; he was assured of loyal support at all levels – from the peon
to the prime minister. As his predecessor did before him, Dr Sarabhai set out to
secure cooperation from the spacefaring powers. He first turned to the United
States.
Dr Sarabhai initially made overtures to NASA (National Aeronautics and
Space Administration) in 1961, during his stint as a visiting Professor at the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), Massachusetts. He told NASA of
India’s plans to start a space science research programme at select facilities,
namely, the Physical Research Laboratory, Ahmedabad; the Tata Institute of
Fundamental Research, Bombay; and the Tata Institute of Nuclear Physics
(TINP), Calcutta. He also described his plans to recruit trained Indian physicists
for European countries and the United States.
During his meetings with NASA officials, Dr Sarabhai explored possible
cooperative endeavours that could be mutually beneficial to both NASA and
India, including magnetic fields, solar radio astronomy, geomagnetism,
atmospheric studies from 30 to 150 kilometres, trapped particles in radiation
belts and electrojet studies. With the intention of furthering these fields of
research, Dr Sarabhai discussed the possibility of a cooperative sounding rocket
programme between India and NASA and also a telemetry receiving facility at
PRL in Ahmedabad.
Sounding rockets are one- or two-stage solid propellant rockets used for
probing the upper atmospheric regions and for space research. They also serve as
easily affordable platforms to test or prove prototypes of new components or
subsystems, intended for use in launch vehicles and satellites. NASA had
developed sounding rockets that played an important role in the International
Geophysical Year (IGY), an eighteen-month period (1 July 1957 to 31 December
1958) coinciding with high solar activity. The IGY entailed an intensive
investigation of the natural environment – the earth, the oceans and the
atmosphere – by some 30,000 participants representing sixty-six nations. More
than 300 instrumented sounding rockets launched from sites around the world
made significant discoveries regarding the atmosphere, the ionosphere, cosmic
radiation, auroras and geomagnetism.
While INCOSPAR was being constituted, the United Nations Committee on
the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space (COPUOS) passed a resolution recommending

and sponsoring the creation and use of sounding rocket launching facilities,
especially in the equatorial regions in the southern hemisphere. Taking the cue
from the United Nations, Indian scientists proposed a site in southern India to
NASA. To help choose the most appropriate location, NASA shared volumes of
their Wallops Island handbooks.
The coastal village of Thumba, (8°33'N, 76°56'E), in the state of Kerala, was
judged a suitable location. Its proximity to the magnetic equator (0°24'S) was
ideal for launching sounding rockets to undertake geographical investigations,
particularly those dealing with the interaction of neutral and charged particles in
the earth’s magnetic field.
INCOSPAR commenced its work as part of the Tata Institute of Fundamental
Research, led by Prof. M.G.K. Menon. Its first task was to recruit the cream of
India’s young scientists with expertise in this sphere and groom them with the
necessary skills and competencies to fulfil their new roles. It was this that had
brought Prof. Menon to the Aeronautical Development Establishment,
Bangalore, where he had identified Kalam as one of his new young charges for
the organization. Kalam was awed by Dr Vikram Sarabhai, the head of
INCOSPAR, not the least for his graciousness in their first meeting; but also for
his almost clairvoyant manner of appraising Kalam in his interview in Mumbai:
There was none of the arrogance or the patronising attitudes, which interviewers usually display
when talking to a young and vulnerable candidate. Dr Sarabhai’s questions did not probe my
existing knowledge or skills; rather they were an exploration of the possibilities I was filled with.
He was looking at me as if in reference to a larger whole. 1

The primary objective for the new team of scientists was fairly
straightforward. They were to establish a modest rocket-launching facility at
Thumba and provide facilities to the international scientific community to gather
data. Although Dr Sarabhai must have had this in mind, there was initially no
mention of developing satellites or launching vehicles.
Although Trivandrum was the state capital of Kerala, it was a somnolent and
unhurried town with nineteenth-century tiled houses lost amidst coconut palms.
The roads were narrow and curvy, with sharp turns and fast-changing slopes.
Kalam knew no cooking, and there were hardly any eating places there at that
time. He boarded with his other colleagues in a lodging house that provided the

most basic amenities. Many of the scientists would visit the railway canteen for
meals. As there was no canteen even at the workplace, each of them would buy
his snacks and lunch after eating breakfast and go to the bus stand, to catch a
mofussil bus to Kazhakkutam. After alighting from the bus they would walk for
about a kilometre. The trip would take around an hour.
Thumba was a small village known only for fishing. The site at Thumba lay
between the railway line and the seacoast, and covered an area of approximately
600 acres. Within this area stood an ancient church of St Mary Magdalene at
Pallithura and the bishop’s residence. Prof. Vikram Sarabhai met many
politicians and bureaucrats to procure the site, but to no avail. Resolute to
succeed, and with almost evangelical zeal for the purity of his mission, Prof.
Sarabhai decided to meet the bishop and plead his case personally. At that time,
Reverend Father Peter Bernard Pereira was the bishop. Prof. Sarabhai met him
on a Saturday. The bishop heard him patiently and asked him to come to the
Sunday morning mass where he would present the matter before the community.
Kalam would later recall the vision and high-mindedness with which the bishop
requested his congregation’s support for the Thumba facility:
The bishop said, ‘My children, I have a famous scientist with me who wants our church and the
place I live for the work of space science research. It is true that science enriches human life. What
he is doing and what I am doing are the same. Within six months, our abode and church will be
newly built and given to us. Children, can we give them God’s abode, my abode and your abode for
a scientific mission?’ There was a pin-drop silence for a moment, ruptured by a loud ‘Amen’ from
the congregation.2

The newly built rocket launching pad was set amidst coconut groves, and the
church building served as the main office for the scientists. The bishop’s house
was converted into a workshop. A cattle shed became the laboratory for the
sounding rockets. There were no strict working hours, and it was common
practice for the scientists to time their departure to the last bus of the evening.
Soon, a jeep was acquired for transporting the scientists home after late-night
shifts. While the facility creation work was in progress, it was decided to send
seven rocket engineers for training with NASA. Kalam was one of these seven.
Kalam landed at the Langley Research Center (LaRC) in Hampton, Virginia,
United States, in March 1963. The Center conducted basic research in a variety

of fields for aeronautical and space flight and had management responsibility for
the Lunar Orbiter and Viking projects and the Scout launch vehicles. Kalam
found the presence here of his colleague Ramabhadran Aravamudan a great
blessing. Aravamudan had arrived six months earlier to learn radar tracking,
radio telemetry and other ground instrumentation systems. They lived in the
hostel attached to the centre and would eat at the self-service cafeteria. One of
their challenges was trying to pick vegetarian fare from the typically American
carnivorous offerings at the cafeteria. Mashed potatoes, boiled beans or peas,
bread and lots of milk became their staple diet during their time at LaRC.
After completing their training at LaRC, Kalam and Aravamudan went to
Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) at Greenbelt, Maryland. This facility was
named after Dr Robert H. Goddard, a rocket theorist as well as practical inventor
who first launched a liquid-propellant rocket in March 1926. Goddard Space
Flight Center was responsible for unmanned spacecraft and sounding rocket
experiments. It operated the worldwide Space Tracking and Data Acquisition
Network (STADAN), which later became Spaceflight Tracking and Data
Network (STDN). It also managed development of the Thor-Delta launch
vehicle, which was to be used for the first ballistic missile deployed by the
United States Air Force.
In the third and final phase of their training, Kalam and Aravamudan were
posted at the Wallops Flight Center (WFC) at Wallops Island in Virginia, which
was the only rocket flight-test range owned and operated by NASA. Wallops
launched Scout boosters and sounding rocket experiments, with instrumentation
developed by scientists and engineers throughout the United States and the
world.
On weekends, Kalam and Aravamudan would go to Washington DC in an old
Dakota plane, which NASA used to fly free of cost for its employees. Hotels in
Washington would offer discounted room rates for NASA personnel but the rate
was still around $6 per night, which was an exorbitant amount for them. The pair
would stay up, roaming around the nation’s capital in the quiet hours of the
night, before catching the early-morning shuttle flight back to Wallops.
Immediately upon Kalam’s return to Thumba, the Nike Apache rocket was
successfully launched with the Vapour Cloud payload on 21 November 1963.
This marked the beginning of the Indian space programme. It was followed by

the launch of Russian M-100 and French Centaure sounding rockets. While the
M-100 could carry a payload of 70 kg to an altitude of 85 km, the Centaure was
capable of reaching altitudes of 150 km with a payload of approximately 30 km.
The launch pads were still being built. The only covered buildings were the
church, the bishop’s house and a small school building – and all of them had
been vacated because they came within the safety zone. These served as offices,
storage houses and laboratories. Since the only vehicle was always busy, the
scientists had to either walk or use a bicycle to move within the range. Kalam,
who was not a cyclist, would hitch a ride with Aravamudan. Even rocket parts
and payloads were transported on bicycles. Decades later, Aravamudan fondly
recalled their time at Thumba, which was characterized by plenty of hard work
interspersed with light-hearted entertainment:
During launch campaigns we had no weekends or holidays. But at other times, we would either go
to the beaches at Kovalam or Shankumukham or catch an old Hollywood movie at Srikumar
Theatre. Kalam, being from Rameswaram, loved to swim; he would spend hours on the beach at
Kovalam. Though Kalam was a vegetarian, he loved the egg masala with parantha at Xavier’s
College on the Main Road near the Secretariat.3

In 1965, TERLS (Thumba Equatorial Rocket Launching Station) rented a
beautiful old building called ‘Ingledine’ opposite the Trivandrum Raj Bhavan
and converted it into a club with two badminton courts, a table tennis table and a
room for card games. Kalam was an enthusiastic badminton player. He took
great interest in setting up the club, buying furniture, getting a canteen going and
so forth. Every evening there would be friendly badminton matches, with the
losers having to shout the winners a bonji each, which is how a glass of lime
juice was referred to in Trivandrum. Kalam would doggedly fight a match to
earn a free bonji.
While his leisure time was filled with the standard diversions of young
bachelors, Kalam’s work was anything but mundane: ‘At TERLS, I was
involved with building payload housing and jettisonable nose cones. Working
with the nose cones led me, as a natural consequence, into the field of composite
materials.’4
The exigency in aerospace for light, strong and temperature-resistant
materials has always made developing high performance composites a primary

research activity of aerospace organizations worldwide. In a related initiative in
the ongoing quest to lighten its rockets, NASA had achieved weight savings of
25 to 30 per cent with filament-wound motors over comparable all-metallic
vessels. Kalam was tasked with formulating advanced composite materials and
setting up India’s first filament-winding machine, to build non-magnetic payload
housings for the two-stage sounding rockets and rocket motor casings.
Kalam approached his new assignments with hallmark enthusiasm. He was by
now utilizing his interpersonal skills at work almost as much as his analytical
and scientific talents. Kalam relied not merely on tapping the inspiration and
expertise within his team. He would engage with select industry scientists and
engineers, who would readily proffer their knowledge and support to help
achieve these pioneering indigenous efforts in aerospace. Kalam’s trademark
charismatic personality was just beginning to play its part in matters of national
significance.
Rockets had first made their impression on the world in south India, under
Hyder Ali and Tipu Sultan late in the eighteenth century. These Mysorean rulers
had successfully deployed thousands of Mysorean rockets against British East
India Company forces, who had been awed by their glare and terrifying
destruction. Now, Kalam and his team brought rockets back to the subcontinent
with the first Indian-designed and Indian-built space rocket, the RH-75. This
sounding rocket, designated for its 75 mm diameter, was an outstanding success
– due in no small part to Kalam’s pivotal work. The RH-75 made its maiden
flight on 20 November 1967. This was the fifty-second launch of a sounding
rocket from TERLS. The RH-75 was flown twice again in 1967 and another
twelve times in 1968, making a total of fifteen RH-75 flights.
Prime Minister Indira Gandhi formally dedicated TERLS to the United
Nations on 2 February 1968. After the ceremony, Dr Sarabhai invited the prime
minister to the Rocket Engineering Division. Pointing his fingers towards Kalam
and his younger colleague C.R. Sathya, Dr Sarabhai said to the prime minister,
‘They are waiting for you to switch on the machine.’ A smiling Indira Gandhi
quipped, ‘Is it so? What does this machine do?’ Kalam suggested Sathya should
answer. Nervous to the core in the presence of this august personage, Sathya
briefly explained the machine’s working and its importance. ‘Glad to know
about it, where is the switch?’ asked the jubilant prime minister. The event

brought smiles to the faces of Dr Vikram Sarabhai, Kalam and, of course,
Sathya.
Dr Sarabhai argued that technology in space was practically worthless
without a vast array of other technological systems on the ground. It was
therefore imperative that an Indian National Satellite System was developed.
This would ensure that the practical benefits of advanced technologies,
particularly telecommunications, broadcasting, meteorology and search and
rescue operations could be deployed for the service of the Indian people. Dr
Sarabhai told Kalam it is important for everyone working in the organization to
be mindful that the plans for space technology were driven by real needs on
land.
During the early 1960s, NASA was planning a series of advanced technology
satellites known by the acronym ATS. There was a need to field-test an ATS
configuration which involved the direct broadcast of television to receivers from
a satellite. At the time, this technology was untested. The commercial and
political advantages of a satellite system that could beam programmes directly to
television sets attracted NASA policymakers, though.
The three countries that were large enough and close enough to the equator
for testing a direct-broadcast satellite were Brazil, China and India. Brazil
proved uninterested; the population was concentrated in a few cities, and
conventional television broadcast technology was clearly more feasible. The
People’s Republic of China was out of the picture for political reasons. India was
the logical choice. It was densely populated, yet only Delhi had a television
transmitter – a small one, left behind by a Dutch electronics company after a
trade show.
Dr Sarabhai prudently seized this opportunity. He requested NASA to allow
the use of an ATS satellite for a year to conduct a satellite instructional television
experiment in India’s villages. He saw this as a great opportunity to convince
India of the need to invest heavily in space technology and a unique chance to
learn the ground segment of a satellite system from the Americans. Moreover, he
saw it as a chance to baptize a whole generation of Indian scientists and
engineers in this avant-garde technology, so that they could make their own
satellite in the future. The Indian Department of Atomic Energy and NASA
signed an agreement for the Satellite Instructional Television Experiment (SITE)

in 1966.
Dr Vikram Sarabhai was a visionary. His brilliance in his field was coupled
with a revolutionary desire to use technology for the betterment of his country
and its people, and was perhaps only surpassed by his enlightened management
and diplomacy. Kalam venerated Sarabhai, and his unconscious was filled with a
desire to emulate his achievements. He later marvelled at Dr Sarabhai’s inherent
gift for reaching out and securing international cooperation:‘Vikram Sarabhai
enjoyed global stature. While he secured cooperation of NASA in the Satellite
Instructional Television Experiment (SITE) programme, the first Indian satellite,
Aryabhata, was put into orbit in 1975 from a Russian cosmodrome.’5
The Indian government soon enough recognized the imminent role of space
communications in nation building, and an Experimental Satellite
Communication Earth Station (ESCES) was established in 1967 at Ahmedabad.
On 15 August 1969, INCOSPAR, under the Department of Atomic Energy, was
made independent as the Indian Space Research Organization, and the
Department of Space was created by the prime minster of India,
institutionalizing space activities in India.
Kalam had been instrumental in the birth of India’s aerospace programme,
and as Dr Sarabhai had anticipated, it led to a thriving technological sector in the
country. India, which had languished in the nineteenth century in many respects,
was now propelled towards the twenty-first century by this visionary scientist
and his team. Kalam was determined to build on the work of Dr Sarabhai, and
like this brilliant, noble man, Kalam had his own vision for the country. And he
knew from the challenges he had faced in developing indigenous technology, his
vision would entail plenty of hard work. It is impossible to get something for
nothing. But most significantly, the RH-75 project had demonstrated to him the
freedom that comes with strength and self-reliance.

1.8

Unreasonable Men

Human progress is neither automatic nor inevitable. It requires sacrifice, suffering, and
struggle; the tireless exertions and passionate concern of dedicated individuals.
– Martin Luther King Jr
African-American Civil Rights movement leader

n January 1968, Kalam received a message that Dr Sarabhai wanted to
urgently see him in Delhi. Travelling to Delhi from Trivandrum was no simple
matter in the late 1960s. After changing many flights, Kalam reached Delhi and
contacted Dr Sarabhai’s office for an appointment. He was asked to meet Dr
Sarabhai at 3.30 a.m. at the Hotel Ashok. Why 3.30 a.m.? The secretary offered
no explanation. Unsure about how to reach there at that ungodly hour, Kalam
decided to wait in the lobby of the hotel overnight. A dinner at the hotel was
beyond his means, so he ate in a roadside eatery and came to the lobby by 11
p.m. He identified himself at reception as a guest of Dr Sarabhai and was
escorted to an elegant lounge. He had never seen such opulent surroundings.
After some moments of astonishment, Kalam noticed a book kept on a nearby
sofa; its owner must have absent-mindedly left it there, he thought. To fill the
long hours of waiting constructively, Kalam picked up the book and started
browsing through it. It was a popular self-help book, the kind that tells the reader
he is born to win, born to be rich, born to succeed. Kalam observed, during his
training in the United States, that self-help books were very popular in America.
It was not that such books couldn’t be found in India; they were just less
prevalent. But their popularity in America was too powerful a phenomenon to
overlook. These books, dispensing advice to millions on matters physical,
psychological and spiritual, must be making a difference in the lives of their
readers.

I

He was skimming over paragraphs and turning pages rather nonchalantly
when a passage captured his attention. It was a quotation from George Bernard
Shaw. The gist of the quote was that all reasonable men adapt themselves to the
world. Only a few unreasonable ones try to change the world. All progress in the
world comes from these unreasonable men. Waiting in the lobby in the middle of
the night for an appointment a few hours later was certainly not a reasonable
proposition for Kalam. Nor was a 3.30 a.m. appointment reasonable for Dr
Sarabhai, who had, nevertheless, set its time.
The whole scenario was at best unorthodox. But Dr Vikram Sarabhai was, by
most measures, an unorthodox man. An egalitarian scientist of patrician lineage,
he was successfully running an understaffed, overworked enterprise pioneering
space research in India, a country that seemed indifferent to technology. For his
part, Kalam appeared somewhat eccentric in manner. He looked careless, casual
and sloppy – but he had a hawk’s eye on his interests, consistency in his purpose
and an appetite for hard work only rivalled by his tenacity. Moreover, his
scientific acumen was balanced with a firm belief in God, from which he derived
inspiration:
I have been always a religious person in the sense that I maintain a working partnership with God. I
was aware that the best work required more ability than I would ever possess and therefore I needed
help that only God could give me. So I must make a true estimate of my own ability, then raise it by
50 per cent by putting myself in God’s hand and then get down to work with no doubts and fears in
my mind.1

While Kalam sat and read, whiling away the time in the early hours of the
morning, another man entered the lobby and seated himself opposite Kalam.
Neither man bothered to interact, leave alone make pleasantries. From his
mannerisms, gait and taut appearance, he was perhaps a service officer. He was
well built; his hair was neatly trimmed and combed; he was wearing a suit with a
striped tie; his shoes were shining – and notwithstanding the odd hours he sat
erect, looking alert and animated. He seemed, in contrast to Kalam, to be quite at
ease in the hotel’s luxurious surroundings. And quite disconcertingly, he
appeared to almost look straight through Kalam, as if he were not there at all.
Despite his aloofness, there was some magnetism in this man, and it
distracted Kalam from his reading. He was saved from his distraction soon

enough, however, by Dr Sarabhai’s secretary, who stepped into the lobby and
announced that Dr Sarabhai was ready to meet ‘them’. Who was this man? In
whichever way he was connected to Dr Sarabhai, why should Dr Sarabhai meet
them together, wondered Kalam. Dr Sarabhai received them with his
characteristic charm and introduced them to each other. ‘Good morning,
gentlemen. Kalam is my colleague in Space; Kalam, he is Group Captain
Narayanan from Air Headquarters.’
Dr Sarabhai ordered coffee and outlined his plan of developing a rocketassisted take-off (RATO) system for military aircraft. This would help our
warplanes to take off from short runways in the Himalayas, he informed his
contrasting guests. Hot coffee arrived, and Dr Sarabhai most graciously engaged
his young guests in light conversation. As soon as the coffee and discussion
concluded, Dr Sarabhai rose to his feet and asked them to accompany him to the
Tilpat Range, near Faridabad, south of Delhi.
It was about an hour’s drive to the range, which was functioning at the time as
an Air Force Depot. Dr Sarabhai showed them a Russian RATO plane parked
there. It was not covered, and Kalam felt that it had only just arrived, perhaps as
recently as a day earlier. ‘Rockets have been used simply to assist the main
propulsion in the form of rocket-assisted take-off. Because of the heavy
propellant use and the various practical difficulties of operating rockets, the
majority of rocket planes have been built for experimental use, as interceptor
fighters and space aircraft.’
Dr Sarabhai spoke to the two younger men with the ease and fluency of a
master teacher. ‘If I get you guys the rockets for study, would you be able to
make indigenous equivalents and mount them on our HF-24 aircraft in eighteen
months’ time?’ ‘Yes, we can,’ both men affirmed simultaneously. Dr Sarabhai’s
face beamed, reflecting their enthusiasm. He dropped them back outside the
Ashok Hotel and proceeded for his breakfast meeting with the prime minister. In
an instant, Kalam understood the reasonableness behind the unreasonable
meeting time of 3.30 a.m.
The next day’s newspapers carried a story on India taking up the indigenous
development of rocket-assisted take-off aircraft. Kalam realized that for the first
time in his life, he was working not for a project, his organization or even an
enlightened boss like Dr Sarabhai. He was working for his country. He was

working for India. It was a thrilling feeling, one that Kalam had never had
before. He understood now that patriotism is much more than a conviction that
your country is superior to all others because you were born in it. He trembled
when he heard of the confidence that had been expressed in him.
The next day he went to the library of the National Defence College on Tees
January Marg and sat for a few hours to learn about RATO aeroplanes. Rocketpowered flight was pioneered in Germany. The first aircraft to fly under rocket
power was the Lippisch Ente (‘Duck’ in German), in 1928. The first rocket plane
ever to be mass-produced was the Messerschmitt Me163 interceptor in 1944, one
of several German World War II attempts at rocket-powered aircraft. Russians
flew the Bereznyak-Isayev BI-1 in 1942. The Japanese also produced
approximately 850 Yokosuka MXY-7 Ohka rocket-powered suicide-attack
aircraft in World War II.
In 1947, the rocket-powered Bell X-1 was the first aircraft to break the speed
of sound in level flight and the first of a series of National Advisory Committee
for Aeronautics (NACA)/NASA rocket-powered aircraft. The North American
X-15 and X-15A-2 designs were used for around a decade and eventually
reached Mach 6.7 and over 100 kilometres in altitude. In the 1950s, the British
developed mixed-power designs to augment the performance of the then current
turbojet designs. The rocket was employed in short bursts to deliver the speed
and height required for high-speed interception of high-level bombers, and the
more efficient turbojet engine was otherwise used. Increased turbojet engine
output, the advent of missiles and advances in radar had rendered this
configuration obsolete by the time of Kalam’s meeting at the Ashok Hotel. But
in order to defend the high altitude of its territory, from short runways in the
Himalayas, India needed its own RATO planes.
The Russian RATO system shown to Kalam and Narayanan at the Tilpat
Range was capable of generating a 3000 kgf thrust with a total impulse of
24,500 kilogram seconds. It weighed 220 kilograms, and had a double-based
propellant encased in steel. The development work was to be carried out at the
Space Science and Technology Centre (SSTC) where Kalam was working with
the Defence Research and Development Organization (DRDO), HAL, DTD&P
(Air), and Air Headquarters where Narayanan was posted. The project relied on
cooperation between organizations and people, and it suited Kalam admirably.

Kalam always believed in the sanctity of institutions. India’s ancient civilization,
he felt, had survived invasion, colonial rule and all manner of setbacks because
its people lived as members of institutions – of families and communities –
rather than as individuals. Indian people derived meaning in their lives not from
their individual strength, but from living in harmonious social relationships.
By this time, Kalam knew that technology is only purposeful with reference
to people, who must use it for their benefit. He knew full well that any promising
early-stage technologies developed in the laboratories require ‘maturation’, in
the form of additional development, testing, prototyping, and eventually their
intended application. He therefore opted for a composite structure for the RATO
motor, using filament fibreglass and epoxy. The filament winding machine
facility was fully operational, and he needed a good ‘product’ to make it mature.
He decided to use another two nascent technologies in the project, namely
composite propellant with event-based ignition and a real-time jettisoning
system.
The first static test of the RATO motor was conducted in February 1969.
Another sixty-four tests followed in the next four months. All this was
accomplished with only twenty engineers working on the project – and some
astute management. The marriage of technology and human skills holds infinite
promise, but it is hard to properly realize. Through the RATO project, Kalam
learned the secret of managing technology-intensive projects. Failure of these
most often lies in the execution, specifically the mishandling of the technology.
Lack of knowledge and inadequacy of skills lead to this mishandling.
Knowledge and skills must therefore be fostered for success: knowledge comes
from learning; skills come by doing. And there are no short cuts here.
RATO brought forth a more profound understanding of leadership in Kalam.
Dr Sarabhai fascinated him, and Kalam’s admiration for his boss bordered on
idolization; but he felt no wish to emulate his inimitable style. Working on the
RATO helped Kalam realize that leadership was something that could be learned
and developed over time. Leadership was a function of specific internal
processes and interpersonal skills that are accessible to everyone, not only a
select few. The perceptions, behaviours and skills that individuals integrate to
motivate others to action play a critical role in the success or failure of new
ventures, projects and goals. In order to master these skills, individuals must

view them as competencies – behaviours that require careful reflection,
evaluation and practice.
Kalam shared with me four internally oriented and four externally oriented
competencies. ‘It is useless to go for externally oriented competencies without
working on internally oriented ones,’ he would say. The internal work includes
gaining self-awareness, asking powerful questions, communicating with a
purpose and developing an entrepreneurial mindset. The externally oriented
competencies that follow the internal mastery are how to manage and mobilize
change, how to collaborate with others, leverage differences to maximize
performance and become more resilient and adaptable.
Two significant developments occurred during the RATO project. The first
was the release of a ten-year profile for space research in the country by Dr
Sarabhai. This document made it clear that the long-term priorities of the ISRO
would be linked to national development. Telecommunications, remote sensing
for resource surveys and meteorology were the areas identified where ISRO
would best serve the nation’s progress. Furthermore, the active international
cooperation dominant in the early years of the Indian space programme was to
be dispensed with. The organization would now become largely self-reliant; its
work would revolve around the development and deployment of more
indigenous technology.
Kalam was a pioneer of this swadeshi space programme, and the new regime
was especially favourable for his resourceful, self-motivated approach. He had
proved his mettle with the RH-75 rocket project, which had indeed inspired
confidence in the halls of power to take the ISRO in this bold new direction.
From now, the ISRO’s objectives would have to be realized by the designing,
fabricating and launching of Indian satellites, including geosynchronous ones,
with Indian launch vehicles.
The second development was the formation of a Missile Panel in the Ministry
of Defence. Kalam was invited as a member of the panel with Narayanan. The
bitter lessons of the 1962 war had been duly noted. The national leadership felt
there was now little choice but to pursue a similar swadeshi approach to
developing military hardware and weapon systems. To cater for immediate
demands of national defence until indigenous systems could be deployed, a large
number of Surface-to-Air Missiles (SAMs) were obtained from Soviet Russia.

Narayanan was appointed director of Defence Research and Development
Laboratory (DRDL), Hyderabad, to fast-track the development of indigenous
missile systems.
While working together on RATO motors and on the Missile Panel, Kalam
and Narayanan alternately played the roles of student and teacher, as demanded
by the situation. Narayanan was very eager to learn about rocketry, and Kalam
was very curious to know about airborne weapon systems. Opposites in many
ways, they had much to learn from each other, even in terms of their approaches
to tasks, though they were equally focused on their work. Kalam would later
write admiringly of Narayanan’s commitment to the duties before him:
The depth of Narayanan’s conviction and his force of application were inspiring. Right from the day
of our pre-dawn visit to the Tilpat Range with Dr Sarabhai, Narayanan was always busy with the
RATO motor. He had arranged everything that was required before being asked. ‘You name the
thing and I will get it for you, but do not ask for time,’ he said. At times, I laughed at his
impatience.2

When Kalam compiled the Bill of Material for the RATO motor, he realized that
virtually nothing indigenous was available. He felt despondent. Was there no
remedy or alternative? Would the Indian nation be doomed forever to the farce
of ‘screwdriver science’ – importing and assembling other countries’ creations?
Could a developing country afford to produce this kind of technology?
Kalam identified procurement procedures as the root of indigenous
development woes. He enumerated seven points, or seven liberties he proposed
be granted him. These were: single-point financial approval and no up-and-down
movement of paper in the bureaucratic hierarchy; air travel for all people on
work irrespective of their rank-based entitlement; accountability to only one
person; lifting of goods by air cargo; involvement of the private sector wherever
possible; placement of orders based on technical competence and not on the
lowest price; and expeditious accounting procedures. None of the seven points
were scientific, but the lack of such proactive approaches was hampering
science’s progress in the country.
Such demands were unheard of in government establishments. But if the
RATO project was an entirely new game, what was wrong with a new set of
rules? How could procedures laid down by colonial officers – and premised on a

fundamental mistrust of Indian people – continue to be employed in the vain
hope that projects of national importance would be accomplished? When Dr
Sarabhai stipulated an eighteen-month deadline for delivering an indigenous
RATO system, could he give the freedom to work efficiently? And Dr Sarabhai
did. Upon hearing Kalam’s plea for administrative liberalization – and seeing the
inherent sense of his proposals – Dr Sarabhai approved the seven-point plan
without a second thought.
That day, Kalam learned from Dr Sarabhai that trust is the basis of all
business. If trust is lacking, the parties involved must take the necessary steps to
allow it to improve. The foundation of trust should permeate every aspect of
your organization. Work on RATO progressed without glitches thereafter, and it
indeed became a glowing success story of indigenization.
RATO taught Kalam the power of integrity and the importance of truthful
communication. Its success was largely due to its treating people in the
organization as deserving to know the facts. Dr Sarabhai knew that you cannot
give your staff half the story. You cannot hide the story. You must treat them as
true equals. And as you communicate honestly and you communicate truthfully
and you communicate with respect, your people will work for you to the best of
their ability; they will work for you whenever you need them, and they will work
harder than you have requested. With this lesson, it was time for Kalam to now
move on to another plane.