The Paradise of Hope

Three grand essentials to happiness in this life are something to do, something to love, and
something to hope for.
– Joseph Addison
Seventeenth-century English essayist

t was on the second day of the sixth month of the year 1350 in the Islamic
calendar, corresponding to Thursday, the fifteenth day of October in 1931, that
Jainulabdeen and Ashiamma were blessed with the arrival of their fifth child and
fourth son. The boy was born, as children mostly were in those times, in their
ancestral home: a modest traditional house with a small, tiled verandah facing
the street, near the Ramanathaswamy Temple on Pamban Island.
Pamban Island is steeped in religious tradition and history. Located 2
kilometres from the mainland between peninsular India and Sri Lanka, its 30kilometre-long land mass narrows to a fine point, reaching towards Sri Lanka. It
has two main settlements: Pamban and Rameswaram. Pamban, situated at the
western edge of Pamban Island, is a fishing village and a harbour; it is the main
point of entry to Rameswaram, the larger settlement,which is one of the most
sacred Hindu religious sites in the country.
Rameswaram is a pilgrimage destination for countless Hindus every year. The
erstwhile town of Dhanushkodi, which was laid waste by a cyclonic storm in
1964, is at the southern opposite tip of the island, closest to Sri Lanka. In the
years that Jainulabdeen and his wife Ashiamma were raising their family,
Dhanushkodi was still a thriving town, supported largely by devotees of the
Rama temple. It is believed that the god Hanuman with his army of monkeys
constructed a bridge here to Lanka for Lord Rama’s army.
Rameswara means ‘Lord of Rama’ in Sanskrit; an epithet of Shiva, the

I

presiding deity of the Ramanathaswamy Temple. According to the Hindu epic
Ramayana, Rama, the seventh avatar of the god Vishnu, prayed to Shiva here to
absolve any sins that he might have committed during his war against the demon
king Ravana in Sri Lanka, about 50 kilometres away. In much later times, Islam
arrived on the island through Malik Kafur, the head general of Alauddin Khilji,
the ruler of the Delhi Sultanate. Malik Kafur reached Rameswaram during his
three military campaigns in the early fourteenth century, in spite of stiff
resistance from the Pandyan princes.
The region remained a conflict zone over the following centuries, and was
ruled variously by the Nawab of Carnatic, the Nawab of Arcot, and Muhammed
Yusuf Khan, a warrior in the Arcot troops. In 1795, Rameswaram came under
the direct control of the British East India Company and was annexed to the
Madras Presidency. By the time of British rule, Christianity had arrived on the
island, and its devoted band of adherents joined the equally devoted Muslims
and Hindus on this small but hallowed piece of land in the Palk Strait.
Jainulabdeen was a pious man. He lived with his family in a community
whose economy was based on marine products – fish and shells – and the
business of providing basic services and provisions to the island’s pilgrims. He
also owned a small coconut grove, 4 miles from his house. The sixth month in
the Hijri calendar is known as Jumada Al-Thani; it is on the twentieth day of this
month that Prophet Muhammad was blessed with the birth of his daughter
Fatima Zahra. On this day in 1931, Jainulabdeen named his infant son Abdul
Kalam – quite aptly, as Kalam’s life would unfold – after the great Indian scholar
and eminent political leader of the Indian Independence movement, Abul Kalam
Azad. Jainulabdeen and Ashiamma’s boy was thus called ‘Azad’ as he grew up
in his joint family of ten children.
Azad’s mother Ashiamma hailed from an affluent Tamil Muslim family. One
of her forebears had been bestowed the title of Bahadur by the British. She had
married Jainulabdeen at the age of twenty-five and given birth to five children,
Azad being the last. After Azad’s arrival in the family, Jainulabdeen became
imam of the local mosque. His congenial ways and inscrutable conduct won him
respect and social influence across the three religious communities on Pamban
Island. He enjoyed close friendships with the chief priest of Rameswaram
temple, Pakshi Lakshmana Shastrigal, and Rev. Father Bodal, the priest of the

Christian fishing community and builder of St Antony’s Church at Oriyur on the
eastern shore of the island.
Jainulabdeen and Ashiamma gave Azad quite a comfortable childhood. Life’s
basic amenities – shelter, food, clothing and education – were provided, and all
of life’s complications were kindly managed. Of greater significance, though,
were the loving environment they fostered at home and the example they set for
young Azad in their routine. Of the more formative lessons early in Azad’s life
was the willing daily toil of his parents to make ends meet. While the family was
not especially poor by the standards of the time, scarcity was a constant
challenge. Azad would get up early in the morning and watch his parents settling
down to work immediately after their Fajr (daybreak) prayer. Even before the
sun emerged out of the sea, Azad would see his father heading out to their
coconut grove. He would mimic Jainulabdeen, stepping out of the house before
daybreak and playing in the fresh air alive with the cacophony of seabirds.
Azad was sent to an Arabic school along with other children in the Muslim
community, but he also attended the panchayat elementary school, where Hindu
teachers taught him humanities, sciences and English. Azad’s innate brilliance
and cheerful disposition captured the attention of his teachers. One teacher,
Muthu Iyer, took a particularly keen interest in influencing and shaping young
Azad’s development, such that he became a cherished friend of the family. Azad
had three close childhood friends: Ramanadha Sastry, Aravindan and
Sivaprakash. The three boys were from orthodox Brahmin families, but they
would all play with Azad as children from one family.
Loose communal boundaries and cordial relations between the three religions
in Rameswaram were a happy feature of the society in Azad’s childhood. During
the annual Sita Rama Kalyanam ceremony, Jainulabdeen, his elder son
Maracayer and son-in-law Ahmed Jallaluddin would arrange boats with a special
platform for carrying idols to the middle of the pond called Rama Tirtha. From
time to time, Jainulabdeen would meet with Pundit Pakshi Lakshmana Shastrigal
and Father Bodal at the family’s home, where they would sit over cups of tea,
discussing issues facing the people of Rameswaram. The society that Azad was
born to was indeed remarkable for its harmony – religious and social events
were celebrated, and problems managed, across community lines.
This remarkable inter-religious experience of Azad’s formative years was to

have a profound influence on his later life. He enjoyed a society that seemed
enriched rather than divided by its different faiths. Undoubtedly, Jainulabdeen
was Azad’s role model in his penchant for embracing those of all faiths. His
piety was balanced not merely by a tolerance for other religions, but a deeply
spiritual understanding of the brotherhood of man that is integral to the religion
of Islam. And his acknowledgement of those of other faiths as part of his own
community was warmly reciprocated.
When Azad was about six years old, Jainulabdeen embarked on a project of
building a wooden sailing boat that would ferry pilgrims to Dhanushkodi. He
worked at building the boat on the seashore with a relative, Ahmed Jallaluddin,
who later married Azad’s elder sister Zohara. The two men employed the
traditional carvel planking method in their boat building, where planks are
affixed edge to edge on to a sturdy underlying framework. Azad would sit,
intently watching as wooden planks were prepared and affixed to the frame, and
the form of a boat began to appear. He was fascinated by the seasoning of the
hull and bulkheads with heat from wood fires. Azad learned that the abrasion
resistance of wood varies according to its hardness and density. His father
explained that the wood must be protected; it could rapidly deteriorate if
permeated with freshwater or marine organisms. With his innate curiosity, Azad
took note of such details. Throughout his life, he was intrigued by the qualities
of materials, and how these qualities could be put to use for a greater purpose.
At any rate, the boat business was a great success for the family, and
Jainulabdeen employed some men to operate it. There were days when Azad
would slip in among the crowd of pilgrims and sit on the boat. He would listen
on these trips, captivated by the stories of how Hanuman and his army of
monkeys built the bridge from here to Sri Lanka for Rama; how Rama brought
back Sita, stopping at Rameswaram again to perform penance for having killed
Ravana; how Hanuman was sent to bring a large Shivalingam but when it took
longer than expected, Sita made a lingam with her own hands so as not to delay
the worship.
These stories and many others floated around Azad in different tongues and
forms, as people from all over India converged at the boat service. The bright,
engaging youngster naturally found himself welcome. Even at this age, Azad
possessed a certain magnetism, and there was always someone willing to talk to

him, share a life story, religious perspectives or reasons for making the
pilgrimage. It was a blissful time in Azad’s life, but as with everything, it would
pass, and times would quickly change for the growing boy. Nevertheless, his
experience of meeting people and making friends from all walks of life and
faiths was to stay with him for the rest of his years. His love of the sea would
also remain. Even as an adult – when he was not working – Kalam could sit for
hours, looking out to sea, contemplating the rhythm of the waves, and following
the poetic motion of flocks of gulls over the water.
Interestingly, Azad’s lifelong passion for flight began with his observation of
seabirds during primary school. When Azad was studying in the fifth grade, a
lesson given by his teacher Siva Subramania Iyer on avian flight made a lasting
impression on him. To teach about a bird’s flight, Iyer drew a diagram of a bird
on the blackboard, depicting the wings, tail, body and head. He carefully
explained how birds create lift and fly, how they change direction while flying,
and how birds fly in formations of ten, twenty or more. For nearly an hour, he
lectured to a quiet and seemingly attentive class. He then asked whether the
students now understood how birds fly. Azad, ever the inquiring type, stood up
and frankly said that he did not. Iyer then asked the other students whether they
understood. Most of the students said they did not either.
Siva Subramania Iyer was not the least perturbed by their response; he simply
took the class to the seashore to show birds flying. Azad observed the seabirds
and began to understand their flight. He saw the simultaneous flapping wings
and twisting tails, which were the physical imperatives for their flying. But more
significantly, Azad realized that a bird is powered by its own life and the
motivation to fly – its will. The lesson left a deep impression on Azad, and he
would develop a fascination with flying far beyond that of its basic mechanics.
For him, Siva Subramania Iyer’s class was not merely about comprehending the
physics of how a bird flies. A bird’s flight would become a metaphor for
willpower, for striving – and for rising beyond earthly limitations.
Siva Subramania Iyer was not one for limitations himself. An orthodox
Brahmin with a conservative spouse, he was something of a rebel. He would do
his best to break social barriers so that people from varying backgrounds could
mingle easily. Azad emerged as his star pupil, and he would tell him to study
hard and develop, so he would become the equal of the highly educated people

of the big cities. One day, Iyer took Azad to his house and offered him a meal.
Iyer’s wife was astonished at the idea of serving food to a Muslim boy in her
ritually cleaned kitchen. She refused to serve Azad in her kitchen and offered the
food outside. Iyer was quite unruffled and didn’t express anger with his wife. He
instead served Azad himself and sat down beside him to eat his meal.
Iyer’s wife watched Azad and her husband eating from behind the kitchen
door. When Azad was leaving the house, Iyer asked him to come again. Reading
his perplexed expression, Iyer told him that once you decide to change the
system, such problems ought to be confronted: ‘You must learn to defeat the
problem and not get defeated by it.’ When Azad came for a meal the following
week, Iyer’s wife brought him inside the kitchen and served food to him, just as
she would to her own child.
In October 1942, under the darkness of World War II, a cyclone hit the Bay of
Bengal, generating destructive gusts of more than 100 miles per hour near
Pamban Island and saturating the coastal areas with driving rains. Jainulabdeen’s
boat was dashed to pieces and his coconut grove razed to the ground.
Jainulabdeen kept his poise and did not react to his misfortune beyond saying
‘Inna lillahi wa inna ilayhi raji’u’. When Azad asked the meaning of this phrase,
Jainulabdeen replied, ‘It often happens in this world that man loses something,
or suffers some calamity. On such occasions, Islam teaches us to willingly resign
ourselves to our misfortune, taking that to be God’s decree. God has made this
world for the purpose of putting mankind to the test. Here, receiving and losing
are both designed as a trial for man. Therefore, when man receives something,
he should prove himself to be a thankful servant of God. And when he loses
something, he should adopt the attitude of patience. Only one who can do so will
pass God’s test.
The phrase ‘Inna lillahi wa inna ilayhi raji’u’ translates loosely as ‘We are
from God and to God we shall return’. It is indeed an acknowledgement of
God’s guardianship over His creation. Azad learnt from this incidence an attitude
of surrendering to God’s will instead of complaining against fate. He learnt the
secret of converting loss into a new discovery. Jainulabdeen told Azad, who was
deeply worried by the family’s losses,

Whatever misfortune happens to you is because of the things your hands have wrought, and for
many (of them) He grants forgiveness.1

This verse of the Quran tells us that whenever a man is afflicted by some
misfortune, it is necessarily the result of one or more of his own actions.
Complaining against others in this world is meaningless. When everyone must
suffer the consequence of his own actions, protesting and complaining against
others is only a waste of time. It will in no way solve the problem.
This is a merciful system devised by nature itself, and its acceptance is a
revelation: nature has placed our problems in our own hands, and we are thus not
left dependent on the charity and compassion of others. If problems that face us
were the result of others’ actions, we would be reduced to begging for others’
kindness. But God has created the world in such a way that He has made one’s
concerns one’s own personal affair. That is, one can construct his life by dint of
his own efforts. Everyone’s future is in his own hands.
Jainulabdeen was not a man to need the charity and compassion of others.
With singular determination, he set to the task of building a new boat, using
whatever he could salvage from the wreck of the old boat. When his father
procured teak logs for the purpose, Azad learned that the main reason for teak
wood’s durability is that it is not eaten by white ants. Wood normally serves as
food for white ants, and once they have made inroads, it quickly degenerates. Yet
foes as they are of wood in general, they pose no threat to teak. The reason is
quite simple. Teak has a bitter taste, which is not to the liking of the white ant.
This example of an inherent quality acting as a life preserver set young Azad
thinking. He saw in this the way of nature. To preserve teak from the
depredations of the white ant, nature did not formulate demands or utter protests,
but simply endowed teak with such a property as would keep its insect attackers
at bay. Kalam would later say, ‘Just as wood has an enemy in the white ant, so
do men have their human enemies in this world. Now what should a man do to
save himself from them? Taking a leaf out of nature’s book, he should strive to
produce in himself such qualities as will keep his enemies away from him, and
refrain from indulging in any injurious course of action.’
Inspired by the hard work of his father in building the new boat, Azad
ventured into his first line of work: selling tamarind seeds. The pressures of
World War II on the textile, paper and jute industries created a sudden demand in

the market for the seeds. Azad started going door to door, collecting seeds and
selling them to the trading shop. A day’s work would fetch him a princely sum of
one anna (one-sixteenth of a rupee), which was enough for a hearty meal in
those times. Azad would proudly present the coin to his mother at the end of the
day for safe keeping.
The Pamban area was initially unaffected by World War II. But soon India
was forced to join the Allied forces, and troops were deployed to counter any
Japanese invasion by sea. The train halt at the Rameswaram railway station was
suspended, and the train now passed through, stopping only at the Dhanushkodi
terminus. Azad’s cousin Samsuddin was a newspaper vendor, and he drafted
Azad into catching and then distributing the newspapers thrown in bundles from
the moving train. It is during this tumultuous phase of India’s modern history
that Azad started noticing pictures of national leaders in the newspapers; and he
was captivated by the idea of an independent, self-determined Indian nation.
World War II ended, and freedom from British rule was imminent. Gandhiji
declared, ‘Indians will build their own India’, and an unprecedented hope filled
the air. Azad asked Jainulabdeen’s permission to leave the island and study at the
district headquarters in Ramanathapuram. Jainulabdeen told Azad, as if thinking
aloud, ‘I know you have to go away to grow. Does the seagull not fly across the
sun, alone and without a nest? You must forego longing for the land of your
memories to move into the dwelling pace of your greater desires; our love will
not bind you, nor our needs hold you.’2
Ashiamma produced all the coins Azad had earned by selling tamarind seeds
and distributing newspapers door to door, now a significant amount towards
Azad’s school fees. When an emotional Azad resisted, she said, ‘Mothers only
give.’ Azad travelled with his elder cousin Samsuddin and brother-in-law Ahmed
Jallaluddin to Schwartz High School at Ramanathapuram. He was enrolled as
A.P.J. Abdul Kalam. The letters A, P and J indicate his genetic lineage – his
great-grandfather Avul, his grandfather Pakir and his father Jainulabdeen.
