Bootstrapping

Science is about knowing; engineering is about doing.
– Henry Petroski, American engineer

ith the dawn of Independence, the need for establishing a sound
technological basis for industrial advancement of the country was
recognized. A new generation of highly skilled, trained professionals would be
needed to propel the new nation forward. Madras Institute of Technology, the
first self-financing engineering institute in the country, was established in 1949
to this end. At a time when other engineering institutions were offering
conventional courses in civil, mechanical and electrical engineering at the
undergraduate level, Mr Chinnaswamy Rajam launched the experiment of
introducing, for the first time in the country, new areas of specialization in
engineering. The courses he introduced were aeronautical engineering,
automobile engineering, electronics engineering and instrument technology.
During its early years, the institute offered a diploma in engineering to science
graduates, a policy that made possible Kalam’s shift from physics to
engineering.
The theme of bootstrapping, or lifting oneself up the social and economic
ladder through individual effort, hard work and personal responsibility always
fascinated Kalam. He found the idea of lifting oneself, pulling oneself up by the
bootstraps so inspiring. Could the near impossible be achieved through hard
work, tenacity and personal initiative, without the backing of inheritance or
someone powerful lending a supporting hand? Kalam joined MIT with a
determination to realize his childhood dream of flying.
The decision emerged from his self-realization at the dargah of Nathar Vali in

W

Tiruchirappalli. Kalam had by now understood that no one cared very much
about the direction his life would take, the principles he stood for, and his skills
and qualifications – apart from himself. Therefore, any fraction of his life lived
in the hope of someone else’s approval was in fact wasted. People would never
notice, and he would be unfulfilled, waiting for something that would not
happen. The only one whose opinion ultimately mattered was the person whose
face he had to see in the mirror at the end of the day. If he was not satisfied with
who he was and what he was doing, then he had failed.
His last year at St Joseph’s made Kalam realize that the science of the
working of the physical world was not his calling in life. He was far more
attracted to making things and doing things. Undoubtedly, he was a knowledge
seeker; but more important to him was applying knowledge to creative solutions
that would serve some purpose. And he was inexorably drawn to flight. When
Kalam arrived at MIT, he was enthralled by two decommissioned aircraft
displayed there. The mere sight of these flying machines was an inspiration,
much as the seagulls hovering over the water at Rameswaram had been in his
primary school years. ‘Kalam would later recall: I felt a strange attraction
towards them, and would sit near them long after other students had gone back
to the hostel, admiring man’s will to fly free in the sky, like a bird.’1
Kalam found himself at ease with the study of engineering subjects. He
discovered his natural talent for technical drawing. He found he could easily
look at things on different planes and from different perspectives: the plans,
elevations and sections came to him without much struggle. Studying subjects
like aviation, control techniques and defence systems that are used in airplanes
and spacecraft held a great fascination for him. His self-esteem grew with the
acquiring of skills to design, construct, develop, test and maintain the parts of
any type of aircraft, both theoretically and practically.
His class in MIT was small – there were only eight students – and this
allowed Kalam to interact closely not only with his classmates, but also with
members of the faculty. Kalam felt a strong affinity with Prof. Sponder, his
teacher for technical aerodynamics. Prof. Sponder was an Austrian who had
been captured by the Nazis during World War II and imprisoned in a
concentration camp. Incidentally, there were two Germans on the academic staff:
Prof. Walter Repenthin, who headed the aeronautical engineering department,

and Prof. Kurt Tank, who designed the Fockle-Wilf FW 190 single-seat fighter
plane, an outstanding combat aircraft of World War II. The tension between
these men and Prof. Sponder was palpable.
Aviation had been firmly established during World War II as a critical facet of
modern warfare. From the Battle of Britain, waged by the German Luftwaffe
against the RAF during the summer and autumn of 1940, to the great aircraft
carrier battles between American and Japanese Pacific fleets, dominance in the
air shaped the course of the war. And the final blows of the war, the nuclear
obliteration of Hiroshima and Nagasaki in August 1945, were delivered from the
skies. The major combatants engaged in an aviation war of economic attrition
and technology: massive industrial production of aircraft and munitions required
huge investment, and the imperatives of war drove technology forward with
unprecedented haste.
The streamlined cantilever monoplane quickly proved its worth in almost
every role, although a few older biplanes remained in niche roles for much of the
war. Engine power and aircraft performance increased exponentially, first with
forced induction, then with jet and rocket engines making their appearance by
the end of the war. Avionics systems became almost infinitely more
sophisticated and widespread, with power-assisted flight controls, blind flying
instrumentation, radio communications and radar tracking replacing the naked
eye and binoculars used by World War I flight crews. The rapid pace of aviation
development in those years was such that a World War I pilot would barely have
recognized the aircraft of the latter days of World War II, not much more than a
generation later.
The students at MIT, and indeed the whole world of aviation, were the
beneficiaries of this war-inspired revolution in their field. Along with new
knowledge in medicine – and of course decolonization – it was one of the few
truly positive outcomes from the war. And Kalam’s new mentors had personally
taken part in this revolution. Their approach was thus strict, grounded by
practical experience and open-minded; and their abilities engendered the
admiration of their students.
Kalam particularly admired the individuality and high professional standards
of Prof. Sponder, who was always calm, energetic and in total control of himself.
Prof. Sponder kept abreast of the latest technological advancements and

expected his students to do likewise. Kalam would spend a good deal of time
talking to him. The pair would take a regular stroll in the late evenings through
the sprawling MIT campus, its lawns and trees a cool escape from the balmy
heat of Madras. He would enjoy their philosophical discussions about the nature
of civilization as it applied to the various peoples of the world.
Prof. Sponder told Kalam that he indeed envied the great Indian civilization
and the enduring identity of Indian people. In contrast, the history of Austria had
seen its domain expand and contract with the rise and then decay of its once
great empire. The nadir of its fortunes had seen the country annexed as part of
‘greater Germany’ by Adolf Hitler’s regime, an event which led to considerable
personal suffering for the professor. Prof. Sponder said that while Indians never
invaded any other country, their great civilization ‘digested’ the religion and
customs of the invaders. The invaders, who came to plunder this bountiful land
and expand their existing territories, would for the most part be subsumed
themselves. They would become Indian over a generation or two, and never
return to the countries of their origin.
Another teacher whose impression on Kalam would last throughout his life
was Prof. K.V.A. Pandalai, who taught him aerostructure design and analysis.
Prof. Pandalai was a cheerful, friendly and enthusiastic teacher. He would bring
a fresh approach to the course every year. Kalam reached a deeper understanding
of intellectual integrity through Prof. Pandalai and embraced it as an approach
for the rest of his life. Kalam had learned early of the need to be true to one’s
own thinking and to hold one’s self to the same rigorous standards of evidence
and proof to which one holds one’s antagonists. Kalam trained himself to
practise what he advocated for others, and would, like all truly great men, freely
admit discrepancies and inconsistencies in his own thought and action.
Prof. Pandalai also instilled in Kalam the importance of intellectual humility.
He taught Kalam how to be conscious of the limits of one’s knowledge. He drew
attention to the need for sensitivity to circumstances in which one’s native
egocentricity is likely to function self-deceptively, and encouraged mindfulness
of bias, prejudice and limitations of one’s viewpoint. Kalam had never been one
to claim to know more than he actually knew. He realized that humility does not
denote spinelessness or submissiveness. It denotes a lack of intellectual
pretentiousness, boastfulness or conceit, combined with a clear insight into the

logical foundations of one’s beliefs. For his part, Prof. Pandalai termed the lack
of intellectual integrity, intellectual hypocrisy.
Prof. Narasingha Rao, a mathematician, not only taught Kalam theoretical
aerodynamics but initiated him to the higher planes of abstract thinking. Kalam
learned from him that in every field of study, you can learn more from studying
God’s contribution to that field than the contributions of all the world’s experts.
Prof. Rao would say that God is ‘doubly infinite’, or just plain ‘infinite’, because
God has no beginning or end. He always existed and always will. On the other
hand, we humans are ‘semi-infinite’ because we have a beginning – conception –
but we have no end. How long we live – that is, how long our bodies live – isn’t
of great import. Of far greater consequence is that our soul will exist forever.
Kalam would later remind those close to him that, from an eternal perspective,
the time between conception and bodily death is fairly unimportant.
Prof. Rao gave Kalam a very interesting analogy that he would share with all
his colleagues in later life. Mathematicians often use the Greek letter epsilon (ε)
to refer to a ‘small quantity’. Whether one ‘lives’ for only a few hours, minutes
or seconds after conception or for 100 years, that time is always an ε compared
to eternity/infinity (∞). In other words, once you are conceived – your soul is
created – you are brought into being. You are going to be forever and ever.
Conception, fertilization or ensoulment is therefore the most awesome moment
of our lives because once we begin/exist, we have a soul that will exist forever in
the presence of God, family, saints and angels.
Prof. Rao imparted other, more earthly wisdom to Kalam. Kalam used to have
a savings account in the Imperial Bank of India, the oldest and the largest
commercial bank of the Indian subcontinent. On 1 July 1955 it became the State
Bank of India. When Kalam discussed this change with Prof. Rao, the professor
gave him the great insight that the connections between financial institutions and
individual people are fundamental for society. Banks are central to activities like
the construction of houses, the funding of a hospital, the building of a new
university, or the construction of a new road or railway line. Finance provides
structure to these and other enterprises and institutions throughout society. If
finance succeeds for all of us, it helps to build a good society.
Kalam spent a month in the summer of 1956 in Rameswaram, nursing his
ailing father. Jainulabdeen was his first teacher – and always remained the

foremost. He never lied to Kalam. If Kalam asked him a question, he always
answered it. Kalam knew many things at a young age, because his father
encouraged him to know things, express doubts and seek answers. One day,
Jainulabdeen lamented that Kalam was not settling down to a family life. He
said, ‘Look, Azad, until you have a son of your own, you will never know the
joy, the love beyond feeling that resonates in the heart of a father as he looks
upon his son.’ Kalam said nothing; and Jainulabdeen did not extend the
conversation.
Before Kalam returned to MIT, Jainulabdeen made all his children sit together
and told them a profound observation that he had made in his eighty-two years.
He said, ‘It is not dirt but the fear of dirt which is the sign of man’s degradation.
The official families, whose children learn expensive habits of living, prosper
only for a generation or two. The merchant families who are industrious and
frugal may prosper for three or four generations. The families who till the
ground and study books and have simple and careful habits prosper for five or
six generations. The families who have the virtues of respect for one’s father,
elders and ancestors and friendliness, prosper for eight or ten generations. Know
this and never be cruel and rude to the poor.’
Back at MIT, Kalam shared his father’s reflections with Prof. Sponder. The
professor told Kalam that his father’s thoughts were indeed profound wisdom for
a good life. Prof. Sponder said, ‘The kind of knowledge which regards things in
their individual capacity alone and takes the part for the whole, mistaking each
entity for a complete substantiality and truth and thus giving rise to likes and
dislikes in the mind, is the minimum of knowledge, the grossest of perceptions
and the crudest type of understanding.’
Prof. Sponder regretted that this was the case in his own life and millions of
others in the conflict-ridden Europe of his forefathers. The professor continued:
‘A higher knowledge is the mutual relationship among things. I am concerned
with you and you are concerned with me. This is a socialistic type of knowledge,
to which we have risen today. The jungle type of living follows the law of the
fish, as they call it, the larger one swallowing the smaller. Though today we are
gradually rising from the law of the jungle where each one flies at the throat of
another and swallows the lesser one, and have come to a socialistic kind of
understanding of mutual appreciation of individual values, we are still far away

from that highest type of knowledge that your father shared with you.’
The professor then shared his own insight on the matter of the urge for higher
knowledge, an urge which was to preoccupy Kalam for much of the following
six decades: ‘Why are we so miserable in our human existence? The simple
answer is that human life is incomplete. Human knowledge is not the whole of
knowledge, and there are further stages of the evolution of the universe, of
which the human level is only one link in the long chain of this process. What
pushes us forward and urges us onwards is the existence of a higher principle
beyond us. We become restless merely because of the fact that there is
something higher above us. The very existence of something higher is enough to
push us onwards. The unconscious urge of the lower to realize the higher is
indeed evolution, and this is what your father conveyed to you.’
Kalam’s third and last year at MIT was a year of transition, and it was to have
a great impact on his later life. It would serve to define his approach towards
work, and was to have an abiding effect on his formulation of successful
management principles. When he had finished his coursework, Kalam was
assigned a project to design a low-level attack aircraft, together with four other
colleagues. He assumed the responsibility of design and preparing the requisite
drawings. The other teammates distributed amongst them the tasks of designing
the propulsion, structure, control and instrumentation of the aircraft.
When Prof. K. Srinivasan, the guide and the director of MIT, reviewed their
work, he said he found their progress dismal, and bluntly expressed his
disappointment. Kalam asked for a month’s time to complete the task, since he
had to get input from five of his colleagues to complete the system design. Prof.
Srinivasan told him,‘Look, young man, today is Friday afternoon. I will give you
three days’ time. By Monday morning, if I don’t get the configuration design,
your scholarship will be stopped.’
Kalam was shocked by Prof. Srinivasan’s ultimatum, as the scholarship was
his lifeline. Without it, he could not continue with his studies. There was no
option but to finish the task, and he was galvanized into action. Kalam later
recalled:
My team felt the need for working together around the clock. We didn’t sleep that night, working on
the drawing board and skipping our dinner. On Saturday, I took just an hour’s break. On Sunday
morning, I was near completion, when I felt someone’s presence in the laboratory. It was Prof.

Srinivasan, studying our progress. After looking at my work, he patted and hugged me
affectionately. ‘I knew I was putting you under stress and asking you to meet a difficult deadline.
No stress, no progress!’2

Kalam learned an inescapable truth from this incident. He realized that we are
all playing the ultimate game of life, whether we want to or not. Those who play
the game well win in life, while those who play it poorly suffer. Those who do
not know they are playing the game suffer from the crueller fates of existence.
Our destiny is to win at the ultimate game of life, for our destination is to sit with
God. The fates of life only step in when we play the game poorly or refuse to
play it at all.
Kalam identified two mighty opponents in the game of turning ambitions into
accomplishments – namely, fear and ignorance. One feeds the other, as they are
allies – an axis of negativity, you might say. Kalam also understood that
knowledge is the antidote for the poisons of both ignorance and fear. But just as
too little knowledge keeps us enslaved to fear and ignorance, too much
knowledge gained too quickly can be similarly detrimental. When we increase
our awareness of life and its negative factors too quickly, the sudden influx of
such knowledge can cause anxiety and feelings of helplessness, and we can
suffer a net loss of knowledge. In other words, we can lose more ground than we
have won by gaining knowledge too quickly. The tendency is then to shut down
our drive for knowledge, as it is hurting us. Becoming fearful or stressed from
knowledge gained, however, is nothing to feel ashamed of; in fact, it can be a
sign of becoming more aware, more conscious.
Kalam was given a surprise accolade on his last day at MIT. The graduating
students and faculty members were posing for a group photograph as part of a
farewell ritual. The students were lined up in three rows behind the professors,
who were seated in the front. Unexpectedly, Prof. Sponder stood and looked for
Kalam, who was standing in the last row. ‘Come and sit with me, said the
Professor. You are my best student and hard work will help you earn a great
name for your teachers in the future … Let God be your hope, your stay, your
guide and provide the lantern for your feet in your journey into the future.3
In 1957, at the age of twenty-six, Kalam graduated from MIT. He now felt
prepared to take his place in the world; and he was ready for his learning to
manifest – making things, solving real-life problems. He would now reach for

the skies.
