Disillusioned Learner

Your visions will become clear only when you can look into your own heart. Who looks
outside, dreams; who looks inside, awakes.
– C.G. Jung
Swiss psychiatrist and philosopher

alam arrived at St Joseph’s College at Tiruchirappalli to study for his
intermediate cum graduation. He had never travelled out of
Ramanathapuram, and this was his first exposure to a large town. The imposing
college building with its renaissance-style spires and cloisters captured his
imagination, and he felt surprisingly at home with its European ambience. The
college had been established in 1844 by the Society of Jesus (the Jesuits) – a
male order of the Catholic Church – and affiliated to Madras University since
1869.
Kalam was lodged in a three-storey hostel building, sharing a room with an
orthodox Iyengar Brahmin from Srirangam and a Syrian Christian from Kerala.
Kalam was not an outstanding student in terms of examination grades, but an
insightful proclivity that had awakened under the guidance of his three great
teachers at Schwartz would now come to the fore. His engaging intellect helped
him gel with his room-mates, and he became the leader of the trio, in and out of
college.
The three friends would walk through the town in their free time.
Tiruchirappalli was the capital of the early Cholas in the third century bc. With
the passage of time, power changed hands between the Pallavas, medieval
Cholas, Pandyas, Delhi Sultanate, Madurai Nayaks and finally rested with
Chanda Sahib, Nawab of the Carnatic, before British rule. The Nayaks made
Tiruchirappalli their capital in the seventeenth century and augmented the

K

magnificent Rock Fort Temple.
The Rock Fort Temple, perched 83 metres high on a massive outcrop, lords
over the town with stony majesty. The Pallavas first hewed the ancient rock and
the Pandyas cut small cave temples on its south side, but it was the tactically
adept Nayaks who later made strategic use of this naturally fortified position.
There are more than 400 stone-cut steps to climb to the top, which the three
friends vigorously did without even once stopping. Kalam was disappointed to
find that the Thayumanaswami Koil, the rock’s largest temple, was closed to
non-Hindus.
Kalam knew well by now that possibly the most critical factor for success in
school is a close and nurturing relationship with at least one teacher. It is a
tremendous benefit for a student to feel there is someone within the school
whom he knows, to whom he can turn, and who will act as an advocate for him.
The hostel warden and English teacher Reverend Father Sequeira was one such
teacher for Kalam at St Joseph’s.
The Reverend Father saw each student as an individual with hopes, dreams,
strengths and vulnerabilities. And he worked to create a classroom atmosphere in
which each student could see their fellow students in this light – an atmosphere
in which respect for others became the guiding principle. He fostered a learning
environment in which all his students felt safe to share their thoughts and
feelings; and in which making a mistake would be seen as an opportunity to
learn rather than an obligation to feel like a failure. Kalam would later recollect
fondly of the Reverend Father’s kindness:
Reverend Father used to visit each boy every night with a Bible in his hand. His energy and
patience was amazing. He was a very considerate person, who took care of even the minutest
requirements of his students. On Deepavali, on his instructions, gingelly oil would be given to
everyone for the ritual head bath.1

Kalam was now twenty years of age. The nation’s first general elections, to
constitute the Lok Sabha, were held between October 1951 and February 1952.
The population of India at this time was 360 million, of which 173 million were
registered voters, and 45.7 per cent of these voters turned out to exercise their
franchise. The Indian National Congress (INC) won a landslide victory, securing
364 of the 489 seats and 45 per cent of the total votes polled. Jawaharlal Nehru

became the first democratically elected prime minister of the country.
Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru, as head of the former provisional
parliament, had already moved a raft of constitutional changes, which were
passed amidst a good deal of public clamour on 18 June 1951. The first
amendment of the Constitution of India made several alterations to the
fundamental rights provisions of the Constitution that had been finalized barely a
year earlier. The amendment provided powers to the government against the
abuse of freedom of speech and expression, validated laws pertaining to the
abolition of zamindari, and clarified that the right to equality does not bar the
enactment of laws that provide ‘special consideration’ for weaker sections of
society.
A debate on the topic was held in the central hall of St Joseph’s, with
hundreds of students present. Why did the Nehru government pass the first
amendment? Critics of Nehru decried his government’s alterations to the
Constitution as authoritarian, whereas his supporters argued that the loss of some
freedoms was a reasonable price to pay for ensuring unity and stability in the
first few years of independent India. It was Kalam’s first taste of the complexity
of national affairs. He did not understand the nuances of the issue, and decided
to focus on his immediate studies rather than become engrossed in political
concerns.
A few months later, however, when Kalam visited Rameswaram during the
Christmas holidays, he made a stop at Ramanathapuram to reconnect with S.T.R.
Manickam, and captured the learned revolutionary’s take on these developments.
Manickam told Kalam that freedom of expression is, frankly, the most Indian
and holy of values. From ancient times, India had been largely a tolerant,
pluralist land, nurturing a variety of religious faiths and practices. A myriad of
versions of the epics like the Ramayana and the Mahabharata were publicly
recited, and even the atheistic views openly aired by the Charvak received due
consideration by their contemporaries. Manickam explained that India has long
exhibited an almost infinite capacity for absorbing divergent views, lifestyles
and religious practices. Freedom of expression even has its place in the Rig
Veda, with the maxim: Ekam sat viprah bahudha vadanti – Truth is one, but the
wise men speak it as many.
Kalam departed from S.T.R. Manickam’s house with much to ponder. But

after arriving at Rameswaram and meeting his parents and family members, he
could not help but notice a change within himself. Kalam was feeling a strange
disconnect. While physically present there in his family home, Kalam’s mind
was far removed, and he appeared preoccupied or distracted to his family. His
mother was first to detect the malady. She picked up the issue while serving him
breakfast. Kalam opened his heart to his mother and shared with her his doubts
for the new trajectory of his life: Was he on the right path, studying in a city and
preparing himself for a job that would take him further away from his roots? The
more he became involved with the world around him, the more he was feeling
himself being drawn away.
Ashiamma smiled and said lovingly to her grown-up and yet still innocent
child that whenever one is ambivalent or unsure about a decision one has to
make, one should surrender to the will of Allah. And the method for doing this is
by Istakhara. This is a prayer asking Allah to help one make a choice, usually
meaning choosing the better of two options. In Istakhara, she explained, you are
essentially asking Allah about His will; you are discussing your issue with Allah
and seeking His expert advice. Then there is no point in worrying. That night,
Kalam assiduously recited the Istakhara prayers. He then slept deeply, waking up
the next morning with his mind uncluttered and his resolve clear. He packed his
bag and left for Tiruchirappalli the following day. He knew in his heart that his
life would take him far from the comfortable seaside village of his childhood.
During his BSc, Kalam encountered a number of great teachers who urged
him to pursue further higher education. He found his mathematics teacher Prof.
Thothathri Iyengar particularly inspiring, and it is during this time that Kalam
felt that his consciousness was shifting to a higher plane. It is important to
discuss this shift, for no life can truly be purposeful without a transformation in a
person’s inner world. Kalam recounted:
I had an opportunity at St. Joseph’s College to witness a unique scene of a divine-looking
personality walking through the college campus every morning, and teaching mathematics to
various degree courses. Students looked at this personality, who was a symbol of our own culture,
with awe and respect. When he walked, knowledge radiated all around. The great personality was
Professor Thothathri Iyengar, our teacher.2

In his third year at St Joseph’s, Kalam was made the secretary of the

vegetarian mess. One Sunday, he invited the rector, Reverend Father Kalathil, to
lunch. This marked the beginning of a year-long spiritual fellowship of a great
Jesuit and a young seeker. His discussion of great men of the ages was
particularly inspiring for the young Kalam:
I uniquely remember the lectures given by the highest authority of the Jesuit institution, Reverend
Father Kalathil … He used to talk about good human beings present and past and what makes a
good human being. In this class, he gave lectures on personalities such as Buddha, Confucius, St.
Augustine, Caliph Umar, Mahatma Gandhi, Einstein, Abraham Lincoln and moral stories linked to
our civilizational heritage.3

Kalam learned from Rev. Father Kalathil that everyone has two natures; one
is lower and the other higher. The lower nature consists of various defects like
anger, impatience and greed, ignorance and sloth. It is very stubborn. It hates to
change and release its grip. The lower nature has a very strong will that may not
always manifest itself openly, and wants its way without paying the price of hard
work or perseverance. It is full of pride and selfishness. It exhibits itself as
personal vanity.
Rev. Father Kalathil taught Kalam that purity, humility and austerity are the
three most potent weapons to tame and conquer our lower natures. A certain
level of development is necessary to interpret which thought forms come from
the higher self, and which from the lower. We can also determine which wishes
and endeavours of the higher self may be mixed in with tendencies from the
lower self; their original shade twisted, coloured or dirtied. When messages from
the higher self are tainted with lower-self motives, a disorder is created in the
soul that gives rise to emotional illness. Rev. Father Kalathil shared with Kalam
his wisdom, cultivated over years of pious conduct and disciplined living, that
various tendencies have different colours – and in many cases different tones and
scents.
A most common manifestation of the lower self occurs where a person may
want something selfishly, and because he does not want to admit his selfishness,
he rationalizes his desire and deceives himself about his motives. We can see all
this very clearly – especially in others – and indeed, this kind of self-deception is
a foundation of much conflict among people. While the forms of the higher self
have an entirely different character to those of the lower, and are more subtle,

they are ultimately more powerful. And it is inconceivable that the higher self
could give rise to human conflict. The treacherous lower self, though, has no
limit to its dissembling.
Kalam learnt a crucial skill from Rev. Father Kalathil: seeing through the
masks people wear. These masks are indeed a mode of living in the lower nature,
in the world of conveniences and comforts. We put on masks when we recognize
that we may come into conflict with our surroundings, thereby giving in to our
lower selves. This is because we are not ready to pay the price for rising above
our lower natures. Subconsciously, we decide to present different images of our
selves in order to avoid certain difficulties, unpleasantness, or disadvantages.
These images become our masks, other layers of our selves, which have nothing
to do with the reality of the higher selves or even the temporary reality of the
lower selves. Kalam came to know now that when a person is emotionally sick,
it is always a sign that, in one way or another, a ‘mask self’ has been created.
The person does not realize he is living a lie. He has built a layer of unreality,
and is thus not being true to his real personality.
Rev. Father Kalathil taught Kalam to understand himself in the light of this
wisdom. He was led by his teacher to comprehend the truth that beyond the
layers of his lower self is the realm of his higher self; and the higher self is the
ultimate and absolute reality which he must eventually reach. In order to reach it,
he must first face his lower self, or his temporary reality, instead of covering it
up, because that puts an even greater distance between him and his own higher
self. To face the lower self he must, at all costs, tear away the mask self.
Kalam’s test arrived soon enough. A relative living in Sivaganga proposed a
marriage alliance. The easy way out was to offer an excuse – that he was busy
with studies, waiting to settle down, etc. But Kalam refused to wear this mask
self. And he resisted the cravings of the lower self for a companion, for his
higher self could see he would tread a long path alone. He thus decided he would
not marry; and he declared his decision loud and clear to all in the family, and
through them to the community. Kalam’s teacher Professor K.V.A. Pandalai
writes in his reminiscences: ‘He [Kalam] slowly began to realize that through
science, spiritual enrichment and self-realization were possible.’4
Indeed, Kalam’s quest for self-realization was becoming paramount for him,
and it received no less of his diligence than his academic pursuits. As with the

academic sphere of his learning, which he by now saw as intrinsic to his spiritual
development, Kalam would gather new understandings from reading, discussion
and contemplation. Perhaps the only difference for Kalam in these facets of his
learning was the structure dedicated to his academic progress. Revelations of a
spiritual nature would come with a higher sense of timing, arising in the manner
of fortuitous accidents.
One Thursday evening, Kalam went to the dargah of Nathar Vali, a Sufi saint
who came to Tiruchirappalli in the eleventh century and was among the first
Sufis to bring Islam to south India and Sri Lanka. He sat for many hours in
contemplation. Then a fakir appeared, as if from nowhere, and sat down by his
side.
‘What are you seeking, young man?’ he asked.
‘I am trying to see my real self,’ said Kalam.
‘So what is the problem?’ the fakir asked.
‘I am unable to see it,’ said Kalam.
‘Scrub the nafs,’ said the fakir.
‘What is that?’ asked Kalam.
‘Nafs is a term for the baser, lower, egotistical and passionate facets of human
nature which, along with tab (literally, physical nature), comprise the vegetative
and animal aspects of human life. Some of the other synonyms for nafs are devil,
passion, greed, avarice, egocentricity, etc.,’ answered the fakir.
‘So nafs is not soul?’ asked Kalam.
‘No. The soul is ruh. The central aim of a good human life is the
transformation of nafs from its deplorable state of egocentricity through various
psycho-spiritual stages to a state of purity and submission, to the will of God,’
said the fakir.
‘What are these various psycho-spiritual stages?’asked Kalam.
‘The Holy Quran provides a very deep understanding of the psycho-spiritual
phenomena that go through a human life. A clear distinction is made between
nafs, qalb, sirr and ruh,’ the fakir said.
‘Please explain, I am really ignorant,’ said Kalam.
The fakir explained: ‘The term qalb stands for the heart which is the cradle of
thoughts and emotions. This heart is the seat of beatific vision as well. But for
the vast majority, it is the battleground of two warring armies: those of nafs or

passion, and ruh or spirit. Cleaning of the qalb is a necessary element in spiritual
discipline for travellers on the right path.’
‘And what is sirr?’ asked Kalam.
‘The faculty of sirr is believed to be located in the middle of the chest, where
the physiological heart exists. By “emptying of the sirr”we mean diverting one’s
attention from the mundane aspects of human life and fixing it on the spiritual
realm.’
‘You have used two different verbs – cleansing of qalb, and emptying of sirr.
Why?’ inquired Kalam.
The fakir replied, ‘I am happy you are getting into the concept. The emptying
signifies negation and obliteration of ego-centred human propensities. Ruh is a
dormant spiritual faculty that needs to be worked upon by constant vigil and
prayer, in order to achieve the illumination of the spirit.’
‘It appears so systematic and orderly,’ said Kalam.
‘Young man, there is a well-defined sequence of actions. The purification of
the elementary passionate nature (tazkiya-e-nafs), followed by cleansing of the
spiritual heart so that it may acquire a mirror-like purity of reflection (tazkiya-eqalb), fortified by emptying of egoistic drives (taqliyya-e-sirr) and remembrance
of God’s attributes (zikr), gloriously culminating in illumination of the spirit
(tajjali-e-ruh) – this is the essential spiritual journey,’ said the fakir with a tone
of finality, and got up to leave.
Peace entered Kalam’s heart. He did not get up to see the fakir off, but sat
with his thoughts, unmuddied and calm, for another hour or so. That night, he
enjoyed a sound sleep, and when he arose the next morning, he decided to
abandon his study of physics. Engineering would now be his calling. In any
event, he would have to pursue engineering to realize his dream of flying. He
could have made this choice two years earlier, but fortunately even now there
was a suitable course available at the Madras Institute of Technology (MIT). He
promptly applied for the three-year postgraduate diploma in aeronautical
engineering.
Kalam’s application was successful; but admission to this prestigious
institution was a costly affair. Kalam’s sister Zohara came to his aid. She pawned
her gold bangles and chain to provide for his admission fees, and in doing so
taught Kalam all about real sacrifice: That it should be done from love. That it

should be done readily, not after exhausting all other options. That it should be
done for people who need your strength because they don’t have enough of their
own.