every age has its heroes and every hero has a story. The worldwide attention
that the demise of A.P.J. Abdul Kalam attracted and the profound grief
expressed by millions of people across the world upon his sudden passing are
testimony to his stature as a hero of this age. Dr Kalam’s stellar career won him
the highest civilian honour of the Indian nation, the Bharat Ratna, and
culminated in his term as the eleventh president of India. But he was not born to
power. He came from a geographically isolated village, was raised in a poor
family, studied in publicly funded schools, worked in the government throughout
his life – and made his mark through a simple and pious existence. Kalam was a
rare human being who would soften even the hardest hearts of his critics and
adversaries by his caring manners, impeccable character and truthful conduct.
This book presents in a most accurate manner the details of his long life of
eighty-three years, his salient achievements, his ideals, and his legacy.
The first part, ‘Simulation’, is based on the Aristotelian dictum that man is by
nature a social animal. Society is something that precedes the individual.
Anyone who either cannot lead the common life or is so self-sufficient as not to
need to – and therefore does not partake of society – is either a beast or a god.
The eight chapters in this part capture the growth of the child Kalam to
adulthood, wherein he did what was told him by the system, got educated,
graduated in physics – and then realized that his heart lay elsewhere. The
hovering seagulls at the shore of his island birthplace had created a desire in him
to fly. Becoming a pilot was his dream, and he sought a way into the air force
through the aeronautical engineering route, which was the only way possible at
that time. He changed his studies accordingly; but when he failed in his
selection, he joined HAL (Hindustan Aircraft Limited, as it was known then) and
later the Aeronautical Development Establishment, two of the only choices
available in those days. This part of his life, spanning from 1931 to 1962, sees
him acquiring an identity of an engineer, with a flair for innovation and the grit
to get things done in imperfect situations.
The second part, ‘Creation’, presents Kalam’s years in aerospace. He was

E

among the first batch of young scientists inducted into the new set-up in the
country to undertake space research, and his growth coincides with the growth of
the Indian Space Research Organization (ISRO), as it came to be known. Kalam
had the good fortune of working with the legendary Vikram Sarabhai and Satish
Dhawan. He was made project director of India’s first Satellite Launch Vehicle
(SLV) and anointed for still senior roles in the organization. This phase of his
life saw the evolution of his leadership traits, and Brahm Prakash refined his
essential ingenuity and tempered his impatience with the status quo by imparting
finer management skills to Kalam. The support he received from his seniors after
the failure of the first SLV flight – and the envy that he evoked after its success a
year later – taught him some great lessons about how the world works and how
one must decide to play the game of life.
The third part, ‘Realization’, gives the details of his leadership of the Indian
missile programme, which led to his ascent to the corridors of power in Delhi.
His rise in stature was not, however, without a realization that the expenditure on
technology projects from taxpayer’s funds entails a ‘what do you give back to
society’ element. Here, the well-known facts of Kalam’s great success are
intentionally kept in the background to highlight the more important aspect of
how he made his endeavours happen. It emerges that he was working within the
very same political and bureaucratic system that is often cited as a reason for
non-performance, tardiness, and even outright failure by all and sundry in the
Indian establishment. Leadership is one of social science’s most examined
phenomena. In industrial, educational, and military settings, and in social
movements, leadership plays a critical – if not the most critical – role. This part
establishes the great contribution of Kalam in creating a new brand of
leadership: one that gets things done without excuses.
The fourth part, ‘Expansion’, looks at his Delhi years as a scientist
bureaucrat. It captures the reasons behind the not-so-successful story of the
Indian Light Combat Aircraft project, and offers useful suggestions to free the
stagnating mammoth Indian aeronautical industry. Kalam’s vision of a developed
India by the year 2020 emerged out of his insights into how larger forces that run
the world must be handled in the national interest. His involvement with the
Pokhran nuclear tests is given perspective, and certain myths are corrected for
posterity. This part also captures Kalam’s less pleasant experiences in the newly

created office of the principal scientific adviser to the Government of India, and
the snub he received upon his delayed retirement from the government service.
The concluding two parts of the book, ‘Dispersion’ and ‘Emancipation’,
present his years as the eleventh president of India and map his emergence as a
great leader of the people post-presidency. A current of transformation drives
Kalam’s evermore spiritual focus through these years. Well-known and
discussed issues are not repeated here, and emphasis is placed on how Kalam
realized the blending of his scientific mind with his spiritual heart. His pointed
observations on the role of families in creating a climate of corruption, and also
their capacity to overcome it, are explained. His formula of success for youth is
elucidated. Kalam’s unfinished agenda of fostering global cooperation in space
for developing a sustainable international economic system is given mention.
His passion for new medical wisdom based on traditional well-being and
cutting-edge technology is outlined, and his vision of Thorium-based nuclear
power is recorded for future generations. Underpinning the book is Kalam’s
spiritual journey, which is exemplified in his profound fellowship with Pramukh
Swamiji. He would advocate in his later years a fourfold way of life based on
righteousness, knowledge, austerity and devotion.
The meaning of life is a philosophical and spiritual question concerning the
significance of living or existence in general. The reader will find it expressed in
different forms through the eighty-three-year-long journey of Kalam. By reading
about Kalam’s life, the reader will find his or her own personal answers for
‘What should I do?’, ‘Why am I here?’, ‘What is life all about?’ and ‘What is the
purpose of my existence?’ The author was privileged to be closely associated
with Kalam for thirty-three years, as his subordinate scientist developing missile
systems, his technology manager developing civilian spin-offs of defence
technology, and finally, his co-author and speechwriter. The author shares with
the reader Kalam as a champion of the underdog, a man who would untiringly
use his position as a platform to inspire and uplift the less fortunate. Ultimately,
the author proffers the reader Kalam the saint, someone free from all the three
poisons of mind, namely greed, aversion and lethargy. In this book, he can be
seen as a truly pious man with a disciplined mind and in total control of his
senses – a man well worthy of emulation.