The Beginning

Every new beginning comes from some other beginning’s end.
– Seneca
Roman Stoic philosopher

uilt in 1785, the Schwartz Higher Secondary School in Ramanathapuram
had a characteristic old-world charm. There was not much else, however,
that was remarkable about the place. The large grounds, the big trees, the high
ceilings and columns had been built along a familiar utilitarian model of
colonial-era institutions. The desks and benches were battered by the years.
Kalam’s first reaction to the school was one of indifference. His enchantment
with the rustic and simple life of Rameswaram was strong, and the fusty
orderliness of his new school in Ramanathapuram seemed foreign and
unwelcoming by comparison.
Within a few days of his arrival, Kalam visited the Sethupathi Raja Palace. It
was the first stately building he had seen in his life, and he was awed by its faded
grandeur. He learned from his new friends in school that the Raja of Sivaganga
and the Sethupathi of Ramanathapuram were great kings who were subdued by
the Nawab of Arcot in the eighteenth century. The throne of Arcot itself had two
rivals in these times: Chanda Shahib and Muhammed Ali, the former supported
by the British, and the latter, the French. This paved the way for a series of
military conflicts amongst several nominally independent rulers and their vassals
– struggles for succession and territory, and a struggle for supremacy between
the French East India Company and the British East India Company.
Eventually, the British East India Company prevailed, establishing its
dominance among the European trading companies within India. The French

B

company was thereafter corralled in the several enclaves of Pondicherry, which
remained under French control until their ceding to the Indian Union in 1956. In
1910, the British carved out a new district, Ramnad, from portions of Madurai
and Tirunelveli districts, with the intention of maintaining tighter governance
over this area. Later, the district was renamed Ramanathapuram in conformity
with the Tamil name for this region.
The Schwartz Higher Secondary School itself was named in honour of
Christian Frederick Schwartz (1726–98), a celebrated German Lutheran
Protestant missionary who came to India in 1750. Kalam learned, to his
amazement, that all Christians are not the same. He discovered that, apart from
the Eastern Churches, there are ostensibly two main categories of Christians:
Catholics whose leader is the Pope and Protestants who do not accept the Pope’s
authority. Protestants advocate a doctrine of justification by grace of faith in God
on the basis of scripture, shunning certain practices of the Catholic Church.
Lutheran Christians are the followers of Martin Luther, an early sixteenthcentury dissident German priest, and the prototype Protestant. Schwarz’s success
in gathering new adherents for his Lutheran Church exceeded that of any other
Protestant missionary in India. Moreover, and perhaps of far greater significance,
he managed to win the esteem of Muslims and Hindus in spite of his
proselytizing.
At Schwartz, Kalam’s first lesson was in dealing with the unknown others.
The approach of the school’s faculty contrasted with the teachers at
Rameswaram, where every student was treated as an extended family member.
The town of Ramanathapuram at this time was a thriving but discordant town of
some fifty thousand people. The social coherence and harmony of Rameswaram
was absent here, as perhaps it would have been in almost any urban centre.
Furthermore, while the teachers at Schwartz were refined in their methods and
demanding of the students, their manner was, at first, somewhat austere. Kalam
felt uncomfortable in this new setting, but he realized he must adapt: ‘Despite
my homesickness, I was determined to come to terms with the new environment,
because I knew my father had invested great hopes in my success.’1
A rapport with S.T.R. Manickam, a revolutionary nationalist, was to be a
saving grace for the young Kalam. Manickam housed a large library of books in
Ramanathapuram and encouraged people to access them; the library was a

welcome escape for Kalam – both from his homesickness and the mundaneness
of class work. Kalam was first drawn there by his innate curiosity, but quickly
found solace in the company of good books. It was in this library that he
discovered the seminal 1925 book The Law of Success2 by American author
Napoleon Hill, who proclaimed in the introduction that he wrote the book for
high-school students. Kalam was transfixed by a sentence in the first few pages
of this book: ‘Whatever the mind can conceive and believe, it can achieve.’
From these words, a new understanding of the power of thought penetrated
the young Kalam’s inquiring mind. The idea that man alone has the power to
transform his thoughts into physical reality, that man alone can dream and make
his dreams come true fascinated him; that a thought energized with willpower is
like a seed which, when planted in fertile soil, germinates, grows, and multiplies
itself over and over again infused him with a new energy. Iyadurai Solomon, a
teacher at Schwartz, was the first to recognize this spark in Kalam’s young mind.
Kalam, for his part, found reassurance in Solomon’s company and positivity:
‘He [Solomon] made me feel very comfortable in class with his warm and openminded attitude. He would encourage me by saying that a good student could
learn more from an ordinary teacher than a poor student even from a great
teacher.’3
Iyadurai Solomon was a patriot by heart. He overstepped his assigned
syllabus to give his young students a clear perspective of India’s protracted
struggle for freedom that was about to succeed. The students themselves felt
enthusiastic at the prospect of India gaining Independence, and Solomon’s
excursions from the regular curriculum were welcomed. This was a few years
after Gandhi’s Quit India movement, and the preceding years had seen a marked
change in the attitude of the British authorities to Indian Independence. The
expectation of a new era of self-determination was exciting for Kalam and his
peers.
While the Quit India movement had galvanized unprecedented popular
support for self-rule in those years, Kalam learned from Solomon that the term
‘Indian Independence movement’ encompassed activities and ideas not just from
Gandhi and his contemporaries, but from efforts to end British rule as early as
the late nineteenth century.
The expectation of freedom had unleashed a darkness, though, that had been

long suppressed by colonial force. Kalam read in disbelief the news reports
about a slew of atrocities committed by members of the Muslim community
against their Hindu compatriots in the districts of Noakhali, in the Chittagong
Division of Bengal in October–November 1946. The very notion of communal
violence was utterly foreign to Kalam; it was a cruel shock after the idyllic interreligious society that had sheltered him in childhood. For him, Hindu and
Christian neighbours were more than friends and teachers – they were part of his
extended family. The very thought that men could wound and kill their
neighbours was profoundly disturbing for the teenage Kalam.
The young students at Schwartz sat in regular prayer meetings when Gandhi
camped in Noakhali for four months and toured the district in a mission to
restore peace and communal harmony. The failure of his peace mission
foreshadowed a more drastic breakdown of communal relations. During
Gandhi’s tour, the Congress leadership accepted Partition of India; the mission
and relief camps were abandoned. The greater number of the riot survivors
migrated to West Bengal, Tripura and Assam.
On 14 August 1947 Pakistan was declared a separate nation, and at 12.02
a.m., just after midnight, on 15 August 1947, India also became an independent
nation. Communal bloodletting involving Hindus, Sikhs and Muslims on an
unprecedented scale followed, with horrors that could scarcely be conveyed in
words. Some fourteen million people were displaced and as many as one million
perished during Partition. It had given rise to the largest mass migration in
human history. The national upheaval had barely abated when Nathuram Godse,
a militant Hindu nationalist, assassinated Mahatma Gandhi in New Delhi on 30
January 1948.
Kalam was deeply grieved by this turn of events, news of which reached the
calm deep south mostly in stark black-and-white accounts of daily papers. He
took some time off from school to stay at Rameswaram with his parents and
became withdrawn. Kalam would sit in the mosque for long hours alone, deep in
contemplation. One day, Jainulabdeen sat by the side of his son and asked the
reason for his sorrow. Kalam said, ‘Father, our world is marred by injustice and
dishonesty and all kinds of atrocities at both the individual as well as the
communal level. Why do people feel free to do as they please, unfettered by
moral considerations?’

Jainulabdeen told Kalam, ‘The freedom, which people abuse, has been given
to them not as their power but an obligation. Our world is a testing place, and on
the Day of Judgement all without exception will be called to account for how
they have used this freedom. If they have ignored and denied the truth in this
world, they shall be obliged to accept it, because their options will have run out,
and subterfuge and pleas for mercy will be of no avail; by that time it will be too
late either to beg for forgiveness or to attempt to make amends.’
He added, ‘Son, do not ever wait to be forced to be good: be good by your
own free will, here and now. And do not worry beyond a point about what is not
in your control. Man is constantly under trial in this world. To pass all tests, you
must learn your limitations along with your intellectual limitlessness. By doing
so, you will be saving yourself from all misapprehensions and exercising your
free will in the sphere of reality, to the pleasure of Allah.’
In any event, the political turmoil and communal upheaval of Partition had
been more than a thousand miles away from tranquil Rameswaram, and its
brutality had seemed from another universe. The birth of the Indian nation
brought change, though, and Jainulabdeen would play his part in the new,
autonomous India. Just after Independence in 1947, panchayat board elections
took place at Rameswaram. Jainulabdeen, who had earned respect across the
communities of the island, was elected the president of the Rameswaram
panchayat board. He was, however, certainly not one to savour the fruits of his
new position.
One afternoon, Azad was reading his lessons loudly in his house when a
visitor came and asked for Jainulabdeen. Azad told him that his father had gone
for namaz. The visitor said, ‘I have brought something for him, can I keep it
here?’ Azad called to his mother for her consent, but she was also praying and
did not respond. Azad asked the man to leave the bundle of clothes he had
brought on the cot and continued his study. When Jainulabdeen returned and saw
the bundle he asked Azad, ‘What is this? Who has given that?’ Azad told him,
‘Somebody came and left this for you.’ Jainulabdeen became immediately
enraged and gave Azad a thorough beating – one of the very few of his life.
Azad was frightened and began weeping. His mother embraced and consoled
him.
When his anger subsided, Jainulabdeen touched his son’s shoulder lovingly

and advised him not to receive any untoward gift from anyone – ever. He quoted
the Hadith, ‘When the Almighty appoints a person to a position, He takes care of
his provision. If a person takes anything beyond that, it is an illegal gain.’ He
told Azad that such a gift is always accompanied by some purpose and so is
dangerous: it is like touching a snake and in turn suffering its poisonous bite.
This incident taught Azad a valuable lesson for his later life in public office.
Kalam returned to Schwartz and again became immersed in his studies. His
only diversion was to spend time with S.T.R. Manickam. Kalam was curious to
know, after such a horrendous start, what kind of country India would become.
Manickam would reassure him, telling him that horrific though Partition had
been, this too would pass. He also explained the sincere work of Dr B.R.
Ambedkar in drafting the Constitution of India. Manickam told Kalam of how
this most learned man was adapting and incorporating elements from the
constitutions of the world’s great democracies: the United States of America,
Australia, Canada, Ireland, Germany, France and inevitably, the statutes of Great
Britain.
The Constitution of India as the supreme law of the nation came into force on
26 January 1950. The date of 26 January was chosen to commemorate the Purna
Swaraj (Absolute Self-rule) declaration of independence of 1930. Manickam
would make time to help Kalam, and the young students who would gather
around him, understand the great political changes written about in the
newspapers. Perhaps more importantly, Manickam shared with Kalam Benjamin
Franklin’s famous words apropos the Constitution of the United States: ‘The
Constitution only gives people the right to pursue happiness. You have to catch it
yourself.’
By this time, Kalam was well ensconced at Schwartz, and his talents had been
noted. The mathematics teacher, Ramakrishna Iyer, developed a special fondness
for him. Ramakrishna Iyer believed that true education is not a process of
pouring into a student from outside, but of calling forth what is within. He saw it
not as a process of memorizing but a process of nurturing, of allowing, of
evoking. He felt that it was ultimately a matter of bringing forth the person that
is meant to be. For Ramakrishna Iyer, education was manifesting the inner divine
potentialities of students, and he saw a great innate potential in young Kalam. He
told Kalam, ‘Book-based education cannot make a true man. Physical health,

mental purity, intellectual acuteness, moral power and a spiritual outlook on life
– with the right effort directing its aim – must combine if perfection is to be
achieved. Students should be diligent, Brahmachari (observing chastity),
adherents to satya (truth) and dharma (righteousness), to countenance their
optimum physical and mental abilities and attain a righteous mode of living.’
Ramana Maharshi, the ancient sage of the modern era, died on 14 April 1950.
There was a condolence meeting in the school. Students were told that Ramana
Maharshi was noted for his belief in the power of silence and his relatively
sparse use of speech, as well as for his lack of concern for fame or criticism –
and his special love of animals and plants. Ramakrishna Iyer told Kalam that
evening, ‘Sat-chit-ananda (Existence, Consciousness, Bliss) is a description of
the subjective experience of God. This sublimely blissful experience of the
boundless, pure consciousness is a glimpse of ultimate reality.’ Not
understanding much of this, Kalam nonetheless deduced the simple fact that if
your inner world is peaceful and without conflict, your outer world will be no
different.
Kalam decided to pursue his Bachelor of Science and secured admission at St
Joseph’s College, Tiruchirappalli. But before leaving Ramanathapuram, he
sought a joint session with his three great teachers to comprehend the great
upheavals of those times. Some other students also joined. This meeting gave
Kalam some deep insights that indeed triggered a long-term transformative
process in him.
His teachers told him that India had asserted its sovereignty, and established
itself as a state among the world’s nations. It had implemented a secular,
democratic system of governance based not merely on an inherited British
tradition, but also calling on select provisions of other prominent countries’
systems. It had instituted the rule of law in its dominions – an imperative for its
citizens – and made some efforts to put the law to use as a tool for India’s selftransformation. It had thus laid the foundations for relative peace and economic
stability on the subcontinent. Moreover, it had expressed its will for selfdetermination by creating institutions, such as the Council of Scientific and
Industrial Research (CSIR), the Atomic Energy Commission (AEC) and the
Planning Commission.
But Kalam’s teachers lamented that other challenges remained, and there

appeared to be scant political will to address these. First and foremost: The
government was failing to educate the citizenry. India began its first decade with
a mere 18 per cent of its population classed as literate. Further, India’s unequal
distribution of landownership was a stumbling block for development, and
vested interests would naturally resist reform in this area. And on an
international level, India appeared to be without a cogent vision for its place in
the world; foreign policy was adrift, and India would be blown to and fro by
events and moved by the tides of the times, rather than steered according to its
national priorities.
This succinct, clear-sighted analysis of the country’s predicament lodged
itself in Kalam’s mind, all the more deeply for the respect he felt for his teachers.
He would be reminded of their words, at any rate, by his observations over the
coming years that tallied with their thoughts. His native wisdom would also tell
him, though, that thoughts and words could not be enough to bring greatness to
India.