World Cup Woes

When you are on 94,just hit a six.-Arjun Tendulkar's advice to his
father.
The Indian team's preparations for the 2003 World Cup in ~outh
Mrica entailed a tour to New Zealand which turned out to be an
unmitigated disaster.
This time it was the West Indies and Sri Lanka who came over for
four ODis each. India won both series comfortably, but the cracks were
beginning to show between the players and the team management.
Tendulkar claimed the Man of the Series award against the Windies
with scores of31, 0, 60 and 100 not out at Vadodara. In addition, he
had the satisfaction of claiming the wicket of captain Brian Lara in the
opening match at Nagpur just when the West Indies captain looked
like taking the game away from India.
Tendulkar reached three figures from 76 balls off the final delivery
of the innings at Vadodara, though he was dropped twice. In terms of
brute force it was a vintage knock.
However, he had a quieter time against the Lankans and it was
another veteran, Sourav Ganguly, who took the Man of the Series
award this time.
India, the 2003 World Cup runners-up, were placed in Group B
with Sri Lanka, Bangladesh and Bermuda. The matches would be
played at Port-of-Spain in Trinidad, traditionally India's favourite
venue.
So confident were the ICC oflndia and Pakistan advancing to the
Super 8 stage that they had even drawn up the schedule for the second

stage, something unheard-of at any major sporting event.
As far as the ICC were concerned, the biggest match of the World
Cup would be the India-Pakistan clash confidently slated to be played
at Bridgetown, Barbados on 15 April, just over a month after the
opening match.
Thousands of bookings were made by Indian and Pakistani fans,
mainly from the United States, and huge anticipation was building
around the match.
Imagine the shock around the cricket world then when it was
Ireland and Bangladesh who faced each other on April15!
Behind that amazing turnaround was the story of two of the biggest
upsets in World Cup history-Bangladesh stunning India in their
opening Group B match and Ireland shocking Pakistan in Group D,
both on the same fateful day.
Though reports of some of the Indian players partying late into
the night before the match are unsubstantiated, there is no doubt they
were over-confident going into the match. The Banglas on their part
went into it with a grim determination to teach the cocky Indians a
very expensive lesson.
They sure did that. India crawled to 191 all out in 49.3 overs with
only Yuvraj Singh showing some urgency towards the end of the
innings. Tendulkar ate up 26 deliveries for his painful 7 and looked
uncomfortable during his 40 minutes at the crease.
Unfancied Bangladesh made light of the target and reached it with
five wickets in hand.
Back home, a mixture of gloom and disbelief spread across the
country. Suddenly one of the favourites for the title found themselves
in a tight corner-they would have to win their remaining two matches
to have a realistic chance of making it to the next stage.
Bermuda were never going to be a problem and India became the
first team to post a 400-plus total in a World Cup match.
Sri Lanka were another matter altogether. Although India had
beaten them easily in their last two ODI series, both had been played at
home. And the Lankans had crushed Bangladesh and Bermuda in
their two group games.
348

Sachin

Indian cricket's worst nightmare came true. Lanka's total of254
for 6 was challenging, though not formidable. But the Indian batting
was just not up to the task. They collapsed to 185 all out and the
dreams ofhundreds of millions lay dashed.
When Tendulkar was bowled third ball without scoring by Dilhara
Fernando at 44 for 3, the fight had been knocked out of the side. Dravid
played a lone hand with 60, but it was far from enough.
Indian fans reacted with fury. They may have been justified in
their anger. But some of the reactions were condemnable. Players'
properties were vandalized in the full glare of TV news cameras.
Motives were ascribed, and the patriotism and commitment of the
players were questioned.
The BCCI, instead of trying to heal the wounds, decided the time
was ripe to crack the whip; after all, they had public sentiment on their
side. India's cricketers who were long used to adulation suddenly found
themselves painted as villains.
Coach Chappell's contract had been till the end of the World Cup
and he resigned before he was asked to go.
The tensions between the players and the coach had become ever
more evident as the World Cup dragged on and now they came out
into the open. It was as iflndian cricket had descended into a free-forall.
Rumours abounded that there was a movement among the senior
players to replace Dravid as captain with Tendulkar as the feeling was
the incumbent was too much of a Chappell man.
It was alleged that Chappell had sent a letter to the Board
complaining about the attitude of the seniors in the team and now
Tendulkar stepped forward as the players' senior statesman to air their
feelings.
It was a role he had rarely taken up throughout his career when he
preferred to keep a low profile during every crisis, even at the height of
match-fixing when his intervention may have doused the flames.
Tendulkar now poured out his soul, claiming he was 'shattered
beyond words' by the World Cup debacle. He said he had given his
World Cup Woes

349

heart and soul to cricket for 17 years but that in all those years no
coach had ever doubted his attitude. While admitting the team played
badly he added, 'What hurt us most is that the coach has questioned
our attitude.'
Chappell predictably denied the contents of the letter, but now it
was time for Indian cricket to move on.
Ironically, the next contest was in Bangladesh, the same side that
had caused India's downfall in the Caribbean.
It was announced that both Tendulkar and Ganguly had been
'rested' for the om series. But few could deny that this was in fact the
first time Tendulkar was actually dropped from the Indian side since
his debut back in 1989.
He was back for the two Test matches and feasted on the weak
bowling to record two more centuries.
The ever-busy Indian cricket team was next in England. India
faced South Mrica in three oms at Belfast prior to the Test series and
the horrors of the whitewash in South Mrica a year earlier were put
behind them as India won the series 2-1.
Tendulkar regained his rightful place in the side and was Man of
the Series with scores of99, 93 and 18. He also passed 15,000 runs in
the series.
That 99 was particularly mortifying as he was run out inches short
of the crease. It was the first time he had been out for 99 in an
international match but he batted for 143 balls. Only four times had
he batted for longer in oms and each time he went on to a big hundred.
The first 50 took 95 balls, slow even by Test standards. But he was back
to his dominating best in the very next match.
It was in England in 1990 that the teenager had first announced
himself with his maiden Test century at Old Trafford. Six years later
he was established as one of world cricket's finest batsmen, and he
consolidated that status in 2002.
Now five years later he was back for his fourth England Test tour
in his new position as the senior statesman of the team and still, after
all these years, one of the best in the world.
India were very lucky indeed to escape with a draw in the first Test
350

Sachin

at Lord's with nine wickets down and the weather playing a big part in
the proceedings.
Tendulkar did not make much of an impact in the Test with scores
of37 and 16 as India, set a target of380 to win, finished at 282 for nine.
A mini-storm erupted back home when Kapil Dev made the point
that Tendulkar had failed to deliver in crunch situations throughout
his long and illustrious career.
The criticism may have stung but statistics hacked up Kapil. Till
date Tendulkar had batted 40 times in the last innings of a Test and
had scored over 50 on just four occasions. His fourth innings average
of33.65 till the Lord's Test paled before his first innings average of
72.49.
India came roaring back to win the second Test at Trent Bridge by
seven wickets, only the fifth time they had won a Test in England in
75 years.
Zaheer Khan was the bowling hero with nine wickets while
Tendulkar with 91 in the first innings was India's top scorer.
But the innings also signalled that his days of dominating Test
attacks were over. Left-arm pace bowler Ryan Sidebottom in particular
troubled the master batsman and did everything short of getting his
wicket. Off the 48 balls he bowled to Tend ulkar, only seven runs were
scored and the bowler had three lbw appeals turned down.
Having battled so hard for over four hours, it was a travesty of
justice when he was given out leg before to Paul Collingwood nine
short of his century in a shocking decision by umpire Simon Taufel.
The world's leading umpire later admitted he was 'very upset' about
the decision.
By drawing the third and final Test at the Oval, India had won a
series in England for only the third time, and the first since 1986. It
was a feather in the cap for captain Rahul Dravid. His decision to quit
the captaincy weeks later thus came as a shock.
Though he made 82 in the first innings at the Oval, it was the first
time on four visits that Tendulkar had failed to score a century in the
Test series. England came back to win a thrilling oor series 4-3 after
the teams were deadlocked going into the final game at Lord's. Here
World Cup Woes

lSI

the Indian batsmen once again crumbled in a pressure situation
having fought back after trailing 1-3 in the series.
Tendulkar's odd run of the 90s continued. For the second time he
was out on 99, a marginal decision by the umpire ruling him caught
behind off Andrew Flintoff in the match at Bristol which India won
by9 runs.
He also scored 94 in the penultimate game at Old Trafford and had
two other 50s. But his 30 in the decider at Lord's was not enough.
It was in South Mrica just six months after India's World Cup
debacle that an earthquake of sorts hit the cricket world. Dravid,
Ganguly and Tendulkar had all made themselves unavailable for the
inaugural World Twenty20 championship, though they may well
have been advised to, to avoid any embarrassment. The Indian selectors
rightly decided to go with a youthful team under new captain
Mahendra Singh Dhoni.
When India beat Pakistan in the final in Johannesburg on 24
September 2007 it would set in motion a movement that would rival
the fallout oflndia's stunning triumph in the 1983 Prudential World
Cup.
Less than a week after the final-with all of India still busy
celebrating-the Australians landed in India determined to avenge
their defeat in the semi-finals of the T20 World Cup.
They came to India as reigning world 50-overs champions and
the best Test side in the world as well and proved their might by
trouncing India 4-2 in the ODI series. India though had the consolation
ofbeating them in the lone T20 match.
Tendulkar topped the averages for the Indians but his two halfcenturies in the series were not enough to prevent Australia's victory.
Dhoni's elevation to the captaincy of the 50-overs game was only
natural once Dravid had quit. But the appointment ofAnil Kumble as
Test captain came as a pleasant surprise. Tendulkar had been sounded
out too, but he declined what would have been his third time in charge.
Kumble's first assignment was when Pakistan visited India late in
the year.
But before the Test series, India defeated Pakistan 3-2 in the oms
352

Sachin

and for Tendulkar the jinx of2007 continued-he was out for 99 (in
the second match at Mohali) for the third time in the year and then for
97 in the fourth match at Gwalior.
It meant he had been out in the 90s six times in oms in 2007
leading to son Arjun's sage piece of advice: 'Next time you are on 94,
just hit a six .. .'
Kumble's first Test as captain at the age of37 was at his favourite
ground, the Feroze Shah Kotla in New Delhi, and India maintained
their streak at the ground by winning the Test by six wickets early on
the fifth day, their seventh straight at the capital.
But with Shoaib Akhtar at his fiery best in the second innings,
India looked shaky chasing 203 when the fast bowler grabbed the top
three wickets with 93 on the board.
Tendular's innings was a mix of caution and some splendid
boundaries. He thwarted Shoaib's pace and looked calm and collected
throughout, fittingly finishing it off by smashing the fast bowler for
his ninth boundary. That crucial innings of 56 not out made up for
the first innings when he was run out for 1 after a mix-up with Dravid.
Sachin's contribution was 82 in the second Test at Kolkata which
ended in a draw, but he was forced to miss the final Test at Bangalore
with a stiffknee.
That Test was drawn too, giving India their first Test victory on
home soil against Pakistan since 1978-79.
The next challenge would be the sternest test of them all, a tour of
Australia.

World Cup Woes

353