World Cup Debut

Inzamam is a much better batsman against fast bowling.-Imran Khan
There was some speculation at the end of the Test series that the Indian
team would return for a short break before their opening World Cup
game at Perth against England on 22 February, just 17 days after the
fifth Test at the same venue had ended. Many of the players were
homesick after so many weeks away from their families, and the
prospect of another month of travelling the length and breadth of this
vast land for the World Cup was a daunting one. However, it was
decided that they should stay on and play a couple of warm-up games,
though the team was hardly short of match practice. Ajay Jadeja and
Vinod Kambli joined the team for the World Cup and Ravi Shastri
was back from Mumbai, having been declared fit after the knee injury
that had kept him out of the last two Test matches.
The (ifth edition of the World Cup to be staged in Australia and
New Zealand, or the Benson and Hedges World Cup to give it its full
name, was unique in many respects. For the first time on the world
stage, matches would be played under lights with the players donning
coloured outfits and using two white balls from either ends. This
would set the trend for future World Cups. There was also considerable
excitement over the debut of post-apartheid South Mrica. Also, there
was a new round-robin league format, with all the nine teams facing
each other.
The tournament could not have got off to a more sensational start.
New Zealand, which had failed to make the semi-finals in 1987,
stunned World Cup holders Australia by 37 runs in Auckland, with

Kiwi skipper Martin Crowe stroking a masterly 100 not out-and
surprising one and all by opening the bowling with off-spinner Dipak
Patel. On the same day at the Western Association Cricket Association
(wAcA), India came within a whisker of upsetting the 1987 runnersup England, ultimately losing by just nine runs. This was a match
that swung back and forth as India became the first team to bat under
lights in a World Cup game. With Graham Gooch (51) and Robin
Smith (91) to the fore, England made a brisk start and were looking
good for a big score. Smith was out at 197 for 4 and the last six wickets
then crashed for just 27 runs. The English tally for the last seven overs
was 39 runs for the loss of six wickets and a total of236 for 9 appeared
eminently achievable. That certainly seemed the case as openers
Shastri and Srikkanth put on 63 in contrasting styles. There were
seven boundaries in the latter's 39, while Shastri top-scored with a
rather laborious 51. Azhar's nightmare run with the bat continued, as
he got out on the first ball. At 63 for 2, it was left to the Mumbai pair of
Shastri and Tendulkar to put the innings back on the rails. This they
did in a stand that doubled the score by the thirtieth over.
Now Ian Botham swung the advantage back England's way with
an inspired spell ofbowling that would win him the Man of the Match
award. Just as Tendulkar was looking like he would win the game
single-handed, Botham tied him down and then foxed him with a
slower one. The perfectly pitched away cutter had him playing forward
and well caught by wicketkeeper Alec Stewart for a smart 35 from 44
balb, with five fours. The experienced Botham was delighted; the
young Tendulkar anguished. It was a dismissal he would forever look
upon with considerable chagrin, for he did not have a clue to the
delivery. Botham also accounted for Vinod Kambli and the equation
came down to 51 from seven overs, then to 36 from three with the last
wicket pair ofBanerjee and Srinath at the crease. Some amazing shots
saw them needing 11 from the last over from Chris Lewis. But
England had the last laugh.
India's next match against Sri Lanka at Mackay was abandoned
due to rain after just two balls had been bowled and both teams were
awarded one point. Australia had suffered another shock defeat,
88

Sachin

following their loss to New Zealand m the opening game. This time
they were handed out a nine-wicket trouncing by South Mrica who
could not have marked their World Cup debut in greater style.
The India-Australia bout at Brisbane on 1 March was thm. a needle
match with both teams looking for their first win. It turned out to be
one of the greatest games of cricket ever, at the venue of the first ever
tied Test (in 1960).
Australia batted first. Dean Jones hit 90 from 109 balls, while
Border's miserable form with the bat continued, and they finished on
237 for 9. Kapil Dev and Prabhakar turned in identical figures of3-41
from ten overs. India, in its innings, had reached 45 for 1 (Srikkanth
the batsman out, bowled for a duck by McDermott) after 16.2 overs,
when there was a 21-minute delay on account of rain. The rain rule
came into play then, and the revised target (under the 'highest scoring
overs' formula) was now 236 from 47 overs. While only two runs had
been knocked off the target, India would have three overs less to play.
The damp ball after the rain made things slippery for the Aussie
bowlers. Azharuddin played one ofhis gems, a rare occurrence in a
tour of horrors for the Indian captain. Kapil Dev was promoted to
push the scoring along and slammed 21 in a run-a-ball cameo. This
after Shastri had got bogged down, plodding to 25 from 70 balls.
It was Manjrekar, coming in at number six, who gave his captain
the necessary support to go for the win. Azhar played typically glorious,
wristy shots all round the ground and raced to 93 from 103 balls (ten
fours) before becoming the first offour run-out victims in the innings:
Border's rocket-like throw caught him short of the crease. His stand
with Manjrekar was worth 66, and when he fell the score was 194 for
5. With eight overs and six wickets in hand, the target had come down
to 77. Manjrekar lifted the tempo and it was now down to 42 from five.
He hit Hughes for a six and a four and raced to 47 from 42 balls, then
he too was run out at 216 for 7, with 20 runs still needed for what
seemed an improbable win. Tendulkar's failure (he was out for 11)
put further pressure on the lower order.
It was now left to the tail-enders and they took the team to the very
doorstep of victory. A miscalculation by Border saw his main strike
World Cup Debut

89

bowler McDermott bowl the penultimate over from which he
conceded just six runs and now 13 were needed from the last over by
off-spinner Tom Moody. Kiran More smashed the first two to the
boundary. But he was bowled next ball, trying to finish the game with
another four. Prabhakar scored a single from the first ball he faced and
was run out from the next. Four runs were now needed from the last
ball. Srinath swung hard and connected cleanly, sending the ball
soaring down to the fine leg boundary for what appeared to be a certain
six and victory. Indeed, last man Raju was already doing a victory jig.
Then came the final breathtaking twist. At full tilt, Steve Waugh ran
round and reached for the catch, only to drop it even as the crowd
gasped in dis belie£ Waugh grabbed the ball as it slid towards the gutter
while Srinath and Raju ran for their lives, and threw as the batsmen
were crossing for the third run that would have tied the game. The
throw was wayward and Boon, keeping in place of the injured Healy,
had to drag it in, but he managed to remove the bails a split second
before Raju could complete the run. Australia had won by one run,
just as they had at Chennai in the opening match of the 1987 Reliance
Cup, which they went on to lift. Finally, it looked like their defence of
the title was back on the rails. India could only curse the wretched rain
rule.
The round-robin format of the World Cup ensured that all the
teams played each other before the knockout stage. Thus, for the first
time in five World Cup tournaments, India and Pakistan would come
face to face. Until now, organizers had made sure to place the traditional
rivals in different groups. Even as India were looking for their first
win in the tournament, Pakistan were decidedly lucky to be saved by
rain against England, at Adelaide, after crashing to 74 all out.
The two teams met at the Sydney Cricket Ground on 4 March
1992. The pressure on both sides was intense. The crowd of 10,000
was almost entirely made up of expatriate Indians and Pakistanis.
Azhar took first strike on winning the toss. The Indian total of216
for 7 was built around Ajay Jadeja's 46 (he opened in place of Shastri)
and Tendulkar's 54 not out from 62 balls. Kapil Dev provided the
impetus towards the end with a quick-fire 35. Pakistan began their
90

Sachin

run chase with Azhar setting an attacking field from the start.
Inzamam-ul-Haq and Zahid Fazal both fell for two and at 17 for 2, the
Indian bowlers had gained the upper hand. Opener Aamir Sohail and
Javed Miandad began the rescue act in a partnership of88, punctuated
with a confrontation between wicketkeeper More and Miandad. It
was Tendulkar who made the breakthrough, getting Sohail caught
low down at midwicket by Srikkanth for 62. Once Miandad had been
bowled by Srinath for a painstaking 40, the rest of the batting fell apart
and subsided to 173 all out, leaving India winners by 43 runs and
Tendulkar with his first Man of the Match award in the World Cup.
Mter all the frustration with the rain rule in the match against
Australia, things evened out for India in the next match against
Zimbabwe in Hamilton, New Zealand. The match was initially
curtailed to 32 overs. Zimbabwe's innings was terminated by another
downpour, at 104 for 1 in 19.1 overs. Though India's score at the same
stage was 106 for 3, their 'best' 19 overs had produced 159, hence the
strange calculations and victory to India by 55 runs.
India opened with Kapil Dev, but it was Tendulkar who stole the
show. He smashed his highest ODI score of81 from 77 balls, with eight
fours and a six, that saw them to 203 for 7. He mastered all the bowlers
except veteran off-spinner John Traicos, who was 26 years older than
him. Traicos claimed 3-35 from his six overs. Though this contrived
result kept their hopes alive, India were struggling and it was no
surprise when they lost their next three matches against the West
Indies, New Zealand and South Mrica, and made their exit from the
tournament.
Tendulkar failed against the West Indies at Wellington, caught
behind off a perfect leg-cutter from Curtly Ambrose as India went
down by five wickets. He came roaring back against New Zealand,
overtaking his previous highest score of 81 by three runs. He was
dropped early at short cover, after which he unleashed a range of
sparkling strokes with six boundaries in his knock of 84 from 107
balls. His stand of127 in 30 overs with Azhar produced some dazzling
batting in front ofa crowd of exactly 9000. But it wasn't enough, as the
hosts won by four wickets to make it six wins in a row. The Indians
World Cup Debut

91

weren't helped by the freezing conditions: Caris brook in Dunedin is
cricket's closest venue 10 the South Pole. The defeat finally dashed
whatever slim hopes India may have harboured of reaching the semifinals. Their last match at Adelaide against South Mrica was once
again reduced hy rain. South Mrica won in the thirtieth and final over
to make it to the last four in their maiden World Cup.
It was an unhappy end to a disappointing campaign by the 1983
World Cup champions.
Tendulkar's personal total of283 runs came from seven innings at
an average of 47.17, with three 50s. He was now emerging as the
team's potential match winner. 'His contributions were consistent,
but not enough,' summed up manager Abbas Ali Baig.
Pakistan were the surprise winners of the World Cup final at the
Melbourne Cricket Ground (MeG) on 25 March. Led by lmran Khan,
they would have been eliminated in the league stage itself, but for rain
during the match against England at Adelaide. The virtually unknown
lnzamam-ul-Haq's dazzling 60 from 37 balls in the semi-finals against
New Zealand at Auckland helped them pull off an improbable victory.
The 22-year-old hit 42 in the final against England, following which
his captain predicted he would be the world's number one batsman in
the near future.
Ten years later, this is lmran Khan's analysis of the two batsmen
from the subcontinent who promised to rule the world:
I feel both Tendulkar and Inzamam are great players. When
Tendulkar first came to Pakistan in 1989, his timing was very
good. Tendulkar's innings management is much better than
Inzamam's. He times the ball very well and he manages his
innings to perfection. But I still say that Inzamam is a much
better batsman against fast bowlers. He has played a number of
match-winning innings for Pakistan against quality fast
bowlers, whereas I don't think Tendulkar has played that many
match-winning knocks for India. There are lots of other
batsmen I would like to mention. Allan Border and Javed
Miandad were not that talented, but the big plus of these
92

Sachin

batsmen was that they were very good at building their
innings-a quality which certainly Tendulkar has.

World Cup Debut

93

II

Two Little Bits of Cricket History

No one could have done a betterjob if breaking the ice.
- Geoffrey Boycott
Few Indian cricketers have enjoyed long stints in English county
cricket. Kapil Dev, Ravi Shastri and Azharuddin played briefly for
Northamptonshire, Glamorgan and Derbyshire respectively, while
in more rect:nt years Javagal Srinath, Anil Kumble, Rahul Dravid
and Sourav Ganguly have turned out for various teams with mixed
results. Sunil Gavaskar played just one season, and that was in 1980
for Somerset. The only Indian who made a career out of county cricket
was wicketkeeper-batsman Farokh Engineer who was part of the
Lancashire squad that enjoyed much one-day success in the 1970s.
Sachin Tendulkar had made a huge impression on the English public
and the media on his first tour in 1990. His century at Old Trafford at
the age of 17 had captured public imagination. It wasn't surprising,
therefore, that he should receive an offer to play county cricket. The
real surprise was that the offer came from Yorkshire.
While county cricket had been thrown open to foreign professionals
from the 1960s-and many played in England long before that toothe only county that did not allow 'outsiders' to be part of their team
was Yorkshire, also the most successful team in county cricket history.
Cricket is part of the Yorkshire ethos, much as it is in Mumbai, or in
Victoria and New South Wales in Australia. Great pride is taken in
being able to wear the Yorkshire colours and there is a saying that
'When Yorkshire is strong, England is strong.' Yorkshire, in fact,
extended their ban on outsiders to anyone born outside the boundaries

of the county. Along with their pride came a sense of parochialism and
in more recent years, charges of racism. It is ironical given the large
population of Pakistani immigrants, particularly in Bradford, that
Yorkshire has never awarded a county cap to even those Asians born
within its boundaries. To add to their reputation, the crowd at
Hcadingley, Leeds was often virulent in its taunts and slurs.
While other teams were marching ahead with their overseas stars,
Yorkshire cricket went from bad to worse. They had last won the
county title in 1968 and in 1983 they took the wooden spoon for the
first time. The team was also riven asunder by internal squabbles that
caused immense bitterness in the 1980s and beyond. In frustration,
many of its best players migrated to other counties. Finally, Australian
fast bowler Craig McDermott was signed up on a three-year contract
starting from 1992. But injury forced him to pull out. Former Yorkshire
captain Geoffrey Boycott, the focus ofa great deal of controversy at the
club during his playing days, then decided to sign up Tendulkar in
place of McDermott. He came up against opposition from another
former captain, Brian Close, the chairman of the Cricket Committee.
Close was adamant that a fast bowler should replace McDermott. But
with time running out, a lack of international fast bowlers to choose
from, and sponsors Yorkshire Television keen on a big-name signing,
the final choice remained Tendulkar. And it proved to be an inspired
one, more off the field than on it.
The deal was worth £30,000 to Sachin. Yorkshire ChiefExecutive
Chris Hassell flew to Mumbai in April 1992 for the signing, which
Tendulkar agreed to after receiving the stamp of approval from coach
Ramakant Achrekar and mentor Sunil Gavaskar. Yorkshire were keen
to shake off the racist tag and also to attract more Asians to their
matches. But, while they may have succeeded to a limited extent in
the PR department, there was hardly a surge of interest among the
immigrants. As Michael Calvin pointed out in the Daily Telegraph, the
immigrants mainly consisted of Pakistanis who were not particularly
enthused by the presence ofTendulkar. For his part, Tendulkar fitted
in remarkably well, considering he was just 19 and aware that there
was a fair amount of opposition to the century-old 'no outsiders'
Two Little Bits of Cricket History

95

tradition being dismantled in his favour. A Press Association photograph
that was published in virtually every Indian newspaper showed him
gamely attired in a Yorkshire flat hat, in his hand a glass of Tetley
Bitter beer, one of the team's sponsors.
On the field, he was consistent without being spectacular. There
was just one century (exactly 100 vDurham) and seven 50s in a total
of 1070 championship runs from 25 innings at 46.52, placing him
fortieth in the year's averages. In the Sunday League (40 overs), his
best was 107 from 73 balls against Lancashire. The century against
Durham powered Yorkshire to victory after they had been set a target
of262. Teammate Phil Carrick was quoted on that innings by Scyld
Berry in Wisden Cricket Monthly Oune 1996):
I walked over to have a chat with him as he came in and I
remember him staring at me quite intently-perhaps he
couldn't understand me! I passed on some information, then I
thought: 'what am I doing telling him?' You could tell he had
a fantastic talent, class oozing through every vein.
I told him it was the sort ofwicket where you couldn't hit it on
the up, and shortly after he came in he smashed one straight
past Ian Botham. It was a full-length ball, so I thought, 'well, he
might have heard me,' and he went on to win the match. The
only criticism that you could make was that sometimes he'd be
a bit impetuous, he'd get to 60 or 70 and set the game up, then
get out in ways he wouldn't do now. He'd never play for
himself-in fact we wished he would bat for himself a bit more.
Otherwise he made an ideal first overseas player, for us and
him. He contributed a few ideas and in the dressing-room he
used to fiddle with his bats-tremendously heavy bats-or
listen to his music, and just get on with it.
Against Essex he struck a classy 93 as Yorkshire won by a huge
margin of an innings and 55 runs. The Roses match saw him strike 56
not out and 48 as Yorkshire beat traditional rivals Lancashire by four
wickets. In addition, he struck 86 against Hampshire and a brilliant
96

Sachin

92 against Gloucestershire. Yorkshire's downward slide, however,
continued as they fell two places to finish sixteenth in the county
championship and eight places to fifteenth in the Sunday League.
Sachin's real success was in breaking down barriers and creating
goodwill wherever he went, with colleagues, fans and the media.
Boycott summed it up in his book, Gec!lfrey Boycott on Cricket: 'He had
a lot to prove. If he had tailed with the bat or behaved carelessly, the
outcome would almost certainly have been disastrous. Happily, we
picked a winner. Unfailingly well-mannered and charming, with a
shy smile on his lips, he settled quickly into the dressing room, and
the Yorkshire public, shrugging off their reservations, took him to
their collective .heart. No one could have done a better job ofbreaking
the ice on behalf of the imports.'
The positive reaction in the Yorkshire county circles paved the
way the next year for West Indian captain Richie Richardson to join
the team. In 2001, Yorkshire won the county title for the first time
since 1968. Their match winner throughout the season was Darren
Lehmann, an Australian left-bander not good enough for the
Australian touring side, but good enough to finish second in the
national averages that season.
Tendulkar has always looked back on his county stint with affection.
'It was a tremendous experience and exposure and, in many respects, a
highlight for me, particularly as I was the first overseas player to play
for Yorkshire,' he told Sebastian Coe of the Daily Telegraph (6 May
2001). 'I'm sorry I couldn't stay longer, but there was just no way I
could combine five months' commitment to the Indian team with a
county season. I don't think it will be possible for me to play for a
county again.' According to Boycott, writing in Outlook (4 January
1999): 'Yorkshire supporters loved him. Sachin played well for a
medium team but at the age of18 he was not the finished article. We
didn't expect him to be but he created an enormous amount of interest
and left behind tremendous goodwill. I wouldn't have swapped him
for any other player.'
Tendulkar's season was curtailed when on 21 August he was
summoned by the BCCI to play in the Duleep Trophy. As if he were
Two Little Bits of Cricket History

97

still on trial! He was interviewed by Andrew Collomose for the Cricketer
International (November 1992), at Scarborough, during his last game
against Nottinghamshire. Wrote Collomose of 'Yorkshire's Fresh
Spice': 'Tendulkar's warmth, courtesy and obvious enthusiasm for
the cause quickly made a nonsense of unspoken pre-season fears that
the racist element among Yorkshire followers would sour his season
before it really got underway. "It is a time I will treasure," said
Tendulkar. ... "Everywhere I have played, both in Yorkshire and
elsewhere, people have gone out of their way to be friendly. Yes, I was
a little nervous when I first arrived in England. Yorkshire is such a
famous county and I was going to be their first overseas player. It was
a big responsibility. But my only regret is that it took me so long to
score a hundred. At one stage it seemed I would never do so."'
He shared a flat in Dews bury with old school chum Vinod Kambli
who was playing with Spen Victoria in the Bradford League. Despite
the numerous Indian restaurants in the county, they ate mostly
Chinese, or a pizza, or maybe a Kentucky Fried or something at
McDonald's. 'The Indian food over here is not quite the same as I am
used to at home. Not enough fresh spices.'
In late 1992, India were invited to be the first team to play in South
Mrica since the apartheid ban imposed in 1970. With Nelson Mandela
all set to assume leadership of the 'new' South Africa, it was a historic
visit in many ways. Indeed, from the moment they landed till the end
of the tour, the Indians were feted and felicitated wherever they went,
particularly by the local Indian community which tended to go
overboard in its enthusiasm. One of the Indian team's sponsors who
travelled with the team confided to me that such was the hectic round
of parties and functions, there were occasions when Sachin would
hide in his room to avoid attending them!
Dr Ali Bacher dubbed the visit 'The Friendship Tour'. It may have
been so off the field. But the cricket itself was very hard fought, at
times even bitter, with the home side determined to give their fans a
taste of victory after more than two decades. The Indian team had
earlier made a brief stopover in Harare en route to South Mrica, where
Zimbabwe gave a pretty good account of themselves in their maiden
98

Sachin

Test. The Test marked the second occasion on which Tendulkarwas
out for a duck, caught and bowled by master off-spinner John Traicos.
The one-day festival match at Raadjasfontein that kicked off the
South Mrican tour saw Tendulkar score a century against Nicky
Oppenheimer's XI. The series began in right earnest at Durban with
South Mrican opener Jimmy Cook out to the first ball of the series,
caught by Tendulkar at third slip offKapil Dev. This was South Mrica's
second Test after readmission, having been stunned earlier in the year
by the West Indies in Barbados. The weather had the final say at
Durban, with more than a day lost to rain, and the match ended in a
tame draw. But there were quite a few interesting events that captured
the attention of cricket historians. Left-arm spinner Omar Henry, at
40 South Mrica's oldest debutant, also became the first non-white to
play for his country. South Mrican captain Kepler Wessels, who had
earlier represented his adopted country, Australia, in Test cricket,
became the first to score a century for two different countries. Ramakant
Achrekar's 'boy' Praveen Amre became the ninth Indian to score a
century on Test debut.
The most dramatic moment of the match came on 14 November
1992, the second day of the Test. Tendulkar was on 11 and the total on
38 for 2. He played a ball from Brian McMillan backward of point, set
off for a run and then changed his mind as Jonty Rhodes swooped and
threw the ball to Andrew Hudson. The batsman tried to make his
ground even as short leg Hudson, up at the stumps, took the flat throw
on the bounce and broke the wicket. It appeared desperately close and
South Mrican Cyril Mitchley at square leg passed the decision to the
umpires' room, outlining the shape of a TV screen with his hands.
Third umpire Karl Liebenberg was sitting in front of the TV, and 29
seconds later came his response: a green light flashed (for 'go' rather
than red for 'stay'-the reverse works now) and Tendulkar made his
way back, the first cricketer to go through a trial by TV. So close was the
verdict that he may well have gained the benefit of the doubt if the onfield umpire hadn't had the benefit of calling for the replay. Cricket
had entered the technological age, at last.
The fact that this new technology did not find universal acceptance
Two Little Bits of Cricket History

99

even among the umpires may well have cost India the second Test at
Johannesburg. West Indian Steve Bucknor was the neutral umpire
standing in the series. Ironically, it was Jhonty Rhodes who gained the
reprieve. South Mrica were 61 for 4 in their first innings, with Rhodes
on 28, when Srinath threw down the stumps with a direct throw. But
Bucknor ruled it not out without consulting the third umpire, despite
pleas from the fielding side. The TV replays showed Rhodes clearly
short of the crease. He went on to score 91 and took his side to the
respectable score of 292. It was a mistake no international umpire
would make again.
India too lost early wickets. It was 27 for 2 when Tend ulkar walked
in. Two more wickets fell for the addition of SO, and at 77 for 4, there
was the looming threat of a follow-on. Tendulkar started hesitantly.
He took 20 balls to get off the mark and was dropped at ten by Craig
Matthews off Donald. His 50 came from 84 balls, his century from
243, and there were 19 fours in his 111 before he was ninth out at 212,
caught Hudson by Cronje. He had been at the crease for 372 minutes.
His fourth Test century made him the youngest in Test hi5tory to
reach 1000 runs, at the age of19 years 217 days. Teammate Kapil Dev
at 21 years 27 days was the previous record holder. It was Tendulkar's
nineteenth Test and twenty-eighth innings.
These are the bald statistical details. They do not convey his power
that day at the Wanderers where the mighty Donald was blasted out of
sight. Once again, Sachin played a lone hand, battling to pull his team
out of a hole, making full use of his favourite square cut and square
drive. Time and again, Donald and McMillan bounced at him and
Tendulkar went up on his toes and used his powerful wrists to play
attacking strokes to deliveries that were at least shoulder high. In an
Indian total of227, Tendulkar scored virtually half the runs off his
own bat. Thanks to his effort and 6 for 53 from Ani! Kumble in South
Mrica's second innings, India gained a face-saving draw. Once again,
the luminaries of cricket were ecstatic in their reaction to Tendulkar's
batting. One of South Mrica's best all-rounders, Eddie Barlow, had
this to say: 'He has the technique which is the hallmark of a great
player. Everything indicates that he will be a great player and I am
100

Sachin

sure he will prove me right. Under incredible pressure, he batted
superbly. Like Barry Richards he is very straight, very compact. He
moves his feet very quickly into position and can adjust to the pace
and bounce superbly' (Sportstar, 12 December 1992).
Between the second and third Tests, India and South Africa played
a series of seven One-day Internationals. Tendulkar was a major
disappointment, with only 144 runs from seven innings, and a highest
score of32. India were beaten 5-2.
Donald came into his own in the third Test at Port Elizabeth and
India were crushed by nine wickets. There was an extraordinary
century by Kapil Devin the second innings. But it was not enough to
stop Donald bowling South Africa to their first victory in 22 years
with the devastating figures of 5 for 55 and 7 for 84. There were,
unfortunately; plenty of umpiring disputes during the match, with
the visitors feeling they had got a raw deal. Perhaps the most shocking
was umpire Rudi Koertzen's decision to give Tendulkar caught behind
first ball off Donald in the second innings, when the ball had brushed
his pad. The departing batsman was horrified and non-striker Shastri
dropped his bat in disgust and had words with the umpire.
Much of the cricket played in the three Tests had been dreary. But
the fourth and final match at Cape Town made a dubious entry into
cricket's record books as the slowest of all time. The Indian batsmen
were wary of the South African pace attack. The hosts were keen to
hang on to their lead in order to wrap up the series. This they achieved
even as the Test produced an average of159 runs per day at 1.83 per
over. Tendulkar was his side's. top scorer in the match with 73. But
even his normally attacking batsmanship was curtailed, the 50 taking
him 167 minutes. For Kepler Wessels and his countrymen, the series
marked a triumphant return to Test cricket. The story was starkly
different in the rival camp, with Azharuddin seemingly on his way
out as captain after another series defeat and a lacklustre batting
performance.

Two Little Bits of Cricket History

101