Debacle Down Under

That bat is so heavy but he's got so much time, he waves it around like a
toothpick.-Brett Lee
The team for Australia generated the usual debate and criticism, most
of it centred un the exclusion of Mohammad Azharuddin and Nayan
Mongia. 'Mongia was thought to be a self-centred cricketer, which
could be debated and Azharuddin was obviously held in poor esteem
by the new coach and also skipper Tendulkar. To be sidelined without
a proper trial was not the best way to treat a senior cricketer like
Azharuddin,' wrote Vijay Lokapally in the Sportstar (20 November
1999). By now, both the players were under a cloud of suspicion over
their role in corrupt cricket practices. As we have seen in the excerpt
from the CBI report, Tendulkar did not feel Azhar was giving 100 per
cent during his first stint as captain. And Mongia's crazy shot in the
closing stages of the Chennai Test against Pakistan was still, no doubt,
fresh in his batting partner's mind. Tendulkar would also tell the CB!
how furious he was with Prabhakar and Mongia for their notorious
go-slow in the Kanpur oor against the West Indies in 1994.
Bizarrely, Mongia did finally make it to Australia. But not tor long.
He was flown out as a backup for M.S.K. Prasad when it was thought
he might not be fit for the second Test. He played in one match (against
Tasmania), hung around for a while and then returned to India
despondent, even as Prasad made a miraculous recovery. When he
arrived in Australia, his reception by the captain and the coach was
frosty. It was obvious that Tendulkar and Kapil Dev were trying to
forge a united front against the selectors. But not all their demands

were granted at the selection meeting.
The captain wanted Mumbai left-arm spinner Nilesh Kulkarni in
the squad, reinforcing the widely held belief that Tendulkar veered
towards players from his own side. The claims of all other left-arm
spinners were ignored in the process. The selectors put their collective
foot down on this.
There was enormous anticipation and excitement in Australia over
the visit of the Indian team, with the focus, naturally enough, on the
captain. Tendulkar had made a huge impact on his previous tour
Down Under in 1991-92, with his brilliant centuries at Sydney and
Perth, while still a teenager. The intervening years had seen him mature
into the world's greatest batsman and Australians were delighted as
well by the stamp of approval accorded to the Indian master from their
very own living legend, Sir Don Bradman.
There was an additional edge to the contest, for Australia under
Mark Taylor had been ambushed by the Indians on home turfjust the
year before. Now, guided by Steve Waugh, they were having a vintage
year. After their triumph in the World Cup, they had whitewashed
New Zealand and Pakistan at home, at the start of a fantastic run of
victories that would last till March 2001.
Sadly, as the tour progressed, it became increasingly apparent that
the Indians had developed a siege mentality. This was brought about
not just by the dazzling quality of the opposition, but also by the
hostile local press and highly contentious umpiring. The Australian
cricket fraternity always presents a united front at home and this time
was no different. Traditionally, the top player or captain is made a
special target. Tendulkar fell into both c1tegories and he was made to
pay a heavy price. The trend was set even before the first Test, when
umpire Darrell Hair decided to stamp his authority on the tourists in
the tour match against New South Wales at Sydney.
'Twice in that match, Darrell Hair played the headmaster to
perfection, admonishing the tourists as if they were errant children
caught smoking in a sehoul toilet,' wrote Harsha Bhogle in Wisden
Cricketers' Almanack Australia (2000-01 ). Hair's bullying tactics had
long been resented by teams from Asia. The Indian team management
Debacle Down Under

251

made it clear that they would not be happy if he stood in the Test
series. He did, though, in the third and final Test at Sydney.
The high esteem in which Tendulkar is held by Australian cricket
followers was best illustrated when Sachin was introduced to Sachin
Voigt at the Adelaide Oval, venue of the first Test. The seven-year-old
had been named by his father Ian Voigt following Tendulkar's exploits
on the previous tour to Australia. 'Dear Sachin, keep smiling, Sachin
Tendulkar,' Tendulkar signed on the mini-bat presented by his young
namesake who had waited patiently for three hours to meet his hero.
That would be about the last pleasant memory of Adelaide for
Tendulkar.
After a promising start by the Indian pace bowlers-Australia: 52
for 4---it was downhill all the way for the visitors. A crushing defeat by
285 runs set the pattern for the rest of the series. It did not help matters
that Tendulkar was the victim, in both innings, of hotly debated
decisions handed out by Australian umpire Daryl Harper, which only
added to the growing suspicion that he was being unfairly targeted.
Replying to Australia's 441, the Indians were 123 for 4 at close on the
second day, with Tendulkar and Ganguly both on 12. The skirmish
between McGrath and Tendulkar on the second evening had been
brief but captivating. In their only previous meeting in a Test match,
the Australian speedster had bowled the Indian captain for a duck in
New Delhi in 1996. Now Tendulkar, coming in at a shockingly low
number five in the order, was in a rare defensive mood as he batted for
89 minutes and 69 balls for 12 runs. Time and again, McGrath tested
him outside off stump, and each time the batsman just waved his bat
away and let the ball through to the keeper. Having weathered that
storm, it was a different Tendulkar who took charge on the third
mornmg.
He hit the first three deliveries of the second over from fast bowler
Michael Kasprowicz to the boundary-an on drive, a flick to square
leg and a cover drive. With Ganguly for company, 92 runs were added
in 22 overs. Tendulkar's 49 came from 64 balls and he was just getting
into his stride when he was adjudged to have been caught bat and pad
at short leg offWarne for 61. The replays showed he had clearly missed
252

Sachin

the ball. The score was-215 for 5, and with the wind taken out of the
Indian sails, the innings folded up for 285.
Worse was to follow. Mter Australia declared their second innings
at 239 for 8, it became a matter of survival for the Indians. But they
folded up for 110 with the captain out for a duck. He ducked under a
McGrath delivery-the fifth one he faced-that did not rise as expected,
sank to his haunches and was struck on the left shoulder. Mter some
deliberation, Harper_ raised his finger. The Australian players and
media immediately sprang to the defence of their own. The Indian
camp, on the other hand, was incensed. 'I was disappointed that I got
out,' was Tendulkar's terse comment.
The question was whether the ball would have hit the stumps or
not. Sunil Gavaskar was convinced it would not have, the Australians
were convinced it would have. Back home, the dismissal was shown
over and over again on television, with various pundits passing
judgement in the cozy confines of the studio. Mohinder Amarnath's
commem was rather pithy. 'I had always been taught that the umpire's
verdict is final, so where is the debate?' The Indian journalists travelling
with the team were scathing in their dispatches and it seemed paranoia
was gripping the team. That, of course, was exactly what the Aussies
wanted.
'The Indians had all along feared this kind of situation and when
your best batsman becomes a sort of marked man it becomes tough on
the team. If the Tendulkar episode took away the sheen from the Aussie
victory the fault lay with the umpire. He was not convincing at all,'
wrote Lokapally in the Sportstar (25 December 1999).
The series was won and lost in the traditional Boxing Day Test at
Melbourne. But before that, Tendulkar enthralled one and all with
his third century Down Under and his fifth against Australia in 11
Tests. India this time were beaten by 180 runs in a match curtailed by
rain. Mter Australia once again crossed 400 in their first innings, India
were struggling at 235 for 9 at the end of the third day, with Tendulkar
holding the batting together with his twenty-second Test century. But
it was fast bowler Brett Lee, who grabbed five wickets on Test debut,
who captured most of the headlines. Lee bowled lightning quick and
Debacle Down Under

253

only Tendulkar-now batting at number four-managed to defy his
hostile pace. Ninth out at 212, he was caught in the deep, hooking
Damien Fleming. It was the only mistake he made while facing 191
balls. Even as he got a standing ovation from the crowd of23,000 he
was furious with himself for the poor shot. This time, though, there
could be no excuse on the umpiring front.
It appeared as if there was a game within the game going on in the
middle: Tendulkar v Australia. Only twice was he beaten, prompting
Lee to exclaim in awe: 'That bat is so heavy but he's got so much time,
he waves it around like a toothpick.'
There was too, a little gem of an innings when India batted to save
the Test the second time round. The battle with Warne was once again
engrossing stuff Finlly, the leg-spinner had him lbw for 52 as he
padded up to one that went straight on. The Man of the Match award
was little consolation. As the world celebrated the dawn of the new
millennium, Tendulkar must have looked back at 1999 with decidedly
mixed feelings: His father's death, India's disappointing World Cup
performance, his back worries, the captaincy drama and the miseries
in Australia ....All these factors combined to make it a year to forget.
The only silver lining was the birth of his second child, Arjun, in
Mumbai on 23 September.
Australia completed a 3-0 whitewash with victory by an innings
and 141 runs injust three days in the third and final Test at Sydney,
the first Test of the year 2000. There was a brief flash of brilliance in
Tendulkar's first-innings 45 as he once again duelled with McGrath.
He took 14 runs otT one over from the fast bowler before being given
out lbw for 45, a shocking decision by Zimbabwean umpire Ian
Robinson. McGrath sent the batsman on his way with a crude gesture
and a mouthful of abuse, and was lucky to get just a slap on the wrist
from match referee Ranjan Madugalle. The Sri Lankan had fined
Venkatesh Prasad heavily for a much lesser offence in the second Test
and all this added to India's frustration. It was the third ti:ne in five
innings that Tendulkar had got the short end of the stick from the
umpires. And despite a defiant century by VV S. Laxman in the second
innings, India's was a lost cause.
254

Sachin

Tendulkar's disappointment at the end of the Test was heightened
by anger over the behaviour of the two umpires on the final day.
Inevitably, Hair was in the thick of things, refusing the Indian captain's
request tor sawdust to be sprinkled on damp patches behind the stumps.
On the boundary line, Prasad was the target for louts throwing shoes.
But the umpires ignored Tendulkar's plea to step in. At the post-match
press conference, Man of the Series Tendulkarwas livid.
'In all the years that I have known Tendulkar-and I have known
him since he was 14--1 have never known him to be as worked up at
a press conference,' said Harsha Bhogle who pinpointed Hair's attitude
towards Asian teams as the crux of the problem. Tendulkar was asked
after the series ifhe felt the umpires had targeted him, but he refused
to be drawn, saying it was probably a coincidence.
Despite the rout, crowds for the Tests were huge. And they had
come to see one player and one player alone. Not even Sir Donald
Brad man in his last international summer at home in 1947-48 caused
more excitement at the turnstiles, according to veteran Australian
journalist Mike Coward. Coward, a man with a deep affection for
Indian cricket and cricketers, wrote an impassioned open letter to
Tendulkar in the Weekend Australian (8-9 January 2000). It concerned
his silence over various controversial issues that had bedevilled the
season. Interestingly, Sunil Gavaskar wrote a similar critique in one
of his columns in 2001. He too gently chided his protege for not
taking a public stand on important cricket issues.
Following are excerpts from Coward's article under the headline
'Sounds ofSilence Magnify Mystique of Cultural Divide':
Dear Sachin,
These people [the Australian cricket public] also want to hear
from you; to know your thoughts on so many matters affecting
cricket in India and around the world.
As the game's pre-eminent batsman and your country's
captain you are in a priceless position to make a difference.
With respect, you have said little to arouse interest since you've
been in the country.
Debacle Down Under

255

Indeed, your press conferences have been little more than
well practiced exercises in political and diplomatic correctness.
Perhaps you were following instructions laid down by the
faceless powerbrokers oflndian cricket. ...
Or could it have been that you were so badly wounded in
your first incarnation as captain that you now simply do your
duty?
... there is a need for a powerful, persuasive and contemporary
voice from the region [the Indian subcontinent].
Sachin, you are recognized throughout the cricket world as a
thoughtful, self-effacing, intelligent young man of great
integrity and quiet dignity.
You can be the voice as well as the face of the game in its most
populous and increasingly influential region.
Rest assured, the people (of Australia) who await your every
stroke will hang on your every word.
And there are serious matters confronting the game which
would benefit greatly from your involvement.
Is this [speculation of an anti-Asian sentiment running
through the game and one that is most easily identified in
Australia] merely a perception or a reality and has it impacted
on your visit?
.... after much too long, Australian cricket wants to know more
about India and Indian cricket and cricketers.
Sachin, you are in a powerful position. You can make a real
difference.
Tendulkar's response to these criticisms was that he was more
worried about what he did on the ground than off the field; he hadn't
accepted the captaincy to be drawn into controversies.
Writing in 2002 (Sportstar, 12 January 2002), Sunil Gavaskar made
a similar point:
When he was captain of the team to Australia he had the media
256

Sachin

there looking for a comment or two about how to give the
game a new direction. Owing to his phenomenal batting in the
home series, the Australian media was waiting to lap up every
word of his but he disappointed them by hardly saying anything
of consequence .... As one India-loving Australian veteran
mediaperson said: 'It was as if"no comment" was two words
too many for him.' Perhaps Tendulkar was taking shelter under
the ICC Code of Conduct regarding comments, but there comes
a time when the good of cricket counts before anything else
and one has to stick one's neck out for the betterment of the
game. For, when Tendulkar speaks the world will stop and listen.
There was further misery in the one-day tri-series where the Indians
lost every match to Australia and Pakistan, except one. That was at
Adelaide where they beat Pakistan by 48 runs. India's failure was largely
put down to Tendulkar's poor run. At one stage he admitted that the
pressures of the one-day game and the non-stop cricket were proving
too taxing. He had just one substantial innings, 93 against Pakistan at
Hobart, where India lost by 32 runs.
There were two other incidents that further upset his frame of
mind and must have been factors in his shock decision to step down
from the captaincy. Pakistan's young all-rounder Abdul Razzaq accused
Tendulkar of tampering with the ball in the Adelaide game on 26
January. The charge was dismissed as 'frivolous and without
foundation' by match referee Cammie Smith and umpires Hair and
Steve Davis. The Indian camp was furious at Razzaq's impertinence.
And the Pakistan team management reacted by dropping him on
disciplinary grounds for the next match at Perth, even though the
official reason given was that he was injured.
In that match in Perth, Tendulkar received yet another terrible
decision, given out caught behind offWaqar Younis by umpire Simon
Taufel for 17. He had struck four boundaries off Akram and Wagar
and looked to be getting into his stride when he was handed down the
latest shocker. For the first time in two months, something snapped
and he showed his displeasure before leaving the crease. It had been a
Debacle Down Under

257

gruelling time for the team and the captain in particular, and he must
have been relieved when it was all over.
This was the first time since England in 197 4 that India had been
whitewashed 3-0. The debacle of the ODI tri-series was really the last
straw on the captain's tender back.

258

Sac hi n
