
Match-fixing and the CBI

I do not know a thing.-Sachin Tendulkar

Tendulkar's stand on the match-fixing controversy and the subsequent
CBI probe and report has been consistent from the start. He has
steadfastly maintained that he was unaware of anything unsavoury
within the team before, during, or after he was captain. It is a line that
one finds increasingly hard to accept.
The question then arises: as the leading player in the side and
indeed in the world, could he not have taken a moral stand on the
issue as did Pakistan's Rashid Latif? This is a question that Sachin and
Sachin alone can answer. So far, he has not been very forthcoming on
the matter, except to consistently stress not only his innocence, but
also his ignorance. But then, as we have seen before, he has never been
one to rock the boat. In an interview to Cricket Talk (30 September
2000), he declared, 'I have said it before and I am saying it again. I do
not know a thing. No one has approached me about any such thing. I
don't think they will dare.' In the same interview, he urged, 'Find the
guilty and make examples of them. The game is too great for it to be
disgraced in this way.' This was shortly before the release of the CBI
report on match-fixing. 'I did not think this would happen to the
game. I thought that it was impossible. In fact, such a thought never
crossed my mind because it is something no cricketer should even
contemplate,' he added.
In interviews, Tendulkar has always claimed he did not have an
axe to grind with Azharuddin. In private, it was a different matter. The
two enjoyed a good rapport till the game of musical chairs for the

captain's seat began to put a strain on their relationship. More than
that, Tendulkar always felt that Azhar did not perform as well under
his captaincy as he had done under Azhar's. Things came to a head in
Sharjah in December 1997 when Azhar's batting methods and running
between the wickets came under the microscope. That Tendulkar was
sacked from the captaincy and Azhar restored to the position shortly
afterwards is just another bitterly ironic chapter in the history oflndian
cricket. As we saw in the last chapter, Sachin resigned his second term
as captain when Azhar was brought back for the home series against
South Africa in March 2000. It was obviously the last straw. However,
in one of his last interviews as captain, he reiterated that there was no
issue between him and Azharuddin. If someone was performing well
and could win games for the country, how could he have a problem?
He had not had a serious disagreement with any player for the past 10
years. Mter losing his captaincy he had played under Azhar and then
Azhar had played under him, and there had never been a problemor so he said.
The closest he came to admitting to a rift was when he was asked
by V Srivatsa of the Timescflndia (7 July 2001): 'How do you find him
[Azhar] as a man and what are your feelings after what's happened to
him? [the match-fixing ban]. Tendulkar replied, 'It's a very touchy
topic and I wouldn't like to go into it.'
The first journalist to openly write about the murky activities of
bookies and the speculation of match-fixing was Pradeep Magazine,
currently sports editor of the Hindustan Times. Magazine was sports
editor of the Pioneer in 1997, and was covering the tour of the West
Indies when he broke the story about being approached by a bookie
from Delhi who offered him large sums of money. In return, he was
asked to introduce the bookie to key players in the side, including
captain Tendulkar.
Magazine recounted the encounter and its aftermath in his book
Not Quite Cricket. There have been many books on the subject since,
but his was the very first. He met Tendulkar for an interview in
Georgetown, Guyana, at the end of which he asked the captain for his
reaction to the bookie's offer. Magazine quotes Tendulkar:
Match-fixing and the CBI

269

Look, I am earning crores of rupees from the game, from
advertising, only to steel myself against these temptations so
that at the end of the day I can look people in the eye with a
clear conscience. And playing for the country is so important
for me that I can't even dream of doing such a thing. Neither
can anyone have the courage to approach me with an offer like
this. Ifhe did so the next moment he would find himself in jail.
He added: 'Even I have been hearing a lot of things about this
whole affair. I don't know what to do. Ifl were you I wouldn't do the
story but would tell the police about the man. Tell them to tap the
man's phone and let us see who he talks to.'
Magazine wrote that he was 'impressed by Sachin's presence of
mind, his ability to see things in perspective .... Above all, one thing
was becoming increasingly clear to me: the rumours of betting and
players taking money was not limited to journalistic circles alone;
even the team management in the West Indies had heard about it and
were quite concerned.'
The team management included coach Madan La! who too had
advised Magazine against writing the article about his bookie
encounter. The headline for Magazine's report splashed across the
front page of the newspaper was: 'I Was Offered Rs 40 Lakh by a
Bookie to" fix" a Match'.
As often happens in the media world, the heading did not quite
reflect the contents. He had been offered the money for introductions
to key players, not to 'fix' a match. The 'I' in the headline had an
unfortunate fallout. While the BCCI brushed aside the story in public,
unknown to Magazine himself, a letter was faxed to Tendulkar midway
through the West Indies tour, asking him who the bookie was who
had offered him the money! A complete misinterpretation of the report.
Tendulkar confronted Magazine with this revelation at the nets
before the Independence Cup match in Chennai against Pakistan in
May 1997.
His voice [Tendulkar's] was a mixture ofanger and hurt. 'What
270

Sachin

have you written? You have written that I was offered money?'
I looked him straight in the eye and replied: 'Who told you
that? I wrote exactly what I had told you. Didn't you read the
story?' It took only these few words from me for Tendulkar to
calm down. 'The Board had taken the "I" in your story to be me
[Tendulkar] ,' he said. I explained to him that it was quite the
reverse, the 'I' referred to me, not him.
'How can they interpret it like that?' I exclaimed. 'I have
referred to you only in the end, that too quoting you as saying
"it is beneath my dignity to talk about such things."'
Mter the match was over, it was agreed between Tendulkar, Madan
Lal and Magazine that the journalist would write a letter to the Board,
clarifying the matter. In his letter Magazine wrote: 'I fail to understand
how Tendulkar's name was linked with the bookie when my story
was clear and at no stage did it even hint that the bookie had met
Tendulkar.' He added something to the effect that Tendulkar was not
only a great player but also a great ambassador for the country and
should be left alone to concentrate on his game.
'After a week or so,' says Magazine, 'I got a reply from the Board
that upset me even more. While thanking me for "clarifying" the
situation, it read: "Now that you have denied your story, it would have
been in the fitness of things if you had also named the bookie whom
you had met."'
Magazine wrote that he was reminded of what Madan Lal had told
him in the West Indies. 'The only possibility of the truth coming out
is when a player gets up and says that his teammates have taken money.
Till that happens there is no point in pursuing this story.'
The establishment's duplicity was becoming clear. Worried perhaps
that skeletons from its own closet would come tumbling out under
the scrutiny of an investigation, everybody acted as if the crisis did not
exist. The shabby cover-up of the Chandrachud Commission
followed. This, and the public outcry over the next couple of years,
and then the Delhi Police tapes implicating Hansie Cronje, made the
government call in the CBI to institute its own independent probe, the
Match-fixing and the CBI

271

report of which was released in October 2000.
Outlook weekly picked up the threads of the story from Magazine
in 1997, and then in 2000 came the tehelka.com videos clandestinely
recorded by Manoj Prabhakar.
These tapes achieved precious little, apart from revealing the
backbiting and gossip prevalent among India's cricketing fraternity.
But two points concerning Tendulkar stood out: firstly, Prabhakar
refused to trap Tendulkar on video despite pressure from those at the
web site; he said he had too much respect for him. Secondly, amidst all
the tawdry talk-much of it influenced by liberal doses of alcoholnot one person pointed a finger at Tendulkar or was critical ufhim in
any form.
Prabhakar had resigned in a huff after the 1996 World Cup, and
was seen to have too many axes to grind. The main target of his
campaign was Kapil Dev. Further, Prabhakar allowed himself to
become a pawn in the hands of certain sections of the media, who
cynically manipulated him for their own benefit. His words thus
lacked credibility, and ultimately he would be hoist by his own petard.
The CBI probe uncovered his own role in match-fixing and the Board
banned him from cricket for five years, acting on the report. The ban
was, of course, only symbolic, since he had retired by then.
There remained the question mark over Tendulkar's decision to
not enforce a follow-on in the third Test against New Zealand at
Ahmedabad. The CBI probed coach Kapil Dev's role in it and both the
captain and the coach were questioned. The summer of 2000 saw
journalists camping outside the CBI headquarters in central Delhi.
One after the other, the who's who oflndian cricket were called to the
capital and questioned by India's premier investigating agency. The
media scrimmage was getting increasingly chaotic as television
cameras and reporters with their mikes jostled with print journalists
to get quotes from Azharuddin, Mongia, Wadekar, Kapil Dev,
Prabhakar and other past and present players and administrators. Most
kept their lips sealed.
Tendulkar was spared the ordeal. He was questioned at home in
Mumbai. The stampede outside the CBI office ifhe had been called to
272

Sachin

Delhi would have been unmanageable.
The CBI report did not indict either the captain or the coach over
the Ahmedabad match,•though there were certain intriguing questions
that appeared to haye been left unanswered. The matter was finally
closed in late 2001 with the CBI issuing a brief press release that it had
found no evidence of wrongdoing.
Mter the report came out in October, BCCI president A.C.Muthiah
decided to constitute the Board's own one-man commission in the
form of former CBI Joint Director, K.Madhavan. Madhavan also probed
the matter, and spoke to Tcndulkar and Kapil Devin July 2001. He
too came to the same conclusion. It would be relevant here to quote
passages from the em report directly concerning Tendulkar, which
was released to the media on 1 November 2000. (The italics are mine.)
Bookie Pawan Puri's testimony (pages 45-47):
Once there was a party at his friend Dimpy's house on 31.10.99
to which both he and (fellow-bookie) Rattan Mehta were also
invited. Around 11 p.m. on that day he (Puri) picked up Rattan
Mehta from his house in Panchsheel Enclave (in New Delhi)
to go to Dimpy's house which is at Sainik Farms. On the way,
Rattan Mehta asked him to ring up Shobhan Mehta, a Bombay
bookie, and asked him to place a bet to the effect that the ongoing
match between India-New Zealand at Ahmedabad would end
in a draw. He was surprised as to how Rattan Mehta could
anticipate this since New Zealand were in a precarious position
on 31.1 0. 99 and very few persons would have anticipated that
the match would end in a draw. He dialed Shobhan's number
and placed a bet to this effect. Even Shobhan Mehta was skeptical
and since he was quite close to him, advised him not to place
this bet. However, he told Shobhan that he was placing bets on
somebody else's behalf. On being asked as to why Rattan placed
bets with Shobhan through him and not directly, he stated that
Rattan does not have an account with Shobhan and hence he
had to place this bet through him. At Dimpy's place, Rattan
Mehta, after getting drunk, boasted that he had exact
Match-fixing and the CBI

273

information about the outcome of the Ahmedabad Test match
and also placed bets with some other bookies, whose names he
did not remember.
(The scores on 31 October, the third day cf the Test, was India 583 for 7

wickets declared in the first innings and New Zealand 211 for 6 in reply. The
match did, if course, end in a draw.)
Dr Ali Irani (pages 71-76):
Dr Irani stated that he had never heard anything adverse
regarding Tendulkar. In fact, in most of the matches where
fixing was taking place, the clue was that the game would be
'on' only when Tendulkar got 'out' because he was one player
who could single-handedly win the match and upset any
calculation.
(This was later quoted by English journalist Scyld Berry in his prifrle cf
Tendulkarfor Wisden.com, callinR it the .'finest compliment' accorded to him.)
Kapil Dev (pages 85-88):
About the India-New Zealand Test at Ahmedabad in 1999
where India did not enforce the follow-on, he stated that this
decision was taken in consultation with the captain, vice captain
and other senior players.
One day prior to the decision, there was absolutely no doubt
in his mind that the follow-on should be enforced. At the end
of play on the third day, there was no team meeting on the
strategy for the next day. Somewhere during lunchtime on the
fourth day the bowlers, especially Srinath, complained that they
were very tired and India should bat again and score quick runs
and make New Zealand bat thereafter.
On being told that the bookies in Delhi allegedly knew about
274

Sachin

the decision not to enforce follow-on on 31.1 0. 99 night, Kapil
stated that no decision to this effect was taken on the 31st and
hence it was very surprising. On being asked whether somebody
could have subconsciously influenced this decision on the next
day, he stated that it could not be ruled out. He could not
remember as to who could have done it.
Analysis of evidence (pages 127- 132):
With regard to the 1999 Ahmedabad Test against New Zealand,
Sachin Tendulkar has stated that the decision not to enforce
the follow-on was collective, influenced by the fact that bowlers,
especially Srinath, had expressed that they were too tired. Kapil
Dev has corroborated this version. Moreover, both of them
have stated that the decision was arrived at during lunch on the
4th day. There is no evidence that Kapil Dev had passed on any
information to the betting syndicate about this match.
Sachin Tendulkar (pages 88---89):
Sachin Tendulkar, former Indian captain, when asked about
the India-New Zealand Test at Ahmedabad in 1999, stated that
by the end of third day's play when New Zealand had lost
around 6 wickets, he had thought to himself that he would
enforce the follow-on the next day.
However, the New Zealand innings dragged on till after lunch
the next day and by then he himself, coach Kapil Dev, Ani!
Kumble and Ajay Jadeja decided that the follow-on would not
be enforced since the bowlers, especially Srinath had insisted
that they were very tired.
It was a collective decision not to enforce the follow-on. (There
was speculation in the media that he was here trying to protect
the coach.) On being asked whether anybody could have
influenced this decision since the bookies in Delhi allegedly
knew one day in advance that the follow-on would not be
enforced, he accepted that it was possible.
Match-fixing and the CBI

275

About Shobhan Mehta, the Mumbai bookie, he stated that he
had never met this person nor did he invite him to his wedding.
During his wedding there was tight security and only select
persons were invited and nobody without a proper invitation
could have gatecrashed.
All speculations about himself and Shobhan Mehta were
absolutely rubbish and he had never met this person any time
in his life. On being asked whether he suspected any Indian
player of being involved in match-fixing, Sachin stated that
during his tenure as captain, he had felt that Mohammad
Azharuddin was not putting in 100 per cent effort and he
suspected that he was involved with some bookies.
On being asked about the India-West Indies match at Kanpur
in 1994 when Manoj Prabhakar and Nayan Mongia batted
slowly, he stated that he was the vice captain during that match
and he was absolutely sure that there were no instructions from
the management for Manoj Prabhakar and Nayan Mongia to
bat slowly and that he was so upset with their tactics that he did
not talk to them after the match.
At the end of it all, Ajay Sharma and Azharuddin were banned
from cricket for life by the BCCI while Manoj Prabhakar, Ali Irani and
Ajay Jadeja got five-year suspensions.
Ironically, while Kapil Dev was let off (he later resigned as coach of
the national side), it was his accuser Prabhakar who found himself
briefly behind bars, for his alleged role in a chit fund scam.
By July 2001, the dust had settled on the controversy, but Tendulkar
continued to be guarded in his response.
Asked by V Srivatsa (Times cflndia, 6 July 2001), 'Did you ever
suspect such things were happening right under your nose?' his answer
was: 'It's very hard to comment on it. I treated whatever has happened
as one of those bad phases and happily it's past. I do get this feeling that
people have forgotten all that, they look at this team from a different
angle altogether, that's very important to all of us.'
How did the team take it?,' asked Srivatsa.
276

Sachin

Tendulkar replied, 'The whole team was shocked because none
of us could ever think of it.'

Match-fixing and the CBI

277