The Great Friendship

He took the elevator to the top and I took the stairs.-Vinod Kambli
Sachin Tendulkar first met Vinod Ganpat Kambli when he made the
switch from the New English School to Sharadashram Vidyamandir
(English) at the age of 11. Kambli was a year older than Sachin and
played in the same school team, for Mumbai and West Zone junior
(under-15) teams and then for the Mumbai Ranji Trophy side and
finally for India. Except perhaps for the odd match here and there,
they have not found themselves on opposing sides in nearly 18 years
of knowing each other and playing cricket together.
The names Tendulkar and Kambli became inextricably linked after
the semi-final of the Harris Shield against St. Xavier's Fort at Azad
Maidan. That game, played on 23-25 February 1988, saw them
involved in the world-record partnership of 664 (unbroken) for the
third wicket-a mark that is unlikely to be erased for a long, long
time. Suddenly the pair were the talk of Mumbai cricket circles. At
school level Vinod often outscored his friend. But Sachin made a
rapid transition from school to first class and then Test cricket, while
Vinod lagged behind. Achrekar, who coached them both, told me:
'Vinod scored more runs at school level. But he did not have the
dedication or perseverance ofSachin, and also developed bad habits.
Sachin, on the other hand, always had a very sensible attitude and a
strong family background, especially with his father and brother Ajit
always behind him.'
Sachin made his Test debut in November 1989 in Pakistan and
less than a year later, in his ninth Test, scored his maiden century.

Kambli would follow him into Test cricket in the home series against
England in 1993. But while Tendulkar would have to wait till late
1999 to score his first Test double century, Kambli's very first threefigure knock was 224--in only his third Test.
As we have seen in the previous chapter, Kambli followed up that
224 with 227 in the next Test and then two centuries in three Tests in
Sri Lanka. It was scintillating cricket. And suddenly comparisons were
being made with Tendulkar, not all of them flattering for the younger
man. 'He took the elevator to the top and I took the stairs,' is the way
Kambli described their varyingjourneys to the world of international
cricket. Kambli made his international debut in October 1991 in
Sharjah with scores of 23 not out, 40 and 30. A year later, he was
chosen for the World Cup in Australia and New Zealand after being
passed up for the Test series in South Mrica and Australia. The story
goes that when Kambli landed in Sydney for the World Cup, he was
disappointed that his chum had not come to the airport to receive
him. But Sachin had stayed up the whole night in his hotel room,
reading and watching television to keep himself awake for the late
night arrival. They spent the night chatting.
IfTendulkar's de hut in first-class cricket was a remarkable one for
a schoolboy, Kambli's early career was notable for the mountain of
runs he scored in his first three seasons, starting with his debut in
1989-90. He piled up 2400 runs from only 20 games at the amazing
average of85.71. The tally included nine 100s (with a highest score of
262) and 12 half-centuries. So why did it take him four years to break
into Test cricket? To put it bluntly, Kambli had rapidly acquired an
'image' problem. His West Indian-like appearance and hero worship
ofDesmond Haynes had earned him the nickname of'Dessy'. Haynes
used to sport a bracelet on his wrist with the words 'Live, Love, Laugh'
inscribed on it. Kambli perhaps took these words literally, particularly
when he first broke into big-time cricket. Achrekar has always felt that
Kambli's flamboyant ways held him back in a cricket set-up that
continues to be conservative. Flamboyance is acceptable on the field.
But once stories of off-field shenanigans began circulating, progress
was stymied.
110

Sachin

There was an incident in the 1992 World Cup that was held against
Kambli for quite sometime. It occured during a rain break in the
match against Sri Lanka at Mackay when the cheerleaders were out
on the field keeping the crowd entertained. Kambli joined in the
dancing and the photographers had a field day. But many thought that
for someone so fresh to the team, it was inappropriate behaviour, even
brash. Much has also been made ofKambli's social background and
childhood. It would be best to quote the man himself on this sensitive
aspect of his life. In an interview in 1998 he revealed, 'I come from a
very, very poor family. My father was a machinist, worked in Bhandup
[in Mumbai]. We lived in a chaw[ in Ka~ur Marg. Dad was a good
fast bowler and played against many former Mumbai players, even
Test cricketers. He had to look after seven of us, but he never made us
feel that we lacked anything.' (Redijfcom, 15 December 1998)
Cricket elevated Kambli to a lifestyle he could only have dreamed
of. Subsequent reports of'temptations' and 'distractions' during the
1992 World Cup didn't do his career any good. And the contrast with
Tendulkar could not have been starker. In an interview to the Sportstar
(30 September 1995), Kambli himself explained the difference in their
outlook to life: 'He [Sachin] is reserved. I am the outgoing type. I like
to enjoy life. I always enjoyed life. People say I am fascinated with
jewellery. But I like wearing it and I earned the money to buy it. I may
go to a disco to unwind. There is life after cricket hours. People love
clothes. Some wear sober clothes. I suppose I am the type who likes
colourful clothes. It all depends on your liking. I will not like to change
my lifestyle.' Kambli certainly could not be accused of hypocrisy. He
did nothing to hide his flamboyant ways. But this very frankness had
a negative effect on the authorities.
In the early years, Vinod and Sachin often found themselves batting
together when one or the other reached a personal land mark, almost
as if fate were playing a hand. The bonds of friendship were thus
strengthened and made public. Tendulkar was at the other end when
Kambli got his maiden century in One-day Internationals against
England at Jaipur in 1993. They were together when Vi nod got his
first Test 50 in the second Test at Chennai shortly after that. And the

very next Test at Mumbai .saw them involved in a stand worth 194 as
Kambli struck his double ton. The second Test at Colombo later that
year which India won, saw them score centuries in the same match
for the first and only time so far.
By 1994 there were rumours that Tendulkar was feeling pressurized
by Kambli's success. This question was put to him by Sportstar (26
March 1994), at which stage he was yet to score a century in One-day
Internationals. 'Rubbish, there is nothing like that,' Tendulkar
shrugged off the suggestion. 'These things take place because people
just assume things.' Kambli, for his part, has always expressed his
gratitude to Sachin for his help and support. 'Sachin is my friend,
philosopher and guide,' he would repeatedly emphasize in interviews.
The no-om-century monkey was taken offTendulkar's back in
the Singer Cup match against Australia in Colombo on 9 September
1994. It was five years since his international debut. And sure enough,
Kambli was at the non-striker's end to embrace him on reaching the
landmark.
But the contrast in their batting form was the starkest in the Hero
Cup five-nation tournament which India won at home in November
1993. Kambli and Azhar were the outstanding batsmen in the
tournament. Kambli had scores of78, 10, 55, 86, 4 and 68. Tendulkar,
on the other hand, could only score 26 (not out), 2, 24, 3, 15 and 28
(not out). But if one is to believe them, the competitive streak extends
only to their respective music collections. This is another shared
passion and it became a race to see who had the bigger and better
collection. As Kambli put it in his interview on Rediff.com (December
1999), 'Actually, whenever Sachin is there at the other end, the
understanding between us is so good that if he hits a four, I don't take
it as a challenge. If I get a loose delivery, I am going to whack it,
anyway, but if I don't get one, no big deal. There has been no
competition between us as such. I know people expect a lot of runs
from me, just like they do from Sachin. I try my best to fulfil their
expectations. It's not that I don't try. I try, I try and I try. If I don't
succeed, even I feel bad about it. Everybody does.'
In the same interview Kambli explained how Sachin's presence in
112

Sachin

the team acted as an inspiration to him. 'He is such a thinking cricketer
and a perfect team man. When I play alongside him, he helps me so
much. Of course, he helps others as well. He provides a lot of
motivation to other players. His presence is very, very important in
the side for the others. Whenever we are together, we talk a lot about
cricket. And I hope when I finally make a comeback, we will again do
the same. It will not only motivate me, it will help keep me upbeat.'
Kambli's first seven Tests fetched him 793 runs at an average of113.29.
He was the quickest Indian to reach 1000 Test runs, in 14 innings
from 12 Tests. The earlier Indian record had stood in the name of
Sunil Gavaskar (21 innings/11 Tests) while the only batsmen quicker
than Kambli were Everton Weekes, Herbert Sutcliffe (both 12/9) and
Don Bradman (13n). In contrast, it took Tendulkar 28 innings from
19 Tests to reach 1000. Of course, he was the youngest to do so. In fact,
it was not till his forty-third first-class match (first Test v West Indies
at Mumbai, November 1994) that Kambli was dismissed for a duck.
'I'm no longer just Sachin's batting partner, I'm Vinod Kambli,' he
proudly asserted after his second double century on the trot. But it did
not last very long.
The visit to Sri Lanka in 1993 was one of the stormiest and most
contentious tours an Indian team has undertaken. As one of the leading
Indian batsmen, Tendulkar was targeted by the appalling umpiring.
While he refused to be provoked by some atrocious decisions, Kambli
could not keep his cool and received a reprimand from the match
referee for showing dissent. This provided yet another reminder of
their contrasting temperaments. Also, despite all those runs early in
his career, there was always a lurking suspicion that Kambli would
find himself in trouble against top class fast bowling. The bulk of his
runs had come in the subcontinent against the weaker bowling attacks
ofEngland, Zimbabwe and Sri Lanka. The West Indians soon sorted
him out when they toured India late in 1994. Walsh and company
peppered him with the short stuff. And suddenly, suspicions about his
ability to face quality fast bowling appeared to have been proved true.
He scraped together a miserable 64 runs from six innings in the Test
series.
The Great Friendship

Ill

Later, in 1996, one of the most enduring and poignant images of
the World Cup was that ofKambli coming off the field after the semifinal at Kolkata had been awarded to Sri Lanka followed crowd
disturbances. The tears flowed freely that night. For Kambli wears his
heart on his sleeve. There was more anguish off the field too, during
the World Cup. Unruly behaviour at the team hotel, including public
shouting matches with his newly married wife, left a very poor
impression on the team management. He was left out of the team that
toured England after the World Cup, apparently on disciplinary
grounds, and not for the last time.
It has been a virtual see-saw since then. He was picked for the
playing XI ahead ofSourav Ganguly for the Sahara Cup in Toronto
in 1996---which inevitably led to whispered allegations of nepotism
against Tendulkar who was captain then. In April 1998, a serious
ankle injury while fielding as a substitute in the one-day game against
Australia at Cuttack saw him out of action for the rest of the year. He
was back for the visits to Sri Lanka and Singapore in September 1999
for one-day tournaments. This was soon after Tendulkar had been
asked to lead for the second time.
The new captain reacted angrily when asked the question by G.
Viswanath for the Sportstar (21 August 1999): 'The selection ofVinod
Kambli. People have linked it to your friendship?'
Sachin replied, 'lfl were to pick friends, then my brother [Ajit]
should be there in the Indian team. He can also play cricket. It just
says about the mentality and petty-mindedness of the people who
think that he [Kambli] is there in the team because I am the captain.
I am the captain of the Indian team and my only interest is to win
matches for India. There is no question of friendship. Kambli might
be my friend, but off the field. On the field, there are no friends.
Everyone is playing for the country. Even a captain of a Club team
will pick the best side. There have been occasions when I have not
played him in the eleven.'
Kambli has been in and out of the team a dozen times since his
debut. His last appearance was in Nairobi and Sharjah late in 2000. In
the public eye, Sachin and Vinod are still closely associated. Their
114

Sachin

joint appearance in a Fiat Palio 1V commercial only reinforces that
image. Andwhile Tendulkar was going great guns in South Africa in
2001, Kambli was busy acting in his first movie-as a 'villain'.
(Tendulkar too has received movie offers, all of which he has politely
and consistently turned down.)
It was manager Ajit Wadekar who took Kambli under his wing
when he hit the purple patch in 1993. The famous code of conduct
was drawn up to keep a rein on the players, and Kambli was made to
toe the line. Wadekar and Kambli enjoyed a special relationship. Both
being left-handed and both being from Mumbai may have helped.
Wadekar was like an indulgent uncle keeping an eye on his wayward
nephew. But today, ask Wadekar why Sachin zoomed ahead and Kambli
has only played 17 Tests till date, and the former manager will sum it
up with one word: 'attitude'.
Journalist Vijay Lokapally of the Hindu, who knows both Sachin
and Vi nod well, told me that the 'real' Sachin could be seen only in the
presence of his great pal. 'He is totally relaxed in Vinod's company.
There are plenty of jokes and leg-pulling. What struck me was that
even at noisy and crowded functions when it is hard to hear anything,
the two would be conversing comfortably.'

The Great Friendship

liS