The Don and I

He spoke and we listened in awe.-Sachin Tendulkar
At his home in Australia, the legendary Sir Donald Brad man watched
Sachin Tendulkar on television and saw in his batting a reflection of
his own style. This was during the 1996 World Cup match against
Australia at Mumbai, a match in which Sachin scored 90. 'He plays
much the same as I played,' were Sir Don's exact words during a rare
television interview on Australia's Channel Nine (May 1996). The
interview was accompanied by split screen shots of Bradman and
Tendulkar and their similar stroke play.
Sir Don played his final Test in 1948. In the decades since, he had
paid fulsome praise to many batsmen who followed him, notably
West Indians Sir Garry Sobers and Sir Vivian Richards, South Mrican
Barry Richards, and Indian opener Sunil Gavaskar, the only man to
score more Test centuries than Brad man himself
However, he obviously felt a special affinity for Tendulkar. Both
were icons in their respective countries, both short men whose first
instinct was always to attack and dominate the bowlers. They were
also both precocious talents, though in this regard Tendulkar made an
impact at a much younger age than the Australian legend. Averse as
Sachin is to comparisons, he gently chided Sir Don for making an
'unfair' comparison, in a television interview. It was said with a wry
smile on his face. For Tendulkar knew that while he could shrug off
such comparisons made by journalists, it was a different matter when
the world's greatest batsman himselfwent on record with such a telling
comment. Tendulkar also made the point that he would be happy ifhe

could retire with an average half that ofBradman's-an astounding
99.94.
Bradman played 52 Tests from 1928 to 1948, interrupted by World
War II. In fact, at the same stage (52 Tests), Tendulkar's average was
precisely half that ofBradman's. These are their comparative records:
Bradman: 52 Tests; 80 innings; 10 not out; 6996 runs; 99.94 average;
334 highest score; 100s: 29; 50s: 13; Os: 7. Tendulkar: 52 Tests; 79
innings; 8 not out; 3534 runs; 49.77 average; 179 highest score; 11
100s; 17 50s; 4 ducks. Still, after his fabulous exploits in Sharjah, the
comparisons flew thick and fast. Naturally, then, there was huge
excitement when Sir Don invited Tendulkar to his Adelaide home on
the occasion of his ninetieth birthday on 27 August 1998.
The Indian team was at the training camp in Chennai for the
Sahara Cup, when the invitation came. Tendulkar received special
permission from BCCI president Raj Singh Dungarpur to fly to Australia.
One of the few dissenting voices was surprisingly that of Sunil
Gavaskar who, in his syndicated column, publicly urged Tendulkar
not to leave the camp. He also revealed that during the 1991-92 tour
to Australia, Tendulkar had turned down Gavaskar's invitation to
join him on a visit to Sir Don.
The day was marked by a charity dinner in Bradman's honour,
which was attended by 1,100 guests-but not by the great man himself.
His celebrations were private, a quiet dinner with his son, daughter
and two grandchildren. In the afternoon, Tendulkar and Shane Warne,
attired in matching suits, dropped by to spend time at Sir Don's home.
Bradman had also expressed his appreciation ofWarne's leg-spinning
skills, though he always maintained that another Australian legspinner, Bill O'Reilly, was the greatest bowler he had seen. It was the
first time either of the two giants of the contemporary game were
meeting cricket's all-time legend; both were understandably nervous.
'I was tense. I did not know where to begin, what to ask. But Sir
Don made us feel easy. He spoke and we listened in awe,' Tendulkar
told Sanjay Raj an of the Sportstar (2 September 1998) on his return to
Chennai. The meeting lasted for an hour and both Warne and
Tendulkar were pleasantly surprised to learn of Sir Don's high regard
208

Sachin

for the modern game. 'Sir Don, who watches a lot of cricket on
television, spoke about the present-day game. He said the standard
now is very high and competitive and the fielding very good. He said
one-day cricket is attacking and exciting, though he loves Test cricket,'
said Tendulkar.
There were two aspects ofBradman' s career that Sachin was curious
about. 'I asked him what was his initial movement while playing
quick bowling and then his approach to the spinners. He said, to fast
bowlers his initial movement was back-and-across and for the spinners
an initial front-foot movement, though not a front-foot commitment.'
Sir Don, in turn, asked Sachin if he moved before the ball left the
bowler's hand. 'I don't know,' was his reply. But Sir Don was insistent.
'I think you do. You begin your movement before the bowler bowls,
otherwise you wouldn't have the time to play the kind of shots you
do,' reported Tendulkar in Outlook (12 September 1998). (A year later,
Tendulkar himself spoke ofhis ability to anticipate the bowler's action
depending on the previous few deliveries, and even to 'compel' the
bowler to bowl in a certain way-just as Bradman was said to have
done in his own playing days.)
Brad man also expressed surprise that Sachin had been coached. 'I
have had three coaches, one in school, one at the state level and one at
Test level,' Tendulkar told him. 'I didn't think you were coached,'
confessed Sir Don, 'because anybody who's been through coaches is
told to play with the left elbow pointed towards mid-ofi You don't do
that. I didn't do that. That gives you the flexibility to play in any
direction anywhere.'
The second question Tendulkar posed to Sir Don was on his 'mental
preparation' before a big match. The answer surprised him. 'He told
me he would work in office between 7 and 10 in the morning, play the
match and go back to work again.'
Sir Don repeated one~ again his observation that Sachin was the
best batsman in the world at the moment and the closest in style to the
way he himselfhad played. He felt that among contemporary batsmen,
Brian Lara took more risks, and Warne agreed: 'Yes, he takes more
risks. I think I can get him out anytime I want. He has so many
The Don and I

209

openings. But with Tendulkar the problem is that there are no
openings. He can spot the length of a delivery better than any other
human being.'
Sir Don did not give Sachin any particular advice on batting.
'Before leaving, I told him that India was scheduled to play a series in
Australia in 1999, to which he said, "Hopefully, I should be able to
come and watch."'
Tendulkar's lasting impression was of 'the kindness of that
remarkable person. Though the greatest batsman of all time and
Australia's greatest sportsperson, Sir Don is so down to earth. He has
stayed away from publicity and controversy all these years.' On a
personal note, the photograph of Tendulkar, Warne and Sir Don
together-and signed by all three-is the favourite item in my cricket
memorabilia collection.
The charity dinner that evening was marked by another
Tcndulkar-Warne duel-this time at the bidding for an autographed
photograph of Brad man dating back to 1948. The batsman emerged
the winner with a bid of $A 4000 (about Rs 100,000).
When Sir Don passed away on the eve of the first India v Australia
Test at Mumbai in February 2001, Tendulkar and Warne led the tributes
with their memories of that August afternoon two years earlier. And it
emerged a few months later that Sir Don had posthumously paid
Sachin Tendulkar the ultimate compliment. He was the only
contemporary cricketer to figure in his all-time World XI.
Tendulkar flew straight from Australia to New Delhi after meeting
Bradman. Here, he was to receive the Rajiv Gandhi Khel Ratna award,
the nation's highest sports-specific honour, from President
K.R.Narayanan at Rashtrapati Bhavan, on 29 August. The Khel Ratna
had been instituted by the government in 1991-92 as a sort of'super'
Arjuna Award, the annual award given to meritorious sports persons
since 1961. Surprisingly, for such a cricket-mad nation, Tendulkar
was the first cricketer to receive the Khel Ratna, and the only one so far.
For some weeks before the function, the private television company
I was working for was in touch with WorldTel in order to get Tendulkar
into the studios for a series ofinterviews. Everything was agreed upon
210

Sachin

and we arrived at the Rashtrapati Bhavan with our camera crews,
ready to bring Tendulkar back with us. Sourav Ganguly and Ajay
Jadeja were among the Arjuna Awardees. With three cricketers at the
function, there was pandemonium in the normally staid environs of
the President's official residence.
The first shock came when the press discovered that all their
reserved seating had been taken by the President's staff and family.
Once the awards were presented amidst all the pomp and ceremony, it
was time for the informal tea session hosted by the President for the
various dignitaries, sports officials, the press, and the awardees and
their families. I was just a few feet away from the President and was
shocked to see him standing alone in a corner, teacup in hand. He
seemed equally shocked, judging by his expression.
The President oflndia had been abandoned by his security staff,
ministers and YIPs-all of whom had made a beeline for the only
person who seemed to matter on the day. Sachin was acco!11panied by
his wife Anjali and a family friend. They found themselves hemmed
in by hundreds of hysterical autograph hunters. He turned to her,
whispered a few words, and the next thing we knew, they had bolted-with fans in desperate chase. It was the quickest of quick singles as
they reached the car and sped off, leaving behind hundreds of unsigned
autograph books. Even Jadeja and Ganguly had all but been forgotten.
Inside, the other sports persons were grumbling and muttering. Once
again, their moment of glory had been hijacked by cricketers.
My colleague and I, and our camera crew, piled into our vehicles
and followed Tendulkar to the hotel. There, we were told he would
not be able to make it to the studio and we would have to be satisfied
with a quick 'shoot' by the hotel swimming pool. Apparently, Anjali
wanted her husband to accompany her on a shopping excursion into
town. We were none too happy, as may be imagined.
A harried looking Sachinjoined us after some time, after having
changed from formals into jeans and a checked shirt. He snapped at
the camera crew with a 'jaldi kar' (be quick) as they set up the
equipment-though he was courteous to me and my fellow reporter.
I did notice that Viv Richards swagger return as I greeted him in the
The Don and I

211

lobby and escorted him outdoors. I thought to myself, how is it possible
for a young man constantly in the spotlight and adored by millions to
keep his head? And what a year it had been already-the thrashing of
the Australians and the taming of Shane Warne at home and abroad,
Man of the Match at the Diana Memorial match at Lord's, a private
audience with the Don-and now the Rajiv Gandhi Khel Ratna.
These were the topics we covered in an interview that lasted just
over four minutes, as foreign tourists sunbathing in the background
looked on curiously. As the cameras were being set up, I mentioned to
him something I had read in the papers-that Sir Don's son John had
turned to his father as Sachin left their residence and commented:
'What a bonzer!' With a grin Sachin asked me what 'bonzer' meant,
and I explained to him it was Australian slang for an all-round great
guy.
Tendulkar was polite but obviously irppatient-wife and shopping
were waiting. He answered all the questions put to him briefly. But
after that day, he has made it a point to wave or greet me whenever our
paths have crossed.
Perhaps he was pleased with the interview.

212

Sachin