Stepping Down

I as captain take the moral responsibilityfor theJailure.-Sachin Tendulkar
Was Sachin Tendulkar's opposition to the inclusion of Mohammad
Azharuddin based on sound reasoning, or was it another aspect of his
often stubborn attitude towards the selectors? Confrontation with the
selection panel loomed again when the team for the Australian tour
was being picked, as we have already discussed in the previous chapter.
The bone of contention was the inclusion of Azhar and Nayan
Morygia. The wicketkeeper had, of course, made a brief appearance
Down Under, but was soon sent packing. The face-off-the five
selectots and J.Y Lele on one side and coach Kapil Dev and his captain
on the other-was back in the headlines when the time came to make
changes for the one-day tri-series following the whitewash in the Test
senes.
Here Tendulkar got his way, with Mumbai teammate Sameer
Dighe flying out to replace the disappointing M.S.K. Prasad behind
the stumps. Considering the batting failures in the Tests, there were
also strong indications that Azhar would he part of the one-day team.
Kapil and Sachin, however, would have nothing to do with it. 'The
plane bringing Azhar to Australia will be the same one taking Kapil
and me back home,' Tendulkar is reported to have told his teammates.
But how long could this attitude persist? Sooner or later the two
stalwarts were sure to force their way back into the side on the basis of
both form and reputation.
The second day of the tour-opening match of the South African

team against the Board President's XI at the Brabourne Stadium in
Mumbai was on 20 February 2000. It was also the day the selectors
would announce the team for the first Test at Mumbai's Wankhede
Stadium, starting in four days' time.
But before the team could be announced, Tendulkar walked into
the press box at the Brabourne Stadium to make a dramatic
announcement ofhis own. Accompanied by chairman of the Selection
Committee Chandu Borde and Lele, he walked up to the microphone
and began: 'I have an announcement to make.' He then read out his
statement:
I just want to make a few things very clear. At the beginning of
the season when Mr Wadekar, the then chairman of the
selection committee, met vvith me and offered me the captaincy,
I showed my reluctance to accept the job as I felt that I was not
mentally prepared at that time.
In spite of that, when my name was announced as captain, I
took up the task as I was one of the most experienced players
and the selectors felt at that time I was the best man to do the
job. I accepted the captaincy knowing that this Australian tour
would be a very difficult one ,judging from the Australian team's
recent performance-they had won the World Cup.
I tried my best but nothing worked out for us. I do not want to
offer any excuses for a poor performance in Australia, but I as
captain take the moral responsibility for the failure. I feel sorry
for not living up to the expectations of my countrymen who
always support us and wish well for the team.
I have decided after a lot of thought to step down from the
captaincy after the forthcoming two Test matches against South
Mrica. That will give some time to the next captain to get
prepared. I assure you that I will give my best as I have always
done in the past, and I am ready to play in the team under
anyone and with anyone.
The press were stunned for a moment. Then they began firing
260

Sachin

questions. Tendulkar stonewalled the more sensitive ones and left the
box. Borde then announced the team, and surrprise, surprise, Azhar
and Mongia were back in. Now it was Borde's turn to be in the firing
line. Inevitably, most questions were about the return of Azhar and
the stepping down of the captain. We tried to persuade him to continue,
but he had made up his mind. It was his decision. There is nothing we
can do about it.'
But what was the story behind the scene? Conspiracy theories
abounded. Perhaps a loose understanding was reached between
Tendulkar, Ganguly andJadeja at the World Cup, that whoever was
made captain would resign if Mohammad Azharuddin was picked;
perhaps Tendulkar arrived with two letters in his pocket for the selection
meeting, one with the team he wanted, the other his resignation. Told
that Azhar was picked, he had his resignation ready. The third theory
was that Tendulkar decided to quit after the Test series so that his
confidant Jadeja could take over as captain since India were to play
only one-day cricket till November. But of course, there was nothing
to prove either of these theories right. As Sanjay Manjrekar
commented: '[Sachin] has perfect timing when it comes to batting,
but don't expect him to be perfect at everything. I think the player
Tendulkar is more etTective than the captain-player Tendulkar.'
Writing for Indya.com after Ganguly was eventually appointed to
succeed Tendulkar, this is how Wadekar assessed the man on whose
shoulders he had thrust the captaincy just eight months earlier:
I'm convinced that Sachin will never lead the Indian side in
future. And that is sad. He has perhaps all the ingredients tu
become a good captain. Every member of the team respects his
great talent. He is a thinker, an essential factor for a captain.
Sachin also leads from the front. He can crush any attack in the
world with his batting on any wicket. He also mixes with
everyone in the team. What was it then lacking in him that he
could hardly win any series?
I think he gets too much involved in the game. He expects his
players to perform at the level where he performs. That is just
Stepping Down

261

not possible. No player in the world can come close to the
standards set by him. He also tries to advise his bowlers almost
every ball, with the result that the bowlers stop thinking on
their own. I do not think his batting gets affected by captaincy.
I feel he doesn't have the ambition to captain the team. I tried
my level best to convince him to remain as captain, but he
wouldn't budge. He kept on saying that he wouldn't like to be
the captain again.
Amazingly, there would be another dramatic twist to the tale.
Tendulkar was criticized for delaying his resignation till the day
the team was chosen with Azhar in it. The very next day, Azhar
withdrew from the first Test with an injury suffered in the Mumbai
game, when he was hit on the hand by Nantie Hayward. Inevitably,
this too was not clear-cut. Was his thumb fractured or was it a simple
injury? Now fingers were being pointed at Azhar. Was it a cop-out to
avoid a backlash over Tendulkar's resignation? He insisted the injury
was serious enough for him to miss the first Test, though it was also
obvious he felt he was the victim of a conspiracy hatched by the
incumbent to keep him out of the team.
A survey of former players, including former captains Bishan Singh
Bedi, K.Srikkanth and Sunil Gavaskar found them backing
Tendulkar's decision. The onus for the resignation was placed firmly
on the Board, something Wadekar also agreed with. So what of the
man in the middle himself?
This is what he had to say in Cricket Talk (30 March 2000):

Q: Why did you surrender the captaincy so suddenly?
A: It had been building up gradually, the pressure to perform
well as well as win. We kept losing without competing hard
enough and that hurt. Small, small things contributed till I
decided that it simply cannot go on like this. I was not enjoying
the game at all, so why carry the burden?
Q: You had not been keen to accept the captaincy either. ..
A: Yes, I did not want it. When Ajit Wadekar came to my house
262

Sachin

at the start of the season last year, I told him that I was not
interested in the job. He was supposed to inform the other
selectors but I don't know what happened and I was asked to
lead ...
Q: Does this mean that you were always plagued by doubt?
Then why did you agree in the first place?
A: I was in two minds initially, but then I thought to myself,
why not give it another try. The dream was to win overseas and
I chased it. I tried my level best but it did not work out.
Q: Does the sudden decision to resign have something to do
with Mohammad Azharuddin's return to the team?
A: Look, I have no problems with Azhar. I have not quit because
he is in the team. I have played for more than 10 years and am
not given to whim. I spent a lot of time thinking about this
[Azhar's exclusion] when I was made captain last year. At that
time it seemed reasonable. But I'm of the firm belief that if
anybody is good and he has the form to prove it, he should be in
the team. The relationship between Azhar and me is as it was
all the time. It was needlessly blown into a controversy and
blown out of all proportion.
Interviewed by the same magazine (30 September 2000), this is
what he said on his differences with the selectors: 'Yes, my views differed
with the members of the earlier selection committee. I suppose this
led to a degree of disillusionment and loss of interest in the job. After
all, I was leading on the field. But now that is all in the past, so why
rake it up?'
The two Tests against South Africa were a disaster for India. They
lost the first at Mumbai by four wickets and the second at Bangalore
by an innings and 71 runs. That was the end ofTendulkar's second
stint as captain.
Tendulkar was the only batsman to look comfortable on a bowlerfriendly wicket at Mumbai. His 97 in the first innings was the highest
score in the match by far. There was only one other half-centuryexactly 50 by opener Gary Kirsten. The Indian captain also picked up
Stepping Down

263

his best Test bowling analysis of 3 for 10 from five overs as South
Mrica collapsed for 176 and conceded a lead of 49. He accounted for
Kirsten and fellow opener Herschelle Gibbs as well as Shaun Pollock
with a mixture of off and leg spin. The performance made him the
Man of the Match. But it was South Mrica who held their nerve at the
end.
The first Test was over in three days; the second just about dragged
into the fifth. Azhar was back and hit the only century of the series, his
twenty-second in his ninety-ninth Test. It was also destined to be his
last. At the end of the year the BCCI would impose a life ban on him.
The defeat meant Tendulkar had lost five Tests in a row as captain.
It was shattering for such a proud man and Indian cricket was at one of
its lowest ebbs. His record as captain was poor-four Tests won, 12
drawn and nine lost. In the second stint, it stood at 1-2-5. At virtually
the same time, in the West Indies, Brian Lara stepped down from the
captaincy with a similar record of six won, two drawn and ten lost.
Ganguly took over for the one-day series which India won 3-2.
But a few months later would come the revelations by the Delhi Police.
South African captain Hansie Cronje, faced with the irrefutable
evidence of taped phone calls, would eventually admit his guilt and
the world of cricket was thrown into its gravest crisis.
What emerged was that Cronje and his teammates were busy
hobnobbing with bookies throughout the short tour. Certainly, the
verdict in the one-day series would be forever tainted. India had not
been beaten in a Test series at home since losing 1-0 to Pakistan in
1987. Cronje was the man to emulate the great Imran Khan. What an
irony then, that he should find himself exiled from the world of cricket.
Mter failing in the first three oms, Tendulkar came good with his
twenty-fifth ton at Baroda as India won by four wickets to take an
unbeatable 3-1lead in the series. He followed it up with 93 in the fifth
and final match at N agpur. The next few months would see a familiar
whirl of one-day tournaments around the globe-Sharjah (twice),
Nairobi and Dhaka. South Mrica and India were joined by Pakistan
in Sharjah for the Coca-Cola Cup. India recorded a rare win over
Pakistan in the first round but lost the second match, as well as both
264

Sachin

matches against South Africa, and without a single major contribution
from its top batsman, failed to make it to the final.
The Pepsi Asia Cup at Dhaka, a few months later, seemed likely to be
a total washout with torrential storms lashing the city. June, after all, is
hardly the ideal month to play cricket in Bangladesh.
The run-up on the Indian side could not have been worse. On the
night before the team's departure, coach Kapil Dev called a press
conference in New Delhi at which he launched an extraordinary attack
on Manoj Prabhakar. This followed Prabhakar naming Kapil as the
man who, he claimed, had offered him a bribe to throw a match in Sri
Lanka in 1994.
Kapil called on the Board to withdraw the team, considering its
shattered morale. But the players did arrive in Dhaka, though a more
dispirited side I have rarely seen. They just did not seem to have their
heart in the game, and it showed in their performance on the field.
After an unimpressive win over Bangladesh, India succumbed to both
Pakistan and Sri Lanka and failed to make the final. Tendulkar's 93
against Sri Lanka was made out of a total of205, chasing a target of
277.
Considering their poor one-day form, the Indians turned out to be
the surprise package of the second ICC knockout mini-World Cup in
Nairobi. Once Kenya were brushed aside, India were up against
Australia in the first quarter-final. In a stunning upset, the world
champions were tumbled out, beaten by 20 runs. Young guns Yuvraj
Singh and Zaheer Khan were the batting and bowling heroes. Ganguly
and Tendulkar gave the innings a flying start with a rapid stand of 66
runs. Tendulkar (38) decided to take on McGrath and not only with
his bat. He hammered the world's leading fast bowler, prompting a
frustrated McGrath to unleash his usual string of abuse. He even
offensively demonstrated to Tendulkar how to play a stroke.
McGrath and Brett Lee had over the past two days been talking of
having a plan ready for Tendulkar, with the former saying that his
goal was to remove the openers in the first over. In Australia they had
been able to dictate terms, with Tendulkar on the defensive. It was
Stepping Down

265

different this time. In McGrath's first over Tendulkar tried to take one
from outside off and hit over mid wicket. The ball flared off the bat and
soared with immense power over a stunned Gillespie at third man, for
an amazing six. The furious bowler could be seen mouthing something
to his opponent.
In the next over Sachin danced down the wicket as if he were
facing an innocuous off-spinner, picked McGrath on the rise, and
smashed him over long off for six. On the next ball, back he came
down the track for another smashing drive on the up through midoff As McGrath stopped in his tracks, Tendulkar took a few steps
forward, and very clearly stared at McGrath and said, 'Just fuck off!'
McGrath cupped his hands to his ears, perhaps not able to believe
what he had just heard. There was one more six off McGrath before
Lee sent Sachin back.
It was for only the second time in his career that Sachin had lost
his cool on the field. It was a real shock for the Aussies, and the bowler
in particular, who had targeted Tendulkar on their own soil just a few
months before, in a strategy Steve Waugh liked to refer to ingenuously
as 'mental disintegration'.
It backfired on them this time and India were in the final after
another shock defeat of South Africa in the semis. Tt'ndulkar was
asked by the Sportstar (3 February 2001) about that confrontation.

Q: What is it that fires you? That charge you gave Glenn
McGrath at Nairobi. It was a very different Tendulkar we saw
that day ...
A: That particular innings, I felt the wicket had a lot ofbounce
and dampness. Ifl had not adopted an aggressive approach it
would have been a different story. That innings I think I took
them by surprise. They didn't expect me to do that at all. This
will tell you about how the pitch was. McGrath didn't have a
mid-on to start with. He had a square-leg, a fine-leg, mid-off,
point, three slips and a gully. It reflects on the state of the pitch
for a one-day game. If I had tried to hang around he would
have attacked at the same spot and I didn't want them to be at
266

Sachin

the top. Counter-attack was the best thing. Scoring runs was
important and not killing time on that pitch.
The opening pair again put on 66 in the semi-finals. This time
Ganguly carried his bat for 141 while Tendulkar's contribution was
39. The final turned out to be an anticlimax for the rampaging Indians.
They were beaten in the last over by dark horses New Zealand, with
Chris Cairns not out on 102. This overshadowed another century
from the Indian captain and an opening stand worth 141. Tendulkar
was run out after a mix-up, for 69. Itwas a sad end to what had been an
outstanding tournament for the young team.
Just five days later, India and Sri Lanka were playing the opening
match of the Coca-Cola tri-series (with Zimbabwe) in Sharjah and
Tendulkar was back in century mode. It was his sixth century in
Sharjah where he had already scored over 1500 runs. But this one
against the Sri Lankans was no slam-bang affair. His twenty-sixth ton
(101) consisted ofjust six twos, three fours and a six. 71 runs came
from singles this time, as the rest of the batting crumbled around him.
He was out only in the forty-seventh over, once again the victim of a
run-out.
The track at Sharjah had recently been relaid and was not the
batting-friendly wicket it used to be. It was very slow, with the ball not
coming on to the bat. So, Sachin was forced to change his style,
working the ball around the field, nudging behind square and
dropping the ball short of fielders, and scampering for singles. He
won the Man of the Match award once again, but it was the Sri Lankans
who came out on top by five wickets. Sri Lanka won the return match
as well, and then crushed India in the final. Followingjayasuriya's
huge 189, the Indian batting crashed to their lowest total of 54 all out.
The euphoria of Nairobi was suddenly forgotten.

Stepping Down

267