Two Little Bits of Cricket History

No one could have done a betterjob if breaking the ice.
- Geoffrey Boycott
Few Indian cricketers have enjoyed long stints in English county
cricket. Kapil Dev, Ravi Shastri and Azharuddin played briefly for
Northamptonshire, Glamorgan and Derbyshire respectively, while
in more rect:nt years Javagal Srinath, Anil Kumble, Rahul Dravid
and Sourav Ganguly have turned out for various teams with mixed
results. Sunil Gavaskar played just one season, and that was in 1980
for Somerset. The only Indian who made a career out of county cricket
was wicketkeeper-batsman Farokh Engineer who was part of the
Lancashire squad that enjoyed much one-day success in the 1970s.
Sachin Tendulkar had made a huge impression on the English public
and the media on his first tour in 1990. His century at Old Trafford at
the age of 17 had captured public imagination. It wasn't surprising,
therefore, that he should receive an offer to play county cricket. The
real surprise was that the offer came from Yorkshire.
While county cricket had been thrown open to foreign professionals
from the 1960s-and many played in England long before that toothe only county that did not allow 'outsiders' to be part of their team
was Yorkshire, also the most successful team in county cricket history.
Cricket is part of the Yorkshire ethos, much as it is in Mumbai, or in
Victoria and New South Wales in Australia. Great pride is taken in
being able to wear the Yorkshire colours and there is a saying that
'When Yorkshire is strong, England is strong.' Yorkshire, in fact,
extended their ban on outsiders to anyone born outside the boundaries

of the county. Along with their pride came a sense of parochialism and
in more recent years, charges of racism. It is ironical given the large
population of Pakistani immigrants, particularly in Bradford, that
Yorkshire has never awarded a county cap to even those Asians born
within its boundaries. To add to their reputation, the crowd at
Hcadingley, Leeds was often virulent in its taunts and slurs.
While other teams were marching ahead with their overseas stars,
Yorkshire cricket went from bad to worse. They had last won the
county title in 1968 and in 1983 they took the wooden spoon for the
first time. The team was also riven asunder by internal squabbles that
caused immense bitterness in the 1980s and beyond. In frustration,
many of its best players migrated to other counties. Finally, Australian
fast bowler Craig McDermott was signed up on a three-year contract
starting from 1992. But injury forced him to pull out. Former Yorkshire
captain Geoffrey Boycott, the focus ofa great deal of controversy at the
club during his playing days, then decided to sign up Tendulkar in
place of McDermott. He came up against opposition from another
former captain, Brian Close, the chairman of the Cricket Committee.
Close was adamant that a fast bowler should replace McDermott. But
with time running out, a lack of international fast bowlers to choose
from, and sponsors Yorkshire Television keen on a big-name signing,
the final choice remained Tendulkar. And it proved to be an inspired
one, more off the field than on it.
The deal was worth £30,000 to Sachin. Yorkshire ChiefExecutive
Chris Hassell flew to Mumbai in April 1992 for the signing, which
Tendulkar agreed to after receiving the stamp of approval from coach
Ramakant Achrekar and mentor Sunil Gavaskar. Yorkshire were keen
to shake off the racist tag and also to attract more Asians to their
matches. But, while they may have succeeded to a limited extent in
the PR department, there was hardly a surge of interest among the
immigrants. As Michael Calvin pointed out in the Daily Telegraph, the
immigrants mainly consisted of Pakistanis who were not particularly
enthused by the presence ofTendulkar. For his part, Tendulkar fitted
in remarkably well, considering he was just 19 and aware that there
was a fair amount of opposition to the century-old 'no outsiders'
Two Little Bits of Cricket History

95

tradition being dismantled in his favour. A Press Association photograph
that was published in virtually every Indian newspaper showed him
gamely attired in a Yorkshire flat hat, in his hand a glass of Tetley
Bitter beer, one of the team's sponsors.
On the field, he was consistent without being spectacular. There
was just one century (exactly 100 vDurham) and seven 50s in a total
of 1070 championship runs from 25 innings at 46.52, placing him
fortieth in the year's averages. In the Sunday League (40 overs), his
best was 107 from 73 balls against Lancashire. The century against
Durham powered Yorkshire to victory after they had been set a target
of262. Teammate Phil Carrick was quoted on that innings by Scyld
Berry in Wisden Cricket Monthly Oune 1996):
I walked over to have a chat with him as he came in and I
remember him staring at me quite intently-perhaps he
couldn't understand me! I passed on some information, then I
thought: 'what am I doing telling him?' You could tell he had
a fantastic talent, class oozing through every vein.
I told him it was the sort ofwicket where you couldn't hit it on
the up, and shortly after he came in he smashed one straight
past Ian Botham. It was a full-length ball, so I thought, 'well, he
might have heard me,' and he went on to win the match. The
only criticism that you could make was that sometimes he'd be
a bit impetuous, he'd get to 60 or 70 and set the game up, then
get out in ways he wouldn't do now. He'd never play for
himself-in fact we wished he would bat for himself a bit more.
Otherwise he made an ideal first overseas player, for us and
him. He contributed a few ideas and in the dressing-room he
used to fiddle with his bats-tremendously heavy bats-or
listen to his music, and just get on with it.
Against Essex he struck a classy 93 as Yorkshire won by a huge
margin of an innings and 55 runs. The Roses match saw him strike 56
not out and 48 as Yorkshire beat traditional rivals Lancashire by four
wickets. In addition, he struck 86 against Hampshire and a brilliant
96

Sachin

92 against Gloucestershire. Yorkshire's downward slide, however,
continued as they fell two places to finish sixteenth in the county
championship and eight places to fifteenth in the Sunday League.
Sachin's real success was in breaking down barriers and creating
goodwill wherever he went, with colleagues, fans and the media.
Boycott summed it up in his book, Gec!lfrey Boycott on Cricket: 'He had
a lot to prove. If he had tailed with the bat or behaved carelessly, the
outcome would almost certainly have been disastrous. Happily, we
picked a winner. Unfailingly well-mannered and charming, with a
shy smile on his lips, he settled quickly into the dressing room, and
the Yorkshire public, shrugging off their reservations, took him to
their collective .heart. No one could have done a better job ofbreaking
the ice on behalf of the imports.'
The positive reaction in the Yorkshire county circles paved the
way the next year for West Indian captain Richie Richardson to join
the team. In 2001, Yorkshire won the county title for the first time
since 1968. Their match winner throughout the season was Darren
Lehmann, an Australian left-bander not good enough for the
Australian touring side, but good enough to finish second in the
national averages that season.
Tendulkar has always looked back on his county stint with affection.
'It was a tremendous experience and exposure and, in many respects, a
highlight for me, particularly as I was the first overseas player to play
for Yorkshire,' he told Sebastian Coe of the Daily Telegraph (6 May
2001). 'I'm sorry I couldn't stay longer, but there was just no way I
could combine five months' commitment to the Indian team with a
county season. I don't think it will be possible for me to play for a
county again.' According to Boycott, writing in Outlook (4 January
1999): 'Yorkshire supporters loved him. Sachin played well for a
medium team but at the age of18 he was not the finished article. We
didn't expect him to be but he created an enormous amount of interest
and left behind tremendous goodwill. I wouldn't have swapped him
for any other player.'
Tendulkar's season was curtailed when on 21 August he was
summoned by the BCCI to play in the Duleep Trophy. As if he were
Two Little Bits of Cricket History

97

still on trial! He was interviewed by Andrew Collomose for the Cricketer
International (November 1992), at Scarborough, during his last game
against Nottinghamshire. Wrote Collomose of 'Yorkshire's Fresh
Spice': 'Tendulkar's warmth, courtesy and obvious enthusiasm for
the cause quickly made a nonsense of unspoken pre-season fears that
the racist element among Yorkshire followers would sour his season
before it really got underway. "It is a time I will treasure," said
Tendulkar. ... "Everywhere I have played, both in Yorkshire and
elsewhere, people have gone out of their way to be friendly. Yes, I was
a little nervous when I first arrived in England. Yorkshire is such a
famous county and I was going to be their first overseas player. It was
a big responsibility. But my only regret is that it took me so long to
score a hundred. At one stage it seemed I would never do so."'
He shared a flat in Dews bury with old school chum Vinod Kambli
who was playing with Spen Victoria in the Bradford League. Despite
the numerous Indian restaurants in the county, they ate mostly
Chinese, or a pizza, or maybe a Kentucky Fried or something at
McDonald's. 'The Indian food over here is not quite the same as I am
used to at home. Not enough fresh spices.'
In late 1992, India were invited to be the first team to play in South
Mrica since the apartheid ban imposed in 1970. With Nelson Mandela
all set to assume leadership of the 'new' South Africa, it was a historic
visit in many ways. Indeed, from the moment they landed till the end
of the tour, the Indians were feted and felicitated wherever they went,
particularly by the local Indian community which tended to go
overboard in its enthusiasm. One of the Indian team's sponsors who
travelled with the team confided to me that such was the hectic round
of parties and functions, there were occasions when Sachin would
hide in his room to avoid attending them!
Dr Ali Bacher dubbed the visit 'The Friendship Tour'. It may have
been so off the field. But the cricket itself was very hard fought, at
times even bitter, with the home side determined to give their fans a
taste of victory after more than two decades. The Indian team had
earlier made a brief stopover in Harare en route to South Mrica, where
Zimbabwe gave a pretty good account of themselves in their maiden
98

Sachin

Test. The Test marked the second occasion on which Tendulkarwas
out for a duck, caught and bowled by master off-spinner John Traicos.
The one-day festival match at Raadjasfontein that kicked off the
South Mrican tour saw Tendulkar score a century against Nicky
Oppenheimer's XI. The series began in right earnest at Durban with
South Mrican opener Jimmy Cook out to the first ball of the series,
caught by Tendulkar at third slip offKapil Dev. This was South Mrica's
second Test after readmission, having been stunned earlier in the year
by the West Indies in Barbados. The weather had the final say at
Durban, with more than a day lost to rain, and the match ended in a
tame draw. But there were quite a few interesting events that captured
the attention of cricket historians. Left-arm spinner Omar Henry, at
40 South Mrica's oldest debutant, also became the first non-white to
play for his country. South Mrican captain Kepler Wessels, who had
earlier represented his adopted country, Australia, in Test cricket,
became the first to score a century for two different countries. Ramakant
Achrekar's 'boy' Praveen Amre became the ninth Indian to score a
century on Test debut.
The most dramatic moment of the match came on 14 November
1992, the second day of the Test. Tendulkar was on 11 and the total on
38 for 2. He played a ball from Brian McMillan backward of point, set
off for a run and then changed his mind as Jonty Rhodes swooped and
threw the ball to Andrew Hudson. The batsman tried to make his
ground even as short leg Hudson, up at the stumps, took the flat throw
on the bounce and broke the wicket. It appeared desperately close and
South Mrican Cyril Mitchley at square leg passed the decision to the
umpires' room, outlining the shape of a TV screen with his hands.
Third umpire Karl Liebenberg was sitting in front of the TV, and 29
seconds later came his response: a green light flashed (for 'go' rather
than red for 'stay'-the reverse works now) and Tendulkar made his
way back, the first cricketer to go through a trial by TV. So close was the
verdict that he may well have gained the benefit of the doubt if the onfield umpire hadn't had the benefit of calling for the replay. Cricket
had entered the technological age, at last.
The fact that this new technology did not find universal acceptance
Two Little Bits of Cricket History

99

even among the umpires may well have cost India the second Test at
Johannesburg. West Indian Steve Bucknor was the neutral umpire
standing in the series. Ironically, it was Jhonty Rhodes who gained the
reprieve. South Mrica were 61 for 4 in their first innings, with Rhodes
on 28, when Srinath threw down the stumps with a direct throw. But
Bucknor ruled it not out without consulting the third umpire, despite
pleas from the fielding side. The TV replays showed Rhodes clearly
short of the crease. He went on to score 91 and took his side to the
respectable score of 292. It was a mistake no international umpire
would make again.
India too lost early wickets. It was 27 for 2 when Tend ulkar walked
in. Two more wickets fell for the addition of SO, and at 77 for 4, there
was the looming threat of a follow-on. Tendulkar started hesitantly.
He took 20 balls to get off the mark and was dropped at ten by Craig
Matthews off Donald. His 50 came from 84 balls, his century from
243, and there were 19 fours in his 111 before he was ninth out at 212,
caught Hudson by Cronje. He had been at the crease for 372 minutes.
His fourth Test century made him the youngest in Test hi5tory to
reach 1000 runs, at the age of19 years 217 days. Teammate Kapil Dev
at 21 years 27 days was the previous record holder. It was Tendulkar's
nineteenth Test and twenty-eighth innings.
These are the bald statistical details. They do not convey his power
that day at the Wanderers where the mighty Donald was blasted out of
sight. Once again, Sachin played a lone hand, battling to pull his team
out of a hole, making full use of his favourite square cut and square
drive. Time and again, Donald and McMillan bounced at him and
Tendulkar went up on his toes and used his powerful wrists to play
attacking strokes to deliveries that were at least shoulder high. In an
Indian total of227, Tendulkar scored virtually half the runs off his
own bat. Thanks to his effort and 6 for 53 from Ani! Kumble in South
Mrica's second innings, India gained a face-saving draw. Once again,
the luminaries of cricket were ecstatic in their reaction to Tendulkar's
batting. One of South Mrica's best all-rounders, Eddie Barlow, had
this to say: 'He has the technique which is the hallmark of a great
player. Everything indicates that he will be a great player and I am
100

Sachin

sure he will prove me right. Under incredible pressure, he batted
superbly. Like Barry Richards he is very straight, very compact. He
moves his feet very quickly into position and can adjust to the pace
and bounce superbly' (Sportstar, 12 December 1992).
Between the second and third Tests, India and South Africa played
a series of seven One-day Internationals. Tendulkar was a major
disappointment, with only 144 runs from seven innings, and a highest
score of32. India were beaten 5-2.
Donald came into his own in the third Test at Port Elizabeth and
India were crushed by nine wickets. There was an extraordinary
century by Kapil Devin the second innings. But it was not enough to
stop Donald bowling South Africa to their first victory in 22 years
with the devastating figures of 5 for 55 and 7 for 84. There were,
unfortunately; plenty of umpiring disputes during the match, with
the visitors feeling they had got a raw deal. Perhaps the most shocking
was umpire Rudi Koertzen's decision to give Tendulkar caught behind
first ball off Donald in the second innings, when the ball had brushed
his pad. The departing batsman was horrified and non-striker Shastri
dropped his bat in disgust and had words with the umpire.
Much of the cricket played in the three Tests had been dreary. But
the fourth and final match at Cape Town made a dubious entry into
cricket's record books as the slowest of all time. The Indian batsmen
were wary of the South African pace attack. The hosts were keen to
hang on to their lead in order to wrap up the series. This they achieved
even as the Test produced an average of159 runs per day at 1.83 per
over. Tendulkar was his side's. top scorer in the match with 73. But
even his normally attacking batsmanship was curtailed, the 50 taking
him 167 minutes. For Kepler Wessels and his countrymen, the series
marked a triumphant return to Test cricket. The story was starkly
different in the rival camp, with Azharuddin seemingly on his way
out as captain after another series defeat and a lacklustre batting
performance.

Two Little Bits of Cricket History

101
