Desert Storm

I'll be having nightmares of Sachin just running down the wicket and belting
rne back over the head for six.-Shane Warne
A mere three days after India lost to Australia in the final of the Pepsi
Cup, the two teams were in Sharjah for the Coca-Cola Cup, with
New Zealand joining the fray. For the first time in ten years, Pakistan
was not part of the Sharjah tournament. Just four months before, the
Indian team had been the object of derision, and the captain had been
displaced after they had crashed to three defeats in a row. Now
Tendulkar was determined to prove a point to the spectators who had
insulted him and his team in December 1997.
The format of the tournament had each team playing the other
twice in the league stage. The start was low-key, hardly indicative of
the fireworks that were to follow. New Zealand ran India close despite
Ganguly's century, before fading out and losing by 15 runs. It was
India's first win in Sharjah after five straight defeats. The next day, the
Kiwis were brushed aside by six wickets by Australia, and now it was
the turn of the Big Two to clash in their first league encounter, which
was ex-pected to be a dress rehearsal for the final. Once again, it was
Tendulkar who played the lone hand, though a losing one. His 80 was
the highest score of the match and won him the Man of the Match
award. But it was little consolation as the Aussies ran out easy winners
by 58 runs. The nightmare ofDecember 1997 seemed to have returned
to haunt the Indians; the very next day; they went down by four wickets
to New Zealand. The Kiwis excelled in the field and three oflndia's
top batsmen-Tendulkar, Azhar and Jadeja-were run out. Suddenly;

there was the unexpected possibility oflndia not making it to the final.
Australia rested some of their key players when they faced New
Zealand for the second time, and yet emerged easy winners to book
their place in the final. As has so often been the case before and since,
India now brought it down to the last game. They would have to
either beat Australia outright, or raise their net run rate above that of
New Zealand to reach the final. The organizers were hoping for an
India-Australia clash for the title, as the crowds had been disappointing
till then. But the Australians were in no mood to oblige in the return
game.
For the first time in the tournament, the stadium was full. Many
Indian fans felt this might be their last chance to see their team in
action. Their pessimism was only heightened when Australia
effortlessly made the highest total of the tournament, a huge 284 for 7.
Michael Bevan remained not out on 101 and Mark Waugh took 81.
The target: 285 to win, 254 to qualify on run rate. These were
revised to 276 and 237 after a sandstorm lopped off four overs from the
chase. In the end, India lost, but still made it to the final. Thanks to
Tendulkar, the real winner of the dramatic night. 'Second Only to
Brad man' was the headline of the tournament report in the Cricketer
International Oune 1998), and few who were there at Sharjah or watched
the match on 1\1 would argue with that assessment.
The morale of the Indian team was already low after the defeat by
the underdogs, New Zealand. It was compounded by the sandstorm
that disrupted play after they had lost their four top batsmen, Ganguly,
Mongia, Azhar and Jadeja. Their cause now looked more hopeless
than ever. The score at that stage was 143 for 4 in 31 overs. To reach
the final on better run rate, India needed 94 runs from the next 15
overs. Laxman hung around to give Tendulkar some support. But it
was clear to Tendulkar himself that only he could turn the tide. He
proceeded to attack the bowling as though it were a club side. He
played every shot in the book and some that had never been seen on a
cricket field. The Australians were sent reeling by the murderous
assault and wilted in the desert heat. As millions watched at home in
India on their 1\1 sets, they must have missed a heartbeat or two. One
Desert Storm

201

shot landed in no man's land, another was dropped on the boundary.
But the gods were smiling on the champion that day. By the time he
was given out to a highly dubious decision, caught behind off Gillespie,
the deed had been done. India were in the final. His masterly 142 had
come from 131 balls and had nine fours and five sixes in it. The next
highest score was Mongia's 35. Tendulkar was stunned by the decision
that sent him on his way and lingered for a moment in disappointment.
Still, he knew he had done his job, and there was an unmistakable
swagger in his walk up the steps as his teammates rushed to pat him
on the back. 'I wish we had won the match,' he said later that evening,
after receiving yet another Man of the Match award for his fourteenth
century.
Looking back on that night, having watched the match on video,
Tendulkar expressed surprise at the manner in which he strode into
the pavilion. 'Though India lost the match, we qualified. When I
came back inside, I was angry because of my dismissal. But I realized
that we had a chance against the Australians in the next match. What
I can't forget about the incident is the swagger with which I walked
into the dressing room. I was walking like Viv Richards. I don't think
I will ever forget that walk,' he said (Outlook, 24 August 1998).
Unbelievable as it may seem, 48 hours later, Tendulkar matched
that magical innings of his, stroke for stroke. India had lost in the
Pepsi Cup finals at home, after winning all their preliminary matches.
Now it was the turn of Australia to suffer the same fate in the CocaCola Cup.
The occasion was perfect. It was Sachin's twenty-fifth birthday
The stage was just right-India v Australia in front of25,000 Indian
fans. The result was fitting-another match-winning century from
the birthday boy. Australia's 272 for 9 had set up another challenging
target for the Indians. In the end, they made it relatively easily, winning
by six wickets with nine balls to spare. Tendulkar's share this time
round was 134 from 131 balls, with 12 fours and three sixes. And once
again, it was a dubious umpiring decision that saved the bowlers from
further humiliation.
Even the Aussies waxed eloquent after the match. Steve Waugh
202

Sachin

confessed that Tendulkar had to be the best after Bradman: 'We were
beaten hy one man. It is difficult to control Sachin when he is on song.
What sort of field can one set for a batsman who has so many shots to
play?' This was echoed by the long-suffering Warne whose ten overs
in the final went for 61 runs: 'He was unstoppable. I don't think anyone,
apart from Don Brad man, is in the same class. He is just an amazing
player.'
Richie Benaud was another awestruck Aussie, calling Sachin's
two centuries the most glorious exhibition ofbatting he had ever seen
in limited-overs cricket, ranking with two other innings he had seen
from Viv Richards.
Later that year, Sachin revealed that he had set himself a goal before
the tournament: to win it for India. And he succeeded.
Sachin had scored 1130 (average 113) against the best team in the
world, in ten matches in both forms of cricket over a two-month
period. This included one double century, five centuries and t\vo 50s.
And the land that produced the one and only Don realized what it felt
like to be on the opposite side of a batting legend.
Back home, mass Sachin hysteria had broken out across the country.
The nation's favourite son had marked his twenty-fifth birthday with
a dominating display, the likes of which Indian sports lovers had never
seen before. And all of it live on television. Harsha Bhogle writing in
the Spottstar (9 May 1998) sounded a note of caution: 'The issue with
Sachin Tendulkar is not whether he can keep his sense of balance
amidst the uncontrolled hysteria that surrounds his existence. It is
whether we can keep ours. It is not how he reacts to the persistent
scrutiny that is important. It is the quality of the scrutiny itself.' Wise
words. But the:1, who was listening?
There was no stopping the comparisons with Sir Donald Brad man
now. One news magazine even brought out an entire special issue
dedicated to Sachin, complete with a specially commissioned poem
and painting and an artist's rendering of a stamp. It was all a bit over
the top. Tendulkar's greatness lay in his feats in both forms of the
game. In Test cricket, several others had achieved far more by the time
they turned twenty-five.
Desert Storm

203

What was phenomenal was the amount of cricket Sachin had
played in the last nine years. Though his average at the same age was
less than that ofBradman (23 Tests; average 99.71 ), Viv Richards (23/
62.41), Garry Sobers (37/59.86), and Javed Miandad (40/54.36),
Tendulkar had played 62 Test matches (average 54.03)-50 per cent
more than Miandad. On top of that was the huge number of OD!s
(nearly 200) he had played in. This was the twin load borne by the
modern player, especially by those playing for India, who over the last
few years had been saddled with a massive schedule of international
matches.
The Coca-Cola tri-series at home with cricket babes Kenya and
Bangladesh generated more interest in the cola wars than in the action
itsel£ Held at the height of summer, this was a tournament where the
eventual winner was never in any doubt. Tendulkar was rested for the
first two matches, apparently much against his own wishes. Certainly,
the organizers were keen to have him back as the Indians also rested
some other big names and tried out a number of new faces-28 players
in all were fielded in the five matches. Tendulkar's return for the
second game against Bangladesh ensured a full house at the Wankhede
Stadium. He contributed 33 as India won by five wickets, as they had
done in the first match.
There was a shock in the return match against Kenya at Gwalior.
Already assured of a place in the final, the Indians were beaten by 69
runs, with Tendulkar falling for 18. Fired by this defeat and his two
failures with the bat, Tendulkar led a resurgent India in the final against
Kenya at Eden Gardens. The Kenyan total of 196 was overhauled in
double-quick time-35 overs, to be precise. The former captain's
contribution was 100 not out from 103 balls. He was now only one
step removed from the world record of 17 001 tons held by West Indian
opener Desmond Haynes.
The amazing title run of the Indians continued in Sri Lanka where,
the year before, they had had a dismal tour. But now, with Azhar back
at the helm, they could scarcely do wrong. They won their fourth title
in seven months after finishing with just one the year before. The
204

Sachin

Singer Akai Nidahas (meaning 'independence' in Sinhalese) Trophy
tri-series with New Zealand as the third team, was the latest of the
subcontinent's celebratory tournaments-none of which were won
by the celebrants themselves. India, Pakistan and Bangladesh had all
previously failed to please their home fans and the trend was carried
into Sri Lanka.
As with all tournaments held here in June-July, rain played a major
role. This time round, all three league matches at Galle had to be
called off without a ball being bowled. Colombo also saw two 'noresults', and New Zealand gained points without winning a single
match.
The opening game of the tournament saw India record one of its
most emphatic victories over Sri Lanka. Openers Ganguly (80) and
Tendulkar (65) put on a sparkling 115 in 18 overs, easily overhauling
Sri Lanka's 243 for 6, with eight wickets and plenty of deliveries to
spare. But the Indians were almost done in by the rain rule, in their
next match against New Zealand. They had raced to 131 for 2 in 24.2
overs, Tendulkar (53) galloping to his 50 in 33 balls, in reply to New
Zealand's 219 for 8. That's when the rain came down with only four
balls needed for it to be considered a contest. If that had happened,
India would have needed 147 runs in 25 overs to be deemed winners!
Mter a week of nearly non-stop rain at Galle, the action moved
back to Colombo, and this time it was Sri Lanka who nosed out India
by eight runs in a match reduced to 36 overs a side. The two sides
expectedly met in the final, which proved to be a real humdinger. The
Indian innings was marked by a world record opening stand of252
runs from 43 overs by Ganguly and Tendulkar. Both got centuries,
with Tendulkar in his one hundred and ninty-sixth ODI now level
with Haynes after his 128 from 131 balls. It was Tendulkar's third
century and third Man of the Match award in three consecutive triseries finals in the span of three months, India having won all three.
The pair were out to successive deliveries, though there was an element
of doubt in third umpire Peter Manuel's decision against Tendulkar.
Manuel took his time over the stumping appeal offJayasuriya, even
as it appeared that the batsman's right toe was within the crease.
Desert Storm

205

A heroic century by Aravinda de Silva, hobbled by a groin strain,
took the home side within a few runs oflndia' s 307 for 6. But Agarkar
picked up four wickets and they fell short in the last over of a pulsating
final, by six runs. It was heady stuff for Azhar and his men. In five ODI
tri-series in the year so far, they had won four and lost only the final of
the Pepsi Cup at home to Australia.
And there was still more to follow.

206

Sachin