
The Burden Eases

I was surprised and disappointed at the declaration.-Sachin Tendulkar
after being stranded on 194 in the Multan Test match.
Sachin Tendulkar's poor run ofTest match form from the disastrous
tour to New Zealand carried on when the Kiwis visited India in October
2003. This was his first taste of cricket following the World Cup,
having opted out of the TVS one-day tri-series in Bangladesh
immediately following the World Cup. It also followed a visit to the
United States for surgery on his right hand, an injury that had troubled
him right through his glorious World Cup run.
Scores of8, 7, 55 and 1 in the two Tests against New Zealand were
followed by a splendid run in the ODI tri-series with Australia and
New Zealand. But two centuries and two 50s in the preliminary games
were followed by an unenterprising 45 in the final against Australia at
Kolkata which India lost by 37 runs. The ghost of the World Cup was
back to haunt India.
India under Tendulkar's captaincy had been whitewashed 3-0
when they last toured Australia in 1999-2000. But it was a different
team and a different captain four years later when India were back
Down Under for another gripping Test series.
Australia were the undisputed world champions in both forms of
the game and few gave the Indians much chance, given their abysmal
track record on foreign soil.
But at the end of the series India were the moral victors as Australia
hung on for a draw in the fourth and final Test at Sydney with the
series locked at 1-1.

It was at Sydney, where he had made such an impact as a teenager
on his first visit in 1991-92, that Tendulkar finally came out of his
Test match slump.
Right through the series he had been overshadowed by the
awesome form ofDravid, Laxman, Sehwag and Ganguly with even
rookie Aakash Chopra being more consistent.
Scores ofO, 1, 37,0 and 44 had his fans dejected. In the third Test at
Melbourne he was even shielded by Ganguly in the second innings,
coming in at number five.
Now at Sydney he finally reached three figures for the first time
since the Kolkata Test against the West Indies in November 2002seven Tests without a century.
Tendulkar eschewed all risks, cutting out virtually all off-side shots
in a remarkable display of self-restraint. Of his 241 not out, 176 came
on the on-side in an innings stretching to over 10 hours, his longestever stint at the crease.
Just for good measure he added 60 not out in the second innings to
climb to third in the averages behind the in-form Dravid and
Laxman-but 301 of his 383 runs from his seven innings had come in
the final Test.
The two finals of the tri-series (with Zimbabwe as the third team)
saw India trounced by Australia for the third time in less than twelve
months in the final of an 001 tournament. Tendulkar's scores of27
and 8 meant he had failed once again to rise to the big occasion.
The tour to Pakistan in early 2004 had been on the minds of the
Indian team even as they were battling away in the om series in
Australia. The safety concerns were naturally uppermost in their minds.
In the event it turned out be a hugely successful visit, both on and
off the field. For the first time in over 50 years India won a Test match
(and series) in Pakistan, and the 001 series too for good measure.
Tendulkar was the only player in the touring side to have played a
Test match in Pakistan, having made his debut there in 1989.
His major contribution in the 001 series was a fabulous 141 in a
losing cause in the third match at Rawalpindi, the first 001 century by
an Indian batsman in Pakistan. The series went 3-2 in India's favour.
332

Sachin

The Indian batting was in form in the first Test at Multan, carrying
on from where they had left off at Sydney just a couple of months
earlier.
Sehwag became the first Indian cricketer to score a Test triple
century, adding 336 for the third wicket with Tendulkar. The talking
point of the match was not only Sehwag's feat and India's win by an
innings and 52 runs but Tendulkar's public reaction to stand-in captain
Rahul Dravid's declaration with his score on 194.
It puzzled even his most ardent supporters that he should express
'surprise and disappointment' at a decision that was after all for the
benefit of the team. It was his 33rd Test century, placing him just one
behind the world record held by Sunil Gavaskar.
When India were well beaten in the second Test at Lahore it looked
like that elusive foreign series win would continue to evade the grasp
of the Indian team.
It was fitting then that the final Pakistani batsman to fall in the
third and final Test at Rawalpindi should have been caught by captain
Ganguly off the bowling ofTendulkar.
It had been 11 long years since India had won a series away from
home, beating Sri Lanka 1-0 in 1993, with only Ani! Kumble and
Tendulkar surviving from that era.
For the rest of the side it was a heady and intoxicating feeling. India
had now established themselves as the second best team in the world
behind Australia both in Tests and oms. And finally after nearly a
decade of carrying the Indian batting on his shoulders, the burden
and pressures had eased for Tendulkar with Laxman, Dravid and
Sehwag emerging as world-class batsmen.

The Burden Eases

333