The World Cup

It is an honour to be named the best player cif the l#lrld Cup, but I would
have been happier if India had won the title.-Sachin Tendulkar
India had won the World Cup for the first and so far only time 20 years
ago in England. They were not among the favourites to reach the
final in South Mrica when the mega-event kicked off in February
2003.
There were fears that the abysmal batting performance in New
Zealand would affect the psyche of the players and these fears appeared
to have been well-grounded after India's first two matches.
The opening game at Paarl pitted them against rank outsiders, the
Netherlands. The performance though was frankly an embarrassment.
Arguably the strongest batting line-up in the world, the Indians
struggled to 204.
Tendulkar top-scored with 52 during the course of which he
overtook Javed Miandad as the leading scorer in the World Cup. But
he looked sketchy throughout. Though they won by 68 runs, the
1983 champions looked far from convincing.
They promptly came crashing down to earth in the next match at
Centurion against reigning champions Australia. Once again
Tendulkar top scored with 36 but the miserable total of125 all out was
overtaken in a canter.
Provoked by some intemperate comments by former players during
the telecast, the nation's cricket fans exploded in fury. Processions
were taken out, effigies burnt and players' houses attacked. It was all
threatening to get out ofhand and the result was a mass boycott of the

former players-cum-commentators by the current squad.
Perhaps goaded by events back home, the Indians now stormed
back with Tendulkar leading the charge.
A run-a-ball opening stand between openers Tendulkar (81) and
Virender Sehwag helped haul the Indian campaign back on the tracks
as Zimbabwe were beaten by 83 runs at Harare.
Namibia, another African side, were crushed by 181 runs with
Tendulkar easing his way to 152, his highest World Cup score and 34'h
001 century.
But now it was crunch time for India with crucial matches against
England and then the big one, versus Pakistan.
Ashish Nehra's magic spell under the Durban lights snuffed out
England's batting after India had reached 250 for 9. Tendulkar hit a
sparkling 50 with 75 runs flowing from the first 11 overs.
As soon as the fixtures had been announced a year earlier, the India/
Pakistan clash was the most anticipated of all the games and a packed
house of almost 20,000 at Centurion saw India maintain their clean
slate against Pakistan in World Cup matches-four wins out of four
since 1992.
The two sides had not met since Dhaka in June 2000 and the
match certainly lived up to all the hype. It was Man of the Match
Tendulkar who knocked the stuffing out of the Pakistan bowling,
especially the much-vaunted Shoaib Akhtar whose pre-game boasts
were shoved down his throat.
Pakistan amassed a challenging 273 for 7 which soon paled into
insignificance in the face of a withering onslaught led by Tendulkar
as the 100 was reached in a mere 12 overs.
Akhtar was punished in his very first over. The first ball was met
with a blistering upper-cut for six and the next two were dispatched to
the boundary.
It was a massive psychological boost and though Sachin fell to
Akhtar for 98, the damage had been done with his runs takingjust 75
balls.
India had stormed into the Super Six, and back home all was
suddenly forgiven.
The World Cup

329

By now they appeared virtually unstoppable. Kenya were beaten
by six wickets, Sri Lanka were routed by 183 runs (Tendulkar 97) and
that meant India were in the semifinals. New Zealand were then
brushed aside by seven wickets and the semi-final line-up was
complete-Australia v Sri Lanka and India against the surprising
Kenyans. Both were no-contests and the final threw up the ideal duelthe best batting side against the most powerful bowling line-up in a
repeat of the 15 February league match.
A packed Wanderers stadium at Johannesburg on23 March were
denied a close contest but treated to the most awesome batting ever
seen in a final.
Ganguly's decision to put the champions in to bat has been
endlessly debated. The bowlers appeared to lose their nerve and a
massive total of359 for two meant India were out of it even before
they had batted.
The reply was just five balls old when Tendulkar top-edged Glenn
McGrath and it was all over despite a flourish from Sehwag.
Though he received the Man of the Tournament award from Sir
Garfield Sobers (his 673 runs a World Cup record), the post-mortems
pinpointed another Tendulkar failure at the crunch-time. It was a sad
end to what had been a magnificent performance by the Indians.

llO

Sachin
