The One-day Phenom

It was quite satisfying.-Sachin Tendulkar

The Hero Cup five-nation tournament in November 1993 saw India
reach the semi-final against South Mrica despite being trounced by
West Indies in their league game and held to a tie by Zimbabwe. The
Indians seemed to be peaking at the right time, as they beat South
Mrica easily by 43 runs in the final league game at Mohali. Two days
later, they met again in the last four. The sole team to be eliminated
was Zimbabwe, with the other semi-final pitting West Indies against
Sri Lanka. Both the semis and the final were played in Kolkata under
lights for the first time.
Tendulkar had scores of26 not out, 2, 24 and 3. He failed with the
bat in the semis too, caught behind by Dave Richardson off mediumpacer Richard Snell for 15. But he would play a crucial hand in the
very last over of the game. On a slow track, India had mustered a total
of195 in their 50 overs, with skipper Azharuddin top-scoring with 90.
More than the bowlers, it was the Indian batsmen themselves who
made a hash of things with four run-outs. This was the first 001 with
a third umpire in charge of replays, and there was no escape. Vinod
Kambli was the first such victim in limited-overs cricket.
The South Mrican batsmen appeared overcautious in chasing the
small total, and the crowd of nearly 100,000 gave them little respite.
Srinath got captain Kepler Wessels out early, but fellow opener Andrew
Hudson survived two chances to make 62 as they inched their way
towards the target. The Indians hit back through Ajay Jadeja and Ani!

. Kumble who picked up two wickets each to break the back of the top
order and reduce the score to 130 for 5. The asking rate had climbed to
eight an over as the batting subsided to 145 for 7, with three run-outs,
including that ofHansie Cronje at 13. Then came the first of many
dramatic twists.
In three overs, the burly Brian McMillan and Richardson
plundered 32 runs to take their side to within just seven runs of victory.
When Richardson got out for 15, it was down to the last over, with six
runs standing between South Mrica and the final. Srinath had conceded
23 runs in his last two overs and Prabhakar had gone for 16. Kapil still
had two in harid. Who would bowl the last over to McMillan, a man
capable of finishing things offwith one mighty blow? It looked like a
toss-up between Srinath and Kapil. Then wicketkeeper Vijay Yadav
suggested the name ofTendulkar. The problem was that he had not
bowled a single over so far.
This is manager Wadekar's version of what happened next: 'I had
sent a message to Azhar that Kapil, being most senior and experienced,
should bowl the last over. When Sachin saw Kapil slightly hesitating,
he snatched the ball from his hand and told Azhar that he would bowl
the last one. Azhar had no choice.' Millions of TV viewers saw it that
way too. The young man had grabbed the challenge as he always has
done in his career.
There were two wickets standing and six balls to go, with six runs
to get. Bowling tantalizingly slow medium-pacers, Tendulkar induced
panic from the first ball. Fanie de Villiers was run out going for a
second run. Five from five, and last man Allan Donald to face. All he
had to do was take a single and give McMillan the strike. He did so,
but only off the penultimate ball-for three balls he swung and missed.
The last ball, and a boundary w;ts what South Mrica required.
Tendulkar managed to squeeze the ball between the bat and leg stump.
And McMillan could get just one from the edge down the leg side as
he swung and failed to connect. The Indian players mobbed Tendulkar,
hugging and kissing him as the crowd erupted with joy.
We had to win the match for the spectators. They cheered us
throughout and we owed it to them,' said Tendulkar, his voice choked
The One-day Phenom

117

with emotion. Watching on 1V in his hotel room, West Indies captain
Richie Richardson thought Azhar had got it wrong. 'I would have
given it to my best bowler. But the young fellow bowled intelligently,'
he said. Sachin spoke about that last over in an interview to Sportsworld
(December 1993). 'Some team members had suggested I try and bowl
leg-spin. But I decided to bowl leg cutters at military medium pace.
The idea was to frustrate the batsman going for a big hit, as the ball
wouldn't come onto the bat. I only had one apprehension, that in
trying to restrict the batsmen I don't end up bowling a wide or a no
ball. Especially before I came in to bowl the last ball, I was ultra
cautious. The last ball that I bowled was slightly faster. The line was
outside the off stump. I varied my pace, to unsettle the batsman who
was expecting a slower delivery.'
West Indies brushed aside Sri Lanka in the other semi-final and
ten years after their historic World Cup encounter, it would be India v
West Indies again.
This time it was leg-spinner Ani! Kumble who emerged the hero.
His figures of 6 for 12 are still the best by an Indian in oms and saw
West Indies crumble to 123 in reply to India's 225 for 7. Kambli capped
a brilliant run with the top score of68. Tendulkar chipped in with his
highest in the tournament, 28 not out, and then bowled Brian Lara for
33 just as the West Indian batsman looked to be taking command.
Tendulkar had done enough-just about-to silence the critics who
were beginning to ask where his next big innings would come from.
He had proved his utility to the team. Still, that elusive century was
nowhere in sight.
The subject of his relative lack of success 'noms was posed to him
by a reporter with the Sportstar ( 26 March 1994),just before the om
series in New Zealand where he opened for the first time.

Q: How do you explain your failures in one-day internationals
as opposed to your success in Test cricket? Are you aware this is
causing the misimpression that you have been failing in
international cricket for a while now?
A: It is very difficult to analyse why you fail in the one-day
118

Sachin

games. It is also difficult to know what you have to do when
you go out to the middle. You go out to bat in the 40th over, or
even in the 30th over, and you don't know whether you have to
go after the bowlers or hang on there, give the strike to the set
batsman and play your shots later. That is what has been
happening to me in the one-day internationals. I have tried
playing shots and got out early. I have not been able to get too
many runs. But then I am as serious about the one-dayers as I
am about Test cricket and so the failures are not coming from
lack of seriousness. So, maybe, things will change with a big
innings or two. As far as I see it, there is nothing wrong with
my technique so far as one-day cricket is concerned. It is just
that a few failures have made it even more difficult for me.lt is
not as if I am getting out only in one way. Then you have to
think and sort out the problem. Otherwise, I feel it is quite
okay. I know I can succeed in one-day cricket also.
The specific issue of his low position in the batting order was
discussed in an interview (Sportsworld, December 1993) shortly after
the Hero Cup.

Q: Why don't you request the captain to promote you up the
batting order? You could also try and do a 'Brian Lara' by
opening the innings in one-dayers and then go in at number
four in Test matches?
A: Well, I've no problems about that. Tomorrow if they tell me
that my opening the innings in one-dayers will help the team,
I'll surely open. If they say 'no', I won't press for it either. I'm
quite flexible as a cricketer.
Q: What do you mean 'they'? You're the vice-captain of the
side. Ifyou think by opening the innings you would be able to
help the team, why aren't you suggesting that? Mter all, the
vice-captain comprises the management.
A: No, I'm not going to do that. I'm not going to go out of my
way. But as I told you, if they ask me to open the innings, I will.
The One-day Phenom

119

'They' would 'ask' him soon-and in somewhat freakish
circumstances. The moment came in the Bank ofNew Zealand series
of four one-day matches early in 1994, which followed the one-off
Test. New Zealand won the first match at Napier by 28 runs with
openers Jadeja and Sidhu putting on 66 runs for India. Tendulkar was
out for 15. Two days later, on 27 March 1994, the Indian think tank
faced a crisis when Sidhu woke up with a stiff neck in Auckland and
found himself unfit. Azharuddin explained the circumstances in his
column in the Sportstar (11 February 1995).
Sidhu and I had gone shopping down the main street of
Auckland the previous evening and there had been no thought
that a fitness problem would develop and that the extraordinary
event of opening with Sachin would take place. Poor Sidhu
woke up with a stiff neck and had to sit down and Tendulkar
came up and asked me whether he could try his hand at opening.
This was discussed at the team meetingjust before the match
and all agreed this was well worth trying since we had to win
the second match to keep our chances of winning the series.
This is what Wadekar told me about the turn of events: 'Sachin
and I used to talk about his opening the innings in one-dayers so that
he would get more overs to thrash the opposition. However, the team
management thought of not risking his wicket with the new ball as he
would be more useful in the middle order. When Sidhu pulled out,
the three of us-Azhar as captain, Kapil Dev as a senior member and
myself-had an emergency meeting on the ground before the toss
and when I told them that Sachin would not mind opening, they
agreed willingly. Sachinjumped in the air with joy and celebrated his
promotion to the opening slot with a swashbuckling innings. Thus a
star opening batsman was born for India in ODis.'
And how! It was Tendulkar's seventieth ODI and one that would
change the face of modern cricket. This is how New Zealand selector
and journalist Don Neely recalls the match and Tendulkar's innings:

120

Sachin

New Zealand made a dismal 142 and in the course of 49.4
overs only managed to hit 9 fours and one six. There was a
surprise for the spectators who had almost been comatose by
the local batting.
Jadeja's partner was Tendulkar. The young man played shots
of technical excellence and plundered the attack. The Indian
50 was posted in 7.4 overs, the 100 in 12.5. An experienced
group ofbowlers was exposed as being good at containing most
batsmen but powerless to curb the brilliance of the young Indian.
His innings of82 consisted ofjust 22 scoring shots and he was
back in the pavilion in 69 minutes and the game was over with
26.4 overs to spare.
No one who witnessed the batting ofTendulkar that day will
ever forget it. He was calm while all around him was in chaos.
He was composed, fast on his feet, a master batsman displaying
his wares. There were no crude, innovative creations. Just
textbook perfection. Power came from sublime timing.
The effect on followers in New Zealand was that the grounds
were almost full before the toss was made. No spectator wanted
to run the risk of arriving at the ground late and missing
Tendulkar.
As he has done repeatedly since then Tendulkar has shown
that in both forms of the game he is an exceptional batsman.
One innings of such class is burned into the memory banks, to
be replayed at will for the rest of one's life.
In the batsman's own words in the Sportstar (23 December 1995), 'I
thought I could play a few lofted shots and scatter the field. Mentally,
I was prepared to go for the bowling. I waited for the first three or four
overs. I realized the onus was on me and Ajay Jadeja to give a good
start. I gauged the bowling, gained in confidence. I started striking the
ball very well. The rest happened automatically.'
What happened 'automatically' was the decimation of the Kiwi
attack consisting.ofDanny Morrison, Chris Pringle, Gavin Larsen,
Matthew Hart and Chris Harris. The most experienced of the lot,
The One-day Phenom

121

Morrison, was singled out for special treatment and smashed for five
imperious boundaries. At Napier, in the first om two days earlier, he
had taken New Zealand's first om hat-trick. Now he was carted for 46
runs from six overs. 'It was pleasing to get runs off Morrison. But
actually the Kiwis bowled the way I expected them to. I was picking
the line easily. It was sheer instinct.' In panic and not knowing where
to pitch the ball, Morrison bowled a bouncer so high that it went way
over Tendulkar's head.lt was done deliberately to deny him the chance
of making contact, such was the bowler's desperation.
Larsen was considered the tightest of the Kiwi bowlers. He was
taken off after two overs which cost him 24 runs, including two sixes.
The opening stand with Jadeja was worth 61 runs-Jadeja's
contribution was 18. The 100 came up in an amazing 12.5 overs. 'The
captain and the manager had said the score should be 100 by the 25th
over. I said, "Fair enough. We will try and do it." I still remember
when the score reached 100, it was 12.5 overs. It was quite satisfying.'
The target of 143 was now a mere formality. The only question
was whether Azharuddin's world record of the quickest om centuryoff 61 balls against New Zealand at Baroda in 1989-would be beaten.
Tendulkar raced to 82 from 49 balls (22 scoring shots) before being
caught by skipper Ken Rutherford off Pringle. Rutherford was the
first to applaud-perhaps as much in relief as in awe-as the crowd
rose in tribute to one of the great om innings. 'I was thinking about a
hundred, but it didn't matter. The team won, that's more important.
To me the team always comes first.' Once again, Vinod Kambli was
witness to the fireworks from the other end. The two had added 56 for
the second wicket. This was the sequence of scoring shots: 2, 4, 4, 4, 4,
3, 4, 4, 4, 4, 6, 4, 4, 6, 4, 4, 4, 4, 2, 4, 2, 1. Even umpires Brian Aldridge
and Chris Kingjoined in the applause from the crowd and the New
Zealand players.
Seven years later, in April2001, after becoming the first player to
cross 10,000 ODI runs, Sachin was asked by Vijay Lokapally of the
Sportstar about the thrust his career had got after opening the innings.
'It was a big change,' Tendulkar said. 'Batting at number six I thought
I wasn't getting enough opportunities. I was capable of delivering
122

Sachin

more than I was doing at that time, batting so low in the order.
Something inside me would always tell me that I was cut out to bat
higher in the order to be able to give more and more to the team.'
The series was drawn 2-2. In the next game at Wellington, India
won by 12 runs and once again, the openers did their job admirably.
Jadeja (56) and Tendulkar (63) put on 103. There was an opening
stand of61 in the final game at Christchurch, which the home side
won by six wickets. The series was levelled, but the gain for the Indian
team was immeasurable.
The hectic schedule of the team took them to Sharjah less than a
fortnight after the one-day series had ended in New Zealand. The sixnation Austral-Asia Cup was an opportunity for Tendulkar to test his
new found skills as opener against the formidable bowling attacks of
Pakistan and Australia. New Zealand, Sri Lanka and the UAE were the
other teams in the fray.
The opening match between India and the UAE was their maiden
One-day International. In the course of his 63, Tendulkar broke
another record: he became the youngest player to make 2000 om
runs.
India had stayed away from Sharjah for nearly three years for a
variety of reasons. The India-Pakistan match was, therefore, more
eagerly anticipated than ever.
Tendulkar gave India a blazing start. He raced to his 50 from just
42 deliveries, and after the match Pakistani captain Salim Malik
conceded that he had been worried India would reach 280-plus, the
way the top order went for the bowling. In the end, they could only get
to 219, which was hardly a challenge for the strong Pakistani batting
line-up. As he had done just a couple of weeks earlier, Jadeja was
content to watch from the other end as Tendulkar went at the bowlers
hammer and tongs. His contribution in a stand of 62 was just 19.
Even the pro-Pakistani sections of the crowd cheered Sachin's
audacious stroke play. He hit ten fours and three sixes, one of which,
offWasim Akram, was a real beauty. The ball was picked clean from
the middle stump and sent soaring over midwicket. Even Akram had
The One-day Phenom

123

to confess: 'It was stunning.' Rarely had an Indian batsman treated the
Pakistani bowling with such contemptuous ease. But just when he
was beginning to look unstoppable, a careless shot brought the
entertainment to an end. In off-spinner Akram Raza's first over, Sachin
tried to hoist him over midwicket only to present a catch to Basit Ali in
the deep. He was out for 73 from 64 deliveries. It was Raza's only
wicket in the match, but what a vital one!
With Sidhu and Azhar following Sachin's cue, India were well
placed at 164 for 3 when wickets began to fall in a heap. Pakistan
eventually cantered home by six wickets.
In the semi-final against Australia, Tendulkar was dismissed
cheaply by Glenn McGrath, though India won by seven wickets.
With Pakistan beating New Zealand by 62 runs in the other semifinal,
it was once again an India-Pakistan final, just what the organizers and
fans had hoped for. The Pakistanis took 250 in their innings, a total
which could have been overhauled easily if the Indians had received
another good start fromJadeja and Tendulkar. It was not to be. Akram
removedJadeja for a duck and then Ata-ur-Rehman struck the vital
blow when he had Tendulkar caught by Aamir So hail from a full toss
for 24. Kambli's 56 was the top score as ·Pakistan completed their
twelfth win over India in 15 matches in Sharjah, to win the title for
the third time running. Tendulkar's position at the top of the batting
order was, however, cemented by now.
But when would that elusive century finally arrive?
The answer came on 10 September 1994 at the R.Premadasa
Stadium at Khettarama in Colombo. The Singer Cup was the first
major one-day tournament to be staged in Sri Lanka, the hosts
competing with India, Australia and Pakistan for the top prize. The
tournament was badly hit by rain with a number of matches being
cancelled, postponed or curtailed. The players spent long periods
cooped up in their Colombo hotel. Perhaps this gave them ample
time to indulge in non-cricketing activity. For, as the murky matchfixing saga unfolded over the years, events off the field in the Singer
Cup would acquire notoriety.
Mter losing the opening match to Sri Lanka by seven wickets,
124

Sachin

India were desperately looking for a win to keep their hopes alive
when they met Australia. This was Tendulkar's seventy-eighth ODI.
His record before the match stood at 2053 runs from 74 innings (nine
not out) at 31.58--useful rather than world-class. The day-night game
at Colombo would change all that.
India's opening match had been reduced to 25 overs because of
rain. Wadekar was confident his boys would prove their worth if given
the full quota. He was proved right as India won against Australia by
31 runs. Tendulkar had a new opening partner in the tournament in
all-rounder Manoj Prabhakar. Their stand was worth 87 and India's
total of246 for 8 was built on Tendulkar's 110. Craig McDermott,
Glenn McGrath and Shane Warne were at their wits' end on where to
pitch the ball. Good deliveries as well as bad were treated with equal
contempt as Tendulkar launched an attack on Warne that saw him go
for 53 runs from his ten overs. Repeatedly, he hit over the top and
through the line and when he reached three figures, the Australians
joined in the applause. He raced to 50 from 43 balls, but slowed down
a little after that, once the century was in his sights.
The sight of non-striker Vinod Kambli (43 not out) embracing his
friend on reaching the long-awaited ton was a sight to warm every
Indian heart. 'It came a little late but I am glad to have got over that
mental pressure of not having achieved the distinction,' said the
relieved Man of the Match. India went on to win. the rain-reduced
final against Sri Lanka, though Tendulkar was out for a duck.
From October 1994 following the Singer Cup to December 1995,
Tendulkar played in all oflndia's 19 one-day games. Only in one of
these did he not open. The 19 innings brought him 931 runs at an
average of 49, with three more centuries and five 50s as well.
The one-day phenomenon had arrived.

The One-day Phenom

125

