
Confrontation

The Indian skipper is powerless.-Sachin Tendulkar

The most high-profile victim of the West Indies debacle was
Mohammad Azharuddin. It was not only his miserable form on the
tour, but the way he threw away his wicket on more than one occasion
that forced the selectors to take the decision prior to the Independence
Cup four-nation tournament staged in India in the summer of 1997.
'Let it be said that Sachin Tendulkar had it up to here,' wrote R. Mohan,
a staunch Azhar supporter, in the cover story of the Sponstar (3 May
1997), headlined: 'He Had It Coming.'
He could not wait anymore for results from Azhar's bat and
greater support to the younger men of the middle order. Any
residual sympathy may have been washed away in St. Vincent
where Azhar simply did not take charge of the business end of
the chase as he should have.
Here was a great opportunity for him to pay back his skipper
for all the support and the understanding on two tours that
have been the toughest in many years. One good knock from
him in the second and third Tests and one in St. Vincent would
have given India at least a half share of the one-day series. One
knock, just one knock from the country's most experienced
cricketer would have enabled the side to make history.
What did it get in return but careless strokes played as if
winning matches was not his concern? The flailing shot that

ballooned to cover in St. Vincent was the last straw.
The writer dismissed the talk of bookie influence behind that
'flailing shot' as 'so many straws in the wind'. Subsequent events may
have given some ertra credence to that theory, though. Mohan later
called for Azhar to be rehabilitated in the Indian team after the
Independence Cup.
Tendulkar appeared to put all these cares behind him in India's
opening match against New Zealand at Bangalore. The Kiwis had
stunned Pakistan in the tournament opener at Mohali. Now their
bowling was simply torn to pieces as India romped home by eight
wickets. New Zealand scored 220 for 9 and India made the target in
42.3 overs. The captain's 117 and his opening stand of 169 with
Ganguly destroyed the bowling, especially medium-pacer Heath Davis
who was belted for 4, 6, 4, 4 by Sachin in his third over.
But the wheels starting falling off the Indian campaign after that.
The next match in Mumbai was a replay of the previous year's World
Cup semi-final and once again, it was Sri Lanka who came out on top.
'Get Tendulkar early' had by now become the winning mantra
for all opposing teams, and it was no different this time. The Indians
never recovered from losing both openers with just four on the board.
Ganguly was bowled first ball by Vaas and then in the fourth over
came the breakthrough the Sri Lankans had sought so eagerly. The
captain was out for two in the fourth over, top edging a cut from
Sa~eeva de Silva straight into Kumara Dharmasena's hands at third
man. Mter that it was SanathJayasuriya all the way; his unbeaten 151
made it a one-sided contest.
The key game of the tournament was inevitably the India-Pakistan
clash at Chennai and it created a feast of runs and a world record. If
Pakistan came out on top by 35 runs, it was almost entirely thanks to
opener Saeed Anwar's 194, which remains the highest score in an 001.
Pakistan's huge 327 for 5 was always going to be a challenge, and once
Tendulkar went early, this time for four, it was left to Rahul Dravid to
keep the match alive with his maiden century. Vinod Kambli (65)
gave him good support. But Pakistan's record total was beyond the
Confrontation

169

Indians. Anwar was helped considerably by the generosity shown by
the Indian captain in allowing him to use the speedy Shahid Mridi as
a runner after he had reached 75. The heat and humidity in the
Chepauk Stadium made the game as much a test of stamina as of skill.
Anwar had a history of illness going into the match and was overcome
by heat exhaustion and fluid loss, as were many other players. Having
someone to do most ofhis running was no doubt a factor in his world
record, though it took nothing away from his dazzling strokes and
domination of the bowling.
In the finals a few days later, Sri Lanka confirmed their status as
world champions by beating Pakistan 2-0.
The simmering discontent between the Indian selectors and the
captain exploded into the open when the team was announced for the
Asia Cup to be held in Sri Lanka in July, the next stop in the crazy
schedule that the Indians were subjected to in 1997. It came down to
this-Tendulkar wanted Mongia and Kambli in the team, the selectors
did not. Back in were Azharuddin and Sidhu, with newcomer Syed
Saba Karim replacing the experienced Mongia. Tendulkar was on his
way to London to attend the international captains' annual meeting
when he heard the news. In an interview over the phone to Kolkata
daily Aqj Kat, he declared that it was time to 'speak the truth', and that
'lies do not serve any purpose'. But the statement that rocked Indian
cricket was this: 'I've been given a B grade team.lt's not the best. It was
imposed on me.'
The interview was, of course, splashed on the front page. Among
other statements much out of character for the usually laconic and
non-controversial captain: 'I will not be a scapegoat anymore. Why
shouldn't the captain get the team he wants when he receives the
flak?'; 'I won't be used any longer. I'm going to speak the truth'; 'I'm
not enamoured of the captaincy. They can take it away. The Indian
skipper is powerless'; It's my prerogative what I do on the field. I'm
not answerable (to the selectors).'
A fortnight before this interview an extraordinary column under
170

Sachin

Tendulkar's byline, syndicated by Sunil Gavaskar's Professional
Management Group, had appeared in the Times cflndia (28 June 1997).
It was largely a series ofjustifications for his captaincy record. And it
had appeared, surely not by coincidence, the day the selectors were
discussing the captaincy. The article is reproduced in its entirety below.
Mumbai: By the end of the Indian cricket team's England tour
of 1996, my name was being mentioned for captaincy for the
forthcoming season. Hence on the third day of the third Test
match against England when captain Azharuddin reported unfit
and I took charge of the team, my captaincy received special
attention.
Mter India had ~cored 500 runs in the first innings it was
expected of me to put pressure on England by placing an
attacking field and making proper bowling changes. Contrary
to this, it appeared I was adopting tactics which had slowed
down the pace of the game. Obviously, my moves were not
appreciated by cricket lovers.
The fact was that things were not so easy. Centuries scored by
Atherton and Hussain reduced chances of our possible lead in
the first innings considerably. At this stage I thought it would
be unwise if we got England out quickly.
This would have made India bat in their second innings rather
too early, which could have created problems for us. Rathore
was unfit to bat; Manjrekar and Mongia were to open the
innings and were not in good form; Ganguly and Dravid were
playing only their second Test; Azharuddin was injured and
was not in good form. He was to bat only if needed. I thought
one or two quick wickets could have changed the complexion
of the game and the situation could have been reversed.
These two days of experience made me realise the ordeal of
captaincy that I would have to face ifl was selected captain of
the team.
I entered the test arena in 1989 and today when I am at the
helm, I find most of the senior players Kapil Dev, Dilip
Confrontation

171

Vengsarkar, Krishnamachari Srikkanth, Ravi Shastri, Manoj
Prabhakar and Kiran More with whom I played at the start of
my career, have left the scene. Two experienced batsmen, Sidhu
and Manjrekar, have been in and out of the side for some reason
or the other.
During the last year, the Indian team, barring Mohd.
Azharuddin, Ani! Kumble, Nayan Mongia and Javagal Srinath
comprised of a large number of newcomers. Laxman, Abey
Kuruvilla, David Johnson, Dodda Ganesh and Noel David all
made their debut during the year. Rathore, Ganguly, Dravid,
Prasad and Joshi had played hardly two to three Test matches.
This scenario clearly indicates that the team has been passing
through a transitional period.
Further, Sidhu was not in the team until the tour of the West
Indies. In the circumstances, Raman who had not played Test
cricket for a long time, opened the innings in South Africa.
Srinath's injury and subsequent return to India at the start of
the West Indies tour was a big blow to India's bowling attack.
The Test season began with victory in the solitary Test match
against Australia; my first Test match as captain. Although I
was delighted we won, to be fair to Australia, they were playing
on a turning track which does not suit their style at all. But the
victory against South Mrica in the first Test at Ahmedabad
meant much more to me, from the viewpoint of captaincy.
At 65 runs for the loss offour wickets and 170 runs needed to
win, victory seemed within their reach. Their strategy, perhaps,
was to curb the spin ofKumblc and Joshi on the turning track.
Sensing this I decided to bring Srinath back into the attack,
and it did the trick. In their second innings South Africa were
all out for a meagre 1OS runs. In his interview after the match,
skipper Hansie Cronje was generous enough to compliment
me on my captaincy, and confessed that his team was not
prepared mentally for this move.
At the start of the tour of South Mrica, we played only one
practice match, a three-day match against a local team. The
172

Sachin

wicket happened to be the slowest of all the wickets that we
came across on that tour. Mter Test matches at home, where we
had got used to playing on the front foot because of the low
bounce on our wickets, we looked forward to getting some
practice on the bouncy wickets in South Mrica. But it didn't
happen. South Africa simply crushed us in the first two Test
matches. Incidentally the wicket at Durban for the first Test
was perhaps the fastest that I have ever played on.
Past records indicate that Indian teams have found it difficult
to adjust their game or. foreign wickets and perform to the best
of their ability at the beginning of the tour. At the same time
they have not only done better in the latter part of the tour but
have also won Test matches. It appears that we do take time to
adjust. As if to prove this we came close to winning the third
and final Test, but the rains came to South Mrica's rescue in
their second innings on the last day. Two crucial hours between
lunch and tea were washed out. At the end of the day South
Mrica had lost eight wickets, but had managed to save the game.
On that occasion weather had certainly deprived us of a win
in South Africa; but let us not deprive ourselves of better
performances abroad by preparing fast and bouncy wickets at
home along with traditional turning wickets. Also we must
play more practice matches at the start of a tour; this will give
the team time to adjust to the conditions and more importantly
to the pace bowlers abroad.
\Vhen we went to the West Indies, Srinath had to leave the
team because of a shoulder injury. For a five Test series we were
left with only two specialist bowlers in Prasad and Kumble.
Abey Kuruvilla was making his debut; the other two bowlers,
Sunil Joshi and Dodda Ganesh, hadn't been in the playing
eleven regularly. Obviously most of the cricket lovers in this
country ruled out our chances of even giving a good fight. But
except for the first Test match when the West Indies took the
lead and put us under pressure, in the remaining four matches
Confrontation

173

we had the upper hand. This seemed to be overlooked in the
light of our failure to reach the target of 121 runs in the third
Test at Barbados.
I get a feeling that the assessment of our performance on the
e~tire tour is being decided by the happenings on the fourth
day.
In this match too we had put West Indies under pressure on
the first three days. We had taken a lead of21 runs in the first
innings and then skittled them out for a mere 140 odd runs.
But at the end of the third day the wicket had deteriorated
considerably and the experts like Sunil Gavaskar, Geoff Boycott
and Michael Holding were unanimous in their opinion, even
before our innings started, that it was going to be very difficult
to score those runs. The beginning of our second innings was
going to be of the utmost importance. Sidhu got out first, to a
perfectly-pitched ball which rose suddenly giving him no
chance at all to defend. The ball hit him on the glove and went
straight into the hands of the gully fielder. The team's score
had not even reached double figures then.
Sidhu's wicket confirmed our doubts about the deteriorating
pitch. I will not blame the wicket entirely, but some accurate
bowling, excellent field placing, and to some extent bad batting
contributed to our loss. I remember a similar situation when in
1982 one of the strongest batting line-ups ofan Australian team
comprising Greg Chappell, Doug Walters, Allan Border, Kim
Hughes, Graeme Wood, John Dyson and Rodney Marsh, could
not achieve a target of only 129 runs against India on a bad
Melbourne wicket.
As I have mentioned earlier, our present team has many
newcomers who have played very few Test matches as yet. The
team needs time to improve and develop their skills.
Even the 1996 World Cup winning Sri Lankan team has
developed into a winning combination over a period of time
and has reached such heights in one-day cricket only recently
and in Test cricket too their present performances indicate that
174

Sachin

they are a side to reckon with.
The first six players, Sanath Jayasuriya, Aravinda de Silva,
Gurusinghe, Arjuna Ranatunga, Roshan Mahanama and
Tillekratne of the Sri Lankan team had played around 125
matches each before the World Cup. Jayasuriya himself took
almost 100 matches to prove his potential, which in my mind
was never in doubt. I happened to witness his batting during
Sri Lanka's tour of India in 1993-94. He was not known to
many as a batsman of the calibre as he is known today. Also he
used to bat lower down in the middle order. But even in those
days his ability of playing breath-taking strokes against the likes
of Kapil Dev was enough to give proof of his talent.
Mter so many years of struggle, patience, and organized efforts
the Sri Lankans have struck a good performing combination.
We too are at the beginning of our efforts to build a young team
of talented players. Let us continue.
By now the selectors were aware that they were not dealing with a
rubber stamp, as Tendulkar's predecessor was often considered to be.
He was younger, with a mind of his own and obviously not afraid to
speak it. This did not go down well with the selectors, or at least some
of them. Reportedly, the meeting took more than an hour to decide to
retain him as captain and the vote could not have been closer: 3-2.
What saved him evidently was that there was no viable alternative at
that stage.
The panel at the time consisted of Ramakant Desai (chairman)
Sambaran Banerjee, Shivlal Yadav, Kishen Rungta and M.P. Pandove.
They were joined on 7 July for the team selection meeting in Bangalore
by Tendulkar, Madan La! and BCC:l secretary J.Y. Lele. It was more
than two hours before the 14 were announced. When Desai was asked
if he was happy with the way the meeting went, he said: 'I think so.'
Three days later, Desai admitted in Mumbai that there had been a
major dispute. He said he too wanted Kambli and Mongia in the team
but that they (Desai and Tendulkar) were helpless in the face of stiff
opposition from the other selectors. (He would subsequently deny
Confrontation

175

these comments.) 'Everybody agrees that Mongia is the best wicketkeeper in the business. The fact that he was not selected will create a
lot of heartburn and soul searching,' Desai added.
However, he questioned the credibility of the interview inAaj Kal.
'Tendulkar has a wise head and knows the futility of crying over spilt
milk in public. If at all he had to speak, he would go guardedly about
it and not scream from the roof top.' Reportedly, Desai z.nd Tendulkar
on two occasions during the stormy meeting lost their cool with the
other selectors. Lele too was certain that Tendulkar would distance
himselffrom the interview and fall back on the 'I was misquoted' line
so beloved oflndian cricketers and officials.
In fact, on reaching London, Tendulkar gave an interview to Press
Trust ifIndia in which he virtually corroborated hisAaj Kal comments.
'The skipper should get the team of his choice as it's his head which is
on the chopping block each time there is a reverse. The selectors
dropped Kambli despite his innings of character during the
Independence Cup in Chennai.'
There were some half-hearted attempts to disassociate himself from
the stinging remarks by the time the Indians reached Colombo. But it
was a case of too little, too late. The general consensus was that
Tcndulkar was going public with his grievances over team selection
just when his captaincy was under threat. It was felt that now he had
made his feelings clear, the selectors could not take action against him
without it being perceived as an act of revenge. By this time, the meJia
was full of match-fixing, bookies and bribery revelations and by the
time the Indians landed in Colombo, former Pakistan captain Rashid
Latif had named names in an interview from London.
Latif claimed four Indians-Azharuddin, Sidhu, Venkatapathy
Raju and Mongia-were involved in betting on matches. Azhar
immediately issued a denial and Latif too denied his earlier statement
in a fax to the Indian team hotel, in which he claimed he had been
misquoted. But with the captain's remarks still ringing in their ears,
the team was not in the best of spirits and were routed by Sri Lanka in
the final of the Asia Cup. Madan Lal's public lashing of his team after
the defeat did not go down well either. While a gag order had been
176

Sachin

placed on the players speaking to the media, the coach gave an interview
in which he castigated virtually every member of the team. Things
went from bad to worse on the tour, with the two Tests being drawn
and Sri Lanka making it a clean sweep in the three-match 001 series.
The Indians returned empty-handed from a dismal tour.
Tendulkar was in form in the two Tests, scoring 143 in the first and
139 in the first innings of the second. But all other feats were
overshadowed by Sri Lanka's world record total of952 for 6 wickets in
the first Test at the R.Premadasa Stadium. Roshan Mahanama (225)
and Sanath Jayasuriya (340) broke all partnership records for Test
cricket with their second wicket stand of576 runs. The Indian bowling,
still without Srinath, had run out of answers. Indian cricket was at a
pretty low ebb. The year was turning out to be a disaster tor both the
team and the captain. The BCCI, under public pressure, constituted a
one-man enquiry commission to probe into the allegations of
corruption in Indiari cricket. But former Chief Justice Y.V.
Chandrachud came under a lot of fire for what turned out to be a farce
and a whitewash. All the findings of the commission and the pious
pronouncements of the Board officials would be thoroughly exposed
by the CBI report three years later.
Ironically, the first to be axed was not a cricketer, but a journalist.
R.Mohan, the experienced and high-profile cricket correspondent for
the Hindu and the Sportstar for more than 15 years, was summarily
sacked by his employees in the wake of rumours that he had links
with bookies.
The next stop on the Indians' whistle-stop calendar was Toronto, for
the second annual Sahara Cup 001 series against Pakistan. Considering
what had transpired in the previous ten months, there was little scope
for optimism.
But it turned out to be the one silver lining in the dark clouds that
had gathered over Indian cricket. And the hero oflndia's successful
campaign was none other than Sourav Ganguly, the man who had
been left fretting on the sidelines a year earlier, in Toronto. The Indian
attack was pretty raw, with Srinath and Prasad both unfit and Kumble
Confrontation

177

'rested' by the selectors. Pakistan too were without their two strike
bowlers, Wasim Akram and Waqar Younis. In the end, it was Ganguly's
innocuous medium-pacers that did the trick. They got him 15 wickets,
including two in the third match which was declared a 'no-result' due
to rain. No wonder the captain referred to him as the 'secret weapon'.
Added to these wickets was Ganguly's total of222 runs, more than
enough to make him the obvious choice for Man of the Series.
The wickets were seamer friendly, and the batsmen struggled in
the first four matches. Pakistan captain Rameez Raja condemned them
as unsuited to one-day cricket, and no wonder. His team was swept
aside in the first four matches, his own form plummeted, there were
non-cricketing problems for his team as well, and at the end of the
tournament he was promptly sacked as captain. For once, India came
out on top despite Tendulkar not being among the runs. It was not till
the last match that he managed to cross 50. 'As long as the team performs
well and wins matches, I don't worry about my batting. I would say
thatthese wins against Pakistan have been the most satisfYing to me
in my career,' said the winning captain.
Just a week later, though, Pakistan would exact revenge, that too at
home. The Wills Challenge Cup series of three matches was the first
time since his debut in 1989 that Tendulkar was playing in Pakistan.
His poor form continued with scores of2, 21 and 7 and this was a
factor in Pakistan winning 2-1. Beaten by five wickets in the first ODI
at Hyderabad (Sind), India came storming h::tck to win the second at
Karachi in the last over. Once again, Karachi lived up to its poor
crowd reputation and Tendulkar was forced to take his team off the
field after the third incident of stone throwing. Pakistan had reached
265 for 4 in 47.2 overs at that stage. Ganguly once again did the star
turn with 89 before Rajesh Chauhan hit Saqlain Mushtaq for a six in
the last over to make it safe for India. The decider at Lahore saw Ijaz
Ahmed blast the Indians out of the game and make it 2-1 for the home
side.
Sri Lanka had been whitewashed 3-0 when they toured India in 1994.
Now,just three years later, they were a changed side after their epochal
178

Sachin

triumph in the World Cup the year before. This time, all the three
Tests they played in India were drawn. So was the ODI series, played on
India's return from Sharjah. India won the first at Guwahati by se~·en
wickets and lost the third at Margao by five. In between, the second at
Indore had to be abandoned after just three overs because ofa dangerous
pitch. This meant that India had played 12 Tests Uust three at home)
in 1997 without a single victory, though at Mumbai in the third Test
against Sri Lanka they were thwarted by rain when well on top, as had
happened earlier in the year in South Mrica.
Tendulkar was feeling the heat as pressure on his captaincy
mounted. There was a campaign in certain sections of the media to
bring back Azhar and by now the selectors, backed by some Board
officials, were gunning for him too. But all the talk of the captaincy.
affecting his batting was nonsense, at least in Test matches. He had
exactly 1000 Test runs in the year at an average of 62.50, with four
100s and three 50s. The ODI figures for the year, though, did show a
decline-1011 runs in 39 matches at 30.66, with two 100s and five
50s. And of those 39 matches, India had managed only ten wins. There
were 23 defeats as well as one tic and five 'no-results'. India's win
percentage of30.88 per cent fo; the year was below that of Kenya and
above only Bangladesh. It did not make for pretty reading.
At the end of the year, England sprang a surprise by winning the
Akai Singer Champions Trophy four-nation tournament on only
their third visit to Sharjah. This turned out to be the final nail in
Tendulkar's captaincy coffin. How it came about set new low standards
for intrigue even in the history oflndian cricket, which is replete with
such sordid tales. India hit the depths, beaten by England (seven runs),
Pakistan (four wickets) and West Indies (41 runs). To add to his
humiliation by the selectors, Tendulkar had also now been ordered to
bat lower down the order. It did not do much good. He had scores of
91, 3 and 1. The nadir was reached in the third and final match against
the West Indies. Chasing229 for 6, India crumbled to 188. Azharuddin,
for one, appeared in a tearing hurry. His running between the wickets
shocked everybody and it was no surprise when he was run out for
four, going for a non-existent second run. Sunil Gavaskar, commenting
Confrontation

179

on TV, summed up the feelings of every Indian cricket fan when he
said: 'Azhar has just run hirr.self out of the Indian team.'
Three weeks later, Azhar was to be appointed captain again.

180

Sachin