On Top of the World

It zvas as though he zvas having a net.-Allan Donald
The Mccv Rest of the World match at Lord's on 18July 1998was held
to commemorate Dr W.G.Grace's hundred and fiftieth birth
anniversary. Officialiy, however, it was known as the Diana, Princess
ofWales Memorial Match, as all proceeds (£750,000) were contributed
to the Memorial Fund. Although it was an exhibition match, 22,861
people turned up to see a glittering array of 22 of the world's best
cricketers.
Tendulkar found himself leading the Rest of the World XI. The
MCC XI were led by Mike Atherton and had in their ranks the current
Indian captain, Mohammad Azharuddin, as well as Ani! Kumble,
Javagal Srinath and Sourav Ganguly. Though the usual tension
associated with an official international match was obviously missing,
the cricket was played seriously.
MCC XI scored 261 for 4 in the allotted 50 overs, with West Indian
left-hander Shivnarine Chanderpaul top-scoring with 127 not out.
Azhar contributed a delightful 61. The MCC attack was formidable,
with Allan Donald, Srinath, Glenn McGrath and Kumble. Sanath
Jayasuriya opened with Tendulkar, but was soon lbw to Srinath and
Donald picked up Saeed Anwar cheaply to leave the Rest of the World
at 54 for 2. Aravinda De Silva then joined his captain of the day for the
most entertaining part of a delightful game. The two added 177 and
ensured their team won the match by six wicket~ with plenty to spare.
Tendulkar was initially scratchy and was troubled by Srinath. But he
was soon into his stride and was particularly severe on the part-time

left-arm spin of Aamir So hail, whose two overs were smashed for 37
runs. By the time he was bowled by Kumble fat 125, he had batted for
114 balls, with 15 fours and four sixes. Even the bowlers were impressed.
At one point, Allan Donald actually said, 'Good shot!', something he
had never said to a batsman at any time in his career. He thought
Sachin the best looking batsman he had ever seen; everything was
right in his technique and judgement, entirely without a fault.
'I do not think even WG. would have played like Sachin,' exclaimed
the normally taciturn Atherton. 'Perhaps a hundred years from now
MCC will stage a Tendulkar Memorial match.'
For an Indian cricketer to play for his country for nearly a decade and
not be involved in a major controversy, is one more 'record' Tendulkar
could have claimed. Except for a publicity-hungry politician-cumcareer-sports-oflicial who attempted to tarnish his reputation and
implied motives to him that had the cricketing fraternity up in arms.
It was a clash of egos and dates that set the Indian Olympic
Association (loA) and the HC:CI on a collision course. For the first time,
cricket was to be played at the Commonwealth Games (it would also
be the last time) at Kuala Lumpur. Unfortunately, the dates for the
Games clashed with those for the India v Pakistan annual Sahara
'Friendship Series' in Toronto, which had been launched with much
fanfare in 1996.
The success of cricket and the amount of coverage it gets in the
media has always been a sore point with those representing other
sports, who react with a mixture of envy, awe and resentment. At the
same time, the officials of the IOA have always resented the fact that the
nee! is the only autonomous sporting federation in the land. And all
thanks to the huge amount of money that flows into its coffers while
other sports associations have to go with begging bowl in hand to get
meagre funds from a hard-up government.
The Commonwealth Games was not recognized by the
International Cricket Council as an official event, while the Toronto
event was. The IOA, backed by the government, insisted on a fullstrength team being sent to Kuala Lumpur; the Sahara Cup was to be
214

Sachin

either postponed or fobbed off with a second-string team. Suddenly,
the lOA converted the issue into one of patriotism v commercialism.
There were no such qualms on the part of the Pakistanis who sent a Bgrade team to Kuala Lumpur while their top players went to Toronto,
awaiting India's challenge.
In fact, England, as the founders of the Commonwealth, did not
even bother sending a team to Kuala Lumpur. Yet, once the lOA and
BCCI locked horns, charges and counter charges began flying back
and forth. The BCCI resented being dictated to by the lOA and was
loathe to shed its autonomy, which it had zealously guarded for so
many decades. Truth to tell, there was just one player the lOA would
have been happy with-the rest could have been a bunch ofjuniors as
far as they were concerned. That one player, naturally, was Sachin
Tendulkar. Sadly, he was made a pawn in the BCCI-IOA power struggle.
Ultimately, the BCCI caved in and Tendulkar was packed off to
Kuala Lumpur. Ajay Jadeja (the captain), Robin Singh and Ani)
Kumble were the other star players in the squad. It was agreed that if
the Indian team made an early exit, the players would rush to Toronto
in a bid to play in at least a couple of games in the five-match series. It
was a compromise that was doomed to failure. India were knocked out
in the preliminary stage at Kuala Lumpur and lost 4-1 to Pakistan at
Toronto.
The conditions for cricket at Kuala Lumpur were sub-standard,
especially the pitches. The weather was appalling too. It was a novel
experience for the cricketers, having to stay in the Games Village
rather than in the luxury of five-star hotels. But they didn't complain.
In fact, Tendulkar and the others quite enjoyed the atmosphere.
India were struggling at 30 for 2 in 9.4 overs when rain washed out
their opening match against Antigua and Barbuda, spearheaded by
Curtly Ambrose, with Sir Viv Richards as their coach. The West Indies
were competing as separate nations as they do at the Olympics. The
Antigua pace attack was augmented by Eldine Baptiste and Kenneth
Benjamin and it was Baptiste who got rid ofTendulkar for 15. There
was an even bigger shock in the next game against Canada, with the
best batsman in the world out for two, the victim of an unknown 35On Top of the World

215

year-old from Granada by the name ofDavisJoseph. The team's final
total of157 for 9 owed much to young Amay Khurasia's 83. Fortunately
for the Indians, the Canadian batsmen then proceeded to fold up for
45 against Kumble, who finished with 4 for 11.
The last league match against Australia was a do-or-die game for
India. Australia were struggling at 84 for 5 before skipper Steve Waugh
scored a century, an innings which he said was his 'most satisfYing' in
one-day cricket-though it will not be in the record books. This time
Tendulkar scored 45 before he fell to Damien Fleming. But India
could only muster 109 in reply to 255 for 5, and their campaign fizzled
out. There is little doubt that the minds of many of the players were in
Toronto. The rumour was then floated that the Indians had, in fact,
booked their tickets even before their last league match.
Whatever be the truth, it was obvious that the whole thing had
been botched up from the start, thanks to the egos ofofficials on both
sides of the fence. And as has always been the case, it was the sportsmen
whose reputations suffered the most. Indian cricket had striven in
1998 to overcome the traumas of the year before. Now much of that
good work had been undone by this farce. The Pakistani team
management had initially objected to India flying in replacements
from Kuala Lumpur. But the sponsor's desperation for more star faces,
and Tendulkar in particular, saw the protests subsequently shelved.
Sachin landed in Toronto after 20 overs of the fourth game had
been bowled. In effect, he had flown across the world for just one
match. Still jet-lagged from his marathon flight, he managed to crack
77 in India's total of 256 for 9 in the fifth and final match; skipper
Azhar top-scored with 101. But it wasn't enough and Pakistan romped
home by five wickets to take the series 4-1.
Subsequently, World Tel felt constrained to issue a press statement
rebutting the harsh comments made by some of the Indian officials
against the cricket team, and specifically Tendulkar, for the poor show
at Kuala Lumpur. Tendulkar expressed his sentiments in an interview
to Vijay Lokapally in the Sp01tstar (10 October 1998): 'I have always
taken great pride in representing the country and nothing gives me
greater joy than seeing the tri-colour flutter high in the stands.'
216

Sachin

Straight from Toronto, it was off to Zimbabwe for the weary Indians.
The one-offTest at Harare was a disaster. It ended in four days;
Zimbabwe were winners by 61 runs. Medium-pacer Neil Johnson
on his debut got Tendulkar in both innings, for 34 and 7. There was
some consolation, though, in the one-day series which India claimed
2-1 at the start of the short tour. And at Bulawayo in the opening
game, Tendulkar scored his eighteenth ODI century to overtake West
Indian opener Desmond Haynes' world record. It had taken Haynes
16 years to score his 17 tons. Tendulkar's eighteenth came four years
after his first in Colombo in 1994. Of course, the number of games
played by the Indians in the late 1990s was also a factor. But it took
Sachin 46 innings (in his hundred and ninety-eighth om) fewer than
the West Indian and that is the true barometer. Ten of Tendulkar's
tons had come abroad and the rest at home. It meant that Indian
batsmen now held the record for most centuries in Tests (34 by Sunil
Gavaskar) and oms. Sachin's 127 not out in India's eight-wicket win
was his sixth of the year, and there would be more to follow.
The golden run of the Indian team had begun in Dhaka. Now it
was back to the Bangladeshi capital for the inaugural ICC mini-World
Cup knockout tournament. The tournament was a success, with huge
crowds at the Bangabandhu Stadium for every match. South Mrica
lifted the Wills Trophy, beating the West Indies by four wickets in the
final. Tendulkar left his mark on the tournament in the third quarterfinal where India faced Australia, this time minus Warne and McGrath.
Ganguly and Azhar went early to make it 8 for 2. Then Tendulkar
and Dravid began the rebuilding and Jadeja weighed in with 71 to
take India past the 300-run mark. Tendulkar was awesome. Some of
the shots he pulled off were extraordinary. He hit five cracking fours
offKasprowicz, but early on decided not to take the aerial route. By the
time he was smartly run out for 141 from 127 balls, he had smashed
13 fours and three sixes and the Indian total of307 for 8 was a formidable
one.
Australia too began well. They were 145 for 2 when Tendulkar
was tossed the ball and started conjuring up wickets with his assortment
of 'offies' and 'leggies'. He accounted for Steve Waugh, caught ancl
On Top of the World

217

bowled, and then added Michael I3evan, Damien Martyn and Brad
Young to his bag. The final figures: 9.1-0-38-4. Only Viv Richards
has scored a century and taken five wickets in an ODI. Tendulkar came
pretty close, and the Australians were all out for 263. He listed the 141
as his greatest innings in an interview with Sebastian Coe (Daily
Telegraph, 6 May 2001): 'Nobody expected us to win. It was the day
that everything came together. I can still remember almost every stroke
I played that day.'
The innings also took Sachin past his own record for most ODI
runs in a year. In 1996 he had 1611 in 32 matches. Now in 1998, in 34
matches (33 innings, four not out) he would compile 1894 runs at
65.31, with nine 1OOs and seven 50s, at a strike rate of 102.1 0! But
India's run in the tournament came to an end in the ne;..."t match, the
semi-final against the West Indies, in which they were beaten by six
wickets with Tendulkar out at eight.
It was back to Sharjah then, for the Coca-Cola Champions Trophy,
with Zimbabwe and Sri Lanka as the competition. And it would be
another trophy in the bag for the Indians. Despite both their prolific
openers falling cheaply, India won their opening match against the
Sri Lankans by three wickets. It was an unhappy week for the world
champions as they lost all four of their matches to make it a rare
Zimbabwe v India final. Tendulkar notched up his twentieth century
against Zimbabwe for a grand total of 36 centuries in international
cricket, taking him past Sunil Gavaskar, Viv Richards and Desmond
Haynes, all of whom had a combined Test and ODI total of35 centuries.
There was a surprise in the return encounter. By this time, the Sri
Lankans were eliminated and the Indians were not at either full
strength or full pace. It was the ideal opportunity for Henry Olonga to
prove a point and he did so forcefully and dramatically. Chasing a
meagre total of205 for 7, the Indian batsmen were rocked by a searing
spell from the dreadlocked fast bowler, in which he had the prize
scalps of Ganguly, Tend ulkar, Dravid and Jadeja-the cream of the
crop. Tendulkar was surprised by one that took off nastily and had
him groping with his bat held high, to be caught by Grant Flower for
11. It was Olonga's first match of the tournament and the fact that he
218

Sachin

made a master like Tendulkar look uncomfortable at the crease was
the talking point when the two teams met in the final 48 hours later.
There was no doubt that Tendulkar's ego had been dented. He has
always taken it as a personal challenge to go after the best bowler in the
opposition, as in the case of McGrath and Warne. This time it was
Olonga. Zimbabwe's total of 196 for 9 was never going to be enough.
But their bowlers could scarcely have foreseen the hammering ahead
of them. The total was passed with contemptuous ease in just 30 overs.
And perhaps for the first time in a tournament, without the loss of a
single wicket. It was India's fifth tournament title of the year in their
record-breaking fortieth ODI in 1998. They also won the ODI series in
Zimbabwe.
Tendulkar's 124 not out was virtually double that of his partner
Ganguly's contribution (63), a measure ofhis total domination at the
crease. Olonga came in for special treatment. His figures: 6-0-50-0. A
f.1r cry from his performance just two days earlier. Tendulkar's century
was his fastest (and the fourth fastest of all), from 71 balls, and had a
fi.nal boundary tally of six sixes and 12 fours. It was close to the Indian
record held by Azhar (62 balls). The first 50 took only 28 balls, inclusive
offour sixes and five fours. The stand with Ganguly fetched 112 in the
first 15 overs as Tendulkar went hell for leather after a dropped catch
when he was on 53, offleg-spinner Paul Strang who was carted for 45
runs from his five overs. Forty-one were smashed from Olonga's first
four overs, 28 of which came from Tendulkar's bat. One six was slashed
over backward point, the ball picked from well outside off stump.
Before that came an extra cover drive. Then he pulled the hapless
bowler from outside off stump. In desperation, Olonga tried a slower
ball, to no avail. The ball landed in the stands, above wid ish long off
A chastened 0 longa was taken off and forced to lick his wounds.
Tendulkar had another world record to his credit-32 Man of the
Match awards in 207 matches, against 31 in 187 by Viv Richards. 'I
decided to enjoy my batting. I thought that the final was the right time
to play some shots. The pitch was really good today and the ball came
on nicely,' he said after the magnificent innings. 'Olonga is an
international bowler. He can bowl some good deliveries and he got
On Top of the World

219

my wicket. I accept that. But I went to the nets and worked on my
batting.' As he said later in the year, he had a point to prove: that he
could be taken by suprise once, but it wasn't going to happen everyday.
Looking back on that triumphant year, Azhar described Tendulkar
as the team's 'pillar of strength'.
There was just enough time in the calendar to squeeze in one final
tour, this one to New Zealand for three Tests and five oms, which
spilled over into January 1999. India had not won a series in New
Zealand since the first in 1967-68 and the trend continued as they
were beaten 1-0 while the 001 series was locked at 2-2. Mter the first
Test had been completely washed out, New Zealand won the second
at Wellington by four wickets, despite centuries by Azhar and
Tendulkar. The third ended in a draw.
Following his golden year, Tendulkar made an inauspicious start
to 1999, out for a duck in the first 001 at Taupo. He followed with
scores of 23, 45 and 5, but had to miss the fifth and final match at
Christchurch (the third was a 'no-result') after suffering a wrist injury
in the fourth game at Auckland.
It was an ominous beginning to a year that would be marked by
tragedy.

220

Sachin
