Year of Controversies

Lift without cricket is unthinkable for me.-Sachin Tendulkar
The latter half of2001 was to see one controversy after another-not
all of his own making--dogging Sachin Tendulkar's footsteps. First
in Zimbabwe had come the interview where he claimed he had been
misquoted on the captaincy issue. There was even some
unpleasantness over his fractured toe, with a section of the media
claiming the injury was not as serious as it was made out to be; and
was merely an excuse to not tour Sri Lanka. This angered both
Tendulkar and Dr Joshi, the BCCI doctor who he had been consulting
after his return from Zimbabwe. It was all quite unnecessary and
mean-minded, really.
Another stortn blew in over which he had little control. Wisden
Cricket Monthly, which had been founded in 1978 by David Frith, was
getting set to launch its Indian edition and also Wisden's Internet site,
Wisden.com. As part of the pre-launch hype, the publishers released at
a press conference in Mumbai on 26 July 2001, their own version of
the top 100 Test batting and bowling performances of all time. This
was presented as the Wisden Online 100. Shockingly, none of
Tendulkar's 25 Test tons (until then) got into the list. The reaction in
India was swift and sharp. 'OhJesus! The Cricketing Bible Excludes
the Great Indian God' screamed the banner headline in the New
Delhi edition of the Indian Express (27 July). The controversial aspect
of the list got it tremendous space in the media, both in India and
abroad.
The formula for deciding the rankings was explained by the man

who had invented the system, YAnanth Narayan, a virtual unknown
in cricket circles.
One Wisden official airily dismissed the outraged response from
the journalists gathered at the function. 'Tendulkar needs to play more
great innings in future to make the list,' he said. Not many in India or
abroad were willing to buy that line. VVS. Laxman was the highest
ranked Indian on the list, at number six, for his stupendous 281 against
Australia at Kolkata earlier that year.
It emerged that the people behind the Wisden rankings had laid
great store by whether the batsman's contribution had been a matchwinning one or not. This automatically shut out some of the great
match-saving batting performances. Nirmal Shekhar in the Sportstar
(11 August 2001) raised the pertinent point: 'Surely, you cannot
penalize a genius [Tendulkar] for the mediocrity around him!'
In fact, two ofTendulkar's 1OOs against Australia, both at Chennai,
had been instrumental in earning India a victory. So also his century
at Colombo in 1993. His 155 not out in 1998 had been ruled out by
Wisdm as the bowling was not considered to be of top quality-Shane
Warne, Gavin Robertson and Paul Reiffel being the front line bowlers!
Even more baffling was the exclusion ofhis 126 at Chennai in March
2001 that had helped India clinch the epic series 2-1. The front line
bowlers this time were Glenn McGrath, Jason Gillespie, Colin Miller
and Warne. Any attack with McGrath and Warne can safely be
considered world-class. But the number-crunchers at Wisden were
unmoved.
In all the heat and dust raised by the rankings, there was one
important factor that was obscured. Wisden Online was not 'the Bible of
cricket'. That tag belongs to Wisden Cricketers' Almanack, which is the
longest running sports yearbook, having appeared continuously since
1864. The launch ofWisden Cricket Asia magazine in December 2001
and the Wisden.com web site earlier the same year had sought to cash in
on the aura surrounding one of the most revered names in sport. But
apart from being part of the same publishing house, they bear little
resemblance to theAlmanack as far as reliability, tradition and longevity
are concerned.

Not only did Tendulkar not find a place in the top 100 of all time,
but he also did not make it to the Indian Top Ten. This is where the
matter took on farcical overtones. For, coming in at number ten was
Ajit Wadekar's 143 in the third Test against New Zealand at Wellington
in 1968.
Raju Bharatan, who attacked the logic (or the lack of it) behind the
rankings both in the Hindu and its sister publication, the Spottstar, had
this to say in the daily (4 August 2001 ):
Commendable as was that 143 knock by way of being Ajit
Wadekar's only Test hundred, pray how did it 'set up India's
first overseas series win'? For Wadekar's 143, being in the third
Test v New Zealand at Basin Reserve (Wellington) during
March 1968, only saw the Junior Nawab ofPataudi's India go
up 2-1 in that four-match series. Short point: 'India's first
overseas series win' was thus yet to happen after that third Test
in which Wadekar hit 143. Actually, only as a result of our 272run victory in the fourth and final Test at Eden Park (Auckland)
did India register its 'first overseas series win'. And, in that
deciding fourth Test, Ajit scored just 5 and 1 (as we clinched
the rubber 3-1), so the renewed query-how did Wadekar's
'excellent innings set up India's first overseas series win'? It was
mainly thanks to Erapalli Prasanna's match analysis of 55.126-84-8 and Bishan Singh Bedi's match figures of34.4-1 9-355 (on top ofFarokh Engineer's 48, Rusi Surti's 99 and Chandu
Borde's 65 not out) that we won that fourth determinant Test
with Ajit Wadekar nowhere in the picture.
In February 2002, the list of top 100 One-day International batting
and bowling performances was announced. This time the media paid
less attention than the year before. There were only fom centuries out
ofSachin's career 31 (at that stage) in the list, with the highest coming
in at number 23. (His bowling figures of5 for 35 against Australia at
Kochi in 1998 came in at number 35).
This time the match-winning argument was invalid-a
294

Sachin

phenomenal 24 of those centuries had helped India win. Missing
from the list was his 143 against Australia at Sharjah in 1998 (the socalled 'sandstorm innings') which got India into the final despite losing
the game. The reasons trotted out by Ananth Narayan for its exclusion
only exposed the hollowness of the system.
We were told the match did not result in a win for India, thus
ignoring the fact that the first target had been to get past New Zealand's
net run rate and into the final. And that the sandstorm which
interrupted Sachin's innings and altered the target, was of no
consideration as factors beyond the scorecard itself were not taken
note of. In other words, any schoolboy could have come up with his
own ranking. Merely attaching the Wisden tag gave it no special
sanctity.
Interestingly, one of Wrsden's own columnists, Kamran Abbasi,
now came out with criticism of the Test listing, saying the absence of
any innings from Tendulkar and Javed Miandad had not been
adequately explained.
Barely a month after the Wrsden Online Test 100, came the revelation
ofSir Don Bradman's 'Dream Team'. Of course, like any 'World XI'
selection, this one too evoked controversy. That it had been chosen by
cricket's greatest legend only added to the debate. It was to avoid all
this that Bradman had stipulated that author Roland Perry release the
twelve names only after his death. There were certainly some
surprising names on the list. It was heavily biased towards Australians
(seven out of 12, including Bradman) and the structure of the team
looked unbalanced. While the team was heavily criticized (Sunil
Gavaskar expressed his doubts as to whether Bradman himself had
made the selection), there was little dispute over Tendulkar's inclusion
in the side.
In the chapter on Tendulkar in Perry's bookBradman's Best, Perry
emphasized Sir Don's fascination with Tendulkar's batting. 'Rradman
never missed a chance to see Tendulkar from then [when he first saw
and commented on his batting] until the end of the 1999 three-match
Test series in Australia,' wrote Perry. Perry adds that by mid-1998, after
watching Tendulkar destroy Australia in Tests and one-day games in
Year of Controversies

295

India, Bradman ranked him with Barry Richards, Arthur Morris and
Garry Sobers. 'Not long after that series against Australia, Tendulkar
received the invitation of a lifetime to join Shane Warne in meeting
Bradman at his Kensington Park home in Adelaide on his 90th birthday.
Tendulkar was honoured to be told by Bradman that he was today's
best batsman.'
Mter the meeting Brad man told Perry how impressed he was with
Tendulkar and how he expected him to go on to even greater
achievements. 'Both players had mutual friendship and respect for
each other. Bradman had great respect for the character ofTendulkar.'
Much to everyone's relief, Tendulkar was fit for the tour to South
Mrica where India were to play three Tests and a one-day tri-series
with Kenya. The short break from cricket had obviously weighed on
Sachin's mind. He watched all the matches on TV and was clearly
frustrated at not being an active part of it all. But the break did give
him precious time with his family.
'How was life without cricket for two months?' he was asked by
Vijay Lokapally (Sportstar, 29 September 2001).
A: It's been tough. Life without cricket is unthinkable for me,
but then the injury left me with no option. I was forced to stay
away from cricket and thankfully the return has been as early
as possible.
Q: Wasn't it a frustrating period?
A: No doubt. It was very, very tough and very frustrating too.
But then it was not that I wasn't in touch with cricket. I watched
the team play and I shared their joy and disappointments in
victories and defeats.
Q: How would you describe the feeling on missing your first
Test series since your debut in 1989?
A: It was a very unusual situation for me. I am not at all used to
sitting at home when cricket is on.
Q: Your reflections after the return from Zimbabwe?
A: I was able to focus on a few things away from cricket even
296

Sachin

though it was a painful experience, but the greatest joy came
out of the period as I could spend a lot of time with my family.
It was a bonus actually for me and my family. I may have missed
cricket but the gain on the home front was priceless. Looking
after my wife and kids and their company made my recovery
every bit easy. Honestly it was great to be in the company of
Anjali, Sara and Arjun.
The rest certainly recharged his batteries. He was in peak form in
the tri-series where he notched up his thirtieth and thirty-first ODI
centuries. Tendulkar and Ganguly had two century opening stands
and in the process rewrote two records set by the great West Indian
opening pair of Gordon Greenidge and Desmond Haynes. Their stand
of25H in the last league match against Kenya at Paarl rewrote their
own previous world record of252 against Sri Lanka in 1997. The 258run stand was their sixteenth partnership of over 100, surpassing the
mark of 15 held by the West Indians. In the same tournament,
Greenidge and Haynes' total of 5150 runs in partnership was also
eclipsed.
The opening match against South Africa at Johannesburg on 5
October saw both the Indian openers record centuries in a stand worth
193. It was Tendulkar's first international match in three months and
he celebrated his return with 101. Yet, India were beaten by six wickets.
There was another century stand against South Africa at East London,
though once again it was in a losing effort. Kenya shocked the Indians
by 70 runs in Port Elizabeth and so, not for the first time in a
tournament, it became a must-win situation for them in their final
league match. This time, Ganguly and Tendulkar ensureJ there would
be no escape route for Kenya, with their world-record partnership.
The Indians were looking to their openers for another good start
in the final against South Africa at Durban. But their twin failures
spelt doom for the side. They were beaten by six wickets. It was the
ninth final in a row that the Indians had lost and questions were now
being asked about Tendulkar's form in crunch games. These were his
scores in the finals (he missed four games between 1999 and 2001 due
Year of Controversies

297

to injuries): Tri-series v South Mrica at Durban: 17; Coca-Cola Cup
v West Indies at Harare: 0; Coca-Cola Cup v Sri Lanka at Sharjah: 5;
rcc Knock-out v New Zealand at Nairobi: 69; Singapore Challenge
v West Indies at Singapore: 0. Ninety-one runs in five innings were
rather poor returns. There were other centuries, though, under adverse
circumstances, such as the two in the 1996 World Cup; the one in
1999 against Kenya, days after his father's death; and two against
Australia at Sharjah in 1998. In addition, he had been there with runs
in crunch situations, when India desperately needed to win their final
league matches or increase their net run rate in order to reach the
finals.
India had not won a Test match on two previous tours to South
Mrica, in 1992 and 1996-97 and they did not look like they were about
to change that scenario in 2001 either. The old weaknesses on pitches
outside the Asian subcontinent would once again be cruelly exposed
on the very first day of the series at Bloemfontein. 4 Indian wickets
were down for 68, with the South Mrican pace attack on the rampage.
Sachin 'lendulkar was now joined by Virender Sehwag who was
playing his first Test; they were the last recognized batting pair at the
crease. One more wicket down and the tail would be exposed. There
followed a savage counter-attack from Tendulkar and the 'new
Tendulkar'. Sehwag, from the small town ofNajafgarh outside Delhi,
had made a huge impact in the one-day series in Sri Lanka. But dubbed
a one-day specialist, he had not been retained for the Test series that
followed. For this Test too, he had been a marginal selection.
Now, in the presence of his batting idol, he took the South Mrican
bowling attack apart in a stand worth 220 glorious runs. Tendulkar
took 17 balls to score his first run; the next 101 came from 97 as he
unleashed a range of savage shots, including one he had rarely used,
the slash over the slips. India finished the opening day at 372 for 7,
Tendulkar out for 155 and Sehwag (1 05)-now dubbed the 'NaJafgarh
Sachin' -becoming the eleventh Indian to score a century on Test
debut. At the end of the day's play, Tendulkar refused to rate his twentysixth Test century, saying 'a hundred is a hundred and each has his
own place.' He was determined not to allow his own ton to obscure
298

Sachin

Sehwag's feat. 'He has shown everything which a batsman should
have-patience, technique and strokes,' he said, hastening to add, 'but
I don't want to comment too much about him as there's a lot more to
come in the future. We can't judge him on just one innings.' That was
seen as Tendulkar's way oflessening the pressure on his 23-year-old
teammate.
When Sehwagjoined him at the crease, Tendukar's words to the
debutant had put him at ease. 'I know you must be tense. Even I was
when I made my debut. But don'tworry too much, just enjoy yourself'
'I didn't copy Sachin, I learnt from him when I was young,' said
Sehwag on television.
Indian coach John Wright was clear in his assessment ofTendulkar' s
ton. With his cricketing experience stretching over 25 years, he said it
was the best Test innings he had ever seen. Tendulkar and Sehwag in
their first big stand together made onlookers rub their eyes in
bewilderment. Who was who? Pradeep Magazine was quick to point
this out in the Hindustan Times (5 November 2001): 'He [Sehwag]
has something more as well: strokes which remind everyone of
Tendulkar. There were moments yesterday when it became difficult
to differentiate between the two. Some of the shots he played bore the
maestro's stamp.'
The impressive innings of155led Wisden.com India editor Sambit
Bal to rank it third after Sachin's 1992 century at Perth and the 1999
Chennai tun against Pakistan. Ironically, all three failed to prevent
defeat for India. Bal was writing on the third day of the Test, by which
time the writing was already on the wall for the Indians despite the
heroic effort of the first day. It led him to lament in Wtsden Online (5
November 2001): 'No prizes for guessing that it won't come within
sniffing distance of the Wisden 100 iflndia lose. Pity.' Sure enough,
despite scoring a healthy 379 in the first innings, India capitulated by
nine wickets in four days.
'Tendulkar has to perform more consistently on bouncy wickets
in South Mrica and Australia to lay claim to be the best batsrran in the
world along with Brian Lara,' South Mrican legend Barry Richards
had said a couple of months earlier, labelling him 'a good batsman
Year of Controversies

299

only at home'. This was Tendulkar's answer to Richards, if one was
needed. It was his third century on South Mrican soil (in his eighth
Test there) to go along with his three in Australia, also in eight Tests.
Defeat in four days was bad enough. But even worse was lurking
round the corner for the tourists. Their bogeyman this time wasn't a
South Mrican cricketer, it was match referee Mike Denness, the former
England captain. India were battling to save the second Test at Port
Elizabeth after conceding a first-innings lead of 161 runs when the
world of cricket was hit by a bombshell delivered by Denness on the
fourth evening of the match.
Six players-captain Sourav Ganguly, Deep Dasgnpta, Shiv
Sundar Das, Harbhajan Singh, Virender Sehwag and Sachin
Tendulkar-were slapped with sentences of varying degrees. The bulk
of these came for what the match referee perceived as excessive and
intimidatory appealing and showing dissent at the umpires' decisions.
Ganguly was hauled up for not being in control of his team. Suspended
sentences and fines were handed out. Sehwag, playing in only his
second Test match, was banned for the next and fined 75 per cent of his
match fee.
Most shocking was the charge against Tendulkar. Denness claimed
Tendulkar, during his bowling spell, had tampered with the ball on
the third day. In the dry language of the law, this was the charge:
For alleged interference with the match ball, thus changing its
condition. Match Referee's decision: By acting on the match
ball, Tendulkar brought the game into disrepute (Icc Players
and Team officials Code No.2) and has been fined 75% ofhis
match fee, plus a one Test ban suspended until the last day of
December 2001.
To understand why Indian cricket fans took to the streets in protest,
why the Indian media was full of articles and editorials condemning
Denness and why the BCCI under its president Jagmohan Dalmiya
virtually brought international cricket to a halt, is to understand the
esteem in which Tendulkar is held in his country. This esteem has not
300

Sachin

been earned easily, nor has it been built merely on a mountain of runs.
It had been gained the hard way, by being the ideal role model and
avoiding the many unsavoury controversies affecting Indian cricket
over the years.
Most shocking was the manner in which South Mrican captain
Shaun Pollock, in the same match, had pressurized the umpires into
handing out decisions against the Indian batsmen with appeals that
were loud, prolonged and provocative. The footage ofhis lbw appeals
against Das and Laxman were shown over and over again on TV.
Suddenly, years of resentment at the widely perceived
discrimination against Asian players who received1harsh punishments
from match referees while 'white' nations were let bff scot-free, boiled
over. Players like Glenn McGrath, Shaun Pollo~k, Allan Donald,
Andrew Flintoff, Ricky Panting and Michael Slate~ had been let off
lightly in the past for directing abuse at their oppo~ents. Tendulkar
himself had been at the receiving end of such behaviour, particularly
from the Australians. What made the charge against Tendulkar
particularly ludicrous, even invalid, was that it had not been brought
to the notice of the match referee by the two on-field umpires as per
the law. Technically, the umpires have to report the matter if they
notice the shape of the ball has been deliberately altered.
Instead, it was a South Mrican TV producer who instructed his
cameraman to focus on Tendulkar as he cleaned the seam of the ball of
mud and grass on a wet day. The tapes were then handed over to
Denness. This was contrary to the procedure laid down by the ICC and
added a diabolical twist to the controversy. Pakistan captain Wagar
Younis expressed his outrage at the anomaly 'How can a match referee
take decisions on the basis of television footage when the on-field
umpires have not reported ball-tampering? The International Cricket
Council must decide on that. How can a match referee take a decision
in such a manner?' (Wisden.com)
Technically, Tendulkar was at fault. A new rule stipulated that he
had to inform the umpires while cleaning the ball. But the punishment
did not fit the 'crime'. Denness, once he had returned home, himself
admitted Tendulkar's fault was technical, and not a breach of the law.
Year of Controversies

301

However, before that, on the fifth morning of the Test, there was a
ridiculous press conference attended by Denness, at which he was
prohibited by ICC regulations from saying a word or explaining his
stand. Amidst all this tension, the Indian batsmen still had a Test and
a series to save. This they did admirably, considering the tremendous
pressure while hatting out the last day.
Dalmiya now demanded that Denness be removed from his post if
the third Test at Centurion was to be played. Or, he threatened to
bring the team home. The United Cricket Board of South Mrica
found itself trapped between the BCCI, the ICC, the series sponsors and
the television company. Eventually, a compromise was reached with
South Mrica's Dennis Lindsay standing in for Denness for the third
match that was designated an unofficial Test by the ICC. India went
down in the Test by an innings and 73 runs. Either way, South Mrica
had won the series.
Tendulkar's form after that blazing 155 in the first innings of the
first Test was something of a let-down. He followed it up with scores
of 15, 1, 22 (not out), 27 and 40. Back home, the storm was now
brewing around Sehwag and the first Test at Mohali against the touring
English team. The stipulation that he be dropped from one Test had
not been adhered to according to the ICC, as the Centurion match
where he was not played was not deemed to be an official Test. It was
only after some brinkmanship that Sehwag was pulled out of the
Mohali Test at the eleventh hour and the series went ahead.
The tour had earlier been thrown into doubt with the English
cricket board dithering over whether to go ahead following the post11 September security scenario in the subcontinent. Their indecision
had come in for much criticism in the Indian media. Now, with
Tendulkar under a cloud, the English and Australian media got a
chance to hit back.
On 17 December in Bangalore, Tendulkar in his first statement
following his penalty, clarified that he was indeed trying to clean the
ball and never intended to do 'anything wrong'. 'Consciously I never
wanted to do anything wrong. I only took the ball to remove the dust
in it but the laws (about cleaning the ball) are different,' Tendulkar
102

Sachin

said while receiving the Castro) Indian Cricketer of the Year Award.
One Australian journalist, among others, brushed aside the fury
oflndian fans as 'knee-jerk hubris'. It was as if they were gloating at
the thought that the Indian icon had finally been found guilty after a
spotless record all these years. The English media's favourite whipping
boy, Dalmiya, was once again a convenient target.
One of the few English writers who tried to understand what Sachin
meant to the Indian psyche was Simon Barnes. Writing in the Cricketer
International Oanuary 2002), Barnes drew parallels between what Sir
Don Bradman meant to Australia in the 1930s and 1940s and
Tendulkar's place in modern India. He also revealed that he had been
told by that doyen of cricket writers, John Woodcock, that he felt
Tendulkar was as good a batsman as Bradman. 'Not the view of a
nutcase, not even an Indian,' wrote Barnes. 'I heard it from John
Woodcock, former cricket correspondent of the Times and former editor
ofWtSden. So I take it seriously.' He continued, 'In India's turbulent
present he [Sachin] means as much as Brad man did to Australia in
the years of the Depression and incipient nationhood. In India's
nationalistic climate, Tendulkar stands for Indian aspiration and India's
desire to fling off subservience and take a new station in the world.'
Harsha Bhoglc in Wisden Cricket Monthly Oanuary 2002), lucidly
explained India's case in an article headlined 'Why India Has Been
Wronged.'
'Somebody [in the Western media] should have had the sagacity
to stand up and say that ifliberal, intelligent, moderate Indians were
feeling outraged by what had happened, then maybe they should try
to see why .... By Denness' own admission he was not tampering with
the ball, nor even picking the seam. He was merely taking the grass off
the seam-an offence but a minor one .... The punishment was
e:x"traordinary, not so much because of the fine and suspended sentence,
but because of the opportunity it gave the world to call an honest man
a cheat. Worse still, Denness had no complaint from the on-field
umpires and refused to trust Tendulkar.'
While the storm was still brewing, the England team under ChennaiYear of Controversies

303

born Nasser Hussain arrived in India--one of the most inexperienced
teams to tour the country. Nobody in the team had previously played
a Test match in India. Alec Stewart, Robert Croft, Darren Gough and
Andrew Caddick all withdrew from the Test series for one reason or
the other, though the last two would be back for the one-day series that
followed. In the first Test at Mohali, India swept to victory by ten
wickets on the strength of their batting and spin bowling, inside of
four days. All the predictions of another whitewash (England had
been routed 3-0 when they toured last in 1993) appeared to be coming
true.
Once again, it was obvious the spectators had eyes for only one
man. When India batted in reply to England's 238, Deep Dasgupta
scored his maiden Test century and, with Rahul Dravid, put on 136
runs. The going was slow as the batsmen sought to build up a big lead.
Not that those in the stands on the second day of the match had much
patience for these tactics. Both Dravid and the wicketkeeper-opener
were regularly booed. It was not very pleasant and the most embarrassed
perwn there was probably the next man to come in. Dravid, at the
vital number three slot, had a new burden to bear: he was coming in
just before Tendulkar. There was polite applause for Dasgupta when
he reached his century in close to six hours. But when he was out for
exactly 100, the man everyone in the ground had been waiting for
made his grand appearance to a tumultuous applause.
Most of the English mediamen were watching Tendulkar play at
home for the first time. The build up to the series in the English press
had almost solely focussed on Tendulkar and h;s place in Indian cricket
and Indian society. For them, it was a novel experience to watch the
stands erupt in joy at the mere sight of their hero.
The huge hype surrounding Tendulkar obviously had an effect
on the English players too, for they appeared to be initially overawed
in his presence. Tendulkar came in with the score at 212 for 3. It had
been quite a crawl till then. But in the short time he was at the crease
before stumps on the second day, he thumped five sizzling boundaries
to get 31 of the SO runs that were scored after his arrival at the wicket.
There was a great deal of overnight anticipation ofhis twenty-seventh
304

Sachin

Test century, and the biggest crowd for the match turned up for it.
Hussain, in a desperate bid to plug the flow of runs from Sachin's bat
had his seamers, particularly Matthew Hoggard, bowl a consistent
outside. off-stump line with an 8-1 field in place. Tendulkar's freeflowing stroke play was stifled and he faced 144 balls before being
caught behind off the persistent Hoggard for 88.
England's tactics and Tendulkar's reaction to them were an
ominous sign of things to come. Mter the debacle at Mohali, England
showed great heart in getting the better of draws, both at Ahmedabad
and Bangalore. England's batsmen bounced back from their first Test
trauma to pile up 407 when they batted first at Ahmedabad. India lost
4 wickets for 93 before Tendulkar and Laxman's century stand hauled
them back. Once again, Hussain switched to containing tactics.
Hoggard, Craig White and Andrew Flintoffbowled well outside off
stump to a 7-2 and 8-1 field-two slips, two gullies, backward point,
point, cover and mid-off.
It was obvious by now that England's intention was not so much
for their bowlers to get Sachin out, but rather to frustrate him so much
that he would throw away his wicket. Tendulkar was not flustered,
though, and got his runs steadily though not particularly quickly. His
first 50 came from 128 balls. Then he decided to break free of the
shackles in the post-lunch session of the third day.
Hoggard's negative line was brilliantly negated in one magical
over. The ball was twice worked outside off, through the vacant leg
side field, for boundaries. For the last ball of the over, Hussain was
forced to move a fielder across. It made no difference. Once again, the
ball was whipped across his stumps and Sachin made three runs.
England's fielders appeared awestruck as Hoggard went for 11 in that
over.
Another 11 followed from off-spinner Richard Dawson's over and
Tendulkar got to his almost inevitable century with a savage pull off
Hoggard. The second 50 had taken just 55 balls. His dismissal for 103,
caught by Hussain at mid-on off Hoggard, was disappointing, just
when he had got on top of the bowling and the tactics. 'I was very
disappointed,' the centurion said at the press conference at the end of
Year of Controversies

lOS

the day. 'I made a hundred but I was hoping to keep going so that we
could get as close to England's total as possible.'
The century brought him level with Steve Waugh and Allan
Border in his eighty-eighth Test. Now only Bradman (29) and
Gavaskar (34) were ahead of him. Significantly, it was also the fiftieth
century of his first-class career since his first on debut in 1988 against
Gujarat. This was his two hundred and seventy-third innings in his
one hundred and seventy-sixth match, and he joined four other
Indians with 50-plus centuries.
England delayed their declaration to set India an improbable target
of374 from 97 overs. Behind the delay-no team had scored 300-plus
to win a Test in India-was the fear in the England captain's mind of
another flurry of runs from Tendulkar. In the event, he scored 26 from
81 balls as India were determined not to go for the runs.
It was obvious by now that just one player out of22 was dictating
the trend of the entire series. Hussain's obsession with Tendulkar had
become all-consuming.
Former England captain Mike Brearley summed up quite
beautifully in the Guardian (16 December 2001), the special place
Tendulkar enjoys in India: 'Perhaps it is in his Hindu roots that
Tendulkar finds the peace of mind to carry without either arrogance
or panic the load of national fervour that lands on his stocky shoulders.
If it is in one's karma to be the Indian Bradman, then all that is to be
done is to try one's best and thank God.'
The Bangalore Test was severely curtailed by rain and a draw was
always on the cards. Once again, though, England gained a healthy
first innings lead. India had won the series 1-0, but there was talk of a
'moral' victory for the raw Englishmen. Hussain was being described
as the best England captain since Brearley. There were comparisons
with Douglas Jardine, the proponent of the hated 'Bodyline' bowling
in the 1932-33 series in Australia. There were indeed some uncanny
similarities: the peaked cap, the angular nose and the place of birth
Qardine too was born in India, though of Scottish parents). But most
striking of all was what the press, both in India and England, were
referring to as 'Bodyline II'.
306

Sachin

Jardine's attempt to stem the massive flow of runs from the blade
of the incomparable Sir Donald Bradman had worked to the extent
that his average was cut from 100-plus to just over 50, and England
won the 'Ashes' back. The sour taste left by the negating of fair play,
however, threatened to cause a split in the Empire. Now, 70 years later,
there was no Empire left and no unfair intimidation either. But there
was one common motive-a batsman with the ability to dominate
had to be stopped at any cost. The bowler entrusted with keeping
Tendulkar on a leash was the tall left-arm spinner Ashley Giles. Giles
operated to a leg-side line with a packed on-side field, bowling over
the wicket in the rough behind Tendulkar's legs in order to frustrate
him. Even wicketkeeper James Foster stationed himself well outside
the leg stump.
'A Moral Win, but at What Price?' was the headline to Brearley's
report of the Test in Wisden Cricket Monthly (February 2002). 'Nasser
Hussain is an inventive thinker, a superb motivator, a steely leader.
But his Bodyline II tactics against Tendulkar took the fun out of
cricket,' he wrote. Tendulkar made a mockery once again of the offstump line ofEngland's pace attack, forcing Hussain to change tactics
and switch the field. Flintoffbegan to pepper the batsmen round the
wicket down the leg side as the fast bowlers had done in 1932-33,
though not to such devastating physical effect. The rules had been
altered shortly after the 'Bodyline I' series to restrict the number of
fielders allowed to crouch around the bat, waiting for the ball to be
fended of( Hussain's tactics were perhaps the supreme compliment to
the supreme batsman of the modern era. Not that Tendulkar was in
any mood to appreciate it at the time.
By the close of the truncated second day, Tendulkarwas on 50. He
had £1iled to score off75 of the first 92 balls he had faced. Things got
out of hand and the umpires had to intervene to cool things down at
the final drinks interval of the day when Tendulkar and Das indulged
in a finger-wagging session with Hussain. The subject of the heated
discussion was obvious. It was one of the very rare occasions when
Tendulkar was seen to lose his temper on the field of play.
On the third morning, he managed just 27 runs in 90 minutes.
Year of Controversies

307

Time and again, he used his backside or his pads instead of his bat to
knock Giles' deliveries away. It was obvious he was trying to make a
point. You bowl this line all day and I will keep using my 'backside'
play. As Brearley explained in the Wzsden Cricket Monthly (February
2002): 'Legside attack precludes almost all the classical strokes of
batting. It becomes impossible to swing the arms freely at the ball if it
is constantly leaping at your ribs or scuttling around behind your
calves. The sweep is hard to control because the bounce of the ball is
unpredictable.' Both Brearley and Sunil Gavaskar called for legislation
to outlaw such bowling. They felt the umpires should have been
empowered to call 'wide'.
Tendulkar was joined at the crease by Sehwag. Remarkably, the
man with just two Tests behind him proceeded to show just how Giles
could be mastered. Admittedly, the 'new Tendulkar' was living
dangerously. He was dropped at slip on one, and time and again he
was beaten outside the off stump. But he brought the first signs of
forceful batting into the Indian innings. Six ofhis 13 boundaries in an
innings of 66 from 88 balls were off the spinner. He went over
midwicket, he played a cross-bat slog and there was a reverse sweep
that went with the speed of a tracer bullet to the boundary.
His ego piqued by this audacious display-perhaps all the talk of
the 'new Tendulkar' was getting on his nerves-the role model decided
to finally chance his arm. He succeeded briefly, smashing 12 in an
over from Giles. But in the next, trying another heave, he was stranded
outside the crease and Foster had him stumped for 90.
It was the first time in 89 Tests that he had been dismissed thus.
Judging by the celebrations, one would have thought England had
got him for a first ball duck.
Gavaskar has long attacked the attitude of English cricket and
cricketers and this display of theirs gave him ample fodder. 'They
once again confirmed (with their tactics) that they are a boring side
that drives spectators to despair,' he declared in the Hindustan Times
(21 December 2001 ).
None, though, was more scathing than former Somerset captain
Peter Roebuck, one of the most perceptive cricket writers. As he
lOB

Sachin

observed in the Age, Melbourne (22 December 2001):
England pretends to be the guardian of the game, yet does more
harm than all the rest put together. That the batsman in these
instances was Sachin Tendulkar hardly needs saying. After all,
the Poms did not hesitate to attack The Dan's skull when they
couldn't get him out, an approach so effective that it was
promptly used against less gifted willow-wielders, and then the
Poms sacked their captain and fastest bowler. Tendulkar is the
modern master of batting. It is a privilege to watch him and
bowl to him. To sec him reduced to kicking the ball away like a
dopey tail-ender in the closing minutes of a tight contest was to
see the game betrayed. England has lots of young players and it
hasn't been much of an education for them. IfTcndulkar has
any sense he'll bat till Christmas. If the game has any sense it
will outlaw these puritanical practices. Tendulkar gives the
bowlers a chance and he is human. Let them try to get him out
with skill and not cleverness.
Wrote former Hampshire captain Mark Nicholas in the Daily

Telegraph (21 December 2001):
What we were watching was a legal, non-violent bodylinctype tactic, an attempt to minimise the impact of an awesome
opponent. I twas well thought out and applied with accuracy ....
With a terrific performance at Ahmedabad they proved to
themselves that they could match 10 of the Indian team but
admitted the 11th, Tendulkar, had the wood on them. So they
resolved to '· -:ep him in check. The line Giles bo~rlcd in
Ahmedabad was very good, consistently on or around leg stump,
and with the seamers sticking to a line outside off stump the
master batsman was tested fair and square. He made an
unforgettable hundred.
The differences from Ahmedabad and here in Bangalore are
that England have increased the distance between him and the
Year of Cont'roversies

309

ball and have at times bowled the same line from both ends.
This compromises the entertainment which, we must continue
to assume, is the point of it all. The line in this case between
what is fair and what compromises the spirit of the game is as
fine as it gets.
Not surprisingly, Tendulkar was the Man of the Series with 307
runs at 76. 75. He would also be Man of the Series in the one-day
games that followed, after Christmas, in which the visitors came back
from 1-3 down to finish on 3-3. Sachin had scores of36, 45, 68, 87
(not out), 18 and 12. An 001 century against England was still elusive,
however, after ten years.
There were two memorable century opening stands between
Sachin and Sehwag in the ODis, during which, but for the names on
their shirts, it would have been virtually impossible to tell the two
apart. In the third match at Chennai, they hammered 107 in the first
19 overs; at Kanpur in the next it was 134 in 18, Tendulkar scoring 87
not out from 67 balls and Schwag 82 from 62.
The talk of 'moral victory' for the English camp was more valid
this time.

310

Sachin