Defeat and Despair

It was a privilege to be there.-Dave Richardson
That old tag, 'Tigers at home, kittens abroad,' which has attached itself
to the Indian team over the 1990s must have been at the back of
Sachin Tendulkar's mind as he prepared himself for his first tour as
captain. The one-offTest against Australia and the three Tests v South
Mrica at home had given him the time and breathing space to get used
to the rigours of his new role. Nothing, though, could have prepared
him for the shocking capitulation in the opening Test at Kingsmead,
Durban.
The South Africans had been aggrieved by the pitch they
encountered at Ahmedabad. Now, within a fortnight, it was time for
revenge. And a brutal reality check for Sachin.
The match was over shortly after tea on the third day. India
crumbled to 100 and 66---the lowest ever score against South Mrica
in Test cricket. Both innings together lasted a total of72.3 overs-less
than a full day's play-with Allan Donald taking 9 for 54 in the match.
South Mrica too struggled on a brute of a pitch, scoring 235 and 259.
But even their first innings would have been sufficient. In the end,
they won by 328 runs and the Indian team was in disarray at the start
of the series. Even Man of the Match Andrew Hudson (80 and 52)
was forced to admit: 'You were never really in on that wicket.'
As has often happened in Tendulkar's career, the rival bowlers and
fielders reserved their best for when he was at the crease. In the first
innings he was bowled by a beauty from Donald for 15. In the second,

it was an astonishing catch by Gary Kirsten at gully offShaun Pollock
that sent him back for four. Donald felt the ball that got Sachin got was
one of the most lethal he had ever bowled in a Test match. Following
two half-volleys which were driven regally to the boundary, Tendulkar
got one that pitched on a perfect length just cutside off stump. It
jagged back at such speed that the batsman was still in the process of
bringing down his bat when the stump was sent cartwheeling in the
direction of the stunned wicketkeeper. 'I always get fired up a bit extra
when I bowl at Sachin and the Waughs,' said the delighted bowler in
a rich tribute to his victim.
In the second innings, a sliced drive at Pollock was flying at great
speed and some distance from gully. An airborne Kirsten clutched it
on the dive.
India were crushed again in the second Test at Cape Town, this
time by 282 runs as the home side scaled the series 2-0. But this time,
two Indian batsmen produced a partnership fit for the gods, of which
players on both sides still speak in awe.
The batsmen were Tcndulkar and Azhar, the stand was worth 222,
the runs came in 40 uvers and produced 175 minutes of some of the
most exhilarating batting seen in the history ofTest cricket. Yet, India
were soundly beaten once again as they capitulated for 144 in the
second innings. South Mrica had piled up a massive 529 for 7 declared
with Kirsten, Brian McMillan and Lance Kluscner all striking
centuries. But even these paled in the face of the onslaught launched
by the current captain and his immediate predecessor. They came
together with India reeling at a hopeless 58 for 5. Once they ·JVere
parted the innings folded up for 359 with only two others reaching
double figures.
Instead of grinding it out, two of the most gifted stroke players in
the modern game decided to fight fire with fire. Azhar played with a
care and abandon not seen since his magnificent series in England in
1990. His hatting was exotic and unorthodox, and more than a little
risky. Tendulkar's was more along classic lines, though no less
attractive. Both had their chances. With the stand worth 197 Azhar
was dropped by Cronje at extra cover; a run later, it was Tendulkar on
156

Sac hi n

80 who was reprieved by Hudson at gully. Hudson had also missed
Azhar on 55. But the crowd did not seem to mind one bit. They cheered
every stroke as if they were being executed by their own batsmen.
Such was the spell cast by the two Indians. Klusener was hammered
out of the attack, smashed for four boundaries in his first over after
lunch and for 60 runs from six overs. The follow-on mark was still 50
runs away when Azhar was run out by a Hudson throw from backward
point. He had batted for just under three hours and raced to 115 off
109 balls with 19 fours and a six. Tendulkar looked determined to
reach his first double century. Instead, he was out to a catch of such
dazzling quality by Adam Bacher deep on the square leg fenceleaping backwards and plucking the ball with one hand as it sped to
the boundary-that Tendulkar could only stand shaking his head,
hand on hip. He was the last man out for 169 (26 boundaries) off
McMillan after a stay of 331 minutes. It was perhaps fitting that it
took such a magical catch to end such a magical innings.
It was not only the South African spectators who were dazzled.
The man with the best view was South African wicketkceper Dave
Richardson and this is what he told me about Tendulkar's innings: 'I
can say it was the only occasion when I have honestly enjoyed an
opposing player scoring a century. It was a privilege to be there. It
obviously helped that despite the century SA was still in a strong position
in the game.'
Richardson was not the only South African player to feel that way.
Allan Donald described the innings as 'fabulous', and admitted that
for once he had detatched himself from his role of fast bowler to
appreciate the stroke play of his opponent.
Englishman John Woodcock has reported on more Test cricket
than any other journalist alive. Even he could not think of any
partnership to match this one. Another English journalist, Matthew
Engel (then the editor ofWisden Cricketers' Almanack) wrote in Wisden
Cricket Monthly (February 1997):
For a few hours in Cape Town on the first Saturday of 1997 the
game of cricket got as near as it perhaps can ever get to being
Defeat and Despair

157

sublime ... .Tendulk:ar's innings was what one expects from him:
mature, controlled, commanding-the weight of his country's
expectations resting lightly on his shoulders. The extra
dimension came from the other end. Azharuddin played what
you might call an ex-captain's innings .... He was determined
to go out there and indulge in the carefree pleasure of showing
everyone how to hit a cricket ball.
The visitors had their best chance to pull one back in the third and
final Test at Johannesburg but were thwarted by weather and a defiant
unbeaten 122 by Daryl! Cullinan. South Mrica, who set a target of
357 in 95 overs were at 228 for 8 when play was called off under dark
skies with four overs remaining. Earlier, 152 minutes were lost to rain
and this robbed the Indians of a well-deserved victory. Tendulk:ar was
clearly disappointed at being denied, but felt the draw had boosted the
confidence of his young side on the eve of the one-day tri-series.
The oms produced some splendid contests with South Mrica
storming into the final with an all-win record and India edging past
Zimbabwe. The outsiders held India to a tie in their first match and
then beat them in the penultimate game to push the league phase
down to the wire. India not only had to beat Zimbabwe in Benoni, but
also had to do it fast enough to push their net run rate above that of
their opponents. It was touch -and-go and once again, it was the captain
who showed the way.
Zimbabwe reached 240 for 8 in their 50 overs and the Indian target
was 241-from 40.5 overs. That they got home by six wickets in 39.2
was largely due to Tendulkar's rip-roaring 104, ably supported by
Ajay Jac;leja (56 not out). Dravid had opened with Ganguly in the
previous matches, but now Tendulkar was back at the top of the order
to give the run chase the launching pad it needed. The final had to be
replayed after the first one was washed out with SouthMrica well on
top. It was different altogether in the replay, and India came pretty
close to pulling off a sensational victory thanks to the batting of
Tendulkar and Dravid.
South Mrica piled up 278 for 8 in 50 overs. Rain intervened again
158

Sachin

and India's target was altered to a stiffer 251 from 40 overs. Tendulkar
set the tone with a lightning 45 from 33 balls and his stand of 66 with
Dravid came at eight an over. Dravid carried the fight almost to the
end with a superb 84 which won him the Man of the Match award.
But India fell 16 runs short with South Mrican lernpers rising and
their behaviour on the field getting worse as the match seemed to slip
out of their grasp.
The tourists had shown considerable spirit in coming back strongly,
both in the Test and ODI tri-series, after the early setbacks. However,
the lack of success weighed heavily on the captain's mind.
R.Mohan revealed Tendulkar's fatalistic state of mind midway
through the tour in the Sportstar (1 March 1997): 'Sachin was speaking
to a friend in his room that evening, asking him ifhe should consider
stepping doyvn from the captaincy. The very thought, fleeting though
it may have been, was reflective of the emotional state of mind he was
in then.'
Mohan admitted that the captain's frame of mind improved after
the latter stages of the tri-series. But the experienced journalist got it
wrong when he repeatedly stated in the article that Tendulkar's
captaincy would be safe for many years to come. There were already
rumblings that the captain was unhappy with the team that he had
been presented with for the five Tests and four oms for India's first
visit to the Caribbean since losing 3-0 in 1989.
Despite the face that the West Indies were a shadow of what they
had been eight years earlier, virtual back-to-hack tours to South Mrica
and the West Indies was a challenge for both the team and the captain.
In the interview that accompanied Mohan's article in the same issue,
Tendulkar expressed concern at the enormous workload imposed on
the Indian players. Indeed, 1997 would probably be the most hectic
ever, with tours to South Mrica, West Indies, Sri Lanka, Pakistan,
Toronto and Sharjah for Test and 001 tournaments, as well as home
games. There was also an uncanny quote from Tendulkar. 'If any of
them [Srinath and Venkatesh Prasad] breaks down in the West Indies! hope it doesn't happen-it's going to be very tough.'
Sure enough, within two days of the team landing in Kingston,
Defeat and Despair

159

Jamaica, the main strike bowler Srinath had to quit the tour because
of a rotator cuff tear in his shoulder that had been troubling him for
some time. It was a crippling blow to the team's hopes. Apart frorn
Venkatesh Prasad, debutant Abey Kuruvilla, the raw D.Ganesh, and
all-rounder Robin Singh were the only medium-pace bowlers left in
the squad. To make things worse, there followed a quixotic move by
the selectors which foxed one and all. Srinath's replacement was
Hyderabacl's Noel David, an off-spinning all-rounder, even though
medium-pacer Salil An kola was on standby, and was the first choice of
the team management. David was not even a front line spinner for
Hyderabad.
Ironically, Tendulkar had been keen on an off-spinner at the
selection meeting forth<? West Indies tour, as Prem Panicker of Rediffcom
testified.
I was at the CCI that day, when the selectors were picking the
side to tour the We.st Indies. I do remember Sachin storming
out of the meeting before it was less than half over-I happened
to be standing in the carpark enjoying a quiet smoke when he
came stomping out and I asked him what happened ... and he
uncharacteristically burst out with 'If they don't want to listen
to my opinions, why do they bother asking me to attend these
meetings?' and he got into his car and slammed out of there.
For me that was the first sign that something was going wrong
between Sachin and the selectors.
He never did say 'Noel who?' when Noel David was named
to replace Srinath-that is apocryphal, a media creation. But
he did get rather bitter and in a team meeting, said something
to the effect that the selectors had deliberately named a bowler
who has never bowled off spin.
I know one thing for sure-he was very, very upset then, he
believed the team had a superb chance to beat the Windies with
spin and wanted to, and he thought selectorial politics was what
kept him from pulling it off.

160

Sachin

Poor David would sit out the whole Test series and get his chance
only in the oms that followed.
India, with their limited bowling attack, did well to draw the first
Test at Kingston. Though West Indies were on the decline, they were
no pushovers, with Ambrose and Walsh still firing away and the batting
in the safe hands of Lara and Chanderpaul. Half the final day was
washed out and India, set 323 to win, finished on 99 for two after an
ovewight declaration by Walsh. Tendulkar pointed out that this was
the first time an Indian touring side had escaped defeat in the opening
Test of a series abroad since he made his debut in Pakistan in 1989. It
had, in fact, happened once before, in the Kandy Test in 1993. But that
was severely curtailed by rain with just 50 minutes' play possible in
all.
If this series was to be a match up between Lara and Tendulkar, the
West Indian had certainly won the first round. He was at his best in
the first innings when he cracked a delightful 83 and followed it up
with 78. Tendulkar had scores of7 and 15 not out.
Traditionally, Port-of-Spain has been the venue where touring
Indian sides have had their best results, thanks_to a pitch which is spin
friendly. Only twice before had India won Test matches in the
Caribbean and both were played in the Trinidad capital.
Just as the home side had the better of the draw in the first Test,
India, it could be said, won t!1e second on point. But then, this was
cricket, not boxing, and it appeared from the very first ball that the
tourists would be more than satisfied with another draw.
Playing in his fiftieth Test match, Tendulkar ground out one of his
slowest batting displays after the West Indians had been dismissed for
296 in their first innings. The Indian batting received a jolt when
Laxman was out to Ambrose from the second ball of the innings.
Thereafter, it was safety-first tactics with Navjot Singh Sidhu-back
for the series after serving his sentence following the episode in
England-recording the second slowest double century in Test cricket.
Dravid and Sidhu did the initial rescue act in their second wicket
stand of171. This was consolidated by the captain when he joined the
opener to pile up a further 174. But at no time did the batsmen seek to
Defeat and Despair

161

accelerate the scoring. And Ganguly was one of the main culprits.
Tendulkar had occupied the crease for 306 minutes when Walsh
ran him out for 88. He struggled to find his touch and had several
close lbw appeals go in his favour as he padded up. The closest was
from the second ball he faced. Ambrose was the bowler and the only
person on the ground who did not think it was out was Australian
umpire Steve Randell. The lead was a substantial140 for the Indians.
But too much time had been consumed and a draw was inevitable
from then onwards, which seemed to please the Indians.
But their world came crashing around them in the next Test at
Bridgetown, Barbados with a shocking fourth innings collapse. This
sealed not only the Test, but effectively the series as well for the West
Indies. The pitch was sub-standard, the ball seamed all over the place
and the uneven bounce caused all sorts of problems for the batsmen.
But after the dreary draws in the first and second Tests, it did at least
produce a result.
Lara led the West Indies for the first time, since Walsh was declared
unfit. Tendulkar won the toss and opted to field and the seam attack of
Prasad, Ganesh and Kuruvilla rewarded their captain by getting the
West Indies out for 298. The innings was held together by Shivnarine
Chanderpaul whose 137 not out was his first century following 13
50s. For the second time in a row, the Indians gained the first innings
lead, even if it was only 21 runs. Tendulkar played a cla~sy innings,
and was eight short ofhis first century in the West Indies, when umpire
Lloyd Barker failed to call Ian Bishop for over-stepping. The resulting
'catch' was a brilliant one by Sherwin Campbell at deep gully.
Mter his tentative batting in the early part of the tour, this was
classic Tendulkar all over again as he and Dravid established a record
for the third wicket for India in the West Indies, of 170 runs. At least
half ofTendulkar's 14 tours from 147 balls came from cuts, and his six
was a pull offRose. His batting was superb as he dispatched anything
loose with outstanding shot selection. Twice he hit balls that werejust
short of a length off the back foot through extra cover-one of the
most difficult shots in the book.
The Indian seamers were back in action in the second innings to
162

Sachin

rout West Indies for 140, their lowest score against India at home. Lara
counter-attacked to top score with 45 and then a last wicket stand
worth 33 between Ambrose and Dillon pushed the target for India to
120. Their runs made all the difference in the end and Tendulkar was
criticized for his defensive field placements during the stand.
There was tremendous tension all round at the Kensington Oval
on the fourth (and final) day as India sought to earn only their third
victory in nearly 50 years in the Caribbean. It was not to be. The
tourists were all out for 81, even if their captain said at the end that it
was 50 per cent due to the pitch and 50 per cent due to their poor
batting. In a mere three hours, the Indian batsmen had thrown away
all the good work of the previous three days. 'I still can't believe we
couldn't make 120 runs,' said the shattered skipper after a defeat that
he still looks back on as one of the most disappointing mom~nts in his
career. 'It you can't score 120 to win you deserve to be punished,' was
the harsh verdict from Madan La!, the disgusted coach.
Lara manipulated his bowlers in a masterly manner with only
Ambrose, Bishop and Rose (debutant Merv Dillon did not get to bowl)
being entrusted with the task of bowling out the Indians. The score of
81 was their lowest in the West Indies. Overnight two without loss,
Sidhu was the first to go on the fourth morning. Once again, umpire
Barker erred in not calling a no-ball. The opener desperately tried to
fend off one from Rose which was climbing towards his throat.
Watching from the dressing room, panic set in among the batsmen as
they allowed the unpredictable pitch to prey on their minds.
IfSidhu was forced to fend for his life, Azharuddin was shocked by
one from Ambrose that crashed into his stumps at shin level. Tendulkar
was done in by the bowler, rather than the pitch. A perfectly pitched
late out swinger from Bishop saw him caught low down to his left by
Lara at the lone slip. Only Laxrnan (19) reached double figures as the
Bajan crowd celebrated late into the night. Vijay Lokapally summed
up India's dismal performance in the Spottstar (12April1997): 'There
was no attempt to push oneselfbeyond the expected levels. There was
not a single partnership worth mention in the second innings and the
disgraceful display left a sour note on a tour which had been quite
Defeat and Despair

163

encouraging till then.'
Back in the solitude ofhis hotel room after the defeat, a journalist
was shocked to see Sachin break down and weep. It had been a
shattering blow. Wtsden Cricket Monthly (May 1997) compared the
performances of the two 'superstar captains'. It gave Lara nine out of
ten and his Indian counterpart seven out of ten-a fair assessment.
Mter all the excitement ofBarbados, the series petered out with the
last two Tests at St. John's, Antigua and Georgetown, Guyana
producing rain-dominated draws. Tendulkar finished second in the
averages behind Dravid with 289 runs at 57.80. Three times he came
close to a century. A five-Test series without a single century was
certainly unusual for the master.
Looking back on the series in an interview with Lokapally in the
Sportstar (3 May 1997), he would rue the loss at Barbados. 'I think it
was a combination of good bowling by the West Indies, bad batting by
us nd a terrible track,' he said when asked 'What really went wrong at
Barbados?'
'It was very tough batting in the fourth innings. It was mainly the
batting which let us down. I can only hope that such mistakes are not
repeated.'
Inevitably, the question ofwhether the captaincy had inhibited his
'strokemaking instincts' cropped up.
There were situations when we would have lost early wickets
and naturally I was required to hang in there ... .I like the ball to
come onto the bat. Since I became captain, it is only in South
Mrica that I have played on wickets where the ball was coming
on and once in Barbados .... On slow tracks, where you have
two players in catching position and a deep point, I have to
curb myself. I just can't go and slam the ball because runs in
international cricket are not easy to come by. I would rather
wait than try to prove I am not bothered by pressure and play
my natural game. I would prefer getting slow 70s or 80s than a
quick 20 or 30.

164

Sachin

The matter of team selection was also raised and here Tendulkar's
words were to haunt him soon, considering the storm just ahead.

Q: How much say do you have in selection matters, or planning
an itinerary?
A: Nothing at all. Not even in the selection matters. I only
make suggestions and the decisions are taken by the selectors.
The captain and the manager have no vote at all.
Q: Would you like to have one?
A: Most definitely because I have to play with the side and not
others. I am the one who is to handle the side and I must have
the players I want.
Sadly, the tour which had started on a promising note would end
on a bitter one. The four ODis that followed the Test series had more
than their fair share of controversy. Ganguly had crawled to 3 from 55
balls in the second Test at Port-of-Spain when quick runs were needed.
This was apparently held against him by the tour management and
he found himself dropped for the fifth Test and the first ODI at Port-ofSpain. Predictably, this led to a storm back home in Kolkata which
had also reacted in fury when their favourite son had been dropped a
few months earlier in Toronto.
West Indies easily won the opening game by eight wickets but
were stunned in the second at the same venue.
Tendulkar admitted he had misread the pitch on winning the toss
in the first match. But he sought to make amends with the bat and
::.mashed nine fours in his 44 (43 balls), audaciously stepping out to
the fast bowlers, knowing full well how difficult the pitch was. It took
an atrocious decision by umpire Eddie Nicholls to halt him in full
flow, adjudged caught behind when the ball had grazed his right
shoulder. After the match he showed the red mark where the ball had
hit him.
Ganguly was back for the second match. A brilliant bowling display
by Prasad. Kuruvilla and debutant David skittled out the West Indies
for 121, their lowest against India in an 001. With rain interruptions.
Defeat and Despair

165

the target was revised to 113 from 40 overs and the runs were promptly
rattled off by openers Tendulkar (65 not out) and Ganguly from just
23.1 overs even as more rain threatened.
All the good work was undone by two awful batting displays as the
West Indies ran away 3-1 winners. 'Incredible,' was all a stunned
Tendulkar could utter at the end of a shocking collapse in the third
game at Amos Vale, St. Vincent.
Chasing 250 for victory, the Indians were coasting with Ganguly
and Dravid at the crease. Their stand was worth 130 from 29 overs and
the score was 157 when the second wicket fell. It came down to 65 off
68 balls with eight wickets in hand. Unbelievably, those wickets fell in
a heap for India to be all out for 231. Mter the good start, the batsmen
simply lashed out at the bowling when the target was well within
reach. Azharuddin was out to a terrible shot when well set on 24, and
the rest followed suit.
There had been ugly scenes in the Indian dressing room before
the match when Sidhu declared himself unfit due to a knee injury
suffered during the warm-up. Even as he prepared to go out to the
toss, those on the scene reported that Tendulkar was forced to separate
a furious Madan Lal and Sidhu, with the coach accusing the batsman
of'not wanting to play for the country'. Hardly the sort of thing to put
the team in the right frame of mind. And things went from bad to
worse after that.
'I gave the batsmen instructions,' said the captain who was so
furious that no team member dared to approach him at the dinner
table in the hotel in the evening. 'Don't hit in the air,' he sent repeated
instructions. But they continued to play airy shots. 'I thought it was
lack of cricketing sense. As a captain I can only tell them and expect
them to follow my instructions. I can't go play for them in the middle.'
Madan La I too was left fuming at the way the potential lead had been
thrown away so callously.
West Indies returned the compliment from the second match by
crushing India by ten wickets in the final game, at the venue of their
sensational Test triumph five weeks earlier. By then the fight had
166

Sachin

gone out of the Indian camp and the overwhelming emotion at the
end of another disappointing tour was one of relief that it was all over.

Defeat and Despair

167
