On Top Down Under

This boy is from heaven. He will do anything.- Tim Laine
The hastily arranged South African tour gave the Indians precious
little time to acclimatize and prepare for their Test tour to Australia.
The Indian team flew out straight after losing the third and final om
in New Delhi on 14 November 1991. The South Africans won the
game, but the series ended 2-1 in the home team's favour.
India were slated to play five Tests Down Under for the first time
since 1977-78. In between the Test series, West Indies would join
India and Australia for the wsc one-day tournament. And after that
was the big one-the World Cup. It would be the most gruelling tour
ever undertaken by an Indian cricket team.
Just how unprepared the Indians were to take on the might of
Australia was cruelly exposed in the first Test at Brisbane. This, after
they had been shot out for 64 in a one-day game against Western
Australia and beaten by New South Wales inside of three days in the
only first-class match before the Test series. The formidable Aussie
fast bowling attack of Craig McDermott, Mike Whitney and Merv
Hughes blew away the Indians in the space of three and a half days by
the thumping margin of ten wickets. Still, there were two inspiring
individual achievements on the Indian side. On the third day, Kapil
Dev produced what Australian opening batsman David Boon described
as 'the best three balls bowled consecutively that I have seen in Test
cricket'. Boon was at the non-striker's end as Kapil bowled an inswinger to Allan Border of such perfect length that any left-hander
would have been bowled off-stump. The second ball, an outswinger

to Dean Jones, beat bat and stump by a coat of varnish. The next ball
was brought back and bowled Jones for a duck. There were also some
batting heroics from Manoj Prabhakar who stayed at the crease for
over five hours. The Test marked the debut ofJavagal Srinath who
picked up three wickets.
The traditional Boxing Day Test at Melbourne followed much the
same pattern, the margin of victory for Australia this time being eight
wickets. The destroyer-in-chiefwas Bruce Reid who replaced another
left-arm seamer, Whitney, in the attack. Reid had figures of12 for 126
and once again the Test was over in four days. Tendulkar had been a
disappointment so far, as was the Indian batting as a whole. His first
three innings had produced scores of16, 7 and 15. But in the second
innings at Melbourne, he hit a cultured 40 with five fours before a
rush of blood saw him caught in the deep off spinner Peter Taylor.
Border took a brilliant catch, running back over a hundred feet to
clutch the swirling ball. It was a chastening experience for the young
man, who vowed never again to hit the ball in the air.
The Sydney wicket with its reputation for aiding spinners has
always provided welcome respite from the generally bouncy tracks
found across Australia, for touring Indian teams. It was surprising
then that India went in for the third Test with only one spinner (Ravi
Shastri), with Venkatapathy Raju and Narendra Hirwani having to
cool their heels. Shastri emerged as the Man of the Match for the first
double century by an Indian against Australia and four wickets in the
second innings, which almost saw India pull off a shock victory. But it
was Tendulkar's sublime century that had the critics once again eating
out of the palm ofhis hand. David Boon's 129 not out was the standout
innings in Australia's total of 313.
India lost Navjot Singh Sidhu for a duck. But they had a stroke of
luck when their tormentor in the previous Test, Bruce Reid, limped
off with a torn muscle in the side after bowling just four overs, and
took no further part in the Test. That was just the chance the Indian
batting needed to finally come good after the defeats at Brisbane and
Melbourne. Opener Shastri batted nearly ten hours for his 206 before
becoming the only victim ofleg-spinner Shane Warne who finished
78

Sachin

with 1 for 150 on his Test debut. Even as Shastri dropped anchor and
sought to repair the early damage with a little help from Manjrekar
and Vengsarkar, it was the silken skills of Tendulkar that had all of
Australia suddenly taking notice of the Indian team. The record stand
for the fifth wicket between Shastri and Tendulkar was worth 196 in
198 minutes and as Shastri moved towards his first Test double century,
Tendulkar took centre stage with an array of dazzling shots that had
the spectators riveted. The fourth day's play belonged to Tendulkar as
he reached his century in 226 minutes from 171 balls, the youngest to
do so on Australian soil. Once again, as at Old Trafford in 1990, the
bat was lifted, the helmet taken off, and a shy half-smile crossed his
lips.
At 18 years and 256 days, Sachin had surpassed the previous record
held by Australian left-handed legend Neil Harvey who had made
153 against India at Melbourne in 1948, at the age of19 years and 121
days, 25 years before Tendulkar was born. Harvey himself led the
chorus which rang out across the country. He thought Sachin's
performance had been quite brilliant and expressed his belief that he
would be around for a long time and would break a few records before
he was finished.
'He is the best player I have seen for ages. I love the way he places
the ball past fieldsmen and his back-foot technique is superb. He also
seems to have a good temperament. Given his ability and the number
of Test matches they play these days, he could play 200 Tests before
he's finished:
There was something else Sachin had in common with Harvey.
He forced a fielding captain to accept an offer ofbad light, something
Harvey had achieved in South Mrica. With just a handful of Tests
behind him, Sachin's innings displayed a maturity that put the vastly
experienced batsmen who came before and after him to shame.
Virtually everything came off the middle of the bat and he drove and
cut with panache and precision.
The Aussies, meanwhile, had been giving a hard time to both
Shastri and Tendulkar with their patented form of abuse known
euphemistically in Australia as 'sledging'. 'I had just reached my
On Top Down Under

79

hundred and I was having a verbal duel with the Australians,' recalled
Shastri in MidDay (May2001). ~t the end of the over he came over to
me and said in Marathi, "Thumb, mazha pan shambhar hounde" (Wait
till I get my hundred). And I said, with your brilliance young man,
you don't even have to do that. What happened is history. The Waugh
brothers were made to eat humble pie.'
India declined to declare on their overnight 445 for 7 (Tendulkar:
120 not out) on the final day and added a further 38 runs to swell their
lead to 170. Tendulkar was now improvising and got 28 of the last 38
runs. His 148 not out from 216 balls with 14 fours took a shade under
five hours. Needing 171 to avoid an innings defeat, Australia finished
on a precarious 173 for 8 with captain Border hanging on for 53. With
the wicket taking plenty of spin on the final day, Azhar in desperation
turned to Tendulkar to bowl some off spin. And he claimed his first
Test wicket in his only over when he had the obdurate Merv Hughes
caught by Prabhakar for 21. The draw was a huge turnaround from
the crushing defeats India had suffered in the previous two Tests and
prevented the clean sweep which many Aussie supporters had been
predicting. Victory could have been India's but for some strange tactics
and also time lost to rain. Azhar was criticized for delaying the
declaration till early on the fifth day. In hindsight, the 36 minutes he
batted on and the ten minutes for the change of innings may have
proved the difference between victory for the Indians and a draw.
David Frith summed up the match eloquently in Wisden Cricket
Monthly (February 1992): 'Tendulkar's creamy elegance, power and
precocity had even the local partisans cooing ... It was bad luck for
Shastri that his double-century and his wickets will take second place
in public memory behind Tendulkar's beautiful century. The boy
wonder's talent is so great it's almost frightening.'
Between Test matches, India, Australia and the West Indies were
involved in the World Series Cup (wsc) in which India had lost in the
finals in 1985-86. The tournament marked the start of the decline of
the mighty West Indies, World Cup champions in 1975 and 1979 and
virtually invincible in one-day games in Australia until now. Led by
Richie Richardson, West Indies were without the one and only Vivian
80

Sachin

Richards for the first time since the mid-1970s. Veterans like Desmond
Haynes and Malcolm Marshall were coming to the end of their careers,
and Brian Lara was yet to set the cricket world alight. Indeed, it was
India who had first pricked the bubble of Caribbean invincibility, first
at Berbice in 1983 and then later the same year at Lord's in the World
Cup finals.
The tri-series began in sensational style at Perth on 6 December
1991 with Sachin Tendulkar getting the last West Indies wicket to
earn a tie for India. Ttwas the first time in 692 oms that both sides were
all out for exactly t; .. 5ame score-a perfect tie. In conditions ideal for
swing and seam bowlers, both sides made their lowest total against
each other. Shastri took a laborious 110 balls to score 33, the highest
score in the match. There were just two boundaries in the entire Indian
innings of 126 all out in 47.4 overs and Shastri hit both. West Indies
were quickly in trouble too, as debutant medium-pacer Subroto
Banerjee picked up three wickets, including Lara for 14. The score
was 76 for 8 before the unlikely pair of Curtly Ambrose and Anderson
Cummins came together in the biggest stand of the match (37).
Cummins and last man Patrick Patterson had pieced together 13 runs
when Tendulkar had Cummins brilliantly caught in the slips by a
diving Azhar, with the scores level. It was his only over of the match
and made up to some extent for his failure with the bat.
Two days later, it was Australia's turn to collapse for their lowest
score against India, a measly 101, as India scored a thumping win by
107 runs against the reigning world champions. Shastri's 5-15 from
6.5 overs were the best om figures tor India till 1993-94. Tendulkar
gave away just eight runs from his four overs and also scored a useful
36 in India's score of208 for 7. Mter the shock at Perth, Australia came
back strongly to crush India by eight wickets at Hobart and then edge
West Indies out by nine runs at Melbourne. Manjrekar and Tendulkar
hit identical scores (57) and their stand of 102 stood out starkly in a
paltry Indian total of 175 for 8 at Hobart.
West Indies' poor run continued as they were beaten by ten runs
by India at Adelaide. The Indian total of262 for 4 would be the highest
in a tournament in which the ball generally dominated the bat.
On Top Down Under

81

Srikkanth-who was making a comeback after being
unceremoniously dumped following the Palcistan tour-smashed 84
at almost a run a ball with Manjrekar (55) and Tendulkar (48) helping
to boost the score. Australia by now were on a roll, and they flattened
both their opponents. It would be a fight between India and West
Indies for the other slot in the final. West Indies finally broke their
wretched run as Cummins' 5-31 bowled them to victory by six wicket<>
against India at Brisbane. Tendulkar's 77 was his highest score in 27
oms and he was now emerging as the most reliable of the Indian
batsmen. Each time he looked set to get a bigger score, though, he got
out to impetuous shots. With the West Indies beating Australia and
then India losing to Australia, it came down to the last game. The
winner of the final league game at Melbourne would be in the final.
West Indies crawled to 48 for 3 from 25 overs and three run-outs
ensured that they could only reach 175 for 8. Though he did not
claim any wickets, Tendulkar gave away just 38 runs in his full quota
of ten overs. The Indian batting was pinned down by an outstanding
opening spell by Ambrose: 6-4-3-1. But Man of the Match Tendulkar
helped break the shackles with 57 not out, which saw India home by
five wickets and into the finals.
Australia romped home by eight wickets in the first final at
Melbourne. The second at Sydney could have gone either way. India
needed 13 off the last over bowled by Whitney. They lost by six runs.
Tendulkar once again top-scored with 69 from 100 balls, though he
had some lucky escapes. He was dropped by Steve Waugh, who had
earlier 'caught' him off a no-ball. Waugh floored a skier off his own
bowling even as TV commentator Tony Greig was saying, 'No way in
the world will he drop that.' Then Tom Moody's throw from square
leg hit the stumps and the TV replay showed Tendulkar was short of
his ground. This was before the advent of the third umpire with the
benefit of TV replays. Ironically, just ten months later Tendulkar would
become the first to be given out (run out) to this technology.
With 401 runs from ten innings (one not out) Sachin was the
leading Indian batsman. The wsc one-day games were an ideal warmup to the World Cup, though they did add to the fatigue of the players.
82

Sachin

But for now it was back to the Test series with India down 2-0 after
three Tests. Shastri had suffered a knee injury during the wsc and his
absence from the last two Tests of the series was a major setback for the
team. The Indian bowling had come in for much flak at the start of the
tour. But the bowlers had performed creditably, and it was their batting
that was the bane of the Indians. The bowlers had their finest hour in
Australia's first innings in the fourth Test at Adelaide after Azhar had
won the toss and put them in. Memories of a similar decision 18
months ago may have been on his mind. But this time, it paid off
handsomely. Kapil Dev and Raju picked up three wickets apiece. And
Tendulkar broke the back of the batting with two vital wickets at the
start of the innings. He bowled opener Mark Taylor for 11, and then
had Border caught by Pandit for his second duck of the series. Australia
crashed to 145 all out.
Kapil was having a vintage series with both bat and ball, and his 56
was the first half-century of the match. But with the top six batsmen
swept away by Hughes and McDermott with just 70 on the board, it
looked like Australia would take the lead after all. However, this time
the Indian tail wagged and a lead of80 runs was their reward.
The Australian umpiring sunk to new depths during the series
and was a persistent grouse with the tourists. When Boon was on 1,
Kapil rapped him on the pads, but he was given not out. It seemed an
unjust decision at the time to the Indians and they would certainly
have cause to rue it, for Boon (135) and Taylor (100) added 221 for the
second wicket, helping Australia cross the 400 mark for the first time
in the series.
Indeed, eight Indian batsmen would be given out leg before in this
Test, against two for the Australians. But it was the shocker which
Vengsarkar received in the second innings, stretching well forward to
Hughes, that took the cake and led commentator Ian Chappell to
blurt out on air, 'If that was not outside the line of the off stump when
it hit, then I'm a Dutchman.' This from a true-blue Aussie!
The normally diplomatic Indian cricket manager Abbas Ali Baig
asked cuttingly if there had been any changes in Law 36 which his
team were unaware of, and about which he wished to speak to the
On Top Down Under

83

umpires for the fifth Test.
Azhar's form in the series had also become the topic of discussion
amongst the team and back home. He had eked out just 51 runs so far
and there were murmurings that he was not worth his place in the
side. It hardly helped matters that the side contained four former
captains-Shastri, Kapil, Vengsarkar and Srikkanth-perhaps still
nursing a desire to get back the captaincy.
In his authorized biography of Azharuddin, Harsha Bhogle hinted
at this while stressing that the younger members of the team were
behind their skipper. 'Sachin Tendulkar told me, "If only Azzu could
score runs, it would make such a difference. For his sake, we all want
him to get runs. You know, the other day, I just couldn't control myself
and I went and told him that if he batted like this, it might help.
Perhaps I shouldn't have done it but all of us so badly want him to
score"' (Azhar: The Authorized Biography cif Mohammad Azharuddin ).
The final day, and the equation was clear. India had all their wickets
intact and the target was now 340 from 90 overs. Azhar had dropped
himself down to number six to accommodate Tendulkar at four, since
the team had decided to go all out for victory in the hope of keeping
the series alive. It was make or break for both the team and their leader,
and Azhar responded with the most dazzling batting exhibition so far.
Just as he had done in England and New Zealand in 1990, he went tor
the bowling and tore it apart. Prabhakar ( 64) put on 101 with him for
the seventh wicket in less than 90 minutes, and while they were at the
crease an improbable Indian victory suddenly loomed large. Azhar
smashed 80 between lunch and tea, at which point the score was 252
for 6, with 120 more needed. It took a tremendous burst with the
second new ball by McDermott and another diabolical umpiring
decision to thwart the victory charge. Azhar was snapped up at slip by
Mark Taylor for 106 as McDermott took the final four wickets to fall,
including Prabhakar lbw off an inside edge. With five wickets in both
innings, the Man of the Match award was his. The series could so
easily have been 2-2 going into the final Test at Perth. Instead, Australia
had pocketed it 3-0 and the Indians were to rue several missed
opportunities, not to mention the umpiring that did them in at crucial
84

Sachin

moments.
Despite there being little to play for at Perth, the Test produced
some glorious personal milestones and achievements. The resultAustralia's victory by a whopping 300 runs-seemed almost
inconsequential. Three Australian batsmen-David Boon, Dean Jones
and Tom Moody-reached three figures (it was Boon's third century
of the series) and Mike Whitney took the bowling honours (4-68 and
7-27). But it was Tendulkar and Kapil who had the media and the fans
enthralled. When Kapil had Taylor lbw for 16 on the fourth day, he
became only the second bowler after New Zealand's Sir Richard
Hadlee to reach the milestone of 400 Test wickets. With four wickets
in the Test, the medium-pacer who had made his debut in 1978 had
his best overseas series with 25 victims in all. Only McDermott with
31 topped that.
The fourth day also saw Tendulkar progress from his overnight 31
not out to his second century of the series, and already predictions
were being made by journalists and former cricketers about the
glittering career that lay ahead of him. After Australia's 346, it took
Tendulkar's daring strokes to get his side to within 74 runs in the first
innings. A total of 400-plus in the fourth innings was always beyond
India's batsmen. But their capitulation to a mere 141 all out after an
opening stand of82 stunned one and all.
Tendulkar's century came from only 135 balls, with 14 fours, as he
cut the formidable Australian pace attack to size in a breathtaking
display of aggression. The second 50 of the innings came from 55
balls with six boundaries. He was like the boy who stood on the burning
deck, for every other batsman in the side struggled to cope with the
steep ling bounce. There would be two more boundaries before he was
caught knee-high by Moody at second slip offWhitney. He had scored
114 out of the 140 runs made while at the crease. The innings was
marked by cutting and driving of ferocious power and timing. Often
he would go up on his toes to smash the ball to the distant square
boundaries. The series saw some dazzling batsmanship on both sides.
But they all paled iii comparison to Tendulkar's third century in 16
Tests.

The Tendulkar fan club was now growing rapidly. Former
Australian Test batsman Norman O'Neill had this to say: 'The
difference between an ordinary and a class player is the time he has
even to make last second adjustments to play his strokes. Tendulkar
has it. He is all class. I enjoyed every moment of his innings.' Said
Border, 'If he could play like this at 19, I shudder to think what he will
be at 25.' In fact, he was still a couple of months shy of his nineteenth
birthday at the end of the Perth Test. Even ABC radio commentator
Tim Laine's gushing praise did not seem out of place: 'This boy is
from heaven. He will do anything' (Sportstar, 15 February 1992). Nearly
a decade later, even after his twenty-fifth Test century, Tendulkar
himself rated this knock as among his top three (Cricket Talk, 9
December 2000).
David Boon told me, 'It was quite amazing that someone so young
could show the maturity he did. His shot selection and execution
were of someone who would normally be much older and more
experienced.'
Cricket manager Abbas Ali Baig shared his memories of the tour
and ofTendulkar in particular with me in his office in New Delhi in
October 2000. 'At Sydney he had a senior pro (Shastri) with him to
nurse him along-not that he really needed it at that stage of his
career. The wicket at Sydney was also rather slow. At Perth it was
another matter. It was a very nasty and fast wicket and the Australian
fast bowlers were playing havoc with our batsmen. But Sachin was
hooking them with impunity; he was cutting and driving them. I rate
this innings very, very highly. The Australians secretly adored him
but on the field they gave him a bit of stick as is their wont. They
always pick out the best player and target him. But he never flinched
and gave it back to them.
'At team meetings he would be very involved. He would sit quietly
but then his little voice would suddenly pipe up. He would be to the
point and didn't waste your time. Even at that age you had to take note
of his suggestions. He was remarkably mature for his age.'

86

Sachin
