Back on Top

I just think Sachin played a super super knock today. just like the man he is.
-Kevin Pietersen.
Footballers for decades have found themselves caught in the clubversus-country dilemma. International cricket has had plenty of
problems ofit:s own to tackle, but this was one that was unheard-oftill the arrival of the Indian Premier League. And the dilemma is
bound to grow if Twenty20 leagues start sprouting up around the
cricket world.
The question ofwhether Tendulkar rushed his return to assist the
Mumbai Indians despite not being fully fit was raised in the previous
chapter.
Now it emerged the groin strain had not healed and it would keep
him out of the 001 tri-series in Bangladesh and the Asia Cup in
Pakistan. Just before the IPL the same injury had forced him to miss
two Test matches against South Mrica as well.
He was back for the Test series in Sri Lanka, but it was not a happy
time either for Tendulkar or the Indian team. The Lankans won the
series 2-1, the same margin as in India's previous tour in 2001, and
Tendulkar could only eke out a miserable 95 runs from six innings. It
was the worst Test series of his career.
To add to his woes, the wretched run of injuries was back and this
time it was his left elbow that suffered while he attempted a catch in
the third Test at Colombo. It meant he had to miss the 001 series that
followed.
His absence was hardly felt though as M.S. Dhoni led India to

their first series triumph on Lankan soil.
Australia's trip to India in late 2008 was the fourth India-Australia
series in the last five seasons and was once again highly anticipated.
Apart from the drawn first Test at Bangalore when they had sessions
of domination, the Australians found themselves outclassed and lost
two of the four Tests.
There were plenty ofdramatic moments throughout the series but
none more so than the sudden retirement of captain Ani! Kumble on
the final day of the third Test in New Delhi. It meant Dhoni was now
leading the nation in all three formats.
Having pocketed the record for most Test centuries three years
earlier, it was now time for Tendulkar to make another significant
mark all his own-most Test runs.
Throughout their careers Tendulkar and Brian Lara had been neckand-neck in batting feats and became great friends and competitors
along the way. The West Indian retired at the end of the 2007 World
Cup but not before he had amassed 11,953 Test runs.
It was only a matter time before Sachin surpassed that figure and it
happened the first ball after tea on the first day of the second Test at
Mohali. There was just a sprinkling of spectators-augmented by a
bunch of schoolchildren who were brought in-to see him scamper
for the three runs he needed, and then the celebrations broke out. A
touch over the top perhaps. Firecrackers were set offby the organizers,
holding up play even as the Australians led by Panting rushed to
congratulate Tendulkar on his latest record.
The man himself reacted as ifhe had reached three figures who
was actually on 15. It was quite understandable though as it was another
burden lifted offhis shoulders.
India were losing wickets at the other end and were in a spot of
bother before Tendulkar and Sourav Ganguly bailed them out.
More landmarks were cross~:d-his 50th Test half-century and
then the first batsman to go past 12,000 runs. The spotlight stayed on
him the whole day despite Ganguly reaching his century in his final
Test series.
But Tendulkar was to be denied a century of his own. It was
366

Sachin

debutant pace bowler Peter Siddle who got his wicket for 88 shortly
before stumps on the first day.
'Success is a process and during that journey sometimes there are
stones thrown at you and you convert them into milestones. It's a
great feeling' was how he summed up the journey that had begun 19
years ago.
Australia were thoroughly outplayed and lost the Test by the
massive margin of 320 runs. It was India's biggest Test win and
Australia's heaviest defeat in terms of runs against India. The critics
who labelled the visitors as the weakest to visit India since Kim
Hughes's side nearly 30 years earlier were being proved correct.
The Australian eclipse was complete when they went down by
172 runs in the fourth and final Test at N agpur.
Tendulkar's 109 in the first innings was his 40th Test century and
10'h against Australia and, with 396 runs in the series, he had once
again bounced back from a bad patch.
India regained the Border-Gavaskar Trophy for the first time since
2001, and Panting and his team were left to lick their wounds.
It was a rare defeat for the world champions. But their decline was
confirmed later in the season when they were beaten on home soil by
South Africa and also toppled off their top spot in the ODI rankings.
It was midway through the series that extracts from Adam
Gilchrist's new autobiography True Colours created a stir. Gilchrist, in
his book, claimed Tendulkar was something of a sore loser and had
changed his testimony in the so-called 'Monkey-gate' episode. Both
allegations were swiftly refuted by Tendulkar and others connected
with the episode, forcing Gilchrist to backtrack from his comments
and phone Tendulkar to personally apologize. The controversy though
surely helped boost sales of his book.
Tendulkar requested the selectors to rest him for the first three oms
against England in late 2008. A surfeit of cricket and a spate of injuries
were no doubt behind the decision.
By the time he returned at Bangalore, India were 3-0 ahead with
four to go. They made it 5--0 by winning both at Ban galore and Cuttack
and the first 7-0 sweep in international cricket was looming large.
Back on Top

367

But by the time the players got back to their hotel rooms at the end
of the Cuttack match, events were unfolding in Mumbai that would
shake the nation to its core and send shockwaves throughout the world.
The horror of the 26/11 terrorist attack on Mumbai was witnessed
on TV by the players and it was immediately decided to call off the tour.
A shocked English team rushed back home.
No one pointed fingers at them this time. The unprecedented
horror of the attacks left everyone stunned with some of the Indian
players confessing they had barely slept the three days the trauma
stretched on for.
There was no pressure on England to return for the two Test
matches. But a decision had to be made and in the end, the English
team-particularly captain Kevin Pietersen-won the hearts of all
Indians by coming back. It was a great boost to the morale of the
nation which had suffered grievously.
The wounds were still raw when the Chennai Test began under
fortress-like conditions in the M.A. Chidambaram Stadium. Mter all,
it was just a fortnight since the heinous attacks had finally been
repulsed.
The return of international cricket at least gave the nation
something to look forward to and a feeling that normalcy was fast
being restored. But for the Indian players the first half of the Test
flashed by as if in a surreal haze.
In fact England dominated the match for three-and-half-days
before the home side pulled themselves back.
With a first innings lead of75 runs, Pietersen declared the England
second innings with nine wickets down and set India 387 as the
improbable winning target. In 75 years of Test cricket on Indian soil
no team had crossed 300 to win.
It took Sehwag's audacious batting to snatch the advantage out of
England's hands. He did not spare any of the bowlers and raced to 83
from 68 balls before falling lbw shortly before stumps on the fourth
day. The opening stand with Gautam Gambhir was worth 117 at five
runs per over and now the momentum was with India.
Resuming on 131 for one on the final day, India lost Dravid,
368

Sachin

Gambhir and Laxman for the addition of93 runs and at 224 for four,
the English bowlers were back on top. The Indian batting line-up had
developed a nasty habit of caving in to pressure in the fourth innings
and 387 certainly looked a bridge too far.
This is where Tendulkar and Yuvraj Singh took over. The young
left-hander was still struggling to establish himself in the Test side
and hoping to fill the big boots of the retired Ganguly.
Such was the mastery of the pair that at no stage did England look
capable of a breakthrough. The crowd, which had been sparse till
then, began to steadily build as word spread through the city that
Tendulkar was producing an innings of a lifetime with his young
partner not too far behind.
There was a steely determination about Tendulkar's batting that
was awe-inspiring. It became clear as the day wore on and the target
came ever closer that this would be his moment.
Sure enough with his own score on 99 and four needed for victory,
destiny played its final hand-off spinner Graeme Swann was swept
to the fine leg boundary and the victory as well as Tendulkar's 41st
century were reached simultaneously.
It was only his third century in the fourth innings of a Test and the
first time it had resulted in a win. The previous two-at Old Trafford
in 1990 and at Chennai against Pakistan in 1999-ended in a draw
and defeat for India, respectively. As Yuvraj lifted his idol in his arms,
the crowd erupted in joy as did millions oflndian fans watching on TV
around the world.
Ravi Shastri with mike in hand captured the moment perfectly as
he interviewed the jubilant pair on the edge of the ground.
His face streaked with sweat, grime and tears, Tendulkar dedicated
the victory to the nation. He could not wipe the broad smile off his
face, yet his voice was choking with emotion. No wonder he said the
century ranked with the very best of his career.
Not even an Indian fan could have put it better when Pietersen
commented: 'I just think Sachin played a super super knock today.
Just like the man he is.'
Though defeat would have been a bitter pill to swallow for England,
Back on Top

369

somehow the feeling was there were no losers at the end of the Test. It
was that kind of a day.
Former England bowler and columnist Mike Selvey summed it
all up in one word: 'karma.'
What followed was always going to be anti-climactic and, sure
enough, the Mohali Test ended in a dreary draw.
Despite the injuries and the setback in the IPL, 2008 turned out to
be another splendid year for Tendulkar what with a major world record
in his pocket. He finished with 1063 runs, the fifth time in his career
he had crossed 1000 Test runs in a calendar year and the first time
since 2002.
In 2007 he had amassed 1425 runs in ODI runs, the seventh such
occasion in his career. So notwithstanding the injuries and the doubters
(former team-mate Sanjay Manjrekar being the foremost and most
vocal), Tendulkar was once again among the top batsmen in the world.
The cancellation of the Pakistan tour allowed the top players to
make a rare appearance in the Ranji Trophy.
Sachin's century in the semi-finals against Saurashtra was the 68th
of his first-class career, including the 41 centuries in Test matches.
But in the final against Uttar Pradesh at Hyderabad that Mumbai
won, he was out for 0 and 4.
Remarkably, that first innings duck was the first time he had been
dismissed without scoring in a domestic first-class match on Indian
soil.
The year 2009 marks the 20th anniversary of Sachin's bow in
international cricket. It was announced in January that he had been
awarded the Padma Vibhushan by the government, the second highest
civilian honour after the Bharat Ratna. World chess champion
Vishwanathan Anand is the only other sportsperson to receive the
honour.
Over the last two decades Sachin has made most of the major
batting records his own. A double century in oms-he would be the
first-and a triple in Tests are two marks he may still be secretly hoping
to achieve.
370

Sachin

The Pakistan tour cancellation also led to a hastily arranged ODI
series in Sri Lanka.
Once India had won the first three games to seal the five-match
series, it was decided to give Tendulkar a break. His patience must also
have been tested as he was given out lbw to dodgy decisions in all
three matches for low scores.
The decision to skip select oms and also opt out of T-20
Internationals appears to be a well-thought-out plan to preserve himself
at least till2011 when India is to co-host the World Cup for the third
time.
Though he has never stated so explicitly, there have been hints
that the World Cup will be Sachin's swansong.
Winning a World Cup for India has been his most fervent wish
and 2011 will surely be his last chance in what would be his sixth
appearance in the premier 50-overs championship.

Back on Top

371