Sunny Eel ipsed

Tendulkar is still the very best in the business.-Arjuna Ranatunga
With Pakistan touring India for the first time since 1999, for three
Tests and six ODis, the pressure was back on Tendulkar. Mter all, it was
against Pakistan that he had made his Test debut in 1989 and which
better side to achieve the world record for most Test centuries than
India's traditional rivals?
India began the series as hot favourites having beaten Pakistan on
their own soil the season before and it was at Mohali in the opening
Test match in March 2005 that Tendulkar fell short of the magical
mark by just one scoring stroke.
It took a tremendous rearguard act by Pakistan's lower order
batsmen on the final day to save the Test after falling behind by 204
runs in the first innings.
India's massive first innings of 516 saw all the top six batsmen
chipping in, with Virender Sehwag's 173 the standout innings.
Tendulkar played some glorious shots early in his knock before
withdrawing into his shell once he got into the 80s.
A thick edge to gully saw him out for 94 in the last session of the
third day and the huge sigh of disappointm~nt around the ground
meant Mohali had missed out on their slice of cricket history. He did
not get a chance to bat the second time round.
Pakistan's great escape would haunt captain Sourav Ganguly later
in the series, which turned out to be his final one in charge at home.
India surged ahead after the second Test at Kolkata thanks to Ani I
Kumble's haul of 10 wickets and another awesome batting display.

Once again Tendulkar was eclipsed, this time by Rahul Dravid
who scored centuries in both innings. In a remarkable coincidence,
Tendulkar scored 52 in both the innings and India's total in each
innings was 407 (for nine wickets declared in the second). It was
enough to win the Test comfortably by 195 runs.
If in the first innings he was out to a poor shot, in the second
Tendulkar fell to India's old bogeyman, umpire Steve Bucknor of
Jamaica who had created his own record by becoming the first umpire
to stand in 100 Tests.
Having turned down an appeal for bad light minutes before,
Bucknor raised his finger to the astonishment of everyone at the
ground-including the Pakistanis-when he upheld a caught-behind
appeal by bowler Abdul Razzaq. No one else in the field went up for
the catch and Tendulkar' sjaw dropped in shock. The distance between
bat and ball was for all to see, except apparently the man who counts
under such circumstances.
Tendulkar had once again missed out on that 35th ton. But on the
first day he became the fifth batsman to cross 10,000 runs and in
exactly the same number of innings (195) as his great friend and rival,
Brian Lara.
Inzamam-ul-Haq's side had been written offat the start of the tour
as one of the weakest from Pakistan to visit India. But the end of the
third and final Test at Bangalore proved how wrong the critics were as
India's inability to shut out the Mohali Test rebounded on them.
Younis Khan's outstanding batting (267 and 84 not out) was the
feature of this match as India's batting once again crumbled when
chasing on the final day-a repeated failing both on the part of the
team and the individual (Tendulkar) over the last decade.
Sehwag responded with a double century of his own but India
conceded over 100 runs on the first innings and the target of383 runs
was well beyond them.
By lunch on the fifth and final day; a draw seemed the most plausible
outcome with India having lost just the wicket ofSehwag through a
run out.
But now shockingly the entire batting line up retreated into their
338

Sachin

shells and the ultra-defensive tactics allowed Pakistan's bowlers to
throttle them to defeat. The last nine wickets crumbled for the addition
of only 127 runs.
It was Tendulkar's inertia at the crease that was a major factor in
the collapse and the last Indian wicket fell with just a handful of overs
left in the match.
Mter striking a rapid 41 in the first innings, Tendulkar, the second
time around, scratched about for 98 balls and 140 minutes before he
succumbed meekly to the part-time spin of Shahid Mridi for a
miserable 16 runs.
India surrendered by 168 runs and a jubilant Pakistan side could
scarcely believe this dramatic tum in fortunes. Though the series
ended 1-1, the visitors were certainly the moral victors and a deflated
Indian side went into the one-day series with their spirits crushed.
That was not immediately evident as they romped home in the
first and second ODis at Kochi and Visakhapatnam and looked to have
taken a firm grip on the series.
Incredibly, Pakistan stormed back to win the next four in a row and
grab the series 4-2.
Tendulkar made a total of145 runs in six innings. But 123 of those
were scored in the fourth game at Ahmedabad. The rest ofhis scores
made sad reading--4, 2, 6, 1 and 9.
His previous 001 century had also been against Pakistan at
Rawalpindi 13 months earlier and in between there had been 15
innings, in which his highest score was 82 not out.
But as at Rawalpindi (where Pakistan won by 12 runs), at
Ahmedabad too his century was not enough.
India scored 315 for 6 and Pakistan scrambled home by three
wickets from the final delivery of the match bowled by Tendulkar
with the scores level, which lnzamam calmly struck for a boundary.
The Pakistan captain took the Man of the Match award for his
unbeaten 60 despite Tendulkar's ton (his 38th) and his bowling which
fetched him the wicket of Abdul Razzaq. Inzamam's was, after all, a
match-winning innings.
To make things worse for the Indians, Ganguly copped a ban of six
Sunny Eclipsed

339

matches for the team's slow over-rates and Dravid led the side for the
last two games. Pakistan were on a roll by now and they deservingly
returned home to a hero's welcome.
The series marked the end of coach john Wright's five-year tenure
and soon !here would be a change of captaincy too.
Wright was replaced by former Australian captain Greg Chappell
and his appointment would set in motion one of the most dramatic
and traumatic periods in the history oflndian cricket.
Meanwhile, it was announced that Tendulkar's 'tennis elbow'
injury that had plagued him the previous year was back and there was
no option but to go in for surgery in London.
So the Indian team prepared itselffor another long leave of absence
by the maestro.
Chappell's first assignment was the Indian Oil om tri-series in Sri
Lanka in July where India lost in the final to the hosts, the West Indies
being the third participant.
It was not the best of starts for the new coach but worse was to
follow in Zimbabwe where India played two Test matches and was
part of the om series with New Zealand.
Ganguly was back as captain but his private spat with Chappell
became public and all hell broke loose back home. Tendulkar was still
recovering from surgery and was no doubt grateful that he was not
around when the storm broke. Though India, expectedly, swept the
Test series, they were once again beaten in the final of the tri-series,
this time at the hands of the Kiwis.
The Sri Lankans were back in town in October for seven oms,
followed by four against South Mrica after which the Lankans would
return for three Tests. And by now, Dravid had been formally appointed
as captain.
Mter missing six months (and eight days, to be precise) of cricketincluding the ill-fated ICC 'Super Series' in Australia-Tendulkar was
declared fit and found the spotlight trained unerringly on himself
once agam.
During this period he had expressed his frustrations in an interview
at not being able to lift a bat during his rehabilitation period. 'Would
340

Sachin

he be able to regain his batting touch after another injury layoff?' was
the question on everyone's lips.
The answer could not have been more emphatic. A sparkling 93 in
the series opener at Nagpur, followed by 67 not out in the next at
Mohali. And though his scores dipped after that, India were
unstoppable and ran out convincing winners at 6-1.
'Tendulkar is still the very best in the business,' proclaimed former
Lanka captain Arjuna Ranatunga after watching him at Nagpur.
There was another slump in the four games against the South
Africans where he totalled just 36 runs. But now it was back to the
business ofTest cricket against Lanka.
The first Test at Chennai was a near-washout but there was a packed
house for the next one inN ew Delhi with anticipation running high.
Would the Ferozeshah Kotla, where in 1983 Gavaskar had drawn
level with Don Bradman's then record of29 centuries, witness another
moment of cricket history?
Tendulkar did not disappoint. Century number 35-and the new
world record was reached just as darkness descended at the end of the
first day. The record that Gavaskar established stood for over two decades
and would stay in India for some more years to come.
Tendulkar had not been fluent to start with and had crawled to his
half-century from 112 balls. But he opened out in the final session
and three boundaries in a Murali over signalled his intentions.
Once the landmark was reached with a tuck off his hips off
Chaminda Vaas, the roar of the crowd was deafening. The bat was
raised, the fist was clenched and a long lingering look at the sky marked
the magical moment.
When asked in an interview in The Spottstar (24 December 2005)
about the emotions of the moment, he replied: 'I have always tried to
keep my emotions under check. But there are times when you just
can't keep them under control. This was one occasion when I wouldn't
have been honest had I not expressed my emotions. I am as human as
anyone else.' He dedicated the record to his late father.
It had been exactly a year since the 34th century at Dhaka and
those 12 months were filled with physical pain and mental agony. But
Sunny Eclipsed

341

it had all been worthwhile in the end as the cricket world saluted the
master who made the record his own after 16long years.
When asked in the same interview what he was most proud of, his
reply was short and simple: 'My discipline.'
Winning the Test match and the next one at Ahmedabad only
made things sweeter and the Dravid-Chappell combine now appeared
to have settled into the job comfortably.
For the third time in two years, India and Pakistan would clash on
a cricket pitch. The encounters were now beginning to feel passe and
some of the tension traditionally associated with them had been lost as
a result of their frequent meetings. Now at the start of2006, India
were once again crossing the border for three Test matches and five
ODIS.

The first Test at Lahore and the second at Faisalabad turned out to
be bloated run-feasts. Bowlers on both sides were left despairing as to
when the next wicket would fall.
They certainly got their revenge at Karachi, for most of the match
at least.
The Test started in a sensational manner with Irfan Pathan
claiming a hat-trick in the very first over of the match. Pakistan
recovered and inched ahead by just seven runs on the first innings.
But in the second they piled up another massive total and declared on
599 for7.
It meant the famed Indian batting line-up had to survive 164 overs
to salvage a draw. Instead, they folded up in 59.4 overs and a little over
four hours for 265 runs. The dreaded fourth innings bogey had
returned.
Pakistan's thumping victory by 341 runs was their biggest in terms
of runs and a stunning turnaround after crashing to 39 for 6 on the
first morning.
Tendulkar finished with 23 and 26 and the photo ofhim nearly
squatting on his haunches as a Mohammad Asif special speared out
his off stump in the second innings was splashed across most of the
Indian dailies. It was not a pleasant sight for Indian fans and one
newspaper had the temerity to headline their report 'Endulkar?' The
342

Sachin

accompanying article raised the question for the first time as to whether
he was nearing the end of his career.
Although he had recorded the world Test record hundred six weeks
earlier in Delhi, Tendulkar looked below his attacking best on the
tour and the spate of injuries only added to the speculation. He had
appeared tentative in Pakistan, hit on the helmet by a Shoaib Akhtar
delivery in Karachi. His dismissal in the second Test at Faisalabad also
raised eyebrows. He walked after gloving Shoaib behind the stumps,
though television replays suggested he was not out because his hand
was off the bat.
Not one to react to the media, Sachin, it appeared, had taken the
offending headline and analysis to heart and lashed out at a press
conference. Within the team there was a feeiing that it had all been too
insulting in tone.
But the team came roaring back to crush Pakistan 4-1 in the om
series. Tendulkar played a major role with 100 in the opening game at
Peshawar which India lost on the Duckworth-Lewis method. It was
his first om century in 10 months and in that period he had managed
only 277 runs from 12 matches averaging a shade over 25.
India swept the next four matches and his innings of 95 in the
third at Lahore was Tendulkar at his best. There was a magical touch
to his strokes and the Pakistani bowlers were at his mercy. So the
results for the team and his own batting in Pakistan had been decidedly
mixed.
The visiting English team appeared down and out even before the
start of the Test series in March 2006. Captain Michael Vaughan
joined paceman Simon Jones and opener Marcus Trescothick on the
early departure list and Ashes hero Andrew Flintoff took over the
captaincy for" the first time.
The first Test at N agpur was drawn and then India rolled over the
visitors at Mohali to win the second by nine wickets. It looked like a
rout would be in store in the third and final Test at Mumbai. Instead,
England came roaring back to win the match by 212 runs, their first
on Indian soil since 1985, and against all odds the series was left
deadlocked at 1-1.
Sunny Eclipsed

l4l

Dravid's decision to ask England to bat first on winning the toss
left all and sundry dumbfounded. It was a stunning move which left
Indian cricket fans fuming and even Tendulkar had to face the wrath
of his home fans for the first time.
Set 313 runs in the fourth innings, the batting folded up in one of
the direst batting displays on home soil by an Indian side in living
memory.
Tendulkar was top scorer with 34 but when he departed at 76 for 5,
the boos from a small section of the crowd at the Wankhede Stadium
came as a shock to everyone present.
The bitter taste of that capitulation was soon forgotten though as
India stormed to a 5-1 victory in the ODI series.
Tendulkar, though, once again had to sit it out with an injury, his
third in successive years. This time it was a tear in the right shoulder
that required surgery. It meant he was forced to miss the tour of the
West Indies with India winning a Test series in the Caribbean for the
first time since 1971, though they were outclassed in the oms.
Sachin had a brief stint with the Lashings club side in England in
charity matches after surgery to test his fitness.
He was back in India colours after a break of five months for the
tri-series in Sri Lanka in August. Sachin faced just three deliveries in
the first match at Colombo before it was abandoned due to rain with
India at 11 for no loss against the hosts.
The tri-series was reduced to a bilateral one after a bomb blast in
Colombo sent the South Africans scurrying home. But the persistently
bad weather wrecked the whole event.
The next test ofSachin's fitness would be the tri-series in Kuala
Lumpur, the first time India (and Sachin) would be playing in the
Malaysian capital since the 1998 Commonwealth Games.
All doubts were put to rest as he smashed five sixes (and 13 fours)
in a masterly innings of 141 not out against the West Indies. His 40th
001 century was not enough though as India were unfortunate to be
edged out via the Duckworth-Lewis method.
Despite the disappointment with the result, Tendulkar was
delighted with his form and fitness, terming it a 'special hundred'.
344

Sachin

What made it special was that he batted right through the 50 overs for
only the second time in 364 matches.
Rival captain Brian Lara was lavish in his praise. 'For a guy coming
back after six months, it showed how much of a genius he is. We just
had to watch it and appreciate it, and it was a very special innings for
India.'
Tendulkar also scored 65 in the return match but flopped in the
two games against Australia (12 and 4), and India failed to reach the
final.
The Champions Trophy was another disappointment as hosts India
lost two of their three matches and were knocked out before the semifinals.
Now it was time for South Mrica where India had not won a Test
match on three previous tours.
Things looked ominous however as India were totally outclassed
and lost all four oms. Tendulkar contributed just one half-century.
But there was a silver lining in the one-off T-20 International at
Johannesburg which India won by six wickets with a ball to spare.
It remains the only Twenty20 International in which Tendulkar
(he scored 10) has played and though no one could have dreamed of it
at the time, India would take the cricket world by storm at the same
venue less than a year later.
The big story on the eve of the Test series was the return of Ganguly
after almost a year out of the Indian side. He was one of the batting
stars in a low-scoring first Test at Johannesburg which India won by
123 runs. Finally, India could boast of a Test match victory in every
cricket playing country around the world.
But the wheels fell off the Indian campaign after that and they
were well beaten in the next two matches to lose the series 2-1.
Tendulkar's patchy form continued into the Test series with only
two half-centuries from six innings. But it was his batting in the second
innings of the third Test at Cape Town that had the critics scratching
their heads in dismay. Despite gaining a small first innings lead, the
Indian batsmen retreated into their shells in the second with debutant
slow left-armer Paul Harris tying down Dravid and Tendulkar.
Sunny Eclipsed

345

The two crawled to 24 runs from 15 overs to hand the advantage
back to the battling hosts. Tendulkar scratched around for 62 balls in
eking out 14 runs in what Wisden Cricketers' Almanac described as
'desperately unconvincing' batting. Others called the innings
'embarrassing' and 'depressing'. It appeared the master batsman was
weighed down by numerous factors including perhaps doubts over
his own fitness.
So the knives were out once again for captain Dravid and coach
Chappell, and Tendulkar too had a harsh spotlight trained on him. A
crisis seemed to be swirling round the Indian team. And now it was
World Cup year again.

346

Sachin