12 Runs Short of Glory

I cried so much when I was out I could not see.-Sachin Tendulkar
A month later, the Indian team were in New Zealand under a new
captain, Mohammad Azharuddin, and a new coach, Bishan Singh
Bedi. The team had a fresh, youthful look to it-it was, as Raj Singh
would describe it, the 'team for the 90s'. Tendulkar scored 13, 47, 4
(not out) and 30 in the two warm-up games prior to the first Test at
Lancaster Park, Christchurch. And in the first innings against New
Zealand President's XI at Pukekura Park, New Plymouth on 22
January 1990, he became the youngest to reach the landmark of1000
first-class runs.
It was a miserable batting performance by the visitors in the first
Test at Christchurch as they were beaten by ten wickets with Tendulkar
out for his first duck in Test cricket, in the first innings. Of the Indian
players, only Kapil Dev had previous playing experience in New
Zealand. India crumbled to 164 all out in reply to New Zealand's 459
and, following on, could muster only 296 (Tendulkar: 24). Sir Richard
Hadlee became the first bowler in Test cricket to reach the landmark
of 400 wickets when he bowled Manjrekar in the second innings.
Hadlee was arguably the best bowler in the world at the time and
facing him at such an early stage of his career was an education for
Sachin. He felt that Hadlee was the kind ofbowler who made batsmen
think all the time and after only his second tour, rated the Kiwi master
as the best bowler he had faced till then.
Mter that early setback, the Indian batting clicked in the second
Test at Napier where over two days were lost to rain and a draw was the

only verdict possible. W V Raman was out to Hadlee off the first ball
of the match and it was Prabhakar (95) and Manjrekar (42) who did
the early repair work, adding 92 for the second wicket. Azharuddin
chipped in with 33 and his departure brought Tendulkar in at 152 for
4. Bo!h Vengsarkar and Kapil came and went cheaply, and when
wicketkeeper Kiran More joined Sachin at the crease, the score read
218 for 6. More (73) played the dominant role as he and Tendulkar
put together a record seventh-wicket stand worth 128 runs. Several
airy-fairy shots outside off stump marked the early part ofTendulkar's
innings and he could have been out on numerous occasions. But his
boyishness faded away gradually, and the longer he stayed at the wicket,
the more decisive he grew. By the close of the third day India were 348
for 7 and Tendulkar had batted five hours for his unbeaten 80. All the
speculation overnight centred on whether the long-standing record
set by Pakistan's Mushtaq Mohammed.against India in 1960-61, for
the youngest Test century-maker, would be broken on the fourth day.
Mushtaq was 17 years and 82 days when he reached his maiden century
in Delhi. Sachin was still two months shy ofhis seventeenth birthday.
A teammate, unnamed by Sachin, perhaps added to the pressure
when he told the not-out batsman that he was 20 runs short ofhistory
as he returned to the dressing room that evening.
The next morning, the first ball of the day from Danny Morrison
was dispatched to the cover boundary and then Sachin ran four runs
to a shot to deep mid-off as he moved quickly to 88. Perhaps overconfidence and youthful exuberance got the better ofhim, for the very
next ball was driven firmly but uppishly to captain John Wright at
mid-off who took a ccmfortable catch on one knee. Sachin had batted
for 324 minutes, faced 266 balls and hit four boundaries. 'I cried so
much when I was out, I could not see. The entire team consoled me,'
said Sachin. 'I could have worked my way to the century. I suppose I
got carried away, wanting to take on the bowler.' (Sports Channel video,
December 1990)
'I had two feelings when I caught him,' recalls Wright, now coach
of the Indian team. 'Firstly one of relief, as at the time I was captain of
New Zealand and he was batting so beautifully we looked like we
54

Sachin

would never get him out. It was the second Test and we had won the
first. My second feeling was one of almost feeling sorry for him as he
was only a lad really and he had batted so well and deserved a century....
I was surprised, as he had hit the ball in the air, it was an easy catch and
it came straight to me at mid-off.'
'[Sachin's innings] left experienced members of the New Zealand
team agog,' wrote Don Neely, the convenor of the New Zealand
selection panel, in the New Zealand CricketAlmanack (1991 ).
The third Test at Auckland, a high-scoring match in which
Tendulkar could score only five, was also drawn and New Zealand
won the series 1-0. There was no second chance at the record for the
youngest Test centurion as the next Test series (against England), was
five months away.
The Auckland Test was followed by a one-day tri-series also
involving Australia. Tendulkar played in the opening match against
New Zealand at Carisbrook but once again failed to score. Which
meant he had got out for a duck in his first two One-day Internationals.
He was dropped for the next match against Australia but in the one
after that, against New Zealand at the Basin Reserve on 6 March, he
scored an attractive 36 from 39 balls, with five fours, as India won by
one run. These were his first runs in One-day Internationals. India
had to beat Australia in the next match two days later at Hamilton if
they were to make the final. Tendulkar was once again dropped for the
match and Australia won by eight wickets to complete an unsuccessful
tour for the Indians.
Hadlee was impressed enough by the end of the series to proclaim
the presence of amazing natural ability in Sachin. He thought it was
extraordinary how one so young could hold his own in the world of
men and in such difficult circumstances.
The summer drew to a close with the six-nation Austral-Asia Cup
in April-May at Sharjah. It was a disappointing tournament for both
Sachin and the team as India lost both its league matches, to Sri Lanka
and Pakistd.ll, in Group Band failed to reach the semi-finals. Sachin
scored 10 (run out) and 20 in the two games. At the end of the season,
he had just 66 runs from his first five oms.
12 Runs Short of Glory

55

7

Hail the Boy King

He played like an old pro.-Graham Gooch
Despite three half-centuries in his first six Test matches, there was
some speculation that Tendulkar would be dropped for the tour of
England in the summer of 1990. Fortunately, better sense prevailed.
After the two tours with Star Cricket Club, this was his third visit to
England in as many years. India were to play three Tests and two
One-day Internationals apart from two months of first-class and oneday games against the counties. After scoring 19 in the opening cneday match against League Cricket Conference at Sunderland,
Tendulkar was rested for the first county game versus Yorkshire at
Headingley. Against Hampshire he had scores of32 and 58 not out as
the Indians lost by seven wickets.
With the first Texaco series om on 18 July, Sachin ran into form
and followed the unbeaten half-century against Hampshire with
scores of92 and 70 (v Kent); 65 (v Minor Counties); and 10 not out (v
Scotland). His first century on tour was an unbeaten 105 in the twowicket win over Derbyshire in the one-day match at Chesterfield, the
day before the first 001. The victory came in the final over when
Tendulkar pulled West Indian fast bowler Ian Bishop for his second
six. There were also seven fours from the 149 balls he faced.
Derbyshire captain Kim Barnett (who scored 115) would be the
first of many Englishmen to he impressed by this awesome talent. 'It
was quite simply an astonishing innings. Even the great players of the
game would have been proud of that,' he said in appreciation (Indian
CruketAnnual, 1990).

Sachin's knocks of 92 and 70 against Kent at Canterbury were
significant as they were the first for him in the role of opener. Regulars
Navjot Sidhu and WV Raman were indisposed and Sachin opened
with wicketkeeper Kiran More in a makeshift arrangement. According
to manager and former Test stumper Madhav Mantri, Sachin had
volunteered for the slot, keeping the team's interests in mind. The
Indians won the game by seven wickets. By now the media was all
abuzz with talkoflndia's latest boy wonder and a full house turned up
to watch the first ODI at Headingley.
Mike Atherton fell early after England were asked to bat first. Then
captain Graham Gooch, in an ominous portent of the flood of runs to
come in the Test series, and with the help of 50s from David Gower
and Allan Lamb, took the score to 134 for 2. Debutant leg-spinner
Ani! Kumble struck t\vo telling blows at this stage and India were
back in the game. Just 19 years of age, Kumble then bowled Gower
and had Robin Smith caught behind for six. h the end, England's
total of229 all out (in the last of the 55 overs) was a credit to the Indian
bowlers' persistence.
Mter lunch Phil DeFreitas opened the bowling for England with a
no-ball. Immediately afterwards, India lost Raman to the first
legitimate delivery of the innings, but they managed to reach the
target with t\'Vo overs to spare, for the loss of four wickets. Though
Tendulkar scored only 19, his straight six off spinner Eddie Hemmings
was a massive one, clearing almost 100 yards. He departed at 115 for 3
and after that it was left to Manjrekar (82) and Azharuddin (55 not
out) to steer the side home quite comfortably. Former England captain
Geoffrey Boycott sprang a pleasant surprise by picking Kumble as the
Man of the Match for his figures ofll-2-29-2.
Another full house for the second game at Trent Bridge, another
toss won by the Indian captain and another victory with exactly t\'Vo
overs to spare, this time by five wickets. Gooch was bowled cheaply.
But Robin Smith's 103 and 50s from Atherton and wicketkeeper Jack
Russell helped England to a formidable 281 all out in exactly 55 overs.
Manjrekar followed up his 82 in the first game with 59 and Vengsarkar
hit a rapid 54 with t\'Vo sixes as all the batsmen scored usefully. India
Hail the Boy King

57

needed 145 runs from the last 20 overs to win and got them in some
style, thanks in part to a delightful little innings of 31 from 26 balls
(two fours) by Tendulkar. He added 63 runs in seven overs with his
captain, with driving described by one newspaper as 'wondrously
potent'. Azhar smashed 63 not out from 44 balls and took the Man of
the Series award for India.
In the first Test at Lord's, Azharuddin won the toss and asked Gooch
to bat first. The English captain probably couldn't believe his ears, for
the wicket was a beauty and there appeared to be runs galore for the
asking. Indian manager Bedi promptly disassociated himself from his
captain's decision. It was an indication of the rift in the Indian camp
that did not auger well for the rest of the tour. Later in the match,
Gooch had another opportunity to be grateful to Indian generosity
when, on 36, he edged medium-pacer Sanjeev Sharma behind and
More floored a straightforward chance.
From the very first day India was fighting to save a Test which
could have turned out very differently if not for a startling bit of
misjudgement by their captain.
The tourists started promisingly enough, with Kapil Dev bowling
Atherton for eight to leave England at 14 for 1. Gower and Gooch
then added 127 runs and the left-hander was most displeased at being
given out for 40, caught at silly point by Manjrekar off Hirwani. It
was uphill for India all the way after that. By close on the opening day,
England were 359 for 2 with Gooch on 194 and Lamb on 104. Lamb
raced to 139 at more than a run a ball, his partnership of 308 with
Gooch an all-wicket record for England against India. Mter that early
lapse, nothing got past Gooch's bat which assumed ever-larger
proportions for the toiling Indian attack. He reached the first triple
century in a Test at Lord's and now Garry Sobers' world record of365
not out was in his sights. But the 37-year-old was beginning to feel the
fatigue of an innings of more than ten hours. Mter adding 192 with
Robin Smith, he was out to a tired stroke, bowled by Prabhakar for
333. England declared at 653 for 4 as soon as Smith reached three
figures and the Indian openers, Shastri and Sidhu, held on to score 48
by the end of the second day. India used five bowlers during England's
58

Sachin

onslaught and all save Shastri-who gave away 99-conceded more
than 100 runs. The target was now clear: 454 to avoid the follow-on.
And India did indeed reach that score in a glorious manner.
Shastri held the top order together with a determined 100.
Vengsarkar, who had scored hundreds in each of his previous three
Tests at Lord's, this time contributed 52. But at 288 for 5, the follow-on
was still looming large. Tendulkar came in to bat, his first visit to
Lord's, and had to return disappointed, bowled middle stump for ten
between bat and pad by Chris Lewis. Now it was up to the captain to
atone for his blunder with the toss. He did so in the only way he knew,
unleashing a torrent of dazzling strokes that had the English bowlers
wringing their hands in despair and the media singing his praises.
Once Azhar was bowled by Eddie Hemmings for 121, it was left to
Kapil to make England bat again. With nine wickets down and only
Hirwani for company, it was a do-or-die situation. Hemmings was
the bowler, and in four deliveries the follow-on had been saved in
astonishing fashion-all four balls were sent over the boundary for
six!
England raced to 272 for 4 declared to set an impossible target for
India. Gooch entered the record books once again as the only batsman
in the history of first-class cricket to score a triple and single century
in the same match. The Indians, the second time round, could not
repeat their first-innings heroics and crumbled to 224 all out to lose
by 247 runs. Tendulkar displayed rare application in an innings of27
in which he struck four boundaries. He occupied the crease for 93
minutes, showed copybook technique and was willing to wait for the
loose ball. But he got one from Fraser that took off from a good length
spot and was caught at slip by Gooch.
The match produced a record for the most runs in a Lord's Testan amazing 1603 at more than four runs an over. It was glorious
entertainment for the spectators. And amidst all the landmarks and
achievements recorded by both sides, there was one moment that is
remembered clearly even today by those who witnessed it. Lamb,
batting in the second innings, had clouted Hirwani, but slightly
miscued the drive. Tendulkar raced across from the wide long off
Hail the Boy Kin.2

59

boundary, past the sight screen where the ball was heading. It was a
40-yard dash worthy of a Carl Lewis. As the ball dipped seemingly out
ofhis grasp, he thrust out his right hand and the ball stuck in his palm.
A lV commentator gushed, 'Oh my goodness gracious me. He didn't
look like he had any chance of reaching it.' Harsha Bhogle, writing in
Mid Day, called it 'the greatest catch I have ever seen'. John Thicknesse,
in Wisden Cricketers' Almanack (1991) called it 'as wonderful an outfield
catch as Lord's has seen'. David Frith in f..Visden Cricket Monthly
(September 1990) called it 'An amazing one-hander which deserved
isolated billing in a meaningless drawn match rather than inclusion
among such competing headlines.' Only someone of Tendulkar's
youthful exuberance would have attempted such a catch, let alone
successfully executed it.
The three-day game against Gloucestershire at Bristol,just before
the second Test, finished in a draw. Tendulkar's scores were 13 and 47.
He was also given his first long spell of bowling on the tour, indeed in
his entire first-class career to date. In 32 overs in Gloucestershire's
first innings, he picked up the wickets of Hodgson, Romaines and
Alleyne, three top order batsmen, for 79 runs. This was after left-arm
spinner Raju had ended his tour with a broken hand while batting in
the first innings.
The second Test at Old Trafford, Manchester, which started on 9
August would finally see the promise of youth translate into a display
of greatness-a match-saving century from the youngest Test cricketer
in the world. Centuries from Gooch-his third in succession-and
fellow opener Atherton saw England finish the opening day on 322
for 3, inducing a sense of deja vu among the Indian bowlers who had
suffered a similar pasting at Lord's less than two weeks ago. Smith
weighed in with a ton and England's massive score of519 once again
meant that India could only hope to save the Test match. They found
themselves on shaky ground at the end of the second day, with the first
three wickets falling for 57. But Azhar took over from where he had
left off at Lord's, and his domination of the bowling was such that the
English attack was made to look pedestrian. His 179 was his third
century in successive Tests as captain, something no Indian captain
60

Sachin

had achieved. His 189-run stand with Manjrekar (93) took the score
to 246 for 4 and was followed by another worth 112 for the fifth wicket
with Tendulkar. The captain was around to guide the young man
through a tricky initial period at the crease. It took Sachin 54 minutes
and 38 balls to get his first run. His contribution to the century
partnership was _iust 24 as Azhar ran amok. But with the last five
wickets going down for 74, his innings of 68 (eight fours) in 216
minutes was enough to see England's lead cut to a manageable 87
runs. It was also Tendulkar's highest score so far in Tests. A mark that
would be obliterated just two days later.
Gooch failed for the first time in the series in the second innings,
but England's 320 for 4 left India with a huge task ahead of them. To
win, they needed 408 runs from a minimum of 88 overs. Sidhu's
dismissal for a duck saw the top order crumble for the second time in
the match, and now the only thought was of survival. Defeat here
would reduce the third and final Test at the Oval to a formality. When
Prabhakar joined Tendulkar at 183 for 6, there were still two and a half
hours remaining for England's bowlers to mop things up. But their
fielders muffed two chances that would have sewn up the match and
the series. Hemmings dropped a sitter off his own bowling from
Tendulkar at ten and Gooch floored Prabhakar at slip. That was all the
pair needed. Tendulkar was watchful, considering the perilous position
the team was in. But he did not fail to punish the loose ball and reached
his second half-century of the Test from 100 balls. The landmark was
reached with three shots to the boundary off Chris Lewis in one over.
At the start of the last 20 overs, the score was 255 for 6 and the field
was still an attacking one. Tendulkar off-drove Fraser for four, then
cut him high and hard over the waiting slip cordon for another, to
move into his 90s. An elegant back-foot boundary offFraser took him
to 96 and then at 97 there was just that tiny sign of nerves as he ducked
Fraser and left his bat sticking up, getting a single to long leg in the
process. Another off drive for three runs, and the magic moment had
arrived. Sachin's maiden century had taken 171 balls, 14 of which had
been crisply dispatched to the boundary.
With a shy half-smile he lifted his helmet to acknowledge the
Hail the Boy King

61

applause from the small crowd and a frenzied Indian dressing room
where his mentor Sunil Gavaskar had raced from the commentary
box to witness the moment. Sachin was too young to vote, too young
to drink alcohol, too young to sign his contract with the Board which
his father had done for him less than 12 months ago. But not too
young to save his side in battle, overshadowing his teammates, some
almost twice his age, who had recklessly thrown away their wickets
on the final day. The line between prodigy and genius-the word
Dennis Compton used to describe him-had been crossed in only his
ninth Test.
The stand with Prabhakar was worth an unbroken 160, the allrounder not out on 67. And despite the five other centuries in a Test
dominated by the batsmen, the critics had eyes only for the sixth and
last one. In all, Tendulkar had batted for 225 minutes, faced 189 balls
and struck 17 boundaries. It made him at 17 years and 112 days the
youngest to score a Test century in England and the second youngest
ever. Fraser, the pick of the bowlers at Old Trafford and the most
successful in a series awash with centuries, told Scyld Berry ofWisden
Cricket Monthly Oune 1996), 'He never looked raw or out of place,
even at Lord's in the first Test. Some batsmen come in and freeze or
seem unsure, but not him-not that he was cocky. It just didn't feel as
if you were bowling to a 17 -year-old. His temperament allowed the
talent to flow.'
'Fraser Denied by Tendulkar's Breathtaking Brilliance' was the
headline in the Cricketer International (October 1990). Wrote
Christopher Martin-] enkins, 'Coming in at 109 for 4, with Hemmings
turning the ball and Lewis fresh and firing, Tendulkar batted with
quite astounding skill and composure.' The headline to David Frith's
report in Wisden Cricket Monthly (October 1990) proclaimed a new
batting master on the world stage: 'Hail the Boy King'.
Founder and former editor ofwcM (and editor of the Cricketer
International before that), author of over 30 books on cricket and one of
the game's greatest historians, Frith readily agreed to contribute his
memories of one of cricket's finest batting displays.
'It was a considerable privilege to have witnessed Sachin
62

Sachin

Tendulkar's maiden Test hundred. Although the England attack was
scarcely the greatest ever fielded by that country, there was a crisis to
be overcome on the final afternoon when India, needing 408 to win
after Gooch's declaration, had slipped to 127 for 5. Tendulkar had
failed at Lord's in the first Test but had scored 68 in the first innings
here at Manchester. Now he showed astonishing maturity in batting
for almost four hours to make 119 not out, his match-saving stand
with Prabhakar realizing 160. He was only 17 years and 112 daysthe second-youngest Test centurion, after Mushtaq Mohammadand we wondered what he might be capable of doing in the next ten
years or so.
'Reverting to my notes from that Test match, I find the sense of
wonder was real. How could anyone so young be so good at the highest
level? He was wearing Sunil Gavaskar's off-white fibreglass pads,
which made him appear to waddle rather like one of television's cuddly
toys. His first innings in this match was worth 68, and he had had to
struggle for almost an hour for his first run. That, for a start, told us
something important about him. He stayed with his captain,
Azharuddin, through a century stand, and finally gave his wicket
away after three and a half hours at the crease. Most notable innings
owe almost everything to a fielding error. In his second-innings century
Tendulkar escaped a chest-high caught-and-bowled to off-spinner
Eddie Hemmings when he was only 10. He inside-edged the next
ball, as England piled on the pressure, but emerged to play calmly and
reassuringly.
'India really had seemed doomed. Kapil Dev got out to a wild shot,
causing one of my neighbouring writers, a senior from India, to slap
his forehead and exclaim, "Oh, my God!" That's how bad it was. But
young Tendulkar stood solid, and so did Prabhakar. The youngster
even showed himself to be street-smart, for almost every time the
bowler turned, preparing to bowl, he was still studying the field, or
adjusting his gear, or marking his crease. With the fielders clustered
around him like members of the fan club that was soon to make his
life difficult, Tendulkar dealt with everything England dished out,
driving powerfully and cutting like a flash. The hundred came with
Hail the Boy King

6]

an off-drive for three off Angus Fraser. I was quite affected by this
wonderful performance from one so young. He saw India to safety,
and half-an-hour later, he was stepping forward in the pavilion to
receive his Man of the Match award. Under the glare of the spotlights
he gave the first discernible sign of nervousness. His lower lip seemed
to tremble as he stepped forward to receive his magnum of champagne,
and he was soon explaining that he was too young to drink.
'At the press conference which followed, he replied to the kindly,
almost patronising questions in a quiet voice, one which had not as
yet fully broken. Always prepared to gaze into years distant-past or
future-I simply had to write: ''A smile came readily to his unrazored
face, and already those with rich imaginations were envisaging the
sophisticated grown-up face and the deeper voice which would respond
to questions at some far-distant press conference to mark his breaking
of Gavaskar's Test records." The young prodigy had helped India
turn the tide in the match, transforming the seemingly inevitable
disappointment of millions into jubilation at his wondrous act. The
finest compliment of all probably came from England's dour skipper
Gooch: "He played like an old pro."'
Said Richie Benaud on TV after Tendulkar had received his award
from David Lloyd: We'll see a lot more centuries from his bat. I hope
I'll be around to see them.' Bedi commented, 'He applied himself
magnificently and showed maturity beyond comprehension.' Bedi
told me he had observed during the tour that even Bradman at that
age was no match for Sachin. 'Of course, the white cricket world was
not too pleased with that statement. And as it turned out, by the time
Sachin reached his 20s, he was way behind what Bradman had
achieved at that age with his numerous double and triple centuries.'
The Indian manager by then had made quite a name for himself
with his numerous controversial comments. One such must have
been acutely embarrassing to Sachin himself. 'The English media
reported that I said that every Englishwoman would like to seduce
Sachin. Actually I said they would like to mother him. At that age he
was so adorable,' Bedi clarified to me.
Mter all that excitement, the third and final Test at the Oval was
64

Sachin

almost anticlimactic. This would be the high noon for the Indian
batting machine, at a ground with happy memories for the country.
(India's first Test victory in England was at the Oval in 1971.) Never
before had India scored over 600 against England and for the first time
at home England were forced to follow-on against India. The massive
total of 606 for 9 declared was built around opener Shastri's 187 and
Kapil Dev's 110. AJI but number ten Hirwani reached double figures
and there were 50s for Azhar and More as well. Tendulkar was out to
debutant medium-pacer Neil Williams for 21 (including three
boundaries), slashing to Lamb a.t first slip. England followed on after
trailing by 266 runs. But any hopes India may have harboured of
forcing victory were thwarted by Gooch (80 in both innings) and a
majestic unbeaten 157 by David Gower. Gooch garnered over 1000
Test runs over the summer, including three Tests earlier in the season
against New Zealand. Tendulkar was third in the averages with 245
runs at 61.25, after Azhar and Shastri. It was a summer full of tons and
runs and yet it was Tendulkar's match-saving knock at Old Trafford
that continued to be the talking point of the year.
There was the formality of one more first-class match to be gone
through before the Indians could fly home after a tour lasting two
months. It was a privately arranged match by TV personality and
journalist Michael Parkinson, played in the festive atmosphere of
Scarborough, but it was a first-class game nonetheless. The match
was billed as Michael Parkinson's World XI v Indians and ended in a
draw. The World team was a motley bunch, including Kiwi Mark
Greatbatch (who slammed unbeaten centuries in both innings),
Mudassar Nazar, Gordon Greenidge (the captain) and Chetan Sharma.
The Indians were set to score 388 in four and a half hours and in a
virtual replay of the last day at Old Trafford, once again it was Tendulkar
who saw them to the safety of a draw with 108 not out. The bowling
attack in the hands ofEzra Moseley, Mike Whitney, Meyrick Pringle,
Chetan Sharma, Roger Harper and Peter Sleep was nothing to sneeze
at. The century was reached from 131 balls, including 17 fours, and
was the perfect end to a perfect summer ofbatting.
Tendulkar finished with the highest aggregate for the touring side,
Hail the Boy King

65

with 945 runs from 11 matches (19 innings) at the impressive average
of63. This included two centuries and six 50s. There was also a century
in the one-day game against Derbyshire. As in the Test series, only
Azhar and Shastri finished ahead ofSachin in the tour averages.
The tour of England was a huge step forward in the cricket
education ofTendulkar. Now he had other worlds to conquer.

66

Sachin