Tragedy and Tears

It was my mother who prompted me to go and attend the nation's call.
-Sachin Tendulkar

The World Cup returned to England in 1999 after 16 years. In 1983,
the Indian team led by Kapil Dev had stunned the world by lifting the
Prudential World Cup. The media and the advertising hype in India
in the run-up to cricket's biggest event was simply mind-boggling. lL
seemed that every company worth its salt, from manufacturers of
televisions to soft drinks and everything else in between, had spent
their annual ad budgets in one massive splurge on cricket. The sum
being tossed around was a staggering Rs 250 crores.
Expectations were sky-high and the atmosphere was one ofhysteria.
Certainly, the Indian team had done little, either at home or abroad, to
justify such enthusiasm. The stars of 1983 also had their day in the
sun once again. There were reunions galore, and even a match pitting
the team of 1983 against the team of 1999 at Mumbai. Sachin
Tendulkar was the star-again-with a century. Which only confirmed
what he had said a few years earlier-that he took his batting seriously
even in exhibition matches.
Once again, Azharuddin led the team, as he had done in 1992 and
1996. There was no doubt in anybody's mind, though, about where
the team's hopes actually rested. In May 1999, Tendulkar made it to
the cover of the Asian edition ofTtme magazine (16 May 1999). Inside,
the players expected to dominate the tournament were profiled.

The Bombay Bomber's blazing batting performances have
earned him comparisons with Diego Maradona-it helps that
they are both short, stocky and curly-haired. But unlike the
Argentine ace, Tendulkar is a levelheaded, even bland
professional who does all his hell-raising at the wicket. He
wields the heaviest bat in the game, both literally and
figuratively and is a quick reader of bowlers and wicket
conditions. Ask Shane Warne: regarded by most batsmen as
unplayable, the leg spinner was brutalized by Tendulkar
throughout the 1998 Australian tour of India. Later, Warne
said he had nightmares about Tendulkar's flashing blade.
It's difficult to single out a standout Tendulkar performance,
as there are so many-and so many to come. He already owns
the record for most om centuries, and he has at least 10 years
ahead of him. Gulp!
India were in Group A with hosts England, Kenya, South Mrica,
holders Sri Lanka and Zimbabwe. Group B consisted of Australia,
New Zealand, West Indies, Pakistan, Scotland and Bangladesh. The
top three teams from each group would advance to the Super Six stage
under a complex system of points and the top four would then go on to
the semi-finals.
India's opening match at Hove on 15 May was against South Mrica,
one of the favourites. India started well after electing to bat first and
Tendulkar (28) and Ganguly (97) put on 67 runs. Tendulkar was
caught behind off Lance Klusener,just after striking a delightful cover
drive to the boundary. The final total of253 for 5 was a challenging
one. Openers Gary Kirsten and Herschelle Gibbs were both claimed
by Srinath with the score at 22 before Jacques Kallis took over. When
he was run out for 96, South Mrica needed 27 from 26 balls. Klusener,
the new man in, promptly struck the first three deliveries for four and
his team were home by four wickets with 2.4 overs to spare.
It was a disappointing start to the Indian campaign. But then, South
Mrica were undoubtedly one of the strongest teams in the tournament.
The next match, four days later, at Leicester, was against Zimbabwe
230

Sachin

and the Indian camp was confident it would earn its first points. It was
not to be. Not only did the Mrican team stun India in a last-over
thriller, but there was an even more disturbing piece of news for
Tendulkar the night before the game. His father, Dr Ramesh
Tendulkar, had died in Mumbai ofa heart attack in his home in Bandra,
late on 18 May, at the age of 66. He had been ailing for some time.
My first thought on hearing the news was the same that must have
crossed the minds of millions oflndian cricket fans-would Sachin
continue at the World Cup or return home? I immediately felt a pang
of guilt for thinking so, and I am sure I was not alone in that either.
Sachin did indeed return to Mumbai to attend his father's funeral and
missed the match against Zimbabwe. He left in the early hours of 19
May with tears in his eyes. Few in the team were aware of what had
happened. At 10.30 in the night, coach Anshuman Gaekwad took the
call from Mumbai, and was asked to convey the tragic news to Sachin.
But he did not have the heart to do so, and turned to Anjali for help.
Both Anjali and daughter Sara were in London at the time. The three
took the first available flight home from London, early on the morning
of the Zimbabwe match.
Ironically, it was at Leicester (which has a large Indian population)
that Dr Tendulkar, ten years earlier, had given a lecture on Marathi
literature. He had retired six years ago from Kirti College in Mumbai,
where he taught Marathi. He had also taught at Sidharth College.
Sachin's brothers Ajit and Nitin had been with the team at Hove.
They were in Chicago when they received the news.
Even as the demoralized Indians were self-destructing against
Zimbabwe, the talk on the streets centred on the tragedy. It was as if
the nation was in collective grieving with their favourite son. The
players had woken up on the morning of19 May, stunned to hear the
news and learn of their teammate's distress and departure.
Understandably, Gaekwad was in no mood to ask Sachin if and when
he planned to return. There was no pressure from the Board either. 'I
know how close he was to his father. We have to wait for the funeral
before we can even think of asking him. I shall keep in touch with
him,' the coach told the reporters from India.
Tradgedy and Tears

231

A minute's silence was observed before the match at the Grace
Road ground. S.Ramesh had the unenviable task of replacing
Tendulkar at the top of the order and he did a more than competent
job as he top-scored with 55. All through the flight from London to
Mumbai, Sachin's mind was on the progress ofhis team. One of the
flight pursers kept coming to him with the latest score. 'Through him
I came to know that we lost closely. I was sorry I could not do anything
under the circumstances.' Chasing Zimbabwe's 252 for 9, India who
had been docked four overs for a slow over-rate by their old nemesis,
match referee 'Cammie' Smith, lost by three runs with their last three
wickets thrown away in the final over bowled by Henry Olonga.
Back in Mumbai, the funeral of Prof. Tendulkar was a family affair
with just a few close friends (Vinod Kambli and Amol Muzumdar)
and Mumbai cricket officials in attendance. The time had been
brought forward to dawn to avoid the media scramble. A sign was put
outside the family residence, requesting people not to pay their
condolences. Eldest son Nitin performed the last rites at the Shivaji
Park electric crematorium in Central Mumbai. The mourners were
personally thanked by Sachin who stood at the exit along with Ajit.
In a touching tribute under the headline, 'God Rewarded Prof.
Tendulkar', Sunil Gavaskar wrote in the Times ifindia (28 May 1999):
The late Ramesh Tendulkar did not watch too many ofhis son,
Sachin's innings at a cricket ground. Even at home he used to
watch the highlights rather than the live coverage on TV.
Now he would have seen how not only millions and millions
ofindians but even the Gods stop everything to watch his son
play. He now has a special place to see his youngest son go on to
become the greatest batsman the world has ever seen.
Gavaskar recalled how Prof Tendulkar (when he was teaching at
Sidharth College in the 1960s and 1970s) helped the cricketers of
Bombay University. 'He would take extra classes and tuition for these
cricketers [who were playing in the inter-varsity Vizzy Trophy] to
ensure that they were able to catch up with their studies and get
232

Sachin

through and not lose a year. So when young Tendulkar started to bat
the way he does, plenty of people who knew about the senior
Tendulkar's contribution were sure it was God's way of rewarding
him with a son as talented as Sachin.'
Pro£ Tendulkar had last been seen in public with Sachin and Anjali
at a cricket awards function in Mumbai a month before his death. A
low-profile man, he stayed out of the spotlight even as he watched his
son grow up to become a national icon.
Atmaram 'Bapu' Bhende, the doyen ofMarathi theatre, had known
Pro£ Tendulkar for many decades. Mr Bhende is married to my father's
sister, Dr Asha Bhende. (In September 2001, when I metAJit Tendulkar
in Mumbai and told him of the relationship, his reaction was, 'Bapu?
He is a great legend.') I asked Mr Bhende to share with me his
memones.
Mr Bhende recalled in a letter sent to me in November 2001, how
he first met Ramesh Tendulkar when he invited him to attend a kavi
sammelan (poets' meet) organized by the Indian National Theatre (of
which he was secretary of the Marathi section) in the mid-1950s.
I was charmed by his gentle, soft spoken and cordial manner. A
true gentleman, ever ready to extend a helping hand to anyone
who needed it. I was particularly impressed by his frank but
without malice opinions of the work of other poets. I was
particularly interested in bringing together budding poets with
the specific intention of bringing them into the limelight.
Ramesh Tendulkar was helpful in identifying such poets and
contacting them .... Those who knew Ramesh Tendulkar
intimately, know that Sachin's modesty is a gift from his father.
I met Ramesh quite accidentally just a few days before his
untimely death. We were both invited to a suburban college
literary function. The car organized by them first picked up
Ramesh and then arrived at my residence. Ramesh rushed into
my living room and we met like two long lost friends. Certainly,
a moment to cherish. And remember, Ramesh had not
changed-the same handsome face, winsome smile, the same
Tradgedy and Tears

233

warmth, the same genuine friendliness. The long years in
between just melted away.
One seldom comes across such a straightforward and
unassuming person, who in reality had so much to boast o£1
His death was not only a great loss to his family and the Marathi
literary world, but also to his large circle of friends, admirers
and well wishers.
Since his death, his children have brought out a book of his
Marathi poems. The eldest, Nitin, is also a poet, obviously inspired by
his father.
Meanwhile, the Indian World Cup campaign appeared to be
heading for an early and inglorious end after two defeats in the first
two matches. In India, there were strident calls for Azharuddin to be
axed before the next game against Kenya on 23 May. Passions were
running high and the phone calls from viewers to the morning
television show I hosted, were getting increasingly irate and abusive.
I realized just how ugly things had become when a furious fan at a
petrol station near the studios accosted me. He demanded to know
why I was calling for the Indian captain to be retained.
Back in Mumbai, Sachin had made the decision to fly back to
England. The news came as a huge relieffor the team and its followers.
For 24 hours after his father's funeral, it seemed no one could talk of
anything else. At the Times q[India office in the heart of New Delhi,
traffic came to a standstill. 'Sachin flying back' was the headline on
the giant electronic bulletin board. Buses and cars screeched to a halt,
people stood and stared as if they could not believe their eyes. Salvation
for the beleaguered Indians was on its way.
'It was my mother who prompted me to go and attend the nation's
call. She said even my father would have liked me to go and do my
duty,' Tendulkar told reporters at Heathrow airport on his arrival back
in England, the morning before the crucial game against Kenya. 'I
realize this match is important and we are keen to make a winning
impression. We have to win all three matches and keep the hopes of
our supporters high. It's not going to be easy to put behind the tragedy
234

Sachin

and concentrate on the job at hand.'
Tendulkar added, 'The entire country wanted me to play. The
World Cup is very important to India. I therefore completed all
formalities and took the first available flight to be here with the team.'
Gaekwad marvelled at Sachin's composure, and said he had no words
to describe his star player's gesture. 'We will do everything to keep
Sachin's mind occupied. In any case, he is a restless person.'
'I thought he might make it for the match against Sri Lanka on 26
May. Even in this hour of griefSachin could not resist coming to the
rescue of the team which, as has been proved, cannot do without this
man.'
Ten days into the World Cup, the first century of the tournament
was recorded. And it was scored by a man who had attended his father's
funeral just a few days earlier. What more monumental tribute can
there be to his skills, discipline and mental strength?
India won by 94 runs to breathe fresh life into its campaign to
reach the next stage. A full house at Bristol (8508) gave Tendulkar
three standing ovations-first when he walked to the crease, then
when he reached his twenty-second century, and finally when he
walked off with fellow centurion Rahul Dravid at the end oflndia's
innings of 329 for 2-Tendulkar on 140 and Dravid on 104. The
unbroken stand of237 in 29 overs was the highest ever in the World
Cup (until India's next match against Sri Lanka). Sachin's previous
ODI centuries had all come when he was opening. This time he came
in after Ramesh, for after the young man's half-century against
Zimbabwe, it had been decided to retain him as Ganguly's opening
partner. Sachin's first 50 came in 54 balls; the second took 30. A look
heavenwards in silent tribute to his father marked the completion of
the 100. 'I just looked up. It's very difficult to explain what I felt.' The
last ball of the innings was flicked disdainfully over midwicket for six,
just as Viv Richards had done in the 1979 World Cup final.
The century was dedicated to his father. Choking with emotion at
the post-match awards ceremony-even Tony Greig appeared
overcome when interviewing him-he said he had been motivated
by his mother's words when he reached Mumbai for the funeral. 'The
Tradgedy and Tears

235

first question my mother asked me was why did I come back. She said
even your father would have wanted you to stay on. I had gone home
because I was committed to my family. Similarly, I also have
commitment towards my country and countrymen.' He admitted it
had not been his best 100. 'But under the circumstances it was special.'
Prime Minister Atal Behari Vajpayee sent a congratulatory fax to
the Man of the Match. 'Not only did you not let the deep personal loss
caused by your father's sudden demise deter you but you actually
used it as an inspiration to scale another summit in cricketing
excellence. The whole oflndia is proud of you.'
Less than three years later, another tragedy would cast its shadow
over Tendulkar's life.
India won their next two matches against Sri Lanka and England to
make it to the Super. Six. They were joined by Zimbabwe and South
Africa from Group A and Australia, Pakistan and New Zealand from
Group B. Australia simply blew away India in the first match in the
Super Stage game. The big breakthrough came when Glenn McGrath
had Tendulkar caught behind for his first duck in 22 innings, with
just one run on the board. His three previous innings against Australia
had produced centuries. Australia had, in its innings, piled up 282 for
6. No team had scored 283 to win an ODI in England and now, with his
first four overs, McGrath had ensured it would not happen at the
Oval either. India were staggering at 17 for 4 and were all out for 205.
The team's chances of qualifYing for the semi-finals were now all but
dead. But their next match against Pakistan took on an extra edge.
The conflict in Kargil was still raging back home and the Old
Trafford authorities were concerned over a flare-up between rival
spectators. The flare-up never happened, and India won a tense match
by 47 runs. It was the third time India and Pakistan had met in the
World Cup and each time India had come out on top. Tendulkar was
back in the opener's slot and blazed briefly for 45. Despite the win,
India were playing only for pride in their final match against New
Zealand, who had to win to reach the last four -which is exactly what
they did. Australia went on to win the World Cup for the second time,
236

Sachin

beating Pakistan in a lopsided final.
The Indian campaign had started and ended with a whimper. In
between, there were some wonderful moments, notably Tendulkar's
century against Kenya and the victories over England and Pakistan.
But overall, the cricket was disappointing and lacked consistency, as
always. All the pre-tournament hysteria had rapidly fizzled out.
Tendulkar's form too was patchy. He had 253 runs at 42.17. But under
the circumstances, it was a huge credit to him that he made it back at
all after the loss of his father.

Tradgedy and Tears

237
