Captaincy-I

It's onlyfor my team's sake that I cannot sleep.-Sachin Tendulkar
It was a virtual fait accompli following the England tour that Sachin
Tendulkar would be asked to take over the captaincy from Mohammad
Azharuddin. Azhar's unbroken spell of seven years was one of the
longest for an Indian captain. The youngest in the history of Test
cricket to take on the responsibility was 'Tiger' Pataudi. He was just
21 when the captain's job was thrust on him after a near fatal injury
suffered by captain Nari Contractor on the 1962 tour of the West
Indies. Appointed vice captain for the series, Pataudi was groomed for
the top post, as was Tendulkar. But while Tendulkar had three years as
the number two, Pataudi did not enjoy the luxury of even one full
series.
'Time for Change' was the headline in the Sportstar (27 July 1996),
and in it R. Mohan summed up the mood oflndian cricket followers:
'The way forward for Indian cricket is to appoint Sachin Tendulkar
captain now. His cricketing powers and his cricket faculties are in
acute focus and there is no better time to hand over charge to a young
man. A young man in charge ofa young team is the only route forward.'
Sure enough, on 8 August 1996, when the squad for the Singer Cup
one-day tri-series in Sri Lanka and the Sahara Cup 'Friendship' oneday series against Pakistan in Toronto was announced, Sachin was
named captain.
In his debut series in Pakistan in 1989, Sachin's captain K.Srikkanth
had told him, perhaps only half-jokingly, 'When you are captain,
remember who was your first.' Now, the appointment received a

unanimous welcome. The question on everybody's mind was, could
Tendulkar, the batsman with the golden touch, transfer those skills
effortlessly to the captaincy as well? This is what Sunil Gavaskar
wrote in his column in the Sportstar (September 1996): 'My gut feeling
is that the responsibility [of the captaincy] will see greater consistency
from him and less throwing of the wicket to casual, experimental
shots. It might make him a marginally less attractive player, but if he
tightens up he will play longer. And which one of us would complain
to seeing more of his batting?' There was also concern over how Azhar
would fit into the scheme of things now that he was no longer in
charge.
These doubts were dispelled-at least for the time being-upon
Tendulkar's debut as captain against Sri Lanka at the R.Premadasa
Stadium in Colombo, on 28 August. Though India were routed by
nine wickets, Tendulkar marked the day with his ninth 001 ton and
added 129 runs for the third wicket with Azhar. It was the world
champions' first home game, five months after winning the title, and
once again it was the explosive opening pair of Jayasuriya and
Kaluwitharana that knocked the stuffing out of the Indian bowling.
The Indians made short work ofZimbabwe in their next match before
being edged out by Australia in the last league game to decide who
would meet Sri Lanka in the final (the result was a repeat of the World
Cup final).
In his book Indian Cricket: The Captains-From Nayudu to Tendulkar,
Partab Ramchand wrote about Tendulkar's first stint in charge:
Really there can be nothing but praise for the manner in which
Tendulkar conducted himself in his various capacities as
captain. He made every attempt to get to know and understand
his players, their needs, their requirements, their comforts. He
made every attempt to goad his players on the field and, by now,
leading by personal example was second nature to him. He
made every attempt to be accessible to the media and in the
public relations aspect he was a big improvement over his
predecessor. India's failure to gain, very narrowly, a berth in the
ISO

Sachin

final, did not in any way make a dent in his popularity.
From Sri Lanka it was straight to Toronto, where big-time cricket
would be played in Canada for the first time in the inaugural India v
Pakistan five-match one-day series. India could have wrapped things
up after leading 2-1. But Pakistan, under the experienced Wasim
Akram, stormed back to win the fourth and fifth games and the series.
Though his captaincy was praised as positive, Tendulkar's batting fell
away after he won the Man of the Match award for an unbeaten 89 in
the first match, which India won by eight wickets. Thereafter, he had
scores of20, 2, 3 and 23 on sub-standard batting pitches which were
severely affected by incessant rain.
There was some controversy during the series, about the preference
of Vi nod Kambli over Sourav Ganguly for the third and fourth
matches. Kambli had scores of3, 29 and 6. Neither Sourav nor he got
a chance to bat in the first match. Ganguly was 11 not out in the
second and when he replaced Kambli in the fifth and final game, he
could manage just 12. The criticism (not surprisingly, mainly from
West Bengal) obviously stung. Tendulkar reacted angrily. He had no
intention of grabbing the captaincy, he said. If the selectors had
confidence in him, they should let him do things his way, without
interfering. He defended his choice ofKambli by saying that he was
the best batsman for that wicket, and if Ganguly wasn't upset, why
should other people?
Asked in Toronto to give his views on his counterpart's captaincy,
WasimAkram was measured in his response: 'Yeah, he has the makings
of a very aggressive captain. Give him at least six more months before
you start judging him. He is attacking and energetic but the Test
matches in the season ahead will be his greatest challenge.' (Sportsworld,
October 1996)
There would be a one-offTest for the inaugural Border-Gavaskar
Trophy in New Delhi in October, followed by a three-Test home
series against South Mrica. In between, India lifted the Titan Cup
one-day title in the tri-series involving Australia and South Mrica.
The Australians were weakened by the absence of the injured Shane
Captaincy- I

151

Warne who no doubt would have licked his lips in anticipation had he
taken one look at the Feroze Shah Kotla pitch.
It was a new Indian team management that was in charge. Madan
Lal had replaced Sandeep Patil as coach while the visitors too had a
new coach, with GeoffMarsl:1 taking over from Bobby Simpson. The
Australians were ill-equipped to exploit a wicket that turned from the
first session and they were outclassed in three and a half days. Tendulkar
failed with the bat (10 and 0) in his first Test as captain. But everything
else went his way as India won by seven wickets, their first victory
over Australia since 1981 in Melbourne. The state of the pitchwhich was to find its way into the CBI report into match-fixing four
years later-was defended by the new Indian captain. 'There is no
harm in playing to your strength. We need not worry about what kind
of pitches we might get in South Africa and West Indies.'
Understandably perhaps, Mark Taylor's views were not quite so
positive.
Australia's poor form continued in the Titan Cup as they lost all
their league matches. South Mrica, on the other hand, appeared
unstoppable as they flattened India and Australia in the run-up to the
final. Tendulkar was in sparkling form and had three half-centuries in
the league phase. The final was expected to be one-sided-and it was.
Surprisingly, it was the Indians who came out on top. The captain
may have had an inkling the day before when he told the media: 'The
South Mrican batting can collapse.'
This it did, folding up for 185 in reply to India's 220 for 7, with the
only 50 of the low-scoring game inevitably coming from Tendulkar.
Tendulkar's proactive approach while defending the small total must
have come as a pleasant surprise to most of the team, as they were used
to Azhar's low-key approach to captaincy. It started with Sachin giving
a short pep talk to his team as they went out to field under the lights.
And it continued till last man Allan Donald was bowled. Tendulkar
was more than just active, he was a touch hyperactive, whether in
advising bowlers, handling the field placements with elaborate care,
or even taking advice at on-field meetings. This gave the impression
ofhis being hands-on and in charge, and impressed the critics no end.
152

Sachin

But a year later, when the defeats outstripped the wins, the same style

of captaincy was condemned as naive and over the t0p.
Sachin's first full series in charge against the strong SouthMricans
was a topsy-turvy affair. India won the first Test at Ahmedabad, were
crushed by 329 runs in the second at Kolkata, and then stormed back
to win the decider at Kanpur by 280 runs. It turned out to be the worst
series ofTendulkar's career with the bat to date (the one against New
Zealand the year before, at home, had been severely curtailed by rain),
and fortunately for India, it still remains his worst. He had scores of
42, 7, 18, 2, 61 and 36 to go with his twin failures in the one-offTest
against Australia. His two kno'cks at Kanpur showed a new Sachin to
the Indian public. It was a Sachin who eschewed stroke play for
occupation of the crease, in an echo ofhis mentor Gavaskar's prediction
in his column. In the first innings, he batted for three and a half hours
to hold the shaky innings together and top-scored in a total of237. In
the second he played the uncharacteristic supporting role, occupying
the crease for 123 minutes as Azharuddin reeled off his second
successive century following his dazzling 109 at Kolkata.
Wrote R.Mohan in the Cricketer International (February 1997), at
the end of the series, 'The change at the helm effected during the year
proved far reaching while also bringing in a twin benefit. Sachin
Tendulkar's captaincy, dynamic in most parts, and Mohammad
Azharuddin's batting touch, a splendid recreation of all that is good
about Indian batsmanship, came about because the switch at the top
was made well in time.' Added Mohan, 'The most positive aspect to
emerge from the series is that a young captain is prepared to play
positive cricket. He has learned his lessons quickly. He may have hit a
low in the negative cricket he made his team play in the second Test in
Calcutta but he came out of that mindset, in time to go for the series
win in Kanpur.'
It was the first time South Mrica had been beaten in a full series
since their return to Test cricket in 1992. For India, the unbeaten run
at home now stretched to almost a decade. But the real test would
come when the Indians moved to South Mrica for the second leg of
the contest.
Captaincy- I

153

There was just enough time at the end of the tour to squeeze in one
more match. The Mohinder Amarnath benefit game at Mumbai was
given official status at the eleventh hour, much to the fury ofCronje
and his men who were keen to get back home after a strenuous tour.
Tendulkar led the a:,sault with his tenth 001 century and South Mrica
were routed.
Four years later, the real story behind this match would emerge.

154

Sachin
