The lad is agenius.-Abdul Qadir
The selection of the team to Pakistan for what turned out to be the last
Test tour by an Indian team (till mid-2002), generated more than the
usual share of controversy. The team would be captained in Tests for
the first time by Tamil Nadu opening batsman Krishnamachari
Srikkanth. His elevation had come under remarkable circumstances,
even for Indian cricket, where unusual happenings are commonplace.
India had been beaten 3-0 in five Tests in the Caribbean and swept
away 5-0 in the one-day series. Mter the West Indies debacle, the
Indian captain Dilip Vengsarkar had given a taped interview to Mudar
Patherya of Sportsworld (May 1989) in which he blamed everyone but
himself, despite his woeful batting form. To make things worse, he
had gone on to the United States, with several other cricketers, to play
exhibition matches which had been specifically forbidden by the BCCI.
The players were banned on their return to India, and though the
Supreme Court subsequently lifted the ban, Vengsarkar's brief reign
as captain was over.
Srikkanth can consider himself lucky that midway through the
West Indies tour he had his arm fractured by a short ball from Ian
Bishop, or he would certainly have joined the team to the us. As it
happened, he was the compromise candidate of the Board. The shock
omission was that of Mohinder Amarnath. Vengsarkar had ruled
himself out of the tour, perhaps anticipating he would be dropped in
any case.
The team was widely described a:; the weakest bowling

combination ever sent to Pakistan. In the event, the fact that the fourTest series was drawn 0-0 is a tribute to the captain and the players
under his command. But perhaps the biggest factor in India escaping
unbeaten was the appointment of two neutral umpires, John Holder
and John Hampshire from England.
This was the idea of Pakistan captain lmran Khan who wanted to
put to rest, once and for all, the complaints against Pakistani umpires
by visiting teams. The neutral umpires experiment had been tried out
in an earlier series in Pakistan when the West Indies were the visitors,
with two Indian umpires standing in for the first time. This time
round, though neither Holder nor Hampshire was faultless, their
supervision reduced the level of tension caused by the umpiring
whenever and wherever the two countries had met in the past.
Srikkanth's leadership impressed one and all, but he failed with
the bat. And this would prove to be his first and last assignment as
captain. Mohammad Azharuddin replaced him for the tour to New
Zealand in 1990.
One thing which may have told against Srikkanth was his backing
of his players in their protest against the BCCI on the eve of their
departure to Pakistan. The Board and the team could not agree on
financial terms, and as a protest the entire team decided to forfeit their
earnings from the series. Only the three newcomers, Sachin, Vivek
Razdan and Salil Ankola were exempted from this action by the players
and allowed to pocket their fees. Srikkanth, perhaps, was made to pay
the price for supporting his teammates. Certainly, the pay dispute was
an unfortunate prologue to Sachin's bow in international cricket. His
selection, however, was widely welcomed.
The tour began on 10 November at Lahore with a one-day charity
game in aid oflmran Khan's cancer hospital. The next day was the
'
only first-class
fixture before the start of the first Test: a three-day
game against the Cricket Board Patron's XI at Rawalpindi where
Sachin made his first appearance in national colours. The match was
drawn, with the tourists scoring 272 in their only innings. Sachin's
contribution was a useful47 before he was stumped offleft-arm spinner
Iqbal Qasim. His performance removed any lingering doubt over his
Into the Cauldron of Test Cricket

43

inclusion in the first Test at the National Stadium, Karachi starting
on 15 November 1989.
There were three significant landmarks for India in this Test. At 16
years and 205 days, Sachin became the youngest Indian Test player
and the fourth youngest of all time. Laxman Sivaramakrishnan ( 17
years 118 days) held the previous Indian record. Salil Ankola made
his Test debut in the same match. This was also Kapil Dev's hundredth
Test match in which he claimed his three hundred and fiftieth Test
wicket. Before him, only Sunil Gavaskar and Dilip Vengsarkar had
played as many matches for India.
The match also marked the turning point in the career of
Azharuddin. He was not <;>riginally scheduled ro play. But Raman
Lamba ruled himself unfit on the morning of the match and Azhar
was in. He scored 35 in both innings and also equalled the world
fielding record of five catches in an innings.
As far as the age record is concerned, three Pakistanis-Mushtaq
Mohammad, Aaqib Javed and Aftab Baloch-were all listed at the
time as being younger than Sachin on debut. However, lmran Khan
has maintdined that all Pakistani cricketers (except him) have routinely
taken two years off their age. Unofficially at least, this made Sachin
the youngest in history· to play Test cricket. There was another
significant debutant in the match on the Pakistani side-fast bowler
Wagar Younis. The opening day at Karachi was reported to be his
eighteenth birthday.
It must have been a strange feeling indeed for a 16-year-old to
suddenly find himself among the big names oflndian cricket. Sachin
admitted as much in an interview to Sebastian Coe of Daily Telegraph
(May 2001): 'I remember walking into the changing room and
wondering how I would cope with all the famous names around me
and they were all about twice my age. My captain, Krish Srikkanth
was a great supporter. He sat me down before the game and told me
that I belonged in the team, and they were all proud of my achievement.
Nobody made me feel Hke a teenager.'
_
Srikkanth won the toss in his first Test as captain and put Pakistan
in. India had immediate success when Kapil Dev dismissed Aamir
44

Sachin

Malik for a duck with four runs on the board. By close on the first day,
Pakistan had reached 259 for 4 with Javed Miandad (76) and Imran
(17) at the crease. Shoaib Mohammad had shored up the batting with
67. Unfortunately, Sachin's first day in Test cricket was marred by a
spectator running on to the field and attacking the Indian captain after
first menacing Kapil. The rest of the team grabbed him before security
officers took him away, but not before he had torn Srikkanth's shirt.
Miandad could add only two more the next morning before he
became Kapil's three hundred and fiftieth Test victim. But there was
no stopping lmran, who recorded his fifth Test century-his third
against India. The Pakistani total of 409 was a challenging one. It
assumed huge proportions when India slumped to 41 for 4. Wasim
Akram and Wagar bowled with hostility as Srikkanth, Navjot Singh
Sidhu, Manjrekar and Prabhakar all failed to reach double figures.
This was surely a baptism by fire for Tendulkar. As he was to
remember in Outlook (4 January 1999): There I was in the middle, all
of 16 years old, absolutely blank and very nervous, butterflies flying
around in formations in my stomach! I really didn't know what was
happening. Akram was bowling very fast. I think he bowled four
bouncers in a row. It was very tough and I thought I was not going to
ever play Test cricket again. At times I was beaten by pace, the ball
went past my bat before I had completed my shot. I made 15, then a
half-century in the next match. After that I don't remember being
troubled by pace as such.'
It was a torrid time for the teenager, but he hit 15 from 24 balls in
29 minutes, including two fours, and was bowled by Younis with the
score at 73 for 5. In the dressing room, the batsman, perhaps still shellshocked, walked up to Ravi Shastri and said in Marathi, 'Me khup gahi
keli' (I was too hasty). Shastri reassured him: 'Young man, you don't
have to worry about anything. The fact that you are playing for your
country at 16 is good enough. Only one thing you must remember.
When you are playing at the highest level, no matter how talented
you arc, you must respect the situation on hand.' (Mid Day, 24 May
2001)
Azhar was lbw to Imran, and India were staring the follow-on
Into the Cauldron of Test Cricket

45

square in the face at 85 for 6.
This is where the Indian team showed resilience and fighting spirit
that had been sadly lacking on recent tours of Pakistan. By close on
the second day, the score had progressed to 157 without the loss of
another wicket as Shastri (25) and Kapil (49) began repairing the
damage. India still needed 53 runs to make Pakistan bat again.
Although Kapil could add only six more runs to his overnight 49, the
tail wagged effectively and India finished on 262. Shastri and
wicketkeeper Kiran More both scored half-centuries and their stand
ensured respectability for the tourists. Still, the lead of 147 was
substantial and Pakistan enjoyed the upper hand. With two days still
to play, they added 103 runs for the loss of three wickets. Shoaib's 95
and Salim Malik's unbeaten 102 helped Imran declare at 305 for 5
and set India the highly improbable task of scoring 453 in a minim urn
of102 overs.
Wagar, who had grabbed four wickets in the first innings in a hostile
spell, could not bowl in the second because of a strain in the back.
That eased the pressure on India. Sidhu's 85 and Manjrekar's 113 not
out meant India finished at 303 for 3 and their honour intact in this
opening encounter. Tendulkar did not get a chance to bat the second
time round. But he did have a chance to bowl on his debut, though
without success ( 1-0-10-0 and 4-0-15-0).
Wagar was not fit for the second Test which was played at the Iq hal
Stadium in Faisalabad from 23 November. India brought in mediumpacer Vivek Razdan for his debut in place of Ankola, while Maninder
replaced Arshad Ayub. This time, it was the turn oflmran to put the
opposition in after winning the toss. But his attack was further
weakened with an injured SaleemJaffar only able to bowl17 overs in
the first innings. Bad light saw only 66.3 overs being bowled on the
opening day and once again the Indian batting was in trouble after a
useful opening stand of 68 between Srikkanth and Sidhu. Azhar failed
to score, Shastri fell cheaply, and there was another crisis at 101 for 4.
The Mumbai pair ofManjrekar (58) and Tendulkar (35) saw to it
that there was no further damage; their stand was worth 99 at the close
of the first day. Sachin curbed his natural attacking instincts and batted
46

Sachin

for 150 minutes, perhaps remembering the sound advice given by
Shastri after his dismissal in the first Test. The partnership was extended
to 143 the next day and Sachin got his maiden Test half-century in
only his second innings. This gave him two world records-he became
the youngest to be involved in a century stand and the youngest to
score 50 in a Test match. Sachin had batted for 244 minutes and 165
balls and hit four fours when lmran, bowling at his best in the series so
far, had him beaten comprehensively and got him plumb in front for
59.
India's total of288 appeared inadequate and Pakistan piled up 423
for 9 declared, with opener Aamir Malik recording his first century.
Sachin took his first catch-Akram caught for 28 offPrabhakar. The
declaration came 30 minutes after lunch on the fourth day.
The Indian batting came into its own in the second innings as it
had at Karachi a week before. Azhar marked his return to form with a
streaky 109 (his first century outside India) while Sidhu, Manjrekar
and Prabhakar all scored half-centuries as India finished on 398 for 7.
Azhar, not for the first time in his career, was like a cat on a hot tin roof
in his 90s and caused jitters in the Indian camp as he almost got four
batsmen run out, including himself. Sachin (8) was one such victim,
rooted a couple ofyards outside his crease, uncertain whether to respond
toAzhar's call for a single when he was on 99.
Just 15 wickets fell in five days in the third Test which began three
days later, a match which was instantly dubbed 'the bore at Lahore'.
Mter the excitement of the first two Tests, it proved to be one of those
typical Indo-Pak matches played on a feather bed of a wicket, with
plenty of records but little else. India's total of 509 saw Manjrekar
reach his first Test double century, his 218 the highest against Pakistan
by an Indian batsman. The total was also India's highest in Pakistan.
Sachin scored 41 before being bowled by Qadir. Unusually, the off
and leg stump were disturbed, but the middle was left standing! But
his innings was buried under Pakistan's mammoth 699 for 5.
Miandad became the first Pakistani to play 100 Tests and made the
event memorable by scoring a century. This was the same ground
where he had made his debut against New Zealand in 1975 when,
Into the Cauldron of Test Cricket

47

too, he had registered a century. This made his feat unique. Shoaib's
203 not out made him and father Hanif the first father-son combination
to score Test double centuries, something Sanjay's father Vijay had
not been able to achieve.
The Indian team was more than satisfied going into the third Test
at Lahore without a defeat to their name. Despite better performances
in the first half, Pakistan had been frustrated by India's batting strength,
with Manjrekar being the outstanding performer.
It would be no different at Sialkot, though for the first time in the
series it was India that emerged with the honours. Manjrekar, following
his Lahore double-ton, was once again top scorer in the first innings,
with 72. All the batsmen except numbers 10 and 11 reached double
figures, with Sachin contributing 35. India took the lead for the first
time in the series (and only for the second time in 20 Tests in Pakistan)
as Pakistan crumbled to 250with medium-pacer Vivek Razdan---one
of Sachin's confidants on the tour-picking up 5 for 79 in only his
second Test.
India faced another early-order crisis in their second innings when
they lost four wickets for 38 runs, with Akram picking up three.
Srikkanth, Manjrekar, Azharuddin and Shastri all fell in single figures.
This brought out the best in Sidhu and Tendulkar and they took the
score to 104without further loss at the close of the fourth day, with the
opener on 54 and Sachin on 33. The Pakistani pace attack oflmran,
Wasim and Wagar used the short ball effectively, especially targeting
the teenager. But Sachin stood up to everything they could fling at
him and even inspired his senior partner. Then, the unexpected
happened. A ball from Wagar did not rise as anticipated; it was topedged and struck Sachin on the bridge of his nose. He was wearing a
helmet without a grill, which he felt obscured his vision. Blood poured
from the wound as he slumped to the ground and even the normally
hardened Imran showed his concern. The crowd, perhaps the most
hostile on tour, was baying for more blood.
Sachin merely threw back his head, pulled out a handkerchief to
staunch the blood and carried on bravely. Medical assistance was
brushed away. The next delivery, swinging and full pitched, was
48

Sachin

gloriously square driven for four. The one after that was short outside
the off stump. The batsman rose on his toes and the ball was smashed
on the up, past the rooted cover fielder for another boundary. It was a
stirring performance and the crowd fell silent, stunned and awed in
equal measure.
No one after that would ever doubt Sachin's value to the Indian
cause. The stand was worth 101 runs before he was caught behind for
57 (195 minutes, 136 balls, five fours) offlmran. Sidhu went on to 97
and India were 234 for 7 when the match was called off. The result:
four draws out of four in the series.
Sachin in an interview to Sportsworld Qanuary 1996) was to look
back at that incident as one that added aggression to his armoury.
Replying to the question, 'How did you develop such an aggressive
outlook?' he responded: 'It was a good thing that on my first tour I got
hurt on the nose off a Younis delivery. I realized that there could be
nothing worse than that. There have been worse injuries than mine.
But that gave me more confidence and allowed me to be aggressive in
my mind. Even ifl break my nose, I decided on staying there and not
be bothered about fast bowling.'
So Waqar Younis actually did a favour to Sachin Tendulkar and
Indian cricket after all! Imran, for his part, claimed he was always
conscious of bowling to a schoolboy. That 'schoolboy' finished the
series with a highly creditable average of35.83 for his 215 runs, with
two 50s and a couple of other useful scores besides.
In a tribute to him after the Test series, R.Mohan wrote in the
Sportstar (30 December 1989) under the headline 'The Wonder Boy Is
Here to Stay': 'The gut feeling is that Sachin Tendulkar will go places.
Much has been predicted for him by many. The projection is that he
will go even further than predicted. There is a quality to his game
which goes beyond the ordinary talk of talent.'
Mohan, then chief cricket correspondent for the Hindu and the
Sportstar, was prescient when he predicted in the same article: 'This is
no young man who will model his batting on Sunil Gavaskar's. He
may go beyond that and think of becoming aViv Richards. He is a
born stroke-player.'
Into the Cauldron of Test Cricket

49

The Indian team had emerged with honour intact in the Test series.
But there was still the business of the One-day Internationals to be
negotiated. Sadly, weather conditions and crowd problems reduced
the four-match ODI series to a farce. The opening match at Peshawar
on 16 December was reduced to an exhibition game of20 overs per
side to placate the crowd after a combination of bad light and fog held
up play. In the second at Gujranwala, only 16 overs could be played by
each side because ofbad light and a wet outfield and Pakistan won by
seven runs. Karachi lived up to its reputation as having the unruliest
crowd in Pakistan. The third ODI had to be abandoned as the Indian
fielders were constantly being pelted by stones. The end came after
just 14.3 overs with Pakistan struggling on 28 for 3, Prabhakar having
picked up all three wickets. Weather once again curtailed play in the
fourth and final game at Lahore, reduced to 37 overs per side, which
Pakistan won by 38 runs.
Even though the Peshawar opener was not considered an official
One-day International, it gave Tendulkar the opportunity to play in
his first limited-overs game in national colours. And how he made the
most of that opportunity is now part of the Sachin legend.
Salim Malik with 75led the charge as Pakistan raced to 157 for 4,
a rate of nearly eight runs per over. Mter losing their first three wickets
for 88, the Indians decided not to exert themselves. Srikkanth had
dropped himself down the order and appeared to have given up the
ghost when he was joined at the crease by Sachin. The required run
rate at this stage was over 15 an over.
The fireworks from the young man's bat had even the fiercely
partisan crowd rooting for him. It all started in leg-spinner Mush tag
Ahmed's second (and final) over in which he was smashed for 16 runs
by Sachin: two sixes and a four.
'Let me see if you can hit my bowling the same way,' Qadir said to
Sachin after Mushtaq's over.
Sachin replied, 'You are such a great bowler, you will not allow me
to do that.' (Sports Channel video, December 1990)
Qadir got the pasting of a lifetime that evening in Peshawar from
a boy young enough to be his son. Three balls in a row were dispatched
50

Sachin

with power and timing over the ropes. Even Qadir applauded as he
turned and saw the second one soaring over his head. Another was hit
for four and the next for three. The over produced an astonishing 27
runs as Sachin reached his 50 from 18 balls. Srikkanth, one of the
most attacking batsmen in the game, was awestruck by his partner's
power. By now it had come down to 17 for victory in the final over
bowled by Akram. The Indians fell short by four runs. Srikkanth was
left on 13 while Tendulkar's contribution was an amazing 53 not out.
Qadir was generous in his praise. Soon after the thrashing, he told
the media: 'The lad is a genius. He is going to take bowlers apart in
international cricket for a very long time.' Qadir had a very clear
recollection of the match when asked to look back on it for this book.
'I did say in 1989 that Tendulkar will be a great batsman. He was a
school kid and looked like an innocent boy. But the way he played
against us was enough to convince me that he was going to be a great
batsman. I still remember when Wagar Younis bowled him his first
delivery when he made his Test debut in Kar<>_chi. It was a very fast
delivery. Tendulkar came forward and tried to drive the speedster
through the covers. He didn't connect the ball and was beaten, but I
told myself, "Here is a kid who will make his name in cricket."
'It's a very interesting story (the Peshawar encounter). Firstly I
want to clarify that it was not supposed to be an exhibition match. It
was actually a One-day International. But it rained heavily in Peshawar.
The organizers didn't want to disappoint a large crowd of over 30,000
so that's why they decided to convert the One-day International into
an exhibition match. I tied down skipper Srikkanth and didn't allow
him to score freely. At that time, Tendulkar was standing at the nonstriker's end. At the end of the over, I asked Tendulkar to go after my
bowling, so that the world knows that he has the potential of scoring
runs against a quality bowler_ It was not that I wanted to bowl him
loose deliveries, I knew that he could hit me for big sixes. I told him,
"Don't feel that a world class leg-spinner is bowling to you. Don't be
afraid what will happen if you get out, just think that I am an ordinary
bowler and try to score big sixes." When I bowled that memorable
over, I didn't bowl badly, but Tendulkar hit me for three sixes and in all
Into the Cauldron of Test Cricket

51

collected 27 runs. I still remember that he was dropped in that over,
but it didn't stop him from playing his classical shots to all parts of the
Arbab Niaz Stadium. It was after that match that I said that Tendulkar
will be a great batsman and I wasn't wrong because I knew that he
would make his name in cricket.
'A couple of years later I went to Sharjah to play in a double-wicket
tournament in which leading players like Salim Malik, Arjuna
Ranatunga, Kapil Dev, Ravi Shastri and others were playing. Tendulkar
was also there. By that time he had made his name in the cricketing
world. That day I again asked him to score runs off my bowling. But
he didn't succeed in scoring as many as he scored in Peshawar.
'I love innocent people and those who want to work hard. Tendulkar
is certainly one of those players.'
In the first official One-day International at Gujranwala on 18
December, Sachin was out for his first duck in international cricket,
caught Akram bowled Younis first ball. Quite shockingly; he was
dropped for the next two matches.
At the start of the Test series in Karachi a poster was seen in the
stands referr:ng to the new kid on the block. It read contemptuously,
Baccha, tu idhar kya karta hai? (Child, what are you doing here?).
A month later, at the end of the one-day game at Peshawar, another.
one popped up. It read: Ek sher aya hai (A tiger has arrived).

52

Sachin
