World Record

He is a sure betfor India in afew years' time.- Raj Singh Dungarpur

The Harris Shield semi-final against St. Xavier's, Fort (Sunil
Gavaskar's old school) was played at the Sassanian Cricket Club
ground on Azad Maidan on 23-25 February 1988, and it was this
match that propelled Sachin into the world record books for the first
time.
St. Xavier's had in their ranks leg-spinner Sairaj Bahutule, a future
Test cricketer, while defending champions Sharadashram had Vinod
Kambli and Amol Muzumdar besides Tendulkar in their team.
Muzumdar would go on to captain Mumbai in the Ranji Trophy; he
holds the world record for the highest score by a debutant in first-class
cricket (260).
Sachin won the toss and took first strike. Opening bowler Sanghani
picked up the wickets of openers Atul Ranade (42) and R.Mulye (18)
and the score was 84 for 2 when Sachin joined Vi nod, who had by
then reached 29. At the end of the first day's play, Vinod was batting on
182 and Sachin on 192.
Achrekar was at the ground on the first day to watch his two pupils.
But he couldn't make it on the second and his deputy Laxman Chavan
was told to keep in touch with him over the phone. It was not long
before both batsmen crossed 200 on the second morning and the total
mounted to 500. Chavan spoke to Achrekar who told him to pass on
instructions to Sachin to declare and give enough time for his bowlers
to dismiss St. Xavier's on the second day itself.
1\chrekar Sir's assistant ran all round trying to attract our attention

so that he could tell us to declare. Sachin kept telling me not to look at
him. We even started singing,' recalled Kambli years later in the
television documentary Tendulkarat 25.
Finally, a stern warning over the phone during the lunch break
forced Sachin to declare at 7 48 for 2. He was on 326 (one six, 49 fours)
and Kambli on 349 (three sixes, 49 fours). The runs had come from
just 120 overs: more than a run a ball. The sole maiden was bowled by
Sanghani who had the 'best' figures of2 for 98. Bahutule conceded
182 runs from his 27 overs. By close, a thoroughly demoralized St.
Xavier's were 77 for 3.
'Yes, I was angry with Sachin and Vinod as they batted on and on,'
Achrekar recalls with a chuckle. 'After all, you cannot bat forever.'
Perhaps for the first time, Sachin got a ticking offfrom his coach. He
did not play in the match the next day as he shifted grounds to play in
a Giles Shield game. St. Xavier's crumbled to 145 with Kambli picking
up 6 for 3 7 with his offbreaks.
A month later, it was revealed in the media that the unbeaten stand
for the third wicket worth 664 runs was a world record for any wicket
in any class of cricket. The previous record stood in the names ofT.
Pal ton and N. Rippon for Buffalo River v Whoroughly at Gapstead in
Victoria, Australia in 1913-14.
Thanks to that band of dedicated number crunchers, the
Association of Cricket Statisticians and Scorers oflndia, this feat was
recognized as a world record, and the boys got plenty of coverage.
They were thrilled to see their names in both the Guinness Book if
VHJrtd Records and Wtsden Cricketers' Almanack.
While Sachin was not a new name for Mumbai cricket followers,
he was for most of us in the rest of the country. I was then with the
Indian Express in Chennai. My brother sent me a cutting from Delhi,
of an article on the world record by the late Sunder Rajan that had
appeared in the Times ifIndia, Mumbai. He wrote across the cutting:
Watch out for this boy.'
'The world record helped us a lot,' recalled Kambli in an interview
to the Sportstar (30 September 1995). 'That enabled us to jump the
ladder. Previously you had to come through the rungs; we were lucky.'
World Record

25

The Harris Shield final is the most important fixture in Mumbai
school cricket. Befitting the occasion, the match is played at Brabourne
Stadium, still a favourite with the city's cricket cognoscenti despite
the presence of the Wankhede Stadium just across the street.
Sharadashram English were up against the formidable Anjuman-EIslam who had an equally glorious record in the competition. Sachin
won the toss and decided to bat. But there wasn't going to be a repeat of
the world-beating semi-final. Kambli was out for 18 with the score on
35 for 2. By close, Sachin was batting on 122. He had begun slowly,
but gradually played his favourite lofted shots to spread the field. He
added a further 144 runs the next day and was on 286 in a total of 511
for 7. The local press had by now latched on to the fact that there was
a real talent in their midst and most papers carried Sachin's photograph
the next morning. Sharadashram added 79 runs before being all out
on the third morning, Sachin's share being 60 to stay unbeaten on
346-his second consecutive unbeaten triple century in the
tournament. There was just one life-he was dropped in the covers
whenon229.
Anjuman finished the third and penultimate day on 131 for 4.
Straight after the rigours ofhis triple ton, Sachin came on to bowl22
overs of medium pace on the trot. The match ended with Anjuman
on 269 for 8 with Sachin having claimed four wickets in 52 overs (28
maidens). Since even the first innings could not be completed, it was
decided that the teams would be declared joint winners.
Tendulkar paid tribute to the Harris Shield and its role in his early
development, on the hundredth anniversary of the tournament. In
the Lord Harris Shield Cricket Tournament: Commemoration Tf:Jlume, 18971997 he wrote:
One cannot but be amazed at the vision and dedication of those
who had thought of organizing the tournament for
schools .... The Harris Shield has a special significance for me.
As everyone knows, the unbeaten partnership of664 between
Vi nod Kambli and myselfbrought both of us into the limelight.
26

Sachin

Thus, often I wonder what I would have been had there been
no Harris Shield tournament. As it has been in my case, the
Harris Shield has shaped the destiny ofcountless cricketers in
Mumbai.
The tournament has made Mumbai cricket a great force to
reckon with. Its contribution to the game is invaluabl~. And it
has withstood the test of time. There are not many tournaments
in the world that can claim to have completed one hundred
years.
I particularly cherish the fact that I had the good fortune of
leading my school, Sharadashram Vidyamandir (English), to
victory in the Harris Shield.
The tournament enabled me to show my cricketing skills at
an early age. With the game becoming increasingly popular
and with youngsters taking to it in large numbers the Harris
Shield assumes added significance as the launching pad for
fresh talent.
Sachin was still in school when Raj Singh Dungarpur, one of the
doyens of Mumbai cricket and the president of the Cricket Club of
India (cCI), took the initiative to make Sachin a member of the
prestigious club, whose home is the Brabourne Stadium. The club
changed its rules to allow Sachin to play for them in the Kanga League.
Club rules stipulated that no one below 18 years was allowed in the
pavilion or the dressing rooms. Sachin was just 14!
In an article on Tendulkar by Scyld Berry (Wtsden Cricket Monthly,
June 1996), Raj Singh-then chairman of the national selection
committee-looked back eight years on Sachin's innings in the Harris
Shield final of April 1988.
'What I recall was his tremendous maturity. He was playing on a
full-sized ground for the first time. The field was spread out and he
kept driving singles to long off and long on. Then he checked his shot
and started taking twos. That was maturity and a high level of
confidence.' Raj Singh was also quoted in a more contemporary profile
World Record

27

ofSachin by Shirish Nadkarni soon after his school and early Ranji
trophy feats, in the Cricketer International (April1989).
This boy is simply amazing; I have never seen so much
concentration and stamina in one so young. He is very strong
on the leg side, but otherwise plays strictly in the 'V' to either
side of the bowler and all along the ground. His concentration
is really astounding-in the two days-plus that he batted while
scoring 346 against Anjuman, there was just one blemish and
perhaps one uppish square-cut that nearly went to hand.
Further, you must remember that he came to the wicket when
his team was in a tight corner, having lost early wickets. He
played with great responsibility and never lofted the ball. And
then he came on to bowl all those tidy overs of medium pace
and spin! There is so much of Greg Chappell that I see in
him-the batting, the strokes, the bowling style. If carefully
nurtured, he is a sure bet for India in a few years' time.
The prediction would come true seven months-not seven
years-after the article was published. For Sachin would make his
international debut in November 1989.

28

Sachin
