Drama Down Under and the

IPL

Tendulkar is surely the game's secular saint.-Greg Baum, Australian
journalist
Ever since the 2001 series in India when Australia's winning streak
was thwarted in the 'greatest series ever', India-Australia matches had
taken on a special resonance.
The whole of the cricket world was riveted by the intensity and
fervour displayed by players on both sides and this contest had even
overtaken India-Pakistan matches in the eyes of the Indian public.
India had battled world champions Australia to a standstill when
they last toured in 2003--04 with the series deadlocked 1-1. One season
later Australia beat India on Indian soil for the first time since
1969-70.
So all eyes were turned towards down under when India resumed
battle against the mighty Aussies in what would be another bloodand-thunder epic.
With just one tour match-that too, a virtual washout-prior to
the first Test at Melbourne, the Indians were under-prepared and sure
enough crashed to a huge defeat.
Tendulkar's 62 in the first innings was India's lone half-century in
the match and was full of thrilling strokes, but was all too brie(
Sydney is India's favourite ground in Australia and they went into
the second Test with hopes of a better showing. For Ricky Panting and
his team, it was a chance to emulate the world record run of 16
successive Test wins under the captaincy of Steve Waugh.
It turned out to be one of the most dramatic and acrimonious

international cricket matches since the infamous Bodyline series of
1932-33. And umpires Steve Bucknor and Mark Benson played a
major role in the match spiralling out of control with some appalling
decisions that largely went against the Indians.
To add to this, the racism row involving Harbhajan Singh and
Andrew Symonds and the three-Test ban imposed on the Indian off
spinner-pending an appeal to be heard after the Test series was averby match referee Mike Procter threatened to bring the whole tour to a
shuddering halt.
The on-field action was pretty riveting too. But in the end, the
Indians would have been kicking themselves for losing the match by
122 runs after securing a first innings lead of 69 runs, and with just
nine minut~s left on the final day.
Australia were in dire straits at 134 for 6 with Symonds the last
specialist batsmen at the crease on the first day.
The first flash point was when Bucknor reprieved Symonds on 30
when a thick edge off !shant Sharma was held by Dhoni. He got
another let-off on 48, this time courtesy the third umpire.
By close of the first day, the score had galloped to 376 for 7 with
Symonds cashing in to reach 137. He candidly admitted he had got an
edge when reprieved, something everyone at the ground except
Bucknor had no doubt about.
India responded with a massive 532 to Australia's 463 and the
match looked headed for a draw by the fourth day.
Outside of India, the scG (Sydney Cricket Ground) has been
Sachin' s favourite venue and for the third time on four tours spanning
16 years, he recorded a century. It led his fans to ask for the SCG to be
renamed the Sachin Cricket Ground!
Unbeaten on 154 when the innings ended, it meant he had now
tallied 455 runs at the SCG since last being dismissed.
The tremendous warmth shown to Tendulkar by the crowd when
he got to his century was one of the few redeeming features of a Test
that brought little credit to the game.
The final day when Michael Clarke grabbed three wickets in the
dying stages to give Australia their record-equalling 16th straight
Drama Down Under and the

IPL

355

victory was once again marked by atrocious umpiring. Plus a petulant
display by the home side that dismayed even their most ardent fans.
Things had come to a head on the third day during the century
partnership between Harbhajan and Tendulkar when Symonds
claimed the Indian off spinner had used a racial slur against him. The
hearing called against Harbhajan by Procter on the insistence of
Panting was deferred till the end of the match.
It was a marathon hearing with the Indians still smarting from the
umpiring and the shock defeat. And at the end of it all, the Match
Referee slapped a ban of three Test matches on Harbhajan.
It turned out to be a case of Tendulkar's word against the
Australians' as the stump mikes had not picked up the exchange.
Procter imposed the ban as he felt Tendulkar was not close enough to
hear what was said between the two protagonists.
The Indians protested vehemently and went on appeal. As tempers
rose over the punishment, there were rumours that the Indian board
would call off their tour. In a compromise move, it was decided to hear
the appeal at the end of the Test series. The ICC also caved in under
Indian pressure and had Bucknor removed as umpire for the third
Test.
All hell broke loose and the media and fans on both sides took
extreme stands.
The BCCI's contention that Indians were incapable of racial abuse
was hard to swallow considering the nasty reception that Symonds
had received at the hands of the crowds when the Aussies had toured
in late 2007.
Those ugly scenes had been captured on camera during the final
001 at Mumbai and the Board was forced to take action against the
erring spectators after first denying such incidents had occurred at
earlier games.
It was during this Mumbai ODI that Symonds first alleged
Harbhajan had called him a monkey, something the all-rounder found
offensive considering he is the only non-white in the Australian team.
Under the ICC terms, it constituted racial abuse.
Panting had wanted to press charges there and then but Symonds
356

Sachin

diffused the situation by conveying his feelings in person to Harbhajan
in the Indian dressing room at the end of that particular match and
apparently getting an assurance that such language would not be
repeated. So there was a history between them. Former English
cricketer and columnist Peter Roebuck went so far as to call for
Panting's head over the behaviour of the team at Sydney. The
Australians were suitably chastened by the time of the third Test at
Perth as a national outcry had erupted around them.
That did not prevent Panting from predicting a rout of the Indians
on the fiery surface of the WACA which had traditionally been a fast
bowler's paradise and where Australia had not lost a Test since 199697.
But in a dramatic turnaround, the Indians became the first team
from Asia to win at the WACA and the Australians were left to lick their
wounds.
It was also the first time since India had won the Adelaide Test in
December 2003 that any touring side had beaten the world champions
at home, that too with a day to spare.
It meant that once again it was the Indians who had halted
Australia's run of16 straight wins just as they had in Kolkata in 2001.
The pace bowlers did indeed dominate but it was the Indian attack
ofRudra Pratap Singh, Irfan Pathan and Ishant Sharma who stole a
march over their more fancied Aussie counterparts.
No batsman reached three figures, with Dravid's 93 in the first
innings the highest individual score in the match.
Tendulkar was batting fluently when umpire Asad Rauf ruled him
out lbw to Brett Lee for 71 with replays showing the ball would have
gone over the stumps.
An upset Sachin walked off shaking his head, perhaps ruing the
fact that he fell short of emulating the feat of scoring centuries at both
Sydney and Perth that he had achieved on his first tour in 1991-92.
India could not regain the Border-Gavaskar Trophy, which was in
Australia's possession, once they had lost the first two Test matches.
But the Perth victory nonetheless came as a huge morale booster for
Ani! Kumble and his men following the trauma and controversy of
Drama Down Under and the IPL

357

Sydney.
Nothing though could deny Tendulkar in the fourth and final
Test at Adelaide. His 39th century was a classic, his sixth in Australia
and first at the SACA ground.
The high-scoring Test ended in a draw with Australia taking the
series 2-1.
A remarkable feature of the tour was the warmth with which
Tendulkar was welcomed at every venue across the country on what
was perhaps his final tour of Australia.
Australian journalist Greg Baum wrote in The Wisden Cricketer
(UK, December 2008): 'Here is a man whose name is synonymous
with purity, of technique, philosophy and image. Iflan Botham was
the Errol Flynn of cricket, or Viv Richards the Martin Luther King, or
Shane Warne the Marilyn Monroe, or Muthiah Muralitharan the
Hobbit, Tendulkar is surely the game's secular saint.'
Tendulkar has always claimed Australia is his favourite country to
play in and the feeling is obviously mutual.
'It's truly a special feeling to walk in to such a reception, when I
don't know ifl am batting on zero or on 100,' was his response when
he was asked after his Adelaide century about the crowd's reception to
him both as he entered the ground and on reaching his hundred.
With the Test series over, it was now time for Harbhajan's appeal
against his ban to be heard by New Zealand High Court judge justice
John Hansen. The Indian camp had obviously done their homework
and came up with what was accepted as a plausible defence of their
bowler after which the ban was lifted. The circumstances round the
hearing though left a bad taste in everyone's mouth and neither camp
emerged with much credit. Hansen unlike Procter accepted from video
evidence that Tendulkar was close enough to hear what had transpired.
Back home in India SMS jokes were being exchanged by cricket
fans that what Harbhajan had uttered was a common Punjabi gaali
(abuse) which was misunderstood by Symonds. It was leftto the master
batsman to defend his friend and colleague and explain to the learned
judge the meaning of the swear-word.
The Australian on-field witnesses were trumped as there was no
358

Sachin

recording or hard evidence on their part to counter the Indians' line of
defence.
Harbhajan earned a reprieve much to the relief of the Indians and
Cricket Australia who were sweating under a renewed threat from the
BCCI to call off the rest of the tour.
It made him into perhaps the most hated visiting cricketer in
Australia since England captain Douglas Jardine of 1932-33 Bodyline
infamy and he received a hostile reception from the crowds and media
right through the remainder of the tour.
It also brought into the spotlight the close bond between the fiery
bowler and the legendary batsman, an unusual friendship of opposites
if ever there was one.
Australians were seething as Hansen himself admitted he would
have imposed a ban had he been provided with data showing
Harbhajan's behavioural record.
Inexplicably, the Icc's 'human and database error'--euphemism
for a screw-up-meant Hansen was informed of only one such
incident when in fact there had been a total offour instances ofpenalties
imposed on Harbhajan for breaches of conduct over the span of his
10-year international career.
Instead, all he earned was a slap on the wrist, forfeiting 50 per cent
ofhis match fees.
Significantly, Hansen made the point that it was Symonds who
had initiated the exchange, provoking the verbal abuse directed at
him. This set an important precedent as Australian cricketers had for
some years gotten offlightly for provoking such incidents, most notably
the Glenn McGrath-Ramnaresh Sarwan flare-up in St. John's,
Antigua, in 2003.
It was back to on-field action with India's campaign in the
Commonwealth Bank om tri-series against the World Cup winners
Australia and runners-up Sri Lanka. India had not won the title on
five previous attempts and now it would be their last chance as it was
the final tri-series to be staged in Australia after 29 seasons.
Dhoni pulled off what Sunil Gavaskar, Kapil Dev, Mohammad
Azharuddin, Tendulkar and Ganguly had all tried but failed to
Drama Down Under and the IPL

359

achieve-he led India to victory over Australia in the finals.
It came down to the final league game against Lanka at Hobart and
here eventually Tendulkar came good with his first half-century of
the tournament. He had struggled in the previous seven matches and
the Indian camp was beginning to fret about his lack of runs. But this
time he kept his best for the last after failing for so many years to score
big in crunch games.
Three times before had the Indians reached the tri-series finals,
each time beaten by Australia. Now in the opening match at Sydney
they coasted home by six wickets with 25 balls to spare, led by an
imperious unbeaten 117 from Tendulkar.
It was his first century in a final since 1998 and his maiden ODI ton
on Australian soil in his 39th match, marking the first time India had
beaten the hosts at the sec in 12 matches.
Tendulkar's previous century was 37 matches back against the
West Indies at Vadodara in January 2007. In between he had been
dismissed in the 90s on six occasions including three times on 99.
The pressure had been building up but he could not have timed
his 42nd ton better. It was the perfect century in the perfect chase as
the Indians easily overhauled Australia's 239 for eight.
Two days later at Brisbane they wrapped up the title but it was
much closer this time.
Tendulkar's 91 was another masterly innings but it all came down
to the final over of the match bowled by Pathan. He picked up two
wickets and the Indians were cock-a-hoop.
Mter an arduous and tension-ridden tour lasting nearly three
months, the new captain and the veteran maestro had combined forces
to achieve what Dhoni acclaimed was even bigger than the World
Twenty20 victory.
'Performance is one thing, but performing back-to-hack is
something else. He is the best,' said the elated captain of his matchWinner.
The Indians were back home triumphant, but in the mad whirl of
international cricket, they hardly had time for a break before the South
360

Sachin

Africans came visiting for three Test matches.
It was towards the end of the Australian tour that an event had
taken place in Mumbai which shook the world of cricket and made
headlines around the globe.
The BCCI's plans for the Indian Premier League Twenty20
tournament had been unveiled in 2007 and now for the first time,
cricketers found themselves auctioned off like cattle (in the words of
Adam Gilchrist) for eye-popping prices amongst the eight franchise
teams.
Dhoni fetched the highest price ofall, $1.5 million for the Chennai
Super Kings.
The Mumbai Indians, owned by Mukesh Ambani, were among
the teams that had the option of an 'icon' player, naturally Tendulkar,
who would automatically fetch 15 per cent more than the highest bid
pla:yer.
Tendulkarwentfor $1.12 million. Itwas the highest for any of the
five icon players, Rahul Dravid (Bangalore), Virender Sehwag (Delhi),
Ganguly (Kolkata) and Yuvraj Singh (Mohali) being the others.
VVS.L:oonan had voluntarily shed his icon status in order to allow
his team (Deccan Chargers) to have more spending money.
With the massively hyped IPL round the corner, the Test series was
rushed through with barely anyone seeming to bother. The whole of
India, indeed the world, was counting down the days to the start of
cricket's latest revolution.
The series was deadlocked 1-1 but what was significant was a groin
injury that kept Tendulkar out of the second and third Tests.
He batted in just one innings in the series and was out for a duck
even as India piled up a mammoth 627 in the opening Test at Chennai,
marked by Sehwag's second Test triple century.
Tendulkar picked up the strain during the closing stages of the triseries in Australia and had been advised two weeks' rest. It was
aggravated at Chennai and now there was a cloud over his participation
in the IPL.
The tournament got off to a spectacular start in Bangalore on April
18 with New Zealand wicket-keeper Brendan McCullum smashing
Drama Down Under and the

IPL

361

a record 158 not out from 73 balls for the Kolkata Knight Riders
against the Bangalore Royal Challengers.
Harbhajan was appointed captain of the Mumbai Indians in
Tendulkar's absence and was obviously uncomfortable in the role.
The concept of IPL was a new experience for the players and the big
Indian names in particular felt under pressure playing for corporate
big-wigs with huge price tags on their heads rather than for regional
or national teams.
Things came to a head after Mumbai's third defeat in a row,
comprehensively beaten by Kings XI Punjab at Mohali.
Punjab's provocative pace bowlerS. Sreesanth had been taunting
the Mumbai players throughout the match and at the end of it
Harbhajan slapped his India team-mate who promptly shed a flood of
tears.
The IPL came down heavily on him and Harbhajan was banned
for the rest of the tournament and lost his entire signing fee.
With Tendulkar still not fit, South Africa's Shaun Pollock took
over and the change made all the difference as Mumbai came back
into the reckoning with three wins in the next four games.
But the pressure was mounting on Sachin to declare himself fit
and make an appearance. He was one of the showpieces of the inaugural
IPL season and it would have been unthinkable if he did not show up
for the grand party.
Finally, after missing seven games, the suspense was over. He took
over the captaincy for the match against leading contenders Chennai
Super Kings on his home turf at the Wankhede Stadium and the
results were spectacular.
After Chennai had compiled 156 for 6, Sanath Jayasuriya-the
oldest player in the IPL-cut loose and even Tendulkar could only
look on with awe from the other end. The target was reached in 13.5
overs with nine wickets in hand and the Lankan left-hander was
unbeaten on 114-of which 102 came from boundaries. It was
Twenty20 batting fireworks at its best. His opening stand with his
captain was worth 82 from 7.2 overs but Tendulkar contributed just
12 runs from 16 balls, and was bowled by Joginder Sharma.
362

Sachin

The Mumbai crowd went berserk. Their hero was back and their
team had made it four wins in succession.
Nagging doubts remained though-had Tendulkar rushed his
return? Was he fully fit?
Mumbai won their next two games as well and with six on the trot
looked certain to make the semi-finals. But a slump followed.
The first setback was defeat at the hands ofPunjab by just one run.
Tendulkar's contribution was 65 which turned out to be his only halfcentury of the tournament. Then came two more agonizingly close
finishes, losing with a ball to spare against Delhi and a last-ballloss at
the hands of Rajasthan which meant Mumbai had fallen just short of
reaching the semi-finals.
The run of defeats brought out a side ofTendulkar his fans had
never witnessed before.
There had been some controversial run-out decisions by third
umpire Suresh Shastri in the loss to Punjab and for the first time in
his career, Tendulkar went public with his criticism.
A standard 'no comment' would have been his usual answer to the
volley of questions. This time he responded. 'The whole world has
watched what it was all about,' he said. 'Everyone has seen what
happened and in whose favour the decisions eventually went. Had we
got those two run-out decisions our way, we would have added two
more runs to the tally and won the match.'
The frustration was building up and it exploded at the end of the
match against Rajasthan inJaipur which sealed Mumbai's fate. The
captain's contribution with the bat had been patchy at best with 188
runs from seven matches at the average of31.33. He had been unable
to bowl either due to his injury. And his captaincy was uninspiring.
One newspaper report, without specifically naming him, broadly
hinted that Tendulkar had lashed out at the younger players in the
team at the end oftheJaipur defeat, much to their shock and dismay
For the senior Indian players, the IPL was a whole new world and
most of them came out of the first season with their reputations dented.
Players were now accountable to their paymasters rather than to the
fans alone and having to report to corporate bosses brought out pressures
Drama Down Under and the IPL

363

and fissures which would take some getting used to. This is what lay
behind the glitz, glamour and hype of the Indian Premier League.
For better or for worse, cricket would never be the same again.

364

Sachin
