Year of Contrasts

I could not even lift a cup oftea.-Sachin Tendulkar on his injury.

Mter a break of three months, the Indian cricketers were back in action
for the Asia Cup in Sri Lanka.
Sachin did not have a good start to the tournament. In the first
match against lowly UAE he fell for 18 and then scored the same
against Sri Lanka in the next game which India lost. However, he was
back in form with 82 not out against Bangladesh and then 39 against
Pakistan, with India losing by 59 runs. India were fortunate to get into
the final against Sri Lanka as they gained a bonus batting point despite
the defeat at the hands of Pakistan.
Once again the jinx of India in 001 finals continued. This time
Tendulkar played the lone hand. Replying to the hosts' 228 for 9,
India struggled against the spin bowling ofU pal Chand ana and could
only muster 203 for 9. Tendulkar played an uncharacteristically
defensive knock, facing 100 balls before he was bowled by off- spinner
Tillakaratne Dilshan for 74.
It was when the team travelled to the Netherlands for the Videocon
om tri-series involving Australia and Pakistan that Tendulkar's left
elbow injury flared up. He stayed with the team for their washed out
matches but then when they travelled to England for the NatWest
series against England and the Champions Trophy, Tendulkar was
forced to drop out and was replaced in the squad by Rohan Gavaskar.
The injury was eventually diagnosed as 'tennis elbow' which meant
he could not even pick up a cup of tea, let alone a bat, with his left hand
and had to sit it out for close to three months. It is usually brought on

by repetitive wrist and elbow motion resulting in tendon damage.
It was yet another forced break through injury, something that had
plagued him since early 1999 when his back spasms almost forced
him to miss the World Cup in England. In 2004, it meant that he had
to skip the Videocon Cup in the Netherlands, the NatWest Challenge
and the Champions Trophy in England and half the home Test series
against Australia.
From 1999 to 2004, Tendulkar missed a total of 61 ODis and five
Test matches. While India won 49.71 of the 342 ODis he played in (till
the end of2004), in his absence the winning percentage dropped to
42.62. In Test matches, India also lost three, drew one and won one of
the five Tests during this same period.
With world champions Australia touring India in October, there
was intense speculation over Tendulkar's availability. But he was not
fit for the first Test at Bangalore which India lost and the second at
Chennai which was drawn.
He made his comeback in the third Test at N agpur. It was however
a disappointing return. He could score only 8 and 2 as India were
beaten by 342 runs and thus lost a home series to Australia for the first
time since 1969-70.
India though had the consolation of winning the fourth and final
Test in Mumbai. On a sharply turning track where batsmen on both
sides struggled, Tendulkar's 55 in the second innings and his stand of
91 with VVS. Laxman (69) were pivotal in giving India victory by 13
runs.
With scores of 3, 20 and 32 not out in the first and second Tests
against South Mrica at Kanpur and Kolkata in November-and with
Virender Sehwag blazing away-questions were now being asked
about Tendulkar's defensive frame of mind and his fitness. He could
score just 125 runs in seven innings since his return from injury till
the end of the South Mrican series.
The short tour to Bangladesh at the end of2004 was an opportunity
to cash in on some easy runs and wickets for the Indian team. This
may have tempted Tendulkar to make the tour despite not being fully
fit.
Year of Contrasts

335

He certainly cashed in. In his previous 14 years of Test cricket,
Tendulkar had only two double centuries to his credit. Now he started
the year 2004 with 241 not out at Sydney, reached 194 not out before
the declaration at Multan and, in December, rounded it off with his
highest Test (and first-class) score to date, 248 not out in the first Test
in Dhaka.
In between all those runs came his debilitating injury and a dip in
form.
That massive Dhaka innings enabled him to draw level with Sunil
Gavaskar's world record mark of34 Test centuries. But did it come at
a high price to his aching body?

336

Sachin
