Foot Fault

There cannot be another Sachin Tendulkar.-Virender Sehwag

After the excitement of the home series against Australia, it was time
for the Indians to hit the road again. First stop would be Zimbabwe,
where they had not won a Test match in the two previous visits,
followed by Sri Lanka and then South Africa. In 1992, Zimbabwe's
inaugural Test had been drawn; six years later, they had shocked India
by 61 runs. Now it was time to make amends.
The Indians started on the right note. The first Test at Bulawayo
was won by the visitors by eight wickets, their first victory outside
Asia since beating England 2-0 in 1986. Sachin Tendulkar top-scored
with 74 in India's first innings of318. However, opener Shiv Sundar
Das was the Man of the Match with 30 and 82 not out. Tendulkar (36)
hit the winning runs. It was a special moment, for only twice before in
his career had India won abroad-in Colombo in 1993 and in Dhaka
in 2000. He pulled out a stump as a souvenir-something he had
never done before. Asked why by a journalist, he replied: 'This is a
special feeling.'
Indeed it was. But it would not last for long. Harare had been the
scene oflndia's shocking defeat in 1998. Now the batting crumbled in
both innings. Totals of 237 and 234 were just not good enough.
Zimbabwe swept home by four wickets and India were once again
denied series victory on foreign soil. From an individual point-ofview, the one-day tri-series that followed (with the West Indies) was a
triumph for Tendulkar. With scores of70, 9, 81 not out, 122 not out
and 0, he was the Man of the Series, bagging three Man of the Match

awards as well. His century came in the last round-robin game against
the West Indies at Harare, on 4 July, after India had ensured that they
would be in the final. Needing 230 to win, Tendulkar stayed until the
end (48.1 overs) on 122, as India won by four wickets. But the duck in
the final against the same opponents, at the same venue, rankled.
Facing a total of 290, India fell short by 16 runs. It was Tendulkar's
dismissal at the hands of Man of the Match Corey Collymore that
proved vital once again.
It was obvious Sachin was having fitness problems and while
fielding, he had made numerous visits to the dressing room for
treatment. At the time, it was said that he had a stomach injury.
Back home, an interview that Tendulkar gave to PTI reporter Ashish
Shukla was causing waves. In it, Sachin had discussed the sensitive
issue of captaincy. Sensitive, because Sourav Ganguly's bad patch
with the bat was just beginning to be noticed and commented upon.
In the interview (published in newspapers around the country on 3
July 2001 ), Tendulkar was quoted as saying that he was not thinking
about leading the team 'at the moment. But I haven't ruled it out also.'
He then sought to dispel suggestions that the burden of captaincy had
hampered his batting in the past and said his first double century
came when he was captain. 'Only, I think when I was captain, we
played South Africa, West Indies and Australia ... probably the toughest
tours,' he was quoted as saying. Shukla added: 'But he did admit that
captaincy had hampered him "as a person" though he did not elaborate.'
Naturally, all the headlines focussed on his comments on the
captaincy, a never-ending debate in Indian cricket circles. Earlier, in
December 2000, he had been quoted on the issue for the first time by
a Bengali paper from Kolkata. 'When I gave up the captaincy, the
situation demanded so. However, I have never said that I will not lead
India again. I am pretty open to the idea ofleading India if the situation
comes to such a stage.'
Word quickly got back to Sachin that the interview was making
news. The result was damage control in the form of one ofhis longest
newspaper interviews to V Srivatsa in Harare, run over three parts in
the Times ofIndia (6-8 July 2001).
Foot Fault

287

Q: Why this sudden speculation about captaincy and you not
being averse to step in when you quit the job on your own even
as everyone begged of you to stay on?
A: I have never spoken on this issue. I was just asked whether
I would be keen on leading the side and I said I have not really
thought about it. I didn't step down from the captaincy so I can
immediately start thinking about it. I took some time to make
this decision, it's not a rash decision taken at the spur of the
moment. I just felt what I was doing was right and I just like to
close those chapters and enjoy the game.
Q: There's nothing wrong in aspiring to be a captain, just as a
politician wanting to become the prime minister, but what were
the compelling reasons for quitting in the first place? Were
they cricketing reasons or personal?
A: Even when I stepped down I said I wasn't ruling out
completely another stint of captaincy at a later stage. Even now
I say the same thing, that doesn't mean I want to become captain
today. Things are going well and I don't want to disturb
anything. The problem is whatever I say is interpreted. Ifl had
said that I am not interested in captaincy it would have become
a headline, and ifl say no comments then people would have
said something is cooking. I feel things are going in the right
direction and that's how it should be.
Apart from the sensitive subject of captaincy, there was news being
created by Sunil Gavaskar too. In a rare critique of Tendulkar, he
came down on him for throwing away his wicket in the defeat in the
second Test at Harare. Tendulkar on 69 had carved a widish delivery
to point, to trigger another Indian batting collapse on the fourth day.
The team had slipped from 197 for 3 to 234, paving the way for
Zimbabwe's victory.
Gavaskar felt that the Australians were correct in rating their captain
Steve Waugh as the best Test batsman in the world, for his ability to
win or save matches for his team on foreign soil. 'Why blame VVS.
Laxman when the best batsman in the universe [Tendulkar] gets a
288

Sachin

half-century and then gets out, when a big score from him is the
crying need of the team?' Gavaskar wrote in an Australian paper. The
criticism was challenged by veteran journalist Raju Bharatan in
Sporstar (14July 2001), who made the point that Waugh had failed to
come through for his side when they were beaten 2-1 in that fantastic
series in India.
There was a more serious matter, though, for the great man and
his millions offollowers to wrestle with, shortly after the team returned
from Zimbabwe. During the last league match against the West Indies
at Harare on 4 July, when he scored his twenty-ninth ODI century,
Sachin had felt a sharp pain in his foot while setting offfor a single. A
month later, he invited the press to his new home in Bandra (West) to
explain the injury and its implications.
During the match [on 4 July], I felt pain while batting. I
remember telling Rahul [Dravid] about feeling pain in the
right toe. I heard a click while batting. Mter that click the toe
began hurting. The next day's practice session I didn't do much
except apply ice to the toe. I informed physio Andrew Lei pus. I
went to hospital for x-rays. Nothing showed in it. It was normal.
We also consulted a specialist who said as there was no fracture,
I could play. But he said the injury would need rest afterwards.
I started feeling pain and was waiting for it to settle down. When
I came back to India I had 4-5 days ice treatment but it didn't go
down. I decided to go through a diagnosis. Dr Anant Joshi
advised a scan.

Mter a bone scan and CT scan were done in Mumbai, it was revealed
that there was a hairline fracture of the right big toe. The 'click' that
Tendulkar had heard was most likely of his tiny toe bone (known as
the 'medial sesamoid') snapping. Tendulkar felt there may have been
more pressure on the area due to the spike-studded sole ofhis custommade shoes. One of the seven spikes is located directly under the
sesamoid bone of the big toe. The pressure exerted when taking off for
a run, up to three to five times the body weight, on one foot, could
Foot Fault

289

have impacted and fractured the tiny bone.
The tour to Sri Lanka, consisting of a one-day tri-series followed
by three Test matches, was round the corner. Initially, it was hoped
Tendulkar would miss only the oms and would be fit in time for the
Test series. 'I don't mind missing the one-dayers, but please ensure I
can make it for the Test series,' he pleaded with Dr B.A. Krishna, chief
of nuclear medicine at Hinduja Hospital, where the scans were carried
out. Itwas not to be. On 10August, by which time the ODI series was
over, he announced he would be pulling out of the Test series as the
fracture had not healed completely. Six weeks' rest was recommended,
so he would hopefully be fit in time for the tour to South Africa in
September.
'Sachin could have played the Test series only at the risk offurther
injury. And even then he wouldn't have been able to give a hundred
per cent,' explained Dr Joshi. For a few days, the whole country watched
as Tendulkar's fractured toe and Prime Minister Vajpayee's worn out
knee competed for space in the media.
Tendulkar had missed some one-day matches just before and after
the 1999 World Cup due to back pain. But it was the first time since
his debut in Pakistan in November 1989 that he was missing a Test
match. By 14 August 2001, when the first Test against Sri Lanka at
Galle started without him, he had played a record 84 consecutive
Tests since his debut, stretching from Karachi in November 1989 to
Harare in June 2001.
Even as he was resting and undergoing treatment, Sachin received
a piece of good news from Australia. Writer Roland Perry revealed that
shortly before his death in February, Sir Don had listed for him what
he considered his all-time greatest team. There was just one Indian
and one contemporary player among the twelve named and that was
Tendulkar, one of Sir Don's favourites. The news delighted Sachin
even as the Indian media went to town. 'It is a great honour. The
greatest thing to happen. It is important when Sir Don speaks anything
and especially when he selects me in his team, there cannot be a better
thing than that,' he said. 'I am very thrilled about it and very excited.
There are some great names missing and to see my namt in it, I am
290

Sachin

more than thrilled. Mter Sir Don and before Garry Sobers [in the
batting line-up ]-what else can you ask for?'
The Sri Lankan tour produced mixed results in Sachin's absence.
India reached the final of the tri-series (New Zealand was the third
team), only to lose once again to the hosts. The Test series started with
India losing the first Test at Galle, bouncing back to win the second at
Kandy, and then being beaten in the decider at Colombo.
There was a significant innings in the last league match in the ODI
series against New Zealand, at Colombo, that India had to win to
reach the final. The young Delhi batsman Virender Sehwag was asked
to open the innings after Yuvraj Singh and Arnay Khurasiya had failed
in that position. He grabbed the opportunity with glee, smashing the
second fastest century by an Indian in oms (from 70 balls).
Remarkably similar in height, build and looks, Sehwag also
displayed an array of attacking shots normally the preserve of
Tendulkar, whose batting spot he had taken in his hero's enforced
absence. Tendulkar thrilled Schwag by sending a message of
congratulations. And the press was quick to latch on to the similarity.
The 'New Tendulkar', they were already calling him. Sehwag, though,
would have none of it.
'How can I be even compared with the great man! Look at the
amount of cricket he has played, and see what I have played in
comparison. Just see how many matches he's won for India. I mean,
he's God when he's out there in the middle. There cannot be another
Sachin Tcndulkar,' he told TapanJoshi ofCrU:ketnext.com.

Foot Fault

291
