Home, Sweet Home

It is impossible to fathom what the youngster is capable c!f-R. Mohan
It was exactly 12 months after he made his international debut that
Sachin Tendulkar finally played a Test match on home soil.
That 12 month-period saw the Indian team play an amazing ten
Test matches, as well as One-day Internationals in Pakistan, New
Zealand, England and Sharjah. Mter all that hectic activity, the Indians
would play just one Test in the next 12 months. Indian fans longing to
get a glimpse of the teenager who had wowed audiences around the
world finally got their opportunity with the one-off Test against Sri
Lanka at Chandigarh in November 1990.
Sri Lanka were still the pushovers of international cricket, a far cry
from their post-1996 status. The prosaic sounding Sector 16 Stadium
in Chandigarh was hosting its first Test match, which would also be
its last. (From 1994 international cricket in the city moved to the
suburb ofMohali on the outskirts ofChandigarh. Expansion at Sector
16 was ruled out due to local building laws and the Punjab Cricket
Association now has one of the best stadia in the country.) The match
had been shifted from Jalandhar at short notice due to political unrest
there. For the first time in India security was so tight that the police
outnumbered the spectators on a couple of days. Both teams were
guarded day and night at the stadium and their hotel by 3000
policemen. It was a pointer of things to come.
The under-prepared pitch was the talking point of the Test that
India won by an innings with a day to spare. Azhar won the toss and
batted first. Ravi Shastri's 88 was the lone half-century of the match

even as India struggled to reach 288. But that score was more than
enough as the visitors crumbled to 82 and 198 all out.
The Man of the Match was left-arm spinner Venkatapathy Raju.
In only his third Test he had figures of 6 for 12 and 2 for 25 from 53.5
overs. It was Azhar's first win as captain and the first for the Indian
team after playing 14 Tests abroad.
Sachin managed only 11. But it was a heady experience being on
the winning side for the first time since his debut a year before. The
Indian dressing room was a joyous sight with champagne corks
popping, though the captain and the prodigy were among those
abstaining from the bubbly.
Sri Lanka's plea for an extra Test match was turned down by the
BCCI, citing short notice. With Pakistan subsequently cancelling their
visit to India on security grounds, this remained the lone Test of the
1990-91 season.
India took the three-match om series against Sri Lanka that followed
the one-off Test with a 2-1 margin. For the first time, Tendulkar
showed glimpses ofhis prowess with the ball.
India won the first 001 at Nagpur by 19 runs with Tendulkar
contributing 36. The second at Pune on 5 December saw him pick up
his first wickets in international cricket, those of openers Roshan
Mahanama and Dhammika Ranatunge, returning figures of9-0-392 with his gentle medium-pacers. To add to his wickets, Tendulkar
recorded his first ODI50 (53) which saw India win comfortably by six
wickets. He reached his half-century in just 38 balls and hit seven
fours and a six in a sparkling innings. His stand with Azhar for the
third wicket was worth 80 runs in only 9.4 overs. The all-round
performance-which included two catches and the run-out of skipper
Arjuna Ranatunga-earned Sachin the first of his numerous Man of
the Match awards. It was one of those games in which everything he
touched seemed to turn to gold.
The final game at Margao was played on an under-prepared pitch
and halfway through the innings, Azhar and Tendulkar had to call for
helmets to play the Sri Lankan spinners as the ball turned and jumped
alarmingly. Tendulkar's 30 was the top score in a miserable Indian
68

Sachin

total of 136 all out. The visitors romped home by seven wickets after
the pitch had dried out.
There was success at home for the Indians in the Asia Cup which
followed. But with Pakistan pulling out, the tournament was robbed
of its glamour and India fought it out with Sri Lanka and Bangladesh.
Tendulkar had a quiet tournament, though he equalled his highest
score of 53 in the final at Kolkata, in which India beat Sri Lanka by
seven wickets.
The lack of international cricket for the rest of the season was a
blessing in disguise for Indian cricket. Finally, the big names in the
country like Kapil Dcv, Ravi Shastri, Dilip Vengsarkar, Sachin
Tendulkar and others would be available to assist their state and zonal
teams in the domestic tournaments. The result was some gripping
cricket after a gap of many years. Sachin enjoyed being a member of
theM urnbai team that won the Wills Trophy and the West Zone team
that lifted the Deodhar Trophy, both limited-overs tournaments. Both
these tournaments were a novel experience for him, as was the zonal
first-class Duleep Trophy in which West Zone lost in the final to
North Zone under highly contentious circumstances.
The quarter-finals against East Zone at Guwahati from 11 to 15
January 1991 saw Sachin complete a unique treble. With an innings
of 159 in the first innings he entered the record books as the first and
still the only batsman to score a century on debut in the Ranji, Irani
and Duleep Trophy. The first two feats had been achieved before the
start ofhis international career. Now, after a year in world cricket, he
had made it three out of three in domestic cricket's first-class set-up.
The East Zone bowling attack was certainly no great shakes and
had no big names to speak of Their batting was marked by Sourav
Ganguly's maiden century in his seventh first-class match. Uniquely,
there were two future India captains in this match, Ganguly and
Tendulkar, as well as two from the recent past-Ravi Shastri and Dilip
Vengsarkar.
The West Zone batting, on the other hand, was formidable, with
the first six batsmen in the line-up as well as number eight Kiran
More having international experience. Little surprise then, that on a
Home, Sweet Home

69

placid track there should be massive scores. Lalchand Rajput (82),
Sanjay Manjrekar (122) and Vengsarkar (72) all cashed in while
Tendulkar top-scored with 159. East were no match for the West total
of 604 and were all out for 317. The match was drawn with West
advancing on their huge first innings lead. Tendulkar's innings, his
fifth century in 31 first-class matches, was divided in pace. It took him
226 minutes to reach three figures, but he lashed out after that. The
last 59 runs included nine fours and two sixes and came from a mere
30 balls.
The semi-finals between West Zone and South Zone at Rourkela
produced a typical run-feast. South piled up 515. But that was dwarfed
by West's 747 and once again West advanced on the basis of their first
innings lead. This time the bowling attack was certainly more
challenging than in the previous match. South had in their ranks
Javagal Srinath, Venkatapathy Raju, Arshad Ayub, Robin Singh and
Ani) Kumble. Not that it bothered Tendulkar. His contribution this
time was another century: 131.
The stage was set for the battle of the giants of domestic cricket,
North Zone and West Zone, atJamshedpur. It was a match that was
destined to go down in history, but for all the wrong reasons.
North Zone, led by Kapil Dev, were more than a match for West in
batting and bowling. Their total of729 was beyond the reach of even
the formidable West batting line-up which could muster 'only' 561
against a bowling attack that was virtually that of the Indian team
itself
Tendulkar failed this time, and that may have made all the
difference. Both sides had three century-makers. But Tendulkar's
contribution was just 25 and with his dismissal, West's hopes faded.
The North second innings was a formality. But it ended in an ugly
brawl between bowler Rashid Patel from Gujarat and batsman Raman
Lamba from Delhi. There had been plenty of bad blood spilled in the
match already, with the North bowlers resorting to beamers and
deliberate overstepping, and the air thick with foul language. Patel
decided to give the North batsmen a taste of their own medicine in the
short time left for them to bat out the match, and bowled some
70

Sachin

menacing bouncers and beamers. Hot words were exchanged between
batsman and bowler and for the first time, cricket witnessed a bowler
assaulting a batsman with a stump on the field of play. Both Lamba
and Patel received bans of varying degrees from the BCCI for their
behaviour even as the match was abandoned by the umpires.
In one of those strange twists offate, the Delhi opener, one of the
most prolific batsmen in domestic cricket, died eight years later, in
1998, after being struck on the head while fielding in a club match in
Dhaka.
Indian cricket spent almost as much time in the law courts as out
on the field of play in this particular season, with controversies galore.
There was a two-month gap between the first two and last two quarterfinals as a dispute between Karnataka and Bengal dragged on and on.
Even during the league stage, a legal dispute between Punjab and
Delhi in the North Zone had threatened to disrupt the tournament.
The end result of all this acrimony was that the tournament for the
first time dragged on till May.
Tendulkar had missed the West Zone league stage in the Ranji
Trophy. But with Mumbai qualifYing as the second team in the league
after Maharashtra, he returned to assist them in the knockout stage.
Mter beating Uttar Pradesh by ten wickets in the pre-quarter-finals,
Mumbai faced the might ofDelhi in the quarter-final tie at the Feroze
Shah Kotla. The match was played in the middle of April.
A number of Delhi players had been contracted to play league
cricket in England that summer. Conflicting interests led to a fixed
match, as the Delhi players admitted to the Central Bureau of
Investigation (CBI) a decade later, during its investigations into matchfixing and corruption in cricket. At the time, of course, no one suspected
anything, and the Mumbai-Delhi match was widely thought to be
one of the most exciting Ranji Trophy matches of all time. Tendulkar
top-scored with 82 in Mumbai's total of390. Bantoo Singh's century
for Delhi guided them to 386 for 9. But when Wassan was bowled by
Patil for 32, Mumbai were assured of a place in the semi-finals on the
basis of their first innings lead of one run. And the Delhi cricketers
could happily book their tickets to England. Failure to arrive on time
Home, Sweet Home

71

would have invited hefty fines from their clubs.
Mumbai made a mountain of runs in their second innings: 719
for 8 declared. Tendulkar's 125 was his third century in five first-class
matches. Though Delhi's second innings was a formality, there was
enough time for Tendulkar to make his mark again, this time with the
ball.
He had bowled just one over in the first innings. Now, in the
second, he got one to leap from the placid pitch and hit Bantoo Singh,
fracturing the nose of the first-innings century-maker. Tendulkar had
fancied himself as a fast bowler till Dennis Lillee told him to
concentrate on his batting. But it is doubtful whether even the great
Australian would have been able to extract such life out of a dead Kotla
pitch on the final day.
Even by the batting standards oflndian domestic cricket, Mumbai's
855 for 6 declared in the semi-finals against Hyderabad at the
Wankhede Stadium four days later was an awesome figure. Sanjay
Manjrekar's 377 was the highest ever by a Mumbai batsman in the
Ranji Trophy. There were centuries from Vengsarkar and Kambli as
well, while Tendulkar's contribution was 70 and 88 in Mumbai's
second innings of 446 for 4 declared. Hyderabad stood no chance at
all.
For the first time Sachin would experience the thrill of playing in
the final of the National Championship, that too at home at the
Wankhede Stadium. Mumbai's opponents were Haryana, who under
Kapil Dev had made short work of Bengal in the other semi-final.
Kapil, Chetan Sharma and Ajay Jadeja (yet to make a mark in
international cricket) were the only known names in the Haryana
line-up. Mumbai, on the other hand, was a virtual who's who oflndian
cricket and the red-hot favourites. It turned out to be one of the best
Ranji finals of all time. Haryana's huge 522 was built around opener
Deepak Sharma's 199 while both Jadeja and Chetan Sharma fell in
the 90s. Most of the top Mumbai players made useful runs, Tendulkar
contributing 47 before he was lbw to Chetan Sharma. It was
nightwatchman Sanjay Patil who top-scored with 85. However,
Mumbai's 410 was well short of Haryana's total and it looked like
72

Sachin

curtains for the side. But their bowlers turned in a strong secondinnings performance and had Haryana on the ropes at 100 for 5 before
Ajay Banerjee (60 not out) rallied them to 242. The target was 355 for
Mumbai to win back the Ra~i Trophy they had last claimed in 198485. The run rate was stiff, more than five an over.
At 3 down for 34, Tendulkar and Vengsarkar gor together in a
rollicking stand worth 134 runs. Sachin took the bowling attack
spearheaded by Kapil Dev and Chetan Sharma apart. He reached his
50 from just 49 balls, taking over the attacking role from his captain
and senior partner. The Haryana bowling was dispatched all around
as Tendulkar raced towards a century which appeared inevitable till
he was caught by Jadeja off the bowling of off-spinner Yogendra
Bhandari for 96. Sachin was going for the boundary that would have
got him his ton. The last 46 runs had come from just 26 balls and the
sparkling innings was studded with five sixes and nine fours. A crowd
of 4000 had turned up to watch the final day's play-a large number
for a domestic match in India. They had pinned their hopes on the
young hero ofMumbai. Such was his dazzling stroke play on the last
day that even Kapil Dev was seen shaking his head in bewilderment.
Just two and a half years earlier, the schoolboy Sachin had faced the
champion bowler in the nets at the Wankhede Stadium. Now he was
dictating terms to him.
Sachin's dismissal at 168 for 4, followed by that ofVinod Kambli
(45), triggered another collapse even as Vengsarkar marched towards
a majestic century. When the ninth wicket fell, debutant pace bowler
Abey Kuruvilla joined the captain with 50 runs still needed for victory.
As tension mounted, the pair added 47 before the last man was run
out. Victory was Haryana's by two runs. Though Vengsarkar's 139
not out was the top score for Mumbai, the run chase would have been
given up as futile if it hadn't been for the teenager's batting
pyrotechnics.
Tendulkar would have to wait some more time to be part of a Ranji
Trophy winning side. He ended the season with 577 runs from four
matches at the outstanding average of 82.42. There were also two
individual honours for him. He was named as the Association of
Home, Sweet Home

73

Cricket Statisticians and Scorers oflndia (ACSSI) Cricketer of the Year
and one of the five Cricketers of the Year by Indian CricketAnnual.
The cancellation ofPakistan's visit to India meant there would be no
international cricket till October 1991 when India were scheduled to
be back in Sharjah for the three-nation Wills Trophy. There would be
non-stop action for the next six months, culminating in the 1992
World Cup in Australia.
The opening match for India in the Sharjah three-nation Wills
Trophy against Pakistan on 17 October 1991 saw the side record a rare
win over their arch-rivals. Manjrekar was the top scorer with 72. But
it was Tendulkar's 52 not out from 40 balls, with five fours, that
provided the impetus towards the end of the innings. The match also
marked the international debut of Vi nod Kambli, three and a half
years after he had been involved in the world-record partnership with
his school chum for Sharadashram Vidyamandir.
In the final league match, which India lost to Pakistan under dark
skies and in controversial circumstances, Tendulkar fell one short of
another 50. But he failed in the final, lbw first ball to Aaqib Javed. That
completed a hat-trick for the medium-pacer who had tlgures of7 for
37, a world record in One-day Internationals that would last for ten
years. West Indies were beaten by India in both their league games. In
the second of these, Sachin got the Man of the Match award, but not
for his batting. He returned his best bowling figures of 4 for 34 as the
former world champions crun 1bled to 145 all out. Tendulkar accounted
for opener Clayton Lambert, captain Richie Richardson, Gus Logie
and JeffDujon. His success with .the ball meant he was now an integral
part of the team's bowling plan.
Meanwhile, in faraway South Mrica, dramatic events were rapidly
unfolding that were soon to bury the evil of apartheid. India had been
in the forefront of the movement to ban South Africa from
international cricket in 1970. Until then, South Mrica only played
Test cricket against the 'white' nations of the ICC. Mter the ban, they
found themselves in exile for 21 years. With the release of Nelson
Mandela, the dismantling of apartheid and the advent of multiracial
74

Sachin

sports, it was once again India that took the lead at the ICC meeting at
Lord's which saw South Mrica return to the fold. South Mrican cricket
supremo Dr Aaron 'Ali' Bacher showed his gratitude by agreeing to
tour India. He hurriedly assembled a team under the captaincy of
veteran Clive Rice and flew to India to play three ODis at the request of
BCCI secretary Jagmohan Dalmiya.
The first match at Eden Gardens, Kolkata on 10 November 1991
in front of over 90,000 spectators was truly a historic event, going
beyond mere sporting cliches. All but Kepler Wessds, who had
previously represented his adopted country of Australia, were making
their international debut. On the ground, the emotion was palpable
and the enormous crowd, the likes of which the visitors had never
seen, egged the home side to victory.
Though the South Mrican total of 177 for 8 in 47 overs was hardly
threatening, India made heavy weather of it initially. South Mrica's
spearhead Allan Donald blasted out the top order to capture the
impressive figures of5 for 29 as India lost their first four wickets with
just 60 on the board. At this stage, a dream victory for the debutants
was very much on the cards. The damage for India was repaired by the
Mumbai pair ofTendulkar and debutant Praveen Amrein a rollicking
stand worth 56 runs that snatched the initiative from the visitors.
(Amre was the third of coach RamakantAchrekar's students to make
it to the big league, following the examples ofTendulkar and Vinod
Kambli. His 55 at Kolkata would be followed a year later by a century
on Test debut against the same opponents at Durban. It was a feat that
Achrekar's other two prodigies had been incapable of.)
R.Mohan was effusive in his praise ofTendulkar's many talents
(he also picked up the wicket of South Mrica's top scorer Wessels) in
the Sportstar (23 November 1991): 'It is impossible to fathom what the
youngster is capable of. He is a match winner pure and simple. The
manner in which he adapted to the slow wicket and played the shots
few others could strike with any great conviction is a clear pointer that
he is the jewel in the Indian crown. Soon, very soon, people will be
turning up only to watch Tendulkar play. He has so much of the
champion phenomenon in him. And he is not capable of playing for
Home, Sweet Home

75

records because he has such a positive approach. Ifhe continues to bat
like this he will be the leader of the new era in which the raw power of
batting is going to dominate cricket as it has baseball. Only Tendulkar
would use that dominance in that refreshingly orthodox way of his.'
The Man of the Match award was shared by Donald and Tendulkar,
an unusual occurrence in international cricket, but one in keeping
with the spirit of the occasion.

76

Sachin