A Boy Among Men

Tendulkar neverfoils.-Naren Tamhane
Raj Singh Dungarpur, with his eye for talent, played a major role in
the formative stages of Sachin's cricketing career. The former
Rajasthan medium-pacer (and erstwhile royalty) arranged for a
sponsor (the Birla Trust) to enable Sachin to go on his first tour abroad,
to England with the Star Cricket Club. The manager of Star was
another former RaJasthan medium-pacer, Kailash Gattani, who also
had playing experience in England with the Kent second eleven. The
tour began in June 1988, when the hot summer months in Mumbai
ensured that there was no competitive cricket to speak of.
It was a tight schedule, with 23 matches (all of 50 overs) played in
a span ofjust 30 days. Two days of sightseeing were allotted for the
boys, all under 19, during which they visited Edinburgh Castle and
the museum at Lord's. Future Test cricketers Vi nod Kambli and Sameer
Dighe were also in the squad. In the first match against Indian
Gymkhana, Sachin scored 49. He followed it up with scores of41, 81
not out, 44, 63 not out and 73, all scored at a rapid rate.
What is more, he played throughout with an injury: a wart on the
left hand between the thumb and the index finger which caused
considerable pain and prevented him from gripping the bat properly.
Sachin was back in the UK the following year with Star, and this
time he scored his first century on foreign soil. It was in the opening
match against Haywards Heath Cricket Club and came from just 77
balls, with 16 fours and two sixes. The team had a few first-class
cricketers from Sussex in the side, as well as future South Mrican Test

pace bowler Meyrick Pringle. There was nearly another century for
Sachin, against Horsham Cricket Club, and this time his 94 came off
75 deliveries.
The two trips gave Sachin valuable exposure to the variable pitches
and the changing weather patterns in England. The experience would
hold him in good stead, for just 12 months after the second tour hewould be back again-this time as a member of the Indian national
team.
Mter returning to Mumbai with the Star team in 1988, it was time
for Sachin to play for the CCI in the first division of the Kanga League.
He was among the top scorers with 190 runs in six innings. The
secretary of the CCI cricket committee and former Mumbai Ranji
Trophy captain Milind Rege was suitably impressed by the way Sachin
played-like a 'grown-up man'-getting on top of the ball even on a
drying track. The seniors in the team paled by comparison.
There was just one more taste ofjunior cricket before Sachin made
his first-class debut. This was as captain of the Mumbai under-17 side
in the Vijay Hazare tournament, in which he scored 83 in the final of
the West Zone league, against Maharashtra.
A week later, his world would change forever.
There was little doubt now that Sachin would make his Ranji Trophy
debut in the season's opening West Zone league game at the Wankhede
Stadium against Gujarat. But before that, he had to play in the trial
matches. The selection committee ofNaren Tamhane, Milind Rege,
Sudhir Naik and Ajit Wadekar were suitably impressed, for Sachin
scored 55 in the first game and 54 in the second, with nine boundaries.
The innings came against an attack that included Test opening bowler
RaJu Kulkarni, reckoned at the time to be one of the fastest in the
country, and that too on a green top.
Years later, Sachin would recall how he irritated Kulkarni by batting
without a helmet. It was not meant as a provocation-he simply did
not possess one!
Rege- wrote in Sportsweek, We decided to induct Sachin in the
Bombay Ranji XI at his usual number four position. Every member
30

Sachin

in the team was delighted with the way Sachin batted. In fact, he was
the only one to drive off the front foot while facing Kasliwal, Kher and
Sabnis who worked up a decent pace on the Wankhede practice wickets
which are fairly nippy. The reason why I say this is because everybody
these days tends to go on the back foot for a medium-pacer.'
Dilip Vengsarkar was captain of both the Mumbai Ranji Trophy
team and the national team at the time. He had never seen Sachin bat
and needed to be convinced that this boy, who was just 15 and barely
five feet two inches tall, could stand up to adults. The Indian team was
in Mumbai for a Test match against New Zealand, and Vengsarkar
invited the schoolboy to the nets where he got a chance to face the
mighty Kapil Dev. Kapil initially bowled off a shorter run-up. But
seeing Sachin play him confidently, he stepped up the pace and even
slipped in a few bouncers. Sachin was unfazed and stood up to him
without flinching.
Asked for his verdict, Kapil was cautious. 'Don't write too much
about him now,' he told the newsmen. 'There is some way to go.'
Vengsarkar, though, was impressed enough to give the go-ahead for
the teenager's inclusion in Mumbai's Ranji fixture against Gujarat.
The experience of facing Kapil left a lasting impression on Sachin.
'I couldn't sleep that night because I had played 15 balls from Kapil
Dev. I remember each of those balls like it was yesterday,' he was to say
ten years later (Outlook, 24 August 1998).
Sachin's debut match was played on 10-12 December 1988 and
was the opening match in the Talim Shield, symbol of supremacy in
the Ranji 11·ophy West Zone division. With Vengsarkar on national
duty, Mumbai were led by Lalchand Raj put who had earlier opened
in Tests for the country. Gujarat's captain was Dhansukh Patel.
Normally, a match involving Gujarat, one of the traditional
whipping boys in the W('st Zone, would evince little interest. But this
time Mumbai's cricketing elite turned up in force to watch the prodigy
make his debut. The entire selection committee was present as were
Gavaskar, Achrekar and Raj Singh-who was at the time the chairman
of the national selection committee. The small crowd of about 300
included many boys from Sahitya Sahawas as well as from
A Boy Among Men

Jl

Sharadashram, all come to cheer their friend.
The match began dramatically after Gujarat won the toss, with
S.D. Pathak bowled by Kasliwal from the first ball of the match. Gujarat
did not recover from that early shock and were skittled out for 140
before the tea break. By close, Mumbai were 95 for the loss ofShishir
Hattangadi's (35) wicket. The fans would have to wait one more day
to watch their favourite in action.
Gujarat's total was passed quickly enough on the second day. Alan
Sippy and his captain added 159 runs for the second wicket and the
pair batted serenely almost till the lunch break. But the spectators had
come for one thing only-to watch Sachin bat. With the interval
barely 15 minutes away, Rajput going for a third run was run out for
99 at 206 for 2, and Sachin made his way to the crease, heralded by
rapturous applause. His moment had arrived.
Seven deliveries later, Sachin faced his first ball in first-class cricket,
bowled by off-spinner N isarg Patel. The batsman defended. The same
with the second. The third, tossed up outside the off stump, was
promptly driven inside out through the covers for four. Sachin's first
scoring stroke in first-class cricket was a boundary. A sign of things to
come for bowlers around the world! The next two balls were defended
and the last of the over produced another boundary, driven past the
bowler and mid-on. At lunch Sachin was on ten. Between lunch and
tea his score progressed to the 80s with a full range of attacking strokes
as Mumbai strove for quick runs and bonus batting points. Together,
Sachin and Sippy added 145 runs to the score, then the left-bander
departed for 127, bowled by left-arm spinner Joy Zinto, and Mumbai
were 361 for 3.
A mini collapse ensued. Iqbal Khan was bowled for a duck and
Suru Nayak was run out for two. Sachin was joined by another
debutant, Sameer Talpade, by which time he had progressed to 95.
Left-arm spinner Bharat Mistry came on to bowl to a slip, point, cover,
deep extra cover, mid-off, long off, mid-on, midwicket and square leg.
Mistry tossed the ball up, inviting the drive. Sachin obliged, the shot
leaving the fielders rooted as he raced to 99. The tension in the stands
was now at breaking point. The next ball was faster and flatter. Sachin
32

Sachin

went on the front foot and with a neat turn of the wrists to backward
square leg, he got the vital run. The century on debut was complete
and the stadium erupted in applause. The 100 had come offjust 129
balls, with 12 fours. In the next over, Talpade was out for five and
Mumbai declared at 394 for 6. The crowd rose as Sachin returned to
the pavilion, unbeaten on 100.
At 15 years, 7 months and 17 days, Sachin Tendulkar entered the
record books as the youngest Indian to score a century on first-class
debut. The match was drawn as Gujarat scored 306 in their second
innings and Mumbai finished on 43 for 2, with Sachin not batting a
second time. But for once, the result was irrelevant.
There were five days between this opening match and the next
against Saurashtra at Rajkot-enough time for more Harris Shield
cricket. Against Bandra Urdu High School, Sachin's 191 runs were
scored in a mere two hours. That same night he left with the team for
Rajkot, where a shock awaited Mumbai. Raj put and Sippy were both
out for a duck in the very first over bowled by left-arm medium-pacer
Rajesh Jadeja. Unlike in his debut match, this time there was the
pressure of a scoreboard reading 0 for 2 when Sachin came to the
crease to join opener Hattangadi. He put his head down as the situation
demanded, and batted for 156 minutes and 125 balls before getting
out for 58. The stand was worth 133 and Hattangadi went on to score
103 in a small Mumbai total of252. None of the other batsmen could
cross 20. Saurashtra gained the rare honour of taking the first innings
lead as they scored 297.
In the second innings Sachin came in at number three with the
score reading 77 and this time played 120 deliveries for his innings
top score of89 with seven boundaries, the same as in the first innings.
He narrowly missed his second century in three innings when he
played an overambitious shot, slashing at spinner Virbhadran Gohil
to be well caught by Bimal Jadeja at point. A newspaper report the next
day commented that 'Tendulkar showed uncanny judgement in
meting out the right treatment to every ball.... He danced to hit the
ball to the straight field and imparted quite a bit of power to his cover
drives and square cuts. He has one flaw. He gets carried away and
A Boy Among Men

33

cannot be curbed even by the non-striker or by advice shouted from
the gallery.'
This match too was drawn, with Mumbai declaring their second
innings at 250 for 5 and Saurashtra scoring 78 for 4.
Following his first two matches, a remarkable article on Sachin by
Mumbai journalist Shirish Nadkarni appeared in the Cricketer
International (April 1989). The headline was startling: ~ Good As
Gavaskar?' Mter recountingSachin's scores in the first three innings
of his fledgling first-class career, Nadkarni wrote: 'If this is the rate at
which Sachin Tendulkar is going to be setting cricketing records, he
may even end up putting the great Sunil Gavaskar in the
shade .... [Sachin] is already being talked about as being better than
Gavaskar was at the same age. Mter all, Gavaskar was not called up for
Ranji duty until he was out of his teens, whereas Sachin will only
celebrate his sixteenth birthday on 24 April1989. Until this point the
comparison runs very much in his favour, but otherwise it is invidious,
since Sachin is basically an attacking batsman whereas Sunny was a
master of classical defensive technique.'
Even after making a mark at the first-class level, Sachin continued
to play for his school and age-specific tournaments, treating all matches
with equal importance. By now, Sanjay Manjrekar, Dilip Vengsarkar
and Chandrakant Pandit were back from the Test series against New
Zealand and turned out for Mumbai in their third league match
against Baroda in Thane. But there was no dislodging Sachin from
the team. Baroda were led by Anshuman Gadcwad with wicketkeeper
Kiran More and left-arm medium-pacer Rashid Patel (all with Test
experience) also in the side. This would be Sachin's most formidable
opposition to date.
Baroda batted first and scored 313. Mumbai lost openers Rajput
and Hattangadi with only 20 on the board, and Sachin came in ahead
ofVengsarkar who was nursing an injured right knee. Patel and Abhay
Palkar were both working up a good pace. Sachin quickly hit them
both for boundaries. But a- lifter from Patel had him caught behind by
More for 17, his first failure in first-class cricket. Mumhai gained a
lead of 19 runs and the match was drawn, with Sachin not batting in
34

Sachin

a second innings total of 5 for 1.
The Indian under-19 team was to tour Pakistan for the first time and
Sachin was a certainty. He scored 63 in the trial match and also had a
double century and a century in the under-19 Coach Behar Trophy.
But the tour was for six weeks' duration and his Secondary School
Certificate (sse) finals were not far off His family decided that his
final year of school had to take precedence. However, he continued
touring with the Mumbai Ranji Trophy side since he would be away
from home for only a few days. His school books were packed with his
cricket gear. 'The school teachers were willing to help me whenever I
went to them for guidance,' said Tendulkar in an interview to the
Sportstaf (6 May 1995), looking back on those early years. 'I used to
attend those special classes. It was just that I had to miss classes in my
last year in school. It was hard to cope with studies. My father had a
greater role to play in my success. He told me, "Whatever you want to
be, see that you achieve something. Do something where the future is
fully secured. I don't want you to try out in every field. If you want to
play tennis, establish yourself as a good tennis player. Or prove to be a
good cricketer. I don't want to compel you to pursue something."'
Obviously, the late Professor Tendulkar was a man of vision. Sachin
did pass his exams but from then on, all further tests would be on the
cricket field.
The last West Zone league match was at Aurangabad in January
1989 against Maharashtra. With Ravi Shastri back in the team after
Test duty, Mumbai now had eight former, current or future Test players
in its ranks. The home side fielded two promising pace bowlers, Salil
Ankola and Gregory D'Monte. Ankola had taken a hat-trick in his
debut match against Gujaratearlier in the season, while D'Monte had
toured Zimbabwe with the India under-25 team.
Maharashtra ran up a huge 575 in their first innings with opener
Surendra Bhave scoring nearly half the total off his own bat. Rajput
and Pandit gave Mumbai a flying start with an opening stand worth
170 and with Manjrekar also chipping in, they were well placed at 303
for 3. They finished on 435. Tendulkar scored 81 and four not out in
A Boy Among M-en

35

the drawn match and Maharashtra finished on top of the West Zone
league with 55 points. Mumbai were second, on 46, to join them in
the knockout stage. Remarkably, for a 15-year-old in a team full of
international stars, Sachin topped the Mumbai batting in the league
phase with 349 runs at an average of87.25. One fascinated viewer of
Sachin's 81 was Sandeep Bamzai who wrote about it in his book
Gavaskar and Tendulkar: Shaping Indian Cricket's Destiny:
Ankola tried to intimidate the little fella (Sachin), but he took a
heavy toll of the wayward bowling. Benign surface or not, it
was a stylish knock which still reverberates in the corridors' of
my mind for the sheer elan and timing displayed. As Ankola
bowled on his legs, Tendulkar smashed him to the mid-wicket
fence twice, in a trice. The following over, he gave him the
same treatment, but this time round, on the off side. He raced
to 81 and there was a shot where he bisected the cover fielders,
rocking on his backfoot which took our collective breath away
in the sharniana which served as the press box.
The match was played shortly before the team for the tour to the
West Indies was selected and Ankola was on the short-list, though he
did not make it. He would eventually play for the country. Mumbai
took on Hyderabad next, led by future India skipper Mohammad
Azharuddin, in the pre-quarter-finals at Secunderabad in February,
and by coincidence I was in Hydcrabad to report on the national table
tennis championships for the Indian Express. With Sachin's reputation
having preceded him, every sports journalist in town made a beeline
for the dust bowl that was the Gymkhana Ground at Secunderabad,
the twin city ofHyderabad.
The large open ground was dotted with shamianas and had no
seating to speak of. But Sachin had already become a major crowdpuller and there must have been close to 10,000 spectators-an
unusually large crowd for a Ranji Trophy match, even one with so
many Test players in both sides. The pitch was a typical turner and the
spinners played a leading role from the very first session of the first
36

Sachin

day Hyderabad had three spinners of note: Venkatapathy Raju (leftarm), Arshad Ayub (off spin) and M.V. Narasimha Rao (leg spin)
while Mumbai could call on the services ofRavi Shastri (left-arm),
Suru N ayak (leg spin) and Kir an Mokashi (off spin).
Sure enough, wickets tumbled to spin as Hyderabad were dismissed
for 270 (Shastri 4-90, Mokashi 4-65). Mumbai too were struggling at
90 for 4 by the close of the second day. Mokashi was sent in as
nightwatchman after Ayub and Raju had accounted for Raj put, Pandit
and Manjrekar. But he too fell to Ayub, and Sachin came in at 79 for 4
at the fag end of the day in the company of captain Vengsarkar.
Sachin defended the first ball he faced and drove the next to the
boundary. That evening he cornered the team's manager, P.K. 'Joe'
Kamath with whom he was sharing a hotel room. Kamath reported
the conversation in the Wisden Cricket Monthly Guly 1990): 'Sir, why
did you send a bowler ahead of me? Did you not have confidence in
me?' asked Sachin. Kamath confessed that he did not have an answer.
The tiny baby-faced Sachin and Vengsarkar, the towering captain
of the national team, were a study in contrast, at least physically. But
Sachin matched his skipper stroke for stroke as they added 118 runs to
take Mumbai out of the woods and eventually to a narrow first innings
lead. Sachin's 59 came in 145 minutes and contained 7 fours. In the
second innings, he took 15 runs. Mumbai won the match by six
wickets. I recall everyone in the press box, both experienced hands and
rookie reporters, being struck by the maturity of the callow youth and
the confidence ofhis stroke play Many in the fraternity were predicting
great things from the schoolboy.
Ravi Shastri was the third Mumbai captain in the season for the
quarter-final against Uttar Pradesh which was played at home, as
Vengsarkar was unavailable. Mter an opening stand worth 145 between
R~putand Hattangadi (140), the Mumbai battir::gcollapsed, the next
nine batsmen failing to reach even double figures. Sachin was
dismissed for just seven by Test off-spinner Gopal Sharma who had
the. best figures of 4 for 81. But Uttar Pradesh suffered an even more
dramatic collapse, crumbling from 104 for 3 to 137 all out. Mumbai
piled up 422 in their second innings (Sharma 7-113). There was
A Boy Among Men

37

another half-century by Sachin, his 75 taking four minutes short of
four hours, his longest stint at the crease so far. Mumbai won by 224
runs and ran into the formidable Delhi in the semi-finals at the
Wankhede Stadium.
Mumbai were weakened by the absence ofVengsarkar, Shastri and
Manjrekar, back on national duty in the West Indies. The Delhi side,
on the other hand, had a formidable look to it with Madan Lal,
Maninder Singh, Manoj Prabhakar and Raman Lamba. Delhi piled
up 409 in their first innings. Manu Nayyar (105) and Prabhakar (123)
put on 232 for the opening wicket. Tendulkar got his first chance to
bowl in first-class cricket (4-0-12-0; 9-2-20-0) and also took his first
catch (Manoj Prabhakar for 11 off Nayak's bowling in the second
innings). Left-arm spinner Maninder Singh, who had not been
considered for the West Indies tour, had the splendid figures of37-5~
105-7 when Mumbai batted. Hattangadi (68) was once again among
the runs and was third out at 138. But it was Sachin who took the
honours and top-scored with 78. It was his seventh score of 50 plus in
the season, in 11 innings, and contained a six and five fours. He began
aggressively, hitting boundaries off Maninder and Madan Lal,
scattering the field. But the rest of the Mumbai batting could not
counter Maninder's spin and at the end of the third day, they were
struggling at 258 for 7 with Sa chin on 58. His first six came early on
the third day, a huge shot that travelled nearly 85 yards from a drive off
Sanjay Sharma, an off-spinner. Sachin was lastman out and Mumbai
were dismissed for 321. The match was drawn, but Delhi were in the
final thanks to their first-innings lead of88 runs.
Maninder, one of the most talented spinners to play for the country,
has fond memories of that match. His seven wickets proved to be a
match-winning performance. But it was Sachin's 78 that caught his
eye.
'The first ball I bowled to him he smashed over extra cover, one
bounce four. I was so impressed that for the first time in my entire life
I said, "God, I hope he scores runs. I would love to watch him,"'
Maninder told me when I interviewed him in August 2001.
'He was so good, so compact at the age of 15 and a half, it was
]8

Sachin

tremendous. When I came back to Delhi after that match, I told my
coach that I had just seen a future star in action.'
Despite his outstanding maiden first-class season (583 runs from
11 innings at 64.77, with one century and six 50s) it had been deCided
that Sachin was too raw to be chosen for the Indian team on their tour
ofthe mighty West Indies. The chairman of the selection board, Raj
Singh, admitted the selectors 'seriously thought' about choosing him.
'But we decided to wait till until the tour of Pakistan [later in 1989] .'
It was perhaps a wise decision not to expose him to the West Indian
quicks at such a tender age. Not that Sachin himself thought so.
Just before the team to the West Indies was announced, actorjournalist Tom Alter interviewed Sachin for a sports video (Sports
Channel).
Alter: Are you willing to go to the West Indies?
Sachin: Ifl get selected I will go.
Alter: How will you face Ambrose, Walsh and the others?
Sachin: I will try my best to face them.
Alter looked back at that interview in Outlook magazine Ganuary
1999):
Four points stood out. Firstly he stated that Gavaskar and
Richards were his heroes. Secondly, without hesitation he said
that he could read Hirwani's googly, and was ready to face the
West Indian fast bowlers (in fact, he said he prefers fast bowling).
Thirdly, when asked whether he grew tired of batting while
with Kambli in that mammoth partnership, Sachin's reply was
an almost unbelievable shake of the head. And fourthly, Sachin
made it very clear that being compared to Gavaskar was a bit
embarrassing to him, and that he simply wanted to play his
own, 'natural' game.
The 1989-90 season kicked off in Mumbai with the Irani Trophy
match between Ranji Trophy champions Delhi and the Rest oflndia
A Boy Among Men

39

for whom Sachin was an automatic choice. It was played on 3-7
November 1989 and was a virtual selection trial for the tour to Pakistan
starting later that month. The selection committee consisting of Raj
Singh Dungarpur (chairman), G.R.Visvanath, Naren Tamhane,
Ramesh Saxena and Akash Lal were to select the team on the third
evening of the match, so competition was hound to be intense.
Delhi piled up 461 and by close on the second day, Rest were 79 for
3 with Rajput, Surendra Bhave and Manjrekar the batsmen back in
the pavilion. It would be uphill all the way after that. When Gursharan
Singh was out for 31 on the third morning, Sachin joined
nightwatchman Syed Saba Karim with the total on 119 for 4. Sachin
punished the medium pace ofSanjeev Sharma and Atul Wassan, but
was troubled by Maninder's accurate left-arm spin. Wassan had picked
up two of the four wickets that had fallen at that stage and was bowling
with his tail up. After playing himself in, Sachin on-drove and then
straight drove Wassan to the boundary. Captain Madan Lal replaced
Wassan with Sharma who was promptly smashed for four, followed
by a square cut off Maninder that went racing to the boundary for
Sachin's fourth four. But Maninder was persisted with and made the
breakthrough under rather fortuitous circumstances. As Sachin
defended on the front foot, the ball went off the middle of the bat,
dropped to the ground and spun on to the stumps to bowl him for a
crisply struck 39. Rest were dismissed for 290 to give Delhi a big lead.
That evening, all talk centred on the selection of the team to Pakistan.
It was an agonizing wait for the Tendulkar family, but finally they got
confirmation ofSachin's selection following a phone call late in the
evening from a reporter asking for reactions. The match itself must
have seemed anticlimactic after that. There was no stopping Delhi,
however, who declared on the fifth morning at their overnight total of
383 for 8. The target of555 for Rest on the last day was an impossibility.
But it did give Sachin another crack at the record books.
Incidentally, during the meeting to select the team for Pakistan,
the view was expressed that Sachin might be a failure. 'Tendulkar
never fails,' was the reply by the late N aren Tamhane, the West Zone
representative.
40

Sachin

Sachin went in with the score at 76 for 2 and as if to celebrate the
news ofhis selection, went for the Delhi bowlers. Wassan and Sharma
were pretty liberal with the short-pitched stuff, but it didn't seem to
bother Sachin. By now, it was virtually Sachin v Delhi as wickeb
tumbled at the other end. Maninder, who had taken four wickets in
the first innings including that ofSachin, was hit over mid-wicket for
a huge six. 'It was a brilliant innings. He was hungry for runs and
more runs even at that age,' Maninder told me. 'That is what makes
him get out of tricky situations. From 15 years onwards, it was his
hunger for perfection that was his greatest quality.'
Sachin raced to 50 from just 66 balls, with seven fours, and was
rapidly running out of partners. Maninder once again bowled well to
claim three wickets. At 132 for 6, the tail was exposed. Sachin tried to
retain the strike as much as possible. Razdan and he added 35 runs,
Vivek Razdan's cootrfumion being just two. But at 180 for 8,
Venkatapathy Raju came otlt in the form of the last man as Gursharan
Singh had fractured a finger on his right hand while batting. Raju was
out at 209 with Sachin atill 11 runs short of the magic three-figure
mark. By this time Raj Singh had told Gursharan to pad up and stay
with Sachin till he got his c-entury. He batted with only his left-hand
glove on as he could not slip the other glove on. Batting courageously
with one hand, Gursharan faced 16 deliveries, finally retiring hurt on
five when Sachin cover drove Maninder for his fourteenth boundary
to go from 99 to 103. The Rest innings was terminated at 245 and
Sachin had registered his second century in eight first-class matches.
It was during this match that Gavaskar presented his ultralight
moulded Morant fibreglass batting pads to the young batsman who
would take over his mantle as the bedrock of the Indian batting in the
years to come. At 16 years and 197 days, Sachin had added another
'youngest' record to his collection-the youngest to score a century in
the Irani Trophy, that too on debut.
Now for the cauldron of Pakistan.
~

A Boy Among Men

41
