The Brian and Sachin Show

I hate comparisons.-Sachin Tendulkar
Sachin Tendulkar hates comparisons. He has made this clear in
interview after interview. Indeed, these comparisons-often
ridiculous-have been made ever since his school days. In 1996, when
Sir Donald Bradman created a sensation in the Indian media by going
on record that the Indian master's batting reminded him ofhis own,
Tendulkar was honoured. But even then he protested, saying Sir Don
was being 'unfair' in making the comparison. Among his
contemporaries, comparisons have most frequently been made
between Tendulkar and the West Indian batting genius, Brian Lara.
Lara is a left-hander. But since the 1990s, the Indian and the West
Indian have emerged as the greatest batsmen of their generation, good
enough to be part of many all-time World XIs. Even as this chapter
was being written, Lara scored his sixteenth century in his eighty-first
Test, at Galle, Sri Lanka. It was his first Test century in 11 months. In
the third and final Test of the series at Colombo, he scored 221 and
130, and finished the series with an astonishing 688 runs (average
114.66)-a record-breaking44.68 per cent ofhis team's total aggregate
and the second highest for a three-Test series. Yet, the West Indies were
beaten 3-0. Mter the series, champion Sri Lankan off-spinner Muthiah
Muralitharan was quoted as saying he found it more difficult to bowl
to Lara than Tendulkar. 'Lara and Tendulkar are the hardest batsmen
to bowl against, but the West Indian has troubled me more. Tendulkar
is positive and difficult to bowl against, but I have an advantage over
him because he is a right-hander. I have been working hard against

Ieft-handers. Part of the problem is I am turning the ball too much
and find it difficult to get leg-before decisions.
'Lara is a wonderful player. He can play all shots. Most batsmen
are restricted in some way and, as a bowler, you can focus on their
weak points. But he can do anything-cut, late-cut, drive, sweep and
the lofted drive. When you are playing a good bowler, you have to be
patient and pick the right ball to hit and Lara does that well. We had a
really good battle. I won it twice, but he was the winner most of the
time.'
Sadly for Lara, the tour ended prematurely, following a dislocated
elbow during a one-day game (followed by more girlfriend troubles
back home). He became only the sixth batsman to score a double
century and a century in the same Test (Graham Gooch had made a
triple century and a century). Still, he has a long way to go to catch up
with Tendulkar's current record and has rapidly fallen behind after
his golden year of 1994. A Test average in the 60s at his peak had
slipped below 47 by mid 2001, and only the wonderful run of scores in
Sri Lanka pushed it marginally past 50. In 1997, Lara scored 394 runs
at 39.40 while Tendulkar's figures were 1000 runs at 62.50; in 1998 it
was 429 at 39 (647 at 80.87 for Tendulkar); in 1999 Lara's 737 runs
were scored at an average of27.29 compared to Tendulkar's 1088 at
68. In 2000 the comparative figures were: Tendulkar: 575 runs at
63.88; Lara: 497 at 29.23; and in 2001 Lara had 1151 runs at 63.94
while Tendulkar's record was 1003 at 62.60.
Lara tends to skip tours with alarming frequency on the flimsiest
of grounds. The most recent instance was the tour to Zimbabwe and
Kenya in 2001 from which he made a late withdrawal, ostensibly due
to an injury.
In the fifth Test against England at St. John's, Antigua in April
1994, amidst scenes of unprecedented jubilation, Lara broke the world
Test record of fellow West Indian Sir Garfield Sobers. The record
individual score of365 not out had been set in 1958. Now Lara eclipsed
it with a powerful innings of375. Then, inside of SO days, he broke the
500-run barrier for the first time in the history of first-class cricket
with an astounding innings of 501 not out for Warwickshire against
The Brian and Sachin Show

127

Durham at Edgbaston in the English county championship. It made
Lara the first batsman after Bradman to simultaneously hold the record
for the highest Test and first-class score. Suddenly the Prince of
Trinidad was being proclaimed the king of cricket. And the cricket
world had eyes for only one man.
Lara had first announced himself with a sublime innings of277
(run out) against Australia at Sydney in December 1992, his maiden
Test century. Tendulkar, it may be recalled, had taken more than ten
years to score his first double century. The Trinidadian's appetite for
massive scores appeared insatiable while Tendulkar's seeming
impatience at the crease saw him fai.J to build on his centuries.
Lara is four years older than Tendulkar. He made his debut a year
later (1990), also in Pakistan. But it took him two years to establish
himself in the West Indian team. No cricketer before or since has
enjoyed as spectacular a year as Lara did in 1994. It not only brought
him tons of runs and records galore, but also fame and wealth the likes
of which cricket had rarely seen. Sponsors lined up to sign up the
master batsman and, back home in Port-of-Spain, Trinidad, the
government gifted him a vast plot ofland to build a house for himself
and his family, It was the stuff of fairy tales, the classic rags to riches
story. But how lorigwould it last?
A friend warned Lara in 1994 that his troubles were just beginning.
The prediction turned out to be spot on. Just a year later, the pressure
proved too much. Lara announced his retirement, walked out of the
tour of England and told manager Wes Hall: 'Cricket is ruining my
life.' It was a startling confession. He was .persuaded to return, but was
fined ten per cent ofhis fees at the end of the tour, and he pulled out of
the tour to Australia later in the year in protest. It was dunng that
series in England in 1995 when things were spiralling downwards
that Curtly Ambrose bluntly told the star batsman at a team meeting:
'It seems like you don't want to bat long again. Where is the hunger,
will and determination? They cannot get you out unless you get
yourself out. You are not the same man, so get hungry.' He showed his
hunger after that with Test scores of87, 145, 152, 20 and 179. Mter
being dismissed for a pair by a part-time bowler against Kent in one of
128

Sachin

the touring team's warm-up matches, he railed, 'Everyone expects me
to go out and at least get close to breaking those records every time I
bat.' Such is the price of fame. At various times Lara has consulted
psychiatrists in a bid to overcome his demons, and in conversation
with former England captain Mike Brearley in 1995, he complained
of'frustration, and mental and physical tiredness'.
There were more troubles ahead after the West Indies were edged
out of the 1996 World Cup semi-finals by Australia. The West Indies
Cricket Board reprimanded Lara after several verbal outbursts by him.
By now, he had made it clear to one and all that he was determined to
be captain of the West Indies and that he would allow nothing and
nobody to get in his way. Lara did get his chance in the Barbados Test
against India in March 1997. With Walsh injured, he led the team
astutely to a thrilling victory. Leading India was Tendulkar. But the·
West Indian authorities appeared in no hurry to make Lara's
appointment a formal one. That decision was finally made for the
home series against England in 1998. Things seemed to be looking
up as the West Indies won the Tests 3-1 and the ODI series 4-1.
But the fall from grace was to come a year later, in South Mrica.
Lara led a pay dispute by the team that saw him stripped ofhis captaincy,
only to get it back once the matter was resolved. The West Indies were
humiliated on their first tour ofSouth Mrica, crushed 5-0 in the Test
series and 6-1 in the oms. Now he was living on borrowed time. He
was retained for the home series against Australia in 1999 after being
castigated by the Board for his 'weakness in leadership', and placed on
probation as captain for the first two Tests.
What happened next was one of the greatest turnarounds in sporting
history. Bowled out by Australia for an all-time low of 51 and crushed
by 314 runs in the first Test, the end appeared near for the West Indies
and not for the last time either. Lara had not scored a century in 13
Tests. In the next three he would reel off three. Two of them-213 and
153 not out-inspired amazing victories. The third, 100 in Antigua
in the final Test, could not prevent Australia from levelling the series.
But single-handedly, Lara had restored the pride ofWest Indian cricket,
and his own reputation in the bargain, with his breathtaking batting.
The Brian and Sachin Show

119

The downslide, however, came back to haunt the team as they crashed
out in the league stage of the 1999 World Cup. Both Tests and all five
oms were surrendered in New Zealand. And on 24 February 2000,
Lara submitted his resignation from the captaincy as he took another
break from cricket. It had become too much. Back home in India
around the same time, Tendulkar too resigned from the captaincy that
had been thrust on him for the second time, late in 1999. The pressure
on the two superstars was having its effect.
The similarity, however, ends there. Lara lacked the comfort of a
stable family life, which has benefited Tendulkar so much, and given
him much needed peace of mind. Lara's father, who was an early
influence, died before he made his Test debut. Lara did have a daughter
from his girlfriend in 1994, but they have since parted ways. In
Australia, during the 2000-01 season, he was accused of spending
more time with an 18-year-old English model (who has since moved
in with him) than on his cricket. Golf, too, had become an obsession,
distracting him from cricket.
Almost every current and ex-cricketer ranks Tendulkar above Lara
in contemporary cricket, though as we have seen, it was not always
that way. Allan Donald, for one, thought that Tendulkar was in a
different class to Lara as a professional cricketer. He was a model
cricketer, and despite the intolerable pressures he faced back home in
India, remained a really nice guy. He also considered Tendulkar the
best batsman in the world, pulling away from Brian Lara every year.
Writing in Sportsworld (May 1995), 'Tiger' Pataudi commented:
'Tendulkar, I reckon is even more talented than Lara, but he is yet to
develop the latter's temperament and so often pleases to tease.' And in
Ge1frey Boycott on Cricket: 'The way in which he [Tendulkar] reacted
[to losing the captaincy in 1998] at a time of great stress illustrates the
difference between Tendulkar, who did not cause a moment's fuss or
trouble, and the petulant Lara. The product of a careful upbringing in
India, Tendulkar, despite his superstar status, simply refused to waste
his time in altercations with the Indian board and selectors.' And finally,
Sir Donald Bradman in Roland Perry's Bradman's Best: 'Lara and
Tendulkar have proved to be the two best batsmen in the 1990s.
130

Sachin

Tendulkar has a very strong defence. He's very tight. But he can be
aggressive, as he showed in that one-day series against Australia early
in 1998 and in the Tests in India. On balance, however, Lara has
probably proved more aggressive, though more mercurial. Tendulkar
is proving more consistent.'
As though to clinch the issue, Tendulkar was the only
contemporary cricketer to find a place in Sir Dan's controversial
'Dream Team' released by Perry shortly after the legend's death in
February 2001.
Lara and Tendulkar came face to face in a Test series for the first
time when West Indies toured India late in 1994 under Walsh's
captaincy. The three-Test series was drawn 1-1. But Tendulkar certainly
had the better of the exchanges, averaging double that of Lara (67 to
33), with a century and two half-centuries. Lara had two 50s with a top
score of 91 in the third Test at Mohali, which West Indies won to
square the series. The tour was the first for Lara following his twin
world records. But it turned out to be something of a nightmare both
on and off the field. He failed to register a century in either the Tests,
the first-class tour matches or the numerous ODIS. And he was
suspended for one 001 by match referee Raman Subba Row. This
followed his request to the umpire to consult the replays after being
given out stumped against New Zealand in the Wills World Series
match at Margao.
Before the series against the West Indies, it was Sri Lanka's turn to be
flattened by the Indian steamroller early in 1994, losing all three Tests
by an innings. It was another whitewash by Azhar and his merry
men-on home soil, that is. The series was notable for Kapil Dev first
equalling and then overtaking Sir Richard Hadlee's world Test record
of 431 wickets. The onslaught began at Lucknow. Opener Sidhu
battered the Sri Lankan bowlers as he smashed eight sixes in his 124.
But it was Tendulkar's 142 that was a class apart.
'Sidhu helped me a lot,' said Tendulkar after his seventh Test
century. 'He smashed the bowlers and that gave me enough insight
into the bowling. I was under a bit of pressure because the Sri Lankans
The Brian and Sachin Show

Ill

concentrated on getting me out.' Poised at 88 at the end of the first day,
Sachin reached his ton the next morning from just four balls from
medium-pacer Pramodya Wickramasinghe. The century came with
two cover drives. He admitted the 100 had been on his mind when he
resumed his innings with Azhar for company.
The West Indies under Walsh wete expected to give India a run for
their money in the winter of 1994. India had not lost a series at home
since 1987; West Indies had not lost a series anywhere for 15 years.
Ultimately, both sides kept their records intact. Indian cricket fans
were also keen to see world record holder Lara in action. But as
mentioned earlier, he was a major disappointment. The first Test at
Mumbai was played on a pitch of such variable bounce that the West
Indies batsmen used chest pads even while facing the spinners. It was
tenacious batting in both innings by the Indians and an outstanding
spell of fast bowling in the second by Srinath that swung the match
India's way. Victory early on the fifth morning was the tenth for
Azharuddin, a record for an Indian captain. But the margin of96 runs
was deceptive; the finish was actually quite tight.
Walsh and Benjamin got an alarming lift on the first day and the
score of99 for 5 would have been even more disastrous but for plucky
batting by Kambli (40) and Tendulkar (34). Both Prabhakar and
Azharuddin failed to score. Wicketkeeper NayanMongia (80) was
the utdikely top scorer and his sixth-wicket stand of 136 with
Manjrekar (51) took India to the respectable total of272. Left-arm
spinner Raju then picked up five wickets to give India a kad of 29
runs. This was nullified, however, by the end of the second day when
India were reduced to 11 for 3, Benjamin bowling with real fire.
There was a delay of 45 minutes to the start of the third day due to
damp patches near the bowling crease. This allowed the sting to be
drawn from the wicket, and that was all the Indian batsmen needed.
Sidhu and Azhar failed for the second time, making it 88 for 5. But as
the day wore on, the pitch eased out and the Mumbai pair ofManjrekar
and Tendulkar took the game away from the West Indies. Tendulkar's
85 (he was the joint top scorer in the Test with Junior Murray) was a
perfect blend of attack and defence, while Manjrekar came up with his
Ill

Sachin

second 50 of the match. Tendulkar straight drove Walsh and worked
him off his pads for fours and then forced the removal ofleg-spinner
Dhanraj, hitting him for a six over long on and a four over mid-off.
Both the batsmen looked in total control as they added 74 for the sixth
wicket before they fell to attacking shots. Tendulkar's 85 came from
139 balls before he sliced an offbreak from Hooper to be caught behind.
The tail wagged furiously with Kumble (42) and Srinath (60) flogging
the bowling. The target for the West Indies (363) was beyond their
reach, and Srinath finished with 4 for 48 and the Man of the Match
award.
India's safety-first approach possibly cost them the second Test at
Nagpur and a series victory. The West Indies, let off the hook then,
staged a fightback at Mohali in the third and final Test to salvage their
pride and unbeaten record. Nagpur saw Tendulkar score his first
century against the West Indies as India built up a formidable 546 for
9 declared and claimed a first innings lead of 118 runs. He added 177
for the third wicket with Sidhu and a further 202 with Azhar (97) for
the fifth. But India consumed nearly two full days in compiling their
huge score.
'I gained in confidence watching Sachin bat,' said Sidhu. 'I consider
him as the living legend. I am his fan. It helps batting with Sachin.'
This was Sidhu's sixth century, and in the last four he had been joined
on three figures by Tendulkar. The two were proving to be India's
batting mainstays. Tendulkar had come off two ducks in a row at
Faridabad and Mumbai in the one-day series and had been feeling the
pressure. He was delighted with his century and for once showed
emotion by leaping and pumping his fist in the air when he got to
three figures-going from 99 to 105 with a hooked six offWalsh. But
he was disappointed at missing his first Test double century, out for
179. Now that his first 001 century was behind him, this was a fresh
landmark preying on his mind. 'People forget easily, but not me. It's in
the back of my mind. But I have an extremely positive mind.'
Sidhu and Tendulkar wrested control of the West Indies' attack
after off-spinner Carl Hooper had got rid of Prabhakar and Kambli
cheaply. Tendulkar's back-foot shots went like bullets, as did his straight
The Brian and Sachin Show

Ill

drives. So good was his timing and so powerful his shots that a rare
defensive stroke offWalsh bounced over fielder Benjamin and raced
to the fence. The double century partnership with his captain was the
first over 200 in which Tendulkar was associated. The 179 was his
highest Test score till then and it took a brilliant, diving catch by Lara
at mid wicket offWalsh to terminate it; he faced 319 balls and hit 24
fours and a six. But the overcautious Indian batting in the second
innings and a late declaration allowed the visitors to escape. There
was another century stand between Sidhu (76) and Tendulkar (54) in
the second innings, for the third wicket. Dut this time the runs came at
a much slower pace even as the Windies' bowlers slowed down the
over rate. The declaration when it came on the final day allowed the
Indian bowlers just four hours-in which they grabbed five wickets.
The West Indies stormed back to take the third Test at Mohali and
draw the series. Walsh and Benjamin unleashed a barrage of hostile
bowling to which the Indian batting had no answer, particularly on
the final day when they collapsed for 114. Adams was the batting hero
and the Man of the Series. But it was their furious fast bowling that
had once again won the day for the visitors. The West Indies had a first
innings lead of 57. The Indian innings was marked by a maiden
century by Manoj Prabhakar. Manjrekar and Tendulkar both chipped
in with 40 while Srinath (52) was once again a revelation with the bat.
Lara (91) in the role of opener finally sparkled in the second innings
when his team was looking for quick runs. He took four fours off a
Srinath over. But just when he seemed set to reach his first century in
the subcontinent, he walked after nicking the ball to the keeper. His
gesture came in for plenty of praise after what had been a taxing tour
for the entire team.
The target of359 was quite beyond India's reach and they lost both
openers on the fourth evening. Prabhakar was taken offbleeding after
being hit on the mouth by Walsh before he had opened his account,
while Sidhu was out for 11. The fifth day collapse was spectacular.
Seven wickets tumbled in the first ten overs and the match was over
five minutes before lunch. India looked to Tendulkar, as usual. But he
played a loose cover drive after a deliberate field change by Walsh for
134

Sachin

Benjamin. The air of invincibility surroundingAzhar's boys at home
had been blown away. The disappointment of the Test series was offset
to some extent by winning both the ODI tri-series (New Zealand were
the third team) and the one-day series against the West Indies, that too
by a convincing 4-1 margin. The two series were played
simultaneously.
Tendulkar started off the 001 series against the West Indies with
two successive ducks. But he followed up those failures with scores of
54,88 and 105 (atJaipur). There was also a century at Baroda against
New Zealand in the Wills World Series. In the final against West
Indies at Calcutta, Man of the Match Tendulkar was top scorer with
66 and returned figures of1 for 35 from eight overs as India won by 72
runs.
Lara and Tendulkar came head-to-head again in the Carribean in
2002. The media was rife with comparisons once again, just before
the series. West Indies captain Carl Hooper admitted the pressure got
the better of Lara in the second Test which India won.
There was rare success for India in Sharjah in April 1995. Despite
losing once again to Pakistan, they made it to the final thanks to an
upset win by Sri Lanka over the Pakistanis. Tendulkar scored his fourth
ODI century of the 1994-95 season in the league game against Sri
Lanka which India won by eight wickets. In the process, he became
the youngest to cross 3000 ODI runs. The margin of victory was
repeated in the final, though this time Tendulkar's score was 41.
Meanwhile, back home Tendulkar had been appointed captain of
Mumbai for the 1994-95 Ranji Trophy season, and it turned out to be
a season of triumph for both the team and the captain, culminating in
a century in both innings in the final against Punjab. The first-innings
century was reached in 83 balls, the second from a mere 66---the
fourth fastest in Ranji history. (The next season he would score the
fastest century in domestic one-day cricket-from 69 balls for Wills
XI in the Wills Trophy quarter-final against Hyderabad in Rajkot.) In
the five Ranji matches that season (seven innings) he had 856 runs
with five centuries at 122.28. It was not just the bulk of runs but the
The Brian and Sachin Show

135

ferocious rate at which they were scored that was amazing. Those 856
runs were scored from S59 balls with 23 sixes and 106 fours. Mumbai
had won all their West Zone league matches for the first time in 37
years. At 21, Sachin. became the youngest captain to win the Ranji
title in the history of the championship.
Tendulkar had been away inN ew Zealand when Mumbai regained
the Ranji Trophy after a gap of ten years in 1994. So, being part of a
winning Mumbai team was special for him. Before the Ranji Trophy
triumph, Mumbai had also won the Wills Trophy limited-overs
tournament. Tendulkar scored 116 in the final against Haryana, which
Mumbai won by nine wickets. Chasing a total of 263 in 50 overs,
Mumbai reached the target in 36.4 overs. Apart from 856 runs in the
Ranji Trophy that year, he had struck his first ODI century as well as
tons against New Zealand at Baroda, West Indies atJaipur and against
Sri Lanka in the Asia Cup in Sharjah. The Wills Trophy saw him
score 57 and 116 for Mumbai. He had 285 runs in the Wills World
Series, 247 in the Pepsi one-day series against the West Indies and 402
runs in three Tests against the same team. No wonder he told Vijay
Lokapally (Sportstar, 6 May 1995) that it was his 'best season'.
The key to his new found success in oms was, ofcourse, the decision
to open the innings. No longer would he be left with less than ten
overs in the middle order. A~ he said in that interview to the Sportstar (6
May 1995): 'I was happy the way I performed in Tests and one-day
matches. There was much to learn and I was really satisfied that there
were occasions when I lived up to the expectations of my teammates.
My overall performance was better and I think I improved technically
as a batsman.'
All those runs and tons gave a huge boost to the Indian side. They
started the season by winning the Singer Cup in Sri Lanka in
September 1994 and ended it with the triumph in the Asia Cup in
Sharjah in April 1995. At home, the West Indies were beaten 4-1 in
the 001 series, and India also won the Wills World Series triangular
tournament. For Sachin, it was a memorable year: his first 001 century,
first Ranji Trophy triumph, first century against the West Indies, the
Asia Cup ... and there would be one more, even more cherished
136

Sachin

moment.
On 25 May 1995, at the Jewel oflndia hall in Mumbai, Sachin
married Dr Anjali Mehta, a paediatrician whom he had been dating
since 1990. She was five years older than him. The wedding and
numerous receptions that followed had all ofMumbai agog. Star TV
offered him a huge amount to telecast the marriage live. But Sachin
flatly turned them down. Other TV crews were turned away at the
venue of the wedding. As always, he drew a very firm line between his
personal and professional life. It took a great deal of persuasion from
one of Mumbai's senior sports journalists before he allowed
photographers a brief session on the lawns of the hotel, with the bride,
following the wedding ceremony. Naturally, the city's cricket fraternity
as well as politicians and film stars were present at the celebrations.
Ex-Yorkshire captain Phil Carrick represented Sachin's old county
team at the wedding. This is what he told Scyld Berry ofWisden Cricket
Monthly 0une 1996): 'It was the nearest I'll ever get to going to a royal
wedding. There were banners and neon signs saying congratulations
to Sachin and Anjali. The wedding itself was for only a few close
friends and relatives, but there were about seven receptions and there
must have been a thousand at the one I went to on a hotel rooftop.'
There was to be another landmark in Tendulkar's life that year. In
November he signed a five-year deal with Mark Mascarenhas's
WorldTel for an astronomical sum.

The Brian and Sachin Show

137