Success at Home and Abroad

ifthey want me to be captain, I'm ready .-Sachin Tendulkar
England's tour to India under the captaincy of Graham Gooch saw
Mohammed Azharuddin placed on probation, in a manner of
speaking. His appointment was confirmed only till the first Test in
Kolkata in january 1993. Two oms were played before the opening
Test, with honours even.
The season unfolding would be an extraordinary one for Vinod
Kambli. Briefly, he would gallop ahead of his old school friend. The
trend was set in the first 001 atjaipur, which England won by four
wickets after a scrambled single from the last ball of the match. It was
Kambli's twentieth birthday and he celebrated it in style with his first
century in international cricket. His score of100 not out came from
149 balls and there was some adverse comment at the end of the game
over the manner in which he crawled through the 90s. The feeling
was that India lost precious momentum which cost it dearly in the
end.
The old Sharadashram pair got together atjaipur after Prabhakar,
Sidhu and Azharuddin had been sent back with just 59 on the board.
They batted till the end of the innings with Kambli reaching his
century in the last over. Sachin stayed unbeaten on a rapid 82 and was
on hand to congratulate his friend. Once again, an om century had
proved elusive for him. The unbroken stand was worth 164 (in 28
overs)--exactly 500 less than their world record for Sharadashram
just five years earlier!

Kambli was quick to give credit to Tendulkar while receiving the
Man of the Match award. He told the media emotionally that it was
his friend's calming influence at the wicket that had helped him to the
landmark. 'I will never forget Sachin's birthday gift to me,' were his
words.
Both batsmen failed in the second om at Chandigarh, though India
won by five wickets to draw level. The sword which has traditionally
been placed over the head of the Indian captain was perilously close to
cutting short Azharuddin's reign when the teams moved to Kolkata
for the first Test. It was here, against England at the Eden Gardens,
that Azhar ~ad first dazzled the cricket world with his century on
debut in the 1984-85 series, followed by two more on the trot. Now,
once again, the lucky charm that had always followed him to Kolkata
seemed to work its magic. The captain's dazzling 182 crushed
England's spirits and victory was India's by nine wickets. Tendulkar's
50 in the first innings promised much more before he had a lapse of
concentration and fished at a wide delivery from Devon Malcolm. By
then, the stand witli his captain was worth 123 runs. Kambli on his
Test debut had scores of16 and 18 not out. With just a handful of runs
needed for the win after England had followed on, Sachin and Vi nod
were at the crease when India wrapped things up before lunch on the
fifth day.
Just as Eden Gardens in Kolkata was Azhar's favourite venue, the
MA Chidambaram Stadium in Chennai is where Tendulkar has scored
the maximum runs. In February 1993, Chepauk was witness to
Tendulkar's first century at home and his fifth overall. This was in his
twenty-third Test match, ofwhich only two-one at Kolkata and before
that the Chandigarh one-off against Sri Lanka-had been played at
home. In 1998, an outstanding innings against Australia saw Sachin
master Shane Warne at Chepauk. But there was heartbreak in 1999:
another masterly ton took India to the doorstep of victory against
Pakistan before Sachin's back gave way and India fell just short. Three
years later, in March 2001, Tendulkar recorded his twenty-fifth Test
century at Chennai as India stunned world champions Australia to
take the series 2-1.
Success at Home and Abroad

10]

There was drama even before the start of the second Test in Chennai
in 1993. England's captain Graham Gooch was forced out by sickness,
thanks to a plate of prawns he had eaten the night before. The
demoralized Englishmen were forced to follow-on for the second time
in successive Tests and lost by an innings. This, after their bowlers
had conceded the highest total against India at home. The massive
560 for 6 declared was built around centuries by Navjot Singh Sidhu
and Tendulkar, who made the highest ofhis five Test centuries in an
innings spanning nearly six hours. Kambli (in his second Test), An1re
and Kapil Dev also chipped in with half-centuries.
Already there was talk of how Tendulkar in the years to come
would challenge Allan Border's record Test aggregate. And for the
first time the comparison with the great West Indian Viv Richards,
one ofTendulkar's heroes, was made, this time by the former England
all-rounder Vic Marks. I noticed too, for the first time, that Tendulkar
was taking over some of the field-placing chores from his captain who
looked on benignly. There was no talk at this stage of Tendulkar
assuming the captaincy. But there were moves to groom him in the
role of vice captain. There were a couple of incidents on the field
during this match which showed Sachin's versatility. Though he
bowled just two overs in each innings, he surprised the cognoscenti
by bowling genuine leg breaks. He even pulled off the perfect googly
for good measure. And there was a dazzling catch to top it all. Paul
Jarvis flicked Kumble hard and low in the second innings, only to be
gobbled up at short leg by Sachin, an outstanding catch at ankle height
from a legitimate shot. There was no doubt after that, about the choice
for the Man of the Match.
India had won the series. And the third and final Test in Mumbai
proved to be the final nail in the coffin for the English team. A new
record total by India at home, and another innings victory. For the first
time, India had accomplished a series whitewash. The Test was a
triumph for the Mumbai trio of Kambli, Tendulkar and Amre,
particularly the left-hander. In only his third Test match, Kambli had
compiled the highest score by an Indian batsman against England:
224. He joined a band of 25 others whose first three-figure knocks
104

Sachin

were over 200, among them two legendary left-banders, Garry Sobers
and Brian Lara. Kambli stayed at the crease for nearly ten hours and
faced 411 deliveries. The English bowling attack of Phil DeFreitas,
Chris Lewis, john Emburey and Phil Tufnell could hardly be called
threatening. The third wicket stand with Tendulkar was worth 194
runs in 44 overs, with the senior partner somewhat subdued. His 78
took nearly four and a half hours and was not nearly as flawless as his
batting in the previous Test. Kambli had two reprieves, at 39 and 119.
Nerves got the better ofhim as he approached the highest score (at the
time) by an Indian in Tests: 236 not out by Sunil Gavaskar. Till then,
his daring stroke play was a wonderful treat for the fans at the Wankhede
Stadium.
The action now switched back to the one-day game and at least
here there was some consolation for the tourists. The series finished
level at 3-3, with neither Kambli nor Tendulkar being able to make
much of an impact.
Before the series began, the selectors had named Tendulkar captain
of the under-25 side which played against England at Cuttack prior to
the first Test. But a minor foot injury had forced him to miss that
game and Ajay Jadeja had taken over. He got his chance to lead in the
three-day game at Visakhapatnam between the first and second Test,
captaining the Rest of India. Also in the team were W V Raman,
Sanjay Manrejkar and Salil Ankola, all with Test experience. Still two
months shy of his twentieth birthday, Sachin appeared comfortable in
a rule he was handling for the first time, and termed the experience
'interesting'.
'I had to lead a relatively new side. There were players like
Ananthapadmanabhan and U tpal Chatterjee whom I had never seen
before, so it took me some time to settle down. I just wish it had been
a five-day game instead of a three-day one,' he recalled in Sportsworld
(February 1993). No doubt the experience at Visakhapatnam gave
him the necessary confidence going into the Chennai Test. And
perhaps Azharuddin was instructed by the selectors to allow the
youngster a little leeway in setting fields. In the same issue of
Sportsworld, chairman of the Selection Committee G.R.Visvanath
Success at Home and Abroad

105

denied that Sachin was being groomed for captaincy. 'Basically Sachin
is a very, very mature cricketer. We have noticed this maturity. It is not
that he is going to captain overnight, we're just trying to put a little
confidence into him. The fact is that he's going to be around for quite
a while and ifhe comes good as captain earlier than expected then it's
good for Indian cricket.'
The article proclaimed him the future captain of India. 'I don't
mind taking up the challenge (of captaincy) anytime,' was the confident
reply from the teenager when asked what would be the right time for
such a move. 'It's not a question ofwhether I want to be captain or not.
It's like whatever the country needs I'm ready to do. If they want me to
be captain, I'm ready. If they want me to play in the side, I'm ready. If
they think I'm not good enough to be in the side, I'm ready to step
down.' Confident words from the 19-year-old.
The first step was taken with Sachin's appointment as vice captain
for the tour of Sri Lanka following the England series. But before that,
there was a one-off Test against Zimbabwe in New Delhi and once
again this was a triumph for Kambli-and how. He suddenly saw his
name up alongside those ofWally Hammond and Don Bradman as
the only other batsman to score two consecutive Test double centuries.
He followed up his 224 at Mumbai with 227 in New Delhi, once
again coming agonizingly close to Gavaskar's all-time highest score.
It was heady stuf( He was the first Indian left-hander to score more
than one Test century and that too, in only his fourth Test. There was
yet another century stand with Sachin (62), and Arnre also contributed
a half-century as did Sidhu. India completed another innings victory
against the hapless Zimbabweans for their fifth win in a row at home.
Tendulkar's start to his Test career had been steady without being
extraordinary, though of course his youth had given it a romantic
sheen. It had taken Kambli nearly four years to follow in Sachin's
footsteps. But the impact he made was immediate and spectacular.
That spectacular run would continue in Sri Lanka where India won a
Test and a series abroad for the first time since England in 1986 (an
achievement they have not been able to equal, till the end of2001).
The first Test against Sri Lanka, at Kandy, was a washout with only
106

Sachin

12 overs bowled. India won the second Test at Colombo's sse by 235
runs as Tendulkar and Kambli both recorded centuries, though not in
the same innings. But incessant appealing and a great deal of
resentment and rancour on the part of the Indians marred the match.
The objects of their ire were the umpires who the Indians accused of
adopting different standards for the two teams. The conflict led to
match referee Peter Burge bringing the two teams together at the end
of the match and issuing them a stern warning about their conduct in
the next Test. Kambli was issued a reprimand by Burge for showing
dissent after being given caught behind in the second innings.
Tendulkar too had got a dicey decision in the first innings when he
was adjudged caught at short leg for 28, when it was doubtful whether
he had played the ball.
Kambli's third hundred saw India score 366 in their first innings.
Anil Kumble picked up five wickets as the home side trailed by 112.
Tendulkar was determined to make amends in the second innings as
the Indians went for quick runs and a declaration. There were three
centuries (and four near-centuries) in the Test. Tendulkar's was the
most attractive by far. At 37 he was dropped by Warnaweera at deep
fine legoffWickramesinghe. Nothing could stop him from reaching
his sixth hundred after that. While Sidhu played the anchor role,
Tendulkar punched and drove the bowlers with ease and power. One
shot in particular stood out amidst the 11 fours and a six-he lofted a
half volley from Warna.weera over long on, with a fielder stationed on
the boundary. It was audacious stuff and allowed Azhar to declare at
359 for 4. Tendulkar remained not out on 104. Sidhu recorded an
identical score, while Prabhakar struck 95.
The unlikely target for Sri Lanka was 472 and the best they could
do was hang on for a draw. By close on the fourth day, they had lost
both openers with 86 on the board. Aravinda de Silva's 93 held up the
Indians on the final day and they finally finished it off after tea. It had
been close, though the final margin of victory was substantial. It was
Azhar's first win abroad after taking over three years ago, and would
end up being India's only victory on foreign soil in the entire decade.
The third Test ended in a high-scoring draw. But not before Kambli
Success at Home and Abroad

107

had recorded his fourth century in five Tests (including Kandy where
he did not bat). He was involved once again in the now almost
obligatory century stand with his friend who managed 71. That helped
Tendulkar finish the series with an awesome average of101.50, though
it was Kambli who had the best aggregate
With Azhar off the field with flu, the vice captain got his chance to
lead the side on the final day of the third Test. Writing in the Cricketer
International (September 1993), Sri Lankan journalist Mahinda
Wijesinghe observed that 'It was refreshing to see young blood calming
frayed tempers and soothing unrequited appeals.' Sachin became the
youngest to lead a side in Test cricket-albeit in an acting capacity. He
was a y~ar younger than the Nawab ofPataudiJr. was when he led
India to the West Indies in 1961-62. Tendulkar enjoyed the experience
as he told Vijay Lokapally of the Spottstar, in September that year: 'I
was a little bit satisfied. But they played negative cricket and I hardly
got a chance to play a commanding role you expect a captain to play.
Yet I was more involved than I am normally.'
India would have to wait seven years before they could emulate
the feat of another win abroad. Tend ulkar would be part of that match
at Dhaka, but not Azhar. A lot would change in Indian (and world)
cricket in the intervening years.

108

Sachin