I thought there was talent in Sachin.-Ajit Tendulkar
He scored his maiden first-class century on debut at 15; his first Test
ton came when he was just 17. But the first person to 'bowl' to Sachin
was his nanny. Laxmibai Ghije used to throw a plastic ball at the
toddler, all of two and a halfyears, who would hit it back with a dhoka
(washing stick). We used to go to the terrace and play. I was the first
bowler he faced in his life,' the 68-year-old recalled in an interview to
the Vlleek (29 November 1998).
For 11 years Sachin was under the care ofLaxmibai at the writers'
cooperative housing society of Sahitya Sahawas (roughly translated,
the 'community oflitterateurs') in the middle-class suburb ofBandra
(East). His father, Professor Ramesh Tendulkar, taught Marathi at
Mumbai's Kirti College, and mother Rajini worked with the Life
Insurance Corporation oflndia (uc). Sachin was born on 24 April
1973, 11 years after brother Ajit; sister Savita and brother Nitin were
the older siblings. His grandfather named him after the famous Hindi
music composer, Sachin Dev Burman. Coincidentally, music would
be one of the adult Sachin's three passions, the other two being cricket
and his family.
Nitin, Savita and Ajit were children from their father's first
marriage. When their mother passed away, Ramesh was left with three
young children to bring up, and as is the custom in several parts of
India, he married the sister ofhis late wife.
The family was not particularly sports oriented, with poetry and
literature being the abiding passions of father Ramesh, a gold medallist

of Bombay University in both the BA and MA examinations. Nitin
took after his father and his initial interest in cricket was soon diverted
to poetry. Aj it was the first in the family to seriously take to cricket; he
captained his school team and also played in college and for various
club sides. Both today work for Air India, Nitin as a flight purser and
Ajit in reservations.
In the 1970s and 80s, the live telecast of cricket and other sports, notably
the finals ofWimbledon, brought the superstars of the sporting world
into the homes oflndians who were starved of top quality international
sports. The very year Sachin was born, the cricket-mad city ofMumbai
for the first time had the privilege ofwatching a Test match live on TV.
It was the fifth and final Test against the MCC (England) side led by
Tony Lewis and would be the final Test match to be played at the
Brabourne Stadium. Ten years later India won the Prudential World
Cup in England-shown live in the country-beating twicechampions West Indies in the final against all odds. Sachin had reached
'double figures' just two months before that epochal victory and was
part of the new generation of youngsters fired by one oflndia' s greatest
sporting achievements.
Sachin,judging from the memories ofhis childhood friends, was
a hyperactive child. An unusual mix of school-yard bully and sensitive
soul, he stood out among his friends even at a young age. Laxmibai
recalls his compassion as a little boy and his loyalty to his friends,
which has stayed with him all his life. 'After coming home from school,
he used to have his milk very reluctantly on the staircase. At times he
would give the milk to Ramesh, his childhood friend. I used to feed
him while he played,' Laxmibai said in the 1998 interview. And he
always insisted on two plates while eating--one for himself and another
for Ramesh, the son of the local watchman and his fast friend. Today
Ramesh is personal assistant to Ajit and Sachin.
The 11 buildings in the Sahitya Sahawas housing complex (the
Tendulkars' wing, where Ajit still lives with his mother, is called
'Ushakkal') had by the standards of the crowded metropolis, a large
playground, all of30 yards by 30 yards. This for Sachin and his close
Bombay Boy

5

companions constituted the great outdoors.
His brother Ajit recalls Sachin as a restless child who could never
stay in one spot for long and was always running around. He had also
an early interest in outdoor games.
Childhood photos ofSachin show him with a mass of curly long
hair, exuberant and playful. The early neighbourhood gang consisted
of Avinash Gowariker (now a photographer) and Sunil Harshe (a
contractor) while Atul Ranade (Mumbai Ranji Trophy player) was a
friend from kindergarten. The most abiding memory of those
childhood days appears to be Sachin's strength and his fondness for
'fights'. Whenever there was a new boy in the housing society or
school, Sachin would challenge him physically. He rarely came out
on the losing side.
Ranade's first glimpse ofSachin was in junior kindergarten. His
long hair had him initially mistaken for a girl. 'But it turned out to be
a boy and that too a very strong boy,' said Ranade in Outlook (4 January
1999).
By the time he reached the second grade, Sachin had achieved the
not inconsiderable feat for a six-year-old of beating up another boy all
of two years older than him. 'Bashing them up for no reason' was his
own unique way of getting his message across to his peer group,
according to Ranade. But he showed compassion too, though this
trait was reserved for animals. Gowariker summed up the paradox:
'He was a very tender person. But he was always fascinated with power,
speed and things like that.'
Sachin's first sporting hero, though, was not a cricketer; it was
tennis superstar John McEnroe. The 1981 Wimbledon final between
the brash American and the cool Swede, Bjorn Borg, was the first to be
shown live in India. It was the match that saw Borg's five-year reign
brought to an end in an epic final. Borg was the sentimental favourite
all over the world, India included. But Sachin was rooting for the
younger man. McEnroe's victory in 1981 spawned a mini 'Mac' in
faraway Bandra. Briefly, the child's fascination was for tennis. With
racket in hand and the trademarks of the new Wimbledon championheadband and two wristbands, not to mention the curly hair-the
6

Sachin

makeover was complete. It was not long before his friends dubbed
him 'Mac'. Fortunately for Indian cricket, the fling with tennis did
not last, and before long Sachin had made it to the Sahitya Sahawas
'big boys' cricket team.
By the time he was 11, Sachin's obsession with cricket had begun.
Every morning at 6 a.m., he would be at the nets in Shivaji Park.
Sachin's uncle and aunt, Suresh and Mangala Tendulkar, lived just
across the road from the park. Sachin would finish school
(Sharadashram English, very close to Shivaji Park) in the morning
and then go to his uncle's for lunch and a rest before crossing to
Shivaji Park for afternoon practice from 3 p.m. to 7 p.m. The kit
would be left dt his uncle's house, and with his school bag he would
get home by 8 p.m. Studies and dinner followed and then a tired
Sachin would be in bed. But the commute from Bandra (East) to
Dadar (West) became too strenuous after a while and it was decided
that it would be better if he stayed on at his uncle's place. The
arrangement continued till he made his first-class debut in 1988.
It was his brother Ajit who first spotted Sachin's natural talent.
While Sachin imitated his heroes in other sports (notably, McEnroe),
where cricket was concerned, he had a style of his own. Ajit noticed
his feel for the game and his ability to read the length of the ball. The
talent was most definitely there. And it struckf\jit before anyone else.
Indian cricket-indeed, the world of sports-owes a huge debt to Ajit
Tendulkar, for it was he who set the first small steps in motion.
To understand the rapid rise ofTendulkar from schoolboy cricketer
to international star, you first have to understand the ethos and history
ofMumbai cricket. Mumbai has produced more Test cricketers and
won the Ranji Trophy on more occasions than any other city or state
in India. When the mighty Sunil Gavaskar, first to reach 10,000 runs
in Test cricket and scorer of most centuries (34) says, 'Whatever I am
in the game today is due to the fact that I have been nursed in the
cradle of cricket, that is Bombay,' it is no exaggeration. According to
him, the most intense clashes he ever took part in were India v Pakistan,
Mumbai v Delhi and Dadar Union v Shivaji Park Gymkhana.
Mumbai's proud record in the Ranji Trophy has faded from the
Bombay Boy

7

glory days that lasted till the mid-70s. Nor do its players these days
dominate the ranks of the national team, as had traditionally been the
case since India made its international debut in 1932. Indeed, there
have been occasions when Sachin Tendulkar was the sole
representative in the Test side from the city that boasts the proudest
cricket tradition in the land. The North (particularly Delhi) and the
South (particularly Karnataka) caught up with their western rival in
the mid-70s. Before that Mumbai remained unbeaten from 1958-59
to 1972-73, a golden streakof15 years unprecedented in the history of
first-class cricket.
To understand the passion that is cricket, take a train to Mumbai.
Look out of the window as you approach the city and you will see the
evidence all around. On tiny strips ofland next to the tracks, on streets
and in fields, wherever a little space can be squeezed out, boys of all
ages, often with the most rudimentary equipment, can be seen playing
their hearts out from dawn to dusk. Veteran cricket journalist Pradeep
Vijayakar told me that this passion for cricket in his beloved city was
'unquenchable': 'Ifl could afford to, I would be at the nets early in the
morning, play a match during the day and then coach in the evening.'
The 'Bombay school ofbatsmanship' is a tradition that has served
Indian cricket well. It is founded on technical certitude and a ruthless
streak where the bowler is the enemy and occupation of the crease a
kind of tunnel vision-a take-no-prisoners style of cricket. And the
names ofMumbai's great batsmen read like an honour scroll oflndian
cricket-Vijay Merchant, Rusi Modi, Polly Umrigar, Nari Contractor,
Vijay Manjrekar, Dilip Sardesai, Ajit Wadekar, Sunil Gavaskar,
Sandeep Patil, Sanjay Manjrekar, down to the present generation of
PravinAmre, Vinod Kambli and quite possibly the finest of them all,
Sachin Tendulkar.
It was on a beach not far from Mumbai, in the Gulf ofCambay, that
the very first game of cricket in India was played. Here, in 1721, British
sailors and traders whiling away their time during a fortnight's docking
played the occasional game which attracted a smattering of local
interest. In 1792, the Calcutta Cricket Club (now the Calcutta Cricket
8

Sachin

and Football Club) was established, the second oldest cricket club in
the world after the MCC. Calcutta (now known as Kolkata) was then
the headquarters of the British East India Company. But the action
soon switched to Mumbai which witnessed its first match in 1797,
thanks to the pioneering efforts of the city's tiny Parsi community,
also known as India's Hambledon (the birthplace of cricket) men.
The first club, the Oriental Cricket Club, was formed in 1848 by
which time the Parsis, who had fled Persia in the sixth century, had
made a reputation for themselves in virtually every field from business
to sporting. They also followed several British customs and traditions,
including the game of cricket.
The first team from India to tour England were the Pars is in 1886.
Though they could register just one win from 28 matches, the
pioneering steps had been .taken and two years later, there was a marked
improvement in their record when they toured again. Early enthusiasm
among Mumbai's population for cricket was obvious in 1890 when
the Parsis beat G.F. Vernon's team from England by four wickets,
watched by 12,000 spectators. After they had beaten two more sides
from England, a biannual match between the Pars is and the Europeans
was instituted in 1895. The Governor of Bombay Presidency, Lord
Harris, a former MCC president and England Test captain, was one of
the early patrons oflndian cricket, and his name lives on in the Harris
Shield inter-school tournament in Mumbai in which Sachin first
made a name for himself.
By 1907, the Hindus had joined the fray and the tournament grew
to a triangular. By 1912, it was termed as the Quadrangular with the
inclusion of the Muslims, and then came the Pentangular with players
from other communities (including Christians,Jains, Buddhists and
Jews) playing for The Rest. All these matches were played in Mumbai,
but eventually the league gave way to the Ranji Trophy after it received
the stamp of disapproval from none other than Mahatma Gandhi,
who considered anything practised along comm unallines anathema.
The bedrock ofMumbai cricket in the twentieth century was the
Kanga League which was established in 1948 and which journalist
R~deep Sardesai (son ofDilip Sardesai) described as the 'heart and

soul of Bombay cricket' (An Indian Cricket Omnibus, ed. Guha and
Vaidyanathan). Raj deep himself once carried his bat for 19 in a total of
40 for Jolly Cricketers (for whom Ajit Tendulkar also turned out) in a
Kanga League match in 1990. Every Mumbai cricketer from Merchant
to Tendulkar has cut his teeth in the league which started with eight
teams and today has 98 from division 'Pl. to 'G', attracting over 3000
players, umpires and scorers. The uniqueness of this tournament is
that it is played in Mumbai's monsoon season when the rain comes
down in unending torrents. 'Play forward on a wet pitch and you will
end up with mud splattered on your face,' said Vljayakarwho proudly
boasts of having claimed Tendulkar's wicket first ball in a club match
when Sachin was 12 years old.
Many veterans ascribe the decline ofMumbai's cricketing fortunes
to the reluctance oftoday's players to participate on pitches which are
so unpredictable in bounce. 'The top players fear playing on wet
tracks ... that is why Mumbai's batting standards have dropped. The
standards were high because the Kanga League helped them tighten
their techniques,' former India opener and Mumhai captain Sudhir
Naik told Clayton Murzello in an interview in Sunday Mid Day (29
July 2001).
The league attracts intense team loyalty. Former Test batsman
Madhav Apte Golly Cricketers) is still active at 69, having played
every year since the team's inception. Another player, wicketkeeper
Mehli Dinshaw Irani who played in the Ranji Trophy, also turned out
for his side (Parsi Cyclists) for more than 50 years. In his essay 'Come
Rain or Shine' (An Indian Cricket Omnibus), Rajdeep Sardesai reports
his 1989 conversation with Irani: 'If you can play one hour on a rainaffected wicket, then you can play anywhere. Yet, I find that today's
youngsters prefer going to England during the summer. Compared
to the Kanga League, English cricket is like a friendly village green.' A
major incentive for young cricketers in the league is the hope of seeing
their names in the next morning's papers. This is their reward for
scores of30 and above, and bowling figures of three or more wickets.
Former Test umpire Piloo Reporter has been standing in local
matches for 40 years. In the same article in Sunday Mid Day, he recollects,
I0

Sachin

'Several years ago, I was standing at square leg, umpiring a game at
Azad Maidan. The batsman struck the ball to midwicket and the
batsmen ran a couple. I was watching the batsman make his ground.
As the wicketkeeper collected the ball, the batsman complained,
"Umpire, yeh apna ball nahin hai'' (Umpire, this is not our ball). He was
right, a fielder from an adjoining match had thrown the ball which
the wicketkeeper gobbled up!'
Nothing can prepare a first-time visitor for the shock of seeing a
dozen games being played simultaneously on the chock-a-bloc Azad
and Cross Maidans. Nowhere in the world will you sec organized
cricket in which a fielder seemingly at mid-wicket is actually positioned
at fine leg for his own team.
In Sandeep Bamzai's book Gavaskar and Tendulkar: Shaping Indian
Cricket's Destiny, the flamboyant former Test batsman Sandeep Patil
propounded the theory of two schools of batsmanship within the
'Bombay school ofbatsmanship': Dadar Union and Shivaji Park. Patil,
whose father Madhu also played in the Ranji 'Irophy for Mumbai
(and who agreed with his son's theory), reckoned that Dadar Union
batsmen exhibited technical exactitude, while the more devastating
version incorporating elan, panache and flamboyance was on show at
Shivaji Park Gymkhana. Gavaskar, Dilip Vengsarkar and Sanjay
Manjrekar played for Dadar Union, while Vijay Manjrekar, Ajit
Wadekar and Sandeep Patil represented Shivaji Park Gymkhana.
While the Kanga League is played every Sunday during the
monsoon season, the Times Shield (founded by the Times ciflndia) is
the inter-office league played during the winter, which attracts an
equal number of international and first-class players. The city's
cricketing structure is completed by the Harris Shield for boys under
15 and the Giles Shield (under 17) inter-school tournaments, ensuring
that cricket is played almost all the year round. And competition is
fierce at every level.
Mumbai has often been described as Indian cricket's Yorkshire.
But just as West Indian cricket fans preferred to refer to Sir Don
Bradman as the 'White Headley' (as against George Headley's popular
Bombay Boy

II

sobriquet, 'The Black Bradman'), diehard Mumbaikars would no doubt
consider Yorkshire English cricket's Mumbai.

12

Sachin
