
Global Brand

Tendulkar works. -Hemant Kenkre
When Sachin Tendulkar was signed up by World Tel chief Mark
Mascarenhas in October 1995 for a five-year deal (starting in 1996)
worth $7.5 million (Rs 31.5 crores), it made the front pages of all the
national papers in India. The sum was considered astronomical, more
than any other Indian sportsperson could have ever dreamed of, and
was of as much news value as another century from Indian cricket's
latest superstar. In May 2001, the contract was renewed, this time
reportedly for $17.5 million. Eight months later, on 26 January 2002,
Mascarenhas was killed in a road accident near Nagpur. He was 44.
It was a shattering blow for Tendulkar. Mascarenhas had used his
marketing genius to transform his client's iconic status on the cric.~et
field into the number one brand name in the Indian marketplace~ His
death came in the middle of the one-day series against England. 'I met
him as an agent, but he became a very close friend of mine,' said
Tendulkar. 'I had a very emotional relationship with him. I will never
forget him because he always stood by me and wished well for me.
Often, he went out of the way to make things comfortable for me.
Overall he was more a family member than an agent.'
Tendulkar flew between one-day matches to Bangalore, where he
delivered a moving eulogy at St. Patrick's Chruch. 'He was like my
elder brother,' Tendulkar said at the 40-minute service, attended by a
large gathering. 'He always treated me as a family member.... He
always told me to concentrate on my cricket and never bother about
the commercial aspect and never forced me to do any commercials.'

By the time he died, Mascarenhas' s empire was beginning to show
numerous cracks. There had been income tax raids on his business
premises in Bangalore and accusations of rigged telecast deals. The
last straw was when, at the height of the match-fixing scandal, he was
publicly referred to as a 'bookie' by a Union minister. As usual, he
threatened to sue. His weekly magazine, Cruket Talk, and the website
total-cmket.com, both launched in characteristically flamboyant fashion,
had shut down in six months in the wake of financial scandals. He had
also lost numerous 1V deals including telecast rightS in the lucrative
Sharjah market and had been left with the crumbs of only Bangladesh.
A far cry from his glory days which began with the acquisition of
telecast rights to the 1996 Wills World Cup. He had paid $10 million
for the rights, and made twice that in profits.
The renewal of the contract with Tendulkar was seen as the last
chance to salvage his business. He got the signature he wanted in the
face of stiff competition from sports marketing giant IMG, who also
manage Tiger Woods, Michael Jordan and the Williams sisters. It was
a measure of the faith Tendulkar had in him. 'I don't believe in what
has been said about Mark,' Tendulkar said in an interview, shortly
after renewing the deal. 'I am very comfortable working with him. He
is a nice guy.'
'Larger than life' was the phrase that popped up in almost every
obituary. Binoo John, who had worked with Mascarenhas at Cricket
Talk, used the most apt comparison in an article on the web site
Hllricket.com (27 January 2002); he described Masceranhas as the
'Don King oflndian cricket'.
'He was tough as nails as a negotiator. But once he got you to sign
on the dotted line, he was the,perfect host. He made his clients feel like
royalty with lavish gifts and extravagant parties,' I was told by the
marketing man of a multinational company, who had extensive
dealings with Mascarenhas.
He was also a man in a hurry, with flamboyant traits and
idiosyncrasies, which would drive his colleagues to dismay. Many of
the obits were written by ex-employees who highlighted ~hese traits.
Dues had been left unpaid to employees and contributors after the
312

Sachin

magazine and website had folded up, including to some high-profile
international cricketers. One person who worked with him told me
that Mascarenhas had a habit of booking four or five airline tickets in
a day. 'As the day wore on he would cancel one after the other. That
gave him a sense of power. Then when it was time for his last flight he
would curse and howl at the poor driver to speed things up. That was
Mark for you.'
WorldTel, with its base in Connecticut-where Sachin and his
family enjoyed occasional holidays-was a one-man show.
Mascarenhas's ego and love for power and prestige meant he controlled
the day-to-day running of the company.
In an interview shortly after Tendulkar's contract was renewed in
2001, Mascarenhas said he was initially attracted by the 'angelic
quality' of his star client, evident in the few commercials he shot
before 1995. Mascarenhas, of course, used the 'national icon' cliche in
abundance, and outlined his plans to merchandize the Tendulkar
brand name in a chain of restaurants. The idea has probably been put
in cold storage now.
The entry of multinational companies into the Indian market after
the opening up of the economy in 1991, the massive appeal cricket
enjoys all over India, and the explosion in the number of one-day
matches combined with the birth of cable TV-were all factors in the
marketing success ofTendulkar. His clean image and status as a role
model for the young generation, in particular, was the clincher. But
back in 1995, Mascarenhas's offer to him was perceived as a huge
gamble. Many felt the World Tel chief had priced his client out of the
market.
It was Ravi Shastri who first introduced Tendulkar to Mascarenhas
in a Bangalore pub. The first deal was struck soon after that. 'I'm
betting on the power ofSachin and the power of the Indian economy,'
Mascarenhas said in an interview (Outlook, 15 November 1995). 'TV
spending is growing at the rate of 50 per cent per annum. Even if you
account for 15 per cent inflation, that's a high figure.' In 1995,
Tendulkar was considered to be in the second rung of cricket's
superstars, a shade behind Brian Lara and Shane Warne. But the
Global Brand

313

Tendulkar mania went from strength to strength in the intervening
years and the Bangalore-born maverick businessman got handsome
returns on his canny investment.
The brands Tendulkar currently endorses represent a wide variety
of products. Only liquor and cigarettes have always been taboo. 'If
people look up to me, I've got to set the right example,' he said in an
interview to the Telegraph (1998). The public today identifies him by
his 1V commercials for Pepsi, Adidas, Fiat and a host of others, as
much as for his cricketing achievements. That is, of course, what the
marketing men aim for.
The car industry has been going through a recession jn India with
a glut of new models flooding the market and most flopping miserably.
It took an Italian manufacturer to cash in on the Tendulkar magic. As
a result, the Fiat Palio is the only car for which there is a waiting list. A
high-priced limited signature edition (the S10) was unveiled in early
2002 and was snapped up in a jiffy. Never mind that Tendulkar's
favourite cars are his two Mercedes Benz luxury models (a silver SL600
and a maroon C36 AMG600-he has a passion for driving them
himself). As far as the buying public is concerned, Pialo is at the top of
his list.
Reportedly, Tendulkar's contract is worth Rs 3 crorcs per year.
(Amitabh Bachchan is said to earn Rs 5 crores annually from the
Maruti Versa ad campaign.) Mter the first contract was finalized in
1995, Mascarenhas claimed in an interview that only Tendulkar and
Bachchan had the power to endorse everything from bicycles to luxury
cars, 'but Bachchan has faded away and Sachin has just risen'.
It's doubtful whether Tendulkar has ever ridden a two-wheeler,
except perhaps bicycles in his schooldays. That did not stop him from
endorsing the lVS Ltd. range of motorbikes. The deal was struck in the
wake of the Sourav Ganguly/Hero Honda endorsement. Then,just
before the 1996 Wills World Cup, the Chennai-based MRF tyre
company proposed a bat logo deal. It was clinched in a matter of
seconds. This has been one of the most lucrative and high-profile
deals for Sachin. The back ofhis broad bat is prime advertising space.
He had some problems initially in regard to ICC regulations. But now,
314

Sac hi n

the world cricket body has ratified such logos and MRF have since
signed up Steve Waugh as well. Every other deal is peanuts compared
to the original one, though.
IfTendulkar is known as the 'god oflndian cricket' (one ad even
depicted him in a Lord Krishna-like avatar), thenAlyque Padamsee is
considered the 'god' of the world oflndian advertising. This is what
Padamsee told me about the Tendulkar marketing phenomenon:
'When a cricketer achieves the status of Don Bradman, he becomes a
global brand. In other words, he is instantly recognizable as the Coke
bottle or the Marlboro Cowboy. He becomes more than a personality.
He becomes a saleable persona. Sachin and Gavaskar have both
imprinted themselves on the global emotional retina.'
'What does money mean to you?' Tendulkar was asked by Sanjay
Karhade in the Times if India Sunday Review (10 June 2001).
I guess it is important. But it doesn't mean you can do anything
to earn it. I play cricket from the bottom of my heart because I
enjoy it a great deal and I am compensated in the process. One
thing most people do not understand is that I started playing at
the age of 11. Do you think at that age, any kid can think of the
money aspect of the game? You will see thousands of kids
playing cricket, do you think they have money on their mind?
There is no doubt that companies that sign on Tendulkar for
astronomical sums get more than their money's worth. Fiat is just
one example. Adidas, the German sports clothing and equipment firm,
is another. 'Adidas has grown by over 200% after signing on Tend ulkar
in 1998,' according to Managing Director Tarun Kunzru (Mid Day,
27 June 2000). 'Growth has been significant and one reason could be
the association between Adidas and Sachin.' More than just 'one
reason', one suspects!
Interviewed for the same article, marketing man Hemant Kenkre
(Tendulkar's captain at the CCI in the late 1980s) had this to say:
'Sachin's a real person, someone who delivers imagery with attitudenot some "make believe" screen persona who acts a part. That's what
Global Brand

liS

a brand Is all about-being real with imagery, attitude and delivery.
Tendulkar works.'
He certainly does-even with that squeaky, boyish voice he has
had since childhood. The current list of endorsements includes Visa,
Britannia, Pepsi, Fiat, Adidas, MRF, TVS and Boost. His first, for Action
Shoes ten years ago, earned him Rs 2lakhs a year. Now the money is
in the region ofRs 2 crores.
Sachin's wife Anjali, her father Anand Mehta, and his elder brother
Ajit are known to handle deals on Sachin's behalf WorldTel steps in to
finalize the arrangement. Tendulkar is thus free to concentrate on
cricket. Sachin, of course, has the final say. 'His strength is that he
listens carefully and he knows very clearly what he wants to do and
what he doesn't,' Mascarenhas said in 2001. 'Is there a parallel to
Tendulkar on the cricket field? So judge it from there,' was his
comment in Mid Day (17 May 2001) when asked, 'Would you say this
deal will be unparalleled in the history of world cricket?'
The renewed contract also saw a new-look Sachin appearing in
commercials for the likes of Home Trade, with the Sydney Cricket
Ground as a backdrop. Gone were the boyish curls, in was the goatee,
complete with designer stubble and a new hairstyle-the dose-cropped
look known as the 'Caesar cut'. The boy-to-man image makeover was
handled by 'Team Tendulkar': hair stylist Monisha Naegamvala,
photographer Atul Kasbekar, fashion consultant Rocky S. (credited
with styling the new look) and ad film-maker Prahlad Kakkar.
'Sachin had a great recall value among men and kids. But after the
Home Trade commercials, even women go "wow Sachin",' said Kasbekar
in an article on the Sachin makeover in the Times if India Sunday
Review (21 October 2001 ). Though he looked stiff in the early
commercials, Sachin is now comfortable in front of the camera. He
comes across as a natural. It was not always like that, as he himself
admits. He used to get nervous in the beginning and it took him a
while to relax before the camera and be himself. It was, after all, a
whole new ball game.
Sachin's priorites in life have always been clear: Family, cricket
and commercials-in that order. His life is cricket, but not without
316

Sachin

his family. They go with him everywhere. What he does off the ground
is private .... And only when he has enough time to switch off from
cricket or when he's not playing the game does he do commercials,
never in the middle of a cricket series.
In the seven years since the first edition of this book was published,
there have been significant changes in 'Brand Sachin'.
The most important of these came in May 2006 with his threeyear deal with new management firm, Ico nix, the marketing wing of
international advertising giant Saatchi & Saatchi. The deal was
reportedly worth $40 million and came a year after his 10-year deal
with World Tel had expired.
Tendulkar's stature in the Indian team had by now matured into
that of senior statesman. This was reflected in the products he began
to endorse.
Pepsi was one of the first to drop him, switching to their 'youngistan' campaign theme led by the likes of M.S. Dhoni and Yuvraj
Singh.
The nature of his portfolio evolved from soft drinks and sporting
goods to banking and insurance, reflecting his image of family man
and senior statesman rather than youth icon.

Global Brand

317