Foreign Travails

Time may have changed my game a little bit, here and there.
-Sachin Tendulkar on the eve of his 100th Test match.
If, as we have seen in Chapter 33, 2001 was a year of controversies,
2002 was the first year in which Sachin Tendulkar would see his preeminence in the Indian team finally overtaken after nearly a decade as
the nation's numero uno.
The first Test of2002 for the Indian team however did not give any
such indications as Zimbabwe were trounced by an innings and 170
runs at N agpur with Tendulkar being one of three Indian centurions,
scoring 176.
This however was a different Tendulkar on display. The Indian
public had got the first indications of another side to his attacking
strokeplay in the earlier home series against England. But that could
be largely put down to the negative antics of the English bowlers and
captain.
Zimbabwe were a different matter altogether and to see Tendulkar
go through a period of 40 minutes after tea on the third day without
scoring a run was indeed a revelation to one and all. Still, the 28th ton
was in the bag.
Further vulnerabilities were revealed in the second Test at New
Delhi and this time tongues began to wag.
Just as England's Ashley Giles had tied him down a few months
earlier, this time it was the turn ofanother left-arm spinner, Ray Price.
Suddenly analysts were telling us that Tendulkar's weakness was
against this type ofbowler.

It all came down to the final day of the Delhi Test with India
needing 86 runs to win with seven wickets in hand and Virender
Sehwag out with a shoulder injury. But Tendulkar was at the crease.
In the first innings Price had bowled 56 balls to Tendulkar,
conceding only eight runs and finally getting him lbw for 36laborious
runs.
Now Tendulkar dodged Price for 12 straight overs with Shiv
Sunder Das farming the strike. But Price had his man, once again lbw
(for 42) from the fourth ball he bowled to him and now panic stations
set in. It took some wild shots from Harbhajan Singh of all people to
seal the issue.
Tendulkar missed the One-day series that followed with a hand
injury and then it was time to head to the Caribbean, only his second
tour there.
In 1997 under his captaincy India were beaten 1-0 and the captain
himself had failed to record a century. This time around there would
be just one.
Things started well enough with 79 in the drawn first Test at
Georgetown, Guyana. This time he allowed leg-spinner Mahendra
Nagamootoo to get the better ofhim, falling to a spinner for the sixth
innings in a row after eking out five runs from the 34 balls he faced.
Don Bradman's 29 centuries was equalled in the next Test at Portof-Spain, Trinidad, and now only Sunil Gavaskar with 34 stood before
him.
This was also the only venue where India had won a Test in the
Caribbean, both in 1971 and 1976. Now they would make ita third.
It was by the narrow margin of37 runs and never easy Epitomizing
the struggle was Tendulkar himself whose century was arguably the
patchiest of his entire career. It was not pretty but it had done the job.
Tendulkar had fallen for a duck in the second innings and he made
it two out of two in the next Test at Bridgetown, Barbados, which India
lost by 10 wickets.
The second innings produced just eight and now in his lone
innings ih the fourth Test at St. John's, Antigua, there was another
duck, this time first ball to Pedro Collins. It meant he had failed to get
324

Sachin

off the mark in three ofhis last four innings which had produced a
total ofjust eight runs.
That horror run ended in the fourth and final Test at Kingston,
Jamaica with scores of 41 and 86. That could not prevent another
defeat and it meant India had lost a series they should have won, just
as in 1997.
There was some consolation in the one-day series, India winning
2-1, the first time they had done so in the West Indies.
The first two games at Kingston were washed out. Then in the
third at Bridgetown, they won a game (of any sort) for the first time at
this venue with Tendulkar on 34 not out in the unusual batting position
of number four. A painful shoulder meant he had to miss the next
match at Port-of-Spain where the Windies levelled the series and now
it was all to play for in the decider at the same ground.
Tendulkar played through the pain to top score with 65 and also
picked up the wicket of Brian Lara. It was enough to gain him the
Man of the Series award and a precious triumph at the end of what
had been a bitterly disappointing Test series.
India had last won a Test series outside of Asia in England in 19R6.
This time round the Test series in England would be drawn 1-1. But
before that came a remarkable victory in the Nat-West tri-series also
involving Sri Lanka.
India overtook England's 325 for 5 to record the highest successful
run-chase in ODI history in the final at Lord's and once again Tendulkar
had failed in a big match with 14.
The knives were out for him but the wielders failed to take into
account his pile of runs in the preliminary games, including two
centuries without which India would have struggled to reach the
final in the first place.
It would have been fitting if the landmark of his 1OOth Test matchthe fourth Indian after Gavaskar, Dilip Vengsarkar and Kapil Dev to
achieve this feat-had taken place at home, particularly at his beloved
Wankhede Stadium in Murnbai. But it was not to be and the venue
instead was the Oval where the fourth and final Test in September
ended in a draw.
Foreign Travels

325

Mter being trounced in the first Test at Lord's, India came back
strongly to crush England by an innings and 46 runs in the third at
Headingley.
Tendulkar had fallen short ofhis 30th century by just eight runs in
the previous drawn Test at Nottingham. Now at Headingley he
reached the mark in style with an imposing 193.
The former captain added a record 249 for the fifth wicket with
current captain Ganguly after Dravid's 148. This included an
astonishing 96 runs from 11 overs of the new ball as the light faded on
the second evening of the Test.
With the teams locked at 1-1 going into the decider, it would have
been fitting ifTendulkar's 100th Test had been a memorable one. But
it was not to be. Neither side wanted to take any chances and rain
washed out the entire final day. Tendulkar's 54 was flashy and stylish
and helped him finish second in the averages to the awesome Dravid
who was now beginning to emerge as the best batsman in the Indian
team as well as one of the best in the world.
West Indies minus an injured Brian Lara visited India for three
Tests and seven oms. Injury kept Tendulkar out of the latter but in the
Test series Indian fans were shown the new side of the master batsman
in the third and final Test at Kolkata.
India having wrapped up the series by winning the first two Tests,
both teams were playing only for pride at the Eden Gardens. It took a
match-saving double century stand between Tendulkar (176) and
WS La.xman (154 not out) to salvage the match after India found
themselves struggling at 87 for 4 in the second innings, still trailing
by 52 runs.
Tendulkar has rarely been a match-saver, more a match-winner
with his attacking batsmanship. Indeed it was way back in 1990 with
his maiden Test century at Old Trafford that he had salvaged a draw
for his country.
This time he batted for seven hours and though he never looked
troubled, it was the sign of a more mature, experienced cricketer.
The tour to New Zealand late in 2002 was an ill-advised one with
the Indian cricketers fatigued after a prolonged season.
326

Sachin

It turned out to be a disaster, India being trounced in the two Test
matches as well as the seven oms, all played in freezing weather and
on sub-standard pitches. Only Vi render Sehwag managed to keep his
reputation intact. Tendulkar missed the first four oms with a sprained
ankle. He managed just 0, 1 and 1 in the next three.
It was the fourth such injury in the season, forcing him to miss
even more one-day games, surely a sign that the wear-and-tear of13
years of non-stop cricket had begun to take a heavy toll on his body.
Now it was time for the World Cup again.

Foreign Travels

327