World Cup 1996-and England Again

He plays much the same as I played.-Sir Donald Bradman
The World Cup returned to Asia in 1996, a decade after the Reliance
World Cup, and as in 1987, under stormy circumstances. India,
Pakistan and Sri Lanka won the right to co-host the sixth edition in
the face of fierce opposition from England. Then, on the eve of
cricket's mega event, terrorist bombs struck in the heart of Colombo,
and Australia and West Indies refused to play their Group A matches
in Sri Lanka due to security concerns. But it turned out to be another
magn.ificent tournament, nonetheless, won in grand style by the Sri
Lankans who defeated Australia in the final at Lahore. For the first
time there was a quarter-final stage, though with only 12 teams in the
fray there was not much doubt as to which eight teams would qualify
for the two groups.
India were once again led by Azharuddin. Their batting challenge
was now firmly in the hands ofSachin Tendulkar who had matured
from 'promising' prior to the 1992 World Cup, to one of the best
batsmen in the world four years later. This, despite struggling in the
run-up to the World Cup. The home series against New Zealand, late
in 1995, had been bedevilled by rain. India had won the three-Test
series 1-0 with precious little play possible in the second and third
Tests. Tcndulkar's scores of 4, 0 (not out), 52 (not out) and 2 were
disappointing. The inexperienced Kiwis ran the hosts close in the
one-day series that followed, losing 2-3. Here again, Tendulkar failed
to fire, and ended with just one half-century. A total of 142 runs from
five innings as opener forced him to rethink some aspects of his

technique. There were a few months between the series and the World
Cup which enabled him to iron out the technical flaws which had
crept into his batting. 'Mine is a floating technique,' he commented
after the lean patch. 'Sometimes the balance of the body weight is on
the front foot and sometimes on the back foot. But I knew all I needed
was one big innings to sort things out.'
That innings came in India's opening World Cup tie against Kenya
at Cuttack; he was 127 not out, at nearly a run a ball. India, needing
200 to win, coasted to victory with seven wickets to spare after
Tendulkar's opening stand of 163 with Ajay Jadeja. It was his maiden
World Cup 100 and won him the Man of the Match award.
India's first big test would come three days later, at Gwalior,
where they met the West Indies, champions in 1975 and 1979 but by
now in rapid decline. For the first time, the Indian team was being
seen as a 'one-man army'-uncharitable though this was to
Tendulkar's talented teammates. But it was true that for Indian fans,
Sachin was the main event. Inevitably, the rnatch was seen as a
Tendulkar v Lara clash.
In the event, it was a no-contest. Not only did India maintain their
recent supremacy over the twice-world champions by winning by
five wickets, but Tendulkar also outshone his famed rival. The scores:
Lara-2; Tendulkar-70.
It was a far from blemish less knock, though. Chasing Windies'
173, India lost two early wickets and it could so easily have been three:
Tendulkar was dropped at square leg when on 12, and then on 22 in
the tenth over. His skied leg side shot hovered in the air for ages before
wicketkeeper Browne floored the sitter. The roar of relief from the
crowd must have rocked the nearby fort. Had the catch been held,
India would have sunk to 35 for 3. It was the slice of luck the side
desperately needed and after that, the West Indies were shut out of the
game. Tendulkar slammed 79 for the third wicket with Azhar in 16
overs and then added 31 with Vinod Kambli before being run out for
70 after a mix-up with his chum. By then, India wen: comfortably
placed at 125 for 4 and the Man of the Match award was Sachin's
again.
World Cup 1996-and England Again

139

It was two weeks before the World Cup came up with its first classic
match. The India-Australia World Cup encounters had gone down to
the wire both in 1987 at Chennai and in 1992 at Brisbane. The match
in Mumbai on 27 February did not quite produce such thrills. But the
cricket played by both sides was out of the top draw. If India v West
Indies was billed as Tendulkar v Lara, this one was the TendulkarWarnc show. This time Sachin won the individual honours against
the leg-spinner. But he was outshone by Mark Waugh and the
Australians who won the contest by 16 runs.
It was Mumbai's first floodlit match and it was a privilege to watch
the classic from the Wankhede Stadium press box. Australia won the
toss and were into their stride right away with an opening stand worth
103 between captain Mark Taylor and Mark Waugh. The total of258
was challenging, though it might have been much more but for a
collapse which saw the last seven wickets fall for 26 runs. Waugh's 126
followed on from his 130 against Kenya four days earlier, making him
the first batsman to make back-to-back centuries in the World Cup.
Even though it came at virtually a run a ball, there was never the
slightest hint of a slog in his imperious innings, It was all wristy stroke
play and even the 40,000 partisans in the stadium could not fail to
appreciate its quality.
The contrast between Waugh and Tendulkar could not have been
greater. WithJadeja and Kambli sent back for next to nothing, a sense
of desperation crept into the Indian master's batting. The result was
batting which was not exactly crude, but certainly brutal. Faced with a
big target, Tendulkar decided to chance his arm and play some
audacious shots. It was not pretty in the way Waugh's innings was, but
under the trying circumstances, it was perhaps the only method
available. Especially since the top Indian order, with the exception of
Sanjay Manjrekar (62), was fast crumbling in the face of Damien
Fleming's accuracy and aggression. McGrath missed a tough caughtand-bowled chance and was promptly carted for 27 runs from two
overs. There were a couple of other half-chances too, and some wild
shots which stayed in the air but landed safely. The Mumbai boy was
living dangerously, willing to take risks in a desperate bid for victory.
140

Sachin

It was a magnificent spectacle under the lights and the crowd was
in a frenzy. It seemed only Sachin could save India as he raced to his
50 from 41 balls. He jumped from 12 to 56 offjust 25 breathtaking
balls-it all appeared to be happening in the blink of an eye, so surreal
was the atmosphere. Warne's very first delivery was hit straight and
hard for six and suddenly Tendulkar was on 90 from 88 balls. This is
where Mark Waugh had the last laugh. Bowling innocuous offbreaks,
he saw Tendulkar charge out and bowled wide down the leg side. Ian
Healy whipped off the bails and the life had gone out of the Indian
batting.
Watching this innings by Tendulkar on TV at home in Adelaide,
Sir Donald Bradman was struck by a sense ofdeja vu. He told his wife
that he felt Tendulkar's batting technique was similar to his own.
There were more fireworks to follow in India's next match against
Sri Lanka in New Delhi, but the Indians were outplayed on this
occasion as well. Tendulkar and Azhar were in devastating form,
plundering 99 runs from the last ten overs. Tendulkar was run out in
the last over for a blazing 137, his highest 001 score which took his
aggregate in the World Cup to 424 runs for three times out. There
were five sixes and eight fours and the runs came from 137 balls.
India's total of271 for 3 was seemingly insurmountable. Certainly,
nothing could have prepared the Indian bowlers and the 25,000-strong
crowd for the onslaught that followed.
SanathJayasuriya and Romesh Kaluwitharana had proved to be
hugely effective in the short time they had opened the innings together.
Under overcast skies, they reduced the crowd to silence with their first
50 coming in an incredible 4.4 overs. Only 23 overs had been bowled
when Sri Lanka lost their fourth wicket at 141. That would be the last
success for the Indians as Arjuna Ranatunga and Hashan Tillekeratne
strolled to victory. Only Kumble (2-39) and Tendulkar, who conceded
41 from his ten overs, were spared the carnage in a show of might by
the Sri Lankans that was a sign of things to come.
Tendulkar's only failure in the entire tournament came against
Zimbabwe in the last league game, when he was bowled by Heath
Streak for three. But Kambli's 106 gave the home side victory by 40
World Cup 1996-and England Again

141

runs and this set up an electric encounter with Pakistan in the quarterfinals.
If any sporting event epitomized George Orwell's description of
sport as 'war minus the shooting', the India-Pakistan match was it.
N ormallife came to a standstill in both nations and the tension was
evident on the field too. It soon became obvious that the team that
would hold its nerves best would win the match. Minutes before the
start came the dramatic announcement that Pakistan captain Wasim
Akram had pulled out with an injury and Aamir Sohail would lead
the side. It was a lucky break for India. Openers Sidhu and Tendulkar
made a cautious start and 90 was on the board before the latter dragged
one from Ata-ur-Rehman on to his stumps for 31. By then his partner
had reached 50. It was a sedate innings by Tendulkar's standards,
taking 59 balls, as the openers weathered a hostile opening spell of
four overs from Wagar Younis. All the top order batsmen got a good
start with Sidhu holding the innings together with 93. Ajay Jadeja
provided the first fireworks of the day when he punished Wagar for 22
runs from one over. His 45 from 26 balls helped India to a huge 287
for8.
As in the match against Sri Lanka, the rival openers made merry
and the total suddenly appeared inadequate. What Jayasuriya and
Kaluwitharana had done to the Indian bowlers at the Kotla, Sohail
and Saeed Anwar now replicated. The crowd was suddenly silent as
84 runs were smashed from the first ten overs. Anwar was the first to
go for 48 from 32 balls while Sohail continued to attack. The acting
Pakistan captain was known for his abrasive behaviour on the field.
He smashed Vcnkatesh Prasad for four, then promptly offered the
bowler some gratuitous advice. Prasad kept his cool, his next ball was
full and straight and bowled So hail for 55. The Bangalore boys were
doing the trick and the crowd was beside itselfwith joy. Prasad picked
up two more wickets, Ani! Kumble grabbed three, and the Pakistani
challenge subsided and died out. Judging by the celebrations on the
streets ofBangalorc and indeed throughout the country, one would
have thought India had won the World Cup. But there was still the
hurdle of Sri Lanka to overcome before they could reach the final.
142

Sachin

If the Ban galore match had brought pride and joy to the country,
the Kolkata semi-final brought only shame. Unruly behaviour and
bottle throwing by the massive crowd at Eden Gardens forced match
referee Clive Lloyd to award the game to the Sri Lankans by default,
the first and only time this has happened in the history of cricket.
Coincidentally, the Sri Lankans had started the tournament with two
wins by forfeit.
The crowd's frustration got the better of it as India slid to certain
defeat. At 120 for 8 in 34.1 overs, in reply to Sri Lanka's 251 for 8, there
could have been only one winner. It was a sad end to a promising
campaign by the co-hosts who looked to be peaking after their
memorable match against Pakistan. Vinod Kambli on ten walked off
with tears streaming down his face and he was not the only one to
show his feelings. The Indian dressing room was the picture of
dejection.
Yet, it could have been so different. Azharuddin went against all
advice in opting to field on winning the toss. Then, for a brief while,
the Indian bowlers looked to be on top when they got rid of the top
three batsmen with just 35 on the board. But Sri Lanka recovered to
post a healthy total, with Tendulkar looking the most impressive of
the bowlers with 2 for 34 from his ten overs. India lost Sidhu early in
front of a crowd of 110,000-the biggest ever for a cricket match.
Once again, the onus was on Tendulkar and he found an able partner
in Manjrekar. He reached his 50 in the seventeenth over with the
score on 71 for 1. By the twenty-third over it had gone up to 98 and the
time for acceleration had arrived. Left-arm spinner Jayasuriya replaced
Muralitharan and slid one down the leg side. The ball brushed
Tendulkar's pad and he moved out of his crease, looking for a leg bye.
Kaluwitharana behind the stumps quickly gathered the ball and
removed the bails; the third umpire confirmed the batsman's backward
lunge had come too late. His 65 had been another masterly display
under immense pressure. The Sri Lankan openers who had blazed a
trail throughout the tournament had scored a solitary run between
them this time. But they had now combined to pull off the turning
point of the match.
World Cup 1996-and England Again

143

The Indian batting after that defied all reason. Seven wickets went
down for 22 runs as one a'fter the other, the batsmen committed harakiri. Lloyd's decisiorywas almost an act of mercy, although Indian
cricket would take a long time to live down the ignominy. The brilliant
Sri Lankans went on to lift the World Cup four days later at Lahore.
Tendulkar finished with the most runs in the tournament: 523
runs at 87.17 from his seven matches-still the only instance in the
World Cup of a batsman exceeding 500 runs. Only Ranatunga
(120.50) and De Silva (89.60) had a better average. Ani! Kumble
captured the most wickets (and took the most catches, too). But no
doubt, both men would gladly have exchanged these individual
honours for the prize that really counted.
Just a fortnight after the World Cup finals, India, Pakistan and Sri
Lanka were at it again. The hectic schedule of international cricket
had brought the three teams together in Singapore, where big-time
international cricket was being played for the first time. The tiny
Pedang ground was tailor-made for big scores and the newly crowl)ed
world champions set the ball rolling in the opening match. J ayasuriya
broke one world record after another while racing to his century in 48
balls against Pakistan, the fastest in oms till then. But Pakistan stormed
back to beat them in the final. India beat Sri Lanka by 12 runs to atone
in some measure for the two World Cup defeats at their hands. But
they were beaten by eight wickets by Pakistan and edged out of the
final on net run rate. Tendulkar's round 100 was his first century
against Pakistan in either form of the game.
There was bad news off the field for him, though. For the first time
he was fined 20 per cent of his match fees by the match referee H.
Gardiner of Zimbabwe. His 'fault' was the MRF logo on his bat, which
infringed the International Cricket Council's (Icc) ruling prohibiting
logos of a particular size other than that of the bat manufacturer.
From Singapore it was over to Sharjah once again for India and
Pakistan, joined for the first time by South Mrica. This time it was
India's turn to pip Pakistan on net run rate and reach the final against
South Mrica, who made it a debut to remember by winning the match
by 38 runs. There was, however, the considerable consolation for India
144

Sachin

of beating Pakistan in the return match by 28 runs, having lost the
opening game by 38 runs. It was the first time in five years that India
had turned the tables on Pakistan in their traditional desert stronghold
and only the third time in the last 12 years.
Not surprisingly, it was Tendulkar who led the charge with his
second century in the last three matches against Pakistan. He also
picked up two wickets, including the last one ofSaqlain Mushtaq's,
lbw. This led to an uncharacteristically aggressive reaction from the
bowler, no doubt fuelled by the thrill of beating Pakistan in Sharjah.
As a result, Tendulkar received a warning from match referee Ranjan
Madugalle for the abuse and pointed finger directed at the departing
batsman. Madugalle also issued him a friendly warning when the
issue of the logo on his bat cropped up again and Tendulkar quietly
removed it to avoid another fine.
The match saw India record its highest total to date (305 for 5)
while the stand for the second wicket (231) between Tendulkar and
Sidhu was India's best for all wickets. Azhar, by now, appeared
preoccupied with matters of a more personal nature. Under these
circumstances, Tendulkar, the trusted lieutenant; was already being
perceived as the de facto captain with Azhar often letting him set the
field and handle the bowling change. Azhar's batting form was in
tatters too, and the story goes that Tend ulkar virtually led him by the
hand to the dressing room door in Sharjah when India recorded their
rare triumph over their arch-rivals. Azhar's confidence had sunk so
low he was trying to push himselflower and lower down the order.
But his deputy's faith was repaid when the captain smashed 29
(remember, India won by 28 runs) from ten balls, including 24 from
the last over bowled by Ata-ur-Rehman. The anti-Azhar campaign,
which received its biggest boost after the captain's blunder in the World
Cup semi-final, had by now reached fever pitch. It appeared to be only
a matter of time-and not much at that-before he would be replaced
in Indian cricket's hot seat by the man who could seemingly do no
V.Tong.
Tendulkar had made his first Test century at Old Trafford on the 1990
World Cup 1996-and England Again

145

tour of England. Now India returned for three Tests and three ODis.
And Azhar was still in charge, though barely. The run-up to the first
Test at Edgbaston could hardly have been worse for the tourists. They
were beaten 2-0 in the ODis (the first was a no-result after being
disrupted by rain). And to make things worse, the experienced Sidhu
stormed out of the tour and flew back home after a row with the
captain.
England drew first blood in a Test that had seven debutants, four of
them from India. Though Nasser Hussain took the Man of the Match
award for his maiden Test century, it was Tendulkar who stood out
with his 122 out of an Indian second-innings total of219. 'The real
Man of the Match,' as Wisden Cricket Monthly aptly put it.
The rest of the Indian batting in both innings ended up in shambles,
with number nine Srinath being the only other to pass 50. Trailing by
99 after the first innings, it would have been a total rout but for the
Indian vice captain's ninth Test 100. With wickets falling in a heap
around him, Tendulkar went for the bowling on a track that offered
plenty ofhelp to the seamers. It took him 50 balls to get to his 50, with
40 of the runs coming from boundaries. Manjrekar and Kumble gave
him a modicum of support and enabled him to reach three figures,
which came with a straight six offMumbai-born spinner Min Patel.
It was a flawless innings with strokes all around the wicket. The bowlers
were treated with disdain as he hit 19 fours plus one six. With batsmen
on both sides struggling to cope with the uneven bounce and
movement off the pitch, this was a batting display that finally cemented
his place as the best in the world.
Tendulkar was ninth out when he skied a bouncer from outside off
stump from Chris Lewis to Graham Thorpe, who caught it running
backwards at midwicket. Geoffrey Boycott summed up the way he
rose head and shoulders above the rest of the Indian batting: 'The best
way for India to beat England would be to have Sachin Tendulkar bat
at number one, two, three, four and five.'
The Sportstar spoke to Tendulkar (29 June 1996) and asked him to
rank his nine Test tons. He put the Edgbaston innings at number two,
after his 114 at Perth in 1992. At number three was the 111 against
146

Sachin

South Mrica at Johannesburg in the same year. At fourth spot was his
maiden century, 119 not out, against England at 0 ld Trafford in 1990.
His century at Sydney in 1992 was placed number five, followed by
179 v West Indies (Mumbai, 1994); 165 v England (Chennai, 1993);
142 v Sri Lanka (Lucknow, 1994) and finally, 104 not out, also against
Sri Lanka (Colomho sse, 1993).
The second Test at Lord's was drawn and was notable for the Test
debuts ofSourav Ganguly (131) and Rahul Dravid (95). Tendulkar
was bowled by a beauty from Lewis for 31. The third and final Test
was another high-scoring draw at Trent Bridge as England repeated
the 1990 series scoreline of1-0. Both teams scored 500-plus in the first
innings and there were four century makers. Ganguly followed up
his debut ton with 136 while Tendulkar came the closest he has ever
been in his career to making two centuries in the same Test. The firstinnings 177 was his fourth against England and tenth overall, a
remarkable feat for a 23-year-old. In the second, he skied an intended
pull offLewis and was out for 74. The combined match aggregate of
251 remains his highest and made him the top scorer by far on either
side in the series. Dropped at slip on zero and then surviving a confident
lbw appeal off Dominic Cork, Tendulkar appeared to have been
coasting to his maiden double century. But as in the second innings, it
was a careless lofted shot which saw his dismissal.
He also led India on the field for nearly the entire duration of the
England innings. Azhar was hit on the ankle by Stewart while fielding
on the third day and only returned to bat on the fifth and final day.
England amassed 564, a lead of 43, and there was already some criticism
ofTendulkar's captaincy. This is how he defended himself in an article
in the Times if India nearly a year later (June 1997):
By the end of the Indian cricket team's England tour of 1996,
my name was being mentioned for captaincy for the
forthcoming season. Hence on the third day of the third Test
match against England when captain Azharuddin reported unfit
and I took charge of the team, my captaincy received special
World Cup 1996-and England Again

147

attention.
Mter India had scored 500 runs in the llrst innings it was
expected of me to put pressure on England by placing an
attacking field and making proper bowling changes. Contrary
to this, it appeared I was adopting tactics which had slowed
down the pace of the game. Obviously, my moves were not
appreciated by cricket lovers. The fact was that things were not
so easy. Centuries scored by Atherton and Hussain reduced
chances of our possible lead in the first innings considerably. At
this stage I thought it would be unwise if we got England out
quickly. This would have made India bat in their second innings
rather too early, which could have created problems for us.
Rathore was unfit to bat; Manjrekar and Mongia were to open
the innings and were not in go_od form; Ganguly and Dravid
were playing only their second Test; Azharuddin was injured
and was not in good form. He was to bat only if needed. I thought
one or two quick wickets could have changed the complexion
of the game and the situation could have been reversed. These
two days of experience made me realise the ordeal of captaincy
that I would have to face ifl was selected captain of the team.
There was no doubt, however, that Tendulkar was streets ahead of
all the other batsmen in the series, so it didn't come as a surprise when
he was chosen as one of the five Cricketers of the Year by Wtsden
Cricketers' Alrnanack (1997).

148

Sachin