He was a natural cricketer.-Ramakant Achrekar
If the Kanga League is the heart and soul of Mumbai cricket, the
Harris and Giles Shield inter-school tournaments are its roots. When
Sachin was growing up, the school scene was dominated by the likes
ofSharadashram Vidyamandir, Balamohan, St. Mary's, Don Bosco,
St. Xavier's and Anjuman-E-Islam.
Sharadashram has produced four Test cricketers-Chandrakant
Pandit, Pravin Arnre, Sachin Tendulkar and Vinod Kambli. By the
1980s it had overtaken Anjuman-E-Islam as the winnet of the most
inter-school tournament titles.
Pandit (a wicketkeeper-batsman) and Lalchand Rajput (opening
batsman) were in Ruia College with Ajit Tendulkar and were coached
by Ramakant Achrekar, the official Sharadashram coach. Achrekar
also ran a few cricket clubs, including the Sassanian Cricket Club and
the Kamat Memorial Cricket Club for whom he kept wickets in
Kanga League matches well into his 40s.
Achrekar never played first-class cricket. But for many years he
was the wicketkeeper-batsman for the strong State Bank oflndia team
in the Times Shield which had in its ranks a future India captain and
coach, Ajit Wadekar.
We used to call him the Bradman of tennis-ball cricket, such was
his technique,' Wadekar told me in Mumbai in September 2001.
For those who may scotT at the thought of playing cricket with a
tennis ball, try it sometime. Keeping the ball on the ground is
devilishly difficult and reaching 20 runs is considered quite a feat.

1\jit Tendulkar felt this was the ideal man to guide the early career
of his little brother, who he was convinced had the spark in him to
make the big time. According to Ajit, Achrekar's biggest asset was the
equal emphasis he laid on both net practice and match practice. The
coach ensured most of his boys were busy playing in one tournament
or the other right through the year.
Ajit duly approached Achrekar 'Sir' (as he is respectfully referred
to) and asked if he could bring his brother along for the net practice
which Achrekar held for Kamat Club and the boys ofSharadashram
at Shivaji Park. The coach, already well known in Mumbai cricket
circles, and soon to become a legend in the cricket world, agreed after
first confirming that 11-year-old Sachin had never played with a hard
cricket ball. Till then, it had been rubber-ball cricket for the little boy.
On the first day; Achrekar told Sachin to watch in order to get a feel
of what playing with the 'big boys' would be like. 'For the first and so
far perhaps the only time in his cricket career, Sachinjust stood and
watched the others play,' remembers Ajit.
Once the batting was over Sachin did, however, get a chance to be
part of the fielding drill. For the first time, he got the feel of a hard
cricket ball. And Ajit, at least, was impressed. 'I realized once more he
had natural talent which should be nurtured.'
I met Achrekar at his modest Dadar flat in September 2001 to get
his first impressions of the boy who would be king. Achrekar, now in
his 60s, has slowed down after a stroke a couple of years ago. But he
was still rushing off to Shivaji Park for the daily coaching sessions.
His eyes lit up when I asked him about his most famous product.
'Everything was just right. He was a natural cricketer. I did not have to
change much. By the time he was 12-13, I knew he would make the
big time. Ifl told him something, he would be diligent and persevering.
I would have to tell him something only once and he would stick to
it.' Achrekar also emphasized that it was the Tendulkar family structure
that provided the bedrock for Sachin's career. 'His father was always
behind him and his brother Ajit would accompany him to the nets.
This was essential for the youngster.'
On the way home from that first session, Sachin told his brother
14

Sachin

with the same confidence with which he would handle the world's
best bowlers, 'I can bat better than any of them.'
The next day was the first batting session at the nets and though
Achrekar did not express any opinion, he did invite him to continue
his practice sessions. Playing with a rubber ball meant Sachin resorted
to cross-bat shots to cope with the exaggerated bounce. This led to an
overemphasis on leg side play in the initial nets. But Ajit noticed his
'uncanny ability'. to judge the length of the ball and middle it.
Like all good coaches, Achrekar was loath to change the natural
style of the youngster. He did, however, have a problem with Sachin's
batting grip, something he had acquired as a five-year-old when he
played around with 1\jit's bat. In order to grip a bat that was obviously
too big for him, Sachin clutched it at the bottom of the handle, and the
habit stuck. The bottom-handed grip enabled him to hit strokes with
great power. But Achrekar felt it affected his stance and would cause
problems as he grew taller. He tried to persuade Sachin to use the
orthodox grip, holding the bat in the middle of the handle with both
hands together. But Sachin felt uncomfortable with this new grip and
finally, Achrekar relented.
Speaking to me late in 2001, Bishan Singh Bedi narrated an
incident that occurred in New Zealand in 1990, during Sachin's
second tour. Bedi was the team's coach and was told by former New
Zealand batting great, Glenn Turner, that Tendulkar's grip was wrong.
'Turner told me that as coach I should do something about it. But I
refused, as this was what had brought so many runs for Sachin at such
a young age.'
Two weeks at the nets and Achrekar invited the youngster to play
his first organized match, a 50-overs match between two teams made
up of his wards. He had fixed Sachin's place as number four in the
batting line-up. The first two matches produced ducks. (So would his
first two One-day Internationals [oms] in 1989.) But those early
failures did not faze Sachin one bit. And soon, the runs began to flow.
1\jit remembers scores of 51,38 and 45 (a batsman had to retire after
reaching 50), though the diary in which Sachin noted his scores has
since been lost. The coach was impressed enough to include him in
Schoolboy Prodigy

IS

the Kamat Memorial, one of the teams he managed. The year was
1984.
It is said in Mumbai that if a boy wants to play cricket seriously, he
should study in Sharadashram English with its champion cricket
team. 'Boys joined the school for cricket. If they wanted to study they
could have gone somewhere else,' says Ranji Trophy player Amol
Muzumdar who studied with Sachin in Sharadashram. (Outlook, 4
January 1999).
Sachin started school in the Indian Education Society's New
English School, close to the family home in Bandra (East) where
most of his friends also studied. But the school lacked a good cricket
ground and coach. Achrekar then approached Professor Rarnesh
Tendulkar with the suggestion that Sachin be moved to Sharadashrarn;
he was by now convinced the boy had potential. The father turned to
Ajit for his opinion. Till now Sachin had played cricket only during
the school vacations. Now he would have to combine studies and
cricket.
The final decision was left to Sachin himself-a tough one for a
boy so young. He would miss his school friends. Commuting every
day from his home in Bandra (East) to the new school would take an
hour each way, and he would have to change buses. However, it did
not take him very long to reach a decision. Cricket was more important
than fun and games in the backyard. Sharadashrarn it would be.
First, though, carne the task of buying him a complete kit, under
the guidance of his coach. Ajit remembers that Sachin in his childlike excitement picked out the first bat he saw, one that appeared too
big and heavy for him. Both Ajit and Achrekar tried to dissuade him.
But he was firm in his choice and it has always been heavy bats from
then on. Today he wields one of the heaviest in the world, between 3
and 3.2 pounds.
By now Sachin's life revolved around cricket and cricket alone.
Studies had begun to take a backseat. Except for a four-month hiatus
during the monsoon months, when the only cricket played in Murnbai
was the Kanga League. Achrekar did not want to risk his star ward on
16

Sachin

the treacherous pitches where the ball would get up to all kinds of
tricks, mostly of the dangerous variety. But those four months helped
Sachin forge what would become one of his closest friendships: with
Vinod Kambli. Before long, the two boys would find themselves in
the record books.
Sachin made his debut in 1984 in the Giles under-15 tournament
for Sharadashram English (he was a reserve in the Harris under-17)
against Khoja Khan High School at the Navroze Cricket Club ground
on Azad Maidan; he was 11 and a half years old.
His first big match knock produced 24 runs. This included three
stylish boundaries-a square cut, a cover drive and a straight drive.
Ajit was struck by the power in his kid brother's hands since most
cricketers of that age do not have the strength to hit boundaries, getting
their runs mainly in singles and two's. But Sachin's timing was so
good that he was able to find the gaps in the field, allowing the ball to
race to the boundary.
The first person to predict success for Sachin was an umpire by the
name of Gondhalekar. He was umpiring the quarter-finals against
Don Bosco at Cross Maidan in which Sachin smashed ten fours in a
knock of 50. The umpire predicted toAchrekar that the lad would one
day play for the country-a prediction Achrekar brushed aside since
this was Sachin's first year in competitive cricket. But Gondhalekar
insisted. Sadly, he would not be around to see his prediction come true
just five years after it had been made.
Achrekar was keen that Sachin get a place in the Bombay Cricket
Association (BCA) nets for under-19 boys which were spread across
the city and were usually conducted by an ex-Test cricketer. These
were very popular during the summer vacations and there was a huge
rush for the limited slots.
Ajit took Sachin to the MIG (Middle Income Group) Cricket Club
ground, a short walk from their home in Bandra, to meet the coach in
charge, a man named Dandekar. But Dandekarwas shocked when he
heard Sachin was only 12, and bluntly told Ajit his kid brother was too
young to get into the under-19 nets.
So the summer was spent in practice sessions with Achrekar, both
Schoolboy Prodigy

17

in the mornings and afternoons. Sessions intense enough for Sachin
to say goodbye to a normal childhood with summer vacations filled
with childhood pranks and fun and games. At about this time, it was
decided that Sachin should move to his uncle and aunt's place near
Shivaji Park. The move was triggered by the events of one summer
afternoon when Sachin and his friends were playing outside the house
while the family watched the Hindi film Guide on television. They
clambered up a mango tree to steal mangoes but came tumbling down
when a branch broke under them. The next day his brother and father
sent him for coaching and his career in cricket started.
Years later, Sachin would list the names of his uncle and aunt, with
those of Ajit and his father, as his greatest influences.
All through this year of1985, it was cricket, cricket and more cricket.
He ate cricket, drank cricket, slept cricket. Even after he broke into
international cricket, Sachin was known to talk--cricket, of course land walk in his sleep. And the phrase he uttered most often in his
sleep? 'Don-ge' (Take two)!
The grind would begin at seven in the morning. Mter a quick
breakfast he would be at the ground at 7.30. A batting session would be
followed by tips from Achrekar, who was always on hand to guide his
favourite student. Bowling was a fascination with Sachin from the
early days and even then he bowled an assortment of medium pace
and leg spin. Fielding was also taken seriously. The morning session
would last till ten and the afternoon one would begin at three and
continue till seven. But there was no shortage of practice games either.
Ifhe got out early, Achrekar would take him across town on his scooter
to the Azad Maidan where his Sassanian Cricket Club was playing,
and Sachin would get to bat twice during the day. Thus were his
summer months spent, engrossed in the game.
At the age of12, Sachin played his first match in the Kanga League,
scoring five for the Young Parsee Cricket Club in the 'F' division.
This was during the monsoon. The season began in right earnest in
October and this time Sachin played for another of Achrekar's clubs:
Hind Sevak Cricket Club in the Gordhandas Shield, open only to
clubs in the suburbs ofMumbai. The team won the tournament with
18

Sachin

Sachin scoring 30 in his first game and 43 in the semi-finals, against
experienced bowlers with '!\ division experience. A special batting
prize was presented to the precocious youngster, still one year short of
his teens. By now he had made quite a name for himself and his
school fielded him in both the Giles and Harris Shield tournaments.
In fact, his maiden century came in the Harris, the senior of the two,
in the 1985-86 season.
The landmark came against Don Bosco School, Matunga, at the
Bharat Cricket Club ground at Shivaji Park. Sachin was unbeaten on
96 at the end of the first day of the three-day match, coming in after
the loss of two wickets. To get over the tension, he decided to spend the
night at his parents' home instead of his uncle's. But it was a sleepless
night.
Early on the second day, one of the rival team's pace bowlers was
square-cut to the boundary and Sachin Ramesh Tendulkar's first
century entered the record books.
Sachin was then chosen for the Mumbai under-15 team for the
Vijay Merchant inter-zonal tournament to be played in Pune.Joining
him in the side was school chum Vinod Kambli. But he was run out
for one in a tournament marred by rain and did not make it to the West
Zone under-15 team.
By this time, the big names ofMumbai cricket were beginning to
take notice of the wonder boy. Former Ranji Trophy captain Milind
Rege, who was also a junior selector, assured Ajit that Sachin had the
potential to go all the way. The 1985-86 season had turned out to be a
notable one for Sachin. A maiden century and a recommendation
from one ofMumbai cricket's old guards!
He played a full season ofKanga League cricket in 1986-87 for the
'F' division team of the John Bright Cricket Club. He scored 121 runs
for an average of nearly 20 when teams were struggling to reach 100
on the treacherous pitches. Scores of36 and 83 for the Shivaji Park
Gymkhana team against P.J.Hindu Gymkhana and the Dadar Union
Cricket Club in the G.RVisvanath Trophy for under-15 boys saw
him secure a berth in the Mumbai under-15 team for the Vijay
Merchant Trophy.
Schoolboy Prodigy

19

It has happened countless times since in newspapers and magazines
around the world. But the very first time Sachin's photograph appeared
in the papers was when he scored 123 against Maharashtra in just 140
minutes, in the opening game at Baroda. That got him into the West
Zone under-15 team as he continued to scale the ladder of success at
bewildering speed. West Zone lost to holders South Zone with Sachin's
74 run-out being the highest score.
Now it was back to do dmy for Sharadashram in the Harris Shield.
In the very first match he registered an amazing score for a boy barely
into his teens: 276 against BPM High School, that too in a single day
against boys three or four years older than him. Just one rung lower,
in the Giles Shield, Sachin had been appointed captain. The first
match was against the powerful Balamohan, Ajit' s former team. Sachin
confidently predicted he would win not only the match, but the title
as well.
Sharadashram were struggling at 40 for 3 in reply to Balamohan's
250 when the captain came in and smashed 159 not out in two hours.
The team was on its way. And so was Sachin. Centuries came thick
and fast as he switched back and forth between the under-17 and the
under-15 grade. Against St. Xavier's Fort in the Harris, he hit 123 for
his third consecutive inter-school ton. Then came 33 not out against
the same school in the Giles, and 156 against Barfiwala High School.
In the final of the Harris Shield, Sharadashram English faced their
sister institution, Sharadashram Marathi. Sachin scored 42 and 150
not out in his side's victory and finished his Harris season with 596
runs in five innings. Captaining his school in the Giles, Sachin
smashed 197 in the semi-finals, and then it was time for the final
against Don Bosco, Matunga. His knocks of 67 and 53 were the top
scores in a low-scoring game. And true to his word, he had led his
school to victory, scoring 665 runs with three centuries in the Giles
Shield. Sharadashram English achieved the Harris/Giles double that
year, largely due to Sachin's huge scores.

Mumbai's local newspapers have always devoted plenty of space on
their sports pages to local cricket, from the Kanga League to school
tournaments.
20

Sachin

The distinction ofbeing the first journalist to interview the prodigy
right after the 'double' fell to Sunil Warrier ofMid Day. Warrier, now
with the Times iflndi£1, sent me a copy of that first interview (published
in December 1986). He has vivid memories of the meeting, claiming
with a laugh: 'I made Sachin famous and then he made me famous.'
'Sachin was making runs by the tons. I went to Shivaji Park in
Dadar and met him just around lunch. I told him that since he was
fielding I would come later in the evening to chat with him,' Warrier
told me. 'I was quite surprised to see his brother too with him in the
evening. I was wondering how he had found the time to call his brother
to the ground. I suggested we go to a restaurant and have a cup of tea.
They agreed and we walked a short distance from the ground to a
small Irani restaurant. It is one of the oldest in that area. As we started
chatting I realized that Sachin was keeping mum and f\jit was doing
all the talking. Every time I asked a question, Sachin would prompt
his brother in Marathi, "Tu sang na" (You tell him). So I told him,
since you go to an English medium school you should speak to me in
English and not in Marathi. He smiled politely. We had tea and bun
maska and the session must have lasted about 25 minutes or so. I did
meet Sachin subsequently when he scored debut hundreds in the
Ranji Trophy and Irani Trophy. But I was weaned away from cricket
to hockey and football and I never met Sachin again.'
Warrier's interview mentioned that Sunil Gavaskar and Vivian
Richards were Sachin's favourite batsmen, something he maintains
to this day. 'The square cut and the off drive are his favourite strokes,'
Warrier wrote. 'He loves to play one-day cricket more than a four-day
match. His natural instincts are to attack from the word go.' The
interview revealed that 'he thrives on Michael Jackson songs' and
concluded with 'Sachin is also a good singer.'
There were so many tournaments to play and Sachin did not want
to miss any of them-the Cosmopolitan Shield, the Bombay Junior
Cricket tournament, the Mahim-Dadar Shield and the Gordhandas
Shield, as well as a few matches for the BCA Colts. He scored his
second double-century of the season, 216 in a day, against IES High
Schoolboy Prodigy

21

School in the Matunga Shield. (Incidentally, it would take him a
decade to score his maiden first-class double century and the same
number of years to score his first Test double ton.)
But the fantastic season was destined to have a disappointing end.
Sachin had scored twice as many runs as any other school cricketer
and was the only batsman to have scored a hundred for Mumbai in
the Vijay Merchant Trophy. He was the top scorer for the West Zone
in the zonal competition for the same tournament. He had been prolific
in club cricket against senior bowlers. Yet, he was bypassed for the
BCA's Best Junior Cricketer of the Year award.lt was a strange decision.
There was consolation, however, in the form of a letter from Sunil
Gavaskar dated 3 August 1987, which contained encouraging words
and a postscript: 'Don't be disappointed at not getting the Best Junior
Cricketer award from BCA. If you look at the best award winners you
will find one name missing and that person has not done badly in Test
cricket!!'
Even while scoring a mountain of runs, Sachin did not neglect his
bowling and picked up quite a few wickets with his medium-pacers.
In October of that year, he was part of the selection trials at the MRF
Pace Academy in Chennai (then known as Madras), overseen by
Australian fast bowling legend Dennis Lillee. But Lillee was not
impressed with his bowling and told him to concentrate on batting.
Sachin was not selected for the Academy.
The 1987-88 season was a turning point in Sachin's fledgling career.
Even while he was making his mark in every junior tournament
in the city, both he and Ajit felt at the start of the season that there was
a chance to make it to first-class cricket. Sure enough, at the age of 14,
Sachin became the youngest player ever selected for Mumbai in the
West Zone Ranji Trophy league.
After useful scores in the Kanga League-where he had now
leapfrogged to the 'B' division-he was selected for the Sportstar
Trophy for boys under 17. The tournament, organized for schoolboys,
featured teams named after famous Indian cricketers. Sachin's scores
of 158, 97 and 75 won him the Man of the Series award and rook his
22

Sachin

team (Dattu Phadkar XI) to victory.
On 14 November 1987, the Mumbai Ranji Trophy selection panel
of Ajit Wadekar, Sudhir Naik, Bapu Nadkarni and Sandeep Patil
announced the names of36 probables. Sachin's name was on the list.
It was just seven months after his fourteenth birthday.
The name ofSunil Gavaskar also figured on the list. But Gavaskar
had announced his retirement during the MCC Bicentenary match at
Lord's in August and thus the two narrowly missed playing in the
same team.
Sachin was in the reserves for the opening West Zone league tie
against Baroda on 19 December. Though he got the chance to field as
a substitute in some of the games, he was not selected for the playing
eleven that season.
Runs continued to flow in junior tournaments. But he failed to
gain selection to the Indian team for the under-19 World Cup in
Australia. In the Giles and Harris Shield he had a fantastic run: 21 not
out, 125, 207 not out, 326 not out, 172 not out, 346 not out, 0 and 14.
The 'failures' ofO and 14, as well as 172 not out, were scored in the
Giles Shield. His Harris Shield total of 1,025 runs came to the
staggering average of1 ,025! The two triple centuries had come in the
Harris Shield, in the semi-finals against St. Xavier's, Fort (326 not
out) and in the final against Anjuman-E-Islam (346 not out).

Schoolboy Prodigy

23
