Trauma

Never leave something that you can do to someone else.-Sunil Gavaskar
At the start of 1999, all the talk in cricket and political circles was
whether or not the Pakistanis would make it to India for a Test series
for the first time since 1987. The ruling BharatiyaJanata Party had to
overcome a dissenting voice in their coalition, from the Shiv Sena,
and not for the first time either. In 1991, the Shiva Sena had dug up
the pitch at the Wankhede Stadium in their stronghold of Mumbai,
forcing the series against Pakistan to be cancelled. The proposed tours
of 1993 and 1994 were cancelled too, in the wake of political protests.
In 1996, the World Cup organizers made sure not to allot any of the
knockout stage matches to Mumbai in case one of them turned out to
be an India-Pakistan clash-which is exactly what occurred in the
quarter-finals, allotted to Bangalore. As a result, Mumbai cricket fans
had to be content with the India v Australia league match.
The Shiv Sena were up to their old tricks this time, too. In a carefully
planned pre-dawn raid-having made sure a bevy of reporters,
cameramen and photographers had been informed in advance-they
proceeded to dig up the pitch at the Feroze Shah Kotla in New Delhi,
the venue of the first Test. As a result, venues had to be switched and
Chennai hosted the first Test; the second (and final) Test moved to the
capital. The Pakistanis would also stay on to play a Test at Kolkata as
part of the inaugural Asian Test championships and then a triangular
one-day series with India and Sri Lanka. Mter that it would be off to
Sharjah. So India-Pakistan cricket was very much the flavour of the
season-all this in the run-up to the big event, the World Cup in

England.
The huge strain on the Indian cricketers would continue for
another year-since 1996, they had played a phenomenal number of
matches. But this was the last thing on the minds of the politicians
and the game's administrators. What mattered was that the Pakistan
tour oflndia should go off without a hitch. In the end, the series was
drawn 1-1 and there was much goodwill all around. There was some
fantastic cricket too, to match the victories on the diplomatic front.
In 1987, in the last India v Pakistan Test on Indian soil, Pakistan
had prevailed by 16 runs at Bangalore despite an epic 96 by Sunil
Gavaskar. The target for India, then, was 221. Now, 12 years'later,
history would repeat itself in another southern city where Pakistan
came out on top by 12 runs. And it was the turn ofGavaskar's successor
to the tag of'Little Master' to script an epic innings in vain. 'Another
Greek tragedy' was how one Indian writer described the Test, as India
fell just short of the victory target of271.
It was certainly an amazing four days of cricket at the MA
Chidambaram Stadium at Chepauk, Chennai-scene of the second
tied Test in 1986. The Indians had got back from New Zealand just a
week earlier and were now plunged into a Test that was gripping from
start to finish. The first day's honours belonged to the hosts. Pakistan
were shot out for 238 with Ani) Kumble picking up six wickets in a
harbinger of things to come. India were 48 tor no loss at stumps, with
debutant opener S.Ramesh delighting his home crowd with a flurry
of boundaries offWasim Akram and Wagar Younis. On the second
day, Tendulkar perished to the third ball he faced, caught by Salim
Malik at gully offSaqlain Mush tag for a rare duck, as he attempted an
ambitious shot. The Pakistanis were beside themselves with joy and
Sag lain's 5 for 94 restricted the Indian lead to 16.
This time it was the turn ofVcnkatesh Prasad to do the damage
with the ball; he claimed six wickets. Tendulkar too made a couple of
important breakthroughs by accounting for Inzamam-ui-Haq and
YousufYouhanna, whom he had dismissed in the first innings, too.
Despite a maiden Test century by Shahid Afridi, Pakistan collapsed
from 275 for 4 to 286 all out and the target for India was 271. On a
222

Sachin

pitch that had turned from day one, it was not likely to be an easy task.
That India got so close was almost entirely due to Tendulkar and
his partnership of136 for the sixth wicket with Nayan Mongia. Only
one other batsman reached double figures (Dravid: 10). With Saqlain
again collecting five wickets and Waqar and Wasim striking vital blows,
India were tottering at 82 for 5 when Tendulkar was joined by the
wicketkeeper. What transpired was intensely competitive cricket as
the last recognized pair for India sought to keep out the rampaging
Pakistani bowlers. It brought the crowd, silenced by the batting
collapse, back to life. Tendulkar revealed a new facet of his supreme
batsmanship-the ability to graft for runs and play a long innings.
Not that he could resist attacking the bowlers. Saqlain went tor four
fours in an over and both Wasim and Waqar felt the full power of his
strokes. In the same over, he had a big slice of luck when on 90 he
charged the off-spinner, got an inside edge and saw keeper Moin Khan
drop the catch and miss the stumping, too.
By the time he reached his eighteenth century-his first against
Pakistan, in his sixty-fifth Test-panic was beginning to surface in the
rival camp. Runs were flowing freely. At the other end, Mongia was
providing Tendulkar with admirable support. But by now, Sachin was
in obvious pain. He could be seen clutching his back and agony was
evident on his face when he played his shots. India were just 53 runs
away from a famous victory when Mongia had a rush of blood and
paid the price. He made a wild slog te> mid-off from the bowling of
Akram and was caught by Y<mnis for 54. At the other end, Tendulkar
was seething with rage at the sight of the rash shot. It would be a long
time before he could bring himself to forgive his teammate.
Thirty-sLx runs were added in the company of Sunil Joshi before
Tendulkar, hampered by back spasms, threw away his wicket after an
innings spanning 405 minutes and 273 balls. Desperate to finish the
match before being overcome by pain, he took a swipe at Saqlain and
was held by Akram at mid-off for 136 at 254 for 7.
This was just the breach the Pakistanis were looking for and the
rest of the Indian batting subsided meekly to hand over victory to the
ecstatic Pakistanis. In the despondent Indian dressing room, Tendulkar
Trauma

223

was a shattered man. He had battled the heat, the pain and 11
determined Pakistanis to take his side to the doorstep of victory. That
he could not complete the task is something that has haunted him
eversmce.
'I should have reached the target myself. I was striking the ball
well but when the strain aggravated, I could not go through with the
follow through. Every time I tried, the pain increased,' he said after his
epic. Looking on was Raj Singh Dungarpur. 'I saw Gundappa
Visvanath make an undefeated 97 in a score of 191 at Chepauk against
the West Indies (in 1975). I would rate Tendulkar's innings in adverse
circumstances above that. Because we know Tendulkar as an attacking
batsman. It is ingrained in him. Today he showed us all a different
facet which should make Capt. Hazare, Visvanath and Sunil Gavaskar
proud,' he said (Sportstar, 13 February 1999).
That 97 not out against a rampaging Andy Roberts and Gavaskar's
96 against Pakistan have long been rated as the best Indian innings
against pace and spin. Now Tendulkar was nudging them off the
pedestal. But it's interesting to note that only Visvanath's masterpiece
had resulted in an Indian victory.
Four days later, the teams were in New Delhi for the second Test.
There was speculation whether Tendulkar would be able to play. It
was obvious that he was not fully fit, and the final decision was left to
the batsman himself. The feeling in the Indian camp was that even a
partially fit Tendulkar would be a psychological boost to the side after
his masterly display at Chepauk. Though he did eventually make it to
the side, he played only a minor role (6 and 29) in India's decisive win
by 212 runs.
The match will go down in cricket history for Anil Kumble's
fantastic feat in the Pakistan second innings of taking all ten wickets,
only the second man to do so after Jim Laker against Australia in 1956.
The first triangular Test tournament since 1912, the Asian Test
championship, the brainchild ofjagmohan Dalmiya, got off to a stormy
start at Kolkata less than a fortnight after Kumble's 'Perfect Ten'. It was
India v Pakistan again in the pressure-cooker atmosphere of Eden
224

Sachin

Gardens. The first four days attracted crowds in excess of 100,000. Yet,
the end of the Test was played out in front of empty stands.
That Pakistan eventually won by 46 runs was astonishing,
considering they found themselves in the doldrums at 26 for 6 after
nine overs from Srinath and Prasad on the first morning. Then came
the first of many fight-backs by the Pakistanis as they reached 185 all
out. India, in its innings, tumbled from 147 for 2 to 223 all out. Shoaib
Akhtar created a sensation by bowling Tendulkar for a first ball duck,
knocking out his middle stump through sheer pace. It was the third
'golden' duck ofSachin's Test career stretching over a decade. With
his previous ball, the fast bowler had bowled Dravid for 24.
The third day belonged to Saeed Anwar and Srinath, both of whom
recorded career-best performances. The left-handed opener carried
his bat for 188, the highest score by a Pakistani in India, while Srinath
returned figures of8 for 86 for a match haul of13 wickets. India were
left to chase 279 for victory.
On the fourth day, Tendulkar came to the wicket at 134 for 2,
openers Ramesh and VVS. Laxman having put on 108 runs. He began
confidently with a four off Akram, when disaster struck on the
thirteenth delivery he faced, also from Akram, which he punched to
midwicket. Substitute Nadeem Khan (on for Anwar) made an
astonishing throw from 75 yards as Sachin went for the third run, his
eyes on the trajectory of the ball. As a result, he did not notice Akhtar
who had positioned himself near the stumps for the throw. The two
collided and the bat got tangled between the fielder's legs. It was
grounded for a split second before the collision which knocked it into
the air, even as the throw crashed into the stumps. West Indies umpire
Steve Bucknor consulted his colleague Dave Orchard of South Mrica
and third umpire K. T.Francis was called in. Francis pressed the
dreaded red button and a dejected Tendulkar started the walk back.
Azharuddin came to the crease as the crowd roared in fury, accusing
Akhtar of having deliberately obstructed Tendulkar. Instead of
retreating to the dressing room, Tendulkar stormed into the TWI TV
control room to watch the replays in the company of match referee
'Cammie' Smith. Neither was allowed to express his views but
Trauma

225

Tendulkar could be seen shaking his head while Smith draped a
consoling arm around him. Play had already resumed and there was
no way the decision could have been reversed. But by now missiles
were raining down on the fielders and Akram led his team off.
ICC presidentJagmohan Dalmiya, in his own backyard, persuaded
Tendulkar to accompany him round the ground in a bid to pacify the
crowd. Mter a break of over an hour, play re-started, though the crowd
and the Indian camp were still seething. So, was the decision correct
or not? The rule book states a batsman can be given not out in such a
situation only if he leaves the crease to avoid the possibility ofbeing
injured. That was not the case, as Tendulkar had not spotted Akhtar in
his path. The only question which remained unanswered was whether
Akhtar had deliberately obstructed the batsman's path.
Raju Bharathan, writing in the Sportstar (13 March 1999), certainly
thought so.
Shoaib Akhtar was showing himself to be no more than a skilful
practitioner of the modern-day stratagem of'crossing the path'
of the batsman (running to the bowler's end) in such an artful
way as to make it look as if he was doing nothing more than
posturing himself to receive the Nadeem Khan throw. That
Akhtar (from the pin pointed corner ofhis left eye) saw Sachin
come dashing down and created that 'gap' between his legs for
1endulkar's bat to 'find', is a fact. But then nothing that Akhtar
did here could be legally viewed as the action replay of a man
studiedly blocking Sachin's way.
Pakistan captain Wasim Akram could have exercised his
prerogative and withdrawn the appeal, though there would have been
all hell to pay across the border ifhe had done so. Reportedly, Pakistan
manager Shahryar Khan (a career diplomat) and Pakistan Cricket
Board chairman Khalid Mehmood were keen to make the gesture of
gettiJ1g Tendulkar recalled. But coach Javed Miandad put his foot
down and the decision stayed.
Jt is doubtful if the crowd would have reacted the way it did if the
226

Sachin

batsman had been any other than their favourite. VSrivatsa captured
the mood well when he wrote in the Times ifIndia: 'Tendulkar is the
body and soul of Indian cricket, Every time he gets out cheaply his
teammates and millions of cricket fans miss a heartbeat or two and
today their hearts must have ached seeing the way he got out.'
Sadly, there was more trouble on the final morning. India needed
65 to win with four wickets in hand. And the match ended up being
played virtually 'in camera' with only the media, officials and club
members present after the spectators had been brutally chased away
by the Kolkata police. Stones and other objects were once again hurled
on to the ground when three quick wickets fell and India were on the
brink, at 231 for 9. Dalmiya was adamant that there would not be a
repeat of the 1996 World Cup semi-final. A recurrence would have
proved a huge embarrassment and could have resulted in the
blacklisting ofKolkata as an international venue.
So, three hours of police action later, the game resumed. It lasted
only ten minutes and folloWing Akhtar's removal oflast man Venkatesh
Prasad, the frenzied Pakistani celebrations began.
Subsequently, a high-scoring draw ensued in Colombo between
India and Sri Lanka. Tendulkar's nineteenth century on the final day
must have also been one ofhis easiest (and most unsatisfying), as the
match was dead and buried by then.
Pakistan were already assured of a place in the final when they
took on Sri Lanka in the last league match at Lahore. Determined to
ensure that India would not meet them in the final at Dhaka, they
cynically gifted away bonus points to Sri Lanka. The final, four days
later, was a cakewalk as Pakistan romped home by an innings and 175
runs. But the manner of their victory left a sour taste.
By now, the strain on Tendulkar's back was going from bad to
worse. The World Cup was not far away and yet, there lay ahead of the
team even more one-day tournaments. The Pepsi tri-series with
Pakistan and Sri Lanka at home was to be played in March and the
BCCI was frantically trying to dispel all talk of Tendulkar's injury
keeping him out of action-perhaps to keep the sponsors quiet. Three
weeks before the opening match, the inimitable Board secretary J.Y.
Trauma

227

Lele came up with one o(his characteristic comments on the issue.
The report that Sachin's family wanted him to take a break was, he
said, 'absolutely bogus. It is absurd and there is no truth in it at all.'
Needless to say, the 'bogus' statement turned out to be true, and a
reluctant Indian team went through their paces, to be beaten by
Pakistan in the final.
There had been rumblings of dissent within the Indian camp about
the event, with many players feeling the strain of so much non-stop
cricket. The Board, though, would have none of it. The result was a
series of listless performances by a jaded Indian team ag:tinst the
rampaging Pakistanis. From there it was back to Sharjah and another
tri-series, this time with Pakistan and England, just a month before
the start of the World Cup in England. Once again, India were without
the still-resting Tendulkar, and once again they lost in the final to
Pakistan.
But there was another honour for Sachin that year. On 23 March
1999, he was back at the Rashtrapati Bhavan for another 'audience'
with President K.R. Narayanan. This time, it was to receive the Padma
Shri, India's fourth highest civilian honour. 'I am very proud of you
and carry on the good work,' were the President's words as he handed
over the award.
Will he, won't he?' was the question for millions offans. With the
World Cup round the corner, the speculation over Tendulkar's fitness
reached fever pitch. He had flown to England for treatment from a
back specialist. It was thought the intense heat and humidity in
Chennai might have triggered off the pain. There was a huge sigh of
relief, not only from India but the whole cricket world, when he was
declared fit for the World Cup. But after the trauma of the back injury,
tragedy was lurking round the corner.

228

Sachin

