Musical Chairs

He has played me better than anybody.-Shane Warne
The third ODI against Sri Lanka at Margao on 28 December 1997 was
Sachin Tendulkar's last in charge before he was sacked on 2January.
India lost the match by five wickets and there were rumours that the
captain had asked to be relieved ofhis duties. The disastrous Sharjah
tournament was played in between the Test and the three-match ODI
series against the Sri Lankans at home. The defeat meant Tendulkar
had lost 31 of the 54 oms in which he had led since taking over in
August 1996. Only 17 were won, five were abandoned, and one was
tied.
His batting record in the 54 matches was below par-1739 runs at
the average of37, with four 100s and ten 50s. In 17 Test matches as
captain, he had 1195 runs at 45. 96, with four 1OOs and four 50s. There
were three wins, four defeats and ten draws in these Tests. The figures
suggest that while his Test performance remained largely unaffected,
his batting in oms had suffered to some extent. Harsha Bhogle had
this to say in the Spottstar (25 October 1997), nearly three months
before Tendulkar's sacking: 'It is not the number of runs that he has
scored, or hasn't, that causes as much concern as the personality he
seems to project now. Tendulkar could always punish good ball and
bad alike and offer more than one shot to a ball. He demolished
bowlers, he didn't kill them softly. Today he seems to stumble
momentarily in the gulf that has ruined the best; in that hrief moment
where he asks himself, "should I or shouldn't I?"'

Of equal concern to genuine cricket fans was the change in
appearance that Bhogle pointed out. 'Tertdulkar had a carefree boyish
look to him two years ago. Today, he seems a worried man. Look at a
photograph of him then and place it alongside one of today's and you
will see two different men.' Tendulkarwas interviewed by the Telegraph
(1998) and asked ifitwas easier not being captain. 'Let's say you have
more time, or well, all the time to think about your own game. Perhaps
as captain, I didn't get the time to think about my own game. I kept
thinking about everybody else. I'm not complaining, still.. .. ' As for
his first reaction to the sacking: 'Initially, yes, I was upset. But those
first few days I fell back on my family.'
The reinstatement ofAzhar was not the first instance of its kind in
Indian cricket. The circumstances, though, were certainly unusual,
for the BCCI officials had,just a few weeks before his reappointment,
said they would be giving him a dressing down for his irresponsible
batting in Sha~jah.
Ramakant Desai dismissed all talk ofTendulkar having tendered
his resignation. He said: 'We removed Tendulkar because he could
not take the pressure ofboth batting and captaincy.' This is something
Tendulkar and his supporters have always denied.
Prem Panicker of Rediffcom was ruthless in his criticism of the
selectors in an article published on 2 January 1998, the day of the
drama (which came to be called 'musical chairs'). It is worth
reproducing in full as it vividly conveys both the drama of the occasion
and the double standards and subterfuge of the National Selection
Committee.
Sachin Sacked, Azhar Back!
By Prem Panicker
Sachin Tendulkar was today removed as India's cricket captain.
Mohammad Azharuddin was reinstated in the job he lost at
the conclusion of the England tour of 1996.
And the selectorial cow jumped over the moon!
New year or no, some things never change-and the
182

Sachin

With Vinod Kambli after their world-record partnership for Sharadashram
Vidyamandir in the Lord Harris Shield (Feburary 1988). Courtesy: Marine Sports
Publishing Division

On his first tour (Pakistan, November-December 1989). Standing (1. tor.): Manoj
Prabhakar, Navjot Singh Sidhu, W.V. Raman, Kiran More, Vivek Razdan, Arshad
Ayub, Sanjay Manjrekar, Vishwas Raut (Physio). Middle row (1. tor.): Chandu
Borde (manager), Kapil Dev, K. Srikkanth (captain), Ravi Shastri, Mohammad
Azharuddin, Maninder Singh . Front row (1. tor.): Salil Ankola, Sachin, Ajay
Sharma, Raman Lamba.

Test debut v Pakistan at Karachi (November 1989).

Cover-driving on the way to his maiden Test century at Old Trafford
(August 1990).

[n action during his 148 not out in the third Test at Sydney (January 1992).

Phil DeFreitas stands by as Tendulkar gets to his first Test century at home in
the second Test at Chennai (February 1993).

Heading for his first One-day International century v Australia at the
R . Premadasa Stadium in Colombo (9 September 1994).

First Test as captain (playing for the Border-Gavaskar Trophy) with Australian
captain Mark Taylor and match referee John Reid at Feroze Shah Kotla, New
Delhi (10 October 1996).

Holding the Border-Gavaskar Trophy, with the batting legends on either side
of him.

Ian Healy watches as Tendulkar drives past a diving Shane Warne during his
unbeaten 155 in the second Test at Chennai (February 1998).

Adam Gilchrist is behind the stumps as Tendulkar goes on the rampage in
Sharjah. Warne is the bowler (24 April 1998).

Australian captain Steve Waugh offers his congratulations as Tendulkar 's
teammates look on.

With father Prof. Ramesh Tendulkar (to
his left) and Vinod Kambli (extreme left)
during a function in Mumbai in February
1996. Also in the photo are former Test
cricketers Ajit Wadekar and Madhav
Mantri (partly visible). Courtesy: Mid Day

Brother Ajit Tendulkar who
played a major role in the
formative stages of his career
(September 2001).

Sachin and Anjali at their wedding reception in Mumbai (May 1995).

Batting against Kenya at Bristol in the 1999 World Cup, soon after returning
from his father's funeral in Mumbai (31 May).

Captain Tendulkar with coach Kapil Devin New Delhi (November 1999).

Chatting with Brian Lara in Singapore (September 1999).

The first to get 10,000 runs in One-day Internationals: v Australia at Indore
(31 March 2001).

Giving thanks after Test century number 25 : third Test v Australia at Chennai
(20 March 2001).

Celebrating One-day International wicket number 100: Steve Waugh at, Margao
(6 April2001).

The author with Ramakant Achrekar
'sir' in Mumbai (September 2001).

The 'new Sachin'? With Virender
Sehwag during his century knock on
debut at Bloemfontein
(3 November 2001).

With Sir Garfield Sobers after receiving the Player of the Tournament award
for the 2003 World Cup at Johannesburg.

On the way to the first ODI century by an Indian in Pakistan at
Rawalpindi in March 2004. Courtesy: The Hindu Photo
Archives

The world record 35th Test century in New Delhi in December 2005 .
Courtesy: The Hindu Photo Archives

With captain M.S. Dhoni at a function in New Delhi after the triumph in the
tri-series in March 2008 . On the right is Robin Uthappa.

CB ODI

Crossing Brian Lara's record for most Test
runs at Mohali in October 2008. Applauding
is Australian fast bowler Peter Siddle.

Celebrating at Chennai with Yuvraj Singh
after beating England and reaching his 41st
Test century. Courtesy: The New Indian
Express

alarmingly contradictory face oflndian cricket is first on that
list.
Consider recent history. Mter a dream run leading India in
Tests and one dayers on home soil, the first cracks appear in
Azharuddin's captaincy when, flying in the face of perceived
wisdom, he wins the toss and opts to bat second against Sri
Lanka in the World Cup semifinal at the Eden Gardens,
Calcutta. The clearly underprepared track crumbles and Sanath
Jayasuriya has India in a spin, leading to a riot and the
abandonment of the game, which is awarded to Sri Lanka by
match referee Clive Lloyd.
The cracks widen during India's disastrous tour of England.
The team stumbles from one bad performance to another,
Navjot Singh Si9hu adds controversy to confusion when he
abandons the tour, media reports and, indeed, the report of the
tour manager speak of a disinterested captain who has totally
cut himself offfrom the rest of the team and spends all his time
with his inamorata.
Ironically, at that point in time, Azhar has really done little
wrong. The defeat in England owed to factors other than the
captaincy-the cold weather told on the bowlers, especially the
spinners; batsmen found their fingers cramping, fielders
lumbered around in clothing more suited to an arctic
expedition ....
l.ook hack at that tour, and you realise that as the biting cold of
winter eased towards the end of the tour, both batsmen and
bowlers began performing a lot better-though the
improvement came too late to do any good in terms of overall
results.
The team returns. And Azharuddin is sacked. The selectors
replace him with Sachin Tendulkar-and the nation goes into
collective frenzy, expecting the master batsman to produce
miracles. Sachin for his part records fine wins over Australia
and South Africa in Tests at home, then leads the team to the
Titan Cup ODI triangular against the same opponents, before
Musical Chairs

183

taking off to South Mrica where the team is caught on the
backfoot on the fastest wicket in the world, and goes down 1-0
before it can even catch its collective breath. From there on, it is
all downhill, till the third Test, when India's bid for victory is
thwarted by a combination of rain and what can best be described
as 'patriotic' ground staff.
Again, after a bad start, India storms into the final of the SBI
ODI series-and an exciting run chase made more difficult by
rain and a consequent readjustment of the target later-lose,
but emerge the real heroes for a brilliant performance.
From there to the West Indies-and an eminently forgettable
performance by the team. And in retrospect, it is here that
Tendulkar's troubles with the selectors begin. Ahead of the tour,
he asks for an off spinner to combat the Windies array oflefthanders. The request is turned down by selectors on the grounds
that there are no off spinners of quality in India (never mind
that the same bunch, later, rediscovered Rajesh Chauhan).
Tendulkar protests. Protests again when the totally unknown
Noel David is flown over after Srinath breaks down.
His protests, for the first time, lead the selectors to realise that
he is no rubber stamp, to meekly toe the line.
Meanwhile, master batsman Mohammad Azharuddin slides.
Badly. Initially it is seen as loss ofform. Then, as the run outs
mount, as instances of his over-ruling the captain's instructions
surface (for instance, in the St Vincent's one dayer), the
groundswell of opinion turns against him.
He is dropped from the Indian side to play the Independence
Cup quadrangular. And the selectors-the same bunch, mind
you, who are doing duty right now-explain that it is his lack
of commitment, his apparent disinterest in the game, that has
led to his ouster.
Reinstated for the Asia Cup and the Test series in Sri Lanka,
Azharuddin comes good with the bat.
At this point, a section of the selectors openly come out in
favour of the sacking of Tendulkar and reinstatement of
184

Sachin

Azharuddin as India's captain. The timing is important, herethis is bifore Toronto. At this point, Sachin Tendulkar is doing
very well with the bat. And yet, sections of the media carry on
the inspired campaign-that Tendulkar is feeling the pressure
of captaincy, that his batting is falling apart, that India's losses
are attributable to this factor and this factor alone.
The five game Sahara Cup in Toronto sees Azhar still in fine
touch-while Tendulkar hits a bad patch. Pakistan, and the
three oms for the Jinnah Cup, and Azhar is still doing okay, if a
shade under the form he showed in Sri Lanka and Canada.
However, the selectors, who have been making a case for the
sacking of Tendulkar, fail to muster a majority within the
committee. Further, the 5-3 win record in eight games on the
trot against Pakistan make it rather embarrassing, for them, to
talk of the sacking of the skipper. And board president Raj Singh
Dungarpur steps in to read the riot act, and indicate firmly that
Tendulkar should not be tampered with.
Then comes Sharjah-and a performance from Azharuddin
that is so downright shocking that international television
commentators of the order of Geoffrey Boycott and Mark
Nichols comment adversely. Sunil Gavaskar, also on live
television, is scathing. The media reports are uniformly
condemnatory.
And as Mohammad Azharuddin gets run out-in a fashion
that would discredit a novice-in the key game against Pakistan,
a section of fans at the ground hold up a banner that sums up
the collective mood. 'Manoj Prabhakar, you are right!', reads
the banner, referring to the former all-rounder's allegations of
bribery and match-fixing within the Indian squad.
The national selectors, shaken by the storm, summon
Azharuddin to a closed door meeting. And at the end of it,
Ramakant Desai, chairman of selectors, announces that he has
been reprimanded, and pardoned.
Board secretary J aywant Lele, who was in Sharjah at the time
of the selection committee meeting in question, announces on
Musical Chairs

185

his return that he believes Azharuddin should have been sacked.
Saying that he was basing his views on the evidence of having
seen Azhar play, at first hand, in Sharjah, Lele says, 'The national
selectors should have shown more courage and dropped
Azharuddin. Reputations should not count, only performance
should be the criterion ... .'
Follows three more oms, against Sri Lanka. Azhar's bad run
of form continues.
At the end of it, Azharuddin is made captain oflndia!
Not just for the three-nation tournament in Bangladesh
beginningJanuary 10. But also for the three Test series against
Australia to follow. And for the triangular ODI tournament after
that.
Contrast this with Sachin Tendulkar, who was recently
appointed 'captain for 27 days.'
Lele is totally, completely silent.
So, interestingly, is Ramakant Desai, chairman of selectors,
who stumbles in the face of acerbic, at times angry, questioning
by the media at the press briefing after the selection committee
meeting in Bombay on Friday.
Desai opens his account in style, by saying 'There was no predetermined move to sack Tendulkar. All five selectors felt it
would be a great disservice to Indian cricket if he continued his
lean trot in one dayers because of the extra burden of captaincy.'
No pre-determined move? When, both before and after the
Asia Cup, two selectors have systematically, under the guise of
anonymity (the heck with the no names policy-the two
selectors in question are Sambaran Bannerjee and Shivlal
Yadav) spoken to the media about their determination to sack
Tendulkar? No 'pre-determination'? When the board president,
then in London, is constrained to telephone the national
selectors ahead of the Sharjah tournament to insist that they do
not sack Tendulkar? No 'pre-determination'? When national
news magazine The Week carries a cover story, quoting a
national selector and an unnamed Beer official as saying that
186

Sachin

there was a move, with sanction from a section of the board, to
sack Tendulkar? And when the same magazine, and others,
openly allege that a cartel of bookmakers, unable to make any
headway with Tendulkar, have begun exerting monetary
influence on the selectors to axe him?
The 'no pre-determination' number by Desai is flayed by the
media. A volley of questions follow. Desai subsides into silence.
Finding him lost for answers, his colleague, Kishen Rungta,
steps into the breach. And comes up with some of the best
specimens of double-talk seen in living memory. We present
samples:
'The reason why the selectors fell back on Azharuddin was
that he was the only player, other than Tendulkar, to be a
certainty in both forms of the game .... '
Oh really? Granted that Rahul Dravid has been droppednever mind, for now. the wisdom or lack thereof of that particular
move-how about Sourav Ganguly, to name just another
certainty? Again, wasn't this the same bunch of selectors who,
just a while ago, spoke of having one captain-Ajay Jadejafor one-dayers and another for Tests? So why does the captain
for Bangladesh have to be a certainty in 'both forms of the
game'?
No reply.
Wasn't Azharuddin originally dropped because he was seen
to be an unimaginative captain? No, says Kishen Rungta. 'He
was sacked due to a turbulent period in his personal life. He
had remained tense and preoccupied, which showed in his
leadership. He is now settled back as a family man, married to
Miss BijJani, he has got an amicable divorce from his first wife
and his parents have also accepted him,' is Rungta's reasoning.
In other words, the most essential qualification for becoming
captain oflndia is a happy married life. Which, of course, rules
out the bachelor boys, Dravid,Jadeja eta!. But last we heard,
Sachin Tendulkar was perfectly happy with wife Anjali and
newborn daughter Sara. And Ganguly, to cite another name,
Musical Chairs

187

was very happy with wife Dona. Or do the selectors know
something about the personal lives of these players that the rest
o(usdon't?
Was there any doubt aboutAzhar's commitment to the side?
Of course not, says Rungta. Then why was he summoned to
the selectors' meeting, ahead of the Sharjah tour? 'We simply
wanted to give him a pep talk, to boost his spirits which seemed
low after so many negative things were written and spoken
about him in the media and on television.'
There was no question of his ability and his sincerity? 'No,
that was never in doubt by any of us!'
The statement is a downright lie.
'Azharuddin was pardoned,' Desai told the press at the end of
the meeting on December 18. The members of the national
press were present. The words were quoted, verbatim, in all
media reports the last day.
However, there is more still. Asked why Tendulkar was sacked,
Rungta on behalf of Desai said that the only criterion was bad
batting, and not any perceived defects in the captaincy.
If that is the case, then why is Tendulkar not captain of the
Test side, considering that he is aggregating over 1,000 runs,
and averaging over 63, in Tests this year-the highest of any of
the Indian batsmen?
No reply.
But more of the same. We wanted to make a last ditch effort to
avoid the unpleasant step of axing Tendulkar, so we asked him
to bat lower down in one dayers. This, however, failed to produce
any extraordinary results, he got only two 50-plus scores in six
innings, so we were forced to take this step.'
So the selectors determine these things on the basis of runs
scored. Interesting.
Now examine the facts. The selectors ask Tendulkar to bat
lower down. He does so, in six matches. His sequence of scores,
beginning with Sharjah, are as follows: Versus England, 91 off
87 deliveries. Versus West Indies, 1 off2. Versus Pakistan, 3 off
188

Sachin

4. Versus Sri Lanka in the first om, 82 off 86. Second om,
abandoned. Third om, 6 off13. And one of those innings, the
82 off86 undefeated, is a match-winner.
Compare Azharuddin's sequence, in the same period, in the
same order: 3 otT19, 4 otiS, 39 otT 57,28 not out otT 46,24 otT36.
In fact, against Sri Lanka, Azhar is ranked below Tendulkar,
who tops with 88, Ganguly (73),Jadeja (60) and Sidhu (53),
with 52 runs to his name. In other words, Azharuddin, whose
form and commitment are not in doubt by the selectors, ranks
last among the 6 specialist batsmen in the side.
Therefore, he-deservedly, in the opinion of the national
selectors-gets to lead the side. Because for the selectors, statistics
are not a beacon light but a crutch-to be used, selectively,
when they do not have a logical leg to stand on.
It is not my intention here to belittle the achievements of
Azharuddin-who, by any yardstick, deserves to be ranked
among the top five batsmen India has produced in
contemporary (even, perhaps, in all time) history. In fact, a
look through our own archives will indicate that at the
conclusion of the England tour of 1996, when there was a
collective demand for his head, Rediffconsistently argued that
his personal life should not be the yardstick used to judge him,
that the team failure in England was collective and could not
be laid at the door of the captain alone, and that it was bad
policy to sack him at that point.
However, applying the same yardstick, we maintain that it is
even worse policy to reappoint him now. His form is suspect,
his commitment even more so (Rungta notwithstanding, do
keep in mind the selectors' move in calling him for a 'reprimand
and pardon'). If captaincy can have a negative impact on Sachin
Tendulkar, how much more then, by the same logic, could it
impact on an already struggling Azharuddin? Wherein lies the
logic, here?
Meanwhile Desai, once the storm of questioning about the
appointment of Azhar subsides, takes over from Rungta to
Musical Chairs

189

mouth an extempore elegy to Sachin Tendulkar. Samples:
~I of us have tremendous respect for Tendulkar, and not since
Gavaskar has anyone received so much admiration from all as
Tendulkar has got. But unfortunately, the selectors could not
come to any other conclusion for his batting failures in onedayers, except that it was due to the 'problem of captaincy.'
Interesting. How then do they account for the fact that
Tendulkar's average in Tests this year is higher than his lifetime
average? The 'problem of captaincy' adversely affects a player
when he is playing one-day cricket, and beneficially when he
is playing Test cricket?
More from Desai: 'The selectors have gone on record
appreciating Tendulkar's sportsmanship of taking all the blame
on himsel£ He is the type to carry on the battle. Very few captains
put their head on the block as he did, but we want him more as
run-scorer than as captain.'
And-as television anchors are so fond of saying-with this,
we come to the end oftoday's programme. The next installment
will be brought to you on Saturday, when the national selectors
meet to finalise the team for Dacca.
Tailpiece: Two peripheral issues need passing mention, here.
On Friday, the national selectors unveiled their latest theory to
explain why Sachin had done badly as captain, and why
Azharuddin was doing badly as a batsman. 'The media has
been writing irresponsibly, and putting pressure on the team,'
says Desai.
Right. The media chopped and changed teams at will. The
media held a gun to Tendulkar's head and asked him to bat at
number four (interestingly, Desai before the Sri Lanka series
vehemently denied that the selectors had asked Tendulkar to
bat lower down, and said that was a media-propagated lie; today,
Rungta confirms that the selectors had indeed done so in a 'last
ditch attempt' to avoid sacking him-so who is lying, here?).
The media consistently refused to give Tendulkar the team he
asked for. The media dictated that Prasad should not play in
190

Sachin

certain games. The media dropped Dravid. The media got
Azharuddin run out with some bad calling .... and so on ....
Right on, Mr Desai!
Meanwhile, was Sachin sacked, or did he quit? The last 48
hours have brought a spate of denials. From Desai, from Lele,
from Shivlal Yadav. Every denial is couched in the same way...
'No, we have not officially been informed of Tendulkar's
resignation .... '
Nice. The media reports, since denied with extreme heat, were
specific. They said in so many words that after the third ODI
against Sri Lanka, Tenduikar has told the selectors that he would
like to step down. He did not put it in writing, to 'whomsoever
it may concern'. And so the Beer establishment kept harping
on not having been informed 'officially'.
The most illuminating statement on this issue comes from
Desai. 'It is true that for some time now we have been debating
a change in captaincy. However, it must be made clear that any
decision on the matter will be our own decision, and not
Tendulkar's.'
In other words-'Sorry, Sachin, you can't quit, because we
want to sack you!'
By the way, friend Desai, when he said on Thursday that 'it is
true we have been debating a change in captaincy,' could not
foresee, poor chap, that 24 hours later, he would inform the
press at the briefing that there was 'no pre-determination about
the move to change captains'.
There was to be a tragic footnote to Desai's travails at the hands of
his fellow selectors and the media. Two months after Tendulkar's
sacking, he resigned on health grounds. A month later he was dead, at
58.
For Indian cricket, on its sickbed throughout 1997, the new year would
be one of robust health as it went on a title-winning spree. And for the
ex-captain, who would celebrate his twenty-fifth birthday in April, it
Musical Chairs

191

was perhaps his annus mirabilis. Whether this was a result ·of the
unburdening of the heavy baggage that the captaincy entailed, is open
to debate. But there is no doubt that in 1998 he was back to 'demolishing'
bowlers.
There appeared to be twin benefits to Indian cricket with the change
at the top. Tendulkar was back to his best in one-day games while
Azharuddin's added responsibilities appeared to bring out the best in
him again. At Dhaka in January 1998, the Indians recorded the most
amazing run chase in nearly 30 years of one-day cricket. The occasion
was Bangladesh's somewhat belated Silver Jubilee Independence Cup
in January. Both the captain and the ex-captain had an outstanding
tournament and combined to beat the hosts in the opening match.
With Bangladesh playing against India and Pakistan, there was little
doubt about who would contest the best-of-three finals. It was the
outcome that would be a surprise.
After their century stand in the first match, Azhar and Tendulkar
were once again involved in a big stand as India beat Pakistan by 18
runs in the preliminary game. Azhar was Man of the Match for his
100. But it was Tendulkar who made it a match to remember. His
fiftieth score of 50-plus (he made 67) was smashed from 44 balls as the
two raced to a stand worth 112 from just 14 overs, taking India to 245
for 7 from 3 7 overs (the match was shortened by fog).
Pakistan's hopes rested on Inzamam-ul-Haq. Their top scorer with
77, he was caught and bowled by Tendulkar-his fiftieth ODI wicket.
Sachin also held three more catches to round off a sparkling all-round
display. India took their form into the first final, coasting home by
eight wickets with nine overs to spare. Once again,Tendulkar was in
the thick of things. He had bowling figures of7-0-45-3 and then he
put the Pakistani bowlers to the sword with 95 runs from 78 balls,
with five sixes and six fours. In this innings he became the youngest to
make 6000 001 runs. His opening stand of 159 from 25 overs with
Ganguly made the task of chasing 213 for victory an easy one.
Coach Anshuman Gaekwad had given Navjot Singh Sidhu the
task of attacking off-spinner Saqlain Mushtaq. But Tendulkar would
have none of it. Though Saqlain was the most successful bowler of
192

Sachin

the tournament, Tendulkar went a,fter him with a vengeance. In the
second final, when he was bowled in the second over by Azhar
Mahmood for 1, the batting folded up for 189 and Pakistan wrapped it
up easily to take the tournament to the decider.
There too, it appeared to be Pakistan all the way as Saeed Anwar
and Ijaz Ahmed went after the bowling and helped amass 314 for 5
from 48 overs. The target seemed out oflndia's reach, though they
were given a flying start with Tendulkar smashing 41 from 26 balls.
Azhar gambled by promoting Robin Singh as the pinch hitter.
Amazingly, the ploy worked. Amazing because it had been tried by
Tendulkar a month earlier at Sharjah against Pakistan. Robin had got
out first ball on that occasion and the captain faced the flak for his
decision. This time, the left-hander stayed long enough to score 82 in
a stand of 179 runs from 29.5 overs with centurion Ganguly. That
took the score to 250 for 1 in 38 overs and now the chase was on, with
ten overs remaining. Six Indian wickets tumbled in the gathering
gloom. The winning hit came from the penultimate ball and the
world record for the highest winning total and the title was India's.
(Australia would go on to equal and then break the record.) Ganguly
was Man of the Match for his superb 124 while Tendulkar took the
Man of the Series award.
Tendulkar has pointed out in subsequent interviews how the
captaincy can hinge on decisions like the promotion of Robin Singh
coming off or not. That was not the only irony of the final match. At
258 for 2 in 39.3 overs, the umpires and the Pakistanis left the field
with the light fading fast. But skipper Azhar stood his ground. India
would have lost if the match had been called off at that stage as they
needed 289 in 40 overs. But the match referee persuaded the umpires
to continue the match which was then played with the floodlights
switched on. This was before the National Stadium was equipped
with floodlights for cricket. The lights the Indians played under were
tneant for football. And the match referee was a gentleman by the
name of Mike Denness, the former England captain who would play
a rnajor role in Indian cricket three years later. One of the keys to the
team's success was the restoration ofTendulkar to the opening slot.
Musical Chairs

193

The new captain had been very particular about it and the selectors
had had to acquiesce.
The visit of the Australian team to India a month later was keenly
anticipated. While India went without a Test win in 1997, Australia
were sweeping all before them. Their record since 1994-95 had elevated
them to the status of undisputed world champions. It was 12 years
since the Aussies had been in India for a full series. In 1996 there was
the one-off Test on an under-prepared pitch in Delhi which India
easily won. But Shane Warne was injured and not on that trip. This
time too, their bowling would be weakened in the absence of Glenn
McGrath and Jason Gillespie, with Paul Reiffel fit only for the first
Test. The focus was on Warne who had come a long way since his
disastrous debut series against the Indians in Australia in 1991-92. He
was now considered the greatest bowler in the world, just as the tag of
greatest batsman rested on Sachin's shoulders. Their duel would be
the battle within the bigger battle and its outcome was expected to tilt
the series one way or the other.
Before the series, Tendulkar's preparations consisted ofgettingsome
local leg-spinners to bowl to him on a pitch where the area outside the
leg stump had deliberately been roughened. The practice held him in
good stead. The tourists' opening match was against Ranji Trophy
champions Mumbai at the Brabourne Stadium. Led by Tendulkar,
they inflicted a crushing ten-wicket defeat on the Aussies and the
captain's own contribution set the tone for the series. In a decade of
first-class cricket, Tendulkar had not come close to a double century.
That would change now as he went after Warne to put the visitors on
the back foot at the very start of their campaign.
Australia declared at 305 for 8 in their first innings. The fireworks
came after that. Warne had figures of 16-1-116-0, his worst in firstclass cricket. Tcndulkar was 204 not out, his best in first-class cricket.
M umbai declared on 410 tor 6 and a demoralized Australia crumbled
to 135 in their second innings to go down by ten wickets. From the
Indian team's point ofview and from 1endulkar's too, this pertormance
was vital. It put a scare into the Aussie camp and it was downhill all the
194

Sachin

way for them after that. Warne was hit for 23 runs in his first two overs.
Tendulkar reached his first 50 from 46 balls and his century came
from 90 with 15 fours and a six. By the time he declared, Tendulkar
was on 204, scored in 269 minutes from 192 balls, with 25 fours and
two sixes. The first bout against Warne had ended in a knockout.
Less than ten days later, it was time for the real thing-the first Test
at Chennai. Once again, Tendulkar employed the rough-outsidethe-leg-stump tactics at the Chennai nets. This time, though, he had
bowlers of the calibre ofKumble and L.Sivaramakrishnan bowling to
him.
India won the toss and took first strike. Openers Mongia and Sidhu
gave them an excellent start with a stand of 122. But the innings fell
away after that and 257 was a disappointing total. Warne picked up
four wickets and the prize one was that of the master himself. In the
space of five balls, the full house at Chepauk first roared with delight
and then was stunned into silence. All the Warne v Tendulkar hype
had obviously got to Sachin. The first ball was smashed past the bowler.
The fifth dipped as he rushed the bowler and turned just enough to
take the edge of his flailing bat. The ball flew to Taylor's right at slip
and the captain clung to it as if his life depended on it. The Aussies
were naturally cock-a-hoop. Tendulkar had been too hasty in trying
to assert his authority over Warne and had paid the price_. Australia
had a first innings lead of71. But they were to bat last on a spinning
track and it wasn't enough. India piled up 418 for 4 declared in their
second knock and then ran through the unofficial world champions,
to come out winners by the convincing margin of 179 runs.
Tendulkar walked to the wicket half an hour into the fourth Jay,
with the score on 115 tor 2, after Sidhu had softened up the bowlers
with a hard-hitting 64. His ability to find the smallest gaps in the field
allied with the power of his shots resulted in an unforgettJble innings
of155 not out-the only century of the Test. It was the fifteenth of his
career, in his fifty-second Test. By now the pitch was wearing rapiJly
and Warne would no doubt have been in his element against any team
except India at home, and any batsman except Tendulkar.
Sachin's two previous tons against Australia in the 1991-92 series,
Musical Chairs

195

at Sydney and Perth, had only contributed to a draw and a heavy
defeat. This time it played a crucial part in India's victory. 'Taking into
account the pitch conditions and the fact that he was facing arguably
the best wrist spinner of them all, Tendulkar's 199-ball innings was
one of the greatest batting exhibitions of modern times,' wrote OJ
Rutnagur in Wisden Cricket Monthly (May 1998).
Warne was reduced to desperation by Tendulkar's uncanny
judgement of the direction and degree of spin from the bowler's hand.
Leg-spinners pitching on the stumps were left alone, while a googly
was read early and ruthlessly disposed of. To make things worse for
the bowler, his flipper wasn't working either. All those hours spent
playing against the leggies in the 'nets', pitching in the rough, now
paid off for Tendulkar. Bowling round the wicket, Warne pushed
Dravid into his shell. But Tendulkar was determined not to allow the
bowler to gain the upper hand in their absotbing personal duel.
Batsmen around the world for many years had floundered against the
leg-spinner pitched on the rough on a turning wicket. But the Indian
master was made of sterner stuff. He smashed the ball over midwicket,
had a narrow escape-then did it again. The calculated risk had come
off splendidly and now he was unstoppable. The Aussie bubble had
been burst and from then on an Indian victory was almost inevitable.
So was Sachin's Man of the Match award.
The first Test had been a contest till Australia's last-day capitulation.
The second at Kolkata turned out to be a rout, the visitors suffering
one of their biggest defeats of all time. India's 633 for 5 declared was
their highest against Australia and the biggest total by any side at
Eden Gardens. Australia crumbled to 233 and 181 and were crushed
by an innings and 219 runs. This time it was the captain who played
the leading hand with the bat. Azhar's 163 not out was his fifth in
seven Tests at Kolkata. Laxman, Sidhu and Dravid all came close, but
fell short of their tons. Once again, Tendulkar was in a murderous
mood and once again Warne was his main target. He reached his 50
from 60 balls and hit 12 fours and two sixes before playing an impetuous
shot to be out for 79.
196

Sachin

India maintained their mastery on their own soil. The Australians
admitted that India at home was their biggest challenge. The series
was decided, and Azharuddin held the Border-Gavaskar Trophy that
India had first won in 1996.
Australia salvaged some of their wounded pride by claiming the
'dead' third Test at Bangalore by eight wickets. It was a case of too little
too late, and once again Tendulkar proved he was peerless, with a
sparkling 177. It was the sixth time in 16 centuries that he had crossed
150 and the double ton would have been his but for a rush ofblood. A
measure of his domination was that he scored 177 out of a total of281
made while he was at the crease, and struck an extraordinary 29
boundaries plus three sixes.
There could only be one candidate for the Man of the Series.
In his autobiography published three years later, Warne admitted
that Tendulkar had had the best of their exchanges during the series.
His immaculate footwork and his confidence to go for his strokes
were admirable, and bowling to him was actually a pleasure, said
Warne.
Tendulkar carried his form against the Aussies into the Pepsi tri-nation
one-day series, where Zimbabwe joined the two teams. The surprise
came in the opening match at Kochi which India won by 41 runs.
This time Tendulkar won his customary Man of the Match award for
his success, not with the bat but with the ball-a first for him. The
huge Indian total of309 for 5 was built around Ajay Jadeja's 105 not
out.
The challenge was taken up by the Australians who started off
with an opening stand of 101. They lost three quick wickets after that
before captain Steve Waugh and Michael Bevan put them back on
track with a partnership that threatened to take the game away from
India. Azhar introduced Tendulkar into the attack more out of
compulsion than anything else. He made an immediate impact and
slowed the run tlow in tandem with Kumble. Mixing up his slow
medium-pacers with leg breaks, he foxed Waugh with a slower one
Musical Chairs

197

and the ball was gently tapped back into the bowler's hands. Next, he
had Darren Lehmann plumb lbw for eight. Bevan and Tom Moody
struck a flurry ofboundaries before Bevan stepped out to Tendulkar in
a bid to increase the run rate. He was stumped by Mongia for 65 and
was followed by Moody, also stumped, from the first ball ofTendulkar's
next over to put him on a hat-trick. He almost got it when Damien
Martyn hit the balljustwide of the bowler. From 201 for 3, the batting
had crumbled to 254 for 8 in 11 overs. Tendulkar got his first fivewicket haul when Martyn was caught at deep mid-off. Australia were
soon all out for 268. Tendulkar's analysis was 10-2-32-5, beating his
previous best of 4-34 against the West Indies at Sharjah in 1991. 'I am
myself surprised by this show,' he said later, at the awards presentation.
Not so surprising was another Tendulkar ton in the Kanpur game
against the hapless Australians, who must have been sick and tired of
the sight ofhis broad bat by now. The Australian total of222 for 9 was
made to look insignificant by an opening stand of 175 between
Ganguly and the century-maker. But the Green Park track was not an
easy batting surface; the ball turned and kept low. Tendulkar decided
the best way would be to get to the pitch of the ball and go for the
bowling if India had to qualify for the final. He did just that, with
devastating effect. His seven sixes (plus five fours) were an Indian
record, beating the six sixes hit by Kapil Dev against Zimbabwe in the
1983 World Cup. The innings took just 89 balls. Waugh admitted that
his bowlers could do little with the batsman in such brilliant form.
'He played a great innings,' he conceded.
Australia won two and lost two of their league matches, India won
all four, while the Zimbabweans were gallant in defeat, losing all four
by narrow margins. The victory in the final for Australia then was
certainly against the run of play and came as a huge consolation to the
exhausted tourists who had criss-crossed the country for six weeks.
Waugh and his men had a plan for the final in Delhi and it worked.
With the star openers sent back with just 5R on the board, they steadily
tightened their grip on the match and then sealed it with Bevan and
Waugh batting them through to victory.
198

Sachin

But if Australia, and Warne in particular, were relieved at the end
of the tour, they could hardly have foreseen what was awaiting them
in Sharjah just days later.

Musical Chairs

1941