Double-Then Trouble

I always wanted this double very badly.-Sachin Tendulkar

By October 1999, Sachin Tendulkar was back in the team after his
enforced break. His first Test series was at home against New Zealand,
a relatively soft start to his second innings as captain-or should one
say, follow-on? Tendulkar was joined by a new coach, Kapil Dev, who
had taken over from Anshuman Gaekwad. Kapil Dev had been with
Tendulkar in his debut series, in Pakistan in 1989, and the two were
known to be close. It was hoped this would open a new chapter in
Indian cricket and that the dynamic Kapil could transfer his magic as
a player to his new role as coach. Their first day in office was, however,
anything but pleasant.
On a slightly damp pitch at Mohali, Stephen Fleming won the
toss, put India into bat and shot them out for a shocking 83 in a mere
27 overs. Tendulkar ( 18) was one of only three batsmen to reach double
figures. New Zealand's lead was 132. But that was wiped offby new
openers Devang Gandhi and S.Ramesh in the second innings. This
time, the top five all crossed 50 and two reached double figuresRahul Dravid and the captain himself At times, it appeared Tendulkar
was batting from memory. Indeed, he survived a vociferous appeal for
lbw from the very first ball from Nathan Astle, which was turned
down by Sri Lankan umpire Peter Manuel. Eventually, India declared
at 505 for 3-the first time that a side dismissed for under 100 in their
first innings had crossed 500 in the second. Tendulkar's twentieth
century was a sketchy one, perhaps due to lack ofbatting practice. He
stayed at the crease for more than six and a half hours and got the

benefit of numerous lbw appeals.
It took a stubborn 73 by captain Stephen Fleming in the second
innings to stave off defeat as the visitors struggled to 251 for 7. But an
Indian victory was duly delivered by the spin bowlers in the next Test
at Kanpur. India coasted to victory by eight wickets, with the captain
himself rattling off 44 not out, from 39 balls, in the second innings of
83 for2.
The third and final Test at Ahmedabad should have been a triumph
for both Tendulkar and the team. Instead, after scoring his first Test
double century in a decade, Tendulkar courted controversy by his
refusal to enforce a follow-on after leading by 275 runs. The match
petered out into a draw and India took the series 1-0. The question of
why the follow-on was not enforced was later taken up by the CBI in
their investigation into match-fixing and corruption in Indian cricket.
The coach and captain would eventually be exonerated of all
wrongdoing late in 2001.
Sachin had recorded his first double century in first-class cricket
in 1998, for Mumbai against the touring Australians. It had taken
him five years to score his maiden om century and now, after ten
years, came his first double ton in an international Test. The New
Zealand attack may not have been the most potent in international
cricket. But, after all the pain and trauma resulting from his back
injury, it was indeed a sweet way to announce to the world of cricket
that he was back at his best.
India were 311 for 3 on the first day at Ahmedabad, with S.Ramesh
out for 110and Tendulkar batting on 104. He had earlier been dropped
at short third man by Astle on 93. Fleming had said then that his team
might pay a price for the lapse and that is precisely what happened.
The runs continued to pile up and Ganguly joined in the fun with
125. The 281 stand with Tendulkar for the fourth wicket was an Indian
record and the team declared at 583 for 7.
There had been talk earlier that Tendulkar had neither the stamina
nor the application to convert his bagful of Test tons into. double
centuries. Now he answered his critics with his longest innings yet:
494 minutes in all, during which he scored 217 from 343 balls. It was
246

Sachin

another psychological breakthrough, overtaking his previous highest
of179 against the West Indies at Nagpur in 1994. The 200 was reached
when he placed Vettori to mid-on for a single. Non-striker Ajay Jadeja
raced back to congratulate his captain. Sachin looked heavenwards in
thanks. The Matera Stadium was once again witness to a milestone.
This was the same ground where Sunil Gavaskar became the first to
reach 10,000 runs and where Kapil Dev broke Sir Richard Hadlee's
world Test wicket record. Sachin dedicated the double ton to his brother
Ajit: 'He has been there for me for the past 10 years of international
cricket.' He said it was only when he crossed 170 that the thought of
the 200 entered his mind. 'I always wanted this double very badly.'
Sunil Gavaskar's Indian record of236 not out was in sight when
Tendulkar was dismissed by a brilliant catch, shortly after tea on the
second day. It was a full-blooded pull offleft-arm spinner Daniel Vettori
which was held inches off the ground at midwicket by Nash. The
batsman lingered and waited for the umpire's decision as he was not
sure the ball had carried to the fielder.
Sadly, the sheen of achievement soon wore off. New Zealand were
dismissed for 308. But India batted again in the second innings, finally
declaring on 148 for 5. Set 424 to win in a possible 103 overs, New
Zealand had no trouble saving the Test and finished on 252 for 2. So
why was the follow-on not enforced? The explanation of the captain
and the coach was that the four specialist bowlers wanted a rest after
toiling in the blazing heat for nearly ten hours in New Zealand's first
mnmgs.
Not everyone was convinced. 'No captain of an international team
wanting to win a Test convincingly would have wished away such a
fine chance,' wrote G. Viswanath in the Hindu (2 November 1999).
Ravi Shastri, one ofTendulkar's close friends and business associates,
admitted he was 'befuddled' by the tactics. Former New Zealand captain
Martin Crowe was more scathing in his column in Rediff.com (3
November 1999): 'The last thing Test cricket needs is this approach
by the Indian captain Sachin Tendulkar. It was a disgrace that the
tactical attitude to dismiss the opposition was not as positive as that of
the batting.' The delayed declaration in the second innings was also
Doubl~Then

Trouble

247

condemned. 'It really shocked me that Tendulkar appeared to have to
be cajoled by Kapil Dev before he did finally declare.' Inexplicably,
one of the bowlers who had apparently demanded a break, Javagal
Srinath (who bowled 35 overs in the first innings) came out to bat in
the second innings and hung around for nearly half an hour to score
19 not out. Both he and the other not-out batsman, Jadeja, were
constantly looking in the direction of the pavilion for the captain to
call them in.
He did, eventually, after the second innings had consumed 32 overs,
leaving the Indians with only 13 overs to have a go at their opponents
on the fourth evening. He justified his strategy in an interview with
Vijay Lokapally (Spottstar, 20 November 1999):
Just spare a thought for the bowlers. They were tired. In the
playing XI, we had a couple of players with health problems.
There were a couple of others who also carried on despite some
health problems ... .It was extremely hot that day (42 degrees)
and they had bowled about 140 overs. Asking them to bowl
another 160 at that stage would have meant someone might
have had a breakdown. We didn't want that kind of situation
and that is why we gave the bowlers a break. They tried their
best I would say.
Tendulkar finished the series with a 100-plus average and got
another chance to gorge himself on the mediocre Kiwi attack in the
one-day series that followed. It was a high-scoring series and India
were run close. They sealed a 3-2 verdict by winning the final game in
New Delhi by seven wickets. It was a pretty mixed bag for the skipper.
In the second match at Hyderabad, he recorded the highest score by
an Indian in oms and the fourth highest of all time, 186. But in the
other four matches he had scores of32, 1, 2 and 0.
New Zealand had thrashed the Indian bowlers 349 for 9 in the first
match at Rajkot-the highest 001 total on Indian soil. That record
lasted just three days. India's 376 for 2 was the sewnd highest ODI total
of all time and the stand of 331 for the second wicket in 46 overs
248

Sachin

between Rahul Dravid and Tendulkar was the biggest ever partnership.
Ganguly missed out on the run riot when bowler Shayne O'Connor
deflected Tendulkar's firm push on to the non-striker's stumps, with
the batsman out of his ground, in the second over. Tendulkar carried
his bat, in the process erasing Ganguly's previous Indian highest of
183 against Sri Lanka in the 1999 World Cup. There were 20 fours
and three sixes from the 150 balls he faced. He was on 182 when Chris
Cairns bowled the last over and there was a huge buzz around the
ground. Could he score the 13 needed to surpass Saeed Anwar's world
record? It was notto be, though the Indian record was his.
The innings was marked by a number of innovative shots behind
square leg. Sachin agreed after the innings that his shot selection had
changed. 'Your style ofbatting should not become too predictable and
should not be based on some set pattern,' he explained. 'This change
in shot selection has come gradually as far as I am concerned .... The
186 was satisfying not because I set an individual mark. It was satisfying
because we won the match. Tomorrow, someone may break the record
but people would remember me for the contribution I made in
winning the match for India.' (Sportstar, 20 November 1999)
The New Zealanders had acquitted themselves admirably. They
lost the three-Test series narrowly, 1-0, and the five-match 001 series
3-2.
For Tendulkar and his men, the real test was round the corner in
Australia, where the world Test and ODI champions were waiting.

Double-Then Trouble

249
