Such a Long Journey

Playingfor India has been a great privilege indeed.
-Sachin Tendulkar on the eve of his twentieth anniversary in
international cricket.

Over the span of cricket history there have been times when one
player's performance was enough to bring an entire nation to a haltIan Botham did just that in England in 1981 in the series known as
'Botham's Ashes'; Andrew Flintoff emulated his hero in 2005. But,
perhaps, no player has so often had the whole country in his thrall on
so many occasions as Sachin Tendulkar.
'Desert Storm' in 1998; India v Pakistan at Chennai a year later;
the World Cup match against Pakistan in 2003; and then December
2008 when he guided India home against England at Chennai in that
emotional run-chase. These are just some of the more prominent
occasiOns.
Then on 5 November 2009 with a sense ofhistory and timing that
only cricket's living legend was capable of, Tendulkar did it again.
The date was significant as 15 November would mark the 20th
anniversary ofhis first appearance in India colours. And it also marked
a golden 12-month period when he could seemingly do no wrong.
The non-stop treadmill of international cricket-even more
pronounced now with the advent of the T -20 format-would have
taxed anyone else, both mentally and physically.
Legendary West Indies all-rounder Garry Sobers too played nonstop (even if not the same volume) for 20years. But nearing the end of

his career, his knees were giving way and he had become sick of the
game.
In the spate of interviews marking his 20th anniversary, there were
two common themes-Tendulkar's childlike enthusiasm and indeed
hunger for cricket and his plea for Test matches to retain their
prommence.
Far from beingjaded, at the age of36 it appeared he was freshly
motivated to keep batting and keep winning for India.
The Australians under Ricky Ponting were back for a series of
seven oms. But the grind of non-stop playing had taken a heavy toll
on the tourists and they were without nine of their frontline players.
The series was poised 2-2 going into the fifth game at Hyderabad.
The Australians looked to have taken the game away from the Indians
as they piled up a mammoth 350 for four.
Despite the batting-friendly wickets, such a total had never been
successfully chased down in an om on Indian soil. Now only one
man stood between Australia and victory.
It was evening and the lights at the stadium were on as people
rushed home from work to sit glued in front of their TV sets. And
Tendulkar was the focus of attention of both 11 Australians and
countless millions of fans in India and around the world. Could he
single-handedly pull off another miraculous feat?
The years rolled back and it was 1998 all over again. Every shot
seemed to land just where he wanted it to, as iflaunched from his bat
like a series oflaser-guided missiles. Ponting and his bowlers looked
clueless.
At one stage an unprecedented double century looked a distinct
possibility even as Suresh Raina kept him company in a century stand
for the fifth wicket at better than a run a ball.
The young left-hander fell for 59 followed by HarabhaJan Singh
for a duck and now Tendulkar knew it was all up to him.
When he miscued an attempted paddle scoop-an innovation of
the T -20 era-to be caught at fine leg he had blazed to a glorious 175
in the course of which he also crossed 17,000 001 runs.
But as has happened so often in the past, the rest of the side failed
Such a Long Journey

373

him and India fell agonizingly short by just three runs. Tendulkar's
face said it all as he collected his obligatory Man of the Match award.
Save for that one brilliant innings, the series had been a quiet one
for Tendulkar and India were left to lick their wounds after being
beaten 4-2 by a second-string Australia.
Hyderabad cast him in the mould oflndian cricket's tragic hero.
But there was plenty of cause for jubilation and celebration by the
time he marked 20 years at the top of world cricket. The media and
public frenzy surrounding the landmark showed the kind of pressure
and expectations he had had to live with throughout his amazing
career.
The year had opened with India in Sri Lanka for an OOI series
followed by New Zealand for a full tour.
The Lankans were outclassed 4-1, the second time in less than six
months they had been beaten by India at home in a bilateral OOI
series. Though Tendulkar flopped in the first three games that India
won (he was rested for the fourth and fifth), he was in majestic form in
New Zealand.
India had not won a Test series in New Zealand since the inaugural
one in 1967-68 and they had never clinched an 001 series there
either.
This time it was a no-contest. The 0 D I verdict was 3-1 in favour
oflndia while the Test series was won 1-0. And Tendulkar played a
stellar role in both.
It was in New Zealand, back in 1994, that Tendulkar had made
such an impact on opening the batting for the first time. Now 15 years
later at Christchurch he was at his cracking best and came close to the·
first double century in 001 history.
What prevented him from carrying on was an abdominal injury
which flared up after he had been hit in the stomach in the previous
match. It forced him to retire hurt on 163 in the 45th over of the
innings. But by then he had put India well on course for a record total
of 392 for four, eventually winning by 58 runs. The injury though
forced him to miss the next two matches.
Said Kiwi captain Brendan McCullum on Tendulkar's innings:
)74

Sachin

'I can hardly remember a shot that didn't come out of the middle ... I
don't think I have seen too many better innings, in any form of the
game.'
It had been 33 years since India had won a Test match in New
Zealand. Now they did it in style in Hamilton in four days for only
their second overseas victory by the margin of 10 wickets.
It was Tendulkar's 160 in the first innings and Harbhajan's six
wickets in the second that made it possible. The 42nd Test century
was full of forceful shots and like the Tend ulkar of yore he looked to
dominate from the start.
The next two Test matches were drawn so India returned with the
honours from the tour.
Now it was time again for the Indian Premier League. However,
due to the general elections the tournament had to be shifted from
India to South Mrica in its second season. The change of venue made
little difference to the fate of the Mumbai Indians.
Mter a disappointing first season when they just missed reaching
the semis, this time around MI finished second from the bottom. Five
wins out of 14 was just not good enough for the most expensive
franchise in the league and once again Tendulkar was a
disappointment both with his leadership and with the bat scoringjust
two half-centuries in 13 innings.
The Board managed to squeeze in a short and rather pointless om
tour of the West Indies. But a finger injury kept Tendulkar out. It also
helped him to take a much-needed break and keep him fresh for the
challenges ahead.
India were back in Sri Lanka in September for a tri-series, also
involving New Zealand.
It was hardly a surprise that India took on Lanka in the final. What
did come as a pleasant surprise for Indian fans was their team beating
the hosts in the final in Colombo, only their fourth win in 21 om
finals since 2000 and their first tournament trophy in Lanka since
1998. That too after receiving a pasting in the league match just two
days earlier.
The Indian total of319 for four was built round a majestic innings
Such a Long Journey

375

of 138 by Tendulkar which he rated as one of his best. Even veteran
Tendulkar-watchers were stunned by the range ofhis strokes, including
a series of reverse sweeps which he has rarely indulged in. The last of
these brought about his dismissal. But he had done enough by then.
Mter defending champions India had flopped in the World T -20
in England (minus Tendulkar of course), hopes were high of an
improved performance in the Champions' Trophy in South Mrica, a
tournament in which India had twice reached the final.
But it was not to be. Defeat at the hands of Pakistan in the first
league match practically sealed India's fate. Rain prevented a result in
their second game against Australia and despite beating the West Indies,
they failed to advance to the semi-finals.
Towards the end of2009, the big question now was: how long can
Tendulkar continue? The previous 12 months had seen him striking
a purple patch and in this period he had played some of the most
memorable knocks ofhis entire career.
Without saying so in so many words, Tendulkar indicated in
interviews in 2009 that his sights were set on the 2011 World Cup to
be staged jointly by India, Sri Lanka and Bangladesh.
A World Cup triumph on Indian soil would be a fitting end to a
career containing plenty ofhighs and a few lows, notably the lack of a
World Cup title in five previous attempts.
Indian fans could not ask for more from the Superman of world
cricket.