Man and Myth

My family is altogether a different issue.-Sachin Tendulkar

It's not easy being Sachin Tendulkar. In a vast country like India,
cricket and movies are about the only outlets for a population of a
billion-plus, of whom most lead a mundane, often perilous existence.
Life can get pretty claustrophobic for us ordinary folk. Imagine what
is must be like for cricketers and movie stars.
I have seen Tendulkar mobbed wherever he goes. Yet, he rarely
loses his cool. And the adulation is not confined to India either. In
Dhaka, Sachin, Sourav Ganguly and Wasim Akram are the reigning
deities. During the October 2000 inaugural Test match, I witnessed
this adulation first-hand. In a country where cricket fanaticism rivals
even the kind witnessed in India, it can sometimes get scary. Certainly,
Ganguly looked terrified as he raced the short distance from the dressi;.g
rooms at the Bangabandhu Stadium to the team bus. Thousands of
hands sought him out from the crowd of fans milling inside and
outside the stadium. I twas equally hysterical when it came to Sachin's
turn to run the gamut of the hordes. 'Sochin, Sochin,' they screamed.
I could not help but notice his beatific smile. He was actually lapping
up the adulation. It reminded me of old film clips depicting the Beatles
mania of the 1960s.
'It would be terrible if only 10 people came to watch. As a cricketer
I try to give pleasure, and the more people that watch and applaud, the
more pleasure I get myself I wouldn't swap it,' Tendulkar told Mark
Nicholas in an interview in the Daily Telegraph (11 December 2001).
Nicholas, the former Hampshire captain, spent the whole interview

seemingly probing for a chink in the Tendulkar armour. He exulted
after the answer above: 'So there's an ego, at last, saved for the stage
and the curtain calls.'
How could it be any different? Every entertainer, whether on stage,
screen or field of play, has an ego. Tendulkar has accomplished what
all superstars strive for, to harness that ego in a positive manner. Ego
has driven some international sports persons, when they visit India, to
bring the media in tow as they do their good deed for the day. It is the
done thing to be seen and heard attempting to alleviate the misery of
India's teeming downtrodden. When was the last time you saw even a
photograph ofTendulkar at a charity function? Yet, he gives of his
spare time unstintingly.
Journalist Joe Hoover knows this hidden side ofTendulkar well.
Sports editor ofDeccan Herald, Hoover has organized numerous charity
auctions and functions where Tendulkar is the star attraction. 'He is
so approachable and he never says no,' Hoover told me. 'He doesn't
need the publicity because unlike some other sportspersons, he sees
no need to use these acts to improve his image.' Hoover recalled an
incident in Pakistan in 1997 when he telephoned Tendulkar in his
hotel room and asked him if he could give some signed bats for a
charity auction. 'Within minutes he was on the phone, informing his
bat manufacturers in Meerut to send over a dozen to New Delhi for
this purpose.'
Throughout this book there have been excerpts from numerous
interviews with Tendulkar by Vijay Lokapally. As the cricket
correspondent for the Hindu and the Sportstar, Lokapally has
undoubtedly interviewed him more often than any other journalist.
He spoke to me about his interaction with Sachin over the years:
Sachin once said to me, "Kiti lihishil?" (How much will you
write)? ... I first m~t him at a Wills Trophy match at Kanpur.
This was before his 1989 Test debut. The next occasion was in
New Delhi just before the Pakistan tour, his first. He and Vivek
Razdan, the other debutant were very excited. And do you know,
he has that same excitement about playing cricket after all these
Man and Myth

319

years?
I have always been impressed by the dignified way he carries
himselfboth on and off the field. Despite all his fame and wealth,
he is very down to earth. That has not changed a bit in all the
years I have known him.
Friends, family, food (particularly seafood-he enjoys a spot of
cooking too), cricket and music. These are Tendulkar's passions in
life. Lokapally says you can guess which hotel room is his by the
music blaring from it. 'Dire Straits used to be his favourite group. But
these days he is into old Hindi songs. He seeks these out and gets them
specially recorded.'
(This incidentally is another trait he shares with Sir Don Bradman,
who would lock himself up in his hotel room and play his
gramophone records after the day's play.)
'Sachin Tendulkar is an important person of our country. He is
our country's wealth and we will protect him,' said Mumbai's
Commissioner of Police, M.N.Singh. This followed reports that
Tendulkar and Ganguly were kidnap targets for militant groups.
Another heavy price offame is the loss of privacy. 'Ask me anything
you want about cricket, but keep my family out of this,' he has told
journalists repeatedly.
Wife Anjali, daughter Sara and son Arjun are the centre ofSachin's
existence,just as his parents and siblings were when he was growing
up. 'My family life is altogether a different issue. I have always kept it
a very private affair and I don't want that to be public. Everybody is
watching whatever I do on the field,' he told the f.#ek (29 November
1998). 'Even. today they [his family] look after me and ensure that my
feet are on the ground,' he said when asked how he copes with all the
hopes and adulation of the fans. 'Not Tiger Woods, not even Michael
Jordan lives with such a following,' wrote Nicholas in the Daily
Telegraph interview.
'It has been harder for my family than for me to be honest. I've
known no other way. A couple of times I tried going out for the evening
in Bombay in disguise but that didn't work too well, so now I just stay
320

Sachin

in. Now when I go to pray I go late at night to the temples which are
empty and -1uiet,' he told Nicholas. His favourite temple is the Uddan
Ganesh temple in Bandra which he visits with Anjali, often after
midnight.
Sachin has spent all his life in Bandra, first with his parents, brothers
and sisters at Sahil}'a Sahawas in Bandra (East) and since the middle of
2001, at the swank Le Mer apartments in Bandra (West). They may
share virtually the same address, but Bandra (East) and Bandra (West)
are worlds apart. West looks down its nose at East,' says one long-time
resident of the more upmarket side of town. For the first few years of
their marriage, Sachin and Anjali stayed in a separate flat in the same
building where he grew up. Le Mer was recommended to him by
Prahlad Kakkar who has been directing Sachin's commercials for a
decade now. The Tendulkars bought a duplex apartment there in mid
2001. 'The apartment block has more glittering stars than the milky
way,' one Mumbai sports journalist told me. In that sense, Sachin has
made the transformation from his solid middle-class youth to the
world ofMumbai's glitterati.
The influence of Anjali and her parents, Anand (an international
bridge player) and Annabelle Mehta (who is English and a leading
philanthropist) has played a large part in this transition. According to
a family friend, when Anjali and he first met and started dating, Mrs
Mehta would disguise Sachin in a wig and beard and smuggle the
couple out to the family's holiday homes in Lonavalla and Goa. The
Mehtas arc among Mumbai's wealthiest families, a fixture on the
city's social circuit. Which is very distant from Sachin's roots. But he
still keeps in touch with his old school friends and often drops by to
enjoy his mother's seafood dishes, which he relishes. ('Favourite Food:
Anything cooked by mother.') Anjali was a practising paediatrician
till the birth of Arjun in 2000. Now she looks after the two kids. It is
the daughter who has inherited her father's curly hair. As for Arjun,
his father has already gifted him a plastic bat and ball. 'It may be a
batsman's game. But I would want him to become a good all-rounder,'
says the proud father with characteristic determination.
Wife and kids (accompanied by a maid) fly out to be with Sachin
Man and Myth

321

on long tours abroad. He obviously cannot be parted from them for
long.
So how good a father is he?
'It's not just bull about spending "quality time" with his children,'
neighbour and friend Kakkar says. 'While other kids are rocked to
sleep with a pat on the back, Sachin drives Arjun round and round the
building in his Mere at night and puts him to sleep' (Times of India
Sunday Review, 9 December 2001).
Arjun has become an enthusiastic cricketer who bats left-handed
and often accompanies his father to net practice.
In May 2008 it was revealed that Tendulkar had paid Rs. 35 crores
for an old mansion near Carter Road, Bandra West in suburban
Mumbai. Built in the 1920s, it is spread over 10,000 square feet and is
undergoing extensive renovations.

Jll

Sachin