'The Greatest Series Ever'

I did not feel any pressure.-Sachin Tendulkar

The second and last quarters of2000 saw two memorable performances
on the domestic circuit by Sachin Tendulkar. In April, he helped
Mumbai bounce back from a disastrous 1998-99 sea~on to win the
Ranji Trophy once again. He could play just two matches, the semifinal against Tamil Nadu and the final against Hyderabad, but in
these his scores were phenomenal: 233 (not out), 13 (not out), 53 and
128.
In December, he made a rare appe::trance, this time virtually in his
backyard! .For the first time, a Ranji Trophy match-Mumbai v
Baroda-was staged at the MIG ground at Bandra, a stone's throw from
his home. He marked the occasion with a century, much to the delight
of his neighbours in the stands.
The Ranji semi-final against Tamil Nadu had been postponed by
two days to allow Tendulkar to return from Dhaka where he had led
an Asian XI against a World XI in a one-day exhibition match. Earlier
that season, he had relinquished the Mumbai captaincy to Sameer
Dighe since he knew the international calendar would keep him away
from domestic cricket.
Tamil Nadu had scored 485 in the first innings, and Mumbai were
in danger of conceding the first innings lead when their ninth wicket
fell at 472. Tendulkar had come in at the fall of the second wicket at 77,
and now had only last man Santosh Saxena for company. He pulled
Kumaran to the midwicket boundary for four to gain the lead and the
cekhrations broke out. The last 20 runs of the innings had come

entirely offhis bat. He was at the crease for 565 minutes-the longest
innings of his career-and was unbeaten on his highest first-class
score of233 (334 balls, 21 fours, five sixes) when Saxena was given out
without scoring. Mumbai eventually won by eight wickets.
There is a remarkable sequence offour photographs ofTendulkar,
taken by Vivek Bendre (Sporlstar, 29 April2000), showing him exulting
after guiding Mumbai to the first innings lead. The fist pumping and
the whoops ofjoy were unusual-rarely in international cricket does
one see him celebrating with such an outward show of emotion. It
showed his commitment to Mumbai cricket.
Mumbai coach and former opening batsman Ashok Mankad said
he had never seen a better innings in first-class cricket. Tendulkar
himself felt it was one of his besl. The final against Hydcrabad saw
Mumbai win by 297 runs. This time Tendulkar's contribution was
53 and 128.
There would be another double ton in November: 201 not out in
the second Test at Nagpur against Zimbabwe. It was the fourth double
century of his first-class career and coincidentally, the two hundredth
in Test cricket history. This followed a century in the first Test at New
Delhi and there was another in the third ODI at Jodhpur. India won the
Test series 1-0 and the ODis 4-1. But the visit of the Zimbabweans was
just a warm-up session for the real thing as far as the Indian cricketers
and fans were concerned. The real test would come with the arrival of
Steve Waugh's all-conquering team.
The Aussies landed in India in February 2001 with an awesome
record. They had won 15 Tests in succession, an unprecedented feat.
But no Australian team had won a series in India since Bill Lawry's 31 verdict in 1969-70.
The pre-tour hype was huge. Waugh called India the 'final frontier'
of his career. He had been the ODI captain under Mark Taylor when
India won the 1998 Test series 2-1 and was determined to keep alive
his side's ruthless streak on Indian soil. He also spoke of 'mental
disintegration', the infamous Aussie weapon. They used to call it
'sledging'-abusing an opFonent on the field. Now a clever play of
words had resulted in a new euphemism for the traditional Aussie
The Greatest Series Ever

279

tactic.
Things were really hatting up for the Indian team. Sourav Ganguly
was still new to the job of captaincy, while Waugh was acknowledged
as the best captain in world cricket. The Zimbabwe visit had been
Ganguly's first Test series as captain. His style was combative and it
was obvious this would be a toe-to-toe, eyeball-to-eyeball
confrontation between two strong men in charge of their respective
sides. Ultimately, the Australian media campaign of targeting Ganguly
backfired. They had seen the Indians roll over tamely, without a fight,
on their soil just a year ago. But it would be different this time, with
Ganguly paying the aggressive Aussies back in their own coin. Even
Tendulkar admitted to 'sledging' Steve Waugh on the field!
Australia were without the injured Brett Lee but were still
formidable, with Shane Warne and Glenn McGrath bowling in
tandem in India for the first time. India too were without one of their
spearheads, the injured Ani) Kumble. The series of three Tests ·
produced some of the most memorable games in the recent past. No
wonder the world media dubbed it 'the greatest series ever'. And in the
end, India were 2-1 winners again.
On the eve of the first Test at Mumbai, the death of Sir Donald
Bradman cast a pall of gloom over the proceedings. Tendulkar and
Warne were immediately sought o•.lt for their memories of the 1998
visit to his home. Both teams wore black armbands in mourning.
However, the visitors won the first round by a knockout. In less than
three days, they tore the stuffing out of the Indian team for win number
16, and another series whitewash seemed apparent. The only saving
grace for India in the ten-wicket trouncing was the batting of
Tendulkar. His knocks of76 and 65 were both classics.
On the opening day, the Indian batting crumbled to 176 all out.
They had lost four wickets at lunch for 55 even as Tendulkar reached
19 from 53 balls. Mter the break, he opened up and suddenly the
rampaging bowlers found themselves on the back foot. The first ball
after lunch from old adversary Warne was cut for four. The next 59
balls went for 57 wondrous runs. Fleming was flayed for three straight
fours and then McGrath was back. Tendulkar succumbed yet again to
280

Sachin

his nemesis in the series Down Under.
The Indian bowlers struck back on the second morning. Australia
found themselves precariously placed at 99 for 5 and the last
recognized pair of Matthew Hayden and Adam Gilchrist were at the
crease. Off-spinner Harbhajan Singh had picked up three wickets in
a sign of things to come. Then, the game was turned on its head as the
two left-banders tore the Indian bowling apart. Gilchrist raced to the
second fastest century by an Australian, from 84 balls, with 19 fours
and a six. Hayden had an identical number of boundaries and their
stand of 197 came from just 32 overs.
Trailing by 173 runs, the Indian batting once again crumbled. By
close on the second day, they had lost both openers. Tendulkar in the
company ofDravid began the rebuilding process. They put on 97 for
the third wicket and Tendulkar was at his dazzling best. Boundaries
flowed off his bat and the bowlers seemed at their wits' end when an
amazing piece ofluck saw the Aussies gain the upper hand again.
Mark Waugh bowled one of his gentle 'offies' and Tendulkar lashed
out with a ferocious pull. Justin Langer at short leg had taken a
pounding and now as he turned instinctively, he was struck on the left
shoulder. The ball ballooned towards midwicket. Panting had failed
to score, but now he pulled off a miraculous catch that turned the
game. He sprinted 20 metres to his right and flung himselfforward to
grasp the catch an inch above the ground. Once again, it had taken an
extraordinary catch to end an extraordinary innings from the maestro.
It was obvious by now that his batting genius made rival bowlers and
fielders strive to raise their game too.
The rest of the batting was soon mopped up and Slater and Hayden
raced to the small target.
By the third morning of the second Test at Kolkata, it looked like
Indian cricket's worst nightmare was unfolding. P~wered by captain
Waugh's first Test century on Indian soil, Australia had piled up 445.
India were then sent packing for 171. The follow-on was duly enforced.
Enter VVS. Laxman to play the innings of a lifetime. His 281 was
begun on the third afternoon and stretched till the fifth morning, and
was the highest score by an Indian in Test cricket. This followed
The Greatest Series Ever

281

Harbhajan Singh's hat-trick, the first by an Indian in Test cricket.
Laxman and Dravid batted throughout the fourth day and suddenly
the tables were turned on Australia. Dravid's 180 was magnificent too,
and his stand with Laxman was worth a massive 376 runs.
Ganguly declared on the fifth morning at 657 for 7. The target was
384 for Australia. Had the declaration come too late? Only twice before
had a team lost after enforcing the follow-on in 124 years of Test
cricket and on each occasion Australia had been on the receiving end.
Finally, the match was won for India in the last hour of the match.
Harbhajan was the bowling hero with figures of7 for 123 and 6 for 73.
Tendulkar too played his part. Though he scored only ten runs in
both innings, he picked up three wickets with his spin bowling.
Sachin's victims were Hayden, Gilchrist and Warne. It was the second
time in Tests that he had three wickets in an innings.
Australia were all out for 212 to lose by 172 runs. It was one of the
greatest moments in Indian cricket hist01y. Now it all came down to
the third and final Test at Chennai. The amazing turnaround ensured
a full house at the M.A.Chidambaram Stadium. Chennai was as hot
and humid as ever, though not as bad as in 1986 when the two teams
had been involved in only the second tied Test in history. Matches
between India and Australia at Chennai have over the years produced
some thrilling contests, both in Tests and ODis. The third Test would
live up to that tradition.
Four years earlier, Tendulkar had played a decisive innings in the
first Test against Australia at Chennai: 155 not out. This time, his 126
would be the side's highest score, though it was Matthew Hayden's
double ton and Harbhajan's 15-wicket haul that took the individual
honours in another fantastic finish. A first-day score of326 for 3 by
Australia had them heading for a 500-plus score. But it was not to be.
Waugh's handled-the-ball dismissal triggered a collapse and they were
all out for 391. With Das, Ramesh and Laxman all going past 50,
Tendulkar did not walk into a crisis as he so often has done in his
career. Instead, with Dravid for company, he took India past Australia's
score with just four wickets lost. It was his twenty-fifth century, but
not one of his best. He had told his teammates before the match that
282

Sachin

he was determined to stick it out and record a century in the series. It
was one of his more patient efforts, the runs coming from 230 balls
and nearly six hours of concentration. Colin Miller, bowling seamers
to Tendulkar and off-spinners to the rest, had the mortification of
seeing him dropped at 82 on 396 for 4. He top-edged a sweep and
Michael Slater on the midwicket boundary appeared to drop the ball
in a premature act of celebration. Miller was immediately smashed
over long on for six as Tendulkarjumped from 94to 100and two balls
later, there was a pull for four.
Steve Waugh had reached his twenty-fifth Test ton at Kolkata.
Now Tendulkar became the sixth to reach this landmark in his eightysecond Test and the third fastest after Don Bradman (45 Tests) and
Sunil Gavaskar (79 Tests). Mter reaching the century, he went after
Warne. Twice he swept him fine as the leggie aimed for the rough
outside the leg stump. Then he cut him cheekily over slip for four.
Tendulkar had come to the crease on the second ball of the third day
after McGrath had Das lbw first ball for 84. Exactly 80 overs later, he
was caught behind offJason Gillespie. It was his fourth century in five
Tests at Chennai, and the sixth against Australia. There were still ten
overs to be bowled in the day. But the crowd began to quietly get up
and leave. For them, Tendulkarwas out, the entertainment for the day
was over, and it was time to slip away.
I asked one of them why he was leaving when there was still some
play remaining. He appeared surprised to be asked the question. 'But
Sachin is out,' he said.
'Soon, very soon, people will be turning up only to watch Tendulkar
play,' R. Mohan had written a decade 'earlier. The prediction had come
true. It was a trend that was first noticeable during the Australia series
and would manifest itself more starkly against England at the end of
the year. Sachin drew crowds the way Bradman had in the previous
century, and WG. Grace in the century before that. Once the master
batsman was out, spectators lost interest in the rest of the day's play. It
was as if a game of 11 players on each side was reduced to just one.
The first-innings lead was stretched to 110. Openers Slater and
Hayden almost wiped it out with a stand worth 82. Once again, there
The Greatest Series Ever

283

was a collapse engineered by Harbhajan, who had 8 for 84 to finish
with a record 32 wickets, the most by a spinner for a three-Test series.
The target for India was only 154. But when Tendulkar (17) fended
off a fiery bouncer from the tireless Gillespie to Mark Waugh at slip,
the tension around the stadium rose to breaking point. Seven down
for 135, the Indians were fighting for every run. Finally, and fittingly,
Man of the Series Harbhajan squeezed the winning runs from
McGrath with only two wickets in hand. Not since the golden years
of 1971 and 1983 had Indian cricket celebrated so long and hard and
joyously.
Mter all the drama of the Test, for once the five-match one-day
series was looked upon as an anticlimax. However, it turned out to be
one of the best played on Indian soil as the players from both sides
carried on the intensity from the Tests. The obvious animosity between
the two captains gave the series an edge as Waugh and his men resolved
not to leave India empty-handed. In the end, just as they had done in
1998, they bounced back from their defeat in the Test series to take the
oDJs 3-2. Hayden and Laxman continued their batting heroics, and
for Tendulkar the series would bring two very special landmarks.
India won the first game at Bangalore by 60 runs. Australia levelled
with a crushing eight-wicket win at Pune. India then took the lead
again as they won the third at Indore by 118 runs and then saw their
lead pegged back when they went down by 93 runs at Visakhapamam.
The final match at Margao saw Michael Bevan play another of his
typical one-day gems as Australia cantered home by four wickets with
two overs to spare.
It was a special moment at Indore for Tendulkar in his two hundred
and sixty-sixth match (259 innings) as he drove Warne to extra cover
for a single. That took him to 34 and he became the first man to score
10,000 runs in ODis, on his way to his twenty-eighth century. Sunil
Gavaskar in 1987 had achieved a similar feat in Tests.
Normally reticent about records, Sachin was candid this time in
his post-match comments. 'I would be lying ifl said I wasn't aware of
the target but I did not feel any pressure.' He seemed to have been
biding his time in the over before Warne's, seemingly determined to
284

Sachin

reach the magic mark off the spinner's bowling. The figures were
revealing. Sixteen of his 28 centuries had come abroad, in 178 matches,
while 12were scored at home in 88 matches. Of the 10,105 runs at the
end of the Indore game, 3675 were scored at home at an average of
48.36, while 6430 were scored abroad at fractionally under 40. There
were some other significant statistics. Twenty-two of the 28 tons had
helped India win. His strike rate was a superb 86.26 and his average
for final matches/grand finals was a striking 56.13. All these figures
were valid until the end of the Indore match.
At Margao, in the fifth game, would come another milestone that
gave him immense satisfaction. He picked up three wickets and the
one of Steve Waugh was his hundredth. 10,000 runs and 100 wicketsit was a unique double for a unique cricketer.

The Greatest Series Ever

285
