Reluctant Messiah

If Sachin says no, he will be making a big mistake.-Ajit Wadekar
1\.lways bat first, Azhar, always bat first,' was Bishan Singh Bedi's
anguished cry as he watched, on television, the Indian captain put
Australia in at the start oflndia's first Super Six match on 4 June. Just
as it had happened three years earlier, at Kolkata in the Wills World
Cup semi-final, this time too the move backfired. With the huge defeat
that followed, India's hopes of making it to the semi-finals were
virtually dashed. And so were Azharuddin's hopes of holding on to
the captaincy. The fact that he stayed on in England for surgery on his
shoulder made the decision of the selectors somewhat easier when
they met in Nagpur on 28 July to announce Azhar's successor.
Nothing is what it seems in Indian cricket. There is always a story
behind the story, and more so when it concerns the never-ending soap
opera that is the captaincy of the Indian cricket team. And so it transpired
this time too, as the committee consisting of chairman Ajit Wadekar,
Madan Lal, Shivlav Yadav, Ani I Deshpande and Ashok Malhotra, with
Hcct Secretary J.Y.Lele in attendance, took all of 'two minutes'
(Wadelear's words) to hand the mantle to Sachin Tendulkar once again,
as they had done three years earlier. This, after taking more than an
hour to trace BCCI president Raj Singh Dungarpur to get his telephonic
consent.
'Only one name, that ofSachin, figured during the meeting and
no other name came up for discussion,' according to the chairman.
'He is the best player in the team, is a thinker and has good rapport
with his colleagues.' Then came the crucial question at the press

conference, directed at Wadekar. Had Tendulkar's consent been taken
by the Board? 'Not yet. But ifSachin says no (to the captaincy) he will
be making a mistake. He has not written to the Board for not being
chosen as captain.'
'Let's see ifhe refuses,' was what another selector was reported to
have said. The day before the meeting, a number of papers had carried
reports stating Tendulkar had informed the selectors he did not want
to lead again. Consequently, Ajay J adeja was considered a shoo-in for
the post. 'Tendulkar Not Inclined to Lead India' was the headline in
the Hindu (28 July). In a Chennai date-lined report, G. Viswanath
wrote: ' ... the little champion has decided to keep himself clear off the
hot seat for reasons best known to him and certain people in the BCCJ.;
In the circumstances the selectors are not likely to look beyond Ajay
Jadeja ... .'
On the day of the announcement, however, the plot thickened
further. It seemed every sports journalist and cricket official in the
country was trying to track down the new appointee. This was cloakand-dagger stuff, Indian cricket style. There was one problem-no
one had a clue as to where he was. And those who did, were tightlipped. As Alice said in Alice in rMmderland, things were getting
'curiouser and curiouser'. Lele, Indian cricket's very own Mad Hatter,
was in the thick of things. 'The telephone answering machine at
Sachin's residence in Mumbai recorded the message of his
appointment as he was away,' he told a PTI reporter in Nagpur.
He was indeed 'away'. But where? And why had he made himself
incommunicado for over 24 hours? The air was full of theories and
speculation. Was he in the family holiday home in the hill resort of
Lonavala, not far from Mumbai? Was he in Bangalore? Or was he
seeking the blessings and advice of his spiritual guru, Satya Sai Baba,
at Puttaparti in Andhra Pradesh? Only family and close friends knew
for sure. And no one was willing to come out with the facts.
Still, after lying low and keeping the country in suspense-will
he, won't he?-the reluctant Messiah finally surfaced in Mumbai on
29 July, and announced he would be holding a press conference the
next day to give his version of the dramatic events. Raj Singh conveyed
Reluctant Messiah

239

the news to an anxious nation that Tendulkar had indeed accepted the
appointment. By now, it was also revealed that the Board had earlier
tried to persuade him to take up the captaincy, but he had refused.
Finally, it had been presented to him as a virtual fait accompli.
Even by the normally chaotic standards ofcricket press conferences,
the one addressed by the new nominee at the Cricket Club oflndia in
Mumbai on 30Julywas pandemonium personified. I twas a good ten
minutes before Tendulkar could speak, as dozens of photographers
and TV cameramen jostled for vantage positions.
Sachin disclosed that he had learnt about his appointment from
the messages left on his answering machine, from phone calls and
watching the news. 'Two days before the selection committee meeting,
I told Mr Raj Singh, Mr Lele and Mr Wadekar, that I was not mentally
prepared (to be made captain),' he said. 'I was not mentally prepared to
take up the captaincy as it is the practice for the vice-captain to be
named the next captain. I was not the vice-captain of the team since
losing the captaincy [in January 1998].' He stressed four points: that
he was proud to lead the country again and that it was an honour; that
he had no problem with Azharuddin being in the team; that he would
want more say in selection matters; and that he would open the batting
in ODIS.
Not everyone was convinced. G .Rajaraman of the Hindustan Times
(30 July 1999) asked in the headline: 'Is Azhar's Slot the Contentious
Issue?'
Even if it is the last thing we wanted, we will have to contend
with the image of a reluctant and sulking leader, too. Sadly, it
will stick for some time ... .If he cannot face pressure at the
appointment, can he stand it when the heat is on?
There seemed little doubt, though, that at the back of Sachin's
mind was the bitter memory of how he had been let down by the
selectors and some teammates during his first tenure including Azhar,
whom he would later name when questioned by the CBI. As the October
2000 Report on Cricket Match-Fixing and Related Malpractices says on
240

Sachin

page 89: 'On being asked whether he suspected any Indian player of
being involved in match-fixing, Sachin stated that during his tenure
as Captain, he had telt that Mohd. Azharuddin was not putting in
100% effort and he suspected that he was involved with some bookies.'
To get to the bottom of the mystery, I asked Wadekar to write down
his views on the incident. He had earlier in a column stated that it was
a mistake to appoint Sachin the second time round, against his wishes.
This is what Wadekar wrote in a letter to me dated 6 October 2001:
In 1999 it was clear that Azhar couldn't have been made captain
as he was not in form. We tried Ani! Kumble but he did not
measure up to the requirements of the captain nor did he look
very aggressive. We wanted Sourav Ganguly to lead instead
but Mr Raj Singh, then president of the Board, interfered with
our selection and told us point-blank in the selection committee
meeting held at Kolkata (sic) that Sourav was a selfish person
and wasn't liked by some of the players. Since he wouldn't
have ratified our decision as president, it was senseless to appoint
him as captain. Yes, Mr Raj Singh has a habit of dabbling in the
selections all the time.
Since there was nobody to take the reins of the captaincy,
including reluctant Sachin, I thought I would persuade him to
be the captain. I went to his home for this purpose. He was
playing table tennis. He came up to his flat to meet me. When
I opened the topic about the captaincy, he did not oppose it
vehemently but he also did not show any joy on the matter and
was rather hesitant to accept it or not.
What he did not realize was that I wanted him to lead the
Indian team for as long as he wanted to. I wanted him to be
another Sir Donald Bradman who was not only a legend in
batting all over the world but also a great captain ... .It was
unfortunate that when he was appointed as a captain, he did
not come out with the acceptance for nearly three days. In fact,
he was not traceable at all ....
What this meant was that Tendulkar was certainly not the only
Reluctant Messiah

241

name in contention. And the selection meeting certainly took more
than two minutes to decide! Tendulkar himself confirmed the meeting
with Wadekar (though with a different perspective) in an interview to
Crilket Talk: 'Yes, I did not want it [the captaincy]. When Ajit Wadekar
came to my house at the start of the season last year [i.e., 1999], I told
him that I was not interested in the job. He was supposed to inform
the other selectors but I don't know what happened and I was asked to
lead ... .'(30 March 2000). Later, Wadekarwrote these words in a specially
commissioned article for the 2001 Sachin birthday special for the
lndya.com website where I was sports editor:
It was really foolish on my part as chairman of the selection
committee to force him to accept the captaincy. This despite
the fact that he was very reluctant when I spoke to him at his
place prior to the selection. He is not interested in the
captaincy-he would prefer to relax by eating his favourite crabs
at my place and then go out and smash the bowlers.

Questions remained, doubts lingered, about the captaincy
controversy. But by late August, it was time for Tendulkar's first outing
as captain in his second stint.
The Aiwa Cup in Sri Lanka pitted India against the hosts and
Australia. It turned out to be something of a misadventure for the
Indians, who won just one of their four matches and failed to make it
to the final. India's first match on 23 August saw them trounced by
eight wickets by the Aussies. Things hardly improved when they
went down by seven wickets to Sri Lanka in their next match. Four
Indian batsmen were run out, including the 'new' captain for 37.
There was worse to come, however. On the morning of28 August,
when India were to take on Australia again, the captain awoke with a
stiff back and ruled himself out of the match. Ajay Jadeja led the side
that was beaten this time by 41 runs.
Tend ulkar returned for the final league match, the only one which
India would win. It was a make-or-break situation for the side and he
chose to ignore his troublesome back. The match was marked by his
242

Sachin

twenty-third century and though India won by 23 runs, they were
edged out of a place in the final on the net run rate. The captain had
endured tremendous pain to reach his century, but in vain. The
discomfort he was in was obvious when he hoicked spinner Uppal
Chandana for six over long on, grimaced and clutched his back. Yet he
soldiered on. Team doctor Ravinder Chadha treated him on the field
after the fall of opener Ramesh's wicket.
There was much speculation in the media about the reasons for
the recurrence of his back problem. Doctors, surgeons, physios, explayers and journalists all had their say. The theories included excessive
cricket, hot and humid conditions, the remarkably heavy bat
Tendulkar wielded, even the position of his feet while making certain
strokes. The general consensus was that the injury could curtail
Tendukar's career.
Next stop for the team was the Singapore Challenge against
Zimbabwe and the West Indies. Tendulkar (85) picked up another
Man of the Match award against Zimbabwe, and the win was enough
to ensure that India would meet the West Indies in the final. Tendulkar
rested himself the next day for the inconsequential league match
against the twice former world champions, and Ganguly led for the
first time. The first final was abandoned due to rain with India
struggling on 149 for 6 (Tendulkar: 40). It was worse when the match
was replayed. Tendulkar was out without scoring, from the sixth ball
of the match bowled by Courtney Walsh, who had taken his wicket in
the abandoned final, too. This time the batsman took a chance but
paid the price as Hendy Bryan held the juggling catch at third man.
India's 254 for 6 was easily overhauled.
The Kargil conflict between India and Pakistan meant the two
teams would not meet in the annual Sahara Cup at Toronto. Instead,
the organizers arranged for two tournaments involving the West
Indies-three matches each against India and Pakistan. The Indians
and West Indians virtually flew across the planet and spent more than
a day travelling between Sri Lanka and Canada. But India was without
the services of their captain, who decided instead to fly to Adelaide to
have his back examined by Dr Peter Barnes, a specialist at the Australian
Reluctant Messiah

243

Cricket Academy.
The prognosis was troubling. According to Dr Barnes, 'I think it
would be a nuisance to him and probably restrict him. I guess in that
sense it would probably limit his career... But he is such a great bat that
he can probably bat with one leg and still make runs.' He felt Tendulkar
had handled the problem pretty well for the last six months.
Dr Barnes said the Indian captain was suffering from spondylosis.
'There is some bony defect on either side of the spine down in the
bottom half of the back.' He told a press conference in Adelaide on 4
September that the problem had been there long before it first surfaced
in Chennai in J,aJtuary, during the Test match against Pakistan. S~chin
had defects in the lower vertebrae and inflamed scar tissue had formed
in the lower back region. It would be an estimated three to four weeks
before he could return to cricket.
Once again, it was as if the entire nation had only one thing on its
mind. As an irritated Sachin was to say (Sportstar, 19 February 2001):
Whoever I met asked the same question, 'How is your back?'
before they actually greeted me with a 'Hello'. It got to a point
when it started affecting me. I did not feel like meeting anyone.
I understood the feelings of the people but ifl have to hear it a
thousand times, 'How is your back?' and I have to answer it, it's
frustrating. I am glad it's all over. It's part of any sportsperson's
life. After playing for 11 years these are things which are bound
to happen. There is going to be wear and tear. The fact is that
the body has been used for so many years.
The break meant! Tendulkar missed not only the DMC Cup in
Toronto (India, led by Ganguly, beat the West Indies 2-1), but also the
LG Cup in Nairobi, where Ajay Jadeja was captain and India lost in the
final to South Africa.

244

Sachin