  I
 
 
 A
 
 A   
  H 
  A    A
 HA     
       
            .
LADIES AND GENTLEMEN: — It will be very diﬀicult
for an audience so large as this to hear distinctly what a
speaker says, and consequently it is important that as
profound silence be preserved as possible.
While I was at the hotel to-day, an elderly gentleman
called upon me to know whether I was really in favor of
producing a perfect equality between the negroes and
white people. While I had not proposed to myself on this
occasion to say much on that subject, yet as the question
was asked me I thought I would occupy perhaps ﬁve
minutes in saying something in regard to it. I will say, then,
that I am not, nor ever have been, in favor of bringing
about in any way the social and political equality of the
white and black races; that I am not, nor ever have been, in
favor of making voters or jurors of negroes, nor of
qualifying them to hold oﬀice, nor to intermarry with white
people; and I will say, in addition to this, that there is a
physical diﬀerence between the white and black races
which I believe will forever forbid the two races living
together on terms of social and political equality. And in as
much as they cannot so live, while they do remain together
there must be the position of superior and inferior, and I as
much as any other man am in favor of having the superior
 position assigned to the white race. I say upon this occasion
I do not perceive that because the white man is to have the
superior position the negro should be denied everything. I
do not understand that because I do not want a negro
woman for a slave I must necessarily want her for a wife.
My understanding is that I can just let her alone. I am now
in my ﬁftieth year, and I certainly never have had a black
woman for either a slave or a wife. So it seems to me quite
possible for us to get along without making either slaves or
wives of negroes. I will add to this that I have never seen,
to my knowledge, a man, woman, or child who was in favor
of producing a perfect equality, social and political,
between negroes and white men. I recollect of but one
distinguished instance that I ever heard of so frequently as
to be entirely satisﬁed of its correctness, and that is the
case of Judge Douglas’s old friend Colonel Richard M.
Johnson. I will also add to the remarks I have made (for I
am not going to enter at large upon this subject), that I
have never had the least apprehension that I or my friends
would marry negroes if there was no law to keep them from
it; but as Judge Douglas and his friends seem to be in great
apprehension that they might, if there were no law to keep
them from it, I give him the most solemn pledge that I will
to the very last stand by the law of this State which forbids
the marrying of white people with negroes. I will add one
further word, which is this: that I do not understand that
there is any place where an alteration of the social and
political relations of the negro and the white man can be
made, except in the State Legislature, — not in the
 Congress of the United States; and as I do not really
apprehend the approach of any such thing myself, and as
Judge Douglas seems to be in constant horror that some
such danger is rapidly approaching, I propose as the best
means to prevent it that the Judge be kept at home, and
placed in the State Legislature to ﬁght the measure. I do
not propose dwelling longer at this time on this subject.
When Judge Trumbull, our other Senator in Congress,
returned to Illinois in the month of August, he made a
speech at Chicago, in which he made what may be called a
charge against Judge Douglas, which I understand proved
to be very oﬀensive to him. The Judge was at that time out
upon one of his speaking tours through the country, and
when the news of it reached him, as I am informed, he
denounced Judge Trumbull in rather harsh terms for having
said what he did in regard to that matter. I was traveling at
that time, and speaking at the same places with Judge
Douglas on subsequent days, and when I heard of what
Judge Trumbull had said of Douglas, and what Douglas had
said back again, I felt that I was in a position where I could
not remain entirely silent in regard to the matter.
Consequently, upon two or three occasions I alluded to it,
and alluded to it in no other wise than to say that in regard
to the charge brought by Trumbull against Douglas, I
personally knew nothing, and sought to say nothing about
it; that I did personally know Judge Trumbull; that I
believed him to be a man of veracity; that I believed him to
be a man of capacity suﬀicient to know very well whether
an assertion he was making, as a conclusion drawn from a
 set of facts, was true or false; and as a conclusion of my
own from that, I stated it as my belief if Trumbull should
ever be called upon, he would prove everything he had
said. I said this upon two or three occasions. Upon a
subsequent occasion, Judge Trumbull spoke again before
an audience at Alton, and upon that occasion not only
repeated his charge against Douglas, but arrayed the
evidence he relied upon to substantiate it. This speech was
published at length; and subsequently at Jacksonville Judge
Douglas alluded to the matter. In the course of his speech,
and near the close of it, he stated in regard to myself what I
will now read:
“Judge Douglas proceeded to remark that he should not
hereafter occupy his time in refuting such charges made by
Trumbull, but that, Lincoln having indorsed the character
of Trumbull for veracity, he should hold him (Lincoln)
responsible for the slanders.”
I have done simply what I have told you, to subject me to
this invitation to notice the charge. I now wish to say that it
had not originally been my purpose to discuss that matter
at all But in-as-much as it seems to be the wish of Judge
Douglas to hold me responsible for it, then for once in my
life I will play General Jackson, and to the just extent I take
the responsibility.
I wish to say at the beginning that I will hand to the
reporters that portion of Judge Trumbull’s Alton speech
which was devoted to this matter, and also that portion of
Judge Douglas’s speech made at Jacksonville in answer to
it. I shall thereby furnish the readers of this debate with the
 complete discussion between Trumbull and Douglas. I
cannot now read them, for the reason that it would take
half of my ﬁrst hour to do so. I can only make some
comments upon them. Trumbull’s charge is in the following
words:
“Now, the charge is, that there was a plot entered into to
have a constitution formed for Kansas, and put in force,
without giving the people an opportunity to vote upon it,
and that Mr. Douglas was in the plot.”
I will state, without quoting further, for all will have an
opportunity of reading it hereafter, that Judge Trumbull
brings forward what he regards as suﬀicient evidence to
substantiate this charge.
It will be perceived Judge Trumbull shows that Senator
Bigler, upon the ﬂoor of the Senate, had declared there had
been 
a 
conference 
among 
the 
senators, 
in 
which
conference it was determined to have an enabling act
passed for the people of Kansas to form a constitution
under, and in this conference it was agreed among them
that it was best not to have a provision for submitting the
constitution to a vote of the people after it should be
formed. He then brings forward to show, and showing, as
he deemed, that Judge Douglas reported the bill back to the
Senate with that clause stricken out. He then shows that
there was a new clause inserted into the bill, which would
in its nature prevent a reference of the constitution back
for a vote of the people, — if, indeed, upon a mere silence
in the law, it could be assumed that they had the right to
 vote upon it. These are the general statements that he has
made.
I propose to examine the points in Judge Douglas’s
speech in which he attempts to answer that speech of
Judge Trumbull’s. When you come to examine Judge
Douglas’s speech, you will ﬁnd that the ﬁrst point he makes
is:
“Suppose it were true that there was such a change in
the bill, and that I struck it out, — is that a proof of a plot to
force a constitution upon them against their will?”
His striking out such a provision, if there was such a one
in the bill, he argues, does not establish the proof that it
was stricken out for the purpose of robbing the people of
that right. I would say, in the ﬁrst place, that that would be
a most manifest reason for it. It is true, as Judge Douglas
states, that many Territorial bills have passed without
having such a provision in them. I believe it is true, though
I am not certain, that in some instances constitutions
framed under such bills have been submitted to a vote of
the people with the law silent upon the subject; but it does
not appear that they once had their enabling acts framed
with an express provision for submitting the constitution to
be framed to a vote of the people, then that they were
stricken out when Congress did not mean to alter the eﬀect
of the law. That there have been bills which never had the
provision in, I do not question; but when was that provision
taken out of one that it was in? More especially does the
evidence tend to prove the proposition that Trumbull
advanced, when we remember that the provision was
 stricken out of the bill almost simultaneously with the time
that Bigler says there was a conference among certain
senators, and in which it was agreed that a bill should be
passed leaving that out. Judge Douglas, in answering
Trumbull, omits to attend to the testimony of Bigler, that
there was a meeting in which it was agreed they should so
frame the bill that there should be no submission of the
constitution to a vote of the people. The Judge does not
notice this part of it. If you take this as one piece of
evidence, and then ascertain that simultaneously Judge
Douglas struck out a provision that did require it to be
submitted, and put the two together, I think it will make a
pretty fair show of proof that Judge Douglas did, as
Trumbull says, enter into a plot to put in force a
constitution for Kansas, without giving the people any
opportunity of voting upon it.
But I must hurry on. The next proposition that Judge
Douglas puts is this:
“But upon examination it turns out that the Toombs bill
never did contain a clause requiring the constitution to be
submitted.”
This is a mere question of fact, and can be determined by
evidence. I only want to ask this question: Why did not
Judge Douglas say that these words were not stricken out
of the Toomb’s bill, or this bill from which it is alleged the
provision was stricken out, — a bill which goes by the name
of Toomb’s, because he originally brought it forward? I ask
why, if the Judge wanted to make a direct issue with
Trumbull, did he not take the exact proposition Trumbull
 made in his speech, and say it was not stricken out?
Trumbull has given the exact words that he says were in
the Toomb’s bill, and he alleges that when the bill came
back, they were stricken out. Judge Douglas does not say
that the words which Trumbull says were stricken out were
not so stricken out, but he says there was no provision in
the Toomb’s bill to submit the constitution to a vote of the
people. We see at once that he is merely making an issue
upon the meaning of the words. He has not undertaken to
say that Trumbull tells a lie about these words being
stricken out, but he is really, when pushed up to it, only
taking an issue upon the meaning of the words. Now, then,
if there be any issue upon the meaning of the words, or if
there be upon the question of fact as to whether these
words were stricken out, I have before me what I suppose
to be a genuine copy of the Toomb’s bill, in which it can be
shown that the words Trumbull says were in it were, in
fact, originally there. If there be any dispute upon the fact,
I have got the documents here to show they were there. If
there be any controversy upon the sense of the words, —
whether these words which were stricken out really
constituted a provision for submitting the matter to a vote
of the people, — as that is a matter of argument, I think I
may as well use Trumbull’s own argument. He says that the
proposition is in these words:
“That the following propositions be and the same are
hereby oﬀered to the said Convention of the people of
Kansas when formed, for their free acceptance or rejection;
which, if accepted by the Convention and ratiﬁed by the
 people at the election for the adoption of the constitution,
shall be obligatory upon the United States and the said
State of Kansas.”
Now, Trumbull alleges that these last words were
stricken out of the bill when it came back, and he says this
was a provision for submitting the constitution to a vote of
the people; and his argument is this:
“Would it have been possible to ratify the land
propositions at the election for the adoption of the
constitution, unless such an election was to be held?”
This is Trumbull’s argument. Now, Judge Douglas does
not meet the charge at all, but he stands up and says there
was no such proposition in that bill for submitting the
constitution to be framed to a vote of the people. Trumbull
admits that the language is not a direct provision for
submitting it, but it is a provision necessarily implied from
another provision. He asks you how it is possible to ratify
the land proposition at the election for the adoption of the
constitution, if there was no election to be held for the
adoption of the constitution. And he goes on to show that it
is not any less a law because the provision is put in that
indirect shape than it would be if it were put directly. But I
presume I have said enough to draw attention to this point,
and I pass it by also.
Another one of the points that Judge Douglas makes upon
Trumbull, and at very great length, is, that Trumbull, while
the bill was pending, said in a speech in the Senate that he
supposed the constitution to be made would have to be
submitted to the people. He asks, if Trumbull thought so
 then, what ground is there for anybody thinking otherwise
now? Fellow-citizens, this much may be said in reply: That
bill had been in the hands of a party to which Trumbull did
not belong. It had been in the hands of the committee at
the head of which Judge Douglas stood. Trumbull perhaps
had a printed copy of the original Toomb’s bill. I have not
the evidence on that point except a sort of inference I draw
from 
the 
general 
course 
of 
business 
there. 
What
alterations, or what provisions in the way of altering, were
going on in committee, Trumbull had no means of knowing,
until the altered bill was reported back. Soon afterwards,
when it was reported back, there was a discussion over it,
and perhaps Trumbull in reading it hastily in the altered
form did not perceive all the bearings of the alterations. He
was hastily borne into the debate, and it does not follow
that because there was something in it Trumbull did not
perceive, that something did not exist. More than this, is it
true that what Trumbull did can have any eﬀect on what
Douglas did? Suppose Trumbull had been in the plot with
these other men, would that let Douglas out of it? Would it
exonerate Douglas that Trumbull did n’t then perceive he
was in the plot? He also asks the question: Why did n’t
Trumbull propose to amend the bill, if he thought it needed
any amendment? Why, I believe that everything Judge
Trumbull had proposed, particularly in connection with this
question of Kansas and Nebraska, since he had been on the
ﬂoor of the Senate, had been promptly voted down by
Judge Douglas and his friends. He had no promise that an
amendment oﬀered by him to anything on this subject
 would receive the slightest consideration. Judge Trumbull
did bring to the notice of the Senate at that time the fact
that there was no provision for submitting the constitution
about to be made for the people of Kansas to a vote of the
people. I believe I may venture to say that Judge Douglas
made some reply to this speech of Judge Trumbull’s, but he
never noticed that part of it at all. And so the thing passed
by. I think, then, the fact that Judge Trumbull oﬀered no
amendment does not throw much blame upon him; and if it
did, it does not reach the question of fact as to what Judge
Douglas was doing. I repeat, that if Trumbull had himself
been in the plot, it would not at all relieve the others who
were in it from blame. If I should be indicted for murder,
and upon the trial it should be discovered that I had been
implicated in that murder, but that the prosecuting witness
was guilty too, that would not at all touch the question of
my crime. It would be no relief to my neck that they
discovered this other man who charged the crime upon me
to be guilty too.
Another one of the points Judge Douglas makes upon
Judge Trumbull is, that when he spoke in Chicago he made
his charge to rest upon the fact that the bill had the
provision in it for submitting the constitution to a vote of
the people when it went into his Judge Douglas’s hands,
that it was missing when he reported it to the Senate, and
that in a public speech he had subsequently said the
alterations in the bill were made while it was in committee,
and that they were made in consultation between him
(Judge Douglas) and Toomb’s. And Judge Douglas goes on
 to comment upon the fact of Trumbull’s adducing in his
Alton speech the proposition that the bill not only came
back with that proposition stricken out, but with another
clause and another provision in it, saying that “until the
complete execution of this Act there shall be no election in
said Territory,” — which, Trumbull argued, was not only
taking the provision for submitting to a vote of the people
out of the bill, but was adding an aﬀirmative one, in that it
prevented the people from exercising the right under a bill
that was merely silent on the question. Now, in regard to
what he says, that Trumbull shifts the issue, that he shifts
his ground, — and I believe he uses the term that, “it being
proven false, he has changed ground,” I call upon all of
you, when you come to examine that portion of Trumbull’s
speech (for it will make a part of mine), to examine whether
Trumbull has shifted his ground or not. I say he did not
shift his ground, but that he brought forward his original
charge and the evidence to sustain it yet more fully, but
precisely as he originally made it. Then, in addition thereto,
he brought in a new piece of evidence. He shifted no
ground. He brought no new piece of evidence inconsistent
with his former testimony; but he brought a new piece,
tending, as he thought, and as I think, to prove his
proposition. To illustrate: A man brings an accusation
against another, and on trial the man making the charge
introduces A and B to prove the accusation. At a second
trial he introduces the same witnesses, who tell the same
story as before, and a third witness, who tells the same
thing, and in addition gives further testimony corroborative
 of the charge. So with Trumbull. There was no shifting of
ground, nor inconsistency of testimony between the new
piece of evidence and what he originally introduced.
But Judge Douglas says that he himself moved to strike
out that last provision of the bill, and that on his motion it
was stricken out and a substitute inserted. That I presume
is the truth. I presume it is true that that last proposition
was stricken out by Judge Douglas. Trumbull has not said it
was not; Trumbull has himself said that it was so stricken
out. He says: “I am now speaking of the bill as Judge
Douglas reported it back. It was amended somewhat in the
Senate before it passed, but I am speaking of it as he
brought it back.” Now, when Judge Douglas parades the
fact that the provision was stricken out of the bill when it
came back, he asserts nothing contrary to what Trumbull
alleges. Trumbull has only said that he originally put it in,
not that he did not strike it out. Trumbull says it was not in
the bill when it went to the committee. When it came back
it was in, and Judge Douglas said the alterations were made
by him in consultation with Toomb’s. Trumbull alleges,
therefore, as his conclusion, that Judge Douglas put it in.
Then, if Douglas wants to contradict Trumbull and call him
a liar, let him say he did not put it in, and not that he did n’t
take it out again. It is said that a bear is sometimes hard
enough pushed to drop a cub; and so I presume it was in
this case. I presume the truth is that Douglas put it in, and
afterward took it out. That, I take it, is the truth about it.
Judge Trumbull says one thing, Douglas says another thing,
and the two don’t contradict one another at all. The
 question is, what did he put it in for? In the ﬁrst place,
what did he take the other provision out of the bill for, —
the provision which Trumbull argued was necessary for
submitting the constitution to a vote of the people? What
did he take that out for; and, having taken it out, what did
he put this in for? I say that in the run of things it is not
unlikely forces conspire to render it vastly expedient for
Judge Douglas to take that latter clause out again. The
question that Trumbull has made is that Judge Douglas put
it in; and he don’t meet Trumbull at all unless he denies
that.
In the clause of Judge Douglas’s speech upon this subject
he uses this language toward Judge Trumbull. He says:
“He forges his evidence from beginning to end; and by
falsifying the record, he endeavors to bolster up his false
charge.”
Well, that is a pretty serious statement — Trumbull
forges his evidence from beginning to end. Now, upon my
own authority I say that it is not true. What is a forgery?
Consider the evidence that Trumbull has brought forward.
When you come to read the speech, as you will be able to,
examine whether the evidence is a forgery from beginning
to end. He had the bill or document in his hand like that
[holding up a paper]. He says that is a copy of the Toomb’s
bill, — the amendment oﬀered by Toomb’s. He says that is a
copy of the bill as it was introduced and went into Judge
Douglas’s hands. Now, does Judge Douglas say that is a
forgery? That is one thing Trumbull brought forward. Judge
Douglas says he forged it from beginning to end! That is
 the “beginning,” we will say. Does Douglas say that is a
forgery? Let him say it to-day, and we will have a
subsequent examination upon this subject. Trumbull then
holds up another document like this, and says that is an
exact copy of the bill as it came back in the amended form
out of Judge Douglas’s hands. Does Judge Douglas say that
is a forgery? Does he say it in his general sweeping charge?
Does he say so now? If he does not, then take this Toomb’s
bill and the bill in the amended form, and it only needs to
compare them to see that the provision is in the one and
not in the other; it leaves the inference inevitable that it
was taken out.
But, while I am dealing with this question, let us see
what Trumbull’s other evidence is. One other piece of
evidence I will read. Trumbull says there are in this original
Toomb’s bill these words:
“That the following propositions be and the same are
hereby oﬀered to the said Convention of the people of
Kansas, when formed, for their free acceptance or
rejection; which, if accepted by the Convention and ratiﬁed
by the people at the election for the adoption of the
constitution, shall be obligatory upon the United States and
the said State of Kansas.”
Now, if it is said that this is a forgery, we will open the
paper here and see whether it is or not. Again, Trumbull
says, as he goes along, that Mr. Bigler made the following
statement in his place in the Senate, December 9, 1857:
“I was present when that subject was discussed by
senators before the bill was introduced, and the question
 was raised and discussed, whether the constitution, when
formed, should be submitted to a vote of the people. It was
held by those most intelligent on the subject that, in view of
all the diﬀiculties surrounding that Territory, the danger of
any experiment at that time of a popular vote, it would be
better there should be no such provision in the Toomb’s
bill; and it was my understanding, in all the intercourse I
had, that the Convention would make a constitution, and
send it here, without submitting it to the popular vote.”
Then Trumbull follows on:
“In speaking of this meeting again on the 21st December,
1857 [Congressional Globe, same vol., page 113], Senator
Bigler said:
“‘Nothing was further from my mind than to allude to
any social or conﬁdential interview. The meeting was not of
that character. Indeed, it was semi-oﬀicial, and called to
promote the public good. My recollection was clear that I
left the conference under the impression that it had been
deemed best to adopt measures to admit Kansas as a State
through the agency of one popular election, and that for
delegates to this Convention. This impression was stronger
because I thought the spirit of the bill infringed upon the
doctrine of non-intervention, to which I had great aversion;
but with the hope of accomplishing a great good, and as no
movement had been made in that direction in the Territory,
I waived this objection, and concluded to support the
measure. I have a few items of testimony as to the
correctness of these impressions, and with their submission
I shall be content. I have before me the bill reported by the
 senator from Illinois on the 7th of March, 1856, providing
for the admission of Kansas as a State, the third section of
which reads as follows:
“That the following propositions be, and the same are
hereby oﬀered to the said Convention of the people of
Kansas, when formed, for their free acceptance or
rejection; which, if accepted by the Convention and ratiﬁed
by the people at the election for the adoption of the
constitution, shall be obligatory upon the United States and
the said State of Kansas.”
The bill read in his place by the senator from Georgia on
the 25th of June, and referred to the Committee on
Territories, contained the same section word for word. Both
these bills were under consideration at the conference
referred to; but, sir, when the senator from Illinois reported
the Toombs bill to the Senate with amendments, the next
morning, it did not contain that portion of the third section
which indicated to the Convention that the constitution
should be approved by the people. The words “and ratiﬁed
by the people at the election for the adoption of the
constitution” had been stricken out.
Now, these things Trumbull says were stated by Bigler
upon the ﬂoor of the Senate on certain days, and that they
are recorded in the Congressional Globe on certain pages.
Does Judge Douglas say this is a forgery? Does he say there
is no such thing in the Congressional Globe? What does he
mean when he says Judge Trumbull forges his evidence
from beginning to end? So again he says in another place
 that Judge Douglas, in his speech, December 9, 1857
(Congressional Globe, part I., page 15), stated:
“That during the last session of Congress, I [Mr. Douglas]
reported a bill from the Committee on Territories, to
authorize the people of Kansas to assemble and form a
constitution for themselves. Subsequently the senator from
Georgia [Mr. Toombs] brought forward a substitute for my
bill, which, after having been modiﬁed by him and myself in
consultation, was passed by the Senate.”
Now, Trumbull says this is a quotation from a speech of
Douglas, and is recorded in the Congressional Globe. Is it a
forgery? Is it there or not? It may not be there, but I want
the Judge to take these pieces of evidence, and distinctly
say they are forgeries if he dare do it.
[A voice: “He will.”]
Well, sir, you had better not commit him. He gives other
quotations, — another from Judge Douglas. He says:
“I will ask the senator to show me an intimation, from
any one member of the Senate, in the whole debate on the
Toombs bill, and in the Union, from any quarter, that the
constitution was not to be submitted to the people. I will
venture to say that on all sides of the chamber it was so
understood at the time. If the opponents of the bill had
understood it was not, they would have made the point on
it; and if they had made it, we should certainly have yielded
to it, and put in the clause. That is a discovery made since
the President found out that it was not safe to take it for
granted that that would be done, which ought in fairness to
have been done.”
 Judge Trumbull says Douglas made that speech, and it is
recorded. Does Judge Douglas say it is a forgery, and was
not true? Trumbull says somewhere, and I propose to skip
it, but it will be found by any one who will read this debate,
that he did distinctly bring it to the notice of those who
were engineering the bill, that it lacked that provision; and
then he goes on to give another quotation from Judge
Douglas, where Judge Trumbull uses this language:
“Judge Douglas, however, on the same day and in the
same debate, probably recollecting or being reminded of
the fact that I had objected to the Toombs bill when
pending that it did not provide for a submission of the
constitution to the people, made another statement, which
is to be found in the same volume of the Globe, page 22, in
which he says: ‘That the bill was silent on this subject was
true, and my attention was called to that about the time it
was passed; and I took the fair construction to be, that
powers not delegated were reserved, and that of course the
constitution would be submitted to the people.’
“Whether this statement is consistent with the statement
just before made, that had the point been made it would
have been yielded to, or that it was a new discovery, you
will determine.”
So I say. I do not know whether Judge Douglas will
dispute this, and yet maintain his position that Trumbull’s
evidence “was forged from beginning to end.” I will remark
that I have not got these Congressional Globes with me.
They are large books, and diﬀicult to carry about, and if
Judge Douglas shall say that on these points where
 Trumbull has quoted from them there are no such passages
there, I shall not be able to prove they are there upon this
occasion, but I will have another chance. Whenever he
points out the forgery and says, “I declare that this
particular thing which Trumbull has uttered is not to be
found where he says it is,” then my attention will be drawn
to that, and I will arm myself for the contest, stating now
that I have not the slightest doubt on earth that I will ﬁnd
every quotation just where Trumbull says it is. Then the
question is, How can Douglas call that a forgery? How can
he make out that it is a forgery? What is a forgery? It is the
bringing forward something in writing or in print
purporting to be of certain eﬀect when it is altogether
untrue. If you come forward with my note for one hundred
dollars when I have never given such a note, there is a
forgery. If you come forward with a letter purporting to be
written by me which I never wrote, there is another
forgery. If you produce anything in writing or in print
saying it is so and so, the document not being genuine, a
forgery has been committed. How do you make this forgery
when every piece of the evidence is genuine? If Judge
Douglas does say these documents and quotations are false
and forged, he has a full right to do so; but until he does it
speciﬁcally, we don’t know how to get at him. If he does say
they are false and forged, I will then look further into it,
and presume I can procure the certiﬁcates of the proper
oﬀicers that they are genuine copies. I have no doubt each
of these extracts will be found exactly where Trumbull says
it is. Then I leave it to you if Judge Douglas, in making his
 sweeping charge that Judge Trumbull’s evidence is forged
from beginning to end, at all meets the case, — if that is the
way to get at the facts. I repeat again, if he will point out
which one is a forgery, I will carefully examine it, and if it
proves that any one of them is really a forgery, it will not be
me who will hold to it any longer. I have always wanted to
deal with everyone I meet candidly and honestly. If I have
made any assertion not warranted by facts, and it is
pointed out to me, I will withdraw it cheerfully. But I do not
choose to see Judge Trumbull calumniated, and the
evidence he has brought forward branded in general terms
“a forgery from beginning to end.” This is not the legal way
of meeting a charge, and I submit it to all intelligent
persons, both friends of Judge Douglas and of myself,
whether it is.
The point upon Judge Douglas is this: The bill that went
into his hands had the provision in it for a submission of the
constitution to the people; and I say its language amounts
to an express provision for a submission, and that he took
the provision out. He says it was known that the bill was
silent in this particular; but I say, Judge Douglas, it was not
silent when you got it. It was vocal with the declaration,
when you got it, for a submission of the constitution to the
people. And now, my direct question to Judge Douglas is, to
answer why, if he deemed the bill silent on this point, he
found it necessary to strike out those particular harmless
words. If he had found the bill silent and without this
provision, he might say what he does now. If he supposes it
was implied that the constitution would be submitted to a
 vote of the people, how could these two lines so encumber
the statute as to make it necessary to strike them out? How
could he infer that a submission was still implied, after its
express provision had been stricken from the bill? I ﬁnd the
bill vocal with the provision, while he silenced it. He took it
out, and although he took out the other provision
preventing a submission to a vote of the people, I ask, Why
did you ﬁrst put it in? I ask him whether he took the
original provision out, which Trumbull alleges was in the
bill. If he admits that he did take it, I ask him what he did it
for. It looks to us as if he had altered the bill. If it looks
diﬀerently to him, — if he has a diﬀerent reason for his
action from the one we assign him — he can tell it. I insist
upon knowing why he made the bill silent upon that point
when it was vocal before he put his hands upon it.
I was told, before my last paragraph, that my time was
within three minutes of being out. I presume it is expired
now; I therefore close.
