  .  I
 
 
      
I
  .
FELLOW-CITIZENS: IT FOLLOWS as a matter of course
that a half-hour answer to a speech of an hour and a half
can be but a very hurried one. I shall only be able to touch
upon a few of the points suggested by Judge Douglas, and
give them a brief attention, while I shall have to totally omit
others for the want of time.
Judge Douglas has said to you that he has not been able
to get from me an answer to the question whether I am in
favor of negro citizenship. So far as I know the Judge never
asked me the question before. He shall have no occasion to
ever ask it again, for I tell him very frankly that I am not in
favor of negro citizenship. This furnishes me an occasion
for saying a few words upon the subject. I mentioned in a
certain speech of mine, which has been printed, that the
Supreme Court had decided that a negro could not possibly
be made a citizen; and without saying what was my ground
of complaint in regard to that, or whether I had any ground
of 
complaint, 
Judge 
Douglas 
has 
from 
that 
thing
manufactured nearly everything that he ever says about my
disposition to produce an equality between the negroes and
the white people. If any one will read my speech, he will
ﬁnd I mentioned that as one of the points decided in the
course of the Supreme Court opinions, but I did not state
 what objection I had to it. But Judge Douglas tells the
people what my objection was when I did not tell them
myself. Now, my opinion is that the diﬀerent States have
the power to make a negro a citizen under the Constitution
of the United States if they choose. The Dred Scott decision
decides that they have not that power. If the State of Illinois
had that power, I should be opposed to the exercise of it.
That is all I have to say about it.
Judge Douglas has told me that he heard my speeches
north and my speeches south; that he had heard me at
Ottawa and at Freeport in the north and recently at
Jonesboro in the south, and there was a very diﬀerent cast
of sentiment in the speeches made at the diﬀerent points. I
will not charge upon Judge Douglas that he wilfully
misrepresents me, but I call upon every fair-minded man to
take these speeches and read them, and I dare him to point
out any diﬀerence between my speeches north and south.
While I am here perhaps I ought to say a word, if I have the
time, in regard to the latter portion of the Judge’s speech,
which was a sort of declamation in reference to my having
said I entertained the belief that this government would not
endure half slave and half free. I have said so, and I did not
say it without what seemed to me to be good reasons. It
perhaps would require more time than I have now to set
forth these reasons in detail; but let me ask you a few
questions. Have we ever had any peace on this slavery
question? When are we to have peace upon it, if it is kept in
the position it now occupies? How are we ever to have
peace upon it? That is an important question. To be sure, if
 we will all stop, and allow Judge Douglas and his friends to
march on in their present career until they plant the
institution all over the nation, here and wherever else our
ﬂag waves, and we acquiesce in it, there will be peace. But
let me ask Judge Douglas how he is going to get the people
to do that? They have been wrangling over this question for
at least forty years. This was the cause of the agitation
resulting in the Missouri Compromise; this produced the
troubles at the annexation of Texas, in the acquisition of the
territory acquired in the Mexican War. Again, this was the
trouble which was quieted by the Compromise of 1850,
when it was settled “forever” as both the great political
parties declared in their National Conventions. That
“forever” turned out to be just four years, when Judge
Douglas himself reopened it. When is it likely to come to an
end? He introduced the Nebraska Bill in 1854 to put
another end to the slavery agitation. He promised that it
would ﬁnish it all up immediately, and he has never made a
speech since, until he got into a quarrel with the President
about the Lecompton Constitution, in which he has not
declared that we are just at the end of the slavery agitation.
But in one speech, I think last winter, he did say that he did
n’t quite see when the end of the slavery agitation would
come. Now he tells us again that it is all over and the
people of Kansas have voted down the Lecompton
Constitution. How is it over? That was only one of the
attempts at putting an end to the slavery agitation — one of
these “ﬁnal settlements.” Is Kansas in the Union? Has she
formed a constitution that she is likely to come in under? Is
 not the slavery agitation still an open question in that
Territory? Has the voting down of that constitution put an
end to all the trouble? Is that more likely to settle it than
every one of these previous attempts to settle the slavery
agitation? Now, at this day in the history of the world we
can no more foretell where the end of this slavery agitation
will be than we can see the end of the world itself. The
Nebraska-Kansas Bill was introduced four years and a half
ago, and if the agitation is ever to come to an end we may
say we are four years and a half nearer the end. So, too, we
can say we are four years and a half nearer the end of the
world, and we can just as clearly see the end of the world
as we can see the end of this agitation. The Kansas
settlement did not conclude it. If Kansas should sink to-day,
and leave a great vacant space in the earth’s surface, this
vexed question would still be among us. I say, then, there is
no way of putting an end to the slavery agitation amongst
us but to put it back upon the basis where our fathers
placed it; no way but to keep it out of our new Territories,
— to restrict it forever to the old States where it now
exists. Then the public mind will rest in the belief that it is
in the course of ultimate extinction. That is one way of
putting an end to the slavery agitation.
The other way is for us to surrender and let Judge
Douglas and his friends have their way and plant slavery
over all the States; cease speaking of it as in any way a
wrong; regard slavery as one of the common matters of
property, and speak of negroes as we do of our horses and
cattle. But while it drives on in its state of progress as it is
 now driving, and as it has driven for the last ﬁve years, I
have ventured the opinion, and I say to-day, that we will
have no end to the slavery agitation until it takes one turn
or the other. I do not mean that when it takes a turn toward
ultimate extinction it will be in a day, nor in a year, nor in
two years. I do not suppose that in the most peaceful way
ultimate extinction would occur in less than a hundred
years at least; but that it will occur in the best way for both
races, in God’s own good time, I have no doubt. But, my
friends, I have used up more of my time than I intended on
this point.
Now, in regard to this matter about Trumbull and myself
having made a bargain to sell out the entire Whig and
Democratic parties in 1854: Judge Douglas brings forward
no evidence to sustain his charge, except the speech
Matheny is said to have made in 1856, in which he told a
cock-and-bull story of that sort, upon the same moral
principles that Judge Douglas tells it here to-day. This is the
simple truth. I do not care greatly for the story, but this is
the truth of it: and I have twice told Judge Douglas to his
face that from beginning to end there is not one word of
truth in it. I have called upon him for the proof, and he does
not at all meet me as Trumbull met him upon that of which
we were just talking, by producing the record. He did n’t
bring the record because there was no record for him to
bring. When he asks if I am ready to indorse Trumbull’s
veracity after he has broken a bargain with me, I reply that
if Trumbull had broken a bargain with me I would not be
likely to indorse his veracity; but I am ready to indorse his
 veracity because neither in that thing, nor in any other, in
all the years that I have known Lyman Trumbull, have I
known him to fail of his word or tell a falsehood large or
small. It is for that reason that I indorse Lyman Trumbull.
[Mr. JAMES BROWN (Douglas postmaster): “What does
Ford’s History say about him?”]
Some gentleman asks me what Ford’s History says about
him. My own recollection is that Ford speaks of Trumbull in
very disrespectful terms in several portions of his book, and
that he talks a great deal worse of Judge Douglas. I refer
you, sir, to the History for examination.
Judge Douglas complains at considerable length about a
disposition on the part of Trumbull and myself to attack
him personally. I want to attend to that suggestion a
moment. I don’t want to be unjustly accused of dealing
illiberally or unfairly with an adversary, either in court or in
a political canvass or anywhere else. I would despise myself
if I supposed myself ready to deal less liberally with an
adversary than I was willing to be treated myself. Judge
Douglas in a general way, without putting it in a direct
shape, revives the old charge against me in reference to
the Mexican War. He does not take the responsibility of
putting it in a very deﬁnite form, but makes a general
reference to it. That charge is more than ten years old. He
complains of Trumbull and myself because he says we bring
charges against him one or two years old. He knows, too,
that in regard to the Mexican War story the more
respectable papers of his own party throughout the State
 have been compelled to take it back and acknowledge that
it was a lie.
[Here Mr. LINCOLN turned to the crowd on the platform,
and, selecting HON. ORLANDO B. FICKLIN, led him
forward and said:]
I do not mean to do anything with Mr. FICKLIN except to
present his face and tell you that he personally knows it to
be a lie! He was a member of Congress at the only time I
was in Congress, and [FICKLIN] knows that whenever
there was an attempt to procure a vote of mine which
would indorse the origin and justice of the war, I refused to
give such indorsement and voted against it; but I never
voted against the supplies for the army, and he knows, as
well as Judge Douglas, that whenever a dollar was asked by
way of compensation or otherwise for the beneﬁt of the
soldiers I gave all the votes that FICKLIN or Douglas did,
and perhaps more.
[Mr. FICKLIN: My friends, I wish to say this in reference
to the matter: Mr. Lincoln and myself are just as good
personal friends as Judge Douglas and myself. In reference
to this Mexican War, my recollection is that when Ashmun’s
resolution [amendment] was oﬀered by Mr. Ashmun of
Massachusetts, in which he declared that the Mexican War
was unnecessary and unconstitutionally commenced by the
President-my recollection is that Mr. Lincoln voted for that
resolution.]
That is the truth. Now, you all remember that was a
resolution censuring the President for the manner in which
the war was begun. You know they have charged that I
 voted against the supplies, by which I starved the soldiers
who were out ﬁghting the battles of their country. I say that
FICKLIN knows it is false. When that charge was brought
forward by the Chicago Times, the Springﬁeld Register
[Douglas’s organ] reminded the Times that the charge
really applied to John Henry; and I do know that John
Henry is now making speeches and ﬁercely battling for
Judge Douglas. If the Judge now says that he oﬀers this as a
sort of setoﬀ to what I said to-day in reference to
Trumbull’s charge, then I remind him that he made this
charge before I said a word about Trumbull’s. He brought
this forward at Ottawa, the ﬁrst time we met face to face;
and in the opening speech that Judge Douglas made he
attacked me in regard to a matter ten years old. Is n’t he a
pretty man to be whining about people making charges
against him only two years old!
The Judge thinks it is altogether wrong that I should have
dwelt upon this charge of Trumbull’s at all. I gave the
apology for doing so in my opening speech. Perhaps it did
n’t ﬁx your attention. I said that when Judge Douglas was
speaking at place — where I spoke on the succeeding day
he used very harsh language about this charge. Two or
three times afterward I said I had conﬁdence in Judge
Trumbull’s veracity and intelligence; and my own opinion
was, from what I knew of the character of Judge Trumbull,
that he would vindicate his position and prove whatever he
had stated to be true. This I repeated two or three times;
and then I dropped it, without saying anything more on the
subject for weeks — perhaps a month. I passed it by
 without noticing it at all till I found, at Jacksonville, Judge
Douglas in the plenitude of his power is not willing to
answer Trumbull and let me alone, but he comes out there
and uses this language: “He should not hereafter occupy
his time in refuting such charges made by Trumbull but
that, Lincoln having indorsed the character of Trumbull for
veracity, he should hold him [Lincoln] responsible for the
slanders.” What was Lincoln to do? Did he not do right,
when he had the ﬁt opportunity of meeting Judge Douglas
here, to tell him he was ready for the responsibility? I ask a
candid audience whether in doing thus Judge Douglas was
not the assailant rather than I? Here I meet him face to
face, and say I am ready to take the responsibility, so far as
it rests on me.
Having done so I ask the attention of this audience to the
question whether I have succeeded in sustaining the
charge, and whether Judge Douglas has at all succeeded in
rebutting it? You all heard me call upon him to say which of
these pieces of evidence was a forgery. Does he say that
what I present here as a copy of the original Toombs bill is
a forgery? Does he say that what I present as a copy of the
bill reported by himself is a forgery, or what is presented as
a transcript from the Globe of the quotations from Bigler’s
speech is a forgery? Does he say the quotations from his
own speech are forgeries? Does he say this transcript from
Trumbull’s speech is a forgery?
[“He didn’t deny one of them.”]
I would then like to know how it comes about that when
each piece of a story is true the whole story turns out false.
 I take it these people have some sense; they see plainly that
Judge Douglas is playing cuttle-ﬁsh, a small species of ﬁsh
that has no mode of defending itself when pursued except
by throwing out a black ﬂuid, which makes the water so
dark the enemy cannot see it, and thus it escapes. Ain’t the
Judge playing the cuttle-ﬁsh?
Now, I would ask very special attention to the
consideration of Judge Douglas’s speech at Jacksonville;
and when you shall read his speech of to-day, I ask you to
watch closely and see which of these pieces of testimony,
every one of which he says is a forgery, he has shown to be
such. Not one of them has he shown to be a forgery. Then I
ask the original question, if each of the pieces of testimony
is true, how is it possible that the whole is a falsehood?
In regard to Trumbull’s charge that he [Douglas] inserted
a provision into the bill to prevent the constitution being
submitted to the people, what was his answer? He comes
here and reads from the Congressional Globe to show that
on his motion that provision was struck out of the bill. Why,
Trumbull has not said it was not stricken out, but Trumbull
says he [Douglas] put it in; and it is no answer to the
charge to say he afterwards took it out. Both are perhaps
true. It was in regard to that thing precisely that I told him
he had dropped the cub. Trumbull shows you that by his
introducing the bill it was his cub. It is no answer to that
assertion to call Trumbull a liar merely because he did not
specially say that Douglas struck it out. Suppose that were
the case, does it answer Trumbull? I assert that you
[pointing to an individual] are here to-day, and you
 undertake to prove me a liar by showing that you were in
Mattoon yesterday. I say that you took your hat oﬀ your
head, and you prove me a liar by putting it on your head.
That is the whole force of Douglas’s argument.
Now, I want to come back to my original question.
Trumbull says that Judge Douglas had a bill with a
provision in it for submitting a constitution to be made to a
vote of the people of Kansas. Does Judge Douglas deny that
fact? Does he deny that the provision which Trumbull reads
was put in that bill? Then Trumbull says he struck it out.
Does he dare to deny that? He does not, and I have the
right to repeat the question, — Why Judge Douglas took it
out? Bigler has said there was a combination of certain
senators, among whom he did not include Judge Douglas,
by which it was agreed that the Kansas Bill should have a
clause in it not to have the constitution formed under it
submitted to a vote of the people. He did not say that
Douglas was among them, but we prove by another source
that about the same time Douglas comes into the Senate
with that provision stricken out of the bill. Although Bigler
cannot say they were all working in concert, yet it looks
very much as if the thing was agreed upon and done with a
mutual understanding after the conference; and while we
do not know that it was absolutely so, yet it looks so
probable that we have a right to call upon the man who
knows the true reason why it was done to tell what the true
reason was. When he will not tell what the true reason was,
he stands in the attitude of an accused thief who has stolen
goods in his possession, and when called to account refuses
 to tell where he got them. Not only is this the evidence, but
when he comes in with the bill having the provision
stricken out, he tells us in a speech, not then but since, that
these alterations and modiﬁcations in the bill had been
made by HIM, in consultation with Toombs, the originator
of the bill. He tells us the same to-day. He says there were
certain modiﬁcations made in the bill in committee that he
did not vote for. I ask you to remember, while certain
amendments were made which he disapproved of, but
which a majority of the committee voted in, he has himself
told us that in this particular the alterations and
modiﬁcations were made by him, upon consultation with
Toombs. We have his own word that these alterations were
made by him, and not by the committee. Now, I ask, what is
the reason Judge Douglas is so chary about coming to the
exact question? What is the reason he will not tell you
anything about How it was made, BY WHOM it was made,
or that he remembers it being made at all? Why does he
stand playing upon the meaning of words and quibbling
around the edges of the evidence? If he can explain all this,
but leaves it unexplained, I have the right to infer that
Judge Douglas understood it was the purpose of his party,
in engineering that bill through, to make a constitution, and
have Kansas come into the Union with that constitution,
without its being submitted to a vote of the people. If he
will explain his action on this question, by giving a better
reason for the facts that happened than he has done, it will
be satisfactory. But until he does that — until he gives a
better or more plausible reason than he has oﬀered against
 the evidence in the case — I suggest to him it will not avail
him at all that he swells himself up, takes on dignity, and
calls people liars. Why, sir, there is not a word in Trumbull’s
speech that depends on Trumbull’s veracity at all. He has
only arrayed the evidence and told you what follows as a
matter of reasoning. There is not a statement in the whole
speech that depends on Trumbull’s word. If you have ever
studied geometry, you remember that by a course of
reasoning Euclid proves that all the angles in a triangle are
equal to two right angles. Euclid has shown you how to
work it out. Now, if you undertake to disprove that
proposition, and to show that it is erroneous, would you
prove it to be false by calling Euclid a liar? They tell me
that my time is out, and therefore I close.
