  I  H  
I
  
  A    A  
I
    
  
      
    .
LADIES AND GENTLEMEN: I have had no immediate
conference with Judge Douglas, but I will venture to say
that he and I will perfectly agree that your entire silence,
both when I speak and when he speaks, will be most
agreeable to us.
In the month of May, 1856, the elements in the State of
Illinois which have since been consolidated into the
Republican party assembled together in a State Convention
at Bloomington. They adopted at that time what, in political
language, is called a platform. In June of the same year the
elements of the Republican party in the nation assembled
together in a National Convention at Philadelphia. They
adopted what is called the National Platform. In June, 1858,
— the present year, — the Republicans of Illinois
reassembled at Springﬁeld, in State Convention, and
adopted again their platform, as I suppose not diﬀering in
any essential particular from either of the former ones, but
perhaps 
adding 
something 
in 
relation 
to 
the 
new
developments of political progress in the country.
The Convention that assembled in June last did me the
honor, if it be one, and I esteem it such, to nominate me as
their candidate for the United States Senate. I have
supposed that, in entering upon this canvass, I stood
 generally upon these platforms. We are now met together
on the 13th of October of the same year, only four months
from the adoption of the last platform, and I am unaware
that in this canvass, from the beginning until to-day, any
one of our adversaries has taken hold of our platforms, or
laid his ﬁnger upon anything that he calls wrong in them.
In the very ﬁrst one of these joint discussions between
Senator Douglas and myself, Senator Douglas, without
alluding at all to these platforms, or any one of them, of
which I have spoken, attempted to hold me responsible for
a set of resolutions passed long before the meeting of
either one of these conventions of which I have spoken. And
as a ground for holding me responsible for these
resolutions, he assumed that they had been passed at a
State Convention of the Republican party, and that I took
part in that Convention. It was discovered afterward that
this was erroneous, that the resolutions which he
endeavored to hold me responsible for had not been passed
by any State Convention anywhere, had not been passed at
Springﬁeld, where he supposed they had, or assumed that
they had, and that they had been passed in no convention
in which I had taken part. The Judge, nevertheless, was not
willing to give up the point that he was endeavoring to
make upon me, and he therefore thought to still hold me to
the point that he was endeavoring to make, by showing that
the resolutions that he read had been passed at a local
convention in the northern part of the State, although it
was not a local convention that embraced my residence at
all, nor one that reached, as I suppose, nearer than one
 hundred and ﬁfty or two hundred miles of where I was
when it met, nor one in which I took any part at all. He also
introduced other resolutions, passed at other meetings, and
by combining the whole, although they were all antecedent
to the two State Conventions and the one National
Convention I have mentioned, still he insisted, and now
insists, as I understand, that I am in some way responsible
for them.
At Jonesboro, on our third meeting, I insisted to the
Judge that I was in no way rightfully held responsible for
the proceedings of this local meeting or convention, in
which I had taken no part, and in which I was in no way
embraced; but I insisted to him that if he thought I was
responsible for every man or every set of men everywhere,
who happen to be my friends, the rule ought to work both
ways, and he ought to be responsible for the acts and
resolutions of all men or sets of men who were or are now
his supporters and friends, and gave him a pretty long
string of resolutions, passed by men who are now his
friends, and announcing doctrines for which he does not
desire to be held responsible.
This still does not satisfy Judge Douglas. He still adheres
to his proposition, that I am responsible for what some of
my friends in diﬀerent parts of the State have done, but
that he is not responsible for what his have done. At least,
so I understand him. But in addition to that, the Judge, at
our meeting in Galesburgh, last week, undertakes to
establish that I am guilty of a species of double dealing
with the public; that I make speeches of a certain sort in
 the north, among the Abolitionists, which I would not make
in the south, and that I make speeches of a certain sort in
the south which I would not make in the north. I
apprehend, in the course I have marked out for myself, that
I shall not have to dwell at very great length upon this
subject.
As this was done in the Judge’s opening speech at
Galesburgh, I had an opportunity, as I had the middle
speech then, of saying something in answer to it. He
brought forward a quotation or two from a speech of mine
delivered at Chicago, and then, to contrast with it, he
brought forward an extract from a speech of mine at
Charleston, in which he insisted that I was greatly
inconsistent, and insisted that his conclusion followed, that
I was playing a double part, and speaking in one region one
way, and in another region another way. I have not time
now to dwell on this as long as I would like, and wish only
now to requote that portion of my speech at Charleston
which the Judge quoted, and then make some comments
upon it. This he quotes from me as being delivered at
Charleston, and I believe correctly:
“I will say, then, that I am not, nor ever have been, in
favor of bringing about in any way the social and political
equality of the white and black races; that I am not, nor
ever have been, in favor of making voters or jurors of
negroes, nor of qualifying them to hold oﬀice, nor to
intermarry with white people; and I will say, in addition to
this, that there is a physical diﬀerence between the white
and black races which will forever forbid the two races
 living together on terms of social and political equality. And
inasmuch as they cannot so live while they do remain
together, there must be the position of superior and
inferior. I am as much as any other man in favor of having
the superior position assigned to the white race.”
This, I believe, is the entire quotation from Charleston
speech, as Judge Douglas made it his comments are as
follows:
“Yes, here you ﬁnd men who hurrah for Lincoln, and say
he is right when he discards all distinction between races,
or when he declares that he discards the doctrine that
there is such a thing as a superior and inferior race; and
Abolitionists are required and expected to vote for Mr.
Lincoln because he goes for the equality of races, holding
that in the Declaration of Independence the white man and
negro were declared equal, and endowed by divine law
with equality. And down South, with the old-line Whigs,
with the Kentuckians, the Virginians and the Tennesseeans,
he tells you that there is a physical diﬀerence between the
races, making the one superior, the other inferior, and he is
in favor of maintaining the superiority of the white race
over the negro.”
Those are the Judges comments. Now, I wish to show you
that a month, or only lacking three days of a month, before
I made the speech at Charleston, which the Judge quotes
from, he had himself heard me say substantially the same
thing It was in our ﬁrst meeting, at Ottawa — and I will say
a word about where it was, and the atmosphere it was in,
after a while — but at our ﬁrst meeting, at Ottawa, I read
 an extract from an old speech of mine, made nearly four
years ago, not merely to show my sentiments, but to show
that my sentiments were long entertained and openly
expressed; in which extract I expressly declared that my
own feelings would not admit a social and political equality
between the white and black races, and that even if my own
feelings would admit of it, I still knew that the public
sentiment of the country would not, and that such a thing
was an utter impossibility, or substantially that. That
extract from my old speech the reporters by some sort of
accident passed over, and it was not reported. I lay no
blame upon anybody. I suppose they thought that I would
hand it over to them, and dropped reporting while I was
giving it, but afterward went away without getting it from
me. At the end of that quotation from my old speech, which
I read at Ottawa, I made the comments which were
reported at that time, and which I will now read, and ask
you to notice how very nearly they are the same as Judge
Douglas says were delivered by me down in Egypt. After
reading, I added these words:
“Now, gentlemen, I don’t want to read at any great
length; but this is the true complexion of all I have ever
said in regard to the institution of slavery or the black race,
and this is the whole of it: anything that argues me into his
idea of perfect social and political equality with the negro,
is but a specious and fantastical arrangement of words by
which a man can prove a horse-chestnut to be a chestnut
horse. I will say here, while upon this subject, that I have
no purpose, directly or indirectly, to interfere with the
 institution in the States where it exists. I believe I have no
right to do so. I have no inclination to do so. I have no
purpose to introduce political and social equality between
the white and black races. There is a physical diﬀerence
between the two which, in my judgment, will probably
forever forbid their living together on the footing of perfect
equality; and inasmuch as it becomes a necessity that there
must be a diﬀerence, I, as well as Judge Douglas, am in
favor of the race to which I belong having the superior
position. I have never said anything to the contrary, but I
hold that, notwithstanding all this, there is no reason in the
world why the negro is not entitled to all the rights
enumerated in the Declaration of Independence, — the
right of life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness. I hold
that he is as much entitled to these as the white man. I
agree with Judge Douglas that he is not my equal in many
respects, certainly not in color, perhaps not in intellectual
and moral endowments; but in the right to eat the bread,
without the leave of anybody else, which his own hand
earns, he is my equal and the equal of Judge Douglas, and
the equal of every other man.”
I have chieﬂy introduced this for the purpose of meeting
the Judge’s charge that the quotation he took from my
Charleston speech was what I would say down South
among the Kentuckians, the Virginians, etc., but would not
say in the regions in which was supposed to be more of the
Abolition element. I now make this comment: That speech
from which I have now read the quotation, and which is
there given correctly — perhaps too much so for good taste
 — was made away up North in the Abolition District of this
State par excellence, in the Lovejoy District, in the personal
presence of Lovejoy, for he was on the stand with us when I
made it. It had been made and put in print in that region
only three days less than a month before the speech made
at Charleston, the like of which Judge Douglas thinks I
would not make where there was any Abolition element. I
only refer to this matter to say that I am altogether
unconscious of having attempted any double-dealing
anywhere; that upon one occasion I may say one thing, and
leave other things unsaid, and vice versa, but that I have
said anything on one occasion that is inconsistent with
what I have said elsewhere, I deny, at least I deny it so far
as the intention is concerned. I ﬁnd that I have devoted to
this topic a larger portion of my time than I had intended. I
wished to show, but I will pass it upon this occasion, that in
the sentiment I have occasionally advanced upon the
Declaration of Independence I am entirely borne out by the
sentiments advanced by our old Whig leader, Henry Clay,
and I have the book here to show it from but because I have
already occupied more time than I intended to do on that
topic, I pass over it.
At Galesburgh, I tried to show that by the Dred Scott
decision, pushed to its legitimate consequences, slavery
would be established in all the States as well as in the
Territories. I did this because, upon a former occasion, I
had asked Judge Douglas whether, if the Supreme Court
should make a decision declaring that the States had not
the power to exclude slavery from their limits, he would
 adopt and follow that decision as a rule of political action;
and because he had not directly answered that question,
but had merely contented himself with sneering at it, I
again introduced it, and tried to show that the conclusion
that I stated followed inevitably and logically from the
proposition already decided by the court. Judge Douglas
had the privilege of replying to me at Galesburgh, and
again he gave me no direct answer as to whether he would
or would not sustain such a decision if made. I give him his
third chance to say yes or no. He is not obliged to do either,
probably he will not do either; but I give him the third
chance. I tried to show then that this result, this
conclusion, inevitably followed from the point already
decided by the court. The Judge, in his reply, again sneers
at the thought of the court making any such decision, and
in the course of his remarks upon this subject uses the
language which I will now read. Speaking of me, the Judge
says:
“He goes on and insists that the Dred Scott decision
would carry slavery into the free States, notwithstanding
the decision itself says the contrary.” And he adds:
“Mr. Lincoln knows that there is no member of the
Supreme Court that holds that doctrine. He knows that
every one of them in their opinions held the reverse.”
I especially introduce this subject again for the purpose
of saying that I have the Dred Scott decision here, and I
will thank Judge Douglas to lay his ﬁnger upon the place in
the entire opinions of the court where any one of them
“says the contrary.” It is very hard to aﬀirm a negative with
 entire conﬁdence. I say, however, that I have examined that
decision with a good deal of care, as a lawyer examines a
decision and, so far as I have been able to do so, the court
has nowhere in its opinions said that the States have the
power to exclude slavery, nor have they used other
language substantially that, I also say, so far as I can ﬁnd,
not one of the concurring judges has said that the States
can 
exclude 
slavery, 
nor 
said 
anything 
that 
was
substantially that. The nearest approach that any one of
them has made to it, so far as I can ﬁnd, was by Judge
Nelson, and the approach he made to it was exactly, in
substance, the Nebraska Bill, — that the States had the
exclusive power over the question of slavery, so far as they
are not limited by the Constitution of the United States. I
asked the question, therefore, if the non-concurring judges,
McLean or Curtis, had asked to get an express declaration
that the States could absolutely exclude slavery from their
limits, what reason have we to believe that it would not
have been voted down by the majority of the judges, just as
Chase’s amendment was voted down by Judge Douglas and
his compeers when it was oﬀered to the Nebraska Bill.
Also, at Galesburgh, I said something in regard to those
Springﬁeld resolutions that Judge Douglas had attempted
to use upon me at Ottawa, and commented at some length
upon the fact that they were, as presented, not genuine.
Judge Douglas in his reply to me seemed to be somewhat
exasperated. He said he would never have believed that
Abraham Lincoln, as he kindly called me, would have
attempted such a thing as I had attempted upon that
 occasion; and among other expressions which he used
toward me, was that I dared to say forgery, that I had dared
to say forgery [turning to Judge Douglas]. Yes, Judge, I did
dare to say forgery. But in this political canvass the Judge
ought to remember that I was not the ﬁrst who dared to say
forgery. At Jacksonville, Judge Douglas made a speech in
answer to something said by Judge Trumbull, and at the
close of what he said upon that subject, he dared to say
that Trumbull had forged his evidence. He said, too, that he
should not concern himself with Trumbull any more, but
thereafter he should hold Lincoln responsible for the
slanders upon him. When I met him at Charleston after
that, although I think that I should not have noticed the
subject if he had not said he would hold me responsible for
it, I spread out before him the statements of the evidence
that Judge Trumbull had used, and I asked Judge Douglas,
piece by piece, to put his ﬁnger upon one piece of all that
evidence that he would say was a forgery! When I went
through with each and every piece, Judge Douglas did not
dare then to say that any piece of it was a forgery. So it
seems that there are some things that Judge Douglas dares
to do, and some that he dares not to do.
[A voice: It is the same thing with you.]
Yes, sir, it is the same thing with me. I do dare to say
forgery when it is true, and don’t dare to say forgery when
it is false. Now I will say here to this audience and to Judge
Douglas I have not dared to say he committed a forgery,
and I never shall until I know it; but I did dare to say — just
to suggest to the Judge — that a forgery had been
 committed, which by his own showing had been traced to
him and two of his friends. I dared to suggest to him that
he had expressly promised in one of his public speeches to
investigate that matter, and I dared to suggest to him that
there was an implied promise that when he investigated it
he would make known the result. I dared to suggest to the
Judge that he could not expect to be quite clear of
suspicion of that fraud, for since the time that promise was
made he had been with those friends, and had not kept his
promise in regard to the investigation and the report upon
it. I am not a very daring man, but I dared that much,
Judge, and I am not much scared about it yet. When the
Judge says he would n’t have believed of Abraham Lincoln
that he would have made such an attempt as that he
reminds me of the fact that he entered upon this canvass
with the purpose to treat me courteously; that touched me
somewhat. It sets me to thinking. I was aware, when it was
ﬁrst agreed that Judge Douglas and I were to have these
seven joint discussions, that they were the successive acts
of a drama, perhaps I should say, to be enacted, not merely
in the face of audiences like this, but in the face of the
nation, and to some extent, by my relation to him, and not
from anything in myself, in the face of the world; and I am
anxious that they should be conducted with dignity and in
the good temper which would be beﬁtting the vast
audiences before which it was conducted. But when Judge
Douglas got home from Washington and made his ﬁrst
speech in Chicago, the evening afterward I made some sort
of a reply to it. His second speech was made at
 Bloomington, in which he commented upon my speech at
Chicago and said that I had used language ingeniously
contrived to conceal my intentions, or words to that eﬀect.
Now, I understand that this is an imputation upon my
veracity and my candor. I do not know what the Judge
understood by it, but in our ﬁrst discussion, at Ottawa, he
led oﬀ by charging a bargain, somewhat corrupt in its
character, upon Trumbull and myself, — that we had
entered into a bargain, one of the terms of which was that
Trumbull was to Abolitionize the old Democratic party, and
I (Lincoln) was to Abolitionize the old Whig party; I
pretending to be as good an old-line Whig as ever. Judge
Douglas may not understand that he implicated my
truthfulness and my honor when he said I was doing one
thing and pretending another; and I misunderstood him if
he thought he was treating me in a digniﬁed way, as a man
of honor and truth, as he now claims he was disposed to
treat me. Even after that time, at Galesburgh, when he
brings forward an extract from a speech made at Chicago
and an extract from a speech made at Charleston, to prove
that I was trying to play a double part, that I was trying to
cheat the public, and get votes upon one set of principles at
one place, and upon another set of principles at another
place, — I do not understand but what he impeaches my
honor, my veracity, and my candor; and because he does
this, I do not understand that I am bound, if I see a truthful
ground for it, to keep my hands oﬀ of him. As soon as I
learned that Judge Douglas was disposed to treat me in this
way, I signiﬁed in one of my speeches that I should be
 driven to draw upon whatever of humble resources I might
have, — to adopt a new course with him. I was not entirely
sure that I should be able to hold my own with him, but I at
least had the purpose made to do as well as I could upon
him; and now I say that I will not be the ﬁrst to cry “Hold.”
I think it originated with the Judge, and when he quits, I
probably will. But I shall not ask any favors at all. He asks
me, or he asks the audience, if I wish to push this matter to
the point of personal diﬀiculty. I tell him, no. He did not
make a mistake, in one of his early speeches, when he
called me an “amiable” man, though perhaps he did when
he called me an “intelligent” man. It really hurts me very
much to suppose that I have wronged anybody on earth. I
again tell him, no! I very much prefer, when this canvass
shall be over, however it may result, that we at least part
without any bitter recollections of personal diﬀiculties.
The Judge, in his concluding speech at Galesburgh, says
that I was pushing this matter to a personal diﬀiculty, to
avoid the responsibility for the enormity of my principles. I
say to the Judge and this audience, now, that I will again
state our principles, as well as I hastily can, in all their
enormity, and if the Judge hereafter chooses to conﬁne
himself to a war upon these principles, he will probably not
ﬁnd me departing from the same course.
We have in this nation this element of domestic slavery. It
is a matter of absolute certainty that it is a disturbing
element. It is the opinion of all the great men who have
expressed an opinion upon it, that it is a dangerous
element. We keep up a controversy in regard to it. That
 controversy necessarily springs from diﬀerence of opinion;
and if we can learn exactly — can reduce to the lowest
elements — what that diﬀerence of opinion is, we perhaps
shall be better prepared for discussing the diﬀerent
systems of policy that we would propose in regard to that
disturbing element. I suggest that the diﬀerence of opinion,
reduced to its lowest of terms, is no other than the
diﬀerence between the men who think slavery a wrong and
those who do not think it wrong. The Republican party
think it wrong; we think it is a moral, a social, and a
political wrong. We think it as a wrong not conﬁning itself
merely to the persons or the States where it exists, but that
it is a wrong in its tendency, to say the least, that extends
itself to the existence of the whole nation. Because we
think it wrong, we propose a course of policy that shall deal
with it as a wrong. We deal with it as with any other wrong,
in so far as we can prevent its growing any larger, and so
deal with it that in the run of time there may be some
promise of an end to it. We have a due regard to the actual
presence of it amongst us, and the diﬀiculties of getting rid
of it in any satisfactory way, and all the constitutional
obligations thrown about it. I suppose that in reference
both to its actual existence in the nation, and to our
constitutional obligations, we have no right at all to disturb
it in the States where it exists, and we profess that we have
no more inclination to disturb it than we have the right to
do it. We go further than that: we don’t propose to disturb
it where, in one instance, we think the Constitution would
permit us. We think the Constitution would permit us to
 disturb it in the District of Columbia. Still, we do not
propose to do that, unless it should be in terms which I
don’t suppose the nation is very likely soon to agree to, —
the terms of making the emancipation gradual, and
compensating the unwilling owners. Where we suppose we
have the constitutional right, we restrain ourselves in
reference to the actual existence of the institution and the
diﬀiculties thrown about it. We also oppose it as an evil so
far as it seeks to spread itself. We insist on the policy that
shall restrict it to its present limits. We don’t suppose that
in doing this we violate anything due to the actual presence
of the institution, or anything due to the constitutional
guaranties thrown around it.
We oppose the Dred Scott decision in a certain way, upon
which I ought perhaps to address you a few words. We do
not propose that when Dred Scott has been decided to be a
slave by the court, we, as a mob, will decide him to be free.
We do not propose that, when any other one, or one
thousand, shall be decided by that court to be slaves, we
will in any violent way disturb the rights of property thus
settled; but we nevertheless do oppose that decision as a
political rule which shall be binding on the voter to vote for
nobody who thinks it wrong, which shall be binding on the
members of Congress or the President to favor no measure
that does not actually concur with the principles of that
decision. We do not propose to be bound by it as a political
rule in that way, because we think it lays the foundation,
not merely of enlarging and spreading out what we
consider an evil, but it lays the foundation for spreading
 that evil into the States themselves. We propose so
resisting it as to have it reversed if we can, and a new
judicial rule established upon this subject.
I will add this: that if there be any man who does not
believe that slavery is wrong in the three aspects which I
have mentioned, or in any one of them, that man is
misplaced, and ought to leave us; while on the other hand,
if there be any man in the Republican party who is
impatient over the necessity springing from its actual
presence, and is impatient of the constitutional guaranties
thrown around it, and would act in disregard of these, he
too is misplaced, standing with us. He will ﬁnd his place
somewhere else; for we have a due regard, so far as we are
capable of understanding them, for all these things. This,
gentlemen, as well as I can give it, is a plain statement of
our principles in all their enormity. I will say now that there
is a sentiment in the country contrary to me, — a sentiment
which holds that slavery is not wrong, and therefore it goes
for the policy that does not propose dealing with it as a
wrong. That policy is the Democratic policy, and that
sentiment is the Democratic sentiment. If there be a doubt
in the mind of any one of this vast audience that this is
really the central idea of the Democratic party in relation to
this subject, I ask him to bear with me while I state a few
things tending, as I think, to prove that proposition. In the
ﬁrst place, the leading man — I think I may do my friend
Judge Douglas the honor of calling him such advocating the
present Democratic policy never himself says it is wrong.
He has the high distinction, so far as I know, of never
 having said slavery is either right or wrong. Almost
everybody else says one or the other, but the Judge never
does. If there be a man in the Democratic party who thinks
it is wrong, and yet clings to that party, I suggest to him, in
the ﬁrst place, that his leader don’t talk as he does, for he
never says that it is wrong. In the second place, I suggest
to him that if he will examine the policy proposed to be
carried forward, he will ﬁnd that he carefully excludes the
idea that there is anything wrong in it. If you will examine
the arguments that are made on it, you will ﬁnd that every
one carefully excludes the idea that there is anything
wrong in slavery. Perhaps that Democrat who says he is as
much opposed to slavery as I am will tell me that I am
wrong about this. I wish him to examine his own course in
regard to this matter a moment, and then see if his opinion
will not be changed a little. You say it is wrong; but don’t
you constantly object to anybody else saying so? Do you not
constantly argue that this is not the right place to oppose
it? You say it must not be opposed in the free States,
because slavery is not here; it must not be opposed in the
slave States, because it is there; it must not be opposed in
politics, because that will make a fuss; it must not be
opposed in the pulpit, because it is not religion. Then
where is the place to oppose it? There is no suitable place
to oppose it. There is no place in the country to oppose this
evil overspreading the continent, which you say yourself is
coming. Frank Blair and Gratz Brown tried to get up a
system of gradual emancipation in Missouri, had an
election in August, and got beat, and you, Mr. Democrat,
 threw up your hat, and hallooed “Hurrah for Democracy!”
So I say, again, that in regard to the arguments that are
made, when Judge Douglas Says he “don’t care whether
slavery is voted up or voted down,” whether he means that
as an individual expression of sentiment, or only as a sort of
statement of his views on national policy, it is alike true to
say that he can thus argue logically if he don’t see anything
wrong in it; but he cannot say so logically if he admits that
slavery is wrong. He cannot say that he would as soon see a
wrong voted up as voted down. When Judge Douglas says
that whoever or whatever community wants slaves, they
have a right to have them, he is perfectly logical, if there is
nothing wrong in the institution; but if you admit that it is
wrong, he cannot logically say that anybody has a right to
do wrong. When he says that slave property and horse and
hog property are alike to be allowed to go into the
Territories, upon the principles of equality, he is reasoning
truly, if there is no diﬀerence between them as property;
but if the one is property held rightfully, and the other is
wrong, then there is no equality between the right and
wrong; so that, turn it in anyway you can, in all the
arguments sustaining the Democratic policy, and in that
policy itself, there is a careful, studied exclusion of the idea
that there is anything wrong in slavery. Let us understand
this. I am not, just here, trying to prove that we are right,
and they are wrong. I have been stating where we and they
stand, and trying to show what is the real diﬀerence
between us; and I now say that whenever we can get the
question distinctly stated, can get all these men who
 believe that slavery is in some of these respects wrong to
stand and act with us in treating it as a wrong, — then, and
not till then, I think we will in some way come to an end of
this slavery agitation.
