A
minor tussle over my services occurred at this time,
between ISRO, which was a little hesitant to relieve me, and
DRDO, which wanted to take me in. Many months went by,
and
many letters were exchanged between ISRO and
DRDO; and meetings were held in the secretariats of the
Defence R&D establishment and the Department of Space
to precipitate a mutually convenient course of action.
Meanwhile, Prof. Ramanna retired from the office of the
Scientific Advisor to Defence Minister. Dr VS
Arunachalam, till then Director of the Defence Metallurgical
Research Laboratory (DMRL) in Hyderabad, succeeded
Prof. Ramanna. Dr Arunachalam was known for his
confidence, and he cared little for the intricacies and
nuances of the scientific bureaucracy. Meanwhile, I
understand that the Defence Minister at that time, R
Venkataraman discussed the matter of my taking over the
missile laboratory with Prof. Dhawan. Prof. Dhawan also
seemed to be waiting for a decisive step at the highest
level in the Defence Ministry. Overcoming the niggling
doubts that had caused delays over the past year, the
decision to appoint me Director, DRDL was finally taken in
February, 1982.
Prof. Dhawan used to visit my room in the ISRO
headquarters and spend many hours in evolving space
launch vehicle projects. It was a great privilege to work with
such a great scientist. Before I left ISRO, Prof. Dhawan
asked me to give a talk on the Space Programme Profile in
India by the year 2000. Almost the entire ISRO
management and staff attended my talk, which was by way
of a farewell meeting.
I had met Dr VS Arunachalam in 1976, when I visited
DMRL in connection with the aluminium alloy investment
casting for the SLV inertial guidance platform. Taking it as
a personal challenge, Dr Arunachalam had the investment
casting, the first of its kind in the country, made in the
incredibly short time of two months. His youthful energy and
enthusiasm never failed to amaze me. This young
metallurgist had within a short span of time lifted the
science of metal-making to the technology of metal-forming
and then to the art of alloy development. With a tall and
elegant figure, Dr Arunachalam was like an electrically
charged dynamo himself. I found him an unusually friendly
person with a forceful manner, as well as an excellent
working partner.
I visited DRDL in April 1982 to acquaint myself with my
potential work site. The Director of DRDL then, SL Bansal,
took me around and introduced me to the senior scientists
in the laboratory. DRDL was working on five staff projects
and sixteen competence build-up projects. They were also
involved in several technology-oriented activities with a
view to gain lead time for the development of indigenous
missile systems in future. I was particularly impressed by
their efforts on the twin 30-ton Liquid Propellant Rocket
Engine.
Meanwhile, Anna University, Madras, conferred the
honorary degree of Doctor of Science on me. It had been
nearly twenty years since I had acquired my degree in
aeronautical engineering. I was happy that Anna University
had recognized my efforts in the field of rocketry, but what
pleased me most was the recognition of the value of our
work in academic circles. To my delight, the honorary

doctorate degree was awarded at a convocation presided
over by Prof. Raja Ramanna.
I joined DRDL on 1 June, 1982. Very soon, I realized
that this laboratory was still haunted by the winding up of the
Devil missile project. Many excellent professionals had not
yet recovered from the disappointment. People outside the
scientific world may find it difficult to comprehend how a
scientist feels when the umbilical cord to his work is
suddenly snapped, for reasons totally alien to his
understanding and interests. The general mood and work
tempo at DRDL reminded me of Samuel Taylor
Coleridge’s poem The Rime of the Ancient Mariner:

Day after day, day after day,
We stuck, nor breath, nor motion;
As idle as a painted ship
Upon a painted ocean.
I found almost all my senior colleagues living with the
pain of dashed hopes. There was a widespread feeling that
the scientists of this laboratory had been cheated by the
senior officials in the Ministry of Defence. It was clear to me
that the burial of the Devil was essential for the rise of hope
and vision.
When about a month later, Admiral OS Dawson, then
the Chief of Naval Staff, visited DRDL, I used it as an
opportunity to make a point with my team. The Tactical
Core Vehicle (TCV) project had been hanging fire for quite
some time. It was conceived as a single core vehicle with
certain common subsystems to meet the requirements of
the services for a quick reaction Surface-to-Air Missile, an
anti-radiation Air-to-Surface Missile which could be
launched from helicopters or fixed wing aircraft. I
emphasized the sea-skimming role of the core vehicle to
Admiral Dawson. I focussed not on its technical intricacies,
but on its battlefield capabilities; and I highlighted the
production plans. The message was loud and clear to my
new associates—do not make anything which you cannot
sell later and do not spend your life on making one thing
only. Missile development is a multi-dimensional business
—if you remain in any one dimension for a long time, you
will get stuck.
My initial few months at DRDL were largely interactive. I
had read at St. Joseph’s that an electron may appear as a
particle or wave depending on how you look at it. If you ask
a particle question, it will give you a particle answer; if you
ask a wave question, it will give you a wave answer. I not
only described and explained our goals, but also made
them an interplay between our work and ourselves. I still
recall quoting Ronald Fischer at one of the meetings, “The
sweetness we taste in a piece of sugar is neither a
property of the sugar nor a property of ourselves. We are
producing the experience of sweetness in the process of
interacting with the sugar.”
Very good work on a Surface-to-Surface missile with a
vertical riseturn straight line climb-ballistic path had been
done by that time. I was astonished to see the
determination of the DRDL workforce, who, in spite of the
premature winding up of their earlier projects, were eager
to go ahead. I arranged reviews for its various subsystems,
to arrive at precise specifications. To the horror of many
old-timers in DRDO, I started inviting people from the Indian
Institute of Science, Indian Institutes of Technology, Council
for Scientific and Industrial Research, Tata Institute of
Fundamental Research, and many other educational
institutions where related experts could be found. I felt that
the stuffy work centres of DRDL needed a breath of fresh

air. Once we opened the windows wide, the light of
scientific talent began to pour in. Once more, Coleridge’s
Ancient Mariner came to mind: “Swiftly, swiftly flew the
ship,\ Riding gently the oncoming tide.”
Sometime in the beginning of 1983, Prof. Dhawan
visited DRDL. I reminded him of his own advice to me
almost a decade ago: “You have to dream before your
dreams can come true. Some people stride towards
whatever it is that they want in life; others shuffle their feet
and never get started because they do not know what they
want—and do not know how to find it either.” ISRO was
lucky to have had Prof. Sarabhai and Prof. Dhawan at the
helm—leaders who elucidated their goals, made their
missions larger than their lives, and could then inspire their
entire workforce. DRDL had not been so lucky. This
excellent laboratory played a truncated role that did not
reflect its existing or potential capabilities or even fulfill the
expectations in South Block. I told Prof. Dhawan about the
highly professional, but slightly bewildered team I had. Prof.
Dhawan responded with his characteristic broad smile
which could be interpreted in any way one chose.
In order to accelerate the pace of R&D activities at
DRDL, it was imperative that decisions on vital scientific,
technical and technological problems be taken quickly.
Throughout my career I had zealously pursued openness in
scientific matters. I had seen from very close quarters the
decay and disintegration that go with management through
closed-door consultations and secret manipulations. I
always despised and resisted such efforts. So the first
major decision which we took was to create a forum of
senior scientists where important matters could be
discussed

Plate 9 The twin-engine indigenous hovercraft
prototype Nandi developed at ADE, Bangalore. As
inventor and pilot, I took my rightful place at the
controls.

Plate 10 The Christian community in Thumba very
graciously gave up this beautiful Church to house the
first unit of the Space Research Centre.

Plate 11 With Prof Vikram Sarabhai, a great
visionary and the master planner behind India's
Missile Development programme, at Thumba

Plate 12 Two gurus of Indian Space Research who
mentored and gently guided the young scientists –
Prof Satish Dhawan and Dr Brahm Prakash – at one
of the SLV-3 review meetings.

Plate 13 A presentation by a member of my SLV-3
team. In an unusual move, I made each of them
present their portion of the work—my idea of project
management.

Plate 14 Dr Brahm Prakash inspecting SLV-3 in its

final phase of integration. He helped me deal with
subsequent frustrations in its launching and
consoled me when I was at my lowest ebb.

Plate 15 Prof Satish Dhawan and I explaining SLV3 results to Prime Minister Indira Gandhi.

Plate 16 SLV-3 on the launch pad. This gave us
many anxious moments!

Plate 17 Receiving the Padma Bushan from Dr
Neelam Sanjeeva Reddy, then President of India.

Plate 18 Successful launch of Prithvi,
the

surface-to-surface

weapons

system.

Plate 19 Agni on
the launch pad, my long-cherished dream.

Nothing to be discouraged! We have
postponed it again because we want
to be absolutely certain!

Plate 20 One of the cartoons in the media after the
failure of the first two Agni launches.

Plate 21 Many a slip between the cup and the lip... .

Plate 22 Being carried by a jubilant crowd after the
successful
launch
of
Agni.

Plate 23 Receiving the Bharat Ratna from President
KR
Narayanan.

Plate 24 With three Service Chiefs. To my left is
Admiral VS Shekhawat, on his right is General BC

Joshi, and Air Chief Marshal SK Kaul.
and debated as a collective endeavour. Thus, a high
level body called the Missile Technology Committee was
formed within DRDL. The concept of management by
participation was evoked and earnest efforts were made to
involve middle-level scientists and engineers in the
management activities of the laboratory.
Days of debate and weeks of thinking finally culminated
in the longterm ‘Guided Missile Development Programme’.
I had read somewhere, “Know where you are going. The
great thing in the world is not knowing so much where we
stand, as in what direction we are moving.” What if we did
not have the technological might of the Western countries,
we knew we had to attain that might, and this determination
was our driving force. To draw up a clear and well-defined
missile development programme for the production of
indigenous missiles, a committee was constituted under
my chairmanship. The members were ZP Marshall, then the
Chief of Bharat Dynamics Limited, Hyderabad, NR Iyer, AK
Kapoor and KS Venkataraman. We drafted a paper for the
perusal of the Cabinet Committee for Political Affairs
(CCPA). The paper was given its final shape after
consulting the representatives of the three Defence
Services. We estimated an expenditure of about Rs 390
crores, spread over a period of twelve years.
Development programmes often get stuck by the time
they reach the production stage, mainly because of lack of
funding. We wanted to get funds to develop and produce
two missiles—a low-level quick reaction Tactical Core
Vehicle and a Medium Range Surface-to-Surface Weapon
System. We planned to make a surface-to-air medium
range weapon system with multi-target handling capability
during the second phase. DRDL had been known for its
pioneering work in the field of anti-tank missiles. We
proposed to develop a third generation anti-tank guided
missile having ‘fire-and-forget’ capabilities. All my
colleagues were pleased with the proposal. They saw an
opportunity to pursue afresh activities initiated long ago.
But I was not entirely satisfied. I longed to revive my buried
dream of a Re-entry Experiment Launch Vehicle (REX). I
persuaded my colleagues to take up a technology
development project to generate data for use in the design
of heat shields. These shields were required for building up
capability to make longrange missiles in the future.
I made a presentation in the South Block. The
presentation was presided over by the Defence Minister of
the time R Venkataraman, and attended by the three
Service Chiefs: General Krishna Rao, Air Chief Marshal
Dilbagh Singh and Admiral Dawson. The Cabinet
Secretary, Krishna Rao Sahib, Defence Secretary, SM
Ghosh and Secretary, Expenditure, R Ganapathy were
present. Everyone seemed to have all sorts of doubts—
about our capabilities, about the feasibility and availability
of required technological infrastructure, about the viability,
the schedule and cost. Dr Arunachalam stood by me like a
rock throughout the entire question-answer session.
Members were skeptical and apprehensive of drift—which
they felt was common among scientists. Although some
questioned our ambitious proposal, everyone, even the
doubting Thomases, were very excited about the idea of
India having her own missile systems. In the end, we were
asked by Defence Minister Venkataraman to meet him in
the evening, about three hours later.
We spent the intervening time working on permutations
and combinations. If they sanctioned only Rs 100 crores,
how would we allocate it? Suppose they gave us Rs 200

crores, then what would we do? When we met the Defence
Minister in the evening, I had a hunch we were going to get
some funds at any rate. But when he suggested that we
launch an integrated guided missile development
programme, instead of making missiles in phases, we
could not believe our ears.
We were quite dumbfounded by the Defence Minister’s
suggestion. After a long pause, Dr Arunachalam replied,
“We beg for time to rethink and return, Sir!” “You come
back tomorrow morning please,” the Defence Minister
replied. It was reminiscent of Prof. Sarabhai’s zeal and
vision. That night, Dr Arunachalam and I laboured together
on reworking our plan.
We worked out some very important extensions and
improvements in our proposal, taking all the variables, such
as design, fabrication, system integration, qualification,
experimental flights, evaluation, updating, user trials,
producibility, quality, reliability, and financial viability into
account. We then integrated them into a single function of
total accountability, in order to meet the needs of the
country’s armed forces with an indigenous endeavour. We
worked out the concepts of design, development,
production concurrency and proposed the participation of
user and inspection agencies right from the drawing-board
stage. We also suggested a methodology to achieve stateof-the-art systems after all the years of developmental
activities. We wanted to deliver contemporary missiles to
our Services and not some outdated inventory of weapons.
It was a very exciting challenge that had been thrown to us.
By the time we finished our work, it was already
morning. Suddenly, at the breakfast table, I remembered
that I was to attend my niece Zameela’s wedding at
Rameswaram that evening. I thought it was already too late
to do anything. Even if I could catch the Madras flight later in
the day, how would I reach Rameswaram from there? There
was no air link between Madras and Madurai from where I
could board the evening train to Rameswaram. A pang of
guilt dampened my spirits. Was it fair, I asked myself, to
forget my family commitments and obligations? Zameela
was more like a daughter to me. The thought of missing her
wedding because of professional preoccupations at Delhi
was very distressing. I finished breakfast and left for the
meeting.
When we met Defence Minister Venkataraman and
showed him our revised proposal, he was visibly pleased.
The proposal of the missile development project had been
turned overnight into the blueprint of an integrated
programme with far-reaching consequences. It would have
wide-ranging technological spinoffs, and was exactly what
the Defence Minister had had in mind the previous evening.
Notwithstanding the great respect I had for the Defence
Minister, I was not really sure if he would clear our entire
proposal. But he did. I was absolutely delighted!
The Defence Minister stood up, signalling that the
meeting was over. Turning to me he said, “Since I brought
you here, I was expecting you to come up with something
like this. I am happy to see your work.” In a split second, the
mystery surrounding the clearance of my appointment as
Director DRDL in 1982 was cleared. So it was Defence
Minister Venkataraman who had brought me in! Bowing in
thanks, I turned towards the door when I heard Dr
Arunachalam telling the Minister about Zameela’s wedding
being scheduled for that evening at Rameswaram. It
amazed me that Dr Arunachalam should bring up this
matter before the Minister. Why would a person of his

stature, sitting in the all-powerful South Block, be
concerned about a wedding which was to take place on a
far-flung island in a small house on Mosque Street?
I have always had a high regard for Dr Arunachalam. He
has together with a command over language as he
displayed on this occasion, an uncanny presence of mind. I
was overwhelmed when the Defence Minister located an
Air Force helicopter doing sorties between Madras and
Madurai later in the day to take me to Madurai as soon as I
disembarked at Madras from the regular Indian Airlines
flight, which was leaving Delhi in an hour’s time. Dr
Arunachalam told me, “You have earned this for your hard
work of the last six months.”
Flying towards Madras, I scribbled on the back of my
boarding pass:

Who never climbed the weary league –
Can such a foot explore
The purple territories
On Rameswaram’s shore?
The Air Force helicopter landed close to the Indian
Airlines aircraft as soon as it arrived from Delhi. Within the
next few minutes I was on my way to Madurai. The Air
Force commandant there was kind enough to take me to
the railway station, where the train to Rameswaram was
just about to roll out of the platform. I was in Rameswaram
well in time for Zameela’s wedding. I blessed my brother’s
daughter with a father’s love.
The Defence Minister put up our proposal before the
Cabinet and saw it through. His recommendations on our
proposal were accepted and an unprecedented amount of
Rs 388 crores was sanctioned for this purpose. Thus was
born India’s prestigious Integrated Guided Missile
Development Programme, later abbreviated to IGMDP.
When I presented the government sanction letter before
the Missile Technology Committee at DRDL, they were
enthused with fire and action. The proposed projects were
christened in accordance with the spirit of India’s selfreliance. Thus the Surface-to-Surface weapon system
became Prithvi (“the Earth”) and the Tactical Core Vehicle
was called Trishul (the trident of Lord Shiva). The Surfaceto-Air area defence system was named as Akash (“sky”)
and the anti-tank missile project Nag (“Cobra”). I gave the
name Agni (“Fire”) to my long cherished dream of REX. Dr
Arunachalam came to DRDL and formally launched the
IGMDP on 27 July 1983. It was a great event in which every
single employee of DRDL participated. Everybody who
was somebody in Indian Aerospace Research was invited.
A large number of scientists from other laboratories and
organizations, professors from academic institutions,
representatives of the armed forces, production centres,
and inspection authorities, who were our business partners
now, were present on this occasion. A closed-circuit TV
network had to be pressed into operation to ensure proper
communication between the participants for we had no
single place to accommodate all the invitees. This was the
second most significant day in my career, next only to 18
July 1980, when the SLV-3 had launched Rohini into the
earth’s orbit.