    
  
A
 I A I
   
  A
A I
   A
 A    
    .
THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA:
A PROCLAMATION.
Whereas on the 22d day of September, A.D. 1862, a
proclamation was issued by the President of the United
States, containing, among other things, the following, to
wit:
“That on the 1st day of January, A.D., 1863, all persons
held as slaves within any State or designated part of a
State the people whereof shall then be in rebellion against
the United States shall be then, thenceforward, and forever
free; and the executive government of the United States,
including the military and naval authority thereof, will
recognize and maintain the freedom of such persons and
will do no act or acts to repress such persons, or any of
them, in any eﬀorts they may make for their actual
freedom.
“That the executive will on the 1st day of January
aforesaid, by proclamation, designate the States and parts
of States, if any, in which the people thereof, respectively,
shall then be in rebellion against the United States; and the
fact that any State or the people thereof shall on that day
be in good faith represented in the Congress of the United
 States by members chosen thereto at elections wherein a
majority of the qualiﬁed voters of such States shall have
participated shall, in the absence of strong countervailing
testimony, be deemed conclusive evidence that such State
and the people thereof are not then in rebellion against the
United States.”
Now, therefore, I, Abraham Lincoln, President of the
United States, by virtue of the power in me vested as
Commander-in-Chief of the Army and Navy of the United
States in time of actual armed rebellion against the
authority and government of the United States, and as a ﬁt
and necessary war measure for suppressing said rebellion,
do, on this 1st day of January, A. D. 1863, and in
accordance with my purpose so to do, publicly proclaimed
for the full period of one hundred days from the ﬁrst day
above mentioned, order and designate as the States and
parts of States wherein the people thereof, respectively, are
this day in rebellion against the United States the
following, to wit:
Arkansas, Texas, Louisiana (except the parishes of St.
Bernard, Plaquemines, Jeﬀerson, St. John, St. Charles, St.
James, Ascension, Assumption, Terre Bonne, Lafourche, St.
Mary, St. Martin, and Orleans, including the city of New
Orleans), Mississippi, Alabama, Florida, Georgia, South
Carolina, North Carolina, and Virginia (except the forty-
eight counties designated as West Virginia, and also the
counties of Berkeley, Accomac, Northampton, Elizabeth
City, York, Princess Anne, and Norfolk, including the cities
of Norfolk and Portsmouth), and which excepted parts are
 for the present left precisely as if this proclamation were
not issued.
And by virtue of the power and for the purpose aforesaid,
I do order and declare that all persons held as slaves within
said designated States and parts of States are, and
henceforward shall be, free; and that the Executive
Government of the United States, including the military
and naval authorities thereof, will recognize and maintain
the freedom of said persons.
And I hereby enjoin upon the people so declared to be
free to abstain from all violence, unless in necessary self-
defense; and I recommend to them that, in all cases when
allowed, they labor faithfully for reasonable wages.
And I further declare and make known that such persons
of suitable condition will be received into the armed service
of the United States to garrison forts, positions, stations,
and other places, and to man vessels of all sorts in said
service.
And upon this act, sincerely believed to be an act of
justice, warranted by the Constitution upon military
necessity, I invoke the considerate judgment of mankind
and the gracious favor of Almighty God.
In witness whereof I have hereunto set my hand and
caused the seal of the United States to be aﬀixed.
Done at the city of Washington, this ﬁrst day of January,
A.D. 1863, and of the independence of the United States of
America the eighty-seventh.
A. LINCOLN.
 By the President: WILLIAM H. SEWARD, Secretary of
State.
  
 
 
  A  H. 
. HA     .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON January 1, 1863
MAJOR-GENERAL HALLECK.
DEAR SIR: — General Burnside wishes to cross the
Rappahannock with his army, but his grand division
commanders all oppose the movement. If in such a
diﬀiculty as this you do not help, you fail me precisely in
the point for which I sought your assistance You know what
General Burnside’s plan is, and it is my wish that you go
with him to the ground, examine it as far as practicable,
confer with the oﬀicers, getting their judgment, and
ascertaining their temper — in a word, gather all the
elements for forming a judgment of your own, and then tell
General Burnside that you do approve or that you do not
approve his plan. Your military skill is useless to me if you
will not do this.
Yours very truly, A. LINCOLN
[Indorsement]
January 1, 1863 Withdrawn, because considered harsh by
General Halleck.
A. LINCOLN.
    A
   
  
   
WASHINGTON, January 2, 1863
TO THE SENATE AND HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES:
I submit to Congress the expediency of extending to other
departments of the government the authority conferred on
the President by the eighth section of the act of the 8th of
May, 1792, to appoint a person to temporarily discharge
the duties of Secretary of State, Secretary of the Treasury,
and Secretary of War, in case of the death, absence from
the seat of government, or sickness of either of those
oﬀicers.
A. LINCOLN.
  
 
 
  A   .  .  
  I .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON JANUARY 2, 1863
MAJOR-GENERAL CURTIS.
MY DEAR SIR: — Yours of December 29 by the hand of
Mr. Strong is just received. The day I telegraphed you
suspending the order in relation to Dr. McPheeters, he,
with Mr. Bates, the Attorney-General, appeared before me
and left with me a copy of the order mentioned. The doctor
also showed me the Copy of an oath which he said he had
taken, which is indeed very strong and speciﬁc. He also
verbally assured me that he had constantly prayed in
church for the President and government, as he had always
done before the present war. In looking over the recitals in
your order, I do not see that this matter of the prayer, as he
states it, is negatived, nor that any violation of his oath is
charged nor, in fact, that anything speciﬁc is alleged
against him. The charges are all general: that he has a
rebel wife and rebel relations, that he sympathies with
rebels, and that he exercises rebel inﬂuence. Now, after
talking with him, I tell you frankly I believe he does
sympathize with the rebels, but the question remains
whether such a man, of unquestioned good moral
character, who has taken such an oath as he has, and
cannot even be charged with violating it, and who can be
 charged with no other speciﬁc act or omission, can, with
safety to the government, be exiled upon the suspicion of
his secret sympathies. But I agree that this must be left to
you, who are on the spot; and if, after all, you think the
public good requires his removal, my suspension of the
order is withdrawn, only with this qualiﬁcation, that the
time during the suspension is not to be counted against
him. I have promised him this. But I must add that the
United States Government must not, as by this order,
undertake to run the churches. When an individual in a
church or out of it becomes dangerous to the public
interest, he must be checked; but let the churches, as such,
take care of themselves. It will not do for the United States
to appoint trustees, supervisors, or other agents for the
churches.
Yours very truly, A. LINCOLN.
P. S. — The committee composed of Messrs. Yeatman and
Filley (Mr. Broadhead not attending) has presented your
letter and the memorial of sundry citizens. On the whole
subject embraced exercise your best judgment, with a sole
view to the public interest, and I will not interfere without
hearing you.
A. LINCOLN., January 3, 1863.
  
       A   
     .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, January 4, 1863.
HON. GIDEON WELLES, Secretary of the Navy.
DEAR SIR: — As many persons who come well
recommended for loyalty and service to the Union cause,
and who are refugees from rebel oppression in the State of
Virginia, make application to me for authority and
permission to remove their families and property to
protection within the Union lines, by means of our armed
gunboats on the Potomac River and Chesapeake Bay, you
are hereby requested to hear and consider all such
applications, and to grant such assistance to this class of
persons as in your judgment their merits may render
proper, and as may in each case be consistent with the
perfect and complete eﬀiciency of the naval service and
with military expediency.
A. LINCOLN.
  
 
 
  A   .    
  I .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, January 5, 1863
MAJOR-GENERAL CURTIS.
MY DEAR SIR: — I am having a good deal of trouble with
Missouri matters, and I now sit down to write you
particularly about it. One class of friends believe in greater
severity and another in greater leniency in regard to
arrests, banishments, and assessments. As usual in such
cases, each questions the other’s motives. On the one hand,
it is insisted that Governor Gamble’s unionism, at most, is
not better than a secondary spring of action; that
hunkerism and a wish for political inﬂuence stand before
Unionism with him. On the other hand, it is urged that
arrests, banishments, and assessments are made more for
private malice, revenge, and pecuniary interest than for the
public good. This morning I was told, by a gentleman who I
have no doubt believes what he says, that in one case of
assessments for  10,000 the diﬀerent persons who paid
compared receipts, and found they had paid  30,000. If this
be true, the inference is that the collecting agents pocketed
the odd  20,000. And true or not in the instance, nothing
but the sternest necessity can justify the making and
maintaining of a system so liable to such abuses. Doubtless
the necessity for the making of the system in Missouri did
 exist, and whether it continues for the maintenance of it is
now a practical and very important question. Some days
ago Governor Gamble telegraphed me, asking that the
assessments outside of St. Louis County might be
suspended, as they already have been within it, and this
morning all the members of Congress here from Missouri
but one laid a paper before me asking the same thing. Now,
my belief is that Governor Gamble is an honest and true
man, not less so than yourself; that you and he could confer
together on this and other Missouri questions with great
advantage to the public; that each knows something which
the other does not; and that acting together you could
about double your stock of pertinent information. May I not
hope that you and he will attempt this? I could at once
safely do (or you could safely do without me) whatever you
and he agree upon. There is absolutely no reason why you
should not agree.
Yours as ever, A. LINCOLN.
P. S. — I forgot to say that Hon. James S. Rollins, member
of Congress from one of the Missouri districts, wishes that,
upon his personal responsibility, Rev. John M. Robinson, of
Columbia, Missouri; James L. Matthews, of Boone County,
Missouri; and James L. Stephens, also of Boone County,
Missouri, may be allowed to return to their respective
homes. Major Rollins leaves with me very strong papers
from the neighbors of these men, whom he says he knows
to be true men. He also says he has many constituents who
he thinks are rightly exiled, but that he thinks these three
 should be allowed to return. Please look into the case, and
oblige Major Rollins if you consistently can.
Yours truly,
A. LINCOLN.
[Copy sent to Governor Gamble.]
  
  A     
      A
  A  I  A.   
 
.
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, January 5, 1863.
MY GOOD FRIENDS: The Honorable Senator Harlan has
just placed in my hands your letter of the 27th of
December, which I have read with pleasure and gratitude.
It is most cheering and encouraging for me to know that
in the eﬀorts which I have made and am making for the
restoration of a righteous peace to our country, I am upheld
and sustained by the good wishes and prayers of God’s
people. No one is more deeply than myself aware that
without His favor our highest wisdom is but as foolishness
and that our most strenuous eﬀorts would avail nothing in
the shadow of His displeasure.
I am conscious of no desire for my country’s welfare that
is not in consonance with His will, and of no plan upon
which we may not ask His blessing. It seems to me that if
there be one subject upon which all good men may unitedly
agree, it is imploring the gracious favor of the God of
Nations upon the struggles our people are making for the
preservation of their precious birthright of civil and
religious liberty.
Very truly your friend; A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A   
    A
 .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, January 5. 1863.
MAJOR-GENERAL 
W. 
S. 
ROSECRANS,
Murfreesborough, Tenn.: Your despatch announcing retreat
of enemy has just reached here. God bless you and all with
you! Please tender to all, and accept for yourself, the
nation’s gratitude for your and their skill, endurance, and
dauntless courage.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A  
I .
WAR DEPARTMENT, WASHINGTON, D.C., January 7, 1863.
MAJOR-GENERAL DI , FORT Monroe, Va.:
Do Richmond papers of 6th say nothing about Vicksburg,
or if anything, what?
A. LINCOLN.
  
 
 
  A  H. 
. HA     .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON January 7, 1863.
MAJOR-GENERAL HALLECK.
MY DEAR SIR: — What think you of forming a reserve
cavalry corps of, say, 6000 for the Army of the Potomac?
Might not such a corps be constituted from the cavalry of
Sigel’s and Slocum’s corps, with scraps we could pick up
here and there?
Yours truly, A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
  . 
.   
.
WASHINGTON, D. C., January 7, 1863. 5.30 P.M.
HON. B. GRATZ BROWN, Jeﬀerson City, Mo.: Yours of to-
day just received. The administration takes no part
between its friends in Missouri, of whom I, at least,
consider you one; and I have never before had an
intimation that appointees there were interfering, or were
inclined to interfere.
A. LINCOLN.
  
     
 
   
I H 
 
  A  A.  .
 
 
 I
    A
 A          .
HEADQUARTERS ARMY OF THE POTOMAC January 5,
1863.
HIS E CELLENCY THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED
STATES:
Since my return to the army I have become more than
ever convinced that the general oﬀicers of this command
are almost unanimously opposed to another crossing of the
river; but I am still of the opinion that the crossing should
be attempted, and I have accordingly issued orders to the
engineers and artillery to prepare for it. There is much
hazard in it, as there always is in the majority of military
movements, and I cannot begin the movement without
giving you notice of it, particularly as I know so little of the
eﬀect that it may have upon other movements of distant
armies.
The inﬂuence of your telegram the other day is still upon
me, and has impressed me with the idea that there are
many parts of the problem which inﬂuence you that are not
known to me.
In order to relieve you from all embarrassment in my
case, I inclose with this my resignation of my commission
as major-general of volunteers, which you can have
 accepted if my movement is not in accordance with the
views of yourself and your military advisers.
I have taken the liberty to write to you personally upon
this subject, because it was necessary, as I learned from
General Halleck, for you to approve of my general plan,
written at Warrenton, before I could commence the
movement; and I think it quite as necessary that you should
know of the important movement I am about to make,
particularly as it will have to be made in opposition to the
views of nearly all my general oﬀicers, and after the receipt
of a despatch from you informing me of the opinion of some
of them who had visited you.
In conversation with you on New Year’s morning I was
led to express some opinions which I afterward felt it my
duty to place on paper, and to express them verbally to the
gentleman of whom we were speaking, which I did in your
presence, after handing you the letter. You were not
disposed then, as I saw, to retain the letter, and I took it
back, but I now return it to you for record if you wish it.
I beg leave to say that my resignation is not sent in in
any spirit of insubordination, but, as I before said, simply to
relieve 
you 
from 
any 
embarrassment 
in 
changing
commanders where lack of conﬁdence may have rendered
it necessary.
The bearer of this will bring me any answer, or I should
be glad to hear from you by telegraph in cipher.
I have the honor to be, very respectfully, your obedient
servant,
A. E. BURNSIDE,
 Major-General, Commanding Army of the Potomac.
 H A
 A      
   H  A 
   
A HI
 
 anuar         .
MAJOR-GENERAL BURNSIDE, Commanding, etc.,
Falmouth: 
GENERAL: — YOUR communication of the 5th was
delivered to me by your aide-de-camp at 12 M. to-day.
In all my communications and interviews with you since
you took command of the Army of the Potomac I have
advised a forward movement across the Rappahannock. At
our interview at Warrenton I urged that you should cross by
the fords above Fredericksburg rather than to fall down to
that place; and when I left you at Warrenton it was
understood that at least a considerable part of your army
would cross by the fords, and I so represented to the
President. It was this modiﬁcation of the plan proposed by
you that I telegraphed you had received his approval. When
the attempt at Fredericksburg was abandoned, I advised
you to renew the attempt at some other point, either in
whole or in part, to turn the enemy’s works, or to threaten
their wings or communications; in other words, to keep the
enemy occupied till a favorable opportunity oﬀered to
strike a decisive blow. I particularly advised you to use your
cavalry and light artillery upon his communications, and
attempt to cut oﬀ his supplies and engage him at an
advantage.
 In all our interviews I have urged that our ﬁrst object
was, not Richmond, but the defeat or scattering of Lee’s
army, which threatened Washington and the line of the
upper Potomac. I now recur to these things simply to
remind you of the general views which I have expressed,
and which I still hold.
The circumstances of the case, however, have somewhat
changed since the early part of November. The chances of
an extended line of operations are now, on account of the
advanced season, much less than then. But the chances are
still in our favor to meet and defeat the enemy on the
Rappahannock, if we can eﬀect a crossing in a position
where we can meet the enemy on favorable or even equal
terms. I therefore still advise a movement against him. The
character of that movement, however, must depend upon
circumstances which may change any day and almost any
hour. If the enemy should concentrate his forces at the
place you have selected for a crossing, make it a feint and
try another place. Again, the circumstances at the time may
be such as to render an attempt to cross the entire army
not advisable. In that case, theory suggests that, while the
enemy concentrates at that point, advantages can be
gained by crossing smaller forces at other points to cut oﬀ
his lines, destroy his communication, and capture his rear-
guards, outposts, etc. The great object is to occupy the
enemy to prevent his making large detachments or distant
raids, and to injure him all you can with the least injury to
yourself. If this can be best accomplished by feints of a
general crossing and detached real crossings, take that
 course; if by an actual general crossing, with feints on
other points, adopt that course. There seem to me to be
many reasons why a crossing at some point should be
attempted. It will not do to keep your large army inactive.
As you yourself admit, it devolves on you to decide upon the
time, place, and character of the crossing which you may
attempt. I can only advise that an attempt be made, and as
early as possible.
Very respectfully, your obedient servant, H. W. HALLECK,
General-in-Chief.
[Indorsement.]
January 8, 1863.
GENERAL BURNSIDE: I understand General Halleck has
sent you a letter of which this is a copy. I approve this
letter. I deplore the want of concurrence with you in
opinion by your general oﬀicers, but I do not see the
remedy. Be cautious, and do not understand that the
government or country is driving you. I do not yet see how I
could proﬁt by changing the command of the Army of the
Potomac; and if I did, I should not wish to do it by
accepting the resignation of your commission.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
   
   
H
 
.
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, January 8, 1863.
GOVERNOR JOHNSON, NASHVILLE Tenn.: A dispatch of
yesterday from Nashville says the body of Captain Todd, of
the Sixth Kentucky, was brought in to-day.
Please tell me what was his Christian name, and whether
he was in our service or that of the enemy. I shall also be
glad to have your impression as to the eﬀect the late
operations about Murfreesborough will have on the
prospects of Tennessee.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A   .  .  
  I .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, January 10, 1863.
MAJOR-GENERAL 
CURTIS, 
ST. 
Louis, 
MO.: 
I
understand there is considerable trouble with the slaves in
Missouri. Please do your best to keep peace on the question
for two or three weeks, by which time we hope to do
something here toward settling the question in Missouri.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
   
   
H
 
.
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, January 10, 1863
GOVERNOR 
JOHNSON, 
NASHVILLE, 
Tenn.: 
Yours
received. I presume the remains of Captain Todd are in the
hands of his family and friends, and I wish to give no order
on the subject; but I do wish your opinion of the eﬀects of
the late battles about Murfreesborough upon the prospects
of Tennessee.
A. LINCOLN.
 I
   
  I
  
  H   
  A
 
 A  
 
  A .
WAR DEPARTMENT, WASHINGTON CITY, January 12,
1863.
THE JUDGE-ADVOCATE-GENERAL IS instructed to revise the
proceedings of the court-martial in the case of Major-
General Fitz-John Porter, and to report fully upon any legal
questions that may have arisen in them, and upon the
bearing of the testimony in reference to the charges and
speciﬁcations exhibited against the accused, and upon
which he was tried.
A. LINCOLN.
    A
   
  H  H
   
         
 A I   .
 A
 A           .
TO THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES: The Secretary
of State has submitted to me a resolution of the House of
Representatives of the 5th instant, which has been
delivered to him, and which is in the following words:
“Resolved, That the Secretary of State be requested to
communicate to this House, if not, in his judgment,
incompatible with the public interest, why our Minister in
New Granada has not presented his credentials to the
actual government of that country; also the reasons for
which Senor Murillo is not recognized by the United States
as 
the 
diplomatic 
representative 
of 
the 
Mosquera
government of that country; also, what negotiations have
been had, if any, with General Herran as the representative
of Ospina’s government in New Granada since it went into
existence.”
On the 12th day of December, 1846, a treaty of amity,
peace, and concord was concluded between the United
States of America and the Republic of New Granada, which
is still in force. On the 7th day of December, 1847, General
Pedro Alcantara Herran, who had been duly accredited,
was received here as the envoy extraordinary and minister
plenipotentiary of that, republic. On the 30th day of August,
1849, Senor Don Rafael Rivas was received by this
 government as charge d’aﬀaires of the same republic. On
the 5th day of December, 1851, a consular convention was
concluded between that republic and the United States,
which treaty was signed on behalf of the Republic of
Granada by the same Senor Rivas. This treaty is still in
force. On the 27th of April, 1852, Senor Don Victoriano de
Diego Paredes was received as charge d’aﬀaires of the
Republic of New Granada. On the 20th of June, 1855,
General Pedro Alcantara Herran was again received as
envoy extraordinary and minister plenipotentiary, duly
accredited by the Republic of New Granada, and he has
ever since remained, under the same credentials, as the
representative of that republic near the Government of the
United States. On the 10th of September, 1857, a claims
convention was concluded between the United States and
the Republic of Granada. This convention is still in force,
and has in part been executed. In May, 1858, the
constitution of the republic was remodelled; and the nation
assumed the political title of “The Granadian Confederacy.”
This fact was formally announced to this Government, but
without any change in their representative here. Previously
to the 4th day of March, 1861, a revolutionary war against
the Republic of New Granada, which had thus been
recognized and treated with by the United States, broke
out in New Granada, assuming to set up a new government
under the name of “United States of Colombia.” This war
has 
had 
various 
vicissitudes, 
sometimes 
favorable,
sometimes adverse, to the revolutionary movements. The
revolutionary organization has hitherto been simply a
 military provisionary power, and no deﬁnitive constitution
of government has yet been established in New Granada in
place of that organized by the constitution of 1858. The
minister of the United States to the Granadian Confederacy,
who was appointed on the 29th day of May, 1861, was
directed, in view of the occupation of the capital by the
revolutionary party and of the uncertainty of the civil war,
not to present his credentials to either the government of
the Granadian Confederacy or to the provisional military
government, but to conduct his aﬀairs informally, as is
customary in such cases, and to report the progress of
events and await the instructions of this Government. The
advices which have been received from him have not
hitherto, been suﬀiciently conclusive to determine me to
recognize the revolutionary government. General Herran
being here, with full authority from the Government of New
Canada, which has been so long recognized by the United
States, I have not received any representative from the
revolutionary 
government, 
which 
has 
not 
yet 
been
recognized, because such a proceeding would be in itself
an act of recognition.
Oﬀicial communications have been had on various
incidental and occasional questions with General Herran as
the minister plenipotentiary and envoy extraordinary of the
Granadian Confederacy, but in no other character. No
deﬁnitive measure or proceeding has resulted from these
communications, and a communication of them at present
would not, in my judgment, be compatible with the public
interest.
 A. LINCOLN.
  
       A   
  
A .
WASHINGTON, January 15, 1863.
SECRETARY OF WAR:
Please see Mr. Staﬀord, who wants to assist in raising
colored troops in Missouri.
A. LINCOLN.
   I
 I
 
 
MESSAGE TO CONGRESS.
JANUARY 17, 1863.
TO THE SENATE AND HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES:
I have signed the joint resolution to provide for the
immediate payment of the army and navy of the United
States, passed by the House of Representatives on the 14th
and by the Senate on the 15th instant.
The joint resolution is a simple authority, amounting,
however, under existing circumstances, to a direction, to
the Secretary of the Treasury to make an additional issue of
 100,000,000 in United States notes, if so much money is
needed, for the payment of the army and navy.
My approval is given in order that every possible facility
may be aﬀorded for the prompt discharge of all arrears of
pay due to our soldiers and our sailors.
While giving this approval, however, I think it my duty to
express my sincere regret that it has been found necessary
to authorize so large an additional issue of United States
notes, when this circulation and that of the suspended
banks together have become already so redundant as to
increase prices beyond real values, thereby augmenting the
cost of living to the injury of labor, and the cost of supplies
to the injury of the whole country.
 It seems very plain that continued issues of United States
notes without any check to the issues of suspended banks,
and without adequate provision for the raising of money by
loans and for funding the issues so as to keep them within
due limits, must soon produce disastrous consequences;
and this matter appears to me so important that I feel
bound to avail myself of this occasion to ask the special
attention of Congress to it.
That Congress has power to regulate the currency of the
country can hardly admit of doubt, and that a judicious
measure to prevent the deterioration of this currency, by a
seasonable taxation of bank circulation or otherwise, is
needed seems equally clear. Independently of this general
consideration, it would be unjust to the people at large to
exempt banks enjoying the special privilege of circulation
from their just proportion of the public burdens.
In order to raise money by way of loans most easily and
cheaply, it is clearly necessary to give every possible
support to the public credit. To that end a uniform
currency, in which taxes, subscriptions to loans, and all
other ordinary public dues as well as all private dues may
be paid, is almost if not quite indispensable. Such a
currency can be furnished by banking associations
organized under a general act of Congress, as suggested in
my message at the beginning of the present session. The
securing of this circulation by the pledge of United States
bonds, as therein suggested, would still further facilitate
loans, by increasing the present and causing a future
demand for such bonds.
 In view of the actual ﬁnancial embarrassments of the
government, and of the greater embarrassment sure to
come if the necessary means of relief be not aﬀorded, I feel
that 
I 
should 
not 
perform 
my 
duty 
by 
a 
simple
announcement of my approval of the joint resolution, which
proposes relief only by increased circulation, without
expressing my earnest desire that measures such in
substance as those I have just referred to may receive the
early sanction of Congress. By such measures, in my
opinion, will payment be most certainly secured, not only to
the army and navy, but to all honest creditors of the
government, and satisfactory provision made for future
demands on the treasury.
A. LINCOLN.
  
  H  
  I
 
 
 
  
A
 H     
 
 A
.
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, January, 1863.
TO THE WORKING-MEN OF MANCHESTER: I have the
honor to acknowledge the receipt of the address and
resolutions which you sent me on the eve of the new year.
When I came, on the 4th of March, 1861, through a free
and constitutional election to ﬁreside in the Government of
the United States, the country was found at the verge of
civil war. Whatever might have been the cause, or
whosesoever the fault, one duty, paramount to all others,
was before me, namely, to maintain and preserve at once
the Constitution and the integrity of the Federal Republic.
A conscientious purpose to perform this duty is the key to
all the measures of administration which have been and to
all which will hereafter be pursued. Under our frame of
government and my oﬀicial oath, I could not depart from
this purpose if I would. It is not always in the power of
governments to enlarge or restrict the scope of moral
results which follow the policies that they may deem it
necessary for the public safety from time to time to adopt.
I have understood well that the duty of self-preservation
rests solely with the American people; but I have at the
same time been aware that favor or disfavor of foreign
 nations might have a material inﬂuence in enlarging or
prolonging the struggle with disloyal men in which the
country is engaged. A fair examination of history has
served to authorize a belief that the past actions and
inﬂuences of the United States were generally regarded as
having been beneﬁcial toward mankind. I have, therefore,
reckoned upon the forbearance of nations. Circumstances
— to some of which you kindly allude — induce me
especially to expect that if justice and good faith should be
practised by the United States, they would encounter no
hostile inﬂuence on the part of Great Britain. It is now a
pleasant duty to acknowledge the demonstration you have
given of your desire that a spirit of amity and peace toward
this country may prevail in the councils of your Queen, who
is respected and esteemed in your own country only more
than she is by the kindred nation which has its home on
this side of the Atlantic.
I know and deeply deplore the suﬀerings which the
workingmen at Manchester, and in all Europe, are called to
endure in this crisis. It has been often and studiously
represented 
that 
the 
attempt 
to 
overthrow 
this
government, which was built upon the foundation of human
rights, and to substitute for it one which should rest
exclusively on the basis of human slavery, was likely to
obtain the favor of Europe. Through the action of our
disloyal citizens, the working-men of Europe have been
subjected to severe trials, for the purpose of forcing their
sanction to that attempt. Under the circumstance, I cannot
but regard your decisive utterances upon the question as
 an instance of sublime Christian heroism which has not
been surpassed in any age or in any country. It is indeed an
energetic and inspiring assurance of the inherent power of
truth and of the ultimate and universal triumph of justice,
humanity, and freedom. I do not doubt that the sentiments,
you have expressed will be sustained by your great nation;
and, on the other hand, I have no hesitation in assuring you
that they will excite admiration, esteem, and the most
reciprocal feelings of friendship among the American
people.
I hail this interchange of sentiment, therefore, as an
augury 
that 
whatever 
else 
may 
happen, 
whatever
misfortune may befall your country or my own, the peace
and friendship which now exist between the two nations
will be, as it shall be my desire to make them, perpetual.
A. LINCOLN.
    A
   
  
    .
WASHINGTON, January 21, 1863.
GENTLEMEN OF THE SENATE AND HOUSE OF
REPRESENTATIVES: 
I 
submit 
herewith 
for 
your
consideration the joint resolutions of the corporate
authorities of the city of Washington, adopted September a
7, 1862, and a memorial of the same under date of October
28, 1862, both relating to and urging the construction of
certain 
railroads 
concentrating 
upon 
the 
city 
of
Washington.
In presenting this memorial and the joint resolutions to
you, I am not prepared to say more than that the subject is
one of great practical importance, and that I hope it will
receive the attention of Congress.
A. LINCOLN.
  I    
H
  
      
   
A  IA .
INDORSEMENT ON THE PROCEEDINGS AND SENTENCE
HEADQUARTERS 
OF 
THE 
ARMY, 
WASHINGTON,
January 13, 1863.
In compliance with the Sixty-ﬁfth Article of War, these
whole proceedings are transmitted to the Secretary of War,
to be laid before the President of the United States.
H. W. HALLECK, General-in-Chief.
January 21, 1863.
The foregoing proceedings, ﬁndings, and sentence in the
foregoing case of Major-General Fitz-John Porter are
approved and conﬁrmed, and it is ordered that the said
Fitz-John Porter be, and he hereby is, cashiered and
dismissed from the service of the United States as a major-
general of volunteers, and as colonel and brevet brigadier-
general in the regular service of the United States, and
forever disqualiﬁed from holding any oﬀice of trust or proﬁt
under the Government of the United States.
A. LINCOLN.
   
 
 
  A  HA       
 
 
  A  
.  .
 A
 .
HEADQUARTERS OF THE ARMY, WASHINGTON
JANUARY 21, 1863.
MAJOR-GENERAL GRANT, Memphis.
GENERAL: — The President has directed that so much of
Arkansas as you may desire to control be temporarily
attached to your department. This will give you control of
both banks of the river.
In your operations down the Mississippi you must not
rely too conﬁdently upon any direct co-operation of General
Banks and the lower ﬂotilla, as it is possible that they may
not be able to pass or reduce Port Hudson. They, however,
will do everything in their power to form a junction with
you at Vicksburg. If they should not be able to eﬀect this,
they will at least occupy a portion of the enemy’s forces,
and prevent them from reinforcing Vicksburg. I hope,
however, that they will do still better and be able to join
you.
It may be proper to give you some explanation of the
revocation of your order expelling all Jews from your
department. The President has no objection to your
expelling traitors and Jew peddlers, which, I suppose, was
the object of your order; but as it in terms proscribed an
 entire religious class, some of whom are ﬁghting in our
ranks, the President deemed it necessary to revoke it.
Very respectfully, your obedient servant, H. W. HALLECK,
General-in-Chief.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A   
 
 I
 .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, January 23, 1863
GENERAL BURNSIDE:
Will see you any moment when you come.
A. LINCOLN.
  
      I  I
 
 
  A  A.  .  
 
 I
A
 
A I
 
 H    HA
  .
(General Orders No.20.)
WAR DEPARTMENT, ADJUTANT-GENERAL’S OFFICE,
WASHINGTON, D.C. JANUARY 25, 1863.
I. The President of the United States has directed:
1st. That Major-General A. E. Burnside, at his own
request, be relieved from the command of the Army of the
Potomac.
2d. That Major-General E. V. Sumner, at his own request,
be relieved from duty in the Army of the Potomac.
3d. That Major-General W. B. Franklin be relieved from
duty in the Army of the Potomac.
4th. That Major-General J. Hooker be assigned to the
command of the Army of the Potomac.
II. The oﬀicers relieved as above will report in person to
the adjutant-general of the army.
By order of the Secretary of War: D. TOWNSEND,
Assistant Adjutant-General
  
 
 
  A   . H
   .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, D. C., January 26,
1863.
MAJOR-GENERAL HOOKER.
GENERAL: — I have placed you at the head of the Army
of the Potomac. Of course I have done this upon what
appear to me to be suﬀicient reasons, and yet I think it best
for you to know that there are some things in regard to
which I am not quite satisﬁed with you. I believe you to be
a brave and skillful soldier, which of course I like. I also
believe you do not mix politics with your profession, in
which you are right. You have conﬁdence in yourself, which
is a valuable if not an indispensable quality. You are
ambitious, which within reasonable bounds does good
rather than harm; but I think that during General
Burnside’s command of the army you have taken counsel of
your ambition and thwarted him as much as you could, in
which you did a great wrong to the country and to a most
meritorious and honorable brother oﬀicer. I have heard, in
such a way as to believe it, of your recently saying that
both the army and the government needed a dictator. Of
course it was not for this, but in spite of it, that I have given
you the command. Only those generals who gain successes
can set up dictators. What I now ask of you is military
 success, and I will risk the dictatorship. The government
will support you to the utmost of its ability, which is neither
more nor less than it has done and will do for all
commanders. I much fear that the spirit that you have
aided to infuse into the army, of criticizing their
commander and withholding conﬁdence from him, will now
turn upon you. I shall assist you as far as I can to put it
down. Neither you nor Napoleon, if he were alive again,
could get any good out of an army while such a spirit
prevails in it. And now beware of rashness. Beware of
rashness, but with energy and sleepless vigilance go
forward and give us victories.
Yours very truly, A. LINCOLN.
    A
   
  
    .
WASHINGTON CITY, January 28,1863, 
TO THE SENATE AND HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES:
In conformity to the law of July 16, 1862, I most cordially
recommend that Commander David D. Porter, United States
Navy, acting rear-admiral, commanding the Mississippi
Squadron, receive a vote of thanks of Congress for the
bravery and skill displayed in the attack on the post of
Arkansas, which surrendered to the combined military and
naval forces on the 10th instant.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A   
   
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, January 28, 1863.
MAJOR-GENERAL BUTLER, LOWELL, Mass.:
Please come here immediately. Telegraph me about what
time you will arrive.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A  
I .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, January 29, 1863
MAJOR-GENERAL DI , FORT Monroe, Va.:
Do Richmond papers have anything from Vicksburg?
A. LINCOLN.
  
  H
  
 
  
.
WASHINGTON, January 29, 1863.
HON. THURLOW WEED.
DEAR SIR: — Your valedictory to the patrons of the
Albany Evening journal brings me a good deal of
uneasiness. What does it mean?
Truly Yours,
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A  
I .
WAR DEPARTMENT, WASHINGTON CITY,
JANUARY 30, 1863. 5.45 P.M.
MAJOR-GENERAL Dix, Fort Monroe, Va.:
What iron-clads, if any, have gone out of Hampton Roads
within the last two days?
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A  
I .
WAR DEPARTMENT, WASHINGTON CITY, D. C., January
31, 1863.
MAJOR-GENERAL DI , FORT Monroe, Va.: Corcoran’s
and Pryor’s battle terminated. Have you any news through
Richmond papers or otherwise?
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A    H 
  .
WAR DEPARTMENT, WASHINGTON CITY, D. C., January
31, 1863.
MAJOR-GENERAL SCHENCK, BALTIMORE, Md.:
I do not take jurisdiction of the pass question. Exercise
your own discretion as to whether Judge Pettis shall have a
pass.
A. LINCOLN.
  
  H  
  I
 
 
 
   
   
 A
.
E ECUTIVE MANSION, February 1, 1863.
TO THE WORKING-MEN OF LONDON: I have received
the New Year’s address which you have sent me, with a
sincere appreciation of the exalted and humane sentiments
by which it was inspired.
As these sentiments are manifestly the enduring support
of the free institutions of England, so I am sure also that
they constitute the only reliable basis for free institutions
throughout the world.
The resources, advantages, and powers of the American
people are very great, and they have consequently
succeeded to equally great responsibilities. It seems to
have devolved upon them to test whether a government
established on the principles of human freedom can be
maintained against an eﬀort to build one upon the exclusive
foundation of human bondage. They will rejoice with me in
the new evidences which your proceedings furnish that the
magnanimity they are exhibiting is justly estimated by the
true friends of freedom and humanity in foreign countries.
Accept my best wishes for your individual welfare, and
for the welfare and happiness of the whole British people.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A    H 
  .   i her.
A  
  A  
 
   
A HI
 
  
.  .
February 4, 1863.
MAJOR-GENERAL SCHENCK, BALTIMORE, Md.:
I hear of some diﬀiculty in the streets of Baltimore
yesterday. What is the amount of it?
A. LINCOLN.
    A
   
  H    
A  .
WASHINGTON, D. C., February 12, 1863.
TO THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES: On the 4th
of September, 1862, Commander George Henry Preble,
United States Navy, then senior oﬀicer in command of the
naval force oﬀ the harbor of Mobile, was guilty of
inexcusable neglect in permitting the armed steamer Oreto
in open daylight to run the blockade. For his omission to
perform his whole duty on that occasion, and the injury
thereby inﬂicted on the service and the country, his name
was stricken from the list of naval oﬀicers and he was
dismissed [from] the service.
Since his dismissal earnest application has been made
for his restoration to his former position by senators and
naval oﬀicers, on the ground that his fault was an error of
judgment, and that the example in his case has already had
its eﬀect in preventing a repetition of similar neglect.
I therefore on this application and representation, and in
consideration of his previous fair record, do hereby
nominate George Henry Preble to be a commander in the
navy from the 16th July, 1862, to take rank on the active list
next after Commander Edward Donaldson, and to ﬁll a
vacancy occasioned by the death of Commander J. M.
Wainwright.
 A. LINCOLN.
    A
   
  H    
A  .
WASHINGTON, D. C., February 12, 1863.
TO THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES: On the 24th
August, 1861, Commander Roger Perry, United. States
Navy, 
was 
dismissed 
from 
the 
service 
under 
a
misapprehension 
in 
regard 
to 
his 
loyalty 
to 
the
Government, from the circumstance that several oaths
were transmitted to him and the Navy Department failed to
receive any recognition of them. After his dismissal, and
upon his assurance that the oath failed to reach him and his
readiness to execute it, he was recommissioned to his
original position on the 4th September following. On the
same day, 4th September, he was ordered to command the
sloop of war Vandalia; on the 22d this order was revoked
and he was ordered to duty in the Mississippi Squadron,
and on the 23d January, 1862, was detached sick, and has
since remained unemployed. The advisory board under the
act of 16th July, 1862, did not recommend him for further
promotion.
This last commission, having been issued during the
recess of the Senate, expired at the end of the succeeding
session, 17th July, 1862, from which date, not having been
nominated to the Senate, he ceased to be a commander in
the navy.
 To correct the omission to nominate this oﬀicer to the
Senate at its last session, I now nominate Commander
Roger Perry to be a commander in the navy from the 14th
September, 1855, to take his relative position on the list of
commanders not recommended for further promotion.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A  
.  .  
    A
 .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, February 12,1863.
MAJOR-GENERAL ROSECRANS, MURFREESBOROUGH,
Tenn.: Your despatch about “river patrolling” received. I
have called the Secretary of the Navy, Secretary of War,
and General-in-Chief together, and submitted it to them,
who promise to do their very best in the case. I cannot take
it into my own hands without producing inextricable
confusion.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
  I
  A
  
.
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, February 13,
1863.
HON. SIMON CAMERON, Harrisburg, Pa.: General Clay
is here and I suppose the matter we spoke of will have to
be deﬁnitely settled now. Please answer.
A. LINCOLN.
  
 A   A
      
.
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, February 22,
1863.
REV. ALE ANDER REED. MY DEAR SIR: — Your note,
by which you, as General Superintendent of the United
States Christian Commission, invite me to preside at a
meeting to be held this day at the hall of the House of
Representatives in this city, is received.
While, for reasons which I deem suﬀicient, I must decline
to preside, I cannot withhold my approval of the meeting
and its worthy objects.
Whatever shall be, sincerely and in God’s name, devised
for the good of the soldiers and seamen in their hard
spheres of duty, can scarcely fail to be blessed; and
whatever shall tend to turn our thoughts from the
unreasoning and uncharitable passions, prejudices, and
jealousies incident to a great national trouble such as ours,
and 
to 
ﬁx 
them 
on 
the 
vast 
and 
long 
enduring
consequences, for weal or for woe, which are to result from
the struggle, and especially to strengthen our reliance on
the Supreme Being for the ﬁnal triumph of the right,
cannot but be well for us all.
The birthday of Washington and the Christian Sabbath
coinciding this year, and suggesting together the highest
 interests of this life and of that to come, is most propitious
for the meeting proposed.
Your obedient servant, A. LINCOLN
     
 A
  
  .  . 
 
I .
[Cipher]
WAR DEPARTMENT, WASHINGTON, D. C. February
26,1863.
HON. J. K. DuBois, Springﬁeld, Ill.: General Rosecrans
respectfully urges the appointment of William P. Caslin as a
brigadier-general, What say you?
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A  H
  
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, February 27,1863
MAJOR-GENERAL HOOKER:
If it will be no detriment to the service I will be obliged
for Capt. Henry A. Marchant, of Company I, Twenty-third
Pennsylvania Volunteers, to come here and remain four or
ﬁve days.
A. LINCOLN.
   
  A
A I
  
  
I
  H    
A  
     A          
BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES OF
AMERICA 
A PROCLAMATION.
Whereas objects of interest to the United States require
that the Senate should be convened at 12 o’clock on the 4th
of 
March 
next 
to 
receive 
and 
act 
upon 
such
communications as may be made to it on the part of the
Executive: Now, therefore, I, Abraham Lincoln, President of
the United States, have considered it to be my duty to issue
this my proclamation, declaring that an extraordinary
occasion requires the Senate of the United States to
convene for the transaction of business at the Capitol, in
the city of Washington, on the 4th day of March next, at 12
o’clock at noon on that day, of which all who shall at that
time be entitled to act as members of that body are hereby
required to take notice.
Given under my hand and the seal of the United States,
at Washington, the twenty eighth day of February A.D.
1863, and of the independence of the United States of
America, the eighty-seventh.
A. LINCOLN.
By the President WILLIAM H. SEWARD, Secretary o f
State.
  
       A     
A 
.
WASHINGTON, March, 7,1863.
MR. M. IS now with me on the question of the Honolulu
Commissioner. It pains me some that this tilt for the place
of Colonel Baker’s friend grows so ﬁerce, now that the
Colonel is no longer alive to defend him. I presume,
however, we shall have no rest from it. In self-defense I am
disposed to say, “Make a selection and send it to me.”
A. LINCOLN
     
 A
  
 
   
   
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, March 9, 1863.
GOVERNOR DAVID TOD, Columbus, Ohio:
I think your advice with that of others would be valuable
in the selection of provost-marshals for Ohio.
A. LINCOLN.
   
  A
A I
    A  I
  
 
I     
  H I
  
I
 
    
A  H        
BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES:
A PROCLAMATION
In pursuance of the twenty-sixth section of the act of
Congress entitled “An act for enrolling and calling out the
national forces, and for other purposes,” approved on the
3d day of March, 1863, I, Abraham Lincoln, President and
Commander-in-Chief of the Army and Navy of the United
States, do hereby order and command that all soldiers
enlisted or drafted in the service of the United States now
absent from their regiments without leave shall forthwith
return to their respective regiments.
And I do hereby declare and proclaim that all soldiers
now absent from their respective regiments without leave
who shall, on or before the ﬁrst day of April, 1863, report
themselves at any rendezvous designated by the general
orders of the War Department No. 58, hereto annexed, may
be 
restored 
to 
their 
respective 
regiments 
without
punishment, except the forfeiture of pay and allowances
during their absence; and all who do not return within the
time above speciﬁed shall be arrested as deserters and
punished as the law provides; and
 Whereas evil-disposed and disloyal persons at sundry
places have enticed and procured soldiers to desert and
absent 
themselves 
from 
their 
regiments, 
thereby
weakening the strength of the armies and prolonging the
war, giving aid and comfort to the enemy, and cruelly
exposing the gallant and faithful soldiers remaining in the
ranks to increased hardships and danger:
I do therefore call upon all patriotic and faithful citizens
to oppose and resist the aforementioned dangerous and
treasonable crimes, and to aid in restoring to their
regiments all soldiers absent without leave, and to assist in
the execution of the act of Congress “for enrolling and
calling out the national forces, and for other purposes,” and
to support the proper authorities in the prosecution and
punishment 
of 
oﬀenders 
against 
said 
act 
and 
in
suppressing the insurrection and rebellion.
In testimony whereof I have hereunto set my hand. Done
at the city of Washington, this tenth day of March, A.D.
1863, and of the independence of the United States the
eighty-seventh.
A. LINCOLN.
By the President: EDWIN M. STANTON, Secretary of
War.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A  H
   .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, March 13, 1863.
MAJOR-GENERAL HOOKER: General Stahel wishes to
be 
assigned 
to 
General 
Heintzelman 
and 
General
Heintzelman also desires it. I would like to oblige both if it
would not injure the service in your army, or incommode
you. What say you?
A. LINCOLN.
  
       A     
A 
.
WASHINGTON, Match 15, 1863.
I AM VERY glad of your note saying “recent despatches from
him are able, judicious, and loyal,” and that if I agree; we
will leave him there. I am glad to agree, so long as the
public interest does not seem to require his removal.
     
 A
  
  . 
. 
  
.
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, March 16, 1863.
HON. J. O. MORTON, Joliet, Ill.: William Chumasero is
proposed for provost-marshal of your district. What think
you of it? I understand he is a good man.
A. LINCOLN.
  A
        
 I
 
  A 
 
  A  
   
   
REVOCATION OF SENTENCE OF T. W. KNO .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, March 20,
1863.
WHOM IT MAY CONCERN: — Whereas, it appears to my
satisfaction that Thomas W. Knox, a correspondent of the
New York Herald, has been by the sentence of a court-
martial excluded from the military department under
command of Major-General Grant, and also that General
Thayer, president of the court-martial which rendered the
sentence, and Major-General McClernand, in command of a
corps of that department, and many other respectable
persons, are of opinion that Mr. Knox’s oﬀense was
technical rather than wilfully wrong, and that the sentence
should be revoked: now, therefore, said sentence is hereby
so far revoked as to allow Mr. Knox to return to General
Grant’s headquarters, and to remain if General Grant shall
give his express assent, and to again leave the department
if General Grant shall refuse such assent.
A. LINCOLN.
  
   
 A
I
 
 A  .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, March 25,1863.
MR. BENJAMIN GRATZ, Lexington, Ky.:
Show this to whom it may concern as your authority for
allowing Mrs. Selby to remain at your house, so long as you
choose to be responsible for what she may do.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A   
    A
 .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, March 25, 1863.
MAJOR-GENERAL ROSECRANS, MURFREESBOROUGH,
Tenn.: Your dispatches about General Davis and General
Mitchell are received. General Davis’ case is not particular,
being simply one of a great many recommended and not
nominated because they would transcend the number
allowed by law. General Mitchell (was) nominated and
rejected by the Senate and I do not think it proper for me
to renominate him without a change of circumstances such
as the performance of additional service, or an expressed
change of purpose on the part of at least some senators
who opposed him.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A   . A. H
   
 .
WASHINGTON, March 25, 1863.
MAJOR-GENERAL HURLBUT, MEMPHIS:
What news have you? What from Vicksburg? What from
Yazoo Pass? What from Lake Providence? What generally?
A. LINCOLN.
    I
 
   AI I
 
 
 
   
 
TO GOVERNOR JOHNSON.
(PRIVATE.) 
E ECUTIVE 
MANSION, 
WASHINGTON
March 26, 1863.
HON. ANDREW JOHNSON.
MY DEAR SIR: — I am told you have at least thought of
raising a negro military force. In my opinion the country
now needs no speciﬁc thing so much as some man of your
ability and position to go to this work. When I speak of your
position, I mean that of an eminent citizen of a slave State
and himself a slaveholder. The colored population is the
great available and yet unavailed of force for restoring the
Union. The bare sight of ﬁfty thousand armed and drilled
black soldiers upon the banks of the Mississippi would end
the rebellion at once; and who doubts that we can present
that sight if we but take hold in earnest? If you have been
thinking of it, please do not dismiss the thought.
Yours very truly, A. LINCOLN.
   
  A
A I
 A  
I
 I
 A 
A I
A   A  
A .
BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES OF
AMERICA:
A PROCLAMATION.
March 30, 1863.
Whereas the Senate of the United States, devoutly
recognizing the supreme authority and just government of
Almighty God in all the aﬀairs of men and of nations, has by
a resolution requested the President to designate and set
apart a day for national prayer and humiliation:
And whereas it is the duty of nations as well as men to
own their dependence upon the overruling power of God; to
confess their sins and transgressions in humble sorrow, yet
with assured hope that genuine repentance will lead to
mercy and pardon; and to recognize the sublime truth,
announced in the Holy Scriptures and proven by all history,
that those nations only are blessed whose God is the Lord:
And insomuch as we know that by His divine law nations,
like 
individuals, 
are 
subjected 
to 
punishments 
and
chastisements in this world, may we not justly fear that the
awful calamity of civil war which now desolates the land
may be but a punishment inﬂicted upon us for our
presumptuous sins, to the needful end of our national
 reformation as a whole people? We have been the
recipients of the choicest bounties of Heaven. We have
been preserved, these many years, in peace and prosperity.
We have grown in numbers, wealth, and power as no other
nation has ever grown; but we have forgotten God. We have
forgotten the gracious hand which preserved us in peace,
and multiplied and enriched and strengthened us; and we
have vainly imagined, in the deceitfulness of our hearts,
that all these blessings were produced by some superior
wisdom and virtue of our own. Intoxicated with unbroken
success, we have become too self-suﬀicient to feel the
necessity of redeeming and preserving grace, too proud to
pray to the God that made us:
It behooves us, then, to humble ourselves before the
oﬀended Power, to confess our national sins, and to pray for
clemency and forgiveness:
Now, therefore, in compliance with the request, and fully
concurring in the views, of the Senate, I do by this my
proclamation designate and set apart Thursday, the 30th
day of April, 1863, as a day of national humiliation, fasting,
and prayer. And I do hereby request all the people to
abstain on that day from their ordinary secular pursuits,
and to unite at their several places of public worship and
their respective homes in keeping the day holy to the Lord,
and devoted to the humble discharge of the religious duties
proper to that solemn occasion. All this being done in
sincerity and truth, let us then rest humbly in the hope,
authorized by the divine teachings, that the united cry of
the nation will be heard on high, and answered with
 blessings no less than the pardon of our national sins, and
the restoration of our now divided and suﬀering country to
its former happy condition of unity and peace.
In witness whereof, I have hereunto set my hand, and
caused the seal of the United States to be aﬀixed.
Done at the city of Washington, this thirtieth day of
March, in the year of our Lord one thousand eight hundred
and sixty-three, and of the independence of the United
States the eighty-seventh.
A. LINCOLN.
By the President: WILLIAM H. SEWARD,
Secretary of State.
  I  
   
   
   IA  I
    
   .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, March 31, 1863.
WHEREAS BY THE act of Congress approved July 13, 1861,
entitled “An act to provide for the collection of duties on
imports, 
and 
for 
other 
purposes,” 
all 
commercial
intercourse between the inhabitants of such States as
should by proclamation be declared in insurrection against
the United States and the citizens of the rest of the United
States was prohibited so long as such condition of hostility
should continue, except as the same shall be licensed and
permitted by the President to be conducted and carried on
only in pursuance of rules and regulations prescribed by
the Secretary of the Treasury; and: Whereas it appears that
a partial restoration of such intercourse between the
inhabitants of sundry places and sections heretofore
declared in insurrection in pursuance of said act and the
citizens of the rest of the United States will favorably aﬀect
the public interests: Now, therefore, I, Abraham Lincoln,
President of the United States, exercising the authority and
discretion conﬁded to me by the said act of Congress, do
hereby license and permit such commercial intercourse
between the citizens of loyal States and the inhabitants of
such insurrectionary States in the cases and under the
restrictions described and expressed in the regulations
 prescribed by the Secretary of the Treasury bearing even
date with these presents, or in such other regulations as he
may hereafter, with my approval, prescribe.
A. LINCOLN.
  
 
 
  A  
. H
   .
(Private.) E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, D. C
April 1, 1863.
MAJOR-GENERAL HUNTER.
MY DEAR SIR: — I am glad to see the accounts of your
colored force at Jacksonville, Florida. I see the enemy are
driving at them ﬁercely, as is to be expected. It is important
to the enemy that such a force shall not take shape and
grow and thrive in the South, and in precisely the same
proportion it is important to us that it shall. Hence the
utmost caution and vigilance is necessary on our part. The
enemy will make extra eﬀorts to destroy them, and we
should do the same to preserve and increase them.
Yours truly, A. LINCOLN.
   
  A
A I
 A 
   
   IA
I
    
     A  I        
BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES OF
AMERICA:
A PROCLAMATION.
Whereas, in pursuance of the act of Congress approved
July 13, 1861, I did, by proclamation dated August 16,
1861, declare that the inhabitants of the States of Georgia,
South Carolina, Virginia, North Carolina, Tennessee,
Alabama, Louisiana, Texas, Arkansas, Mississippi, and
Florida (except the inhabitants of that part of Virginia lying
west of the Alleghany Mountains, and of such other parts of
that State and the other States hereinbefore named as
might maintain a legal adhesion to the Union and the
Constitution or might be from time to time occupied and
controlled by forces of the United States engaged in the
dispersion of said insurgents) were in a state of
insurrection against the United States, and that all
commercial intercourse between the same and the
inhabitants thereof, with the exceptions aforesaid, and the
citizens of other States and other parts of the United States
was unlawful and would remain unlawful until such
insurrection should cease or be suppressed, and that all
goods and chattels, wares and merchandise, coming from
 any of said States, with the exceptions aforesaid, into other
parts of the United States without the license and
permission of the President, through the Secretary of the
Treasury, or proceeding to any of said States, with the
exceptions aforesaid, by land or water, together with the
vessel or vehicle conveying the same to or from said States,
with the exceptions aforesaid, would be forfeited to the
United States, and:
Whereas experience has shown that the exceptions made
in 
and 
by 
said 
proclamation 
embarrass 
the 
due
enforcement of said act of July 13, 1861, and the proper
regulation of the commercial intercourse authorized by said
act with the loyal citizens of said States:
Now, therefore, I, Abraham Lincoln, President of the
United States, do hereby revoke the said exceptions, and
declare that the inhabitants of the States of Georgia, South
Carolina, North Carolina, Tennessee, Alabama, Louisiana,
Texas, Arkansas, Mississippi, Florida, and Virginia (except
the forty-eight counties of Virginia designated as West
Virginia, and except also the ports of New Orleans, Key
West; Port Royal, and Beaufort in North Carolina) are in a
state of insurrection against the United States, and that all
commercial intercourse not licensed and conducted as
provided in said act between the said States and the
inhabitants thereof, with the exceptions aforesaid, and the
citizens of other States and other parts of the United States
is unlawful and will remain unlawful until such insurrection
shall cease or has been suppressed and notice thereof has
been duly given by proclamation; and all cotton, tobacco,
 and other products, and all other goods and chattels, wares
and merchandise, coming from any of said States, with the
exceptions aforesaid, into other parts of the United States,
or proceeding to any of said States, with the exceptions
aforesaid, without the license and permission of the
President, through the Secretary of the Treasury, will
together with the vessel or vehicle conveying the same, be
forfeited to the United States.
In witness whereof I have hereunto set my hand and
caused the seal of the United States to be aﬀixed.
Done at the city of Washington, this second day of April,
A.D. 1863, and of the independence of the United States of
America the eighty-seventh.
A. LINCOLN.
By the President: WILLIAM H. SEWARD,
Secretary of State.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A  H
   .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, April 3, 1863.
MAJOR-GENERAL HOOKER: Our plan is to pass
Saturday night on the boat, go over from Aquia Creek to
your camp Sunday morning, remain with you till Tuesday
morning, and then return. Our party will probably not
exceed six persons of all sorts.
A. LINCOLN.
  I
I
 
 HA  
  
   
  .
April 4, 1863.
ON THIS GENERAL subject I respectfully refer Mr. —— — to
the Secretaries of War and Navy for conference and
consultation. I have a single idea of my own about harbor
defense. It is a steam ram, built so as to sacriﬁce nearly all
capacity for carrying to those of speed and strength, so as
to be able to split any vessel having hollow enough in her to
carry supplies for a voyage of any distance. Such ram, of
course, could not herself carry supplies for a voyage of
considerable distance, and her business would be to guard
a particular harbor as a bulldog guards his master’s door.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
  H        A   
   H  
A  .
HEADQUARTERS ARMY POTOMAC, April 9, 1863.
HON. SECRETARY OF THE NAVY: Richmond Whig of
the 8th has no telegraphic despatches from Charleston, but
has the following as editorial: “All thoughts are now centred
upon Charleston. Oﬀicial intelligence was made public
early yesterday morning that the enemy’s iron-clad ﬂeet
had attempted to cross the bar and failed, but later in the
day it was announced that the gunboats and transports had
succeeded in crossing and were at anchor. Our iron-clads
lay between the forts quietly awaiting the attack. Further
intelligence is looked for with eager anxiety. The Yankees
have made no secret of this vast preparation for an attack
on Charleston, and we may well anticipate a desperate
conﬂict. At last the hour of trial has come for Charleston,
the hour of deliverance or destruction, for no one believes
the other alternative, surrender, possible. The heart of the
whole country yearns toward the beleaguered city with
intense solicitude, yet with hopes amounting to conﬁdence.
Charleston knows what is expected of her, and which is due
to her fame, and to the relation she sustains to the cause.
The devoted, the heroic, the great-hearted Beauregard is
there, and he, too, knows what is expected of him and will
not disappoint that expectation. We predict a Saragossa
 defense, and that if Charleston is taken it will be only a
heap of ruins.”
The rebel pickets are reported as calling over to our
pickets today that we had taken some rebel fort. This is not
very intelligible, and I think is entirely unreliable.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
  I    I
  
A
 A
A H I   .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, April 11,1863.
OFFICER IN COMMAND at Nashville, Tenn: Is there a
soldier by the name of John R. Minnick of Wynkoop’s
cavalry under sentence of death, by a court-martial or
military commission, in Nashville? And if so what was his
oﬀense, and when is he to be executed?
A. LINCOLN.
If necessary let the execution be staid till I can be heard
from again.
A. LINCOLN.
[President Lincoln sent many telegrams similar in form
to this one in order to avoid tiresome repetition the editor
has omitted all those without especial interest. Hardly a
day went by that there were not people in the White House
begging mercy for a sentenced soldier. A mother one day,
pleaded with Lincoln to remit the sentence of execution on
her son. “Well, I don’t think it will do him a bit of good”
said Mr. Lincoln— “Pardoned.” D.W.]
     
 A
  
 
 
  A  H
   .
WASHINGTON D.C., April 12, 1863
MAJOR-GENERAL HOOKER:
Your letter by the hand of General Butterﬁeld is received,
and will be conformed to. The thing you dispense with
would have been ready by mid-day to-morrow.
A. LINCOLN
     
 A
  
 A
I A   .  . 
 
 .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, April 13, 1863
ADMIRAL DUPONT: Hold your position inside the bar
near Charleston; or, if you shall have left it, return to it, and
hold it until further orders. Do not allow the enemy to erect
new batteries or defenses on Morris Island. If he has begun
it, drive him out. I do not herein order you to renew the
general attack. That is to depend on your own discretion or
a further order.
A. LINCOLN.
  
 
 
  A  
. H
    A
 A
I A   .  .
 
 .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, April 54, 1863.
GENERAL HUNTER AND ADMIRAL DUPONT: This is
intended to clear up an apparent inconsistency between the
recent order to continue operations before Charleston and
the former one to remove to another point in a certain
contingency. No censure upon you, or either of you, is
intended. We still hope that by cordial and judicious co-
operation you can take the batteries on Morris Island and
Sullivan’s Island and Fort Sumter. But whether you can or
not, we wish the demonstration kept up for a time, for a
collateral and very important object. We wish the attempt
to be a real one, though not a desperate one, if it aﬀords
any considerable chance of success. But if prosecuted as a
demonstration only, this must not become public, or the
whole eﬀect will be lost. Once again before Charleston, do
not leave until further orders from here. Of course this is
not intended to force you to leave unduly exposed Hilton
Head or other near points in your charge.
Yours truly, A. LINCOLN.
P. S. — Whoever receives this ﬁrst, please send a copy to
the other immediately. A.L.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A   . H
   .
WASHINGTON, D. C., April 15, 1863. 10.15 P.M.
MAJOR-GENERAL HOOKER: It is now 10.15 P.M. An
hour ago I received your letter of this morning, and a few
moments later your despatch of this evening. The latter
gives me considerable uneasiness. The rain and mud of
course were to be calculated upon. General S. is not
moving rapidly enough to make the expedition come to
anything. He has now been out three days, two of which
were unusually fair weather, and all three without
hindrance from the enemy, and yet he is not twenty-ﬁve
miles from where he started. To reach his point he still has
sixty to go, another river (the Rapidan) to cross, and will be
hindered by the enemy. By arithmetic, how many days will
it take him to do it? I do not know that any better can be
done, but I greatly fear it is another failure already. Write
me often. I am very anxious.
Yours truly, A. LINCOLN.
   
 
I A I
 A  A
 
 
 
REPUDIATION OF AN AGREEMENT WITH BERNARD
KOCK
APRIL 16, 1863. A. LINCOLN, PRESIDENT OF THE
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, TO ALL TO WHOM THESE
PRESENTS SHALL COME, GREETING: Know ye that,
whereas a paper bearing date the 3rd day of December
last, purporting to be an agreement between the United
States and one Bernard Kock for immigration of persons of
African extraction to a dependency of the Republic of Haiti,
was signed by me on behalf of the party of the ﬁrst part;
but whereas the said instrument was and has since
remained incomplete in consequence of the seal of the
United States not having been thereunto aﬀixed; and
whereas I have been moved by considerations by me
deemed suﬀicient to withhold my authority for aﬀixing the
said seal: Now, therefore, be it known that I, Abraham
Lincoln, President of the United States, do hereby
authorize the Secretary of State to cancel my signature to
the instrument aforesaid.
Done at Washington, this sixteenth day of April, A.D.
1863.
A. LINCOLN.
 By the President: WILLIAM H. SEWARD, Secretary of
State.
   A  H
  
  
     I 
I
IA  A  I    
    .
PROCLAMATION ADMITTING WEST VIRGINIA INTO THE
UNION,
BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES OF
AMERICA:
A Proclamation.
Whereas by the act of Congress approved the 31st day of
December last the State of West Virginia was declared to
be one of the United States of America, and was admitted
into the Union on an equal footing with the original States
in all respects whatever, upon the condition that certain
changes should be duly made in the proposed constitution
for that State; and
Whereas proof of a compliance with that condition, as
required by the second section of the act aforesaid, has
been submitted to me:
Now, therefore, be it known that I, Abraham Lincoln,
President of the United States, do hereby, in pursuance of
the act of Congress aforesaid, declare and proclaim that
the said act shall take eﬀect and be in force from and after
sixty days from the date hereof.
In witness whereof I have hereunto set my hand and
caused the seal of the United States to be aﬀixed.
 Done at the city of Washington, this twentieth day of
April, A.D. 1863, and of the independence of the United
States the eighty-seventh.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A  
.  .  
    A
 .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, APRIL 23, 1863
10.10am 
MAJOR-GENERAL ROSECRANS, MURFREESBOROUGH,
Tenn.: Your despatch of the 21st received. I really cannot
say that I have heard any complaint of you. I have heard
complaint of a police corps at Nashville, but your name was
not mentioned in connection with it, so far as I remember.
It may be that by inference you are connected with it, but
my attention has never been drawn to it in that light.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A   . H
   .
WASHINGTON, D.C., April 27, 1863. 3.30 P.M.
MAJOR-GENERAL HOOKER:
How does it look now?
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
   
   
  I
.
WAR DEPARTMENT, WASHINGTON, April 28, 1863.
HON. A. O. CURTIN, Harrisburg, Penn.: I do not think the
people of Pennsylvania should be uneasy about an invasion.
Doubtless a small force of the enemy is ﬂourishing about in
the northern part of Virginia, on the “skewhorn” principle,
on purpose to divert us in another quarter. I believe it is
nothing more. We think we have adequate force close after
them.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
. A. 
 
   .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, April 29, 1863.
HON. W. A. NEWELL, Allentown, N.J.: I have some
trouble about provost-marshal in your ﬁrst district. Please
procure HON. Mr. Starr to come with you and see me, or
come to an agreement with him and telegraph me the
result.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
   
   
  I
E ECUTIVE MANSION, MAY 1, 1863
GOVERNOR CURTIN, HARRISBURG, Penn.: The whole
disposable force at Baltimore and else where in reach have
already been sent after the enemy which alarms you. The
worst thing the enemy could do for himself would be to
weaken himself before Hooker, and therefore it is safe to
believe he is not doing it; and the best thing he could do for
himself would be to get us so scared as to bring part of
Hooker’s force away, and that is just what he is trying to
do. I will telegraph you in the morning about calling out the
militia.
A. LINCOLN,
     
 A
  
 
   
   
  I
E ECUTIVE MANSION, MAY 2, 1863
GOVERNOR CURTIN, HARRISBURG, Penn.: General
Halleck tells me he has a despatch from General Schenck
this morning, informing him that our forces have joined,
and that the enemy menacing Pennsylvania will have to
ﬁght or run today. I hope I am not less anxious to do my
duty to Pennsylvania than yourself, but I really do not yet
see the justiﬁcation for incurring the trouble and expense
of calling out the militia. I shall keep watch, and try to do
my duty.
A. LINCOLN P. S. — Our forces are exactly between the
enemy and Pennsylvania.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A  
.  
     I  
.
WASHINGTON, D. C., May 3, 1863.
MAJOR-GENERAL BUTTERFIELD, CHIEF of Staﬀ:
The President thanks you for your telegrams, and hopes
you will keep him advised as rapidly as any information
reaches you.
EDWIN M. STANTON, Secretary of War.
  
  A    
 
TELEGRAM TO GENERAL D. BUTTERFIELD.
WASHINGTON, D. C., May 3, 1863. 4.35 P.M.
MAJOR-GENERAL BUTTERFIELD:
Where is General Hooker? Where is Sedgwick Where is
Stoneman?
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A   . H
   .
WASHINGTON, D.C., May 4, 1863. 3.10 P M.
MAJOR-GENERAL HOOKER:
We have news here that the enemy has reoccupied
heights above Fredericksburg. Is that so?
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A   
 
 I
 .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, May 4, 1863.
MAJOR-GENERAL BURNSIDE, CINCINNATI, O.:
Our friend General Sigel claims that you owe him a
letter. If you so remember please write him at once. He is
here.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A  H
   .
WASHINGTON, D.C., May 6, 1863. 2.25. P.M.
MAJOR-GENERAL HOOKER: We have through General
Dix the contents of Richmond papers of the 5th. General
Dix’s despatch in full is going to you by Captain Fox of the
navy. The substance is General Lee’s despatch of the 3d
(Sunday), claiming that he had beaten you and that you
were then retreating across the Rappahannock, distinctly
stating that two of Longstreet’s divisions fought you on
Saturday, and that General [E. F.] Paxton was killed,
Stonewall Jackson severely wounded, and Generals Heth
and A. P. Hill slightly wounded. The Richmond papers also
stated, upon what authority not mentioned, that our cavalry
have been at Ashland, Hanover Court-House, and other
points, destroying several locomotives and a good deal of
other property, and all the railroad bridges to within ﬁve
miles of Richmond.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A  H
  
WASHINGTON, D.C., May 6, 1863. 12.30 P.M.
JUST AS I telegraphed you contents of Richmond papers
showing that our cavalry has not failed, I received General
Butterﬁeld’s of 11 A.M. yesterday. This, with the great rain
of yesterday and last night securing your right ﬂank, I think
puts a new face upon your case; but you must be the judge.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
  
 
    . I
A   .
WASHINGTON, D. C., May 6, 1863 1.45 PM
COLONEL INGALLS:
News has gone to General Hooker which may change his
plans. Act in view of such contingency.
A. LINCOLN.
  
 
 
  A   . H
   .
HEADQUARTERS ARMY OF THE POTOMAC, May 7, 1863.
MAJOR-GENERAL HOOKER.
MY DEAR SIR: — The recent movement of your army is
ended without eﬀecting its object, except, perhaps, some
important breakings of the enemy’s communications. What
next? If possible, I would be very glad of another movement
early enough to give us some beneﬁt from the fact of the
enemy’s communication being broken; but neither for this
reason nor any other do I wish anything done in
desperation or rashness. An early movement would also
help to supersede the bad moral eﬀect of there certain,
which is said to be considerably injurious. Have you already
in your mind a plan wholly or partially formed? If you have,
prosecute it without interference from me. If you have not,
please inform me, so that I, incompetent as I may be, can
try and assist in the formation of some plan for the army.
Yours as ever, A. LINCOLN.
  A  I
 
  A I 
PROCLAMATION CONCERNING ALIENS,
MAY 8, 1863. BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED
STATES OF AMERICA:
A Proclamation
Whereas the Congress of the United States, at its last
session, enacted a law entitled “An act for enrolling and
calling out the national forces and for other purposes,”
which was approved on the 3d day of March last; and
Whereas it is recited in the said act that there now exists
in the United States an insurrection and rebellion against
the authority thereof, and it is, under the Constitution of
the United States, the duty of the government to suppress
insurrection and rebellion, to guarantee to each State a
republican form of government, and to preserve the public
tranquillity; and
Whereas for these high purposes a military force is
indispensable, to raise and support which all persons Ought
willingly to contribute; and
Whereas no service can be more praiseworthy and
honorable than that which is rendered for the maintenance
of the Constitution and the Union, and the consequent
preservation of free government; and
 Whereas, for the reasons thus recited, it was enacted by
the said statute that all able-bodied male citizens of the
United States, and persons of foreign birth who shall have
declared on oath their intention to become citizens under
and in pursuance of the laws thereof, between the ages of
twenty and forty-ﬁve years (with certain exceptions not
necessary to be here mentioned), are declared to constitute
the national forces, and shall be liable to perform military
duty in the service of the United States when called out by
the President for that purpose; and
Whereas it is claimed by and in behalf of persons of
foreign birth within the ages speciﬁed in said act, who have
heretofore declared on oath their intentions to become
citizens under and in pursuance of the laws of the United
States, and who have not exercised the right of suﬀrage or
any other political franchise under the laws of the United
States, or of any of the States thereof, that they are not
absolutely concluded by their aforesaid declaration of
intention from renouncing their purpose to become
citizens, and that, on the contrary, such persons under
treaties or the law of nations retain a right to renounce that
purpose and to forego the privileges of citizenship and
residence within the United States under the obligations
imposed by the aforesaid act of Congress:
Now, therefore, to avoid all misapprehensions concerning
the liability of persons concerned to perform the service
required by such enactment, and to give it full eﬀect, I do
hereby order and proclaim that no plea of alienage will be
received or allowed to exempt from the obligations imposed
 by the aforesaid act of Congress any person of foreign birth
who shall have declared on oath his intention to become a
citizen of the United States under the laws thereof, and
who shall be found within the United States at any time
during the continuance of the present insurrection and
rebellion, at or after the expiration of the period of sixty-
ﬁve days from the date of this proclamation; nor shall any
such plea of alienage be allowed in favor of any such
person who has so, as aforesaid, declared his intention to
become a citizen of the United States, and shall have
exercised at any time the right of suﬀrage, or any other
political franchise, within the United States, under the laws
thereof, or under the laws of any of the several States.
In witness whereof, I have hereunto set my hand, and
caused the seal of the United States to be aﬀixed. Done at
the city of Washington, this eighth day of May, in the year
of our Lord one thousand eight hundred and sixty-three,
and of the independence of the United States the eighty-
seventh.
A. LINCOLN.
By the President: WILLIAM H. SEWARD
     
 A
  
 
 
  A   . H
   .
WASHINGTON, D. C. May 8, 1863. 4 P.M.
MAJOR-GENERAL HOOKER: The news is here of the
capture by our forces of Grand Gulf — a large and very
important thing. General Willich, an exchanged prisoner
just from Richmond, has talked with me this morning. He
was there when our cavalry cut the roads in that vicinity.
He says there was not a sound pair of legs in Richmond,
and that our men, had they known it, could have safely
gone in and burned everything and brought in Jeﬀ Davis.
We captured and paroled 300 or 400 men. He says as he
came to City Point there was an army three miles long
(Longstreet’s, he thought) moving toward Richmond.
Muroy has captured a despatch of General Lee, in which
he says his loss was fearful in his last battle with you.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A   . A. 
I .
WAR DEPARTMENT, May 9,1863.
MAJOR-GENERAL DI : It is very important for Hooker
to know exactly what damage is done to the railroads at all
points between Fredericksburg and Richmond. As yet we
have no word as to whether the crossings of the North and
South Anna, or any of them, have been touched. There are
four of these Crossings; that is, one on each road on each
stream. You readily perceive why this information is
desired. I suppose Kilpatrick or Davis can tell. Please
ascertain fully what was done, and what is the present
condition, as near as you can, and advise me at once.
A. LINCOLN.
  
       A     
A 
.
WASHINGTON, May 9, 1863
I BELIEVE MR. L. is a good man, but two things need to be
remembered.
1st. Mr. R.’s rival was a relative of Mr. L.
2d. I hear of nobody calling Mr. R. a “Copperhead,” but
Mr. L. However, let us watch.
A. L.
  
       A     A
 
.
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, MAY 11, 1863
HON. SECRETARY OF WAR.
DEAR SIR: — I have again concluded to relieve General
Curtis. I see no other way to avoid the worst consequences
there. I think of General Schoﬁeld as his successor, but I do
not wish to take the matter of a successor out of the hands
of yourself and General Halleck.
Yours truly, A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A  
I .
WAR DEPARTMENT, WASHINGTON CITY, May 11, 1863.
MAJOR-GENERAL DI :
Do the Richmond papers have anything about Grand Gulf
or Vicksburg?
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A   
     I  
.
[Cipher.]
WAR DEPARTMENT, WASHINGTON CITY, May 11,
1863.
MAJOR-GENERAL BUTTERFIELD:
About what distance is it from the observatory we
stopped at last Thursday to the line of enemies’ works you
ranged the glass upon for me?
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
   
     
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, May 12, 1863.
GOVERNOR SEYMOUR, ALBANY, N.Y.: Dr. Swinburne
and Mr. Gillett are here, having been refused, as they say,
by the War Department, permission to go to the Army of the
Potomac. They now appeal to me, saying you wish them to
go. I suppose they have been excluded by a rule which
experience has induced the department to deem proper;
still they shall have leave to go, if you say you desire it.
Please answer.
A. LINCOLN
     
 A
  
 A. 
. H 
  .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON May 13,1863.
DR. A. G. HENRY, Metropolitan Hotel, New York:
Governor Chase’s feelings were hurt by my action in his
absence. Smith is removed, but Governor Chase wishes to
name his successor, and asks a day or two to make the
designation.
A. LINCOLN.
  
 
 
  A   . H
   .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, D.C. May 14,
1863.
MAJOR-GENERAL HOOKER, COMMANDING.
MY DEAR SIR: — When I wrote on the 7th, I had an
impression that possibly by an early movement you could
get some advantage from the supposed facts that the
enemy’s communications were disturbed and that he was
somewhat deranged in position. That idea has now passed
away, the enemy having re-established his communications,
regained 
his 
positions, 
and 
actually 
received
reinforcements. It does not now appear probable to me that
you can gain anything by an early renewal of the attempt to
cross the Rappahannock. I therefore shall not complain if
you do no more for a time than to keep the enemy at bay
and out of other mischief by menaces and occasional
cavalry raids, if practicable, and to put your own army in
good condition again. Still, if in your own clear judgment
you can renew the attack successfully, I do not mean to
restrain you. Bearing upon this last point, I must tell you
that I have some painful intimations that some of your
corps and division commanders are not giving you their
entire conﬁdence. This would be ruinous, if true, and you
 should therefore, ﬁrst of all, ascertain the real facts beyond
all possibility of doubt.
Yours truly, A. LINCOLN.
  A  I
A  
 A    
TELEGRAM TO H. T. BLOW AND OTHERS.
E ECUTIVE 
MANSION, 
WASHINGTON, May 15,
1863.
HON. H. T. BLOW, C. D. DRAKE, AND OTHERS, St. Louis,
Mo.: Your despatch of to-day is just received. It is very
painful to me that you in Missouri cannot or will not settle
your factional quarrel among yourselves. I have been
tormented with it beyond endurance for months by both
sides. Neither side pays the least respect to my appeals to
your reason. I am now compelled to take hold of the case.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
  A
   
 H I .
WAR DEPARTMENT, WASHINGTON CITY, May 16, 1863.
HON. JAMES GUTHRIE, Louisville, Ky.: Your despatch
of to-day is received. I personally know nothing of Colonel
Churchill, but months ago and more than once he has been
represented to me as exerting a mischievous inﬂuence at
Saint Louis, for which reason I am unwilling to force his
continuance there against the judgment of our friends on
the ground; but if it will oblige you, he may come to and
remain at Louisville upon taking the oath of allegiance, and
your pledge for his good behavior.
A. LINCOLN.
  
       A   
  
A .
WAR DEPARTMENT, WASHINGTON CITY, May 16, 1863.
HON. SECRETARY OF WAR.
MY DEAR SIR: — The commander of the Department at
St. Louis has ordered several persons south of our military
lines, which order is not disapproved by me. Yet at the
special request of the HON. James Guthrie I have
consented to one of the number, Samuel Churchill,
remaining at Louisville, Ky., upon condition of his taking the
oath of allegiance and Mr. Gutlirie’s word of honor for his
good behavior.
Yours truly, A. LINCOLN.
  
      
I
  .  .  A  A
I
HA
   
 
I I A    I
  .
[Cipher.]
UNITED STATES MILITARY TELEGRAPH, May 10,
1863. By telegraph from Washington, 9.40 PM, 1863
TO 
MAJOR-GENERAL 
BURNSIDE, 
Commanding
Department of Ohio.
SIR: — The President directs that without delay you send
C. L. Vallandigham under secure guard to the Headquarters
of General Rosecrans, to be put by him beyond our military
lines; and in case of his return within our lines, he be
arrested and kept in close custody for the term speciﬁed in
his sentence.
By order of the President: E. R. S. CANBY, Assistant
Adjutant-General.
 A  
  A  
 
   
a          .
MAJOR-GENERAL 
A. 
B. 
BURNSIDE, 
Commanding
Department of Ohio, Cincinnati, O.
Your despatch of three o’clock this afternoon to the
Secretary of War has been received and shown to the
President. He thinks the best disposition to be made of
Vallandigham is to put him beyond the lines, as directed in
the order transmitted to you last evening, and directs that
you execute that order by sending him forward under
secure guard without delay to General Rosecrans.
By order of the President: ED. R. S. CANBY, Brigadier-
General
     
 A
  
 
 
  A  
.  .  
    A
 .
WASHINGTON, May 20, 1863.
MAJOR-GENERAL ROSECRANS: Yours of yesterday in
regard to Colonel Haggard is received. I am anxious that
you shall not misunderstand me. In no case have I intended
to censure you or to question your ability. In Colonel
Haggard’s case I meant no more than to suggest that
possibly you might have been mistaken in a point that could
[be] corrected. I frequently make mistakes myself in the
many things I am compelled to do hastily.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A  
.  .  
    A
 .
WASHINGTON, May 21, 1863. 4.40 PM.
MAJOR-GENERAL ROSECRANS: For certain reasons it
is thought best for Rev. Dr. Jaquess not to come here.
Present my respects to him, and ask him to write me fully
on the subject he has in contemplation.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A   . A. H
   
 .
WASHINGTON, May 22, 1863.
MAJOR-GENERAL HURLBUT, MEMPHIS, Tenn.: We
have news here in the Richmond newspapers of 20th and
21st, including a despatch from General Joe Johnston
himself, that on the 15th or 16th — a little confusion as to
the day — Grant beat Pemberton and [W. W.] Loring near
Edwards Station, at the end of a nine hours’ ﬁght, driving
Pemberton over the Big Black and cutting Loring oﬀ and
driving him south to Crystal Springs, twenty-ﬁve miles
below Jackson. Joe Johnston telegraphed all this, except
about Loring, from his camp between Brownsville and
Lexington, on the 18th. Another despatch indicates that
Grant was moving against Johnston on the 18th.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 A
 
   A
  .
WAR DEPARTMENT, WASHINGTON, D. C., May 24,
1863.10.40
ANSON STAGER, CLEVELAND, O.: Late last night Fuller
telegraphed you, as you say, that “the Stars and Stripes
ﬂoat over Vicksburg and the victory is complete.” Did he
know what he said, or did he say it without knowing it?
Your despatch of this afternoon throws doubt upon it.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
  
 
   HA
A 
.
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON. May 25, 1863.
COLONEL HAGGARD, NASHVILLE, Tenn.:
Your despatch to Green Adams has just been shown me.
General Rosecrans knows better than we can know here
who should be in charge of the Fifth Cavalry.
A. LINCOLN
     
 A
  
 
 
  A   
 
 I
 .
WAR DEPARTMENT, WASHINGTON, D. C., May 26, 1863.
MAJOR-GENERAL BURNSIDE, CINCINNATI, O.:
Your despatch about Campbell, Lyle, and others received
and postponement ordered by you approved. I will consider
and telegraph you again in a few days.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A    H 
  .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, May 27, 1863.
MAJOR-GENERAL SCHENCK, BALTIMORE, Md.:
Let the execution of William B. Compton be respited or
suspended till further order from me, holding him in safe
custody meanwhile. On receiving this notify me.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
   
   
  I
HA
.
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, May 27,1863.
GOVERNOR BUCKINGHAM, HARTFORD, Conn.:
The execution of Warren Whitemarch is hereby respited
or suspended until further order from me, he to be held in
safe custody meanwhile. On receiving this notify me.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A  
.  .  
    A
 .
WAR DEPARTMENT, May 27,1863.
MAJOR-GENERAL ROSECRANS, MURFREESBOROUGH,
Tenn.:
Have you anything from Grant? Where is Forrest’s
headquarters?
A. LINCOLN.
  
 
 
  A    H
 I  
.
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON May 27, 1863.
GENERAL JOHN M. SCHOFIELD.
MY DEAR SIR: — Having relieved General Curtis and
assigned you to the command of the Department of the
Missouri, I think it may be of some advantage for me to
state why I did it. I did not relieve General Curtis because
of any full conviction that he had done wrong by
commission or omission. I did it because of a conviction in
my mind that the Union men of Missouri, constituting,
when united, a vast majority of the whole people, have
entered into a pestilent factional quarrel among themselves
— General Curtis, perhaps not of choice, being the head of
one faction and Governor Gamble that of the other. After
months of labor to reconcile the diﬀiculty, it seemed to
grow worse and worse, until I felt it my duty to break it up
somehow; and as I could not remove Governor Gamble, I
had to remove General Curtis. Now that you are in the
position, I wish you to undo nothing merely because
General Curtis or Governor Gamble did it, but to exercise
your own judgment, and do right for the public interest. Let
your military measures be strong enough to repel the
invader and keep the peace, and not so strong as to
unnecessarily harass and persecute the people. It is a
 diﬀicult role, and so much greater will be the honor if you
perform it well. If both factions, or neither, shall abuse you,
you will probably be about right. Beware of being assailed
by one and praised by the other.
Yours truly, A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A  H
   .
WASHINGTON, May 27, 1863.11 P.M.
MAJOR-GENERAL HOOKER:
Have you Richmond papers of this morning? If so, what
news?
A. LINCOLN.
  
   A  
   
 
I
.
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, May 28, 1863.
HON. ERASTUS CORNING, Albany, N.Y.: The letter of
yourself and others dated the 19th and inclosing the
resolutions of a public meeting held at Albany on the 16th,
was received night before last. I shall give the resolutions
the consideration you ask, and shall try to ﬁnd time and
make a respectful response.
Your obedient servant, A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A  
.  .  
    A
 .
WASHINGTON, May 28, 1863.
MAJOR-GENERAL ROSECRANS, MURFREESBOROUGH,
Tenn..
I would not push you to any rashness, but I am very
anxious that you do your utmost, short of rashness, to keep
Bragg from getting oﬀ to help Johnston against Grant.
A. LINCOLN
     
 A
  
 
   
   
H
 
.
WASHINGTON, May 29, 1863.
GOVERNOR ANDREW JOHNSON, Louisville, Ky.:
General Burnside has been frequently informed lately
that the division under General Getty cannot be spared. I
am sorry to have to tell you this, but it is true, and cannot
be helped.
A. LINCOLN.
  
  .  . 
 
I  A
 
 H   .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, May 29, 1863.
MESSRS. JESSE K. DUBOIS, O. M. HATCH, JOHN
WILLIAMS, JACOB BUNN, JOHN BUNN, GEORGE R.
WEBER, WILLIAM YATES, S. M. CULLOM, CHARLES W.
MATHENY, WILLIAM F. ELKIN, FRANCIS SPRINGER, B. A.
WATSON, ELIPHALET HAWLEY, AND JAMES CAMPBELL.
GENTLEMEN: — Agree among yourselves upon any two
of your own number — one of whom to be quartermaster
and the other to be commissary to serve at Springﬁeld,
Illinois, and send me their names, and I will appoint them.
Yours truly, A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A  A.  .  
 
 I
 .
WASHINGTON, May 29, 1863
MAJOR-GENERAL BURNSIDE, CINCINNATI, O.: Your
despatch of to-day received. When I shall wish to supersede
you I will let you know. All the Cabinet regretted the
necessity of arresting, for instance, Vallandigham, some
perhaps doubting there was a real necessity for it; but,
being done, all were for seeing you through with it.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
  
 
    
 
.
[Cipher.]
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, June 1, 1863.
COLONEL LUDLOW, Fort Monroe:
Richardson and Brown, correspondents of the Tribune
captured at Vicksburg, are detained at Richmond. Please
ascertain why they are detained, and get them oﬀ if you
can.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A  H
   .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, June 2, 1863.
MAJOR-GENERAL HOOKER: It is said that Philip
Margraf, in your army, is under sentence to be shot on
Friday the 5th instant as a deserter. If so please send me up
the record of his case at once.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A  
. . 
 A
 .
WAR DEPARTMENT, June 2, 1863.
MAJOR-GENERAL GRANT, VICKSBURG, via Memphis:
Are you in communication with General Banks? Is he
coming toward you or going farther oﬀ? Is there or has
there been anything to hinder his coming directly to you by
water from Alexandria?
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
A 
  
 
  A  H
   .
  i her.      
 I   
A
 I
  
A HI
 
June 4,1863.
 A 
  
 
  A  H
   
LET 
E
ECUTION 
OF sentences in the cases of Daily,
Margraf, and Harrington be respited till further orders
from me, they remaining in close custody meanwhile.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A   
     I  
.
WAR DEPARTMENT, WASHINGTON, D.C., June 4, 1863.
MAJOR-GENERAL BUTTERFIELD: The news you send
me from the Richmond Sentinel of the 3d must be greatly if
not wholly incorrect. The Thursday mentioned was the
28th, and we have despatches here directly from Vicksburg
of the 28th, 29th, 30th, and 31st; and, while they speak of
the siege progressing, they speak of no assault or general
ﬁghting whatever, and in fact they so speak as to almost
exclude the idea that there can have been any since
Monday the 25th, which was not very heavy. Neither do
they mention any demand made by Grant upon Pemberton
for a surrender. They speak of our troops as being in good
health, condition, and spirits. Some of them do say that
Banks has Port Hudson invested.
A. LINCOLN.
  
       A     A
 
.
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, June 4, 1863.
HON. SECRETARY OF WAR.
MY DEAR SIR: — I have received additional despatches,
which, with former ones, induce me to believe we should
revoke or suspend the order suspending the Chicago
Times; and if you concur in opinion, please have it done.
Yours truly, A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A  H
   .
WASHINGTON, D.C. JUNE 5, 1863
MAJOR-GENERAL 
HOOKER: Yours of to-day was
received an hour ago. So much of professional military skill
is requisite to answer it that I have turned the task over to
General Halleck. He promises to perform it with his utmost
care. I have but one idea which I think worth suggesting to
you, and that is, in case you ﬁnd Lee coming to the north of
the Rappahannock, I would by no means cross to the south
of it. If he should leave a rear force at Fredericksburg,
tempting you to fall upon it, it would ﬁght in entrenchments
and have you at advantage, and so, man for man, worst you
at that point, While his main force would in some way be
getting an advantage of you northward. In one word, I
would not take any risk of being entangled up on the river
like an ox jumped half over a fence and liable to be torn by
dogs front and rear without a fair chance to gore one way
or to kick the other.
If Lee would come to my side of the river I would keep on
the same side and ﬁght him, or act on the defensive,
according as might be my estimate of his strength
relatively to my own. But these are mere suggestions,
which I desire to be controlled by the judgment of yourself
and General Halleck.
 A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
  . 
 I
    .
WASHINGTON, D. C., June 6, 1863.
MRS. ELIZABETH J. GRIMSLEY, Springﬁeld, Ill.:
Is your John ready to enter the naval school? If he is,
telegraph me his full name.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A  
I 
WAR DEPARTMENT, WASHINGTON, D.C., June 6, 1863.
MAJOR-GENERAL DI , FORT Monroe, Va.: By noticing
the news you send from the Richmond Dispatch of this
morning you will see one of the very latest despatches says
they have nothing reliable from Vicksburg since Sunday.
Now we here have a despatch from there Sunday and
others of almost every day preceding since the investment,
and while they show the siege progressing they do not
show any general ﬁghting since the 21st and 22d. We have
nothing from Port Hudson later than the 29th when things
looked reasonably well for us. I have thought this might be
of some interest to you.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A  
I .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, June 8, 1863.
MAJOR-GENERAL DI , FORT Monroe:
We have despatches from Vicksburg of the 3d. Siege
progressing. No general ﬁghting recently. All well. Nothing
new from Port Hudson.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A  
I .
WAR DEPARTMENT, WASHINGTON, D.C. JUNE 8, 1863.
MAJOR-GENERAL DI , FORT Monroe: The substance of
news sent of the ﬁghting at Port Hudson on the 27th we
have had here three or four days, and I supposed you had it
also, when I said this morning, “No news from Port
Hudson.” We knew that General Sherman was wounded,
but we hoped not so dangerously as your despatch
represents. We still have nothing of that Richmond
newspaper story of Kirby Smith crossing and of Banks
losing an arm.
A. LINCOLN
     
 A
  
  .  . HA  .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, June 9, 1863.
HON. JOHN P. HALE, Dover, N. H.: I believe that it was
upon your recommendation that B. B. Bunker was
appointed attorney for Nevada Territory. I am pressed to
remove him on the ground that he does not attend to the
oﬀice, nor in fact pass much time in the Territory. Do you
wish to say anything on the subject?
A. LINCOLN
     
 A
  
 
  .  I
 
 
.
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, June 9, 1863.
MRS. LINCOLN, PHILADELPHIA, Pa.:
Think you had better put “Tad’s” pistol away. I had an
ugly dream about him.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A  H
   .
WASHINGTON, D.C. June 9, 1863
MAJOR-GENERAL HOOKER: I am told there are 50
incendiary shells here at the arsenal made to ﬁt the 100
pounder Parrott gun now with you. If this be true would
you like to have the shells sent to you?
A. LINCOLN
     
 A
  
 
 
  A  H
   .
WASHINGTON, D. C., June 10, 1863
MAJOR-GENERAL HOOKER: Your long despatch of to-
day is just received. If left to me, I would not go south of
the Rappahannock upon Lee’s moving north of it. If you had
Richmond invested to-day you would not be able to take it
in twenty days; meanwhile your communications, and with
them your army, would be ruined. I think Lee’s army, and
not Richmond, is your true objective point. If he comes
towards the upper Potomac, follow on his ﬂank, and on the
inside track, shortening your lines while he lengthens his.
Fight him, too, when opportunity oﬀers. If he stay where he
is, fret him and fret him.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
  .  I
 
 
.
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, June 11,1863.
MRS. LINCOLN, PHILADELPHIA:
Your three despatches received. I am very well and am
glad to know that you and “Tad” are so.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A  H
   .
[Cipher.]
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, JUNE 12,
1863. MAJOR-GENERAL HOOKER:
If you can show me a trial of the incendiary shells on
Saturday night, I will try to join you at 5 P.M. that day
Answer.
A. LINCOLN.
  
   A  
   
 
I
 A
 
 H   .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, June 12, 1863.
HON. ERASTUS CORNING AND OTHERS.
GENTLEMEN: — Your letter of May 19, inclosing the
resolutions of a public meeting held at Albany, New York,
on the 16th of the same month, was received several days
ago.
The resolutions, as I understand them, are resolvable
into two propositions — ﬁrst, the expression of a purpose to
sustain the cause of the Union, to secure peace through
victory, and to support the administration in every
constitutional 
and 
lawful 
measure 
to 
suppress 
the
rebellion; and, secondly, a declaration of censure upon the
administration for supposed unconstitutional action, such
as the making of military arrests. And from the two
propositions a third is deduced, which is that the
gentlemen composing the meeting are resolved on doing
their part to maintain our common government and
country, despite the folly or wickedness, as they may
conceive, of any administration. This position is eminently
patriotic, 
and 
as 
such 
I 
thank 
the 
meeting, 
and
congratulate the nation for it. My own purpose is the same;
so that the meeting and myself have a common object, and
 can have no diﬀerence, except in the choice of means or
measures for eﬀecting that object.
And here I ought to close this paper, and would close it, if
there 
were 
no 
apprehension 
that 
more 
injurious
consequences than any merely personal to myself might
follow the censures systematically cast upon me for doing
what, in my view of duty, I could not forbear. The
resolutions promise to support me in every constitutional
and lawful measure to suppress the rebellion; and I have
not knowingly employed, nor shall knowingly employ, any
other. But the meeting, by their resolutions, assert and
argue that certain military arrests, and proceedings
following them, for which I am ultimately responsible, are
unconstitutional. I think they are not. The resolutions quote
from the Constitution the deﬁnition of treason, and also the
limiting safeguards and guarantees therein provided for the
citizen on trial for treason, and on his being held to answer
for capital or otherwise infamous crimes, and in criminal
prosecutions his right to a speedy and public trial by an
impartial jury. They proceed to resolve “that these
safeguards of the rights of the citizen against the
pretensions of arbitrary power were intended more
especially for his protection in times of civil commotion.”
And, apparently to demonstrate the proposition, the
resolutions proceed: “They were secured substantially to
the English people after years of protracted civil war, and
were adopted into our Constitution at the close of the
Revolution.” Would not the demonstration have been better
if it could have been truly said that these safeguards had
 been adopted and applied during the civil wars and during
our Revolution, instead of after the one and at the close of
the other? I too am devotedly for them after civil war, and
before Civil war, and at all times, “except when, in cases of
rebellion or invasion, the public safety may require” their
suspension. The resolutions proceed to tell us that these
safeguards “have stood the test of seventy-six years of trial
under our republican system, under circumstances which
show that, while they constitute the foundation of all free
government, they are the elements of the enduring stability
of the republic.” No one denies that they have so stood the
test up to the beginning of the present rebellion, if we
except a certain occurrence at New Orleans hereafter to be
mentioned; nor does any one question that they will stand
the same test much longer after the rebellion closes. But
these provisions of the Constitution have no application to
the case we have in hand, because the arrests complained
of were not made for treason — that is, not for the treason
deﬁned in the Constitution, and upon the conviction of
which the punishment is death — nor yet were they made
to hold persons to answer for any capital or otherwise
infamous crimes; nor were the proceedings following, in
any constitutional or legal sense, “criminal prosecutions.”
The arrests were made on totally diﬀerent grounds, and the
proceedings following accorded with the grounds of the
arrests. Let us consider the real case with which we are
dealing, and apply to it the parts of the Constitution plainly
made for such cases.
 Prior to my installation here it had been inculcated that
any State had a lawful right to secede from the national
Union, and that it would be expedient to exercise the right
whenever the devotees of the doctrine should fail to elect a
president to their own liking. I was elected contrary to their
liking; and accordingly, so far as it was legally possible,
they had taken seven States out of the Union, had seized
many of the United States forts, and had ﬁred upon the
United States ﬂag, all before I was inaugurated, and, of
course, before I had done any oﬀicial act whatever. The
rebellion thus begun soon ran into the present civil war;
and, in certain respects, it began on very unequal terms
between the parties. The insurgents had been preparing for
it more than thirty years, while the government had taken
no steps to resist them. The former had carefully
considered all the means which could be turned to their
account. It undoubtedly was a well-pondered reliance with
them that in their own unrestricted eﬀort to destroy Union,
Constitution and law, all together, the government would, in
great degree, be restrained by the same Constitution and
law from arresting their progress. Their sympathizers
invaded all departments of the government and nearly all
communities of the people. From this material, under cover
of “liberty of speech,” “liberty of the press,” and “habeas
corpus,” they hoped to keep on foot amongst us a most
eﬀicient corps of spies, informers, suppliers, and aiders and
abettors of their cause in a thousand ways. They knew that
in times such as they were inaugurating, by the
Constitution 
itself 
the 
“habeas 
corpus” 
might 
be
 suspended; but they also knew they had friends who would
make a question as to who was to suspend it; meanwhile
their spies and others might remain at large to help on
their cause. Or if, as has happened, the Executive should
suspend the writ without ruinous waste of time, instances
of arresting innocent persons might occur, as are always
likely to occur in such cases; and then a clamor could be
raised in regard to this, which might be at least of some
service to the insurgent cause. It needed no very keen
perception to discover this part of the enemies program, so
soon as by open hostilities their machinery was fairly put in
motion. Yet, thoroughly imbued with a reverence for the
guaranteed rights of individuals, I was slow to adopt the
strong measures which by degrees I have been forced to
regard as being within the exceptions of the Constitution,
and as indispensable to the public safety. Nothing is better
known to history than that courts of justice are utterly
incompetent to such cases. Civil courts are organized
chieﬂy for trials of individuals — or, at most, a few
individuals acting in concert, and this in quiet times, and on
charges of crimes well deﬁned in the law. Even in times of
peace bands of horse-thieves and robbers frequently grow
too numerous and powerful for the ordinary courts of
justice. But what comparison, in numbers have such bands
ever borne to the insurgent sympathizers even in many of
the loyal States? Again, a jury too frequently has at least
one member more ready to hang the panel than to hang the
traitor. And yet again, he who dissuades one man from
volunteering, or induces one soldier to desert, weakens the
 Union cause as much as he who kills a Union soldier in
battle. Yet this dissuasion or inducement may be so
conducted as to be no deﬁned crime of which any civil
court would take cognizance.
Ours is a case of rebellion — so called by the resolutions
before me — in fact, a clear, ﬂagrant, and gigantic case of
rebellion; and the provision of the Constitution that “the
privilege of the writ of habeas corpus shall not be
suspended unless when, in cases of rebellion or invasion,
the public safety may require it,” is the provision which
specially applies to our present case. This provision plainly
attests 
the 
understanding 
of 
those 
who 
made 
the
Constitution that ordinary courts of justice are inadequate
to “cases of rebellion” — attests their purpose that, in such
cases, men may be held in custody whom the courts, acting
on ordinary rules, would discharge. Habeas corpus does
not discharge men who are proved to be guilty of deﬁned
crime, and its suspension is allowed by the Constitution on
purpose that men may be arrested and held who can not be
proved to be guilty of deﬁned crime, “when, in cases of
rebellion or invasion, the public safety may require it.”
This is precisely our present case — a case of rebellion
wherein the public safety does require the suspension —
Indeed, arrests by process of courts and arrests in cases of
rebellion do not proceed altogether upon the same basis.
The former is directed at the small percentage of ordinary
and continuous perpetration of crime, while the latter is
directed at sudden and extensive uprisings against the
government, which, at most, will succeed or fail in no great
 length of time. In the latter case arrests are made not so
much for what has been done as for what probably would
be done. The latter is more for the preventive and less for
the vindictive than the former. In such cases the purposes
of men are much more easily understood than in cases of
ordinary crime. The man who stands by and says nothing
when the peril of his government is discussed, cannot be
misunderstood. If not hindered, he is sure to help the
enemy; much more if he talks ambiguously — talks for his
country with “buts,” and “ifs,” and “ands.” Of how little
value the constitutional provision I have quoted will be
rendered if arrests shall never be made until deﬁned
crimes shall have been committed, may be illustrated by a
few notable examples: General John C. Breckinridge,
General Robert E. Lee, General Joseph E. Johnston, General
John B. Magruder, General William B. Preston, General
Simon B. Buckner, and Commodore Franklin Buchanan,
now occupying the very highest places in the rebel war
service, were all within the power of the government since
the rebellion began, and were nearly as well known to be
traitors then as now. Unquestionably if we had seized and
had them the insurgent cause would be much weaker. But
no one of them had then committed any crime deﬁned in
the law. Every one of them, if arrested, would have been
discharged on habeas corpus were the writ allowed to
operate. In view of these and similar cases, I think the time
not unlikely to come when I shall be blamed for having
made too few arrests rather than too many.
 By the third resolution the meeting indicate their opinion
that military arrests may be constitutional in localities
where rebellion actually exists, but that such arrests are
unconstitutional 
in 
localities 
where 
rebellion 
or
insurrection does not actually exist. They insist that such
arrests shall not be made “outside of the lines of necessary
military occupation and the scenes of insurrection.”
Inasmuch, however, as the Constitution itself makes no
such distinction, I am unable to believe that there is any
such constitutional distinction. I concede that the class of
arrests complained of can be constitutional only when, in
cases of rebellion or invasion, the public safety may require
them; and I insist that in such cases — they are
constitutional wherever the public safety does require
them, as well in places to which they may prevent the
rebellion extending, as in those where it may be already
prevailing; as well where they may restrain mischievous
interference with the raising and supplying of armies to
suppress the rebellion as where the rebellion may actually
be; as well where they may restrain the enticing men out of
the army as where they would prevent mutiny in the army;
equally constitutional at all places where they will conduce
to the public safety as against the dangers of rebellion or
invasion. Take the particular case mentioned by the
meeting. It is asserted in substance that Mr. Vallandigham
was, by a military commander, seized and tried “for no
other reason than words addressed to a public meeting in
criticism of the course of the administration, and in
condemnation of the military orders of the general.” Now, if
 there be no mistake about this, if this assertion is the truth,
and the whole truth, if there were no other reason for the
arrest, then I concede that the arrest was wrong. But the
arrest, as I understand, was made for a very diﬀerent
reason. Mr. Vallandigham avows his hostility to the war on
the part of the Union; and his arrest was made because he
was laboring, with some eﬀect, to prevent the raising of
troops, to encourage desertions from the army, and to leave
the rebellion without an adequate military force to
suppress it. He was not arrested because he was damaging
the political prospects of the administration or the personal
interests of the commanding general, but because he was
damaging the army, upon the existence and vigor of which
the life of the nation depends. He was warring upon the
military, 
and 
thus 
gave 
the 
military 
constitutional
jurisdiction to lay hands upon him. If Mr. Vallandigham was
not damaging the military power of the country, then his
arrest was made on mistake of fact, which I would be glad
to correct on reasonably satisfactory evidence.
I understand the meeting whose resolutions I am
considering to be in favor of suppressing the rebellion by
military force — by armies. Long experience has shown
that armies cannot be maintained unless desertion shall be
punished by the severe penalty of death. The case requires,
and the law and the Constitution sanction, this punishment.
Must I shoot a simple-minded boy and not touch a hair of a
wily agitator who induced him to desert. This is none the
less injurious when eﬀected by getting a father, or brother,
or friend into a public meeting, and there working upon his
 feelings till he is persuaded to write the soldier boy that he
is ﬁghting in a bad cause, for a wicked administration of a
contemptible government, too weak to arrest and punish
him if he shall desert. I think that, in such a case, to silence
the agitator and save the boy is not only constitutional, but
withal a great mercy.
If I be wrong on this question of constitutional power, my
error lies in believing that certain proceedings are
constitutional when, in cases of rebellion or invasion, the
public 
safety 
requires 
them, 
which 
would 
not 
be
constitutional when, in absence of rebellion or invasion, the
public safety does not require them: in other words, that
the Constitution is not in its application in all respects the
same in cases of rebellion or invasion involving the public
safety as it is in times of profound peace and public
security. The Constitution itself makes the distinction, and I
can no more be persuaded that the government can
constitutionally take no strong measures in time of
rebellion, because it can be shown that the same could not
be lawfully taken in times of peace, than I can be
persuaded that a particular drug is not good medicine for a
sick man because it can be shown to not be good food for a
well one. Nor am I able to appreciate the danger
apprehended by the meeting, that the American people will
by means of military arrests during the rebellion lose the
right of public discussion, the liberty of speech and the
press, the law of evidence, trial by jury, and habeas corpus
throughout the indeﬁnite peaceful future which I trust lies
before them, any more than I am able to believe that a man
 could contract so strong an appetite for emetics during
temporary illness as to persist in feeding upon them during
the remainder of his healthful life.
In giving the resolutions that earnest consideration
which you request of me, I cannot overlook the fact that the
meeting speak as “Democrats.” Nor can I, with full respect
for their known intelligence, and the fairly presumed
deliberation with which they prepared their resolutions, be
permitted to suppose that this occurred by accident, or in
any way other than that they preferred to designate
themselves “Democrats” rather than “American citizens.”
In this time of national peril I would have preferred to meet
you upon a level one step higher than any party platform,
because I am sure that from such more elevated position
we could do better battle for the country we all love than
we possibly can from those lower ones where, from the
force of habit, the prejudices of the past, and selﬁsh hopes
of the future, we are sure to expend much of our ingenuity
and strength in ﬁnding fault with and aiming blows at each
other. But since you have denied me this I will yet be
thankful for the country’s sake that not all Democrats have
done so. He on whose discretionary judgment Mr.
Vallandigham was arrested and tried is a Democrat, having
no old party aﬀinity with me, and the judge who rejected
the constitutional view expressed in these resolutions, by
refusing to discharge Mr. Vallandigham on habeas corpus is
a Democrat of better days than these, having received his
judicial mantle at the hands of President Jackson. And still
more: of all those Democrats who are nobly exposing their
 lives and shedding their blood on the battle-ﬁeld, I have
learned that many approve the course taken with Mr.
Vallandigham, while I have not heard of a single one
condemning it. I cannot assert that there are none such.
And the name of President Jackson recalls an instance of
pertinent history. After the battle of New Orleans, and
while the fact that the treaty of peace had been concluded
was well known in the city, but before oﬀicial knowledge of
it had arrived, General Jackson still maintained martial or
military law. Now that it could be said that the war was
over, the clamor against martial law, which had existed
from the ﬁrst, grew more furious. Among other things, a
Mr. Louaillier published a denunciatory newspaper article.
General Jackson arrested him. A lawyer by the name of
Morel procured the United States Judge Hall to order a
writ of habeas corpus to release Mr. Louaillier. General
Jackson arrested both the lawyer and the judge. A Mr.
Hollander ventured to say of some part of the matter that
“it was a dirty trick.” General Jackson arrested him. When
the oﬀicer undertook to serve the writ of habeas corpus,
General Jackson took it from him, and sent him away with a
copy. Holding the judge in custody a few days, the general
sent him beyond the limits of his encampment, and set him
at liberty with an order to remain till the ratiﬁcation of
peace should be regularly announced, or until the British
should have left the southern coast. A day or two more
elapsed, the ratiﬁcation of the treaty of peace was regularly
announced, and the judge and others were fully liberated. A
few days more, and the judge called General Jackson into
 court and ﬁned him  1000 for having arrested him and the
others named. The General paid the ﬁne, and then the
matter rested for nearly thirty years, when Congress
refunded principal and interest. The late Senator Douglas,
then in the House of Representatives, took a leading part in
the debates, in which the constitutional question was much
discussed. I am not prepared to say whom the journals
would show to have voted for the measure.
It may be remarked — ﬁrst, that we had the same
Constitution then as now; secondly, that we then had a case
of invasion, and now we have a case of rebellion; and,
thirdly, that the permanent right of the people to public
discussion, the liberty of speech and of the press, the trial
by jury, the law of evidence, and the habeas corpus suﬀered
no detriment whatever by that conduct of General Jackson,
or its subsequent approval by the American Congress.
And yet, let me say that, in my own discretion, I do not
know whether I would have ordered the arrest of Mr.
Vallandigham. While I cannot shift the responsibility from
myself, I hold that, as a general rule, the commander in the
ﬁeld is the better judge of the necessity in any particular
case. Of course I must practice a general directory and
revisory power in the matter.
One of the resolutions expresses the opinion of the
meeting that arbitrary arrests will have the eﬀect to divide
and distract those who should be united in suppressing the
rebellion, and I am speciﬁcally called on to discharge Mr.
Vallandigham. I regard this as, at least, a fair appeal to me
on the expediency of exercising a constitutional power
 which I think exists. In response to such appeal I have to
say, it gave me pain when I learned that Mr. Vallandigham
had been arrested (that is, I was pained that there should
have seemed to be a necessity for arresting him), and that
it will aﬀord me great pleasure to discharge him so soon as
I can by any means believe the public safety will not suﬀer
by it.
I further say that, as the war progresses, it appears to
me, opinion and action, which were in great confusion at
ﬁrst, take shape and fall into more regular channels, so that
the necessity for strong dealing with them gradually
decreases. I have every reason to desire that it should
cease altogether, and far from the least is my regard for the
opinions and wishes of those who, like the meeting at
Albany, declare their purpose to sustain the government in
every constitutional and lawful measure to suppress the
rebellion. Still, I must continue to do so much as may seem
to be required by the public safety.
A. LINCOLN.
  
  H        A   
   H     A 
  .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, June 14, 1863.
HON. SECRETARY OF THE TREASURY.
SIR: — Your note of this morning is received. You will co-
operate by the revenue cutters under your direction with
the navy in arresting rebel depredations on American
commerce and transportation and in capturing rebels
engaged therein.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A       .
WAR DEPARTMENT, June 14, 1863.
GENERAL TYLER, MARTINSBURG: Is Milroy invested so
that he cannot fall back to Harper’s Ferry?
A. LINCOLN.
     
    
 A     I 
 
  
 
  A
TELEGRAM TO GENERAL TYLER.
WAR DEPARTMENT, JUNE 14, 1863.
GENERAL TYLER, Martinsburg:
If you are besieged, how do you despatch me? Why did
you not leave before being besieged?
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A        .
WASHINGTON, June 14, 1863. 1.27 P.M.
MAJOR-GENERAL KELLEY, HARPER’S Ferry:
Are the forces at Winchester and Martinsburg making
any eﬀort to get to you?
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A  H
   .
WASHINGTON, D. C., June 14, 1863.3.50 P.M., 
MAJOR-GENERAL HOOKER: So far as we can make out
here, the enemy have Muroy surrounded at Winchester,
and Tyler at Martinsburg. If they could hold out a few days,
could you help them? If the head of Lee’s army is at
Martinsburg and the tail of it on the plank-road between
Fredericksburg and Chancellorsville, the animal must be
very slim somewhere; could you not break him?
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A   .  .   H 
  .
WAR DEPARTMENT, June 14, 1863.
MAJOR-GENERAL SCHENCK:
Get General Milroy from Winchester to Harper’s Ferry, if
possible. He will be “gobbled up” if he remains, if he is not
already past salvation.
A. LINCOLN, President, United States.
   
  
 
  I    
 HI   A  IA
TELEGRAM TO MRS. LINCOLN.
WAR DEPARTMENT, JUNE 15, 1863.
MRS. LINCOLN, Philadelphia, Pa.:
Tolerably well. Have not rode out much yet, but have at
last got new tires on the carriage wheels and perhaps shall
ride out soon.
A. LINCOLN.
  A    
          
I I IA  
        
   I
 H    
          .
BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES OF
AMERICA:
A PROCLAMATION
Whereas the armed insurrectionary combinations now
existing in several of the States are threatening to make
inroads into the States of Maryland, West Virginia,
Pennsylvania, 
and 
Ohio, 
requiring 
immediately 
an
additional military force for the service of the United
States:
Now, therefore, I, Abraham Lincoln, President of the
United States and Commander-in-Chief of the Army and
Navy thereof and of the militia of the several States when
called into actual service, do hereby call into the service of
the United States 100,000 militia from the States following,
namely:
From the State of Maryland, 10,000; from the State of
Pennsylvania, 50,000; from the State of Ohio, 30,000; from
the State of West Virginia, 10,000 — to be mustered into
the service of the United States forthwith and to serve for a
period of six months from the date of such muster into said
service, unless sooner discharged; to be mustered in as
infantry, artillery, and cavalry, in proportions which will be
 made 
known 
through 
the 
War 
Department, 
which
Department will also designate the several places of
rendezvous. These militia to be organized according to the
rules and regulations of the volunteer service and such
orders as may hereafter be issued. The States aforesaid will
be respectively credited under the enrollment act for the
militia services entered under this proclamation. In
testimony whereof...............
A. LINCOLN
     
 A
  
  .  A   A
 
 H   .
WAR DEPARTMENT, WASHINGTON, D. C., June 10, 1863
FREDERICK KAPP AND OTHERS, New York: The
Governor of New York promises to send us troops, and if he
wishes the assistance of General Fremont and General
Sigel, one or both, he can have it. If he does not wish them
it would but breed confusion for us to set them to work
independently of him.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A  
 A
H  .
WAR DEPARTMENT, WASHINGTON, D. C., June 16, 1863.
GENERAL T. FRANCIS MEAGHER, New York:
Your despatch received. Shall be very glad for you to
raise 3000 Irish troops if done by the consent of and in
concert with Governor Seymour.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
  .  I
 
 
.
WAR DEPARTMENT, WASHINGTON, D. C., June 16, 1863.
MRS. LINCOLN, PHILADELPHIA: It is a matter of choice
with yourself whether you come home. There is no reason
why you should not, that did not exist when you went away.
As bearing on the question of your coming home, I do not
think the raid into Pennsylvania amounts to anything at all.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
  
 
     I  .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, June 16, 1863.
COL. WILLIAM S. BLISS, New York Hotel: Your despatch
asking whether I will accept “the Loyal Brigade of the
North” is received. I never heard of that brigade by name
and do not know where it is; yet, presuming it is in New
York, I say I will gladly accept it, if tendered by and with
the consent and approbation of the Governor of that State.
Otherwise not.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A  H
   .
WASHINGTON, June 16, 1863.10 P.M.
MAJOR-GENERAL 
HOOKER: 
To 
remove 
all
misunderstanding, I now place you in the strict military
relation to General Halleck of a commander of one of the
armies to the general-in-chief of all the armies. I have not
intended diﬀerently, but as it seems to be diﬀerently
understood I shall direct him to give you orders and you to
obey them.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A  H
   .
WAR DEPARTMENT WASHINGTON D. C., June 17, 1863.
MAJOR-GENERAL HOOKER:
Mr. Eckert, superintendent in the telegraph oﬀice,
assures me that he has sent and will send you everything
that comes to the oﬀice.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
  
 H A    I .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, June 17, 1863.
JOSHUA TEVIS, ESQ., U. S. Attorney, Frankfort, Ky.: A
Mr. Burkner is here shoving a record and asking to be
discharged from a suit in San Francisco, as bail for one
Thompson. Unless the record shown me is defectively made
out I think it can be successfully defended against. Please
examine the case carefully and, if you shall be of opinion it
cannot be sustained, dismiss it and relieve me from all
trouble about it. Please answer.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
   
   
.
[Cipher.]
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON,
June 18, 1863.
GOVERNOR D. TOD, Columbus, O.:
Yours received. I deeply regret that you were not
renominated, not that I have aught against Mr. Brough. On
the contrary, like yourself, I say hurrah for him.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A  
I
A
.
WAR DEPARTMENT, WASHINGTON, D. C., June 18, 1863.
GENERAL A. DINGMAN, Belleville, C. W.:
Thanks for your oﬀer of the Fifteenth Battalion. I do not
think Washington is in danger.
A. LINCOLN
  
  .  . 
A HI
  A
 
 H   .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, June 19, 1863.
MESSRS. B. B. MALHIOT, BRADISH JOHNSON, AND
THOMAS COTTMAN.
GENTLEMEN: — Your letter, which follows, has been
received and Considered.
“The undersigned, a committee appointed by the planters
of the State of Louisiana, respectfully represent that they
have been delegated to seek of the General Government a
full recognition of all the rights of the State as they existed
previous to the passage of an act of secession, upon the
principle of the existence of the State constitution
unimpaired, and no legal act having transpired that could
in any way deprive them of the advantages conferred by
that constitution. Under this constitution the State wishes
to return to its full allegiance, in the enjoyment of all rights
and privileges exercised by the other States under the
Federal Constitution. With the view of accomplishing the
desired object, we further request that your Excellency
will, as commander-in-chief of the army of the United
States, direct the Military Governor of Louisiana to order
an election, in conformity with the constitution and laws of
the State, on the ﬁrst Monday of November next, for all
State and Federal oﬀicers.
 “With high consideration and resect, we have the honor
to subscribe ourselves, “Your obedient servants, “E. E.
MALHIOT.
“BRADISH JOHNSON.
“THOMAS COTTMAN.”
Since receiving the letter, reliable information has
reached me that a respectable portion of the Louisiana
people desire to amend their State constitution, and
contemplate holding a State convention for that object.
This fact alone, as it seems to me, is a suﬀicient reason why
the General Government should not give the committal you
seek to the existing State constitution. I may add that,
while I do not perceive how such committal could facilitate
our military operations in Louisiana, I really apprehend it
might be so used as to embarrass them.
As to an election to be held next November, there is
abundant time without any order or proclamation from me
just now. The people of Louisiana shall not lack an
opportunity for a fair election for both Federal and State
oﬀicers by want of anything within my power to give them.
Your obedient servant, A. LINCOLN.
  
 
 
  A   . 
.   H
 I  
.
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON
JUNE 22, 1863.
GENERAL JOHN M. SCHOFIELD. MY DEAR SIR: — Your
despatch, asking in substance whether, in case Missouri
shall adopt gradual emancipation, the General Government
will protect slave owners in that species of property during
the short time it shall be permitted by the State to exist
within it, has been received. Desirous as I am that
emancipation shall be adopted by Missouri, and believing
as I do that gradual can be made better than immediate for
both black and white, except when military necessity
changes the case, my impulse is to say that such protection
would be given. I cannot know exactly what shape an act of
emancipation may take. If the period from the initiation to
the ﬁnal end should be comparatively short, and the act
should prevent persons being sold during that period into
more lasting slavery, the whole would be easier. I do not
wish to pledge the General Government to the aﬀirmative
support of even temporary slavery beyond what can be
fairly claimed under the Constitution. I suppose, however,
this is not desired, but that it is desired for the military
force of the United States, while in Missouri, to not be used
in subverting the temporarily reserved legal rights in slaves
 during the progress of emancipation. This I would desire
also. I have very earnestly urged the slave States to adopt
emancipation; and it ought to be, and is, an object with me
not to overthrow or thwart what any of them may in good
faith do to that end. You are therefore authorized to act in
the spirit of this letter in conjunction with what may appear
to be the military necessities of your department. Although
this letter will become public at some time, it is not
intended to be made so now.
Yours truly, A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A   . H
   .
WASHINGTON, June 22, 1863
MAJOR-GENERAL HOOKER:
Operator at Leesburg just now says: “I heard very little
ﬁring this A.M. about daylight, but it seems to have stopped
now. It was in about the same direction as yesterday, but
farther oﬀ.”
A. LINCOLN.
  
       A   
  
A .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, June 23, 1863.
HON. SECRETARY OF WAR: You remember that Hon. W.
D. Kelly and others are engaged in raising or trying to raise
some colored regiments in Philadelphia. The bearer of this,
Wilton M. Huput, is a friend of Judge Kelly, as appears by
the letter of the latter. He is a private in the 112th Penn.
and has been disappointed in a reasonable expectation of
one of the smaller oﬀices. He now wants to be a lieutenant
in one of the colored regiments. If Judge Kelly will say in
writing he wishes to so have him, I am willing for him to be
discharged from his present position, and be so appointed.
If you approve, so indorse and let him carry the letter to
Kelly.
Yours truly, A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
A 
   A
   I  .
[Cipher.]
WAR DEPARTMENT, WASHINGTON, D. C., June 23,
1863.
MAJOR VAN VLIET, New York:
Have you any idea what the news is in the despatch of
General Banks to General Halleck?
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A   
 H.
WAR DEPARTMENT, June 24, 1863.
MAJOR-GENERAL COUCH, HARRISBURG, Pa.:
Have you any reports of the enemy moving into
Pennsylvania? And if any, what?
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A  
I .
WASHINGTON, June 24, 1863
MAJOR-GENERAL DI , YORKTOWN, Va.: We have a
despatch from General Grant of the 19th. Don’t think Kirby
Smith took Milliken’s Bend since, allowing time to get the
news to Joe Johnston and from him to Richmond. But it is
not absolutely impossible. Also have news from Banks to
the 16th, I think. He had not run away then, nor thought of
it.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A      .
WAR DEPARTMENT, WASHINGTON, D. C., June 25, 1863.
GENERAL PECK, SUFFOLK, Va.: Colonel Derrom, of the
Twenty-ﬁfth New Jersey Volunteers, now mustered out,
says there is a man in your hands under conviction for
desertion, who formerly belonged to the above named
regiment, and whose name is Templeton — Isaac F.
Templeton, I believe. The Colonel and others appeal to me
for him. Please telegraph to me what is the condition of the
case, and if he has not been executed send me the record of
the trial and conviction.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A    
 
.
WAR DEPARTMENT, WASHINGTON, D. C., June 25,1863.
MAJOR-GENERAL SLOCUM, LEESBURG, Va.:
Was 
William 
Gruvier, 
Company 
A, 
Forty-sixth,
Pennsylvania, one of the men executed as a deserter last
Friday?
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A  H
   .
WAR DEPARTMENT, WASHINGTON, D. C., June 27, 1863.
8A.M.
MAJOR-GENERAL HOOKER:
It did not come from the newspapers, nor did I believe it,
but I wished to be entirely sure it was a falsehood.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A   
 
 I
 .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, June 28, 1863.
MAJOR-GENERAL BURNSIDE, CINCINNATI, O.: There
is nothing going on in Kentucky on the subject of which you
telegraph, except an enrolment. Before anything is done
beyond this, I will take care to understand the case better
than I now do.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
   
   
   .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, D. C., June 28,
1863.
GOVERNOR J. T. BOYLE, Cincinnati, O.: There is nothing
going on in Kentucky on the subject of which you telegraph,
except an enrolment. Before anything is done beyond this, I
will take care to understand the case better than I now do.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A    H 
  .
WAR DEPARTMENT, WASHINGTON, D. C., June 28, 1863.
MAJOR GENERAL SCHENCK, Baltimore, Md.:
Every place in the Naval school subject to my
appointment is full, and I have one unredeemed promise of
more than half a year’s standing.
A. LINCOLN.
  
  H   
 
  A I   A      I I I 
TO M. BIRCHARD AND OTHERS.
WASHINGTON, D. C., June 29,1863.
MESSRS. M. BIRCHARD, DAVID A. HOUK, et al:
GENTLEMEN: — The resolutions of the Ohio Democratic
State convention, which you present me, together with your
introductory and closing remarks, being in position and
argument mainly the same as the resolutions of the
Democratic meeting at Albany, New York, I refer you to my
response to the latter as meeting most of the points in the
former.
This response you evidently used in preparing your
remarks, and I desire no more than that it be used with
accuracy. In a single reading of your remarks, I only
discovered one inaccuracy in matter, which I suppose you
took from that paper. It is where you say: “The undersigned
are unable to agree with you in the opinion you have
expressed that the Constitution is diﬀerent in time of
insurrection or invasion from what it is in time of peace and
public security.”
A recurrence to the paper will show you that I have not
expressed the opinion you suppose. I expressed the opinion
that the Constitution is diﬀerent in its application in cases
of rebellion or invasion, involving the public safety, from
 what it is in times of profound peace and public security;
and this opinion I adhere to, simply because, by the
Constitution itself, things may be done in the one case
which may not be done in the other.
I dislike to waste a word on a merely personal point, but
I must respectfully assure you that you will ﬁnd yourselves
at fault should you ever seek for evidence to prove your
assumption that I “opposed in discussions before the
people the policy of the Mexican war.”
You say: “Expunge from the Constitution this limitation
upon the power of Congress to suspend the writ of habeas
corpus, and yet the other guarantees of personal liberty
would remain unchanged.” Doubtless, if this clause of the
Constitution, improperly called, as I think, a limitation upon
the power of Congress, were expunged, the other
guarantees would remain the same; but the question is not
how those guarantees would stand with that clause out of
the Constitution, but how they stand with that clause
remaining in it, in case of rebellion or invasion involving
the public safety. If the liberty could be indulged of
expunging that clause, letter and spirit, I really think the
constitutional argument would be with you.
My general view on this question was stated in the
Albany response, and hence I do not state it now. I only add
that, as seems to me, the beneﬁt of the writ of habeas
corpus is the great means through which the guarantees of
personal liberty are conserved and made available in the
last resort; and corroborative of this view is the fact that
Mr. Vallandigham, in the very case in question, under the
 advice of able lawyers, saw not where else to go but to the
habeas corpus. But by the Constitution the beneﬁt of the
writ of habeas corpus itself may be suspended when, in
case of rebellion or invasion, the public safety may require
it.
You ask, in substance, whether I really claim that I may
override all the guaranteed rights of individuals, on the
plea of conserving the public safety when I may choose to
say the public safety requires it. This question, divested of
the phraseology calculated to represent me as struggling
for an arbitrary personal prerogative, is either simply a
question who shall decide, or an aﬀirmation that nobody
shall decide, what the public safety does require in cases of
rebellion or invasion.
The Constitution contemplates the question as likely to
occur for decision, but it does not expressly declare who is
to decide it. By necessary implication, when rebellion or
invasion comes, the decision is to be made from time to
time; and I think the man whom, for the time, the people
have, under the Constitution, made the commander-in-chief
of their army and navy, is the man who holds the power and
bears the responsibility of making it. If he uses the power
justly, the same people will probably justify him; if he
abuses it, he is in their hands to be dealt with by all the
modes 
they 
have 
reserved 
to 
themselves 
in 
the
Constitution.
The earnestness with which you insist that persons can
only, in times of rebellion, be lawfully dealt with in
accordance 
with 
the 
rules 
for 
criminal 
trials 
and
 punishments in times of peace, induces me to add a word to
what I said on that point in the Albany response.
You claim that men may, if they choose, embarrass those
whose duty it is to combat a giant rebellion, and then be
dealt with in turn only as if there were no rebellion. The
Constitution itself rejects this view. The military arrests and
detentions which have been made, including those of Mr.
Vallandigham, which are not diﬀerent in principle from the
others, have been for prevention, and not for punishment —
as injunctions to stay injury, as proceedings to keep the
peace; and hence, like proceedings in such cases and for
like reasons, they have not been accompanied with
indictments, or trials by juries, nor in a single case by any
punishment whatever, beyond what is purely incidental to
the prevention. The original sentence of imprisonment in
Mr. Vallandigham’s case was to prevent injury to the
military service only, and the modiﬁcation of it was made as
a less disagreeable mode to him of securing the same
prevention.
I am unable to perceive an insult to Ohio in the case of
Mr. Vallandigham. Quite surely nothing of the sort was or is
intended. I was wholly unaware that Mr. Vallandigham was,
at the time of his arrest, a candidate for the Democratic
nomination for governor until so informed by your reading
to me the resolutions of the convention. I am grateful to the
State of Ohio for many things, especially for the brave
soldiers and oﬀicers she has given in the present national
trial to the armies of the Union.
 You claim, as I understand, that according to my own
position in the Albany response, Mr. Vallandigham should
be released; and this because, as you claim, he has not
damaged the military service by discouraging enlistments,
encouraging desertions, or otherwise; and that if he had, he
should have been turned over to the civil authorities under
the recent acts of Congress. I certainly do not know that
Mr. Vallandigham has speciﬁcally and by direct language
advised against enlistments and in favor of desertion and
resistance to drafting.
We all know that combinations, armed in some instances,
to resist the arrest of deserters began several months ago;
that more recently the like has appeared in resistance to
the enrolment preparatory to a draft; and that quite a
number of assassinations have occurred from the same
animus. These had to be met by military force, and this
again has led to bloodshed and death. And now, under a
sense of responsibility more weighty and enduring than any
which is merely oﬀicial, I solemnly declare my belief that
this hindrance of the military, including maiming and
murder, is due to the course in which Mr. Vallandigham has
been engaged in a greater degree than to any other cause;
and it is due to him personally in a greater degree than to
any other one man.
These things have been notorious, known to all, and of
course known to Mr. Vallandigham. Perhaps I would not be
wrong to say they originated with his special friends and
adherents. With perfect knowledge of them, he has
frequently if not constantly made speeches in Congress and
 before popular assemblies; and if it can be shown that, with
these things staring him in the face he has ever uttered a
word of rebuke or counsel against them, it will be a fact
greatly in his favor with me, and one of which as yet I am
totally ignorant. When it is known that the whole burden of
his speeches has been to stir up men against the
prosecution of the war, and that in the midst of resistance
to it he has not been known in any instance to counsel
against such resistance, it is next to impossible to repel the
inference that he has counseled directly in favor of it.
With all this before their eyes, the convention you
represent have nominated Mr. Vallandigham for governor
of Ohio, and both they and you have declared the purpose
to sustain the national Union by all constitutional means.
But of course they and you in common reserve to
yourselves to decide what are constitutional means; and,
unlike the Albany meeting, you omit to state or intimate
that in your opinion an army is a constitutional means of
saving the Union against a rebellion, or even to intimate
that you are conscious of an existing rebellion being in
progress with the avowed object of destroying that very
Union. At the same time your nominee for governor, in
whose behalf you appeal, is known to you and to the world
to declare against the use of an army to suppress the
rebellion. 
Your 
own 
attitude, 
therefore, 
encourages
desertion, resistance to the draft, and the like, because it
teaches those who incline to desert and to escape the draft
to believe it is your purpose to protect them, and to hope
that you will become strong enough to do so.
 After a short personal intercourse with you, gentlemen of
the committee, I cannot say I think you desire this eﬀect to
follow your attitude; but I assure your that both friends and
enemies of the Union look upon it in this light. It is a
substantial hope, and by consequence a real strength to the
enemy. If it is a false hope, and one which you would
willingly dispel, I will make the way exceedingly easy.
I send you duplicates of this letter in order that you, or a
majority of you, may, if you choose, indorse your names
upon one of them and return it thus indorsed to me with
the 
understanding 
that 
those 
signing 
are 
thereby
committed to the following propositions and to nothing
else:
1. That there is now a rebellion in the United States, the
object and tendency of which is to destroy the National
Union; and that, in your opinion, an army and navy are
constitutional means for suppressing that rebellion;
2. That no one of you will do anything which, in his own
judgment, will tend to hinder the increase, or favor the
decrease, or lessen the eﬀiciency of the army or navy while
engaged in the eﬀort to suppress that rebellion; and
3. That each of you will, in his sphere, do all he can to
have the oﬀicers, soldiers, and seamen of the army and
navy, while engaged in the eﬀort to suppress the rebellion,
paid, fed, clad, and otherwise well provided for and
supported.
And with the further understanding that upon receiving
the letter and names thus indorsed, I will cause them to be
published, which publication shall be, within itself, a
 revocation of the order in relation to Mr. Vallandigham. It
will not escape observation that I consent to the release of
Mr. Vallandigham upon terms not embracing any pledge
from him or from others as to what he will or will not do. I
do this because he is not present to speak for himself, or to
authorize others to speak for him; and because I should
expect that on his returning he would not put himself
practically in antagonism with the position of his friends.
But I do it chieﬂy because I thereby prevail on other
inﬂuential gentlemen of Ohio to so deﬁne their position as
to be of immense value to the army — thus more than
compensating for the consequences of any mistake in
allowing Mr. Vallandigham to return; so that, on the whole,
the public safety will not have suﬀered by it. Still, in regard
to Mr. Vallandigham and all others, I must hereafter, as
heretofore, do so much as the public safety may seem to
require.
I have the honor to be respectfully yours, etc.,
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
   
   A    .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, June 30, 1863.
10.55
GOVERNOR PARKER, TRENTON, N.J.: Your despatch of
yesterday received. I really think the attitude of the
enemy’s army in Pennsylvania presents us the best
opportunity we have had since the war began. I think you
will not see the foe in New Jersey. I beg you to be assured
that no one out of my position can know so well as if he
were in it the diﬀiculties and involvements of replacing
General McClellan in command, and this aside from any
imputations upon him.
Please accept my sincere thanks for what you have done
and are doing to get troops forward.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 A.  . 
c  
  .
WAR DEPARTMENT, WASHINGTON CITY, June 30, 1863.
A. K. MCCLURE, Philadelphia:
Do we gain anything by opening one leak to stop
another? Do we gain anything by quieting one merely to
open another, and probably a larger one?
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A   
 H.   i her
A HI
 
  I     une         .  . 
P.M.
MAJOR-GENERAL COUCH, Harrisburg, Pa.:
I judge by absence of news that the enemy is not
crossing or pressing up to the Susquehanna. Please tell me
what you know of his movements.
A. LINCOLN
  
 
 
  A  
. H
   .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, June 30, 1863.
MAJOR-GENERAL HUNTER.
MY DEAR GENERAL: — I have just received your letter
of the 25th of June.
I assure you, and you may feel authorized in stating, that
the recent change of commanders in the Department of the
South was made for no reasons which convey any
imputation upon your known energy, eﬀiciency, and
patriotism; but for causes which seemed suﬀicient, while
they were in no degree incompatible with the respect and
esteem in which I have always held you as a man and an
oﬀicer.
I cannot, by giving my consent to a publication of whose
details I know nothing, assume the responsibility of
whatever you may write. In this matter your own sense of
military propriety must be your guide, and the regulations
of the service your rule of conduct.
I am very truly your friend, A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A   
 
 I
 .
WAR DEPARTMENT, WASHINGTON, D. C., July 3, 1863
MAJOR-GENERAL 
BURNSIDE, 
CINCINNATI, 
Ohio:
Private Downey, of the Twentieth or Twenty-sixth Kentucky
Infantry, is said to have been sentenced to be shot for
desertion to-day. If so, respite the execution until I can see
the record.
A. LINCOLN.
   A  
 I
  
 I
  
   
TELEGRAM TO ROBERT T, LINCOLN.
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, July 3,1863.
ROBERT T. LINCOLN, Esq., Cambridge, Mass.:
Don’t be uneasy. Your mother very slightly hurt by her
fall.
A.L.
Please send at once.
 A
  
 
  
  
 
    
 
      
 
.
WASHINGTON, 
JULY 4, 10.30 A.M.
The President announces to the country that news from
the Army of the Potomac, up to 10 P.M. of the 3d, is such as
to cover that army with the highest honor, to promise a
great success to the cause of the Union, and to claim the
condolence of all for the many gallant fallen; and that for
this he especially desires that on this day He whose will,
not ours, should ever be done be everywhere remembered
and reverenced with profoundest gratitude.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A     
 H.   i her  
A
  A  
 
   
A HI
 
  
.  .
July 5, 1863.
 A 
  
 
  A     
 H   rederic town  
d.
I 
SEE 
YOUR despatch about destruction of pontoons.
Cannot the enemy ford the river?
A. LINCOLN.
  
 I
 
  AI 
    
  
  
   
 
TELEGRAM TO GENERAL H. W. HALLECK.
SOLDIERS’ HOME, WASHINGTON, JULY 6 1863.7
P.M., MAJOR-GENERAL HALLECK: I left the telegraph
oﬀice a good deal dissatisﬁed. You know I did not like the
phrase — in Orders, No. 68, I believe— “Drive the invaders
from our soil.” Since that, I see a despatch from General
French, saying the enemy is crossing his wounded over the
river in ﬂats, without saying why he does not stop it, or
even intimating a thought that it ought to be stopped. Still
later, another despatch from General Pleasonton, by
direction of General Meade, to General French, stating that
the main army is halted because it is believed the rebels
are concentrating “on the road towards Hagerstown,
beyond Fairﬁeld,” and is not to move until it is ascertained
that the rebels intend to evacuate Cumberland Valley.
These things appear to me to be connected with a
purpose to cover Baltimore and Washington and to get the
enemy across the river again without a further collision,
and they do not appear connected with a purpose to
prevent his crossing and to destroy him. I do fear the
former purpose is acted upon and the latter rejected.
If you are satisﬁed the latter purpose is entertained, and
is judiciously pursued, I am content. If you are not so
 satisﬁed, please look to it.
Yours truly, A. LINCOLN.
     
    
 A     
A
 
JULY 7, 1863.
FELLOW-CITIZENS: — I am very glad indeed to see you
to-night, and yet I will not say I thank you for this call; but I
do most sincerely thank Almighty God for the occasion on
which you have called. How long ago is it Eighty-odd years
since, on the Fourth of July, for the ﬁrst time in the history
of the world, a nation, by its representatives, assembled
and declared as a self-evident truth “that all men are
created equal.” That was the birthday of the United States
of America. Since then the Fourth of July has had several
very peculiar recognitions. The two men most distinguished
in the framing and support of the Declaration were Thomas
Jeﬀerson and John Adams, the one having penned it, and
the other sustained it the most forcibly in debate — the
only two of the ﬁfty-ﬁve who signed it and were elected
Presidents of the United States. Precisely ﬁfty years after
they put their hands to the paper, it pleased Almighty God
to take both from this stage of action. This was indeed an
extraordinary and remarkable event in our history. Another
President, ﬁve years after, was called from this stage of
existence on the same day and month of the year; and now
on this last Fourth of July just passed, when we have a
gigantic rebellion, at the bottom of which is an eﬀort to
 overthrow the principle that all men were created equal,
we have the surrender of a most powerful position and
army on that very day. And not only so, but in the
succession of battles in Pennsylvania, near to us, through
three days, so rapidly fought that they might be called one
great battle, on the ﬁrst, second, and third of the month of
July; and on the fourth the cohorts of those who opposed
the Declaration that all men are created equal, “turned
tail” and run.
Gentlemen, this is a glorious theme, and the occasion for
a speech, but I am not prepared to make one worthy of the
occasion. I would like to speak in terms of praise due to the
many brave oﬀicers and soldiers who have fought in the
cause of the Union and liberties of their country from the
beginning of the war. These are trying occasions, not only
in success, but for the want of success. I dislike to mention
the name of one single oﬀicer, lest I might do wrong to
those I might forget. Recent events bring up glorious
names, and particularly prominent ones; but these I will not
mention. Having said this much, I will now take the music.
  
   
   
   I    
 
  
 
 
  A
 A
TELEGRAM FROM GENERAL HALLECK TO GENERAL G.
C. MEADE.
WASHINGTON, D.C., JULY 7, 1863.
MAJOR-GENERAL MEADE, Army of the Potomac: I have
received from the President the following note, which I
respectfully communicate: “We have certain information
that Vicksburg surrendered to General Grant on the Fourth
of July. Now if General Meade can complete his work, so
gloriously prosecuted this far, by the literal or substantial
destruction of Lee’s army, the rebellion will be over.
“Yours truly,
“A. LINCOLN.”
H. W. HALLECK. General-in-Chief.
     
 A
   
 
 
  A  HA       
 
  A  
.  . 
 A
 .
WASHINGTON, D. C., July 8, 1863.
MAJOR-GENERAL MEADE, FREDERICK, Md.: There is
reliable information that the enemy is crossing at
Williamsport. The opportunity to attack his divided forces
should not be lost. The President is urgent and anxious that
your army should move against him by forced marches.
H. W. HALLECK, General-in-Chief
     
 A
  
 
 
  A   H
A .
WAR DEPARTMENT, WASHINGTON, July 8, 1863.12.30
P.M.
GENERAL LORENZO THOMAS, Harrisburg, Pa.: Your
despatch of this morning to the Secretary of War is before
me. The forces you speak of will be of no imaginable
service if they cannot go forward with a little more
expedition. Lee is now passing the Potomac faster than the
forces you mention are passing Carlisle. Forces now beyond
Carlisle to be joined by regiments still at Harrisburg, and
the united force again to join Pierce somewhere, and the
whole to move down the Cumberland Valley, will in my
unprofessional opinion be quite as likely to capture the
“man in the moon” as any part of Lee’s army.
A. LINCOLN.
  
  
  
 A
     A  
   
   I    
 
TELEGRAM TO E. D. SMITH.
WAR DEPARTMENT, WASHINGTON, D.C., July 8,
1863.
E. DELAFIELD SMITH, New York:
Your kind despatch in behalf of self and friends is
gratefully received. Capture of Vicksburg conﬁrmed by
despatch from General Grant himself.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
  .  .  
 .
WAR DEPARTMENT, WASHINGTON, D.C., July 8, 1863.
HON. F. F. LOWE, San Francisco, Cal.: There is no doubt
that General Meade, now commanding the Army of the
Potomac, beat Lee at Gettysburg, Pa., at the end of a three
days’ battle, and that the latter is now crossing the
Potomac at Williamsport over the swollen stream and with
poor means of crossing, and closely pressed by Meade. We
also have despatches rendering it entirely certain that
Vicksburg surrendered to General Grant on the glorious old
4th.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
  .  
    A
  .  .  
 .
[Cipher.]
WAR DEPARTMENT, WASHINGTON CITY, D.C., July 9,
1863.
HON. LEONARD SWETT, HON. F. F. LOWE, San
Francisco, Cal.:
Consult together and do not have a riot, or great
diﬀiculty about delivering possession.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
  .  . 
 
I .
WASHINGTON, D.C., July 11,1863. 9 A.M.
HON. J. K. DUBOIS, Springﬁeld, Ill.: It is certain that,
after three days’ ﬁghting at Gettysburg, Lee withdrew and
made for the Potomac, that he found the river so swollen as
to prevent his crossing; that he is still this side, near
Hagerstown and Williamsport, preparing to defend himself;
and that Meade is close upon him, and preparing to attack
him, heavy skirmishing having occurred nearly all day
yesterday.
I am more than satisﬁed with what has happened north
of the Potomac so far, and am anxious and hopeful for what
is to come.
A. LINCOLN.
[Nothing came! Lee was allowed to escape again and the
war went on for another two years. D.W.]
     
 A
  
 
 
  A    H 
  .
[Cipher.]
WAR DEPARTMENT, WASHINGTON CITY, July 11,
1863.
MAJOR-GENERAL SCHENCK, Baltimore, Md.:
How many rebel prisoners captured within Maryland and
Pennsylvania have reached Baltimore within this month of
July?
A. LINCOLN.
  
 
 
  A  
 A
 .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, July 13, 1863.
MAJOR-GENERAL GRANT: MY DEAR GENERAL: — I do
not remember that you and I ever met personally. I write
this now as a grateful acknowledgment of the almost
inestimable service you have done the Country. I write to
say a word further. When you ﬁrst reached the vicinity of
Vicksburg, I thought you should do what you ﬁnally did —
march the troops across the neck, run the batteries with
the transports, and thus go below; and I never had any faith
except a general hope that you knew better than I, that the
Yazoo Pass expedition and the like could succeed. When
you dropped below, and took Port Gibson, Grand Gulf, and
vicinity, I thought you should go down the river and join
General Banks; and when you turned northward, east of the
Big Black, I feared it was a mistake. I now wish to make the
personal acknowledgment that you were right and I was
wrong.
Yours very truly, A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A   . 
.   H
 I  
.
WAR DEPARTMENT, WASHINGTON, July 13, 1863.
GENERAL SCHOFIELD. ST. Louis, Mo.: I regret to
learn of the arrest of the Democrat editor. I fear this loses
you the middle position I desired you to occupy. I have not
learned which of the two letters I wrote you it was that the
Democrat published, but I care very little for the
publication of any letter I have written. Please spare me the
trouble this is likely to bring.
A. LINCOLN.
  
 I
  
   
  
   
  
 I   HI
 A  
 
TELEGRAM TO R. T. LINCOLN.
WAR DEPARTMENT, WASHINGTON D.C., July 14,
1863.
ROBERT T. LINCOLN: New York, Fifth Avenue Hotel:
Why do I hear no more of you?
A. LINCOLN.
 I
 I
A I
 
  A 
I  I     
 
 A 
FROM JAMES R. GILMORE TO GOVERNOR VANCE OF
NORTH CAROLINA, 
WITH 
THE 
PRESIDENT’S 
INDORSEMENT.
PRESIDENT’S ROOM, WHITE HOUSE, WASHINGTON, July
1864.
HIS E CELLENCY ZEBULON B. VANCE.
MY DEAR SIR: — My former business partner, Mr.
Frederic Kidder, of Boston, has forwarded to me a letter he
has recently received from his brother, Edward Kidder, of
Wilmington, in which (Edward Kidder) says that he has had
an interview with you in which you expressed an anxiety for
any peace compatible with honor; that you regard slavery
as already dead, and the establishment of the Confederacy
as hopeless; and that you should exert all your inﬂuence to
bring about any reunion that would admit the South on
terms of perfect equality with the North.
On receipt of this letter I lost no time in laying it before
the President of the United States, who expressed great
gratiﬁcation at hearing such sentiments from you, one of
the 
most 
inﬂuential 
and 
honored 
of 
the 
Southern
governors, and he desires me to say that he fully shares
your anxiety for the restoration of peace between the
States and for a reunion of all the States on the basis of the
abolition of slavery — the bone we are ﬁghting over — and
 the full reinstatement of every Confederate citizen in all the
rights of citizenship in our common country. These points
conceded, the President authorizes me to say that he will
be glad to receive overtures from any man, or body of men,
who 
have 
authority 
to 
control 
the 
armies 
of 
the
Confederacy; and that he and the United States Congress
will be found very liberal on all collateral points that may
come up in the settlement.
His views on the collateral points that may naturally
arise, the President desires me to say he will communicate
to you through me if you should suggest the personal
interview that Mr. Edward Kidder recommends in his letter
to his brother. In that case you will please forward to me,
through Mr. Kidder, your oﬀicial permit, as Governor of
North Carolina, to enter and leave the State, and to remain
in it in safety during the pendency of these negotiations,
which, I suppose, should be conducted in entire secrecy
until they assume an oﬀicial character. With high
consideration, I am, Sincerely yours, JAMES R. GILMORE.
[Indorsement.]
This letter has been written in my presence, has been
read by me, and has my entire approval. A.L.
   
  A
A I
  
   HA
  
I I
   
     
   
BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES OF
AMERICA: 
A PROCLAMATION.
It has pleased Almighty God to hearken to the
supplications and prayers of an aﬄicted people, and to
vouchsafe to the army and navy of the United States
victories on land and on the sea so signal and so eﬀective
as to furnish reasonable grounds for augmented conﬁdence
that the Union of these States will be maintained, their
Constitution preserved, and their peace and prosperity
permanently restored. But these victories have been
accorded not without sacriﬁces of life, limb, health, and
liberty, incurred by brave, loyal, and patriotic citizens.
Domestic aﬄiction in every part of the country follows in
the train of these fearful bereavements. It is meet and right
to recognize and confess the presence of the Almighty
Father, and the power of His hand equally in these
triumphs and in these sorrows.
Now, therefore, be it known that I do set apart Thursday,
the 6th day of August next, to be observed as a day for
national thanksgiving, praise, and prayer, and I invite the
people of the United States to assemble on that occasion in
their customary places of worship, and, in the forms
 approved by their own consciences, render the homage due
to the Divine Majesty for the wonderful things He has done
in the nation’s behalf, and invoke the inﬂuence of His Holy
Spirit to subdue the anger which has produced and so long
sustained a needless and cruel rebellion, to change the
hearts of the insurgents, to guide the counsels of the
Government with wisdom adequate to so great a national
emergency, and to visit with tender care and consolation
throughout the length and breadth of our land all those
who, through the vicissitudes of marches, voyages, battles,
and sieges have been, brought to suﬀer in mind, body, or
estate, and ﬁnally to lead the whole nation through the
paths of repentance and submission to the Divine Will back
to the perfect enjoyment of union and fraternal peace.
In witness whereof, I have hereunto set my hand and
caused the seal of the United States to be aﬀixed.
Done at the city of Washington, this ﬁfteenth day of July,
in the year of our Lord one thousand eight hundred and
sixty-three, and of the independence of the United States of
America the eighty-eighth.
A. LINCOLN.
By, the President WILLIAM H. SEWARD, Secretary of
State.
     
 A
  
  .  
   .
[Cipher.]
WAR DEPARTMENT, WASHINGTON CITY, July 15,
1863.
HON. L SWETT, San Francisco, Cal.: Many persons are
telegraphing me from California, begging me for the peace
of the State to suspend the military enforcement of the writ
of possession in the Almaden case, while you are the single
one who urges the contrary. You know I would like to oblige
you, but it seems to me my duty in this case is the other
way.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
  I
  A
  
.
[Cipher.]
WAR DEPARTMENT, WASHINGTON CITY, JULY 15,
1863.
HON. SIMON CAMERON, Harrisburg, Pa.: Your despatch
of yesterday received. Lee was already across the river
when you sent it. I would give much to be relieved of the
impression that Meade, Couch, Smith, and all since the
battle at Gettysburg, have striven only to get Lee over the
river without another ﬁght. Please tell me, if you know, who
was the one corps commander who was for ﬁghting in the
council of war on Sunday night.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
  . 
.   
A
H A
.
WASHINGTON, D.C., JULY 15, 1863.
J. O. BROADHEAD, St. Louis, Mo.:
The eﬀect on political position of McKee’s arrest will not
be relieved any by its not having been made with that
purpose.
A. LINCOLN.
  
 
 
  A   A
 .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, July 17 1863.
HON. S. H. LANE.
MY DEAR SIR: — Governor Carney has not asked to
[have] General Blunt removed, or interfered with, in his
military operations. He has asked that he, the Governor, be
allowed to commission oﬀicers for troops raised in Kansas,
as other governors of loyal States do; and I think he is right
in this.
He has asked that General Blunt shall not take persons
charged with civil crimes out of the hands of the courts and
turn them over to mobs to be hung; and I think he is right
in this also. He has asked that General Ewing’s department
be extended to include all Kansas; and I have not
determined whether this is right or not.
Yours truly, A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
   
  
  
.
WASHINGTON, D. C., July 18, 1863.
GOVERNOR O. P. MORTON, Indianapolis:
What do you remember about the case of John O. Brown,
convicted of mutinous conduct and sentenced to death?
What do you desire about it?
A. LINCOLN.
  
 
   
   A   
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON
JULY 20, 1863.
HIS E CELLENCY JOEL PARKER, Governor of New
Jersey.
DEAR SIR: — Yours of the 15th has been received, and
considered by the Secretary of War and myself. I was
pained to be informed this morning by the Provost-Marshal-
General that New Jersey is now behind twelve thousand,
irrespective of the draft. I did not have time to ascertain by
what rules this was made out; and I shall be very glad if it
shall, by any means, prove to be incorrect. He also tells me
that eight thousand will be about the quota of New Jersey
on the ﬁrst draft; and the Secretary of War says the ﬁrst
draft in that State would not be made for some time in any
event. As every man obtained otherwise lessens the draft so
much, and this may supersede it altogether, I hope you will
push forward your volunteer regiments as fast as possible.
It is a very delicate matter to postpone the draft in one
State, because of the argument it furnishes others to have
postponement also. If we could have a reason in one case
which would be good if presented in all cases, we could act
upon it.
 I will thank you, therefore, to inform me, if you can, by
what day, at the earliest, you can promise to have ready to
be mustered into the United States service the eight
thousand men.
If you can make a reliable promise (I mean one which
you can rely on yourself) of this sort, it will be of great
value, if the day is not too remote.
I beg you to be assured I wish to avoid the diﬀiculties you
dread as much as yourself.
Your obedient servant,
A. LINCOLN
  
 
 
  A    H
 I  
.
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON D.C. JULY 20, 1863
MAJOR GENERAL JOHN M. SCHOFIELD.
MY DEAR GENERAL: — I have received and read your
letter of the 14th of July.
I think the suggestion you make, of discontinuing
proceedings against Mr. McKee, a very proper one. While I
admit that there is an apparent impropriety in the
publication of the letter mentioned, without my consent or
yours, it is still a case where no evil could result, and which
I am entirely willing to overlook.
Yours truly, A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A   . 
.   H
 I  
WASHINGTON, D.C. JULY 22, 1863
MAJOR GENERAL SCHOFIELD, St. Louis, Mo.: The
following despatch has been placed in my hands. Please
look to the subject of it.
LE INGTON, Mo., JULY 21, 1863 HON. S C. POMEROY:
Under Orders No.63 the sheriﬀ is arresting slaves of rebels
inside our lines, and returning them in great numbers. Can
he do it? Answer. GOULD.
A. LINCOLN
  
  
  
A     
 
  A    AI
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, 
JULY 24, 1863. HON. POSTMASTER-GENERAL
SIR:-Yesterday little indorsements of mine went to you in
two cases of postmasterships sought for widows whose
husbands have fallen in the battles of this war. These cases
occurring on the same day brought me to reﬂect more
attentively than I had before done, as to what is fairly due
from us herein the dispensing of patronage toward the men
who, by ﬁghting our battles, bear the chief burden of
serving our country. My conclusion is that, other claims and
qualiﬁcations being equal, they have the better right and
this is especially applicable to the disabled and the soldier,
deceased soldier’s family.
Your obedient servant, A. LINCOLN
  
       A   
   H  
A  .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, July 25, 1863.
HON. SECRETARY OF THE NAVY.
SIR: — Certain matters have come to my notice, and
considered by me, which induce me to believe that it will
conduce to the public interest for you to add to the general
instructions given to our naval commanders in relation to
contraband trade propositions substantially as follows, to
wit:
First. You will avoid the reality, and as far as possible the
appearance, of using any neutral port to watch neutral
vessels and then to dart out and seize them on their
departure.
NOTE. — Complaint is made that this has been practiced
at the port of St Thomas, which practice, if it exists, is
disapproved and must cease.
Second. You will not in any case detain the crew of a
captured neutral vessel or any other subject of a neutral
power on board such vessel, as prisoners of war or
otherwise, except the small number necessary as witnesses
in the prize court.
NOTE.-The practice here forbidden is also charged to
exist, which, if true, is disapproved and must cease.
 My dear sir, it is not intended to be insinuated that you
have been remiss in the performance of the arduous and
responsible duties of your department, which, I take
pleasure in aﬀirming, has in your hands been conducted
with admirable success. Yet, while your subordinates are
almost of necessity brought into angry collision with the
subjects of foreign states, the representatives of those
states and yourself do not come into immediate contact for
the purpose of keeping the peace, in spite of such
collisions. At that point there is an ultimate and heavy
responsibility upon me.
What I propose is in strict accordance with international
law, and is therefore unobjectionable; whilst, if it does no
other good, it will contribute to sustain a considerable
portion of the present British ministry in their places, who,
if displaced, are sure to be replaced by others more
unfavorable to us.
Your obedient servant,
A. LINCOLN
         
 
   
   A    .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, 
JULY 25, 1863.
HIS E CELLENCY GOVERNOR JOEL PARKER.
SIR: — Yours of the 21st is received, and I have taken
time and considered and discussed the subject with the
Secretary of War and Provost-Marshal General, in order, if
possible, to make you a more favorable answer than I
ﬁnally ﬁnd myself able to do.
It is a vital point with us to not have a special stipulation
with the governor of any one State, because it would breed
trouble in many, if not all, other States; and my idea was
when I wrote you, as it still is, to get a point of time to
which we could wait, on the reason that we were not ready
ourselves to proceed, and which might enable you to raise
the quota of your State, in whole, or in large part, without
the draft. The points of time you ﬁx are much farther oﬀ
than I had hoped. We might have got along in the way I
have indicated for twenty, or possibly thirty, days. As it
stands, the best I can say is that every volunteer you will
present us within thirty days from this date, ﬁt and ready to
be mustered into the United States service, on the usual
terms, shall be pro tanto an abatement of your quota of the
draft. That quota I can now state at eight thousand seven
hundred and eighty-three (8783). No draft from New
 Jersey, other than for the above quota, will be made before
an additional draft, common to [all] the States, shall be
required; and I may add that if we get well through with
this draft, I entertain a strong hope that any further one
may never be needed. This expression of hope, however,
must not be construed into a promise.
As to conducting the draft by townships, I ﬁnd it would
require such a waste of labor already done, and such an
additional amount of it, and such a loss of time, as to make
it, I fear, inadmissible.
Your obedient servant,
A. LINCOLN.
P. S. — Since writing the above, getting additional
information, I am enabled to say that the draft may be
made in subdistricts, as the enrolment has been made, or is
in process of making. This will amount practically to
drafting by townships, as the enrollment subdistricts are
generally about the extent of townships. A.L.
  o 
 
  A  
. 
. 
 A
 .   ri ate.
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, July 27, 1863.
MAJOR-GENERAL MEADE: I have not thrown General
Hooker away; and therefore I would like to know whether it
would be agreeable to you, all things considered, for him to
take a corps under you, if he himself is willing to do so.
Write me in perfect freedom, with the assurance that I will
not subject you to any embarrassment by making your
letter or its contents known to any one. I wish to know your
wishes before I decide whether to break the subject to him.
Do not lean a hair’s breadth against your own feelings, or
your judgment of the public service, on the idea of
gratifying me.
Yours truly, A. LINCOLN
     
 A
  
 
 
  A  A.  .  
 
 I
 .
WAR DEPARTMENT, WASHINGTON, July 27, 1863.
MAJOR-GENERAL BURNSIDE, CINCINNATI, O.: Let me
explain. In General Grant’s ﬁrst despatch after the fall of
Vicksburg, he said, among other things, he would send the
Ninth Corps to you. Thinking it would be pleasant to you, I
asked the Secretary of War to telegraph you the news. For
some reasons never mentioned to us by General Grant, they
have not been sent, though we have seen outside
intimations that they took part in the expedition against
Jackson. General Grant is a copious worker and ﬁghter, but
a very meager writer or telegrapher. No doubt he changed
his purpose in regard to the Ninth Corps for some suﬀicient
reason, but has forgotten to notify us of it.
A. LINCOLN.
  
 
 
  A  H. 
. HA     .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, July 29, 1863
MAJOR-GENERAL HALLECK: Seeing General Meade’s
despatch of yesterday to yourself causes me to fear that he
supposes the Government here is demanding of him to
bring on a general engagement with Lee as soon as
possible. I am claiming no such thing of him. In fact, my
judgment is against it; which judgment, of course, I will
yield if yours and his are the contrary. If he could not safely
engage Lee at Williamsport, it seems absurd to suppose he
can safely engage him now, when he has scarcely more
than two thirds of the force he had at Williamsport, while it
must be that Lee has been reinforced. True, I desired
General Meade to pursue Lee across the Potomac, hoping,
as has proved true, that he would thereby clear the
Baltimore and Ohio Railroad, and get some advantages by
harassing him on his retreat. These being past, I am
unwilling he should now get into a general engagement on
the impression that we here are pressing him, and I shall
be glad for you to so inform him, unless your own judgment
is against it.
Yours truly, A. LINCOLN.
H. W. HALLECK, General-in-Chief.
  
       A     A
 
.
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, July 29, 1863
HON. SECRETARY OF WAR.
SIR: — Can we not renew the eﬀort to organize a force to
go to western Texas?
Please consult with the general-in-chief on the subject.
If the Governor of New Jersey shall furnish any new
regiments, might not they be put into such an expedition?
Please think of it.
I believe no local object is now more desirable.
Yours truly,
A. LINCOLN.
  
   
     A IA I
.
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, July 30, 1863.
IT IS THE duty of every government to give protection to its
citizens, of whatever class, color, or condition, and
especially to those who are duly organized as soldiers in
the public service. The law of nations and the usages and
customs of war, as carried on by civilized powers, permit no
distinction as to color in the treatment of prisoners of war
as public enemies. To sell or enslave any captured person,
on account of his color and for no oﬀense against the laws
of war, is a relapse into barbarism, and a crime against the
civilization of the age.
The Government of the United States will give the same
protection to all its soldiers; and if the enemy shall sell or
enslave any one because of his color, the oﬀense shall be
punished by retaliation upon the enemy’s prisoners in our
possession.
It is therefore ordered that for every soldier of the
United States killed in violation of the laws of war, a rebel
soldier shall be executed; and for every one enslaved by the
enemy or sold into slavery, a rebel soldier shall be placed at
hard labor on the public works, and continued at such labor
until the other shall be released and receive the treatment
due to a prisoner of war.
 A. LINCOLN.
  
 
 
  A   . A. H
   
 .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, July 31, 1863.
MY DEAR GENERAL HURLBUT: Your letter by Mr. Dana
was duly received. I now learn that your resignation has
reached the War Department. I also learn that an active
command has been assigned you by General Grant. The
Secretary of War and General Halleck are very partial to
you, as you know I also am. We all wish you to reconsider
the question of resigning; not that we would wish to retain
you greatly against your wish and interest, but that your
decision may be at least a very well-considered one.
I understand that Senator [William K.] Sebastian, of
Arkansas, thinks of oﬀering to resume his place in the
Senate. Of course the Senate, and not I, would decide
whether to admit or reject him. Still I should feel great
interest in the question. It may be so presented as to be
one of the very greatest national importance; and it may be
otherwise so presented as to be of no more than temporary
personal consequence to him.
The Emancipation Proclamation applies to Arkansas. I
think it is valid in law, and will be so held by the courts. I
think I shall not retract or repudiate it. Those who shall
have tasted actual freedom I believe can never be slaves or
quasi-slaves again. For the rest, I believe some plan
 substantially being gradual emancipation would be better
for both white and black. The Missouri plan recently
adopted, I do not object to on account of the time for
ending the institution; but I am sorry the beginning should
have been postponed for seven years, leaving all that time
to agitate for the repeal of the whole thing. It should begin
at once, giving at least the new-born a vested interest in
freedom which could not be taken away. If Senator
Sebastian could come with something of this sort from
Arkansas, I, at least, should take great interest in his case;
and I believe a single individual will have scarcely done the
world so great a service. See him if you can, and read this
to him; but charge him not to make it public for the
present. Write me again.
Yours very truly, A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
   
 
   
     
 .
ALBANY, August 1, 1863. Recvd 2 P.M.
TO THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES:
I ask that the draft be suspended in this State until I can
send you a communication I am preparing.
HORATIO SEYMOUR.
     
 A
  
 
   
     
WASHINGTON, D.C., August 1, 1863. 4 P.M.
HIS E CELLENCY GOVERNOR SEYMOUR, Albany,
N.Y.:
By what day may I expect your communication to reach
me? Are you anxious about any part except the city and
vicinity?
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A   
    .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, August 3, 1863.
MAJOR-GENERAL FOSTER (OR whoever may be in
command of the military department with headquarters at
Fort Monroe, Va.): If Dr. Wright, on trial at Norfolk, has
been or shall be convicted, send me a transcript of his trial
and conviction, and do not let execution be done upon him
until my further order.
A. LINCOLN.
  
 
 
  A  
.  .  A
  .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, August 5,1863.
MY DEAR GENERAL BANKS: While I very well know
what I would be glad for Louisiana to do, it is quite a
diﬀerent thing for me to assume direction of the matter. I
would be glad for her to make a new constitution,
recognizing the emancipation proclamation, and adopting
emancipation in those parts of the State to which the
proclamation does not apply. And while she is at it, I think it
would not be objectionable for her to adopt some practical
system by which the two races could gradually live
themselves out of their old relation to each other, and both
come out better prepared for the new. Education for young
blacks should be included in the plan. After all, the power
or element of “contract” may be suﬀicient for this
probationary period, and by its simplicity and ﬂexibility
may be the better.
As an antislavery man, I have a motive to desire
emancipation which proslavery men do not have but even
they have strong enough reason to thus place themselves
again under the shield of the Union, and to thus perpetually
hedge against the recurrence of the scenes through which
we are now passing.
 Governor Shepley has informed me that Mr. Durant is
now taking a registry, with a view to the election of a
constitutional convention in Louisiana. This, to me, appears
proper. If such convention were to ask my views, I could
present little else than what I now say to you. I think the
thing should be pushed forward, so that, if possible, its
mature work may reach here by the meeting of Congress.
For my own part, I think I shall not, in any event, retract
the emancipation proclamation: nor, as executive, ever
return to slavery any person who is free by the terms of
that proclamation, or by any of the acts of Congress.
If Louisiana shall send members to Congress, their
admission to seats will depend, as you know, upon the
respective Houses, and not upon the President.
Yours very truly,
A. LINCOLN.
  
 
   
     
 .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, August 7, 1863.
HIS E CELLENCY HORATIO SEYMOUR, Governor of
New York: Your communication of the 3rd instant has been
received and attentively considered.
I cannot consent to suspend the draft in New York, as
you request, because, among other reasons, time is too
important.
By the ﬁgures you send, which I presume are correct, the
twelve districts represented fall into two classes of eight
and four respectively. The disparity of the quotas for the
draft in these two classes is certainly very striking, being
the diﬀerence between an average of 2200 in one class and
4864 in the other. Assuming that the districts are equal one
to another in entire population, as required by the plan on
which they were made, this disparity is such as to require
attention. Much of it, however, I suppose will be accounted
for by the fact that so many more persons ﬁt for soldiers
are in the city than are in the country who have too
recently arrived from other parts of the United States and
from Europe to be either included in the census of 1860, or
to have voted in 1862. Still, making due allowance for this,
I am yet unwilling to stand upon it as an entirely suﬀicient
explanation of the great disparity.
 I shall direct the draft to proceed in all the districts,
drawing, however, at ﬁrst from each of the four districts —
to wit, the Second, Fourth, Sixth, and Eighth — only, 2200
being the average quota of the other class. After this
drawing, these four districts, and also the Seventeenth and
Twenty-ninth, shall be carefully re-enrolled; and, if you
please, agents of yours may witness every step of the
process. Any deﬁciency which may appear by the new
enrolment will be supplied by a special draft for that object,
allowing due credit for volunteers who may be obtained
from these districts respectively during the interval; and at
all points, so far as consistent with practical convenience,
due credits shall be given for volunteers, and your
Excellency shall be notiﬁed of the time ﬁxed for
commencing the draft in each district.
I do not object to abide a decision of the United States
Supreme Court, or of the judges thereof, on the
constitutionality of the draft law. In fact, I should be willing
to facilitate the obtaining of it. But I cannot consent to lose
the time while it is being obtained. We are contending with
an enemy who, as I understand, drives every able-bodied
man he can reach into his ranks, very much as a butcher
drives bullocks into the slaughter-pen. No time is wasted,
no argument is used. This produces an army which will
soon turn upon our now victorious soldiers already in the
ﬁeld, if they shall not be sustained by recruits as they
should be. It produces an army with a rapidity not to be
matched on our side if we ﬁrst waste time to re-experiment
with the volunteer system, already deemed by Congress,
 and palpably, in fact, so far exhausted as to be inadequate;
and then more time to obtain a court decision as to whether
a law is constitutional, which requires a part of those not
now in the service to go to the aid of those who are already
in it; and still more time to determine with absolute
certainty that we get those who are to go in the precisely
legal proportion to those who are not to go. My purpose is
to be in my action just and constitutional, and yet practical,
in performing the important duty with which I am charged,
of maintaining the unity and the free principles of our
common country.
Your obedient servant, A. LINCOLN.
  
 
 
  A  
. . 
 A
 .
E ECUTIVE MANSION WASHINGTON, August 9, 1863.
MY DEAR GENERAL GRANT: I see by a despatch of
yours that you incline quite strongly toward an expedition
against Mobile. This would appear tempting to me also,
were it not that in view of recent events in Mexico I am
greatly impressed with the importance of re-establishing
the national authority in western Texas as soon as possible.
I am not making an order, however; that I leave, for the
present at least, to the general-in-chief.
A word upon another subject: General Thomas has gone
again to the Mississippi Valley, with the view of raising
colored troops. I have no reason to doubt that you are
doing what you reasonably can upon the same subject. I
believe it is a resource which if vigorously applied now will
soon close the contest. It works doubly, weakening the
enemy and strengthening us. We were not fully ripe for it
until the river was opened. Now, I think at least one
hundred thousand can and ought to be rapidly organized
along its shores, relieving all white troops to serve
elsewhere. Mr. Dana understands you as believing that the
Emancipation Proclamation has helped some in your
military operations. I am very glad if this is so.
 Did you receive a short letter from me dated the 13th of
July?
Yours very truly, A. LINCOLN.
  
 
 
  A  
.  .  
    A
 .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, August 10, 1863.
MY DEAR GENERAL ROSECRANS: Yours of the 1st was
received two days ago. I think you must have inferred more
than General Halleck has intended, as to any dissatisfaction
of mine with you. I am sure you, as a reasonable man,
would not have been wounded could you have heard all my
words and seen all my thoughts in regard to you. I have not
abated in my kind feeling for and conﬁdence in you. I have
seen most of your despatches to General Halleck —
probably all of them. After Grant invested Vicksburg I was
very anxious lest Johnston should overwhelm him from the
outside, and when it appeared certain that part of Bragg’s
force had gone and was going to Johnston, it did seem to
me it was exactly the proper time for you to attack Bragg
with what force he had left. In all kindness let me say it so
seems to me yet. Finding from your despatches to General
Halleck that your judgment was diﬀerent, and being very
anxious for Grant, I, on one occasion, told General Halleck I
thought he should direct you to decide at once to
immediately attack Bragg or to stand on the defensive and
send part of your force to Grant. He replied he had already
so directed in substance. Soon after, despatches from Grant
abated my anxiety for him, and in proportion abated my
 anxiety about any movement of yours. When afterward,
however, I saw a despatch of yours arguing that the right
time for you to attack Bragg was not before, but would be
after, the fall of Vicksburg, it impressed me very strangely,
and I think I so stated to the Secretary of War and General
Halleck. It seemed no other than the proposition that you
could better ﬁght Bragg when Johnston should be at liberty
to return and assist him than you could before he could so
return to his assistance.
Since Grant has been entirely relieved by the fall of
Vicksburg, by which Johnston is also relieved, it has
seemed to me that your chance for a stroke has been
considerably diminished, and I have not been pressing you
directly or indirectly. True, I am very anxious for East
Tennessee to be occupied by us; but I see and appreciate
the diﬀiculties you mention. The question occurs, Can the
thing be done at all? Does preparation advance at all? Do
you not consume supplies as fast as you get them forward?
Have you more animals to-day than you had at the battle of
Stone’s River? And yet have not more been furnished you
since then than your entire present stock? I ask the same
questions as to your mounted force.
Do not misunderstand: I am not casting blame upon you;
I rather think by great exertion you can get to East
Tennessee; but a very important question is, Can you stay
there? I make no order in the case — that I leave to General
Halleck and yourself.
And now be assured once more that I think of you in all
kindness and conﬁdence, and that I am not watching you
 with an evil eye.
Yours very truly, A. LINCOLN.
  
 
   
     
 .
E ECUTIVE MANSION WASHINGTON, August 11.1863.
HIS E CELLENCY HORATIO SEYMOUR, Governor of
New York: Yours of the 8th, with Judge-Advocate-General
Waterbury’s report, was received to-day.
Asking you to remember that I consider time as being
very important, both to the general cause of the country
and to the soldiers in the ﬁeld, I beg to remind you that I
waited, at your request, from the 1st until the 6th inst., to
receive your communication dated the 3d. In view of its
great length, and the known time and apparent care taken
in its preparation, I did not doubt that it contained your full
case as you desired to present it. It contained the ﬁgures
for twelve districts, omitting the other nineteen, as I
suppose, because you found nothing to complain of as to
them. I answered accordingly. In doing so I laid down the
principle to which I purpose adhering, which is to proceed
with the draft, at the same time employing infallible means
to avoid any great wrong. With the communication received
to-day you send ﬁgures for twenty-eight districts, including
the twelve sent before, and still omitting three, for which I
suppose the enrolments are not yet received. In looking
over the fuller list of twenty-eight districts, I ﬁnd that the
quotas for sixteen of them are above 2000 and below 2700,
 while, of the rest, six are above 2700 and six are below
2000. Applying the principle to these new facts, the Fifth
and Seventh districts must be added to the four in which
the quotas have already been reduced to 2200 for the ﬁrst
draft; and with these four others just be added to those to
be re-enrolled. The correct case will then stand: the quotas
of the Second, Fourth, Fifth, Sixth, Seventh, and Eighth
districts ﬁxed at 2200 for the ﬁrst draft. The Provost-
Marshal-General informs me that the drawing is already
completed in the Sixteenth, Seventeenth, Eighteenth,
Twenty-second, 
Twenty-fourth, 
Twenty-sixth, 
Twenty-
seventh, 
Twenty-eighth, 
Twenty-ninth, 
and 
Thirtieth
districts. In the others, except the three outstanding, the
drawing will be made upon the quotas as now ﬁxed. After
the ﬁrst draft, the Second, Fourth, Fifth, Sixth, Seventh,
Eighth, Sixteenth, Seventeenth, Twenty-ﬁrst, Twenty-ﬁfth,
Twenty-ninth, and Thirty-ﬁrst will be enrolled for the
purpose and in the manner stated in my letter of the 7th
inst. The same principle will be applied to the now
outstanding districts when they shall come in. No part of
my former letter is repudiated by reason of not being
restated in this, or for any other cause.
Your obedient servant, A. LINCOLN.
  
 
 
  A   . A. 
c    
A
.
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, August 12, 1863.
MAJOR-GENERAL MCCLERNAND.
MY DEAR SIR: — Our friend William G. Greene has just
presented a kind letter in regard to yourself, addressed to
me by our other friends Yates, Hatch, and Dubois.
I doubt whether your present position is more painful to
you than to myself. Grateful for the patriotic stand so early
taken by you in this life-and-death struggle of the nation, I
have done whatever has appeared practicable to advance
you and the public interest together. No charges, with a
view to a trial, have been preferred against you by any one;
nor do I suppose any will be. All there is, so far as I have
heard, is General Grant’s statement of his reasons for
relieving you. And even this I have not seen or sought to
see; because it is a case, as appears to me, in which I could
do nothing without doing harm. General Grant and yourself
have been conspicuous in our most important successes;
and for me to interfere and thus magnify a breach between
you could not but be of evil eﬀect. Better leave it where the
law of the case has placed it. For me to force you back upon
General Grant would be forcing him to resign. I cannot give
you a new command, because we have no forces except
such as already have commanders.
 I am constantly pressed by those who scold before they
think, or without thinking at all, to give commands
respectively to Fremont, McClellan, Butler, Sigel, Curtis,
Hunter, Hooker, and perhaps others, when, all else out of
the way, I have no commands to give them. This is now your
case; which, as I have said, pains me not less than it does
you. My belief is that the permanent estimate of what a
general does in the ﬁeld is ﬁxed by the “cloud of witnesses”
who have been with him in the ﬁeld, and that, relying on
these, he who has the right needs not to fear.
Your friend as ever, A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
   
     
 .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, AUGUST 16, 1863.
GOVERNOR SEYMOUR, NEW York: Your despatch of
this morning is just received, and I fear I do not perfectly
understand it.
My view of the principle is that every soldier obtained
voluntarily leaves one less to be obtained by draft. The only
diﬀiculty is in applying the principle properly. Looking to
time, as heretofore, I am unwilling to give up a drafted man
now, even for the certainty, much less for the mere chance,
of getting a volunteer hereafter. Again, after the draft in
any district, would it not make trouble to take any drafted
man out and put a volunteer in — for how shall it be
determined which drafted man is to have the privilege of
thus going out, to the exclusion of all the others? And even
before the draft in any district the quota must be ﬁxed; and
the draft must be postponed indeﬁnitely if every time a
volunteer is oﬀered the oﬀicers must stop and reconstruct
the quota. At least I fear there might be this diﬀiculty; but,
at all events, let credits for volunteers be given up to the
last moment which will not produce confusion or delay.
That the principle of giving credits for volunteers shall be
applied by districts seems fair and proper, though I do not
know how far by present statistics it is practicable. When
 for any cause a fair credit is not given at one time, it should
be given as soon thereafter as practicable. My purpose is to
be just and fair, and yet to not lose time.
A. LINCOLN
  o  . H. HA     .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON August 17, 1863.
JAMES H. HACKETT, Esq.
MY 
DEAR 
SIR: 
— 
Months 
ago 
I 
should 
have
acknowledged the receipt of your book and accompanying
kind note; and I now have to beg your pardon for not
having done so.
For one of my age I have seen very little of the drama.
The ﬁrst presentation of Falstaﬀ I ever saw was yours here,
last winter or spring. Perhaps the best compliment I can
pay is to say, as I truly can, I am very anxious to see it
again. Some of Shakespeare’s plays I have never read,
while others I have gone over perhaps as frequently as any
un-professional reader. Among the latter are Lear, Richard
III., Henry VIII., Hamlet, and especially Macbeth. I think
nothing equals Macbeth. It is wonderful.
Unlike you gentlemen of the profession, I think the
soliloquy in Hamlet commencing “Oh, my oﬀense is rank,”
surpasses that commencing “To be or not to be.” But
pardon this small attempt at criticism. I should like to hear
you pronounce the opening speech of Richard III. Will you
not soon visit Washington again? If you do, please call and
let me make your personal acquaintance.
Yours truly, A. LINCOLN
  
  .  .  
 .
WASHINGTON, D. C., August 17, 1863.
HON. P. F. LOWE, San Francisco, Cal.:
There seems to be considerable misunderstanding about
the recent movement to take possession of the “New
Almaden” mine. It has no reference to any other mine or
mines.
In regard to mines and miners generally, no change of
policy by the Government has been decided on, or even
thought of, so far as I know.
The “New Almaden” mine was peculiar in this: that its
occupants claimed to be the legal owners of it on a Mexican
grant, and went into court on that claim. The case found its
way into the Supreme Court of the United States, and last
term, in and by that court, the claim of the occupants was
decided to be utterly fraudulent. Thereupon it was
considered the duty of the Government by the Secretary of
the Interior, the Attorney-General, and myself to take
possession of the premises; and the Attorney-General
carefully made out the writ and I signed it. It was not
obtained surreptitiously, although I suppose General
Halleck thought it had been, when he telegraphed, simply
because he thought possession was about being taken by a
 military order, while he knew no such order had passed
through his hands as general-in-chief.
The writ was suspended, upon urgent representations
from California, simply to keep the peace. It never had any
direct or indirect reference to any mine, place, or person,
except the “New Almaden” mine and the persons
connected with it.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A  
 A
 .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, August 21, 1863.
MAJOR-GENERAL MEADE, WARRENTON, Va.: At this
late moment I am appealed to in behalf of William
Thompson of Company K, Third Maryland Volunteers, in
Twelfth Army Corps, said to be at Kelly’s Ford, under
sentence to be shot to-day as a deserter. He is represented
to me to be very young, with symptoms of insanity. Please
postpone the execution till further order.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A    H
 I  
.
WASHINGTON, D. C., August 22, 1863.
GENERAL SCHOFIELD, SAINT Louis, Mo.: Please send
me if you can a transcript of the record in the case of
McQuin and Bell, convicted of murder by a military
commission. I telegraphed General Strong for it, but he
does not answer.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
  . 
 I
    .
WAR DEPARTMENT, WASHINGTON, D. C., August 24,
1863.
MRS. ELIZABETH J. GRIMSLEY, Springﬁeld, Ill.:
I mail the papers to you to-day appointing Johnny to the
Naval school.
A. LINCOLN
  
   I I   
   
A
 I A I
To J. C. CONKLING.
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, August 26,
1863.
HON. JAMES C. CONKLING.
MY DEAR SIR: — Your letter inviting me to attend a mass
meeting of unconditional Union men, to be held at the
capital of Illinois, on the 3d day of September, has been
received. It would be very agreeable for me thus to meet
my old friends at my own home, but I cannot just now be
absent from here so long as a visit there would require.
The meeting is to be of all those who maintain
unconditional devotion to the Union, and I am sure that my
old political friends will thank me for tendering, as I do, the
nation’s gratitude to those other noble men whom no
partisan malice or partisan hope can make false to the
nation’s life.
There are those who are dissatisﬁed with me. To such I
would say: You desire peace, and you blame me that we do
not have it. But how can we obtain it? There are but three
conceivable ways:
First — to suppress the rebellion by force of arms. This I
am trying to do. Are you for it? If you are, so far we are
agreed. If you are not for it, a second way is to give up the
 Union. I am against this. Are you for it? If you are you
should say so plainly. If you are not for force nor yet for
dissolution, 
there 
only 
remains 
some 
imaginable
compromise.
I do not believe that any compromise embracing the
maintenance of the Union is now possible. All that I learn
leads to a directly opposite belief. The strength of the
rebellion is its military, its army. That army dominates all
the country and all the people within its range. Any oﬀer of
terms made by any man or men within that range, in
opposition to that army, is simply nothing for the present;
because such man or men have no power whatever to
enforce their side of a compromise, if one were made with
them.
To illustrate: Suppose refugees from the South and peace
men of the North get together in convention, and frame
and proclaim a compromise embracing a restoration of the
Union. In what way can that compromise be used to keep
Lee’s army out of Pennsylvania? Meade’s army can keep
Lee’s army out of Pennsylvania, and, I think, can ultimately
drive it out of existence. But no paper compromise to which
the controllers of Lee’s army are not agreed can at all
aﬀect that army. In an eﬀort at such compromise we would
waste time, which the enemy would improve to our
disadvantage; and that would be all.
A compromise, to be eﬀective, must be made either with
those who control the rebel army, or with the people, ﬁrst
liberated from the domination of that army by the success
of our own army. Now allow me to assure you that no word
 or intimation from that rebel army, or from any of the men
controlling it, in relation to any peace compromise, has
ever come to my knowledge or belief. All charges and
insinuations to the contrary are deceptive and groundless.
And I promise you that if any such proposition shall
hereafter come, it shall not be rejected and kept a secret
from you. I freely acknowledge myself to be the servant of
the people, according to the bond of service, the United
States Constitution, and that, as such, I am responsible to
them.
But, to be plain: You are dissatisﬁed with me about the
negro. Quite likely there is a diﬀerence of opinion between
you and myself upon that subject. I certainly wish that all
men could be free, while you, I suppose, do not. Yet, I have
neither adopted nor proposed any measure which is not
consistent with even your view, provided you are for the
Union. I suggested compensated emancipation; to which
you replied you wished not to be taxed to buy negroes. But
I had not asked you to be taxed to buy negroes, except in
such way as to save you from greater taxation to save the
Union exclusively by other means.
You dislike the Emancipation Proclamation, and perhaps
would have it retracted. You say it is unconstitutional. I
think diﬀerently. I think the Constitution invests its
commander-in-chief with the law of war in time of war. The
most that can be said, if so much, is, that slaves are
property. Is there, has there ever been, any question that
by the law of war, property, both of enemies and friends,
may be taken when needed? And is it not needed whenever
 it helps us and hurts the enemy? Armies, the world over,
destroy enemies’ property when they cannot use it, and
even destroy their own to keep it from the enemy. Civilized
belligerents do all in their power to help themselves or hurt
the enemy, except a few things regarded as barbarous or
cruel. 
Among 
the 
exceptions 
are 
the 
massacre 
of
vanquished foes and non-combatants, male and female.
But the proclamation, as law, either is valid or is not
valid. If it is not valid it needs no retraction. If it is valid it
cannot be retracted, any more than the dead can be
brought to life. Some of you profess to think its retraction
would operate favorably for the Union, why better after the
retraction than before the issue? There was more than a
year and a half of trial to suppress the rebellion before the
proclamation was issued, the last one hundred days of
which passed under an explicit notice that it was coming,
unless averted by those in revolt returning to their
allegiance. The war has certainly progressed as favorably
for us since the issue of the proclamation as before.
I know, as fully as one can know the opinions of others,
that some of the commanders of our armies in the ﬁeld,
who have given us our most important victories, believe the
emancipation policy and the use of colored troops
constitute the heaviest blows yet dealt to the rebellion, and
that at least one of those important successes could not
have been achieved when it was but for the aid of black
soldiers.
Among the commanders who hold these views are some
who have never had any aﬀinity with what is called
 “Abolitionism,” or with “Republican Party politics,” but who
hold them purely as military opinions. I submit their
opinions are entitled to some weight against the objections
often urged that emancipation and arming the blacks are
unwise as military measures, and were not adopted as such
in good faith.
You say that you will not ﬁght to free negroes. Some of
them seem willing to ﬁght for you; but no matter. Fight you,
then, exclusively, to save the Union. I issued the
proclamation on purpose to aid you in saving the Union.
Whenever you shall have conquered all resistance to the
Union, if I shall urge you to continue ﬁghting, it will be an
apt time then for you to declare you will not ﬁght to free
negroes. I thought that in your struggle for the Union, to
whatever extent the negroes should cease helping the
enemy, to that extent it weakened the enemy in his
resistance to you. Do you think diﬀerently? I thought that
whatever negroes can be got to do as soldiers, leaves just
so much less for white soldiers to do in saving the Union.
Does it appear otherwise to you? But negroes, like other
people, act upon motives. Why should they do anything for
us if we will do nothing for them? If they stake their lives
for us they must be prompted by the strongest motive, even
the promise of freedom. And the promise, being made,
must be kept.
The signs look better. The Father of Waters again goes
unvexed to the sea. Thanks to the great Northwest for it;
nor yet wholly to them. Three hundred miles up they met
New England, Empire, Keystone, and Jersey, hewing their
 way right and left. The sunny South, too, in more colors
than one, also lent a helping hand. On the spot, their part
of the history was jotted down in black and white. The job
was a great national one, and let none be slighted who bore
an honorable part in it And while those who have cleared
the great river may well be proud, even that is not all. It is
hard to say that anything has been more bravely and well
done than at Antietam, Murfreesboro, Gettysburg, and on
many ﬁelds of less note. Nor must Uncle Sam’s web-feet be
forgotten. At all the watery margins they have been
present; not only on the deep sea, the broad bay, and the
rapid river, but also up the narrow, muddy bayou, and
wherever the ground was a little damp, they have been and
made their tracks. Thanks to all. For the great Republic —
for the principle it lives by and keeps alive — for man’s vast
future — thanks to all.
Peace does not appear so distant as it did. I hope it will
come soon, and come to stay, and so come as to be worth
the keeping in all future time. It will then have been proved
that among freemen there can be no successful appeal from
the ballot to the bullet, and that they who take such appeal
are sure to lose their case and pay the cost. And there will
be some black men who can remember that with silent
tongue, and clinched teeth, and steady eye, and well-poised
bayonet, they have helped mankind on to this great
consummation; while I fear there will be some white ones
unable to forget that with malignant heart and deceitful
speech they have striven to hinder it.
 Still, let us not be over-sanguine of a speedy, ﬁnal
triumph. Let us be quite sober. Let us diligently apply the
means, never doubting that a just God, in His own good
time, will give us the rightful result.
Yours very truly,
A. LINCOLN.
  
  A
    
  I
.
(Private.) 
WAR DEPARTMENT, WASHINGTON CITY, D. C.,
August 27.1863.
HON. JAMES CONKLING.
MY DEAR CONKLING: — I cannot leave here now.
Herewith is a letter instead. You are one of the best public
readers. I have but one suggestion — read it very slowly.
And now God bless you, and all good Union men.
Yours as ever, A. LINCOLN.
  
       A     A
 
.
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, D. C., August 26,
1863.
HON. SECRETARY OF WAR SIR:-In my correspondence
with Governor Seymour in relation to the draft, I have said
to him, substantially, that credits shall be given for
volunteers up to the latest moment, before drawing in any
district, that can be done without producing confusion or
delay. In order to do this, let our mustering oﬀicers in New
York and elsewhere be at, once instructed that whenever
they muster into our service any number of volunteers, to
at once make return to the War Department, both by
telegraph and mail, the date of the muster, the number
mustered, and the Congressional or enrolment district or
districts, of their residences, giving the numbers separately
for each district. Keep these returns diligently posted, and
by them give full credit on the quotas, if possible, on the
last day before the draft begins in any district.
Again, I have informed Governor Seymour that he shall
be notiﬁed of the time when the draft is to commence in
each district in his State. This is equally proper for all the
States. In order to carry it out, I propose that so soon as
the day for commencing the draft in any district is
deﬁnitely determined, the governor of the State, including
 the district, be notiﬁed thereof, both by telegraph and mail,
in form about as follows: —— —— —— —— —— —— —— —
—— —— —— —— —— —— 1863.
Governor of —— —— —— —— —— —— —— — —— ——
—— —— —— —— —— —— —— You are notiﬁed that the
draft will commence in the —— —— —— —— —— —
district, at —— — on the —— — day —— —— —— 1863, at
—— — A.M. of said day.
Please acknowledge receipt of this by telegraph and
mail.
—— —— —— —— —— ——
—— —— —— —— —— ——
This notice may be given by the Provost-Marshal-General
here, the sub-provost-marshal-generals in the States, or
perhaps by the district provost-marshals.
Whenever we shall have so far proceeded in New York as
to make the re-enrolment specially promised there
practicable, I wish that also to go forward, and I wish
Governor Seymour notiﬁed of it; so that if he choose, he
can place agents of his with ours to see the work fairly
done.
Yours truly,
A. LINCOLN.
  
 
   
     
 .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, D. C., August 27.
1863.
HIS E CELLENCY HORATIO SEYMOUR, Governor of
New York: Yours of the 21st, with exhibits, was received on
the 24th.
In the midst of pressing duties I have been unable to
answer it sooner. In the meantime the Provost Marshal-
General has had access to yours, and has addressed a
communication in relation to it to the Secretary of War, a
copy of which communication I herewith enclose to you.
Independently of this, I addressed a letter on the same
subject to the Secretary of War, a copy of which I also
enclose to you. The Secretary has sent my letter to the
Provost-Marshal General, with direction that he adopt and
follow the course therein pointed out. It will, of course,
overrule any conﬂicting view of the Provost-Marshal-
General, if there be such.
Yours very truly, A. LINCOLN.
P. S.-I do not mean to say that if the Provost-Marshal-
General can ﬁnd it practicable to give credits by
subdistricts, I overrule him in that. On the contrary, I shall
be glad of it; but I will not take the risk of over-burdening
him by ordering him to do it. A. L.
 Abraham Lincoln
     
 A
  
 
 
  A   . 
.   H
 I  
.
WASHINGTON, D. C., August 27, 1863 8.30 P. M.
GENERAL SCHOFIELD, ST. LOUIS: I have just received
the despatch which follows, from two very inﬂuential
citizens of Kansas, whose names I omit. The severe blow
they 
have 
received 
naturally 
enough 
makes 
them
intemperate even without there being any just cause for
blame. Please do your utmost to give them future security
and to punish their invaders.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A  
. 
. 
 A
 .
WAR DEPARTMENT, WASHINGTON, D. C., August 27, 1863
9 A.M.
MAJOR-GENERAL MEADE, WARRENTON, Va.: Walter,
Rionese, Folancy, Lai, and Kuhn appealed to me for mercy,
without giving any ground for it whatever. I understand
these are very ﬂagrant cases, and that you deem their
punishment as being indispensable to the service. If I am
not mistaken in this, please let them know at once that
their appeal is denied.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
  .  .  H  
A
 A
  .  . HA   .
WASHINGTON, August 27, 1863.
F. C. SHERMAN, Mayor, J. S. HAVES, Comptroller,
Chicago, Ill.: Yours of the 24th, in relation to the draft, is
received. It seems to me the Government here will be
overwhelmed if it undertakes to conduct these matters with
the authorities of cities and counties. They must be
conducted with the governors of States, who will, of course,
represent their cities and counties. Meanwhile you need
not be uneasy until you again hear from here.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A   
    .
WAR DEPARTMENT, WASHINGTON, August 28, 1863.
MAJOR-GENERAL FOSTER, FORT Monroe, Va.: Please
notify, if you can, Senator Bowden, Mr. Segar, and Mr.
Chandler, all or any of them, that I now have the record in
Dr. Wright’s case, and am ready to hear them. When you
shall have got the notice to them, please let me know.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A    A
 
 
.
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, D. C., August 28,
1863.
GENERAL CRAWFORD, RAPPAHANNOCK Station, Va.:
I regret that I cannot be present to witness the
presentation of a sword by the gallant Pennsylvania
Reserve Corps to one so worthy to receive it as General
Meade.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
  .  
   .
WASHINGTON, D. C., August 29, 1863.
HON. 
L. 
SWETT, 
San 
Francisco, 
Cal.: 
If 
the
Government’s rights are reserved, the Government will be
satisﬁed, and at all events it will consider.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
  .  I
 
 
.
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, D. C. August 29,
1863.
MRS. A. LINCOLN, Manchester, N. H.: All quite well.
Fort Sumter is certainly battered down and utterly useless
to the enemy, and it is believed here, but not entirely
certain, that both Sumter and Fort Wagner are occupied by
our forces. It is also certain that General Gilmore has
thrown some shot into the city of Charleston.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
  .  .  
  I
.
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, 
AUGUST 31, 1863.
HON. JAMES C. CONKLING, Springﬁeld, Ill.: In my letter
of the 26th insert between the sentence ending “since the
issue of the Emancipation Proclamation as before” and the
next, commencing “You say you will not ﬁght, etc.,” what
follows below my signature hereto.
A. LINCOLN.
“I know as fully as one can know the opinions of others
that some of the commanders of our armies in the ﬁeld,
who have given us our most important successes, believe
the emancipation policy and the use of colored troops
constitute the heaviest blow yet dealt to the rebellion, and
that at least one of those important successes could not
have been achieved when it was, but for the aid of black
soldiers. Among the commanders holding these views are
some who have never had any aﬀinity with what is called
abolitionism, or with Republican party politics, but who
hold them purely as military opinions. I submit these
opinions as being entitled to some weight against the
objections, often urged, that emancipation and arming the
blacks are unwise as military measures and were not
adopted as such in good faith.”
  
 
 
  A  
.  .  
    A
 .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, August 31, 1863.
MY DEAR GENERAL ROSECRANS: Yours of the 22d was
received yesterday. When I wrote you before, I did not
intend, nor do I now, to engage in an argument with you on
military questions. You had informed me you were
impressed through General Halleck that I was dissatisﬁed
with you, and I could not bluntly deny that I was without
unjustly implicating him. I therefore concluded to tell you
the plain truth, being satisﬁed the matter would thus
appear much smaller than it would if seen by mere
glimpses. I repeat that my appreciation of you has not
abated. I can never forget whilst I remember anything, that
about the end of last year and the beginning of this, you
gave us a hard-earned victory, which, had there been a
defeat instead, the nation could hardly have lived over.
Neither can I forget the check you so opportunely gave to a
dangerous sentiment which was spreading in the North.
Yours, as ever, A. LINCOLN
  
 
 
  A  H. 
. HA     .
August 31, 1863
IT IS NOT improbable that retaliation for the recent great
outrage 
at 
Lawrence, 
in 
Kansas, 
may 
extend 
to
indiscriminate slaughter on the Missouri border, unless
averted by very judicious action. I shall be obliged if the
general-in-chief can make any suggestions to General
Schoﬁeld upon the subject.
A. LINCOLN.
  
 I I A  
 I A  
 
I 
 A I
 I
 
  A  
TELEGRAM TO J. C. CONKLING.
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, September 3,
1863.
HON. JAMES C. CONKLING, Springﬁeld, Ill.:
I am mortiﬁed this morning to ﬁnd the letter to you
botched up in the Eastern papers, telegraphed from
Chicago. How did this happen?
A. LINCOLN.
  
    
   
I
  
   IA
  
 A I
 .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, September 4,
1863.
ORDERED, THAT THE executive order dated November 21,
1862, prohibiting the exportation from the United States of
arms, ammunition, or munitions of war, under which the
commandants of departments were, by order of the
Secretary of War dated May 13, 1863, directed to prohibit
the purchase and sale, for exportation from the United
States, of all horses and mules within their respective
commands, and to take and appropriate for the use of the
United States any horses, mules, and live stock designed
for exportation, be so far modiﬁed that any arms heretofore
imported into the United States may be re-exported to the
place of original shipment, and that any live stock raised in
any State or Territory bounded by the Paciﬁc Ocean may be
exported from, any port of such State or Territory.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
  .   
A .
WAR DEPARTMENT, WASHINGTON, D. C.. September 5,
1863.
HON. JOSEPH SEGAR, Fort Monroe, Va.: I have just
seen your despatch to the Secretary of War, who is absent. I
also send a despatch from Major Hayner of the 3d showing
that he had notice of my order, and stating that the people
were jubilant over it, as a victory over the Government
extorted by fear, and that he had already collected about
 4000 of the money. If he has proceeded since, I shall hold
him accountable for his contumacy. On the contrary, no
dollar shall be refunded by my order until it shall appear
that my act in the case has been accepted in the right
spirit.
A. LINCOLN
     
 A
  
 
  .  I
 
 
.
WAR DEPARTMENT, WASHINGTON. D. C. September 6,
1863.
MRS. A. LINCOLN, Manchester, Vt.:
All well and no news except that General Burnside has
Knoxville, Ten.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
       A     A
 
.
WAR DEPARTMENT, WASHINGTON, September 6, 1863. 6
P.M.
HON. SECRETARY OF WAR, Bedford, Pa.: Burnside has
Kingston and Knoxville, and drove the enemy across the
river at Loudon, the enemy destroying the bridge there;
captured some stores and one or two trains; very little
ﬁghting; few wounded and none killed. No other news of
consequence.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
  .  .  H  
A
 A
  .  . HA   .
WASHINGTON, September 7, 1863.
YOURS OF AUGUST 29 just received. I suppose it was
intended by Congress that this government should execute
the act in question without dependence upon any other
government, State, city, or county. It is, however, within the
range of practical convenience to confer with the
governments of States, while it is quite beyond that range
to have correspondence on the subject with counties and
cities. They are too numerous. As instances, I have
corresponded with Governor Seymour, but Not with Mayor
Opdyke; with Governor Curtin, but not with Mayor Henry.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
   
   
H
 
.
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, September 8,
1863. 9.30
HON. ANDREW JOHNSON, Nashville, Tenn.: Despatch
of yesterday just received. I shall try to ﬁnd the paper you
mention and carefully consider it. In the meantime let me
urge that you do your utmost to get every man you can,
black and white, under arms at the very earliest moment, to
guard roads, bridges, and trains, allowing all the better
trained soldiers to go forward to Rosecrans. Of course I
mean for you to act in co-operation with and not
independently of, the military authorities.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A  
 A
 .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, September 9,
1863.
MAJOR-GENERAL MEADE, WARRENTON, Va.:
It would be a generous thing to give General Wheaton a
leave of absence for ten or ﬁfteen days, and if you can do so
without injury to the service, please do it.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A  
H A 
.
WASHINGTON, D.C., September 10, 1863.
GENERAL WHEATON, ARMY of Potomac: Yesterday at
the instance of Mr. Blair, senator, I telegraphed General
Meade asking him to grant you a leave of absence, to which
he replied that you had not applied for such leave, and that
you can have it when you do apply. I suppose it is proper
for you to know this.
A. LINCOLN.
  
 
   
   
H
 
.
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, SEPTEMBER, 11,
1863
HON. ANDREW JOHNSON.
MY DEAR SIR: — All Tennessee is now clear of armed
insurrectionists. You need not to be reminded that it is the
nick of time for reinaugurating a loyal State government.
Not a moment should be lost. You and the co-operating
friends there can better judge of the ways and means than
can be judged by any here. I only oﬀer a few suggestions.
The reinauguration must not be such as to give control of
the State and its representation in Congress to the enemies
of the Union, driving its friends there into political exile.
The whole struggle for Tennessee will have been proﬁtless
to both State and nation if it so ends that Governor Johnson
is put down and Governor Harris put up. It must not be so.
You must have it otherwise. Let the reconstruction be the
work of such men only as can be trusted for the Union.
Exclude all others, and trust that your government so
organized will be recognized here as being the one of
republican form to be guaranteed to the State, and to be
protected against invasion and domestic violence. It is
something on the question of time to remember that it
cannot be known who is next to occupy the position I now
 hold, nor what he will do. I see that you have declared in
favor of emancipation in Tennessee, for which may God
bless 
you. 
Get 
emancipation 
into 
your 
new 
State
government constitution and there will be no such word as
fail for your cause. The raising of colored troops, I think,
will greatly help every way.
Yours very truly, A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A  A.  .  
 
 I
 .
WASHINGTON, September 11, 1863.
MAJOR-GENERAL 
BURNSIDE, 
CUMBERLAND 
Gap:
Yours received. A thousand thanks for the late successes
you have given us. We cannot allow you to resign until
things shall be a little more settled in East Tennessee. If
then, purely on your own account, you wish to resign, we
will not further refuse you.
A. LINCOLN
     
 A
  
 
 
  A  
 A
 .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, September 11,
1863.
MAJOR-GENERAL MEADE, WARRENTON, Va.: It is
represented to me that Thomas Edds, in your army, is
under sentence of death for desertion, to be executed next
Monday. It is also said his supposed desertion is comprised
in an absence commencing with his falling behind last
winter, being captured and paroled by the enemy, and then
going home. If this be near the truth, please suspend the
execution till further order and send in the record of the
trial.
A. LINCOLN
     
 A
  
 
 
  A  
 A
 .
WASHINGTON, D.C., September 12, 1863.
MAJOR-GENERAL MEAD, WARRENTON, Va.: The name
is “Thomas Edds” not “Eddies” as in your despatch. The
papers left with me do not designate the regiment to which
he belongs. The man who gave me the papers, I do not
know how to ﬁnd again. He only told me that Edds is in the
Army of the Potomac, and that he fell out of the ranks
during Burnside’s mud march last winter. If I get further
information I will telegraph again.
A. LINCOLN
     
 A
  
 H. H.   
  .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, September 13,
1863.
DR. WILLIAM H. H. SCOTT, Danville, Ill.:
Your niece, Mrs. Kate Sharp, can now have no diﬀiculty
in going to Knoxville, Tenn., as that place is within our
military lines.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
  . 
.   AI
 .
WAR DEPARTMENT, WASHINGTON, D. C., September 25,
1863.
J. G. BLAINE, Augusta, Me.: Thanks both for the good
news you send and for the sending of it.
A. LINCOLN.
   
  A
A I
  
   
I
 
 I  
  HA  A
 
  
        
            .
BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES OF
AMERICA:
A PROCLAMATION.
Whereas the Constitution of the United States has
ordained that the privilege of the writ of habeas corpus
shall not be suspended unless when, in cases of rebellion or
invasion, the public safety may require it; and:
Whereas a rebellion was existing on the third day of
March, 1863, which rebellion is still existing; and:
Whereas by a statute which was approved on that day it
was enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of
the United States in Congress assembled that during the
present insurrection the President of the United States,
whenever in his judgment the public safety may require, is
authorized to suspend the privilege of the writ of habeas
corpus in any case throughout the United States or any
part thereof; and:
Whereas, in the judgment of the President, the public
safety does require that the privilege of the said writ shall
new be suspended throughout the United States in the
cases where, by the authority of the President of the United
States, military, naval, and civil oﬀicers of the United
 States, or any of them, hold persons under their command
or in their custody, either as prisoners of war, spies, or
aiders or abettors of the enemy, or oﬀicers, soldiers, or
seamen enrolled or drafted or mustered or enlisted in or
belonging to the land or naval forces of the United States,
or as deserters therefrom, or otherwise amenable to
military law or the rules and articles of war or the rules or
regulations prescribed for the military or naval services by
authority of the President of the United States, or for
resisting a draft, or for any other oﬀense against the
military or naval service.
Now, therefore, I, Abraham Lincoln, President of the
United States, do hereby proclaim and make known to all
whom it may concern that the privilege of the writ of
habeas corpus is suspended throughout the United States
in the several cases before mentioned, and that this
suspension will continue throughout the duration of the
said rebellion or until this proclamation shall, by a
subsequent one to be issued by the President of the United
States, be modiﬁed or revoked. And I do hereby require all
magistrates, attorneys, and other civil oﬀicers within the
United States and all oﬀicers and others in the military and
naval services of the United States to take distinct notice of
this suspension and to give it full eﬀect, and all citizens of
the United States to conduct and govern themselves
accordingly and in conformity with the Constitution of the
United States and the laws of Congress in such case made
and provided.
 In testimony whereof I have hereunto set my hand and
caused the seal of the United States to be aﬀixed, this
ﬁfteenth day of September, A.D. 1863, and of the
independence of the United States of America the eighty-
eighth.
A. LINCOLN.
By the President: WILLIAM H. SEWARD,
Secretary of State.
  
 
 
  A  H. 
. HA     .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, September 13,
1863.
MAJOR-GENERAL 
HALLECK: 
If 
I 
did 
not
misunderstand General Meade’s last despatch, he posts you
on facts as well as he can, and desires your views and those
of the Government as to what he shall do. My opinion is
that he should move upon Lee at once in manner of general
attack, leaving to developments whether he will make it a
real attack. I think this would develop Lee’s real condition
and purposes better than the cavalry alone can do. Of
course my opinion is not to control you and General Meade.
Yours truly, A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
  .     
.
WASHINGTON, D.C., September 16, 1862.
MRS. J. F. SPEED, Louisville, Ky.:
Mr. Holman will not be jostled from his place with my
knowledge and consent.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A  
 A
 .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, September 16,
1863.
MAJOR-GENERAL MEADE, WARRENTON, Va.:
Is 
Albert 
Jones 
of 
Company 
K, 
Third 
Maryland
Volunteers, to be shot on Friday next? If so please state to
me the general features of the case.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A    H 
  .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, September 17,
1863.
MAJOR-GENERAL SCHENCK, BALTIMORE, Md.: Major
Haynor left here several days ago under a promise to put
down in writing, in detail, the facts in relation to the
misconduct of the people on the eastern shore of Virginia.
He has not returned. Please send him over.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A  
 A
 .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, September 17,
1863.
MAJOR-GENERAL MEADE, HEADQUARTERS Army of
Potomac: Yours in relation to Albert Jones is received. I am
appealed to in behalf of Richard M. Abrams of Company A,
Sixth New Jersey Volunteers, by Governor Parker, Attorney-
General 
Frelinghuysen, 
Governor 
Newell, 
Hon. 
Mr.
Middleton, M. C., of the district, and the marshal who
arrested him. I am also appealed to in behalf of Joseph S.
Smith, of Company A, Eleventh New Jersey Volunteers, by
Governor Parker, Attorney-General Frelinghuysen, and
Hon. Marcus C. Ward. Please state the circumstances of
their cases to me.
A. LINCOLN.
   
     
  
    
A
   
  A  A 
TELEGRAM TO C. M. SMITH.
WASHINGTON, D. C., September 18, 1863.
C.M. SMITH, Esq., Springﬁeld, Ill.:
Why not name him for the general you fancy most? This
is my suggestion.
A. LINCOLN
     
 A
  
 
  . A 
   
.
WASHINGTON, September 18, 1863.
MRS. HANNAH ARMSTRONG, Petersburg, Ill.:
I have just ordered the discharge of your boy William, as
you say, now at Louisville, Ky.
A. LINCOLN.
  
 
   
   
H
 
.
(Private.)
E ECUTIVE 
MANSION, 
WASHINGTON, 
D. 
C.,
September 19.1863.
HON. ANDREW JOHNSON.
MY DEAR SIR: — Herewith I send you a paper,
substantially the same as the one drawn up by yourself and
mentioned in your despatch, but slightly changed in two
particulars: First, yours was so drawn as that I authorized
you to carry into eﬀect the fourth section, etc., whereas I so
modify it as to authorize you to so act as to require the
United States to carry into eﬀect that section.
Secondly, you had a clause committing me in some sort
to the State constitution of Tennessee, which I feared might
embarrass you in making a new constitution, if you desire;
so I dropped that clause.
Yours very truly, A. LINCOLN.
[Inclosure.]
E ECUTIVE 
MANSION, 
WASHINGTON, 
D. 
C.,
September 19, 1863.
HON. 
ANDREW 
JOHNSON, 
Military 
Governor 
of
Tennessee: In addition to the matters contained in the
orders and instructions given you by the Secretary of War,
you are hereby authorized to exercise such powers as may
 be necessary and proper to enable the loyal people of
Tennessee to present such a republican form of State
government as will entitle the State to the guaranty of the
United States therefor, and to be protected under such
State government by the United States against invasion
and domestic violence, all according to the fourth Section
of the fourth article of the Constitution of the United
States.
A. LINCOLN
 I I A      A   
TO GENERAL H. W. HALLECK
E ECUTIVE 
MANSION, 
WASHINGTON 
D.C.
September 19, 1863.
MAJOR-GENERAL HALLECK:
By General Meade’s despatch to you of yesterday it
appears that he desires your views and those of the
government as to whether he shall advance upon the
enemy. I am not prepared to order, or even advise, an
advance in this case, wherein I know so little of particulars,
and wherein he, in the ﬁeld, thinks the risk is so great and
the promise of advantage so small.
And yet the case presents matter for very serious
consideration in another aspect. These two armies confront
each other across a small river, substantially midway
between the two capitals, each defending its own capital,
and menacing the other. General Meade estimates the
enemy’s infantry in front of him at not less than 40,000.
Suppose we add ﬁfty per cent. to this for cavalry, artillery,
and extra-duty men stretching as far as Richmond, making
the whole force of the enemy 60,000.
General Meade, as shown by the returns, has with him,
and between him and Washington, of the same classes, of
well men, over 90,000. Neither can bring the whole of his
 men into a battle; but each can bring as large a percentage
in as the other. For a battle, then, General Meade has three
men to General Lee’s two. Yet, it having been determined
that choosing ground and standing on the defensive gives
so great advantage that the three cannot safely attack the
two, the three are left simply standing on the defensive
also.
If the enemy’s 60,000 are suﬀicient to keep our 90,000
away from Richmond, why, by the same rule, may not
40,000 of ours keep their 60,000 away from Washington,
leaving us 50,000 to put to some other use? Having
practically come to the mere defensive, it seems to be no
economy at all to employ twice as many men for that object
as are needed. With no object, certainly, to mislead myself,
I can perceive no fault in this statement, unless we admit
we are not the equal of the enemy, man for man. I hope you
will consider it.
To avoid misunderstanding, let me say that to attempt to
ﬁght the enemy slowly back into his entrenchments at
Richmond, and then to capture him, is an idea I have been
trying to repudiate for quite a year.
My judgment is so clear against it that I would scarcely
allow the attempt to be made if the general in command
should desire to make it. My last attempt upon Richmond
was to get McClellan, when he was nearer there than the
enemy was, to run in ahead of him. Since then I have
constantly desired the Army of the Potomac to make Lee’s
army, and not Richmond, its objective point. If our army
cannot fall upon the enemy and hurt him where he is, it is
 plain to me it can gain nothing by attempting to follow him
over a succession of intrenched lines into a fortiﬁed city.
Yours truly,
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
  .  I
 
 
.
WAR DEPARTMENT, WASHINGTON, D. C., September 20,
1863.
MRS. A. LINCOLN, New York: I neither see nor hear
anything of sickness here now, though there may be much
without my knowing it. I wish you to stay or come just as is
most agreeable to yourself.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
  .  I
 
 
.
WAR DEPARTMENT, WASHINGTON, D. C, September 21,
1863.
MRS. A. LINCOLN. Fifth Avenue Hotel. New York: The
air is so clear and cool and apparently healthy that I would
be glad for you to come. Nothing very particular, but I
would be glad to see you and Tad.
A. LINCOLN.
  
 
 
  A  H. 
. HA     .
E ECUTIVE MANSION WASHINGTON, D. C., September
21, 1863.
MAJOR-GENERAL HALLECK: I think it very important
for General Rosecrans to hold his position at or about
Chattanooga, because if held from that place to Cleveland,
both inclusive, it keeps all Tennessee clear of the enemy,
and also breaks one of his most important railroad lines. To
prevent these consequences is so vital to his cause that he
cannot give up the eﬀort to dislodge us from the position,
thus bringing him to us and saving us the labor, expense,
and hazard of going farther to ﬁnd him, and also giving us
the advantage of choosing our own ground and preparing it
to ﬁght him upon. The details must, of course, be left to
General Rosecrans, while we must furnish him the means
to the utmost of our ability. If you concur, I think he would
better be informed that we are not pushing him beyond this
position; and that, in fact, our judgment is rather against
his going beyond it. If he can only maintain this position,
without more, this rebellion can only eke out a short and
feeble existence, as an animal sometimes may with a thorn
in its vitals.
Yours truly, A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A  A.  .  
 
 I
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, D.C., September
21, 1863.
GENERAL BURNSIDE, GREENVILLE, Tenn.: If you are to
do any good to Rosecrans it will not do to waste time with
Jonesboro. It is already too late to do the most good that
might have been done, but I hope it will still do some good.
Please do not lose a moment.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A  A.  .  
 
 I
WAR DEPARTMENT, September 21, 1863. 11 A.M.
GENERAL BURNSIDE, KNO
VILLE, Tenn.:
Go to Rosecrans with your force without a moment’s
delay.
A. LINCOLN,
     
 A
  
 
 
  A  
.  .  
    A
WASHINGTON, September 21, 1863. 12.55 PM.
MAJOR-GENERAL ROSECRANS, CHATTANOOGA: Be of
good cheer. We have unabated conﬁdence in you, and in
your soldiers and oﬀicers. In the main you must be the
judge as to what is to be done. If I were to suggest, I would
say, save your army by taking strong positions until
Burnside joins you, when, I hope, you can turn the tide. I
think you had better send a courier to Burnside to hurry
him up. We cannot reach him by telegraph. We suppose
some force is going to you from Corinth, but for want of
communication we do not know how they are getting along.
We shall do our utmost to assist you. Send us your present
positions.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A  
.  .  
    A
 .
[Cipher.]
WAR DEPARTMENT, SEPTEMBER 22, 1863.8.30 A.M.
MAJOR-GENERAL ROSECRANS, Chattanooga, Tenn.: We
have not a word here as to the whereabouts or condition of
your army up to a later hour than sunset, Sunday, the 20th.
Your despatches to me of 9 A.M., and to General Halleck of
2 P. M., yesterday, tell us nothing later on those points.
Please relieve my anxiety as to the position and condition of
your army up to the latest moment.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
. 
. HA  H A
  .  . 
 
I .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON. September 22,
1863.
HON. O. M. HATCH, HON. J. K. DUBOIS, Springﬁeld, Ill.:
Your letter is just received. The particular form of my
despatch was jocular, which I supposed you gentlemen
knew me well enough to understand. General Allen is
considered here as a very faithful and capable oﬀicer, and
one who would be at least thought of for quartermaster-
general if that oﬀice were vacant.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
  .  I
 
 
.
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, September 22,
1863.
MRS. A. LINCOLN, Fifth Avenue House, New York: —
Did you receive my despatch of yesterday? Mrs. Cuthbert
did not correctly understand me. I directed her to tell you
to use your own pleasure whether to stay or come, and I
did not say it is sickly and that you should on no account
come. So far as I see or know, it was never healthier, and I
really wish to see you. Answer this on receipt.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A  
.  .  
    A
 .
WASHINGTON, September 23,1863. 9.13 A.M.
MAJOR-GENERAL ROSECRANS, CHATTANOOGA, Tenn:
Below is Bragg’s despatch as found in the Richmond
papers. You see he does not claim so many prisoners or
captured guns as you were inclined to concede. He also
confesses to heavy loss. An exchanged general of ours
leaving Richmond yesterday says two of Longstreet’s
divisions and his entire artillery and two of Pickett’s
brigades and Wise’s legion have gone to Tennessee. He
mentions no other.
“CHICAMAUGA RIVER, SEPTEMBER 20.
“GENERAL COOPER, Adjutant-General: “After two days’
hard ﬁghting we have driven the enemy, after a desperate
resistance, from several positions, and now hold the ﬁeld;
but he still confronts us. The loses are heavy on both sides,
especially in our oﬀicers....
“BRA TON BRAGG” A. LINCOLN
   
  A
A I
 
  
I
  H   
   
A   A
 IA   I 
I
IA
SEPTEMBER 24, 1863.
BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES OF
AMERICA: A Proclamation.
Whereas, in my proclamation of the twenty-seventh of
April, 1861, the ports of the States of Virginia and North
Carolina were, for reasons therein set forth, placed under
blockade; and whereas the port of Alexandria, Virginia, has
since been blockaded, but as the blockade of said port may
now be safely relaxed with advantage to the interests of
commerce: Now, therefore, be it known that I, Abraham
Lincoln, President of the United Sates, pursuant to the
authority in me vested by the ﬁfth section of the act of
Congress, approved on the 13th of July, 1861, entitled “An
act further to provide for the collection of duties on
imports, and for other purposes,” do hereby declare that
the blockade of the said port of Alexandria shall so far
cease and determine, from and after this date, that
commercial intercourse with said port, except as to
persons, things, and information contraband of war, may
from this date be carried on, subject to the laws of the
United States, and to the limitations and in pursuance of
the regulations which are prescribed by the Secretary of
 the Treasury in his order which is appended to my
proclamation of the 12th of May, 1862.
In witness whereof, I have hereunto set my hand, and
caused the seal of the United States to be aﬀixed.
Done at the city of Washington, this twenty-fourth day of
September in the year of our Lord one thousand eight
hundred and sixty-three, and of the independence of the
United States the eighty-eighth.
A. LINCOLN.
By the President WILLIAM H. SEWARD, Secretary of
State.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A  
.  .  
    A
 .
WAR DEPARTMENT, September 24, 1863. 10 A.M.
MAJOR-GENERAL 
ROSECRANS, 
CHATTANOOGA,
Term.: Last night we received the rebel accounts, through
Richmond papers, of your late battle. They give Major-
General Hood as mortally wounded, and Brigadiers Preston
Smith, Woﬀord, Walthall, Helm of Kentucky, and DesMer
killed, and Major-Generals Preston, Cleburne, and Gregg,
and Brigadier-Generals Benning, Adams, Burm, Brown, and
John [B. H.] Helm wounded. By confusion the two Helms
may be the same man, and Bunn and Brown may be the
same man. With Burnside, Sherman, and from elsewhere
we shall get to you from forty to sixty thousand additional
men.
A. LINCOLN
   .  I
 
 
           
 H   I
  A
 I   
TELEGRAM TO MRS. LINCOLN.
WAR DEPARTMENT, SEPTEMBER 24, 1863
MRS. A. LINCOLN, Fifth Avenue Hotel, New York: We
now have a tolerably accurate summing up of the late
battle between Rosecrans and Braag. The result is that we
are worsted, if at all, only in the fact that we, after the main
ﬁghting was over, yielded the ground, thus leaving
considerable of our artillery and wounded to fall into the
enemy’s hands., for which we got nothing in turn. We lost
in general oﬀicers one killed and three or four wounded, all
brigadiers, while, according to the rebel accounts which we
have, they lost six killed and eight wounded: of the killed
one major-general and ﬁve brigadiers including your
brother-in-law, Helm; and of the wounded three major-
generals and ﬁve brigadiers. This list may be reduced two
in number by corrections of confusion in names. At 11.40
A.M. yesterday General Rosecrans telegraphed from
Chattanooga: “We hold this point, and I cannot be
dislodged except by very superior numbers and after a
great battle.” A despatch leaving there after night
yesterday says, “No ﬁght to-day.”
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A  
c A  
.
WAR DEPARTMENT, WASHINGTON, D. C., September 25,
1863.
GENERAL MCCALLUM, ALE ANDRIA, Va.: I have sent to
General Meade, by telegraph, to suspend the execution of
Daniel Sullivan of Company F, Thirteenth Massachusetts,
which was to be to-day, but understanding there is an
interruption on the line, may I beg you to send this to him
by the quickest mode in your power?
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A  
 A
 .
WAR DEPARTMENT, WASHINGTON, D. C., September 25,
1863.
MAJOR-GENERAL MEADE, ARMY of Potomac: Owing to
the press in behalf of Daniel Sullivan, Company E,
Thirteenth Massachusetts, and the doubt; though small,
which you express of his guilty intention, I have concluded
to say let his execution be suspended till further order, and
copy of record sent me.
A. LINCOLN.
  
 
 
  A  
.  .  
    A
 .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, September 25,
1863.
MY DEAR GENERAL ROSECRANS: We are sending you
two small corps, one under General Howard and one under
General Slocum, and the whole under General Hooker.
Unfortunately the relations between Generals Hooker
and Slocum are not such as to promise good, if their
present relative positions remain. Therefore, let me beg —
almost enjoin upon you — that on their reaching you, you
will make a transposition by which General Slocum with his
Corps, may pass from under the command of General
Hooker, and General Hooker, in turn receive some other
equal force. It is important for this to be done, though we
could not well arrange it here. Please do it.
Yours very truly, A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A  
.  .  
    A
 .
WAR DEPARTMENT, September 28, 1863. 8 A.M.
MAJOR-GENERAL 
ROSECRANS, 
CHATTANOOGA.,
Tenn.:
You can perhaps communicate with General Burnside
more rapidly by sending telegrams directly to him at
Knoxville. Think of it. I send a like despatch to him.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A    H
 I  
.
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, D. C, September
30, 1863.
GENERAL SCHOFIELD, SAINT Louis, Mo.: Following
despatch just received: “Union Men Driven out of
Missouri.”
“Leavenworth, September 29, 1863.
“Governor Gamble having authorized Colonel Moss, of
Liberty, Missouri, to arm the men in Platte and Clinton
Counties, he has armed mostly the returned rebel soldiers
and men wider bonds. Moss’s men are now driving the
Union men out of Missouri. Over one hundred families
crossed the river to-day. Many of the wives of our Union
soldiers have been compelled to leave. Four or ﬁve Union
men have been murdered by Colonel Moss’s men.”
Please look to this and, if true, in main or part, put a stop
to it.
A. LINCOLN
     
 A
  
  .  .  
   A
.
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, September 30,
1863.
HON. FRANCIS S. CORKRAN, Baltimore, Md.: MRS. L.
is now at home and would be pleased to see you any time.
If the grape time has not passed away, she would be
pleased to join in the enterprise you mention.
Yours truly, A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A      
WAR DEPARTMENT, WASHINGTON, D.C., October 1, 1863.
GENERAL TYLER, BALTIMORE: Take care of colored
troops in your charge, but do nothing further about that
branch of aﬀairs until further orders. Particularly do
nothing about General Vickers of Kent County.
A. LINCOLN.
Send a copy to Colonel Birney. A. L.
  
 
 
  A    H
 I  
.
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON,
OCTOBER 1, 1863 GENERAL JOHN M. SCHOFIELD:
There is no organized military force in avowed opposition
to the General Government now in Missouri, and if any
shall reappear, your duty in regard to it will be too plain to
require any special instruction. Still, the condition of
things, both there and elsewhere, is such as to render it
indispensable to maintain, for a time, the United States
military establishment in that State, as well as to rely upon
it for a fair contribution of support to that establishment
generally. Your immediate duty in regard to Missouri now is
to advance the eﬀiciency of that establishment, and to so
use it, as far as practicable, to compel the excited people
there to let one another alone.
Under your recent order, which I have approved, you will
only arrest individuals, and suppress assemblies or
newspapers, when they may be working palpable injury to
the military in your charge; and in no other case will you
interfere with the expression of opinion in any form, or
allow it to be interfered with violently by others. In this you
have a discretion to exercise with great caution, calmness,
and forbearance.
 With the matter of removing the inhabitants of certain
counties en masse, and of removing certain individuals
from time to time, who are supposed to be mischievous, I
am not now interfering, but am leaving to your own
discretion.
Nor am I interfering with what may still seem to you to
be necessary restrictions upon trade and intercourse. I
think proper, however, to enjoin upon you the following:
Allow no part of the military under your command to be
engaged in either returning fugitive slaves or in forcing or
enticing slaves from their homes; and, so far as practicable,
enforce the same forbearance upon the people.
Report to me your opinion upon the availability for good
of the enrolled militia of the State. Allow no one to enlist
colored troops, except upon orders from you, or from here
through you.
Allow no one to assume the functions of conﬁscating
property, under the law of Congress, or otherwise, except
upon orders from here.
At elections see that those, and only those, are allowed to
vote who are entitled to do so by the laws of Missouri,
including as of those laws the restrictions laid by the
Missouri convention upon those who may have participated
in the rebellion.
So far as practicable, you will, by means of your military
force, expel guerrillas, marauders, and murderers, and all
who are known to harbor, aid, or abet them. But in like
manner you will repress assumptions of unauthorized
individuals to perform the same service, because under
 pretense of doing this they become marauders and
murderers themselves.
To now restore peace, let the military obey orders, and
those not of the military leave each other alone, thus not
breaking the peace themselves.
In giving the above directions, it is not intended to
restrain you in other expedient and necessary matters not
falling within their range.
Your obedient servant,
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A   . 
.   H
 I  
.
WASHINGTON, D.C. OCTOBER 2, 1863
MAJOR-GENERAL SCHOFIELD: I have just seen your
despatch to Halleck about Major-General Blunt. If possible,
you better allow me to get through with a certain matter
here, before adding to the diﬀiculties of it. Meantime
supply me the particulars of Major-General Blunt’s case.
A. LINCOLN.
TELEGRAM TO COLONEL BIRNEY. [Cipher.] WAR
DEPARTMENT, WASHINGTON, D.C., October 3, 1863.
COLONEL BIRNEY, Baltimore, Md.: Please give me, as
near as you can, the number of slaves you have recruited in
Maryland. Of course the number is not to include the free
colored.
A. LINCOLN.
   
  A
A I
  
   HA
  
I I
  
  
  
       .
BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES AMERICA:
A PROCLAMATION.
The year that is drawing towards its close has been ﬁlled
with the blessings of fruitful ﬁelds and healthful skies. To
these bounties, which are so constantly enjoyed that we are
prone to forget the source from which they come, others
have been added which are of so extraordinary a nature
that they cannot fail to penetrate and soften even the heart
which 
is 
habitually 
insensible 
to 
the 
ever-watchful
providence of Almighty God. In the midst of a civil war of
unequalled magnitude and severity which has sometimes
seemed to invite and provoke the aggressions of foreign
states; peace has been preserved with all nations, order has
been maintained, the laws have been respected and
obeyed, and harmony has prevailed everywhere except in
the theatre of military conﬂict; while that theatre has been
greatly contracted by the advancing armies and navies of
the Union. The needful diversion of wealth and strength
from the ﬁelds of peaceful industry, to the national defense
has not arrested the plough, the shuttle, or the ship: The
axe has enlarged the borders of our settlements, and the
mines, as well of, iron and coal as of the precious metals,
 have yielded even more abundantly than heretofore.
Population has steadily increased, notwithstanding the
waste that has been made in the camp, the siege, and the
battle-ﬁeld; and the country, rejoicing in the consciousness
of augmented strength and vigor, is permitted to expect a
continuance of years, with large increase of freedom.
No human counsel hath devised, nor hath any mortal
hand worked out these great things. They are the gracious
gifts of the Most High God, who, while dealing with us in
anger for our sins, hath nevertheless remembered mercy.
It has seemed to me ﬁt and proper that they should be
reverently, solemnly, and gratefully acknowledged, as with
one heart and voice, by the whole American people. I do,
therefore, invite my fellow-citizens in every part of the
United States, and also those who are at sea, and those
who are sojourning in foreign lands, to set apart and
observe the last Thursday of November next as a day of
thanksgiving and prayer to our beneﬁcent Father who
dwelleth in the heavens. And I recommend to them that,
while oﬀering up the ascriptions justly due to Him for such
singular deliverances and blessings, they do also, with
humble penitence for our national perverseness and
disobedience, commend to His tender care all those who
have become widows, orphans, mourners, or suﬀerers in
the lamentable civil strife in which we are unavoidably
engaged, and fervently implore the interposition of the
Almighty hand to heal the wounds of the nation, and to
restore it, as soon as may be consistent with divine
 purposes, to the full enjoyment of peace, harmony,
tranquillity, and union.
In testimony whereof, I have hereunto set my hand, and
caused the seal of the United States to be aﬀixed.
Done at the city of Washington, this third day of October,
in the year of our Lord one thousand eight hundred and
sixty-three, and of the independence of the United States
the eighty-eighth.
A. LINCOLN.
By the President: WILLIAM H. SEWARD,
Secretary of State
     
 A
  
 
 
  A   . 
.   H
 I  
.
WASHINGTON D.C., OCTOBER 4, 1863
MAJOR-GENERAL SCHOFIELD, ST. Louis, Mo.:
I think you will not have just cause to complain of my
action.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A  
.  .  
    A
 .
WAR DEPARTMENT, October 4, 1863. 11.30 A.M.
MAJOR-GENERAL ROSECRANS, CHATTANOOGA, Tenn.:
Yours of yesterday received. If we can hold Chattanooga
and East Tennessee, I think the rebellion must dwindle and
die. I think you and Burnside can do this, and hence doing
so is your main object. Of course to greatly damage or
destroy the enemy in your front would be a greater object,
because it would include the former and more, but it is not
so certainly within your power. I understand the main body
of the enemy is very near you, so near that you could
“board at home,” so to speak, and menace or attack him
any day. Would not the doing of this be your best mode of
counteracting his raid on your communications? But this is
not an order. I intend doing something like what you
suggest whenever the case shall appear ripe enough to
have it accepted in the true understanding rather than as a
confession of weakness and fear.
A. LINCOLN.
  
  . 
. 
 A   A
 
 H   .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, October 5, 1863.
HON. CHARLES D. DRAKE AND OTHERS, Committee.
GENTLEMEN:-Your original address, presented on the
30th ult., and the four supplementary ones presented on
the 3d inst., have been carefully considered. I hope you will
regard the other duties claiming my attention, together
with the great length and importance of these documents,
as constituting a suﬀicient apology for not having
responded sooner.
These papers, framed for a common object, consist of the
things demanded and the reasons for demanding them.
The things demanded are
First. That General Schoﬁeld shall be relieved, and
General Butler be appointed as Commander of the Military
Department of Missouri.
Second. That the system of enrolled militia in Missouri
may be broken up, and national forces he substituted for it;
and
Third. That at elections persons may not be allowed to
vote who are not entitled by law to do so.
Among the reasons given, enough of suﬀering and wrong
to Union men is certainly, and I suppose truly, stated. Yet
the whole case, as presented, fails to convince me that
 General Schoﬁeld, or the enrolled militia, is responsible for
that suﬀering and wrong. The whole can be explained on a
more charitable, and, as I think, a more rational hypothesis.
We are in a civil war. In such cases there always is a
main question, but in this case that question is a perplexing
compound — Union and slavery. It thus becomes a question
not of two sides merely, but of at least four sides, even
among those who are for the Union, saying nothing of those
who are against it. Thus, those who are for the Union with,
but not without slavery; those for it without, but not with;
those for it with or without, but prefer it with; and those for
it with or without, but prefer it without.
Among these, again, is a subdivision of those who are for
gradual, but not for immediate, and those who are for
immediate, but not for gradual extinction of slavery.
It is easy to conceive that all these shades of opinion, and
even more, may be sincerely entertained by honest and
truthful men. Yet, all being for the Union, by reason of
these diﬀerences each will prefer a diﬀerent way of
sustaining the Union. At once, sincerity is questioned, and
motives are assailed. Actual war comming, blood grows hot
and blood is spilled. Thought is forced from old channels
into confusion. Deception breeds and thrives. Conﬁdence
dies, and universal suspicion reigns. Each man feels an
impulse to kill his neighbor, lest he be killed by him.
Revenge and retaliation follow. And all this, as before said,
may be among honest men only. But this is not all. Every
foul bird comes abroad, and every dirty reptile rises up.
These add crime to confusion. Strong measures deemed
 indispensable, but harsh at best, such men make worse by
maladministration. Murders for old grudges, and murders
for self, proceed under any cloak that will best serve for the
occasion.
These causes amply account for what has occurred in
Missouri, 
without 
ascribing 
it 
to 
the 
weakness 
or
wickedness of any general. The newspaper ﬁles, those
chroniclers of current events, will show that the evils now
complained of were quite as prevalent under Fremont,
Hunter, Halleck, and Curtis, as under Schoﬁeld. If the
former had greater force opposed to them, they also had
greater force with which to meet it. When the organized
rebel army left the State, the main Federal force had to go
also, leaving the department commander at home relatively
no stronger than before. Without disparaging any, I aﬀirm
with conﬁdence that no commander of that department
has, in proportion to his means, done better than General
Schoﬁeld.
The ﬁrst speciﬁc charge against General Schoﬁeld is,
that the enrolled militia was placed under his command,
whereas it had not been placed under the command of
General Curtis. The fact is, I believe, true; but you do not
point out, nor can I conceive, how that did, or could, injure
loyal men or the Union cause.
You charge that, General Curtis being superseded by
General Schoﬁeld, Franklin A. Dick was superseded by
James O. Broadhead as Provost-Marshal General. No very
speciﬁc showing is made as to how this did or could injure
the Union cause. It recalls, however, the condition of
 things, as presented to me, which led to a change of
commander of that department.
To restrain contraband intelligence and trade, a system
of searches, seizures, permits, and passes, had been
introduced, I think, by General Fremont. When General
Halleck came, he found and continued the system, and
added an order, applicable to some parts of the State, to
levy and collect contributions from noted rebels, to
compensate losses and relieve destitution caused by the
rebellion. The action of General Fremont and General
Halleck, as stated, constituted a sort of system which
General Curtis found in full operation when he took
command of the department. That there was a necessity for
something of the sort was clear; but that it could only be
justiﬁed by stern necessity, and that it was liable to great
abuse in administration, was equally clear. Agents to
execute it, contrary to the great prayer, were led into
temptation. Some might, while others would not, resist that
temptation. It was not possible to hold any to a very strict
accountability; and those yielding to the temptation would
sell permits and passes to those who would pay most and
most readily for them, and would seize property and collect
levies in the aptest way to ﬁll their own pockets. Money
being the object, the man having money, whether loyal or
disloyal, would be a victim. This practice doubtless existed
to some extent, and it was, a real additional evil that it
could be, and was, plausibly charged to exist in greater
extent than it did.
 When General Curtis took command of the department,
Mr. Dick, against whom I never knew anything to allege,
had general charge of this system. A controversy in regard
to it rapidly grew into almost unmanageable proportions.
One side ignored the necessity and magniﬁed the evils of
the system, while the other ignored the evils and magniﬁed
the necessity; and each bitterly assailed the other. I could
not fail to see that the controversy enlarged in the same
proportion as the professed Union men there distinctly took
sides in two opposing political parties. I exhausted my wits,
and very nearly my patience also, in eﬀorts to convince
both that the evils they charged on each other were
inherent in the case, and could not be cured by giving
either party a victory over the other.
Plainly, the irritating system was not to be perpetual; and
it was plausibly urged that it could be modiﬁed at once with
advantage. The case could scarcely be worse, and whether
it could be made better could only be determined by a trial.
In this view, and not to ban or brand General Curtis, or to
give a victory to any party, I made the change of
commander for the department. I now learn that soon after
this change Mr. Dick was removed, and that Mr.
Broadhead, a gentleman of no less good character, was put
in the place. The mere fact of this change is more distinctly
complained of than is any conduct of the new oﬀicer, or
other consequence of the change.
I gave the new commander no instructions as to the
administration of the system mentioned, beyond what is
contained in the private letter afterwards surreptitiously
 published, in which I directed him to act solely for the
public good, and independently of both parties. Neither any
thing you have presented me, nor anything I have
otherwise learned, has convinced me that he has been
unfaithful to this charge.
Imbecility is urged as one cause for removing General
Schoﬁeld; and the late massacre at Lawrence, Kansas, is
pressed as evidence of that imbecility. To my mind that fact
scarcely tends to prove the proposition. That massacre is
only an example of what Grierson, John Morgan, and many
others might have repeatedly done on their respective
raids, had they chosen to incur the personal hazard, and
possessed the ﬁendish hearts to do it.
The charge is made that General Schoﬁeld, on purpose to
protect the Lawrence murderers, would not allow them to
be pursued into Missouri. While no punishment could be
too sudden or too severe for those murderers, I am well
satisﬁed that the preventing of the threatened remedial
raid into Missouri was the only way to avoid an
indiscriminate massacre there, including probably more
innocent than guilty. Instead of condemning, I therefore
approve what I understand General Schoﬁeld did in that
respect.
The charges that General Schoﬁeld has purposely
withheld protection from loyal people and purposely
facilitated the objects of the disloyal are altogether beyond
my power of belief. I do not arraign the veracity of
gentlemen as to the facts complained of, but I do more than
question the judgment which would infer that those facts
 occurred in accordance with the purposes of General
Schoﬁeld.
With my present views, I must decline to remove General
Schoﬁeld. In this I decide nothing against General Butler. I
sincerely wish it were convenient to assign him a suitable
command. In order to meet some existing evils I have
addressed a letter of instructions to General Schoﬁeld, a
copy of which I enclose to you.
As to the enrolled militia, I shall endeavor to ascertain
better than I now know what is its exact value. Let me say
now, however, that your proposal to substitute national
forces for the enrolled militia implies that in your judgment
the latter is doing something which needs to be done; and if
so, the proposition to throw that force away and to supply
its place by bringing other forces from the ﬁeld where they
are urgently needed seems to me very extraordinary.
Whence shall they come? Shall they be withdrawn from
Banks, or Grant, or Steele, or Rosecrans? Few things have
been so grateful to my anxious feelings as when, in June
last, the local force in Missouri aided General Schoﬁeld to
so promptly send a large general force to the relief of
General Grant, then investing Vicksburg and menaced from
without by General Johnston. Was this all wrong? Should
the enrolled militia then have been broken up and General
Herron kept from Grant to police Missouri? So far from
ﬁnding cause to object, I confess to a sympathy for
whatever relieves our general force in Missouri and allows
it to serve elsewhere. I therefore, as at present advised,
cannot attempt the destruction of the enrolled militia of
 Missouri. I may add that, the force being under the national
military control, it is also within the proclamation in regard
to the habeas corpus.
I concur in the propriety of your request in regard to
elections, and have, as you see, directed General Schoﬁeld
accordingly. I do not feel justiﬁed to enter upon the broad
ﬁeld you present in regard to the political diﬀerences
between Radicals and Conservatives. From time to time I
have done and said what appeared to me proper to do and
say. The public knows it all. It obliges nobody to follow me,
and I trust it obliges me to follow nobody. The Radicals and
Conservatives each agree with me in some things and
disagree in others. I could wish both to agree with me in all
things, for then they would agree with each other, and
would be too strong for any foe from any quarter. They,
however, choose to do otherwise; and I do not question
their right. I too shall do what seems to be my duty. I hold
whoever commands in Missouri or elsewhere responsible to
me and not to either Radicals or Conservatives. It is my
duty to hear all, but at last I must, within my sphere, judge
what to do and what to forbear.
Your obedient servant,
A. LINCOLN.
  H   A   
  
 . 
A I
 
. 
 I
H
APPROVAL OF THE DECISION OF THE COURT
WAR DEPARTMENT, ADJUTANT-GENERALS OFFICE,
WASHINGTON, October 8, 1863.
MAJOR-GENERAL 
J. 
G. 
FOSTER, 
Commanding
Department of Virginia and North Carolina, Fort Monroe,
Va.
SIR: — The proceedings of the military commission
instituted for the trial of David Wright, of Norfolk, in
Special Orders Nos. 195, 196, and 197, of 1863, from
headquarters Department of Virginia, have been submitted
to the President of the United States. The following are his
remarks on the case: Upon the presentation of the record
in this case and the examination thereof, aided by the
report thereon of the Judge-Advocate-General, and on full
hearing of counsel for the accused, being speciﬁed that no
proper question remained open except as to the sanity of
the accused, I caused a very full examination to be made on
that question, upon a great amount of evidence, including
all eﬀort by the counsel for accused, by an expert of high
reputation in that professional department, who thereon
reports to me, as his opinion, that the accused, Dr. David
M. Wright, was not insane prior to or on the 11th day of
July, 1863, the date of the homicide of Lieutenant Sanborn;
 that he has not been insane since, and is not insane now
(Oct. 7, 1863). I therefore approve the ﬁnding and sentence
of the military commission, and direct that the major-
general in command of the department including the place
of trial, and wherein the convict is now in custody, appoint
a time and place and carry such sentence into execution.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A  
 A
 .
WAR DEPARTMENT, WASHINGTON, D. C., October 8,
1863.
MAJOR-GENERAL MEADE, ARMY of Potomac: I am
appealed to in behalf of August Blittersdorf, at Mitchell’s
Station, Va., to be shot to-morrow as a deserter. I am
unwilling for any boy under eighteen to be shot, and his
father aﬀirms that he is yet under sixteen. Please answer.
His regiment or company not given me.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A  
 A
 .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, October 8, 1863.
MAJOR-GENERAL MEADE, ARMY of Potomac:
The boy telegraphs from Mitchell’s Station, Va. The
father thinks he is in the One hundred and nineteenth
Pennsylvania Volunteers. The father signs the name
“Blittersdorf.” I can tell no more.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A  
 A
 .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, October 12, 1863.
MAJOR-GENERAL MEADE, ARMY of Potomac: The
father and mother of John Murphy, of the One hundred and
nineteenth Pennsylvania Volunteers, have ﬁled their own
aﬀidavits that he was born June 22, 1846, and also the
aﬀidavits of three other persons who all swear that they
remembered the circumstances of his birth and that it was
in the year 1846, though they do not remember the
particular day. I therefore, on account of his tender age,
have concluded to pardon him, and to leave it to yourself
whether to discharge him or continue him in the service.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
.  .  
    A
 .
[Cipher.]
WAR DEPARTMENT, OCTOBER 12, 1863.8.35 A.M.
MAJOR-GENERAL ROSECRANS, Chattanooga, Term.: As
I understand, Burnside is menaced from the west, and so
cannot go to you without surrendering East Tennessee. I
now think the enemy will not attack Chattanooga, and I
think you will have to look out for his making a
concentrated drive at Burnside. You and Burnside now have
him by the throat, and he must break your hold or perish I
therefore think you better try to hold the road up to
Kingston, leaving Burnside to what is above there. Sherman
is coming to you, though gaps in the telegraph prevent our
knowing how far he is advanced. He and Hooker will so
support you on the west and northwest as to enable you to
look east and northeast. This is not an order. General
Halleck will give his views.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A  
. 
. 
 A
 .
WASHINGTON, October 12, 1863. 9 A.M.
MAJOR-GENERAL MEADE: WHAT news this morning?
A despatch from Rosecrans, leaving him at 7.30 P.M.
yesterday, says:
“Rebel rumors that head of Ewell’s column reached
Dalton yesterday.”
I send this for what it is worth.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
A 
  
c  I
H.
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, October 13, 1863.
MCVEIGH, PHILADELPHIA: The enemy some days ago
made a movement, apparently to turn General Meade’s
right. This led to a maneuvering of the two armies and to
pretty heavy skirmishing on Saturday, Sunday, and Monday.
We have frequent despatches from General Meade and up
to 10 o’clock last night nothing had happened giving either
side any marked advantage. Our army reported to be in
excellent condition. The telegraph is open to General
Meade’s camp this morning, but we have not troubled him
for a despatch.
A. LINCOLN.
  
  H
  
 
  
.
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, October 14, 1863.
HON. THURLOW WEED.
DEAR SIR: — I have been brought to fear recently that
somehow, by commission or omission, I have caused you
some degree of pain. I have never entertained an unkind
feeling or a disparaging thought toward you; and if I have
said or done anything which has been construed into such
unkindness or disparagement, it has been misconstrued. I
am sure if we could meet we would not part with any
unpleasant impression On either side.
Yours as ever, A. LINCOLN.
  
  .  .  
.
WAR DEPARTMENT, WASHINGTON, D. C., October 15,
1863.
L. B. TODD, Lexington, Ky.:
I send the following pass to your care.
A. LINCOLN.
 AI
  
 
  . H  
  
  .  I
 
 
    I   
WASHINGTON, D. C.. October 15, 1863.
TO WHOM IT MAY CONCERN:
Allow MRS. Robert S. Todd, widow, to go south and bring
her daughter, MRS. General B. Hardin Helm, with her
children, north to Kentucky.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A   
    .
WAR DEPARTMENT, WASHINGTON, D. C., October 15,
1863.
MAJOR-GENERAL FOSTER, FORT Monroe, Va.:
Postpone the execution of Dr. Wright to Friday the 23d
instant (October). This is intended for his preparation and
is ﬁnal.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A  
 A
 .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, October 15, 1863.
MAJOR-GENERAL MEADE, ARMY of Potomac: On the
4th instant you telegraphed me that Private Daniel Hanson,
of Ninety-seventh New York Volunteers, had not yet been
tried. When he shall be, please notify me of the result, with
a brief statement of his case, if he be convicted. Gustave
Blittersdorf, who you say is enlisted in the One hundred
and nineteenth Pennsylvania Volunteers as William Fox, is
proven to me to be only ﬁfteen years old last January. I
pardon him, and you will discharge him or put him in the
ranks at your discretion. Mathias Brown, of Nineteenth
Pennsylvania Volunteers, is proven to me to be eighteen
last May, and his friends say he is convicted on an
enlistment and for a desertion both before that time. If this
last be true he is pardoned, to be kept or discharged as you
please. If not true suspend his execution and report the
facts of his case. Did you receive my despatch of 12th
pardoning John Murphy?
A. LINCOLN.
[The Lincoln papers during this time have a suspended
execution on almost every other page, I have omitted most
of these D.W.]
     
 A
  
  . 
.  
  
  .
WAR DEPARTMENT, WASHINGTON, D. C., October 16,
1863.
THOMAS W. SWEENEY, Continental, Philadelphia:
Tad is teasing me to have you forward his pistol to him.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
  .  . 
 A
 .
WASHINGTON, D. C., October 16, 1863.
T. C. DURANT, New York: I remember receiving nothing
from you of the 10th, and I do not comprehend your
despatch of to-day. In fact I do not remember, if I ever
knew, who you are, and I have very little conception as to
what you are telegraphing about.
A. LINCOLN.
  
 
  
 A 
  .
NEW YORK, October 15, 1863.
DEAR SIR: ON the point of leaving I am told, by a
gentleman to whose statements I attach credit, that the
opposition policy for the Presidential campaign will be to
“abstain from voting.” J.
[Comment.]
More likely to abstain from stopping, once they get at it,
until they shall have voted several times each.
October 16. A. L.
  
 
 
  A  H. 
. HA     .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, October 16, 1863.
MAJOR GENERAL HALLECK: I do not believe Lee can
have over 60,000 eﬀective men.
Longstreet’s corps would not be sent away to bring an
equal force back upon the same road; and there is no other
direction for them to have come from.
Doubtless, in making the present movement, Lee
gathered in all available scraps, and added them to Hill’s
and Ewell’s corps; but that is all, and he made the
movement in the belief that four corps had left General
Meade; and General Meade’s apparently avoiding a
collision with him has conﬁrmed him in that belief. If
General Meade can now attack him on a ﬁeld no worse
than equal for us, and will do so now with all the skill and
courage which he, his oﬀicers, and men possess, the honor
will be his if he succeeds, and the blame may be mine if he
fails.
Yours truly, A. LINCOLN.
  A    
           
 
       
  
      
    .
BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES OF
AMERICA:
A PROCLAMATION.
Whereas the term of service of a part of the Volunteer
forces of the United States will expire during the coming
year; and whereas, in addition to the men raised by the
present draft, it is deemed expedient to call out three
hundred thousand volunteers to serve for three years or
during the war, not, however, exceeding three years:
Now, therefore, I, Abraham Lincoln, President of the
United States, and Commander-in-Chief of the Army and
Navy thereof, and of the militia of the several States when
called into actual service, do issue this my proclamation,
calling upon the governors of the diﬀerent States to raise,
and have enlisted into the United States service, for the
various companies and regiments in the ﬁeld from their
respective States, the quotas of three hundred thousand
men.
I further proclaim that all the volunteers thus called out
and duly enlisted shall receive advance pay, premium, and
bounty, as heretofore communicated to the governors of
 States by the War Department through the Provost-
Marshal-General’s oﬀice, by special letters.
I further proclaim that all volunteers received under this
call, as well as all others not heretofore credited, shall be
duly credited and deducted from the quotas established for
the next draft.
I further proclaim that if any State shall fail to raise the
quota assigned to it by the War Department under this call,
then a draft for the deﬁciency in said quota shall be made
in said State, or in the districts of said State, for their due
proportion of said quota, and the said draft shall commence
on the 5th day of January, 1864.
And I further proclaim that nothing in this proclamation
shall interfere with existing orders, or with those which
may be issued for the present draft in the States where it is
now in progress, or where it has not yet been commenced.
The quotas of the States and districts will be assigned by
the 
War 
Department 
through 
the 
Provost-Marshal-
General’s oﬀice, due regard being had for the men
heretofore furnished, whether by volunteering or drafting;
and the recruiting will be conducted in accordance with
such instructions as have been or may be issued by that
department.
In issuing this proclamation, I address myself not only to
the governors of the several States, but also to the good
and loyal people thereof, invoking them to lend their
cheerful, willing, and eﬀective aid to the measures thus
adopted, with a view to reinforce our victorious army now
in the ﬁeld, and bring our needful military operations to a
 prosperous end, thus closing forever the fountains of
sedition and civil war.
In witness whereof, I have hereunto set my hand and
caused 
the 
seal 
of 
the 
United 
States 
to 
be
aﬀixed.....................
A. LINCOLN.
By the President: WILLIAM H. SEWARD, Secretary of
State.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A   
    .
WAR DEPARTMENT, WASHINGTON, D.C., October 17,
1863.
MAJOR-GENERAL FOSTER, PORT Monroe, Va.:
It would be useless for Mrs. Dr. Wright to come here. The
subject is a very painful one, but the case is settled.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
.  .  H
A
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, D.C., OCTOBER
17, 1863
HON. WILLIAM B. THOMAS, Philadelphia, Pa.
I am grateful for your oﬀer of 100,000 men, but as at
present advised I do not consider that Washington is in
danger, or that there is any emergency requiring 60 or 90
days men.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
  . 
I  IA
  A
 
. 
.  A  
 .
WAR DEPARTMENT, October 17, 1863.
JOHN WILLIAMS AND N G. TAYLOR, Knoxville, Tenn.:
You do not estimate the holding of East Tennessee more
highly than I do. There is no absolute purpose of
withdrawing our forces from it, and only a contingent one
to withdraw them temporarily for the purpose of not losing
the position permanently. I am in great hope of not ﬁnding
it necessary to withdraw them at all, particularly if you
raise new troops rapidly for us there.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
  .  . 
 A
 .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON CITY, October 18,
1863.
T. C. DURANT, New York:
As I do with others, so I will try to see you when you
come.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A  
.  .  
    A
 .
WAR DEPARTMENT, October 19, 1863.9. A.M.
MAJOR-GENERAL ROSECRANS, CHATTANOOGA, Tenn:
There has been no battle recently at Bull Run. I suppose
what you have heard a rumor of was not a general battle,
but an “aﬀair” at Bristow Station on the railroad, a few
miles 
beyond 
Manassas 
Junction 
toward 
the
Rappahannock, on Wednesday, the 14th. It began by an
attack of the enemy upon General Warren, and ended in the
enemy being repulsed with a loss of four cannon and from
four to seven hundred prisoners.
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A   .  .   H 
  .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, October 21,
1863.2.45
MAJOR-GENERAL SCHENCK, BALTIMORE, Md.: A
delegation is here saying that our armed colored troops are
at many, if not all, the landings on the Patuxent River, and
by their presence with arms in their hands are frightening
quiet people and producing great confusion. Have they
been sent there by any order, and if so, for what reason?
A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A   .  .   H 
  .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, October 22,
1863.1.30 P.M.
MAJOR-GENERAL SCHENCK, BALTIMORE, Md.: Please
come over here. The fact of one of our oﬀicers being killed
on the Patuxent is a specimen of what I would avoid. It
seems to me we could send white men to recruit better
than to send negroes and thus inaugurate homicides on
punctilio.
Please come over.
A. LINCOLN.
  
 
 
  A  H. 
. HA     .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, October 24, 1863.
MAJOR-GENERAL HALLECK:
Taking all our information together, I think it probable
that Ewell’s corps has started for East Tennessee by way of
Abingdon, marching last Monday, say from Meade’s front
directly to the railroad at Charlottesville.
First, the object of Lee’s recent movement against
Meade; his destruction of the Alexandria and Orange
Railroad, and subsequent withdrawal without more motive,
not otherwise apparent, would be explained by this
hypothesis.
Secondly, the direct statement of Sharpe’s men that
Ewell has gone to Tennessee.
Thirdly, the Irishman’s [Northern Spy in Richmond]
statement that he has not gone through Richmond, and his
further statement of an appeal made to the people at
Richmond to go and protect their salt, which could only
refer to the works near Abingdon.
Fourthly, Graham’s statement from Martinsburg that
Imboden is in retreat for Harrisonburg. This last matches
with the idea that Lee has retained his cavalry, sending
Imboden and perhaps other scraps to join Ewell. Upon this
probability what is to be done?
 If you have a plan matured, I have nothing to say. If you
have not, then I suggest that, with all possible expedition,
the Army of the Potomac get ready to attack Lee, and that
in the meantime a raid shall, at all hazards, break the
railroad at or near Lynchburg.
Yours truly,
A. LINCOLN.
  
  .  . 
A H 
 
 .
(Private and Conﬁdential.) 
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, October 26,
1863.
HON. E. B. WASHBURNE.
MY DEAR SIR: — Yours of the 12th has been in my hands
several days. Inclosed I send the leave of absence for your
brother, in as good form as I think I can safely put it.
Without knowing whether he would accept it. I have
tendered the collectorship at Portland, Maine, to your other
brother, the governor.
Thanks to both you and our friend Campbell for your kind
words and intentions. A second term would be a great
honor and a great labor, which, together, perhaps I would
not decline if tendered.
Yours truly, A. LINCOLN.
  
       A    HA  .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, October 26, 1863.
HON. SECRETARY OF THE TREASURY.
MY DEAR SIR: — The writer of the accompanying letter
is one of Mrs. Lincoln’s numerous cousins. He is a
grandson of “Milliken’s Bend,” near Vicksburg — that is, a
grandson of the man who gave name to Milliken’s Bend.
His father was a brother to MRS. Lincoln’s mother. I know
not a thing about his loyalty beyond what he says.
Supposing he is loyal, can any of his requests be granted,
and if any, which of them?
Yours truly, A. LINCOLN.
