Table of Contents
ALSO BY MARTIN MEREDITH:
Title Page
Dedication
Acknowledgments
PROLOGUE
CHAPTER 1 - THE MISSION SCHOOL LADDER
CHAPTER 2 - JOHANNESBURG
CHAPTER 3 - FRIENDS AND COMRADES
CHAPTER 4 - THE APARTHEID MACHINE
CHAPTER 5 - THE ‘M’ PLAN
CHAPTER 6 - THE FREEDOM CHARTER
CHAPTER 7 - ‘THE FABULOUS DECADE’
CHAPTER 8 - A TRIAL OF ENDURANCE
CHAPTER 9 - SPEAR OF THE NATION
CHAPTER 10 - CAPTURE
CHAPTER 11 - OPERATION MAYIBUYE
CHAPTER 12 - THE RIVONIA TRIAL
CHAPTER 13 - PRISONER 466/64
CHAPTER 14 - A DOUBLE ORDEAL
CHAPTER 15 - SOWETO
CHAPTER 16 - FREE MANDELA!
CHAPTER 17 - TALKING WITH THE ENEMY
CHAPTER 18 - THE FOOTBALL CLUB
CHAPTER 19 - BOTHA’S TEA PARTY
CHAPTER 20 - A STEP TO FREEDOM
CHAPTER 21 - THE THIRD MAN
CHAPTER 22 - WINNIE’S TRIAL
CHAPTER 23 - CODESA
CHAPTER 24 - WINNIE’S DOWNFALL
CHAPTER 25 - THE SUNSET CLAUSE
CHAPTER 26 - THE LONELIEST MAN

CHAPTER 27 - THE ELECTION ROLLER-COASTER
CHAPTER 28 - REINVENTING SOUTH AFRICA
CHAPTER 29 - THE BITTER END
CHAPTER 30 - THE GRAVY TRAIN
CHAPTER 31 - DEALING WITH THE PAST
CHAPTER 32 - PASSING THE BATON
CHAPTER 33 - L’ENVOI
NOTES ON SOURCES
SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY
INDEX
Copyright Page

ALSO BY MARTIN MEREDITH:
The Past Is Another Country: Rhodesia—UDI to Zimbabwe
The First Dance of Freedom: Black Africa in the Postwar Era
In the Name of Apartheid: South Africa in the Postwar Era
Coming to Terms: South Africa’s Search for Truth
Elephant Destiny: Biography of an Endangered Species in Africa
Mugabe: Power, Plunder, and the Struggle for Zimbabwe
The Fate of Africa: A History of Fifty Years of Independence
Diamonds, Gold, and War:
The British, the Boers, and the Making of South Africa

For T

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
IN THE YEARS THAT I HAVE BEEN WRITING ABOUT SOUTH AFRICA,
AS a journalist and as an author, I have encountered much generosity and
goodwill. Many people on many occasions have given me valued help and
assistance and shown great hospitality. For all the acts of kindness I have
received, I am profoundly grateful. I would like here to record my thanks in
particular to Nelson Mandela and to his friends and colleagues who were so
forthcoming about him. I am especially grateful to Walter Sisulu, and to Beryl
Baker, Fikile Bam, Mary Benson, Hilda Bernstein, Rusty Bernstein, George
Bizos, Nat Bregman, Amina Cachalia, Yusuf Cachalia, Ilse Fischer, Ruth
Fischer, Bob Hepple, Rica Hodgson, Joel Joffe, Adelaide Joseph, Paul Joseph,
Kathy Kathrada, Wolfie Kodesh, Mac Maharaj, Govan Mbeki, Godfrey Pitje,
Lazar Sidelsky, Joe Slovo, Ben Turok and Harold Wolpe. My thanks are also
due to librarians at the William Cullen Library and Jan Smuts House Library,
University of the Witwatersrand, at The Star, Johannesburg, and at Queen
Elizabeth House, University of Oxford. I am also grateful to Penny Hoare, for
her early encouragement of the work; to Christina Hardyment, Heidi Holland,
Felicity Bryan, Kate Jones, and Antonia Till; and to Rachel Whitehead, for
providing the rural retreat where this book was written.

PROLOGUE
WHEN NELSON MANDELA WALKED THROUGH THE GATES OF
VICTOR Verster prison in 1990, hand-in-hand with his wife, Winnie, it was a
moment of liberation experienced around the world. Sentenced to life
imprisonment in 1964 for his role in trying to overthrow South Africa’s
apartheid government, Mandela had languished as a prisoner on Robben Island
largely forgotten for more than a decade. ‘During the harsh days in the
Seventies’, Mandela recalled, ‘we had to force ourselves not to give in to
despair’. But during the 1980s, as the anti-apartheid movement gathered
momentum both in South Africa and abroad, Mandela became a potent symbol
of resistance. The campaign for his release was taken up in one country after
another. Awards were showered upon him by foreign governments, by
universities and by cities; streets were named after him; songs were written
about him; his deeds were celebrated at rock concerts. Yet millions of people
who supported the campaign had only scant understanding of who he was. Nor
did anyone have a clear idea of what he now looked like: no new photograph of
him had been published since 1964. Incarcerated in prison, Mandela gained
mythical status—the lost leader whom the world yearned to see again.
Behind the façade of fame, Mandela remained at times an enigmatic figure.
Prison colleagues who were his companions for years on end sometimes felt they
did not really know him. He emerged from prison an intensely private person,
accustomed to concealing his emotions behind a mask. He confided in few
people. He disliked familiarity. The grip of self-control he acquired in prison
rarely left him. His habits remained austere. He did not drink or smoke, and he
never swore. At the state residences he occupied in Cape Town and Pretoria after
the 1994 election, his housekeepers were well versed in his liking for neatness
and order. As president, he continued to make his own bed.
Yet prison life did not rob him of either his charm or his civility. The radiance
of his smile was undiminished. He possessed a natural authority and charisma,
evident to all who encountered him. Despite his patrician nature, he retained the
common touch. His manners were punctilious, reminiscent of another, more
gracious age. He was courteous and attentive to individuals, whatever their
status or age, often stopping to talk with genuine interest to children or youths.

He greeted workers and tycoons with the same politeness. Indeed, he sometimes
seemed more at ease with strangers than in the company of friends.
As president, he managed not only to sustain his popularity among the black
population he had fought to liberate from white rule but also to gain the respect
and admiration of the white community which had once reviled him. His efforts
to overcome the deep racial divisions afflicting South Africa earned him
universal acclaim. As a mark of his standing, the name by which he became
affectionately known, by black and white alike, was Madiba, his clan name,
which dated from an eighteenth-century chief. National sporting victories in
rugby, soccer and cricket were sometimes attributed to ‘Madiba magic’, the
effect of his presence among the spectators. Mandela enjoyed the fame, but
remained unmoved by it and became increasingly conscious of the gap between
his public image and the ordinary man he felt himself to be.
His nature was not always benign. He was feared as well as revered. He
tended to be autocratic. At times he wielded his massive authority unwisely. In
old age he was as capable of acting impetuously as in the days of his youth. He
was still renowned on occasion for his stubbornness and quick temper. His face
sometimes settled into an inscrutable, sphinx-like stare, the lines and furrows on
it marking his displeasure.
Despite the ailments of old age, he brought to his years as president
remarkable energy, as if anxious to make up for lost time. Approaching his
eightieth year, he usually rose before dawn, relishing the prospect of an earlymorning walk, devouring newspapers and telephoning colleagues long before the
normal working day began. Amid an endless stream of meetings, speeches and
official functions, he nevertheless ensured he had time to respond to individual
requests, readily accepting invitations from schoolchildren and from ordinary
citizens, telephoning strangers when the occasion arose and making himself
available for snapshots. But while enjoying contact with common people, the
company to which he was most attracted was that of the rich and famous; status
impressed him.
The relentless pace he set himself took its toll. He succumbed occasionally to
bouts of exhaustion. Constant plane travel exacerbated a hearing problem. His
ankles were perennially swollen. He walked with an increasingly stiff gait. The
eye affliction he had acquired from years of working in the harsh glare of the
lime quarry on Robben Island gave him chronic trouble. The burdens of office

sometimes seemed too onerous. ‘One gets used to it, but it destroys your family
life. I miss children—just being able to be with children at the end of the day and
listen to them chatter’.
His private life was plagued by difficulty and disaster. Upon his release from
prison, he had hoped above all else to re-establish a family home. But the
wayward conduct of his wife, Winnie, her criminal activities and flagrant
infidelity all blighted his late years of freedom. At the height of his popularity
and fame, Mandela was a lonely figure, often spending his evenings alone.
Then, in his late seventies, his close friends noticed he had taken on ‘a new
lease of life’. An attachment he formed with Graca Machel, the widow of a
former president of neighbouring Mozambique, a charming and strong-willed
political leader with her own revolutionary credentials, blossomed into love. On
a spring afternoon in 1996, they declared their affair in public by wandering
hand-in-hand through the leafy suburb of Johannesburg where Mandela lived,
greeting passersby and neighbours working in their gardens. Mandela was
characteristically taciturn in public about their relationship, but Graca Machel
was more forthcoming. ‘To me it is wonderful that we have found each other
after so much pain, and that we can share a life together’, she said. She was
equally forthright about her view of Mandela: ‘He is really a very simple man.
He doesn’t have hidden parts of himself. That’s what makes him so lovable’.
In his latter years as president, Mandela became more mellow and more
reflective. His official speeches were often interspersed with reminiscences and
anecdotes, usually told with self-deprecating humour. One anecdote he
particularly enjoyed concerned a private visit he made to the Bahamas, shortly
before his election victory in 1994. In the street he was approached by a man and
his wife who appeared to recognise him. ‘Aren’t you Nelson Mandela?’ the man
asked. ‘I’m often confused with that chap’, replied Mandela mischievously. The
man was not convinced and whispered to his wife about their unexpected find.
‘What is he famous for?’ his wife inquired in a hushed tone. Not satisfied with
her husband’s mumbled response, the woman turned to Mandela and asked
outright, ‘What are you famous for?’

CHAPTER 1

THE MISSION SCHOOL LADDER
MANDELA WAS BORN IN THE SIMPLE SURROUNDINGS OF A
PEASANT village on the banks of the Mbashe river in Thembuland. But for his
royal connections, his childhood would have been no different from those of
many others there. His great-grandfather Ngubengcuka, however, was a Thembu
king, renowned for his skill in bringing stability to diverse Thembu clans in the
early nineteenth century. And although Mandela was descended from only a
minor branch of the dynasty—the Left-hand House—his link with the Thembu
royal family was to have a marked influence on both his character and his
fortunes.
His father, Gadla Henry Mphakanyiswa, was the village headman at Mvezo.
A tall, respected figure, he presided over local ceremonies and officiated at
traditional rites for such occasions as births, marriages, funerals, harvests and
initiation ceremonies. Like most of his generation, he had had no formal
education; he could not read or write. But he had a keen sense of history and was
valued as a counsellor to the royal family. He was also wealthy enough at one
time to afford four wives and sired in all thirteen children.
Mandela’s mother, Nosekeni Nkedama, was the third of Gadla’s wives. She
bore four children, the eldest of whom, Mandela, was her only son but the
youngest of Gadla’s four sons. Like Gadla, she could neither read nor write.
While Gadla adhered to the traditional Qaba faith, involving the worship of
ancestral spirits, Nosekeni became a devout Christian, taking the name of Fanny.
The Xhosa name given to Mandela at his birth on 18 July 1918 was
Rolihlahla, which meant literally ‘pulling the branch of a tree’, but more
colloquially ‘troublemaker’, and there were friends and relatives who later
ascribed to his Xhosa name the troubles he would encounter. But the name by
which he became popularly known was an English one, Nelson, given to him by
an African teacher on the first day he attended school. For that, there was no
ready explanation, only surmise that it was taken from the famous English

admiral.
It was shortly after he was born that the Mandela household itself encountered
serious trouble. Gadla’s position as headman was dependent not only upon tribal
lineage but upon the approval of white officials in the Cape colonial
administration. After its annexation by Britain in 1885, Thembuland had come
under the control of colonial magistrates who maintained a system of indirect
rule through village headmen appointed to keep order among the local
population as well as to represent their interests. The same system remained in
place when Thembuland became part of the Union of South Africa, established
in 1910, eight years before Mandela was born.
Well known for his stubbornness, Gadla fell into a minor dispute over cattle
with the local magistrate and refused to answer a summons to appear before him.
Gadla took the view that the matter was of tribal concern and not part of the
magistrate’s jurisdiction. He was dismissed for insubordination, losing not only
his government stipend but most of his cattle and his land and the revenue that
went with them. Facing penury, he sent Nosekeni and her young son to Qunu, a
village to the north of Mvezo, about twenty miles from the town of Umtata,
where her family could help support her. It was there that Mandela spent his
boyhood.
The landscape around Qunu—undulating hills, clear streams and lush pastures
grazed by cattle, sheep and goats—made an indelible impression on Mandela.
Qunu was the place where he felt his real roots lay. It was a settlement of
beehive-shaped huts in a narrow valley where life continued much as it had done
for generations past. The population there, numbering no more than a few
hundred, consisted predominantly of ‘red’ people, who dyed their blankets and
clothes with red ochre, a colour said to be beloved by ancestral spirits and the
colour of their faith. There were few Christians in Qunu and those that were
there stood out because of the Western-style clothes they wore.
The Mandela homestead, like most others in Qunu, was simple. Their beehive
huts—a cluster of three—were built without windows or chimneys. The floors
were made of crusted earth taken from ant - hills and kept smooth with layers of
fresh cow dung. There was no furniture, in the Western sense. Everyone slept on
mats, without pillows, resting their heads on their arms. Smoke from the fire
filtered through the grass roof. There was no opening other than a low doorway.
Their diet was also simple, mainly maize, sorghum, beans and pumpkins grown

in fields outside the village and amasi, fermented milk stored in calabashes.
Only a few wealthy families could afford luxuries like tea, coffee and sugar,
bought from the local store.
Having four wives, each living in her own kraal several miles apart, Gadla
visited them in turn, spending perhaps one week a month with each one. With
his children, he was a strict disciplinarian. Complete obedience was expected, in
accordance with Thembu tradition; questions were rarely tolerated. The life that
Mandela led as a child was governed by strict codes of custom and taboo,
guiding him through each state of adolescence. The number of taboos restricting
the course of daily life, for men, boys, girls and especially married women, ran
into hundreds. Most were associated with sex, with key passages of life and with
food. All were held in superstitious awe. Any transgression could incur the wrath
of ancestral spirits, which was to be avoided at all costs.
Along with tribal discipline came the support of an extended family. The
Mandela household in Qunu was often full of relatives, taking as much interest
in the Mandela children as in their own. In Thembu tradition, as with many other
African tribes, uncles and aunts were as responsible for the welfare of children
as the children’s own parents and were referred to as ‘little fathers’ and ‘little
mothers’. The family circle in which Mandela grew up was thus an affectionate
one. Even though he remembered his father mainly for his stern countenance,
Mandela tried to emulate him by rubbing white ash into his hair in imitation of
the tuft of white hair above Gadla’s forehead. Like Gadla, he had the distinctive
facial features of the Madiba clan, high cheek-bones and slanting eyes.
From the age of five, Mandela was set to work as a herdboy, looking after
sheep and calves and learning the central role that cattle played in Thembu
society. Cattle were not only a source of meat and milk but the main medium of
exchange and the measure of a tribes-man’s wealth. As the price of a bride was
paid in cattle, without cattle there could be no marriage. Moreover, the principal
means of propitiating ancestral spirits were through the sacrifice of cattle.
Significant events like funerals were marked by their slaughter.
Much of Mandela’s time was also spent in the open veld in the company of
members of his own age group, stick-throwing and fighting, gathering wild
honey and fruits, trapping birds and small animals that could be roasted, and
swimming in the cold streams—the normal pursuits of young Thembu boys.
What first set him on a different course was the influence of two villagers

known as Mfengu. The Mfengu had arrived in Thembuland and neighbouring
Xhosaland as refugees fleeing southwards from a series of wars and upheavals
called the mfecane which accompanied the rise of the Zulu kingdom in the
1820s. Drawn from a number of different clans among the northern Nguni, the
refugees, some moving in scattered bands, others in larger groups, were given
the name of Mfengu to describe their position as suppliants and were often
treated with contempt and animosity. Lacking land and cattle, many formed a
servant class for the Thembu and their Xhosa neighbours. But they were also
more readily adaptable to serving the interests of white colonists. Mfengu levies
fought as combatants on the colonial side in four frontier wars in the Cape
Colony, helping to inflict defeats on the Xhosa. They were rewarded with land
and cattle. A large area of what had been Xhosa territory was designated as
Fingoland. They were also among the first to take advantage of Christian
missionary education, acquiring new skills and finding employment as teachers,
clerks, policemen and court officials.
Mandela’s father did not share the common prejudice against Mfengu. Among
his friends were two Mfengu brothers, George and Ben Mbekela, both Christian,
one a retired teacher, the other a police sergeant. It was their suggestion that
Mandela should be baptised and sent to the local mission-run school. Gadla,
recognising that an education was the only advancement available for his
youngest son, accepted the idea.
At the age of seven, Mandela went to the one-room school in Qunu, crossing
the boundary between ‘red’ people and ‘school’ people. To mark the occasion,
Gadla presented him with a pair of his old trousers, cut off at the knee and
fastened around his waist with a piece of string. Hitherto, the only clothing that
Mandela had worn had been a blanket, wrapped around one shoulder and pinned
at the waist. ‘I must have been a comical sight,’ he wrote in his autobiography,
‘but I have never owned a suit I was prouder to wear than my father’s cut-off
trousers.’
Two years later, in the Mandela household in Qunu, Gadla died, leaving
Nosekeni without the means to continue her son’s education. The event changed
Mandela’s life dramatically. Because of his family ties to the Thembu royal
house and to the Madiba clan dating back to an eighteenth-century Thembu
chief, the young Mandela was taken up as a ward by Chief Jongintaba
Dalindyebo, the acting regent of the Thembu people. Accompanied by his
mother, he left the simple idyll of Qunu, walking across the hills westwards to

Mqheke - zweni, the provisional capital of Thembuland, where Jongintaba
maintained his Great Place, and entered a new world.
The royal residence, consisting of two large rectangular houses with
corrugated-iron roofs surrounded by seven thatched rondavels all washed in
white lime, was more impressive than anything the young Mandela had ever
seen. As he approached, Jongintaba himself arrived in a Ford V8, to be greeted
by a group of tribal elders who had been waiting in the shade of eucalyptus trees
with the traditional salute, ‘Bayete, Jongintaba!’—‘Hail, Jongintaba!’
In accordance with tribal custom, Mandela was accepted by Jongintaba into
the Great Place as if he were his own child. He shared a rondavel with his only
son, Justice, wore the same kind of clothes and was subject to the same parental
discipline. The regent’s wife, NoEngland, treated him with equal affection and,
once his own mother had returned to Qunu, soon filled her place. Life at
Mqhekezweni was too full of excitement for Mandela to miss for long the world
he had loved at Qunu. Even the chores seemed more enjoyable. He took
particular pride in ironing the creases in the trousers of Jongintaba’s suits.
What impressed him above all was the influence of the chieftaincy. Under
colonial rule, hereditary chiefs had retained a wide range of powers and
functions. They continued to conduct traditional court cases, to collect tributary
fees and dues, and to exercise considerable authority over the distribution of
land. They constituted a central part of the colonial administrative system, held
in high esteem by white officials, while enjoying at the same time the traditional
support of the local population.
Watching at close quarters the way in which Jongintaba exercised his power
as regent, Mandela became absorbed by the workings of the chieftaincy. At
tribal meetings at the Great Place, when high-ranking councillors gathered to
discuss both local and national issues, he observed how Jongintaba would take
care to hear all opinions, listening in silence to whatever criticism was made,
even of himself, before making a summary of what had been said and
endeavouring to find a consensus of views. It was a style of leadership which
made a profound impression upon him. He learned too of the proceedings of the
traditional courts at Mqhekezweni, where chiefs and headmen from surrounding
districts met to settle disputes and judge cases.
It was from these tribal elders, sitting around the fireside at night, that
Mandela first heard stories of Robben Island. It was mentioned often by them

when recounting the long history of conflict between white colonists and Xhosaspeaking tribes in the turbulent eastern frontier region of the Cape Colony during
the nineteenth century. The name given to it in the Xhosa language was
Esiqithini, a word which quite simply meant ‘on the island’. Everybody knew
which island was referred to and what it meant. For the Xhosa, it was a place of
banishment and death.

The first Xhosa leader whom the whites sent to Robben Island was a warriorprophet called Makana; he was also known by the name of Nxele, meaning the
Left-handed. In 1819, in retaliation for a raid by colonial troops into Xhosa
territory, Makana had led an army of 10,000 men against the British military
outpost at Grahamstown, intending ‘to chase the white men from the earth and
drive them into the sea’. The attack, in broad daylight, failed. Four months later,
after British forces had laid waste to a vast stretch of Xhosa territory, Makana
gave himself up at a military camp, hoping to stop the slaughter. ‘People say that
I have occasioned this war,’ he said. ‘Let me see whether delivering myself up to
the conquerors will restore peace to my country.’
Makana was sentenced to life imprisonment, taken in shackles to Port
Elizabeth, put on board the brig Salisbury and delivered to Robben Island, 400
miles away, off the coast at Cape Town. It had been used since the seventeenth
century as a prison colony for both criminal convicts and political dissidents.
Within a year of his imprisonment, Makana, along with other inmates, helped
organise an escape, seized a fishing boat and headed for the mainland three miles
away. As the boat came into the breakers off Blauberg beach, it capsized.
According to the survivors, Makana clung for some time to a rock, shouting
encouragement to others to reach the shore, until he was swept off and engulfed
by the raging surf.
Makana was never forgotten by his Xhosa followers. Many refused to believe
that he was dead and waited for years for his return, giving rise to a new Xhosa
expression, ‘Kukuzakuka Nxele’, the coming of Nxele, meaning forlorn hope.
The fate of Maqoma, the greatest military commander the Xhosa ever
produced, was also well remembered. Expelled from his native valley in 1829,
Maqoma engaged in a series of wars against the British in an attempt to regain
lost Xhosa lands. During the 1850s, his guerrilla force based in the Amatola
mountains held at bay a British army for months on end, inflicting one defeat

after another.
Twice Maqoma was shipped off to Robben Island. During his first term of
imprisonment, lasting eleven years, he was allowed the company of his youngest
wife and a son. But on the second occasion, at the age of seventy-three, he was
sent back there alone. No one else on the island spoke any Xhosa. He received
no visitors. According to an Anglican chaplain who witnessed his last moments
in 1873, he cried bitterly, before dying of old age and dejection, ‘at being here
alone—no wife, or child, or attendant’.
After nine frontier wars, Xhosa resistance against British colonial rule finally
ended. Once an expanding and aggressive nation, the Xhosa had lost great
swathes of land to white settlers. In the process, Xhosa leaders squabbled and
fought with each other as much as they did with the white colonists. Some chiefs
defected to the colonial side. Others were willing enough to collaborate. In the
most desperate act of resistance, the Xhosa slaughtered vast herds of their own
cattle, believing the prophecy of a teenage girl, Nongqawuse, that it would help
‘in driving the English from the land’. It resulted only in mass starvation, in
which tens of thousands of Xhosa died and enabled the authorities to take yet
more Xhosa territory for white settlement.
Unlike their Xhosa neighbours to the south-west, the Thembu, a Xhosaspeaking people, managed to avoid most of the frontier conflict and lost little
land to white settlement. Yet Thembuland, like all the other independent
chiefdoms in the area, eventually succumbed to Cape control and became
incorporated into a new region known as the Transkeian Territories. It was the
largest area of South Africa not to fall into white hands. But just as much as the
Xhosa, the Thembu had lost political control. The authority of their chiefs had
become secondary to that of colonial officials, like the magistrates, as Mandela’s
father had found to his cost.
What stirred the young Mandela’s imagination, as he listened to these tales of
Xhosa history around the fireside, were the bravery and defiance shown by
Xhosa leaders who stood against the whites’ advance. The age of the chiefs was
seen as a heroic time. The memory of men like Makana and Maqoma was
carried down from one generation to the next to ensure that a tradition of
resistance survived. They became the heroes of Mandela’s youth.

Another profound influence on Mandela at Mqhekezweni, pulling in a different
direction, was the Church. The mission station there, centred around a white
stucco church, was revered in Mqhekezweni as much as the Great Place itself. It
was part of a century of endeavour by Wesleyan Methodist missionaries to carry
Christianity to the African peoples of the Eastern Cape which had started when
the Reverend William Shaw, a pioneer missionary accompanying a party of
British settlers to the Cape frontier region in 1820, decided that a far greater
potential for mission work lay in Xhosa territory to the east, ‘a country
abounding with heathen inhabitants’. Within a few years his chain of mission
stations had reached 200 miles into African territory. One of the mission
stations, Clarkebury, on the banks of the Mgwali river in the heart of
Thembuland, was built on land donated by Mandela’s great-grandfather, King
Ngubengcuka. Anglican, Presbyterian and Moravian missionaries were also
active in the Transkei region.
Before arriving in Mqhekezweni, Mandela had been to church only on one
occasion, to be baptised in the Wesleyan chapel in Qunu as a prelude to
attending school there. At Mqhekezweni, church was taken much more
seriously. Jongintaba himself was a devout Wesleyan who regularly attended
church each Sunday, together with his wife, NoEngland, and Mandela was
expected to do the same. Once when Mandela missed Sunday service, preferring
to take part in a fight against boys from another village, he was given a hiding by
the regent.
The church was always full on Sundays, men dressed in suits, women in long
skirts and high-necked blouses—a style favoured by missionaries at the time.
The local minister, Reverend Matyolo, was a popular figure whose fire-andbrimstone sermons, seasoned with a dose of African animism, found a ready
audience. But what impressed Mandela, even more than the rituals and
ceremony, was the impact of missionary education. The African elite of the time
—clerks, teachers, interpreters and policemen—were all products of missionary
schools.
At the primary school at Mqhekezweni, a one-room building next to the royal
residence, Mandela showed no particular flair, but he was a diligent learner and
received special attention from his teachers, taking homework back every day to
the Great Place, where an aunt would check it. The subjects he studied were
standard: English, Xhosa, history and geography. They were taught, in the
tradition that missionaries had long established, with a notable British bias, for

the missionaries believed in the virtues of the British Empire, British culture and
British institutions just as much as they did in the virtues of Christianity.
Thus Mandela grew up a serious boy, respectful of the chieftaincy, the Church
and British tradition. At the Great Place, his solemn demeanour earned him the
nickname Tatamkhulu, meaning Grandpa. He spent much time in the company
of Justice, Jongintaba’s son and heir, a student at Clarkebury mission who was
four years older, admiring him for his outgoing nature, his achievements in sport
and ballroom dancing, and his success with young women, wishing he could be
as accomplished.
At the age of sixteen, Mandela underwent the ritual of circumcision. It was an
event not just of passing interest among the Thembu and other Xhosa-speaking
peoples, but of fundamental significance. The elaborate ceremonies for initiates,
lasting several weeks, marked their passage to full manhood. Without
circumcision, no Thembu male could marry, set up his own home, inherit his
father’s wealth or participate in tribal councils. In Thembu tradition, he would
remain a boy.
Preparations for the sacred rites of the abakhwetha, the groups of youths
undergoing circumcision, were made well in advance, involving whole families.
To prove that they were ready to accept adult responsibilities, initiates were
required to undergo a number of ordeals which had been prescribed for
generations. The most important was the act of circumcision itself. It was
performed by an ingcibi, a surgeon skilled in the use of an assegai blade, who
sliced off the foreskin with a single, quick motion. No word was spoken; no
sound came from the circle of parents and relatives looking on. No matter how
severe the pain, the initiates were instructed not to betray the slightest emotion,
not to moan, clench a fist, or even frown or blink. To do so would be to incur
shame and ridicule. Without a moment of hesitation, once the cut had been
made, their only action was to shout, ‘Ndiyindoda!’— ‘I am a man!’
After the ceremony, the initiates were secluded in a specially constructed
lodge for weeks on end under the guidance and discipline of an overseer who
instructed them on the rules of manhood and ensured that they adhered to strict
lodge rules and activities. Their bodies and heads were shaved and covered in
white clay until the end of their seclusion. Humbled by the experience of
initiation, the abakhwetha were welcomed back into everyday tribal life with
gifts and songs and feasting.

The occasion of Mandela’s circumcision was more important than usual, for
the group of initiates—twenty-six in all—included Justice, a royal son, and the
ceremony was held at a traditional place for circumcision for Thembu kings at
Tyhalarha, on the banks of the Mbashe river. In accordance with Thembu
tradition, Justice was both preceded and followed by commoners. Waiting in
line, Mandela heard the first boy call out ‘Ndiyindoda!’ followed a few seconds
later by Justice. Suddenly, the ingcibi was before him. ‘The pain was so intense
that I buried my chin in my chest,’ he wrote in his autobiography.
Many seconds seemed to pass before I remembered the cry, and then I
recovered and called out ‘Ndiyindoda!’ I looked down and saw a perfect
cut, clean and round like a ring. But I felt ashamed because the other
boys seemed much stronger and firmer than I had been; they had called
out more promptly than I had. I was distressed that I had been disabled,
however briefly, by the pain, and I did my best to hide my agony. A boy
may cry; a man conceals his pain.
Once the period of seclusion was over and the initiates, now daubed in red
ochre, had been welcomed back to society as men, Mandela’s spirits revived.
His gifts included two heifers and four sheep—the first property he had
possessed. ‘I remember walking differently on that day, straighter, taller, firmer.
I was hopeful, and thinking that I might some day have wealth, property and
status.’
A succession of speeches followed, delivered by fathers and tribal elders,
lengthy discourses on Xhosa customs, beliefs and etiquette, on the host of
responsibilities that initiates now faced and on the standard of behaviour
expected of them. The speech that stuck in Mandela’s mind was one by Chief
Meligqili, a brother of Jongintaba. He began with conventional remarks about
the importance of tribal tradition, but then became increasingly outspoken about
the plight of the Xhosa under white rule. They were, he said, slaves in their own
country, with no power or control over their own destiny, performing work for
the whites to make them prosperous. The talents and abilities of young Xhosa
men, like the initiates present, were meanwhile squandered. Without freedom
and independence, the Xhosa nation would die.
Mandela was irritated by the speech and put it down to the ramblings of an old
man who did not understand the value of education and the other benefits that
white rule had brought.

The career laid out for Mandela at the age of sixteen seemed assured. His
guardian, Jongintaba, intended that he should continue his education, climbing
steadily up the mission school ladder, until he was fit for service in the Thembu
royal household. His destiny, like that of other members of the Left-hand House
before him, was to become a counsellor to the Thembu chieftaincy. Mandela
readily accepted such an outcome. He saw himself fulfilling a role at the heart of
Thembu society, upholding the authority of the chieftaincy and maintaining
traditions of which he felt immensely proud.
The alternative, as it applied to the vast majority of young Thembu men of his
age, was for him to seek work far beyond the borders of Thembuland, in the
mines or on the farms of white South Africa. There was a certain glamour
attached to such journeys. Men returned home after months away in dashing
attire—flared trousers, sharp-pointed shoes, striped ties, wide-brimmed hats and
coloured handkerchiefs—bearing tales of the excitement of city life, of trams,
motor cars and electric lights, and bringing with them new possessions like
gramophones. They spoke of the mines as places of daring and courage where
men were able to prove their manhood.
But more lay behind the exodus of men from Thembuland and other African
‘reserves’ than tales of adventure. The reserves were becoming overcrowded,
without sufficient grazing land or arable land to support their growing
populations. Parts of the Transkeian Territories consistently failed to produce
enough food to meet local needs. The burden of taxation, like the poll tax, added
to the spur to men to find wage employment, as it was specifically designed to
do. The result in the Transkei, once one of the most prosperous African areas in
South Africa, was that by the 1920s nearly half of all able-bodied men were
absent from their homes at any given moment on long spells of contract labour.
In villages like Qunu, where Mandela grew up, the population consisted
predominantly of old men, women and children.
However much Mandela was attracted by stories of adventure and money far
afield, Jongintaba decided otherwise. Once he had completed his primary
education at Mqhekezweni, Mandela was sent to Clarkebury, the mission school
which Justice had previously attended. Jongintaba himself drove him there, in
his Ford V8, westwards across the Mbashe river, with Mandela wearing his first
pair of boots, given to him to mark the occasion.

Clarkebury was the most advanced educational institute in Thembuland. It had
been founded in 1875 through the efforts of a Wesleyan minister and with the
help of funds donated by Thembus themselves. It served as both a secondary
school and a teacher-training college, as well as providing practical training in
carpentry, shoemaking, printing and other trades. It was also the centre of a
Methodist network of forty-two outstation schools in Thembuland, including the
primary schools at Qunu and Mqhekezweni which Mandela had attended. Its
buildings were on a far grander scale than anything he had previously
encountered.
On arrival, Jongintaba, himself a former pupil, took Mandela to meet the
school principal, the Reverend Cecil Harris. Hitherto, Mandela had had few
direct dealings with whites. At Qunu, the only whites to be seen, apart from the
local magistrate and the local store-keeper, were occasional travellers and
policemen. At Mqhekezweni, white government officials and traders had often
called at the Great Place to speak to Jongintaba and Mandela had observed them
from a distance. But, as Jongintaba explained while they were on their way to
Clarkebury, the Reverend Harris was different from all of them. A man
renowned for his understanding and affection for the Thembu people, he was
regarded by them as a Thembu himself. One day, said Jongintaba, he would be
entrusted with the upbringing of the future paramount chief, Sabata Dalindyebo.
He was to be treated with as much respect and obedience as the regent himself.
In the principal’s office, as he was introduced by Jongintaba, Mandela shook
Harris’s hand, the first time he had shaken hands with a white man.
Mandela soon discovered that the Reverend Harris ruled Clarkebury with an
iron rod. His countenance was invariably severe. Punishment was handed out
swiftly to anyone who transgressed the rules. Students went in fear of him and
the staff, both white and black, tended to adopt a servile manner.
In private, however, Mandela came to see a different figure. Because
Jongintaba had asked the principal to take a special interest in Mandela, in view
of his likely destiny as a royal counsellor, the Reverend Harris had arranged for
him to work in his garden after school hours, instead of participating with other
pupils in manual labour elsewhere. There Mandela observed a more gentle man,
often lost in thought, taciturn but broad-minded and devoted to the cause of
educating young Africans. His wife too made a favourable impression, carrying
out to the garden warm scones and passing the time in conversation. The Harris
family were the first white family with whom Mandela became familiar.

At the age of nineteen, Mandela moved up the mission school ladder to
Healdtown, a Wesleyan foundation sited at the head of a large and fertile valley
six miles from the village of Fort Beaufort in Ciskei, an area where many of the
frontier wars had been fought. It had been established in 1857, originally for the
education of Mfengu as a reward for their loyal service to the British cause, but
had since grown into the largest educational establishment for Africans in South
Africa, providing a wide range of schooling for boys and girls, from primary
education to the end-of-school matriculation examination. Its Christian and
liberal arts education founded on English grammar and literature had profoundly
influenced generations of students. Most of the staff came from Britain and the
English model provided the basis for all teaching. The principal, Dr Arthur
Wellington, was a man who liked to boast to pupils of his connection to the
Duke of Wellington, the British general who defeated Napoleon at the battle of
Waterloo. Mandela recalled, ‘We were taught and believed that the best ideas
were English ideas, the best government was English government and the best
men were Englishmen.’
Healdtown was also renowned for its spartan routines, attributable in part to a
shortage of mission funds. Breakfast in the dining hall, overlooked by portraits
of George VI and former Healdtown teachers, consisted of a mug of lukewarm
water with sugar and a piece of dry bread; anyone who wanted butter had to buy
it. Lunch on three days of the week consisted of meat, beans and samp-porridge
made from coarsely ground maize; on other days, there was no meat. Supper was
the same as breakfast.
Wednesday afternoons were set aside for sport. Friday afternoons were free.
Saturdays were spent in competitive sports against other schools. They were also
the one day of the week when pupils were given permission to walk to Fort
Beaufort, a village which boasted a general grocer’s store and a fish and chip
shop. On Saturday nights, once a month, there was a film show and,
occasionally, a concert given by a local music troupe. On Sundays, boys
attended church in their full uniform: grey trousers, white shirts, red-and-yellowstriped ties and blazers with a badge on the pocket and the Latin motto Alis velut
aquilarum surgent—they soar as if with the wings of eagles.
There were more than 1,000 pupils at Healdtown. They mostly came from
Xhosa-speaking districts and, after school hours and at weekends, tended to keep
to groups from their own home areas. But some came from further afield in
South Africa, as well as from the British protectorates of Basutoland,

Bechuanaland and Swaziland. To Mandela, they were mostly strangers. His
sense of identity in belonging to the Thembu tribe broadened to include the
Xhosa people in general but not yet a wider African community. He felt quite
bold at having as a friend a Sotho-speaking African and was amazed to discover
a Sotho-speaking teacher there who was married to a Xhosa woman. He had
never known of anyone marrying outside his tribe before.
Mandela adapted well to life at Healdtown. He much admired his
housemaster, the Reverend Seth Mokitimi, took up long-distance running and
boxing, became a prefect and in due course passed matriculation, enabling him
to climb to the top of the mission school ladder, the South African Native
College at Fort Hare.
Before he left, the Xhosa writer and poet Samuel Mqhayi paid a visit to
Healdtown. Mqhayi was renowned for his performances as a mbongi, a praisesinger and orator in the flowery court tradition of the Xhosa people. He was
often at odds with the educational establishment. He had once taught at Lovedale
mission school, but left teaching because he opposed the way African history
was presented. His own writing was a major source of inspiration to early
African nationalists. In 1927 he had written seven stanzas for the song ‘Nkosi
Sikelel’ iAfrika’—‘God Bless Africa’, a song composed by the Xhosa teacher
Enoch Sontonga in Johannesburg’s Nancefield location in 1897 which African
nationalists had decided to use as their anthem.
Gathered in the dining hall, the entire school watched as Mqhayi, dressed in a
leopard-skin kaross and hat and carrying a spear in each hand, walked on to the
stage from a side door, followed by Dr Wellington. For Mandela, it was an
electrifying moment. He listened enthralled as Mqhayi declaimed against the
curse of foreign culture, predicting how the forces of African society would
eventually overcome it. And when he ended with a well-known praise-poem
about the Xhosa people, his school audience rose to their feet clapping and
cheering. It was an event, said Mandela, which for him was ‘like a comet
streaking across the night sky’.

Fort Hare was an educational institute for Africans of unique importance. To
reach there, as Mandela did in 1939 at the age of twenty, represented a great
achievement. To obtain a degree from there, so few were the number of
graduates each year, ensured personal fortune and advancement in any career

then open to Africans. No other place in South Africa offered such opportunity.
Like most of the African education system, its origins lay largely in
missionary endeavour. Three missionary churches—Anglican, Methodist and
Presbyterian—had combined their efforts to establish a centre for higher
education where none previously existed. The site they chose, on mission lands
belonging to the United Free Church of Scotland, lay within and adjacent to the
ramparts of Fort Hare, the largest of all the border forts, built in 1846 and named
after a British officer. It stood on a small plateau overlooking the Tyumie River,
half a mile from the village of Alice and near to Lovedale mission. Only one of
the old fort’s buildings, a square blockhouse, was still standing, but the lines and
trenches, once manned by British soldiers, were still clearly visible.
There was no imposing building in which the college could start, only a
collection of rudimentary bungalows, one of which was adapted for use as a
hostel, another as a classroom and a third as a house for the principal. The
sanitation was primitive, there was no gas or electricity, and water for bathing
had to be drawn from the Tyumie River. At the opening ceremony, in February
1916, the platform for dignitaries was erected under an awning of railway wagon
covers on what had once been a parade ground for British troops.
There was also a shortage of African students qualified to enter higher
education. Only one school in South Africa at the time, Lovedale mission,
provided secondary education for Africans. Of the first intake of students at Fort
Hare in 1916, sixteen had to undertake a four-year course in order to pass
matriculation. The initial task at Fort Hare, in fact, was to ensure that African
students could reach the minimum standard required for university entrance. The
first graduation ceremony was not held until 1924.
The eventual success of Fort Hare was due in large part to the efforts of the
two original members of staff, both of whom were still active when Mandela
arrived in 1939. One was a Scot, Alexander Kerr, educated at Edinburgh
University and appointed principal at Fort Hare at the age of thirty. Free of the
racial attitudes common to most whites in South Africa, he was devoted to the
cause of African education, taught English with a rare passion and maintained
firm discipline. The other was an African teacher of legendary talent, Dr
Davidson Jabavu. The son of a well-known Mfengu teacher, he had been refused
admission as a day scholar to a high school for white boys in King William’s
Town, so he was sent instead to Wales to complete his secondary education. He

had studied at the University of London, graduating with honours in English,
obtained a diploma in education from the University of Birmingham, then visited
Negro schools in the United States before returning to take up a post at Fort Hare
at the age of thirty. He spoke Xhosa, Zulu and Sotho; played the piano and the
violin competently; trained and conducted the college choir; and taught Latin,
Bantu studies and history with the same enthusiasm and verve he gave to music.
He also was active in Church affairs, in journalism, in politics and in founding
an agricultural society. At graduation ceremonies at Fort Hare, Jabavu was a
favourite subject for the praise-poems of the mbongi, Samuel Mqhayi.
Under the guidance of these two teachers, Fort Hare expanded year by year.
The first permanent buildings were finished in 1920. New hostels were built,
each accommodating students according to their Church denomination. The
Methodist hostel, Wesley House, was completed in 1922. No account was taken
of tribal affiliations and women were admitted on equal terms. One of the first
two graduates in 1924—the first Africans with a South African university degree
—was Z. K. Matthews, who went on to study at Yale University before returning
to Fort Hare in 1936 as a lecturer in anthropology and native law. By 1938, the
year before Mandela arrived, the number of graduates had risen to seventeen and
the number of students to 150. No longer was Fort Hare needed for matriculation
purposes, as secondary schools like Healdtown were by then able to provide a
sufficient number of qualified entrants.
Mandela arrived, a tall, thin figure, proudly sporting his first suit, a doublebreasted grey outfit given to him by Jongintaba to mark the occasion. He was
assigned a place in Wesley House in a wooden-floored dormitory of sixteen beds
with lockers and cupboards, along with other first-year students. Also resident at
Wesley House, in his third year there, was a distant cousin, Kaizer Matanzima.
Like Mandela, Matanzima was a descendant of King Ngubengcuka, but he came
from the Great House and was destined to become chief of the Emigrant
Thembu, part of the tribe that had split away in the nineteenth century. They
became close friends. Matanzima took an avuncular interest in Mandela,
introduced him to soccer and shared his allowance with him. They attended
church services at nearby Lovedale mission together. Mandela admired
Matanzima, looking up to him as he had to Justice. He introduced Matanzima to
his great wife and stood as best man at their wedding in 1940. But they were
later to become political adversaries.
Mandela adapted to the routine at Fort Hare without difficulty. In his first year

he studied English, anthropology, politics, native administration and Roman
Dutch law. In his second year he opted to take an interpreter’s course, thinking
that he might settle for a career as an interpreter in a magistrate’s court or some
other government office—positions of considerable importance for Africans. He
joined the Dramatic Society, took part in soccer and cross-country running
competitions and spent hours honing his skills as a ballroom dancer to the tunes
of Victor Sylvester on a crackly old phonograph. His personal habits changed.
He wore pajamas for the first time, used toothpaste instead of ash to clean his
teeth and a toothbrush instead of a toothpick, and used toilet soap instead of blue
detergent to wash.
He also joined the Student Christian Association. The tradition at Fort Hare
was for students to set out on foot in groups on Sunday mornings to conduct
services and Sunday schools in nearby villages, in accordance with a longestablished practice inherited from the missionary institutions in which they had
been educated. In addition to religious talks and teaching, the students would
hold discussions on more mundane matters such as village sanitation and the
prevention of disease.
On such occasions Mandela was often accompanied by a serious-minded
student named Oliver Tambo. Tambo came from humble origins from the village
of Bizana in Pondoland, north-east of Thembuland. The tribal scarification
marks on his cheeks were to remain throughout his life. His parents were poor,
illiterate peasants but he had been rescued from village life by Anglican
missionaries. At Holy Cross mission in Pondoland, he had been so impressed by
the workings of the church that he resolved to become a priest himself. ‘I arrived
there on Easter day, and I shall never forget that moment,’ he once told an
Anglican priest, Father Trevor Huddleston. ‘We entered the great church while
the Mass of Easter was being sung. I can still see the red cassocks of the servers,
the grey smoke of the incense, the vestments of the priest at the altar.’ Having
reached the mission’s highest class, he was sent to an Anglican school in
Johannesburg, St Peter’s, the first school in the Transvaal at which Africans
could take matriculation, and from there gained a scholarship to Fort Hare. A
resident of the Anglican hostel, Beda Hall, he saw little of Mandela at the time,
but the enduring friendship they eventually forged was to become a central part
of Mandela’s life.
Remote as Fort Hare was from the outside world, it was nevertheless touched
by the gathering momentum towards world war. From the warden of Wesley

House, students heard of each development abroad and gathered round an old
radio to listen to patriotic speeches. When General Smuts, the deputy prime
minister, called in at Fort Hare while campaigning for South African support for
the British war effort, Mandela cheered him to the hilt.
His own fortunes, however, were soon to suffer a serious setback. An abiding
grievance among students at Fort Hare was the monotony of the food. It was an
issue which constantly preoccupied the Student Representative Council. The low
fees charged at Fort Hare, to ensure that students from poor backgrounds could
gain access, meant that there was little room for variation in diet. Towards the
end of Mandela’s second year, complaints about food reached one of their
periodic boiling points. A meeting of students unanimously demanded an
increase in the powers of the Student Representative Council to enable it to deal
with their grievances. A majority voted to boycott elections due to be held for
the six members of the council unless their demands were met. Mandela,
nominated to stand as a candidate for one of the six seats, voted in favour of the
move. The election was duly boycotted by a majority of students, but a minority
of twenty-five went ahead and elected six members, one of whom was Mandela.
The six then decided to resign on the grounds that they did not enjoy majority
support and sent a letter of resignation to the principal, Dr Kerr.
Dr Kerr accepted the resignations, then arranged for new elections to be held
the next day in the dining hall at supper time, when the entire student body
would be present. At these new elections the same twenty-five voters supported
the same six candidates, but this time Mandela’s five colleagues accepted the
result. Mandela alone held out, deciding to resign once more. He was summoned
by Dr Kerr, who, after calmly reviewing the matter, asked Mandela to reconsider
his decision, pointing out that he could not allow students to act irresponsibly
and warning that if Mandela insisted on resigning he would be expelled from
Fort Hare.
When set against the opportunities that awaited Mandela and the expectations
of his family and his guardian, Jongintaba, who had paid for his education and
provided him with a home for twelve years, the issue was an utterly trivial one.
Mandela well knew that a degree from Fort Hare was a passport to success.
Time and again, his teachers—Kerr, Jabavu and Matthews—had stressed the life
of privilege and prestige to which graduates could look forward. Mandela
himself had dreamed of how he would be able to care properly for his mother
and sisters, restoring the family fortunes that had been lost upon his father’s

dismissal as village headman.
What overcame him was a fit of stubbornness of the kind for which his father
had been renowned. When he appeared before Dr Kerr the next morning, he was
still largely in a state of indecision, but, confronted with the need to decide, he
declared that in good conscience he could not serve on the Student
Representative Council. After a moment’s thought, Dr Kerr replied that he
would allow Mandela to return to Fort Hare for a third year, provided that he
joined the Student Representative Council. In the meantime, he would have the
summer holiday to consider the matter.
Mandela returned to Mqhekezweni to face the wrath of Jongintaba. Jongintaba
brooked no argument about Mandela’s behaviour, which he regarded as
senseless, and ordered him to obey Dr Kerr’s instructions and to return to Fort
Hare after the summer holiday to complete his third year.
In all likelihood, Mandela would have returned to Fort Hare, but for an
unexpected development. In accordance with Thembu tradition, Jongintaba, in
his old age, had begun negotiations to arrange a marriage for both his son,
Justice, and his ward, Mandela, without informing either of them, to settle the
matter before his death. A few weeks after Mandela’s return to Mqhekezweni,
Jongintaba summoned them both and told them not only who their brides were
to be but that the marriages would take place immediately.
Mandela had had a number of love affairs. He enjoyed the company of women
and felt able to relax with them in a way he was unable to do with men; with
women, he could admit his weaknesses. He was not short of admirers, being a
handsome man, powerfully built, with an engaging laugh, a radiant smile and
dark piercing eyes. He was also by nature a romantic, whose education had
distanced him from the notion that an arranged marriage was an acceptable fate.
The bride whom Jongintaba had chosen for him came from a respectable family;
her father was the local Thembu priest. Mandela had also known for many years
that Jongintaba might exercise his traditional prerogative to arrange a marriage
for him, but the reality of it was more than he could face. He briefly tried to
enlist the support of the regent’s wife, NoEngland, but Jongintaba remained
unmoved. The idea of seeking a solution through tribal intermediaries, as custom
allowed, he did not pursue.
Justice was no more enamoured of the prospect than Mandela and together
they decided to run away. Justice, always more of a playboy than a serious

student, had struggled to complete his secondary education at Healdtown for
several years. He had recently returned from Cape Town and, with Jongintaba’s
consent, had made plans to take up employment as a clerk at a gold mine outside
Johannesburg. Johannesburg seemed the obvious destination for both of them.
First, they waited for Jongintaba to depart for a scheduled week-long visit to
the Transkei capital, Umtata. Then, needing money for the journey, they
deceived a local trader into paying them for two of Jongintaba’s prize oxen,
implying that they were selling them on his behalf. They then hired a car to take
them to the local station, only to find that Jongintaba, suspecting their escapade,
had been there before them and instructed the station manager to refuse to sell
them tickets should they appear. Considerably shaken by this, they drove off in
the hired car to the next station. After taking the train to Queenstown, they
disembarked, hoping to be able to arrange travel permits for Johannesburg,
without which they risked arrest. By chance, at the house of a relative with
whom they stayed, they met Chief Mpondombini, a brother of Jongintaba.
Claiming that they were on an errand for the regent, they explained their need of
travel documents from the local magistrate. Having no reason to doubt their
story, Mpondombini agreed to help and accompanied them to the magistrate’s
office. After listening to the chief ’s explanation, the magistrate issued the
necessary permits. But before handing them over, he decided to check first on
the telephone with the chief magistrate in Umtata. By a remarkable coincidence,
Jongintaba happened to be visiting the chief magistrate when the call came
through. When told what was happening, he shouted out in anger, ‘Arrest those
boys!’ loud enough for Mandela to hear. Mandela managed to stave off arrest,
but left the magistrate’s office in humiliation and disgrace, without the travel
permits. Some time afterwards, he and Justice succeeded in arranging a lift to
Johannesburg in a car driven by an elderly white woman visiting relatives there,
but for a sum which took virtually all their remaining money.
Mandela’s fall from grace had been swift. One minute he was part of an
African elite, attending the most advanced educational institute for Africans in
South Africa, assured of prosperity and prestige in whatever field of work he
chose and welcomed at home in the ruling circles of the Thembu people. A few
weeks later he had fallen foul of the authorities at Fort Hare over a triviality,
forsaken the patronage and goodwill of his guardian, Jongintaba, his benefactor
for twelve years, and laid a trail of deceit and lies in an escapade arranged in
haste and with wanton impatience. Now he was bound, virtually penniless, for a

city renowned for its harsh and violent character, without the slightest idea of
what lay ahead.

CHAPTER 2

JOHANNESBURG
JOHANNESBURG WAS KNOWN IN THE VERNACULAR AS EGOLI—
THE city of gold. It stood in the centre of the richest goldfield ever discovered, a
reef stretching for some forty miles along the line of a rocky ridge named by
Afrikaner farmers as the Witwatersrand, the Ridge of White Waters, after the
glistening streams that flowed from it. The gold rush there, starting in 1886, had
brought hordes of white foreigners to Paul Kruger’s ramshackle Transvaal
republic and transformed a barren stretch of highveld, 6,000 feet above sea level,
into a landscape of mining headgear, battery stamps and ore dumps. From the
original tented diggers’ camp there had grown a frontier town of corrugated-iron
buildings and boarding houses, renowned for drunkenness, debauchery and
gambling. ‘Monte Carlo superimposed on Sodom and Gomorrah’ was one
visitor’s verdict. A survey in 1895 counted ninety-seven brothels of various
nationalities, including thirty-six French, twenty German and five Russian; the
brothels in one part of the town were so numerous that it became known as
‘Frenchfontein’.
By 1896, after only a decade’s existence, Johannesburg’s population had
reached 100,000. Railways had arrived from the Cape, from Durban and from
Delagoa Bay (Maputo). More substantial buildings had appeared: a stock
exchange, banks and mining houses. At the newly built Rand Club, the white
elite—bankers, financiers, lawyers, engineers and businessmen—gathered to
grumble and plot against Kruger’s republic, for gold had made the Transvaal the
richest state in southern Africa. By 1899 more than a quarter of the world’s
output of gold came from the Witwatersrand.
All this was too glittering a prize for Britain, then at the peak of its imperial
ambitions, to ignore. An attempted coup d’êtat, known as the Jameson Raid,
engineered by mining magnates with the connivance of British ministers, failed
ignominiously. But, still determined to extend the realms of empire, Britain
provoked a war with Kruger’s republic in 1899, expecting it to be over within a
few months. Much of Johannesburg’s population—the immigrant miners,

shopkeepers, prostitutes and pimps—fled to the Cape Colony and Natal to await
the end; most of the mines closed down. But it was eight months before the
British army managed to reach Johannesburg and another two years before the
war was finally over.
In the postwar era, Johannesburg acquired a more settled appearance, though
its reputation remained much the same. ‘It is a city of unbridled squander and
unfathomable squalor,’ wrote the Australian journalist Ambrose Pratt in 1913.
Its population by then had risen to more than a quarter of a million, and its
boundaries extended to eighty-two square miles. Wealthy whites lived over the
crest of the ridge in grand mansions in Parktown, with views stretching away to
the Magaliesburg Mountains to the north, protected from the noise and dust of
the mine workings and ore dumps by northerly winds which blew it all
southwards. The middle classes went north and east, to suburbs like Hillbrow,
Yeoville and Bellevue.
Working-class suburbs sprang up in Jeppe, Troyeville and Belgravia in the
east and Fordsburg to the west. And a location for the poorest whites, mainly
unskilled Afrikaners driven out of the Transvaal countryside by poverty and war,
was specially established in Vrededorp to the west. The city centre itself
continued to prosper and expand. At its core was the financial district,
Marshallstown, where the City Hall, the Stock Exchange and the Rand Club
stood within a few blocks of each other. Johannesburg, above all, was a city of
money. But its origins as a mining camp were never far away. The din of stamp
batteries crushing gold ore persisted throughout the night in the city centre and
on windy days clouds of yellow dust from nearby ore dumps swirled through the
streets.
The African population survived in this milieu as best it could. African
mineworkers were confined to mine compounds, living in primitive barracks,
sleeping on narrow concrete shelves, cut off from family and social life on
average for periods of nine to twelve months before returning to their homes at
the end of their contracts. Thousands of migrant mineworkers passed through the
railway station in Johannesburg each week but were otherwise seldom seen
there. The resident African population mainly dwelt in squalid and overcrowded
quarters scattered around the town. Johannesburg’s municipality made little
effort to provide adequate housing, even for its own employees. Many
‘locations’ like Sophiatown, Martindale and Newclare to the west and Klipspruit
ten miles to the south-west were built adjacent to municipal sewage-depositing

sites. Klipspruit, Johannesburg’s first ‘Native location’, was the worst. By 1917,
it was virtually surrounded by a sewage farm; the mortality rate was appalling.
Close by lay Pimville, established in 1904 originally as an emergency camp for
refugees evacuated from a city slum after an outbreak of bubonic plague. Most
of its buildings had been condemned time and again but were left to stand
because of the lack of alternative housing. Part of Pimville consisted of ninetynine water tanks sliced lengthways down the middle. In 1940, Pimville
possessed sixty-three water taps to serve an estimated 15,000 people. Closer to
the centre, scattered throughout the western, central and eastern districts of
Johannesburg, a network of ‘slumyards’ proliferated, properties controlled by
white landlords who crammed as many tenants as possible into shanties and
single rooms at exorbitant rents. Slumyard life revolved around the illicit liquor
trade and the ‘incessant relentless war’ that police fought to suppress it.
In the mid-1930s, in an attempt to make urban segregation more effective,
Johannesburg’s municipality destroyed many of these slumyards, moving the
population to a new location twelve miles to the south-west, in the vicinity of
Klipspruit. It was named Orlando, after the chairman of the municipal Native
Affairs Committee at that time, Councillor Edwin Orlando Leake. By 1940,
nearly 6,000 houses had been built there. Orlando was the prototype for modernday Soweto: monotonous rows of identical houses stretching across the barren
highveld, with few facilities provided other than municipal beer halls. The
advantage for the authorities was that it was relatively easy to regulate and
administer.
To avoid municipal controls, many Africans preferred to live in the freehold
areas of Sophiatown, four miles west of the city centre, and Alexandra, nine
miles to the north, lying just outside the municipal boundary, where blacks had
been allowed to buy and own land since the early years of the century. Both
were densely populated, full of dilapidated buildings, disease-ridden, rife with
crime, violence and prostitution, but home for an ever-increasing black
community. By 1940, Johannesburg’s total African population had risen to a
quarter of a million.
The official government attitude towards South Africa’s black urban
population was based on the Stallard commission of inquiry into local
government in the Transvaal, published in 1922, which asserted that ‘natives—
men, women and children—should only be permitted within municipal areas in
so far and for so long as their presence is demanded by the wants of the white

population’ and ‘should depart there from when they cease to minister to the
needs of the white man’. The towns were regarded essentially as white
preserves; Afri - cans living there were treated as ‘temporary sojourners’, a
convenient reservoir of labour for use when required, but whose real homes were
in rural reserves. Hence there was no need for the authorities to make anything
more than the minimum provision for them. To ensure this policy worked, a
system of pass laws was employed. African men were required to carry passes
recording permission to work and live in an urban area. They needed passes for
travel, for taxes, for curfews, and these were frequently demanded for inspection
by police. Mass police raids in the locations were regularly organised to ensure
that the pass laws and liquor regulations were being enforced, and, as a police
commission of inquiry noted in 1937, the methods used were often violent.
For the hundreds of new arrivals who reached Johannesburg each week,
mainly peasants trying to escape poverty in the reserves and drawn by the
prospect of jobs, the city was a bewildering and hostile place. The tall buildings,
the noise, the traffic, the crowds, the bustle were but a beginning. Everywhere
were signs proclaiming ‘For Europeans Only’, ‘Slegs vir Blankes’. For Africans,
there were no cafés, restaurants or hotels which they could use; public transport
was segregated. Life became an immediate struggle to secure a room, to acquire
the right passes, to find a job. Because of industrial colour-bar legislation,
Africans were confined largely to unskilled, manual work; no skilled work was
available. But only a small percentage of new arrivals could read or write or
possessed a trade. What work they could find was invariably low-paid, with long
hours and poor conditions. Whites they encountered were often abusive. And on
the streets, there was the ever-present danger of tsotsis, young gangsters armed
with flick knives and sharpened bicycle spokes who left scores of victims
maimed and paralysed each week.
Yet the stream of new arrivals grew ever greater. Egoli was the city of gold, of
money, of opportunity. ‘All roads lead to Johannesburg,’ wrote Alan Paton in his
novel Cry, the Beloved Country: ‘If you are white or if you are black they lead to
Johannesburg. If the crops fail, there is work in Johannesburg. If there are taxes
to be paid, there is work in Johannesburg. If the farm is too small to be divided
further, some must go to Johannesburg. If there is a child to be born that must be
delivered in secret, it can be delivered in Johannesburg.’ So in their thousands
they came—Zulus, Swazis, Shangaans, Xhosas, Sothos, Pedis, Pondos and
Thembus. And among them, seeking his own fortune, was Nelson Mandela.

Mandela’s introduction to Johannesburg in 1941 was a sobering experience.
Together with Justice, he made his way south-west of the city through huge mine
dumps to the bleak and pockmarked site of Crown Mines. Deafened by the
relentless din of mine machinery, they passed lines of African miners tired and
dirty from their shifts underground. Justice was expected there: a letter from the
regent requesting employment for him as a clerk had arrived some months
beforehand. As the son of a Thembu leader, he was accorded special treatment
by the mine managers and greeted with gifts on his arrival from Thembu miners.
He was also able to persuade the headman, Piliso, to give Mandela a job as a
mine policeman, assuring him that another letter from the regent requesting his
employment would soon arrive. Out of courtesy to the regent, Piliso invited them
both to stay initially with him. Mandela duly started work as a night watchman,
armed with a whistle and a knobkerrie, a heavy stick with a knobbed head,
guarding the entrance to the mine compound.
It was not long before the regent learned of their whereabouts and sent a
telegram with the instruction: ‘Send the boys home.’ Piliso, realising that he had
been duped, confronted them angrily and told them arrangements would be made
for their journey back to the Transkei. Determined not to return, they continued
to use the regent’s name, gaining an introduction to a white mining official who
issued them with a letter authorising their employment as clerks at Crown
Mines. When Piliso discovered what had happened, he threw them out.
Mandela was without a job, had nowhere to stay and had little money. Worse
was to follow. In his suitcase he was carrying an old revolver given to him by his
father which he had brought to Johannesburg for protection against gangsters. As
he was leaving Crown Mines, his suitcase was searched by a watchman and the
gun was found. At a nearby police station, Mandela was charged with possession
of the gun and was told to appear in court, but he was not arrested. In court he
was given a nominal fine.
From that low ebb, Mandela’s fortunes began to change. He found lodgings
with a cousin, Garlick Mbekeni, in a house in George Goch township, a few
miles east of the city centre, and confided to him his ambition to train as a
lawyer. After making inquiries, Mbekeni took him to see ‘one of our best people
in Johannesburg’. It was a meeting that was to have the most profound effect on
Mandela’s life.

Walter Sisulu was a man to whom many Africans in Johannesburg turned for
help. Only six years older than Mandela, also originally from the Transkei, he
had established a reputation as a community leader always ready to take on other
people’s problems. His office in seedy premises near Market Street on the
western edge of the city centre, from where he ran an estate agency for Africans,
was often used as a meeting place, particularly by those from the Transkei.
Sisulu came from humble origins and grew up in circumstances far rougher
than anything Mandela had ever experienced. His father was a white government
official, Victor Dickinson, who played no part in his upbringing; his mother,
Alice Sisulu, was a Thembu domestic servant. Born in 1912, Sisulu spent his
childhood in the Transkei looked after by Thembu aunts and uncles. All were
devout Anglicans. Prayers were said twice a day at his uncle’s house and every
Sunday there was a service at the Anglican church hut. The household was often
visited by white churchmen. But Sisulu grew up disliking the deferential attitude
that his family members invariably assumed in the presence of whites: ‘I
resented being told how I must behave towards whites.’ His own light
complexion, setting him apart from his African peers, was a constant source of
annoyance. So rude was his behaviour toward white visitors that one of his aunts
seriously rebuked him. ‘I doubt whether you’ll be allowed to work for a white
man,’ she said. ‘You won’t make a man, because you can’t serve.’ At the local
Anglican mission school which he attended, the tales from the Bible that he most
relished were those of Moses and David and the struggle of the Jews against
foreign rule.
Sisulu followed the path that so many other young men in the Transkei were
taking. He left school at the age of sixteen, with little more than a basic
education, and headed by train for Johannesburg. Unable to find a job on the
mines at first, he worked as a labourer at a dairy for several months, returned
home briefly, then signed up for a four-month contract as an underground miner
at Rose Deep Mine, hating the work, the living conditions and his white bosses.
Moving to Johannesburg with his mother and sister in the 1930s, he took a
succession of factory jobs, clashing time and again with white supervisors,
becoming ever more embittered and aggressive. One evening, sitting in a train
on his way home to Orlando, he watched a white ticket collector harass a young
African girl for no apparent reason. Enraged by this, he intervened, fell into a
fight with the ticket collector, was arrested and sent briefly to prison—‘hell itself
’. In his spare time, he developed an intense interest in Xhosa history, joined a

Xhosa social group, the Orlando Brotherly Society, and wrote articles on Xhosa
heroes for the white-owned Bantu World. Then, in 1940, he was introduced to
the African National Congress, a small organisation attempting to revive African
political activity. It became his political home.
The young man who came to see him in his office impressed Sisulu. He
explained that he had fallen foul of the Fort Hare authorities, that he intended to
study by correspondence course to finish his degree and that he wanted to
become a lawyer. His royal connections, his dignified bearing, his evident
ambition all seemed promising material. Sisulu quickly recognised his potential:
‘I saw a bright young man with high ideals.’ Sisulu offered him a job at his
estate agency and decided to make inquiries of a white lawyer with whom he had
business dealings in the property market to see whether some opening could be
found for him.
Lazar Sidelsky was an unusual lawyer. Coming from a modest Jewish family
from a rural district in eastern Transvaal, where he was born in 1911, he had
found it difficult, after graduating from the University of the Witwatersrand in
Johannesburg, to obtain a position with an established law firm and so had set up
his own partnership, known as Witkin, Sidelsky, and Eidelman, concentrating on
the African property market for business. He was regarded in the African
community as fair-minded, conscientious and helpful. When African clients
visited his office, he allowed them to sit down—something unheard of in other
white law firms. He worked in conjunction with a German businessman, Philip
Muller, who was involved in constructing houses and rooms for Africans in the
few areas of Johannesburg, like Sophiatown and Alexandra, where freehold titles
were still available to them. The business was profitable.
When Mandela called at his office on the fourth floor in the Old Mutual
Building in Commissioner Street, Sidelsky, remembering his own difficulty in
finding an opening in the legal field, was inclined to be sympathetic. Mandela
had a pleasing manner, was a member of a royal family and came with a
recommendation from Sisulu, a man whose judgement Sidelsky respected. ‘I had
no difficulty in saying yes,’ he recalled. Sidelsky agreed to employ Mandela as a
clerk while he completed his university degree by correspondence course with
the University of South Africa, studying at night. After that, he could serve his
articles with Sidelsky, while studying law, as part of his legal qualification. For a
young African to be offered a position as an articled clerk with a white law firm
in Johannesburg in the 1940s was extremely rare. What made it even more

remarkable was that Sidelsky waived the premium normally paid by articled
clerks. From being perilously close to early failure, Mandela, through Sisulu’s
intervention, had secured a future.
Mandela and Sidelsky developed a high regard for each other. Mandela,
joining the firm at the age of twenty-three, was engaged at first in simple tasks
but gradually extended the range of his work, handling contracts with African
clients, acting as interpreter and dealing with wills and divorces. At each stage,
Sidelsky took care to explain the firm’s procedures, the reasons for them and the
wider purposes of the law. He was also a generous employer, providing Mandela
with an old suit and a shirt. In later years, Mandela was to remember Sidelsky as
‘a man who trained me to serve our country’. Sidelsky, for his part, found
Mandela an agreeable employee: ‘It was a pleasure to have him around. He had
an intelligent grasp of what was required.’
There was one other African at the firm, Gaur Radebe, ten years older than
Mandela. Sidelsky employed Radebe on an occasional basis for a variety of jobs,
usually on the property side of the business: salesman, clerk, messenger,
interpreter. He was streetwise, smooth-talking and fluent in English, Sotho and
Zulu; a short, stocky man, he was well known in the townships. Radebe led a
multiple life. At heart a political agitator, he had joined the Communist Party in
the 1930s and he was also active in the ANC. As the secretary for mines in the
ANC’s Transvaal branch, he had played a leading role in launching the African
Mineworkers’ Union in 1941. He was prominent too in organising protest
against the public transport system from Alexandra township, where he was
based. He was often outspoken, particularly on a political platform and
occasionally even with Sidelsky. He was also known to be unscrupulous. He was
expelled by the Communist Party in 1941 as a result of his moneylending
activities in Alexandra. He dabbled in the illicit diamond trade. Usually short of
money, he borrowed from Sidelsky without repaying and tended to live off his
wife, a hard-working teacher. But he was useful to Sidelsky, and Sidelsky
regarded him with a certain affection. Their business relationship continued on
and off for many years.
Upon Mandela, Radebe exerted a strong influence. They shared an office and
Mandela was struck by Radebe’s audacious attitude towards whites. He was
fond of telling the story of how, on his first day in the office, a white secretary,
explaining that there was no colour bar in the firm, told him that, in honour of
his arrival, two new teacups had been purchased, one for him and the other for

Radebe. These were the ones they were to take from the tray when the tea boy
came round. When Mandela relayed the news to Radebe, Radebe responded with
a mischievous look. ‘Nelson, just do as I do,’ he said. When tea arrived, Radebe,
with other members of the staff present, ostentatiously avoided the new cups and
chose an old one. Mandela, wanting neither to cause offence to the secretaries
nor to alienate his new colleague, declined to take any tea at all. He subsequently
drank tea on his own.
Radebe’s political views also made an impact. Mandela was still untutored in
politics. His primary loyalty remained with the Thembu. Radebe, however,
stressed the importance of a wider political loyalty, as advocated by the ANC in
its campaigns for African rights. His commitment to the African cause made a
strong impression on Mandela, but Mandela remained aloof from political
involvement. Having had a narrow escape from trouble, his ambition to qualify
as a lawyer was all the stronger. He was mindful of warnings from Sidelsky to
steer clear of politics, which, his employer stressed, would lead only to ruin.
It was at the firm of Witkin, Sidelsky and Eidelman that Mandela made his
first white friend. Nat Bregman, a cousin of Sidelsky, was from a poor Jewish
family and had been taken on as an articled clerk, just before Mandela arrived, at
the age of eighteen. He was already a member of the Communist Party, but he
remained, in his own words, ‘a light-hearted communist’. His main interest was
in show business. He participated in left-wing shows to raise money for Soviet
war charities and went on to perform as a part-time professional comedian at the
Plastic Theatre in the white suburb of Northcliff. He introduced Mandela to
lectures at the Left Club in Commissioner Street and invited him to multiracial
gatherings which Communist Party members organised. For about three years,
they shared an office on the fourth floor of the Old Mutual Building, often using
the same lift when they were supposed to use separate ones. Bregman
remembered Mandela at the time as ‘a quiet, studious, and reserved person’ but
with a good sense of humour that could bring a lighter touch to general
conversation. Mandela enjoyed Bregman’s talent for mimicry and was impressed
by his colour-blind attitude to life. Indeed, it was a remarkable stroke of good
fortune that Mandela, so soon after his ill-planned arrival in Johannesburg in
1941, should have found himself in the hands of an enlightened white employer,
with a radical black activist and an easygoing white youth for company.
Mandela’s home life was rudimentary. After staying briefly with his cousin in
George Goch township, he found lodgings in Alexandra. It was called ‘Dark

City’, for there were no streetlights or electricity supply. The roads were
unpaved, sanitation was primitive, disease was rife and a pall of smoke from
coal stoves polluted the air. The streets were roamed by young tsotsis. On most
mornings, the sight of a corpse lying in a gutter caused no surprise. An everincreasing population was crammed into this one square mile, many of them
‘illegals’ arriving from rural areas without proper documents. Plot owners used
every available space to build rooms and shacks in their backyards, filling them
with as many tenants as possible. Many premises were the haunts of thieves and
prostitutes or used by shebeen queens running illegal drinking dens. Police raids
in Alexandra were commonplace.
Mandela’s lodgings were at 46 Seventh Avenue, the home of the Xhoma
family. He occupied a tin-roofed room with a dirt floor at the back of the
property. There was no running water, or electricity, or heating. He had no
money for comfort. His salary of £2 per week was hardly enough to cover his
basic needs, for rent, bus fares, food and candles for studying at night. There was
also the cost of his correspondence course with the University of South Africa.
Sometimes he walked nine miles to work and back again to save money.
Sometimes he had no money even for food. The only reliable hot meal of the
week came on Sundays, thanks to the kindness of the Xhoma family. Girlfriends
provided the occasional meal, and white secretaries in the office also helped him
with food, but often Mandela went hungry. The suit that Sidelsky gave him was
stitched and patched again and again, year after year.
Despite the poverty and squalor of Alexandra, Mandela developed an
affection for the township. It was the first place he regarded as home after
Thembuland. He enjoyed its cosmopolitan nature—the mingling of different
tribes and languages, the sense of camaraderie that came from belonging to
Alexandra. He stayed for only a year, before taking advantage of an offer of free
accommodation in a mine compound closer to the city centre, but always looked
back to his time there with fondness.
His roots with Thembuland meanwhile steadily loosened. In 1942, his old
guardian, Jongintaba, died. Mandela had met him the previous year while he was
on a visit to Johannesburg. He had seemed then to be ageing rapidly. They did
not speak of the matters that had set them apart, neither Mandela’s expulsion
from Fort Hare nor his flight from the marriage that Jongintaba had arranged.
Jongintaba was more interested in his current plans. On learning of his death,
Mandela travelled to Mqhekezweni, though he arrived there too late to attend the

funeral. He found the Great Place unchanged, but realised how much his own
ambitions had altered. He was no longer interested in a career as a clerk or an
interpreter in the civil service. Nor did he see his future bound up any longer
with Thembuland or the Transkei. The new world he had entered seemed to offer
far greater possibilities.
At the end of 1942, Mandela passed the final examination for his Bachelor of
Arts degree and early the following year returned to Fort Hare for his graduation,
proudly wearing a new suit for which Walter Sisulu had provided the funds.
Both his mother and Jongintaba’s widow, NoEngland, attended the ceremony. It
was an occasion which once again reminded him of how distant his old dreams
and ambitions now seemed. Although Kaizer Matanzima pressed him to return
to Umtata after qualifying as an attorney, he realised he no longer felt any urge
to go there.
Back in Johannesburg, Mandela enrolled as a part-time law student at the
University of the Witwatersrand, one of four English-speaking universities
which permitted blacks to attend specialist courses. The campus was on a hilltop
in the district of Braamfontein, north of the city centre. The student body there
was almost entirely white. In the law faculty, Mandela was the only African. The
experience of dealing with white students was as new to him as dealing with a
black student was to them. Some reacted in traditional white fashion, keeping
themselves apart. One law teacher, Professor H. R. Hahlo, made clear his view
that Africans were not sufficiently disciplined to master the subtleties of law.
But with others he made lifelong friendships. A part-time law lecturer, Bram
Fischer, who came from a prominent Afrikaner family but was also a senior
figure in the Communist Party, was to exert the most profound influence on
Mandela. Among his fellow students, also studying law, was Harold Wolpe, the
son of a poor Jewish immigrant family who had joined the Young Communist
League at the age of seventeen. Another left-wing activist at ‘Wits’ was Ruth
First, a brilliant eighteen-year-old social science student, also from a Jewish
immigrant family active in Communist Party politics. Mandela’s fellow students
generally remembered him as being ‘a little shy, not assertive in any way’. Harry
Schwarz recalled, ‘He was very quiet, never a major participant in class debates
or discussion.’
Mandela also made his first friends in the Indian community. Ismail Meer was
a law student from Natal whose flat on the fourth floor of Kholvad House in
Market Street was a regular meeting place for Indian students where Mandela

too could often be found. Both Meer and his close friend Jaydew Singh were
active in Indian politics and also joined the Communist Party.
It was in the company of Meer, Singh and a third Indian student, Ahmed
Bhoda, that Mandela had another brush with the police. Hastening to get from
Wits to Kholvad House one day, all four boarded a tram to take them to Market
Street. They had not gone far when the white conductor, turning to the Indians,
bawled in Afrikaans, ‘Hey, you are not allowed to carry a kaffir.’ A heated
exchange followed. The conductor stopped the tram and called a policeman, who
arrested the Indians ‘for carrying a kaffir and disturbing the conductor in his
duty’. All four were escorted to Marshall Square police station. There Mandela
was taken aside and encouraged to make a statement against the three Indians,
which he refused to do. Ordered to appear in court the next day, the students
sought help from Bram Fischer, who agreed to act as their advocate. In court, the
magistrate greeted Fischer warmly, mentioning that he had just returned from the
Orange Free State, where he had had the honour to meet Fischer’s father, the
Judge President there. The accused were quickly acquitted.
As well as his work at Witkin, Sidelsky and Eidelman and his studies at Wits,
Mandela began to take a closer interest in the political world around him, in the
web of laws and regulations that kept Africans in a subordinate role and
deprived them of a political voice. Under the influence of Walter Sisulu, he was
drawn increasingly into the orbit of the ANC. His ambition to qualify as a
lawyer did not waver. When Sidelsky gave him an increase in salary, he was
pleased to hear, after asking Mandela what he would do with the extra money,
Mandela’s reply that he would spend it on more candles to help his studies at
night. But Mandela’s own political ambitions had nevertheless begun to stir. In
the office that they shared, Nat Bregman remembered vividly the occasion when
Mandela told him, ‘One day, I’m going to be prime minister of South Africa.’

When Mandela first encountered the ANC, its fortunes were at a low ebb. For
thirty years, ANC leaders had tried to gain a hearing from the government for
their demands for greater African rights. But every method they had tried—
polite petitions, deputations and appeals—had failed. Dissatisfied with the way
the old guard of politicians had run the organisation, a group of young radicals
began meeting in Johannesburg in 1943 to plot a more militant course of action.
It was to this small group that Mandela was introduced by Sisulu.

The founders of the ANC were mostly conservative men, schooled in the
Christian tradition, respectful of authority and concerned largely with their own
position in society. When they gathered on a sweltering day in January 1912 in a
community hall in a black location in Bloemfontein, formally dressed in suits,
frock coats and top hats and carrying furled umbrellas, their main objectives, to
defend African rights and to campaign against racial discrimination, were
notably modest. They were members of an African elite, brought up to believe in
the inherent value of Western rules and anxious to prove their worth as loyal
citizens. What had brought them together was not so much the urge to agitate for
advancement as the fear that their existing privileges were under threat.
The tradition that Britain had established for the Cape Colony, on the occasion
of granting it representative government in 1853, was to accord equal political
rights to all men over the age of twenty-one provided they passed certain
property or income qualifications. Any African was entitled to vote if he
qualified. The initial black electorate was small but grew in time to form a
significant minority, drawn from the constantly rising number of educated
Africans turned out by missionary schools—teachers, priests, clerks, interpreters,
journalists and traders.
The African elite put much faith in what they referred to as the ‘white sense of
fair play’ and went to great lengths to demonstrate their suitability to participate
in politics, turning themselves into model citizens. They dressed in formal
Victorian attire, went regularly to church, abstained from alcohol, put portraits of
Queen Victoria in their sitting rooms and revered the game of cricket, forming
their own teams (which often beat their white opponents). But it was all to little
avail.
The first blow to their aspirations came at the end of the Anglo-Boer War in
1902, when Britain took control of the two Boer repub - lics of the Transvaal and
the Orange Free State. The African elite had hoped that the political traditions
established by Britain in the Cape Colony would now be applied to the two
northern territories and also the neighbouring British colony of Natal. Hitherto,
no political rights had been accorded to them there. The Transvaal constitution
had bluntly stated that ‘the people desire to permit no equality between coloured
people and the white inhabitants, either in Church or State’. The only
relationship tolerated between white and black was that of master and servant. A
similar colour bar had operated in the Orange Free State. In Natal the
qualification for black voters was so rigorous that only two Africans had

obtained the vote.
Britain’s main preoccupation at the end of the war was to achieve
reconciliation between the Boers and the British, and the Boers were adamantly
opposed to the notion of political rights for Africans. Accordingly, the terms of
the peace treaty agreed at Vereeniging excluded ‘natives’ from the franchise in
the two former republics until the question was reconsidered ‘after the
introduction of self-government’. This came as a rude shock to the African elite.
One petition submitted by an African group in the Transvaal questioned why the
Boers, who had been ‘enemies of the King and British principles’, should be
favourably treated while the interests of Africans, who had shown their loyalty
by ‘heart and deeds’, should be ignored. For years ahead, African spokesmen in
all four territories continued to denounce the treaty of Vereeniging as one of the
greatest injustices perpetrated against them.
Worse was to follow. Having gained control over four southern African
territories, each of which maintained different traditions and different laws
affecting the African population, the British authorities were keen to establish ‘a
common understanding on questions of native policy’ in order to facilitate their
integration into a new dominion at some future date. The man entrusted with this
task, the British High Commissioner Lord Milner, had strong views of his own
on the subject. ‘A political equality of white and black is impossible,’ he said.
‘The white man must rule because he is elevated by many, many steps above the
black man.’
In 1903, he appointed a South African Native Affairs Commission under the
chairmanship of Sir Godfrey Lagden, the Commissioner for Native Affairs, to
investigate the matter. The Lagden Commission report, issued in 1905, was to
have a profound impact on South African thinking on race relations.
Its members were mostly English-speaking and regarded as representing
progressive opinion on native matters; in parliament they were described as ‘proNative men’. Their main recommendation was that whites and blacks should be
kept separate in politics and in land occupation and ownership on a permanent
basis. In order to avoid an ‘intolerable situation’ in the future whereby white
voters might be outnumbered by black voters, a system of separate rep resentation should be established for the black population, though political
power, of course, would always remain in white hands. Land should also be
demarcated into white and black areas, as the report said, ‘with a view to

finality’. In urban areas, separate ‘locations’ should be created for African
townsmen. These ideas on the need for segregation between white and black
were widely held at the time, by friends of the black population as well as by
adversaries. The significance of the Lagden Commission was that it elevated
practices of segregation commonly employed throughout South Africa during
the nineteenth century to the level of political doctrine. Segregation was used by
every leading white politician as a respectable slogan.
Britain’s subsequent plans to establish a union between the Cape Colony,
Natal, the Orange Free State and the Transvaal galvanized the African elite into
national opposition for the first time. The draft constitution for a united South
Africa drawn up by white parliamentary representatives from the four colonies
and released in 1909 excluded Africans from the franchise in Natal, the
Transvaal and the Orange Free State, curbed the right of Cape Africans to sit in
parliament, thus making it an all-white institution, and imposed on the Cape
African electorate a condition that their right to vote could be removed through a
two-thirds majority vote of the upper and lower houses of parliament sitting in
joint session. The African view was that the proposed constitution was a sell-out
to politicians from the northern territories. ‘This is treachery,’ remarked Alan
Soga, a prominent journalist. ‘It is worse. It is a successful betrayal, for the Act
has virtually disenfranchised the black man, even before the meeting of the
Union Parliament.’
An unprecedented number of protests followed, most couched in suitably
respectful terms. A protest meeting of prominent Africans in Waaihoek location
in Bloemfontein thanked the authorities for ‘giving the delegates the opportunity
to hold the meeting and to exercise free speech’ and sent expressions of loyalty
to the Governor, the High Commissioner and King Edward VII. A delegation
was sent to London to make representations. But Britain’s House of Commons
saw no reason to amend the constitution and it came into effect in 1910
unaltered. From then on, Britain left South Africa to its own devices.
Realising that further assaults on their position were likely, African leaders
resolved to form a national organisation to defend their rights. Much of the
initiative came from a young Zulu lawyer, Pixley Seme, who had recently
returned to South Africa to establish a law practice in Johannesburg, after
studying at Columbia University in New York and Jesus College, Oxford. He
was adamant about the need for a united front. ‘The demon of racialism, the
aberrations of the Xhosa-Fingo [Mfengu] feud, the animosity that exists between

the Zulus and the Tongas, between the Basuto and every other Native must be
buried and forgotten,’ he wrote in 1911. ‘We are one people. These divisions,
these jealousies, are the cause of all our woes and of all our backwardness and
ignorance today.’
The following year, at the inaugural conference of the South African Native
National Congress, as the ANC was first called, Seme chose the same theme.
Giving the keynote address to an audience of several hundred Africans, both
delegates and observers, he pointed out that their meeting was the first time ‘so
many elements representing different tongues and tribes ever attempted to
cooperate under one umbrella’. Their purpose was straightforward: ‘The white
people of this country have formed what is known as the Union of South Africa
—a union in which we have no voice in the making of laws and no part in the
administration. We have called you, therefore, to this conference so that we can
together find ways and means of forming our national union for the purpose of
creating national unity and defending our rights and privileges.’
The first challenge was soon upon them. In 1913 the government put forward
land legislation prohibiting Africans from purchasing or leasing land outside
areas designated as Native reserves, patches of territory scattered throughout
South Africa, numbering nearly 300 at the time, which had survived the era of
white occupation intact. The reserves varied in size from a few square miles to
large districts. In the old Boer republics of the Transvaal and the Orange Free
State, only a tiny fraction of land had officially been set aside for Native
reserves, while in the Cape Colony and Natal, as a result of the military strength
of Nguni chiefdoms like the Xhosa and Zulu, extensive areas remained under
African control. The reserves then amounted to no more than about 8 per cent of
the country. They were already showing signs of overcrowding, overstocking
and land degradation. Acknowledging that the reserves were not large enough to
hold their existing populations for long, the government made provision for the
‘release’ of additional areas for Native purchase at some future date.
The impact of the Natives’ Land Act of 1913 was felt most immediately in
areas outside the reserves, where nearly a million Africans lived as tenants,
sharecroppers and labour tenants on white-owned land. It was particularly severe
in the Orange Free State, where sharecroppers, who for years had earned a living
by giving half of their produce to white farmers in return for land, were
summarily evicted. Some sought refuge in the overcrowded reserves; others
were forced, after selling their livestock and implements, to work as labourers

for white farmers. The plight of these destitute families driven off the land was
described by Sol Plaatje, the ANC secretary-general, in his Native Life in South
Africa. ‘Awakening on Friday morning, 20 June 1913,’ he wrote, ‘the South
African Native found himself not actually a slave, but a pariah in the land of his
birth.’ Plaatje recorded how, travelling through the Orange Free State by bicycle
in the winter of 1913, he found bands of African peasants trudging from one
place to the next in search of a farmer who might give them shelter, their women
and children shivering with cold in the winter nights, their livestock emaciated
and starving: ‘It looks as if these people were so many fugitives escaping from a
war.’ A whole class of prosperous farmers was eventually destroyed.
All the protests and deputations mounted by the ANC against the legislation
proved ineffective. The ANC’s main argument was based not so much on its
opposition to the principle of segregation but on the inequitable distribution of
land. The government’s pledge to release further areas for African purchase was
not forthcoming for another twenty-three years. In 1936, the total amount of land
reserved for Africans was increased from 8 to 13 per cent. By then, as official
reports warned, the reserves had degenerated towards ‘desert conditions’: they
were ‘congested, denuded, overstocked, eroded and for the most part in a
deplorable condition’; the ‘process of ruination’ there threatened ‘an appalling
problem of Native poverty’.
The same process of segregation was applied to towns and to employment.
African entry into urban areas was regulated more strictly through greater use of
the pass system. Africans deemed surplus to the labour needs of white
households, or those leading ‘an idle, dissolute or disorderly life’, could be
deported to the reserves. Separate ‘locations’ on the outskirts of white urban and
industrial areas were set aside for African occupation. Work opportunities for
Africans were severely curtailed. The common tendency had always been to
confine Africans to unskilled work in mines, on farms and in domestic service.
The Union government now proceeded to enforce an industrial colour bar
excluding Africans from skilled employment in the mines, on the railways and in
the civil service. By the 1920s, South Africa had developed an economic system
allocating skills and high wages to whites and heavy labour and menial tasks to
blacks on meagre pay. The ANC’s efforts to withstand this onslaught of
segregation had a negligible effect.
The ultimate humiliation came in 1936, when African voters were struck from
the common roll in the Cape Province, losing a right they had held for more than

eighty years. In exchange for the loss of their franchise, they were given a
separate roll which allowed them to vote for three white representatives to speak
on their behalf in the House of Assembly and four white members of the Senate.
They were also entitled to elect twelve members of a new Native Representative
Council. But the council was a purely advisory body, without legislative or
financial power. The only benefit from this arrangement was that Africans in the
northern provinces obtained some form of representation for the first time. The
practical effect of the new legislation, the Representation of Natives Act, was
limited. By 1935, African voters in the Cape numbered some 10,000, amounting
to only 2.5 per cent of the provincial electorate, and only 1.1 per cent of the
Union’s electorate. But the political significance was crucial. As the historian
Cornelis de Kiewiet noted, ‘To destroy the Cape native franchise was to destroy
the most important bridge between the worlds of two races.’

Contemptuous of the polite methods of protest that ANC leaders had employed
to so little effect, the circle of young radicals whom Mandela joined were
impatient for confrontation with white authority. They were mostly teachers and
other young professional men, with a core group numbering no more than two
dozen. Few of them possessed political experience and none had any clear idea
of what practical measures to pursue. But they were galvanized by a new vision
of an African future inspired largely by the group’s leading intellectual, Anton
Lembede, a twenty-nine-year-old former teacher who had arrived in
Johannesburg in 1943 to train as a lawyer.
When Mandela first met Lembede at Sisulu’s house in Orlando in 1943, he
was immediately impressed by the breadth of his learning. Born into a family of
Zulu farm labourers, Lembede had pursued a life of intense study and regular
prayer, driving himself relentlessly in quest of educational and professional
achievement. He was fond of discoursing at length about the history of nations
from ancient Greece to the modern era. As Mandela noted, Lembede tended to
be verbose, but he was nevertheless struck by the boldness of the man’s ideas.
Lembede’s message was that Africa belonged to Africans. ‘Africa is a black
man’s country,’ Lembede argued. ‘Africans are the natives of Africa and they
have inhabited Africa, their Motherland, from times immemorial. Africa belongs
to them.’
At the heart of Lembede’s philosophy of ‘Africanism’, as it came to be called,

lay a determination to assert an African identity, to give Africans control of their
own future, to use African political power to change South African society. To
depend on whites for help was considered a waste of time. No group other than
Africans would free them from oppression. Other groups, whether white liberals
or communists, would merely seek to subordinate African interests to their own.
Africans should unite as one people, regardless of their tribal origins or social
status. They should stop emulating white leadership and white culture and
develop pride and confidence in their own political culture. They needed a
‘nation-building’ faith—a faith in their own worth, a pride in their past, a sense
of self-reliance and confidence in their ability to determine their own future.
This would dispel the sense of inferiority that Africans felt and attract mass
support. Mass mobilisation in turn would achieve political results.
Compared to the respectful approach long favoured by ANC leaders, with
their belief in the value of moral argument and their disdain for mass
mobilisation, Lembede’s ideas offered exciting prospects. Though aware of his
own lack of experience and knowledge, Mandela was keen to play a part.
A meeting of young dissidents discontented with the ANC’s leadership was
soon organised. Among those who attended was Oliver Tambo, Mandela’s
friend from Fort Hare, who had returned to Johannesburg to take up a teaching
post at St Peter’s, an Anglican school which he had attended as a student.
Popularly known as ‘The Christian’, he had fallen foul of the college authorities
at Fort Hare in 1942, while studying for a postgraduate teaching diploma, over a
written pledge they required from students regarding their religious conduct. ‘I
knew I could not sign that pledge,’ he later told Father Trevor Huddleston, the
Superintendent of St Peter’s School. ‘It demanded something from me that I
could not give. It would have killed my religion stone dead: an agreement with
God, written and signed! I could not do it!’ So he had been expelled. Hearing of
an unexpected vacancy at St Peter’s, he had returned there in 1943, at the age of
twenty-five, as a mathematics teacher.
By the end of a long evening, the dissidents were convinced of the need to
form a youth movement that would steer the ANC towards radical action. They
tentatively called themselves the Congress Youth League. But first they had to
persuade the ANC hierarchy to give them formal approval. Many of the old
guard were hostile to their young critics, seeing them as a threat to their own
position. Others, however, were aware that the ANC needed to develop a more
aggressive response to reflect the mood of restlessness and discontent growing

among the African population.
In the early 1940s, massive numbers of Africans moved to industrial centres
on the Witwatersrand, driven by poverty and hunger in the reserves and by harsh
conditions on white farms. They were hoping to find work in booming wartime
industries, but often met with little but hardship and squalor. The housing
shortage reached crisis proportions. The cost of food soared. A sudden rash of
industrial action broke out.
In the township of Alexandra, Mandela was given his first taste of protest. In
August 1943, when bus fares from Alexandra to central Johannesburg were
raised from fourpence to fivepence, causing serious difficulty for factory, office
and domestic workers, some 20,000 people boycotted the bus service. Some
were given lifts in cars or lorries, often by sympathetic whites, but most of them
trudged the nine miles or more to work and back again, day after day, blocking
all other traffic for miles along Johannesburg’s main northern highway.
Prominent among the organisers of the boycott was Gaur Radebe. Mandela
joined the stream of marchers with a sense of exhilaration at participating in
popular protest and he was duly impressed by the result. After nine days of
running empty buses, the bus owners reinstated the old fare.
When a delegation of young dissidents approached the ANC president, Dr
Alfred Xuma, hoping to gain his support for founding a Youth League, was
sceptical about their intentions. A distinguished doctor who had qualified at
universities in the United States, Britain and Hungary, before returning to
Johannesburg in 1927 to establish a medical practice, Xuma had set about trying
to infuse the ANC with greater vigour and to reorganise its chaotic
administration and finances. He had played a leading role in drawing up a
document entitled ‘African Claims’, which demanded full citizenship rights and
an end to all discriminatory laws, in accordance with the Atlantic Charter drawn
up by Churchill and Roosevelt in 1941, supporting the right of all peoples to
choose their own government. But he was an aloof and authoritarian figure who
lacked the common touch, finding it difficult to mix with unsophisticated blacks
and preferring a circle of mainly white friends; his vivacious wife, Madie Hall, a
black American and a qualified social worker, was socially ambitious. Xuma
warned the dissidents that it would be a great mistake to think that Africans
could ‘march barefoot’ against their opponents.
Nevertheless, in December 1943, at the annual conference of the ANC in

Bloemfontein, delegates approved the formation of the Congress Youth League.
Two months later, bearing a copy of their draft manifesto for him to review, a
Youth League deputation led by Lembede called on Xuma at his large house in
Sophiatown. Mandela was present, along with Sisulu and Tambo. While they
waited for Xuma to arrive, Madie expounded her own views that the tactics
employed by black Americans—patient conduct, education and economic selfhelp—would eventually pay dividends in South Africa.
Xuma was none too pleased with the draft manifesto. It contained virulent
criticism of the old methods of the ANC. Nor did he take kindly to the Youth
League’s demands for a programme of action, as a record of the meeting
showed:
Dr Xuma replied that the Africans as a group were unorganized and
undisciplined, and that a programme of action such as envisaged by the Youth
League would be rash at this stage. The ANC lacked people who were concerned
about the movement and who knew what they wanted. Action would merely lead
to exposure. The masses of the people were unorganized and only committees
existed in the ANC . . . He felt that what was really wrong with the manifesto
was the tone of criticism and the expressions used. The committee should start
off without antagonizing anyone.
The Youth League paid little heed. When it appeared in March 1944, the
manifesto was still bristling with criticism. It accused the ANC of adopting a
policy of yielding to oppression, ‘regarding itself as a body of gentlemen with
clean hands’. It had come to represent only a privileged few who were out of
touch with the needs of the rank and file, was poorly organised and had no
proper following. The formation of the Youth League was ‘a protest against the
lack of discipline and the absence of a clearly defined goal’. It would become the
‘brainstrust and power-station’ of African nationalism, giving ‘force, direction
and vigour to the struggle for African National Freedom’.
On Easter Sunday in April 1944, at a meeting of about 200 people at the
Bantu Men’s Social Centre in Eloff Street in central Johannesburg, the Congress
Youth League was formally launched, with a series of rousing speeches.
Lembede was elected as president, Tambo as secretary and Sisulu as treasurer.
Although Mandela was elected to the executive committee, the role he had
played in the formation of the Youth League was a minor one. He was working
full-time at Sidelsky’s law firm and part-time as a student at the University of

the Witwatersrand, leaving him little opportunity for other activities. Compared
to the likes of Lembede, he still regarded himself as a novice. In time, however,
the Youth League was to become the vehicle for his own political ambition.

The Sisulu home at 7372 Orlando West, a small brick house near the railway
line in the middle of the township, welcomed a constant stream of friends and
visitors. As well as providing a meeting place for the political activists who
gathered there, Sisulu was always ready to advise and help with people’s
problems. His many acts of kindness were renowned in the local community.
Also on hand at 7372 Orlando was his mother, Ma Sisulu, long accustomed to
providing meals for sudden arrivals. Then, in 1944, Sisulu married a twentyfive-year-old nurse, Albertina Thethiwe. In a speech at the wedding reception,
Dr Xuma said to Albertina, ‘Let me warn you, you are marrying a man who is
already married. He is married to the nation.’ Their partnership did indeed have
to endure many ordeals; it was also to form the centre of a network of close
relationships of which Mandela was a part.
Born into a peasant farming family in the Transkei, Albertina, at the age of
eleven, had been placed in charge of caring for four siblings after her father died
and her mother was too ill to look after them. She swore never to marry but to
dedicate her life to bringing them up. Friends at her Catholic school in the
Transkei called her the Virgin Mary because she refused to loiter with boys at
the train station on the way home. She performed well in school and a priest
offered to help her with a bursary for further education. ‘I suggested I became a
nun, so I could always look after my older brother, who was illiterate, and the
youngest, who was only a baby. The priest told me a nun would have to be
married to the church. So I became a nurse.’ It was while she was training at the
Non-European General Hospital in Hillbrow, Johannesburg, that in 1941 she met
a cousin of Sisulu who introduced them. Albertina instilled in Walter a new
sense of confidence, making him less sensitive about his light complexion. ‘I’m
black enough for both of us,’ she used to say.
Mandela spent more and more time at the Sisulus’ house, regarding it as a
home from home. Ma Sisulu took a great liking to him and Walter regarded him
as his closest friend. They made an odd couple. Mandela had a tall, athletic
figure, a commanding presence and a patrician manner. He was invariably well
dressed. ‘The beautiful white silk scarf he wore around his neck stands out in my

mind to this day,’ the writer Ellen Kuzwayo recalled years later. Sisulu was
short, stocky and bespectacled. He had a habit at times of nervously biting his
lip. His smile revealed a wide gap in his front teeth. At meetings of the Youth
League, they tended to sit together, Mandela dressed in a suit and polished
shoes, Sisulu usually wearing a lumber jacket and sturdy boots. Mandela was
impatient for action; Sisulu was always careful to weigh up the consequences.
It was at the Sisulus’ house that Mandela met an attractive twenty-two-yearold nurse named Evelyn Mase. She was indirectly related to Walter’s mother and
was also a friend of Albertina, training at the same hospital in Hillbrow. Ma
Sisulu introduced them, mentioning that Mandela was studying law at the
University of the Witwatersrand. ‘He was handsome and charming and he made
me laugh,’ Evelyn remembered of their first meeting. ‘He flirted and said he
would come to see me at the hospital.’
Evelyn was a ‘home girl’, born in Engcobo in the Transkei in 1921. Her
father, a mineworker, had died when she was an infant and her mother had died
when she was twelve years old. She was sent to Johannesburg to attend
secondary school and placed in the care of an older brother who was living with
the Sisulus in Orlando. When the brother moved to a house in Orlando East, she
went with him, but she often returned to visit the Sisulus. She was a quiet, hardworking girl, much loved by them. On the half-day off that she had once a
fortnight, her favourite treat was to spend it at the cinema watching Fu Manchu
films.
A few days after that first encounter, Mandela duly turned up at the hospital.
They began meeting regularly and soon fell in love. Neither of them discussed
politics. Within months Mandela proposed and Evelyn accepted. The Sisulus
were overjoyed. The couple were married in 1944 at the Native Commissioner’s
Court in Johannesburg, with Walter and Albertina as witnesses. There was no
wedding feast, for they were too poor to afford one.
Their early life was happy but impoverished. Like many other African
couples, they found it impossible to find suitable accommodation. At first they
went to stay with Evelyn’s brother in Orlando East, then with her sister and
brother-in-law at City Deep Mines. Early in 1946, they were allocated their own
two-room municipal house in Orlando East and finally, a year later, they moved
to a three-room house, no. 8115, in Orlando West. Identical to all the other
houses around it, which were lined up in one monotonous row after another, it

stood on a small plot alongside a dirt road, with a tin roof, a cement floor, a
narrow kitchen and a bucket toilet at the back. There were streetlights outside,
but in the house paraffin lamps had to be used.
The house was soon full. Mandela’s sister, Leabie, joined them from the
Transkei to continue her education at Orlando High School. Later his mother
came to stay. There were always many visitors, especially from the Transkei.
Kaizer Matanzima, now employed as an articled clerk at a law firm in Umtata,
regularly called. The Mandelas were always hospitable, making up beds on the
floor when too many arrived.
Their first child, a boy, was born in 1945. He was named Madiba Thembekile
but known by his nickname, Thembi. Mandela was an attentive father, arriving
at Bertrams Nursing Home loaded with clothes for Evelyn and the newborn
infant and ensuring that, when they returned to no. 8115, a beautiful cot was
ready. At evening time, he enjoyed bathing Thembi, feeding him and putting
him to bed with a story. A daughter, Makaziwe, born in 1948, was frail from
birth and died nine months later.
Mandela’s domestic life was highly organised. He rose at dawn (a routine he
followed all his life), went jogging, ate a light breakfast and occasionally took
over the cooking. His home was a place where he enjoyed relaxing and reading.
But he was to spend less and less time there.
Completing his three years of articles at Witkin, Sidelsky and Eidelman in
early 1947, Mandela decided to study full-time at university to gain an LLB
degree, which would enable him to practise on his own as an attorney. Without
an income, the financial burden was crippling. He managed to obtain a loan of
£150 from the Bantu Welfare Trust at the South African Institute of Race
Relations, but he was otherwise dependent on Evelyn’s earnings as a nurse.
The work of the Congress Youth League, meanwhile, occupied him more and
more. ‘We were never really young,’ Oliver Tambo recalled. ‘There were no
dances, hardly a cinema, but meetings, discussions, every night, every weekend.’
They were propelled all the more by outbreaks of popular discontent erupting
around them, throwing up new movements and new leaders on the political
terrain they wanted to capture for themselves.

In March 1944, a mighty exodus began from the overcrowded quarters of

Orlando, organised by an eccentric community leader named James Mpanza, a
born-again Christian who had spent thirteen years in prison having been
convicted of murdering an Indian trader. The first group he led consisted of a
few hundred families, living as subtenants in municipal housing in Orlando, who
moved on to open land belonging to the municipality between the community
hall and the railway line, and built themselves shacks from sackcloth, cardboard,
scrap metal and corrugated iron. Within weeks, ‘Shantytown’, as it became
known, had grown into a squatter camp of more than 6,000 people and at its
height reached 20,000 people, drawing in African families from other
overcrowded areas of Johannesburg and the Rand. Mpanza became their
unofficial ‘mayor’. He liked to compare himself with Jesus Christ, proclaimed
himself King of Orlando and organised his camp into a movement called
Sofazonke, a Zulu word meaning ‘We shall all die’.
Other squatter bosses followed suit, establishing camps on vacant land in the
same area in defiance of the municipal authorities. Like Mpanza, they levied rent
and other charges on their followers, controlled trading activities and established
‘police’ and ‘courts’, developing autonomous enclaves and enriching themselves
in the process. No whites could enter except under squatter escort. ‘The
government is beaten,’ said one squatter boss, Oriel Monongoaha. ‘The
government was like a man who has a cornfield which is invaded by birds. He
chases the birds from one part of the field and they alight in another part of the
field. . . . We squatters are the birds. The government sends its policemen to
chase us away and we move off and occupy another spot. We shall see whether
it is the farmer or the birds who get tired first.’
It was in 1946 that a maverick white Anglican priest, the Reverend Michael
Scott, entered this underworld to investigate conditions there at the request of a
group of black ex-servicemen living in a squatter camp named Tobruk, just
below Orlando West. Scott was known to Mandela. He had been an occasional
visitor to parties at Ismail Meer’s flat in Kholvad House. An old-fashioned
crusader, he had arrived in South Africa from England in 1943 to work as a
priest at a Coloured orphanage near Sophiatown, soon taking up one cause after
another. The complaint of the ex-servicemen was about the corrupt regime of the
squatter boss who ran Tobruk, Samuel Komo, an ex-serviceman himself, who
had named his camp after the North African town where South African forces
had fought during the war.
Scott duly set up home in a tent amid a sea of shacks and hovels where 17,000

squatters were living. His headquarters became the Church of Christ, a
Congregational outpost made of hessian sacks and wood, which served both as a
church and a home for the Reverend Theophilus Dlamini and his family of
seven. Their living quarters were separated from the church by a partition of
sacking and wood. During divine service, the minister’s wife could be heard
behind the ragged cloth at the back of the altar, alternately spanking, soothing
and dressing her babies.
Scott and the Reverend Theophilus were soon drawn into an ugly conflict with
Komo and his gangsters. The church’s followers were intimidated into staying
away; Scott was attacked and his tent torn down. Finally, armed with sticks and
knives, Komo’s men assaulted Theophilus and his children one night, ripped the
sacking to pieces and burned the church to the ground. Scott, Theophilus, his
wife and children sought refuge nearby at Mandela’s small house in Orlando
West. Mandela remembered Scott as a modest, unassuming guest, but took a
dislike to Theophilus, who complained about the food he served.
Over a three-year period, some 90,000 Africans set up home in squatter camps
around Johannesburg, surviving in squalor and hardship. So great were the
numbers that the municipal authorities abandoned all intention of prosecuting
them and launched instead emergency housing schemes, followed by a huge
increase in the construction of permanent housing. As the squatters were moved
to new sites, officials used what they termed ‘culling’ measures against all who
were unemployed, sending them back to the reserves. The squatter movements
were eventually broken. Nevertheless, their actions had provoked government
intervention. Years later, Mpanza was remembered in the neighbourhood as ‘the
man who founded Soweto’. Though activists in the Congress Youth League
recognised the potential for gathering mass support over the squatter issue, their
efforts to assist Mpanza were negligible. For all the brave talk about the need for
action, they had yet to make a beginning. It was from other quarters, from the
Indian community and the communists, that the action came.

CHAPTER 3

FRIENDS AND COMRADES
IN 1946, SHORTLY AFTER THE SQUATTER EXODUS FROM ORLANDO
HAD begun, two of Mandela’s closest friends, Ismail Meer and Jaydew Singh,
joined hundreds of other Indian volunteers who were protesting against new
legislation restricting Indian rights to land purchase and residence, resulting in
their arrest and imprisonment. The protesters included doctors, lawyers,
teachers, traders, students and even a seventeen-year-old schoolboy, Ahmed
Kathrada, who was to become another of Mandela’s close friends. The
legislation, denounced by Indians as a ‘Ghetto Act’ for prohibiting them from
owning property outside certain designated areas, had been introduced by the
government in response to an increasingly vociferous white clamour against
Indian ‘penetration’ of white areas in Natal and the Transvaal. It was seen as a
general attack on the Indian community and provoked a campaign of passive
resistance similar to ones that the Indian lawyer Mohandas Gandhi had
successfully used in South Africa forty years before. This tradition of civil
disobedience in defence of Indian rights was to have a significant influence on
both Mandela and the ANC.
Indians had first arrived in Natal in the 1860s to work as indentured labourers
for British sugar planters who were unable to secure sufficient labour from
among local Africans. By 1911, when their recruitment stopped, some 150,000
Indian contract workers had made the journey, mostly low-caste Hindus from
Madras and Calcutta, of whom about half stayed on in Natal after their terms of
indenture had expired. Following in their wake came small groups of merchants
—‘passengers’, as they were known—travelling at their own expense, mainly
Muslims from the state of Gujarat, who formed the basis of a prosperous
commercial elite. Most of the Indian community stayed in Natal, but several
thousand found their way to the Transvaal. In Johannesburg, President Kruger
set aside a ‘Coolie Location’ to the west of the town centre for Asian residents,
but they were also allowed to live in other areas there.
When Gandhi first stepped ashore in Durban in 1893, having been hired by a

Durban-based Indian merchant company to assist in a law suit against an Indian
trader in the Transvaal, he expected no more than a single assignment. But he
was swiftly drawn into South Africa’s racial vortex, remained for twenty-one
years and had a lasting effect on the Indian protest movement there.
He played a leading role in establishing the first permanent Indian political
organisation, the Natal Indian Congress, in 1894, and the Transvaal Indian
Congress in 1904. When the Transvaal government passed a law in 1906 making
it compulsory for Indians over the age of eight to carry passes bearing their
fingerprints, Gandhi led the first passive resistance campaign in defence of
Indian rights. At a mass meeting in the Empire Theatre in Johannesburg, where
he took the chair, some 3,000 representatives took an oath pledging to go to
prison rather than apply for registration. The pass law was denounced as a
‘Black Act’ reducing them to the status of pass-bearing Africans. More than
2,000 Indians were eventually jailed or deported. Gandhi himself went to jail
several times.
Other campaigns were launched in protest against changes in the status of
Indian married women and an Indian poll tax. Gandhi was never concerned with
African rights. Indeed, during an African rebellion in Zululand in 1906, out of a
‘genuine sense of loyalty to the British Empire’, he volunteered to lead an Indian
Ambulance Corps to help the authorities, just as six years before he had
volunteered his services in ambulance work to the British army during the
Anglo-Boer War. Nevertheless, the successes that his passive resistance
campaigns achieved in getting pass laws and poll taxes rescinded were long
remembered.
Confronted with government proposals to restrict Indian property rights,
Indian Congress leaders resolved to use Gandhi’s old tactics to try to thwart the
move. Passive Resistance Councils were appointed in Natal and in the
Transvaal. Mandela’s student friend Jaydew Singh served as secretary of the
Transvaal Passive Resistance Council, while Ismail Meer edited a weekly
journal entitled Passive Resister.
The main centre of the campaign was Durban, where the large Indian
population was the most seriously affected by the Ghetto Act. In June 1946, the
first group of protesters pitched tents on a vacant ‘controlled’ site at the corner of
Umbilo Road and Gale Street. ‘Resistance Camp’, as it was known, quickly
became the target for hostile white gangs, which pulled down the tents, set fire to

them and then began to assault the protesters. The protesters were instructed not
to retaliate, no matter how brutal the assaults, even if women volunteers were
attacked. Day after day, batches of protesters assembled to face renewed
assaults. The crusading priest Michael Scott witnessed a night attack.
Suddenly a whistle blew, and with shouts and catcalls the whole
formation charged and bore down upon the little group of resisters who
were standing back-to-back so as to face in all directions. . . With their
fists they struck the Indians in the face and about the body. No one
retaliated but some tried to duck or ward off the blows before falling
down. On the ground they were kicked. Some were still, and some
groaning.
The protesters also faced arrest and imprisonment. Over the months, some
2,000 protesters, including 300 women, were arrested and imprisoned.
Volunteers from Johannesburg, like Meer and Singh, travelled to Durban to play
their part. Mandela watched with admiration as the protesters left Johannesburg.
Among them was Amina Pahad, whose flat in Orient House near Commissioner
Street he often visited for lunch. ‘Suddenly, this charming woman put aside her
apron and went to jail for her beliefs,’ he wrote. ‘If I had once questioned the
willingness of the Indian community to protest against oppression, I no longer
could.’
The campaign lasted until 1948 but failed to move the government. The
Ghetto Act remained in force. But the efforts of the protesters were rewarded
when their case was taken up by Pandit Nehru’s provisional government in
Delhi, which proposed that South Africa’s treatment of its Indian population
should be placed on the agenda of the United Nations General Assembly. For the
first time, the South African government found its racial policies under
international attack.

Within weeks of the beginning of the Indian passive resistance campaign, an
even more potent threat to white authority was launched by African
mineworkers. The mineworkers’ strike of 1946 was the biggest labour protest in
South Africa’s history. What lay behind it were not just long-standing grievances
about pay and conditions but the influence of a dedicated group of communists
with the ability to mobilise workers. Once again, Mandela was left to watch on
the sidelines as friends and acquaintances threw themselves into action while the

Youth League continued to ponder its ideological position.
The Communist Party in South Africa had a tortuous past. Formed in 1921 by
a group consisting mainly of foreign-born British radicals and Eastern European
Jews, it found itself the following year supporting an insurrection by white
mineworkers on the Witwatersrand determined to protect job segregation and
block all African competition. One of its banners, held aloft during a huge
demonstration of miners on the streets of Johannesburg, proclaimed: ‘Workers
of the World, Fight and Unite for a White South Africa.’ The interests of white
workers rather than black workers remained its preoccupation for several years.
At a party congress in 1925, one delegate complained about the activities of a
prominent radical, Eddie Roux: ‘Comrade Roux should not say at public
meetings in Johannesburg that natives should walk on the pavements etcetera.
That is what causes trouble at the meetings.’
It was not until the late 1920s that the party began to attract a significant
African membership. The night school it ran at its dingy office at 41a Fox Street,
in the heart of the Ferreirastown slum in central Johannesburg, became a venue
for scores of African workers. Nearby rooms there were occupied by poor white
down-and-outs, prostitutes and methylated-spirit drinkers. Lessons were
sometimes interrupted by loud stamping from the floor above or by drunkards
forcing their way in. But the white volunteer teachers were enthusiastic and the
students eager to learn the rudiments of reading, writing and arithmetic.
One of the workers who found his way to the night school soon rose to
become a prominent figure in the hierarchy of both the Communist Party and the
ANC. Moses Kotane came from a devout Christian peasant family of Tswana
origin from the Rustenburg district in the western Transvaal. Largely self-taught,
with little formal education, he became an insatiable reader and could often be
found in the back room of Mabuza’s butchery on Market Street, where he could
read in relative peace and quiet. He joined the ANC in 1928 at the age of twentythree, but was disappointed by its ineffectiveness. The following year he joined
the Communist Party, where his abilities as a diligent and clear-thinking activist,
capable of mastering the most abstruse texts, were quickly recognised. In 1931,
he became a full-time functionary, unpaid but provided with food and sleeping
quarters at the Fox Street office. The following year, he was sent off to study at
the Lenin School in Moscow.
The fortunes of the Communist Party had meanwhile slumped. The

Communist International, or Comintern, having paid scant attention to its South
African offspring since 1921, decided abruptly in 1928 that the true task of the
party in South Africa was to work for the establishment of an ‘Independent
Native Republic’ as the first stage ‘towards a workers’ and peasants’
government’. Many white members saw this as racism in reverse and resigned.
Others were drawn into a protracted period of purges and internal strife. After
four years, most members had deserted; all that was left was a rump of 150
followers, almost all of them white.
Only during the war years did the party’s fortunes revive. Once the Soviet
Union had joined the war against Germany, communists emerged as enthusiastic
supporters of the war effort, organising a series of patriotic ‘Defend South
Africa’ rallies, which won them hundreds of new members. Speakers who had
previously denounced the war as an imperialist enterprise now urged their
audiences to ‘arm the people’ and ‘avenge Tobruk’. Pro-Soviet organisations,
like the Friends of the Soviet Union and Medical Aid for Russia, gained
widespread public support, attracting as patrons respectable figures like the
minister of justice, Dr Colin Steyn. Circulation of the pro-communist weekly
newspaper, The Guardian, reached 50,000. In the 1943 general election, party
candidates failed to capture a seat but gained in all some 7,000 votes. The
following year, in municipal elections, a party member, Hilda Bernstein, became
the first and only communist candidate ever elected to public office by an allwhite electorate, winning the Hillbrow seat on the Johannesburg City Council.
A new generation of communists came to the fore. Moses Kotane was chosen
as the party’s secretary-general and was to exercise a pragmatic influence over
party affairs in the years ahead. Also prominent was Edwin Mofutsanyana,
editor of the party newspaper, Inkululeko, who took to patrolling Orlando’s
dusty streets in an air-raid warden’s uniform.
But while the new membership of the Communist Party was predominantly
African, the leadership remained largely in white hands. White communists were
accustomed to playing a leading role both as teachers of theory and as organisers
in the field. Their financial and professional resources gave them inherent
advantages. Mostly they were middle-class activists brought up in an anti-fascist
tradition at a time when battles with pro-Nazi groups on the steps of
Johannesburg City Hall were a regular event. Many came from Jewish families,
descendants of immigrants from Lithuania and Latvia who had arrived in South
Africa in a huge influx between 1880 and 1914, escaping from political and

racial persecution there as well as economic hardship, and who then faced in
South Africa a rising tide of anti-Semitism among Afrikaner nationalists in the
1930s and early 1940s. The reality of white advantage was openly discussed.
Writing in the party press in 1942, Moses Kotane observed: ‘In a party like ours,
where whites and blacks come together, the general tendency of Non-European
members is to take back seats and leave the leadership to the Europeans. They
feel themselves inferior to the European comrades. The reason for this is to be
found in the political, economic and social structure of South Africa.’
What the Communist Party had to offer, to aspiring blacks and Indians in
particular, was not just a sense of political purpose, its vision of a socialist
future, but an avenue through the racial barriers that shaped South African
society. It was the only political organisation in South Africa not to practise
some form of colour bar. It facilitated friendship across the colour line, giving
many people their first glimpse of a multiracial world. The social gatherings
organised by the Communist Party, to which Nat Bregman introduced Mandela
soon after they first met, drew in a circle far wider than communist
sympathisers. Personal contact between white and black was otherwise
extremely rare. In the homes of white communists, Africans could sip brandy,
away from the liquor laws and the threat of police raids, and enjoy a world of
music, painting and discussion normally inaccessible to them.
Despite such efforts, the Communist Party remained an elite group. Its slavish
devotion to the Soviet Union in party pronouncements lent weight to the belief
that its true allegiance lay there. Lacking mass support, it channelled its energies
and abilities into supporting other organisations, seeking to extend its influence
by such means. It paid considerable attention to the ailing ANC, where party
officials like Kotane served simultaneously in senior ANC posts. An anti-pass
campaign initiated by the communists during the war years was in danger of
collapse until Xuma agreed to join it. In the joint campaign that followed, there
was considerable friction when it appeared that the communists were not
prepared to accept anything but token ANC leadership. The communists were
frequently impatient with the sluggish pace of ANC activity and dismissive of its
capacity to organise mass action. Moreover, their ultimate objectives differed.
The communists were intent not simply on fighting for African liberation from
white rule, as the ANC was, but on leading South Africa in the direction of a
socialist republic. This placed them constantly at odds with African activists,
who feared they would try to take over the ANC for their own purposes.

The communists made the greatest impact in the field of trade union
organisation, notably among African mineworkers. In their first attempt to
establish a mineworkers’ union during the 1930s, they encountered difficulties
over organising migrant workers and consequently decided to enlist the support
of the ANC. The initiative was taken by two prominent communists, Edwin
Mofutsanyana, who had trained at the Lenin School in Moscow, and Gaur
Radebe; both held posts in the ANC. In 1941, a steering committee to establish
an African Mineworkers’ Union was elected, headed by J. B. Marks, a former
teacher born in 1903 of mixed parentage in Ventersdorp in the western
Transvaal. Like Kotane and Mofutsanyana, he had joined the Communist Party
in the late 1920s, as well as the ANC, studied at the Lenin School in Moscow in
the 1930s and returned to South Africa to become a full-time party and trade
union organiser.
The task they faced was formidable. African miners on the Witwatersrand
were rural men with strong tribal allegiances, serving out their contracts in mine
compounds, separated from the rest of the black community until they returned
home. Their only alternative to compound life was the cheap canteens and
shabby concession stores adjacent to the compounds. They were men who
understood little of city life or modern politics, whose primary aim was to earn
money for their families back home. The compounds, moreover, were closed to
union officials. Meetings could be held only clandestinely. Organisers faced
dismissal and deportation to rural areas. One of Mandela’s tasks as a mine
policeman, if he had stayed at Crown Mines, would have been to keep a sharp
eye out for such activists.
From the outset, the African Mineworkers’ Union pressed wage demands on
the Chamber of Mines but received no hearing. In 1943, miners’ discontent
spilled over into sporadic strikes at individual mines. Seeking to avoid further
trouble during wartime, the government appointed a commission of inquiry into
the wages and conditions of African miners, giving the Mineworkers’ Union the
opportunity to organise meetings up and down the Reef to collect and formulate
workers’ grievances. The commission recommended substantial improvements.
But three years later wages in the mines were less than half the minimum
amount advocated by the commission, and employers ignored further demands
from mineworkers. Sporadic trouble broke out. At Crown Mines, 5,000 miners
went on hunger strike.
At a union meeting on 4 August 1946, held in public at the New-town Market

Square, west of Johannesburg’s city centre, delegates numbering more than
1,000 voted to call a strike of all Africans employed in the gold mines, starting
on 12 August. No previous attempt had been made to organise an industry-wide
strike. The union president, J. B. Marks, warned them of the risk of repression.
‘You are challenging the basis of the cheap labour system,’ he said, ‘and must be
ready to sacrifice in the struggle.’
The strike brought Mandela into close touch with Marks, beginning another
important friendship. Mandela had several relatives working in the mines and
visited them during the strike to express support, sometimes in the company of
Marks on his own rounds. He was impressed by his ‘cool and reasoned
leadership’ at the height of crisis.
With forty-five mines strung out along fifty miles of the Witwatersrand, often
in isolated areas surrounded by unused scrubland and constantly patrolled by
mine police, the strike call far outstretched the capacity of union organisers. To
bolster the strike, Johannesburg’s close-knit communists mobilised all their
resources, providing teams of volunteers, cars, typewriters, duplicators and
leaflet-writers. The party’s district committee met secretly at different venues
both by day and by night, directing its members’ work. Leaflets were printed and
distributed from end to end of the Witwatersrand. Flying squads of communist
activists rushed from mine to mine to back up the efforts of the union. A strike
bulletin was compiled each evening by Rusty Bernstein, a skilful writer in
charge of party propaganda, and dispatched at night to mine compounds by
volunteers, sometimes dressed to look like miners.
The strike lasted for five days, drawing in some 70,000 miners, about a
quarter of the African labour force. Nine mines came to a standstill and
production at ten others was disrupted. An increasingly ugly struggle developed
between militant miners and police called in to break the strikes, resulting in the
death of twelve miners and injuries to more than 1,200 others. On 16 August, the
Rand Daily Mail reported how a force of 400 policemen sent 1,000 feet
underground at the Nigel gold mine to deal with 1,000 miners staging a sit-down
strike ‘drove the natives up, stope by stope, level by level, until they reached the
surface’.
Police also raided the union’s office in Johannesburg and the Communist
Party’s district office in Commissioner Street, removing case-loads of
documents. Determined to show that it could deal with ‘the red menace’, the

government then ordered the arrest of the entire Johannesburg district committee
and other strike organisers, a total of fifty-two people, on charges of conspiracy
to commit sedition. These were later reduced to a charge of assisting a strike
which was illegal in terms of war measures still in force. All the accused pleaded
guilty, including Yusuf Dadoo, the communist Indian leader who had been in
prison throughout the period serving a sentence for his actions in the passive
resistance campaign, and the Afrikaner lawyer Bram Fischer, a district
committee member who had been on holiday in a wildlife reserve throughout the
strike. In terms of the objectives that the miners set, the strike was a complete
failure. None of their demands was met and their union was virtually destroyed.
The communists too now found themselves the target of harassment. Members
of the party’s central committee were charged anew with sedition. The evidence
was flimsy, but the proceedings dragged on for two years. The popular support
that the communists had enjoyed during the war evaporated. The more timid or
prudent members retired from the fray, leaving behind a committed hardcore.
Nevertheless, the strike produced a considerable shift in the political terrain.
Two days after the strike started, members of the Native Representative Council,
the advisory body established by the government as compensation for the loss of
the African franchise in 1936, assembled in Pretoria for their annual sitting in an
angry and defiant mood, appalled by the government’s treatment of the
mineworkers. Although the council possessed no executive power, it had
attracted some of the most able and respected Africans in the country, including
Mandela’ s teacher from Fort Hare, Professor Matthews, an eminent physician,
Dr James Moroka, and a distinguished Zulu chief, Albert Luthuli, all of whom
were moderate men. During the war years they had become increasingly critical
of the government’s failure to take their views seriously. Now reports of police
brutality against the miners sent them to the brink of rebellion. Their tempers
were not improved when they discovered that, on the instructions of the Pretoria
City Council, they had been barred from premises they normally used in the
Pretoria City Hall and instead given cramped quarters in the Department of
Labour, where the lavatories were for whites only. They also found, much to
their irritation, that the council’s chairman, the Secretary of the Native Affairs
Department, had been called away to Johannesburg on strike business and that
his place had been taken by a deputy. When the deputy made no mention in his
opening address of the miners’ strike or police action, the councillors reacted
with vigour. Paul Mosaka, a successful Johannesburg businessman, referred to
the ‘wanton shooting’ of miners and went on to launch a blistering attack on the

government’s neglect of the council’s work. ‘We have been fooled,’ he said.
‘We have been asked to cooperate with a toy telephone.’
The following day, the council unanimously passed a resolution which
condemned government policy, called for the abolition of all discriminatory
legislation and announced that the session would be adjourned. Even
government-appointed chiefs voted in favour of the motion. At the end of the
debate, a veteran nationalist figure, Selope Thema, turned to the council
chairman and warned, ‘It may not happen in your day, but it may come about
that the black people will stand together against the white people.’
The old style of African politics, of polite requests and suggestions, had
finally reached the end of the road. In its place came a growing interest in
collaboration between different groups of the government’s opponents. To
Mandela and to others in the Youth League, this was an unwelcome
development.

Mandela’s circle of friends and acquaintances in Johannesburg was unusually
wide and varied. He established strong friendships with white, black and Indian
alike. He enjoyed calling at the International Club in Kort Street, where political
radicals of every hue gathered for coffee, social events and lectures. He was as
much at ease in the homes of white radicals like Michael Harmel, a leading
communist theoretician and writer, as in the homes of black radicals. He
developed a liking for Indian cooking and was a welcome guest in many Indian
homes. His favourite base in town was Ismail Meer’s flat in Kholvad House,
where endless discussions and arguments took place and where parties on
Saturday nights, with dancing, illicit drink and a selection of curry meals, would
go on until the early hours of Sunday mornings. When it was too late to catch the
last train for Orlando, Mandela would stay there overnight.
In his political outlook, however, Mandela identified himself with the extreme
wing of the Congress Youth League, which was hostile to all suggestion of
collaboration with white, Indian or communist groups. As a true disciple of
Lembede, he was adamant about the need for African leadership and African
control. Lembede’s Africanism was essentially a philosophy of racial
exclusivity. In an early draft of the Youth League’s statement of policy, whites
were described as ‘foreigners’. The slogans favoured by the more extreme
Africanists included ‘Africa for the Africans’ and ‘Hurl the White man to the

sea’, which they tried to get the ANC’s annual conference in Bloemfontein to
accept in 1945. Mandela was sympathetic to their views: ‘While I was not
prepared to hurl the white man into the sea, I would have been perfectly happy if
he had climbed aboard his steamships and left the continent of his own volition.’
Above all, Mandela was anti-communist, convinced that the communists were
intent on trying to take over the African nationalist movement for their own
purposes. The prominent role that white members played in the party and the
emphasis that communists placed on class struggle rather than racial oppression
all served to confirm his distrust. In 1945, in an overt attempt to rid the ANC of
Communist Party members, Lembede, Sisulu, Tambo and Mandela put forward
a motion to the ANC’s Transvaal branch proposing that members with dual
allegiance to other organisations should be expelled from the ANC.
Towards Indian political activists Mandela was only marginally less hostile,
fearing that, with their superior education and training, Indians would dominate
African initiatives as surely as white communists wanted to. Their interests,
moreover, did not coincide with African interests. Africans were preoccupied
with issues like pass laws, which did not affect Indians, whereas Indians were
pitted against measures like the Ghetto Act, which did not directly affect
Africans. The final verdict reached by the Youth League was that Indians would
not be regarded as ‘intruders or enemies’ provided that they did not undermine
the African struggle for liberation.
For month after month, members of the Youth League argued over these
issues, meeting sometimes in Sisulu’s office off Market Street, sometimes in
Lembede’s office close by, or in each other’s homes in Orlando. The core of the
group consisted of no more than sixty Africans, with a far smaller number
playing an active part in debates. They were preoccupied principally with
establishing ideological positions, with constructing a ‘nation-building’
ideology, rather than planning political action, but they were not short of views
on other matters. When King George VI, Queen Elizabeth and the two royal
princesses toured South Africa in 1947, the Youth League executive met in
Mandela’s house in Orlando to consider the question of a boycott. Lembede
argued passionately against paying homage to the head of a state that had failed
to honour its moral duty to the African people. Mandela, more respectful of
royalty than others, cautioned against taking an emotional view, pointing out that
the British monarchy was a great and enduring institution; but he was not
opposed to a boycott. The Youth League’s subsequent call for a boycott, in

protest against the ‘barbarous policy of the Union Government maintained in the
name of His Majesty’, infuriated the ANC leader, Dr Xuma.
The main body of the ANC was meanwhile moving in a different direction,
seeking new links with other opposition groups. The Africanist attempt at the
1945 annual conference to gain approval for the slogan ‘Africa for the Africans
and the White Man for the Sea’ was rejected as being ‘not in accordance with
the Congress spirit’. Xuma was also receptive to communist approaches to
collaborate, taking part in a communist-organised anti-pass campaign during the
war years. In 1946, three veteran communists, Marks, Kotane and Daniel
Tloome, were elected to the ANC’s national executive committee. Communists
within the ANC became articulate critics of the exclusivist position that the
Africanists advocated. Attempts by the Youth League to exclude communists
from ANC membership, which gained significant support in the Transvaal ANC,
failed at a national level.
Cooperation with Indian organisations was also strengthened. In the wake of
the Indian passive resistance campaign, the ANC found common cause with the
Transvaal Indian Congress and the Natal Indian Congress in opposing
discriminatory legislation. In March 1947, all three organisations signed a pact
committing them to work together for full franchise rights and the removal of all
forms of racial discrimination. One of the first projects they launched was a
‘Votes for All’ campaign, demanding the extension of the franchise to all South
Africans.
It was over the ‘Votes for All’ issue that Mandela and Sisulu came into sharp
disagreement. Sisulu had begun to take a more pragmatic view of opposition to
the government. Once a committed member of the Africanist group, as hostile to
cooperation with whites, Indians and communists as Lembede, he had come to
accept the need for a wider approach if opposition was to succeed. However
appealing Lembede’s Africanism was at an emotional level, from a strategic
point of view it had obvious limitations. Joint campaigns were a practical way
forward.
Mandela, however, along with Oliver Tambo, insisted on the need for African
leadership of any campaign involving other groups. At a rowdy meeting of the
Transvaal ANC called to debate the ‘Votes for All’ issue, their disagreement
burst out into the open. The meeting broke up in disorder. ‘Nelson and Oliver
were so angry with me that instead of going to the station together to take the

train home, as we usually did, we went separate ways,’ recalled Sisulu.
What shifted the balance within the Youth League further in the direction of a
more moderate stance was the sudden death of Lembede, at the age of thirtythree, in July 1947. Mandela had been visiting Lembede at his office during a
lunch break when Lembede complained of a pain in his stomach. When the pain
grew worse, Lembede was taken to Coronation Hospital, but he died that
evening. The Youth League was stunned. Lembede’s forceful personality had
guided it from the beginning; his ideas on Africanism had become its own creed.
However, his obsession with sticking rigidly to Africanist ideals, fending off
critics from all sides, had become an obstacle to its advancement.
His successor, Peter Mda, an Orlando teacher with a sharper, more analytical
approach, began to move the Youth League away from the extreme positions
favoured by Lembede. In place of the term ‘Africanism’, Mda preferred to use
‘African Nationalism’. When the Youth League finally published its ‘Basic
Policy’ in 1948, four years after its formation, Mda was its author.
It must be noted that there are two streams of African Nationalism. One
centres round Marcus Garvey’s slogan ‘Africa for Africans’. It is based
on the ‘Quit Africa’ slogan and the cry ‘Hurl the Whiteman into the sea’.
This brand of African nationalism is extreme and ultra-revolutionary.
There is another stream of African Nationalism (Africanism) which is
moderate, and which the Congress Youth League professes. We of the
Youth League take account of the concrete situation in South Africa, and
realize that the different racial groups have come to stay. But we insist
that a condition for interracial peace and progress is the abandonment of
white domination, and such a change in the basic structure of South
African society that those relations which breed exploitation and human
misery will disappear.
Due warnings were given about ‘the need for vigilance against communists
and other groups which foster non-African interests . . . groups that seek to
impose on our struggle cut-and-dried formulas, which so far from clarifying the
issues of our struggle, only serve to obscure the fundamental fact that we are
oppressed not as a class, but as a people’. The help of white liberals was
dismissed as being worthless: ‘Their voice is negligible, and in the last analysis
counts for nothing. In their struggle for freedom the Africans will be wasting
their time and deflecting their forces if they look up to the Europeans either for

inspiration or for help.’ Indian organisations were given similarly short shrift.
What the Youth League essentially wanted was to ‘go it alone’. But the extent to
which other groups were to be excluded from the African struggle for power was
an issue that was left unresolved. Two rival schools of thought developed: the
Africanist school, which put African interests above all others, and the
Nationalist school, which preferred a more flexible approach towards other
groups. This division in African opinion was to be the cause of bitter clashes for
years to come.
Mandela remained firmly in the Africanist camp. Yet though he was spending
more and more time on political activity, neglecting both his law studies at the
University of the Witwatersrand and his family in Orlando, he possessed no
clear sense of direction. As a political activist in the 1940s, he made no
particular impact. He had a reputation, as he admitted, as ‘a gadfly’, knowing
what he was against rather than what he was for. Whereas Sisulu was developing
a strategic outlook about the African struggle for political rights, using the
‘Votes for All’ campaign as a means to strengthen links with other opposition
groups, Mandela was more concerned about tactical issues, worried that the
ANC might not gain the credit for the campaign rather than whether the
campaign achieved any success. Sisulu, often quiet amid fierce debate going on
around him, listened carefully to arguments by veteran communists like Marks
and Kotane about the need for collaboration; Mandela, relishing fierce argument,
was not so amenable. He was also prone to occasional hotheaded action. Oliver
Tambo, in later years, remembered him as ‘passionate, emotional, sensitive,
quickly stung to bitterness and retaliation by insult and patronage’. Sisulu,
recalling their dispute over the ‘Votes for All’ issue, reflected on the moments of
anger that Mandela sometimes showed: ‘Essentially, he is a moderate,
reasonable man in his approach. That is his general nature. But then there is this
contradiction of stubbornness. When it comes to the final point, he can become
very stubborn, very arrogant. His anger becomes extreme. It is not in argument
that he becomes angry. It is when he suspects people’s motives—as he did with
the communists.’
So engrossed were members of the Youth League with their own internal
debates and meetings that they paid scant attention to political developments in
the white community. Nor did they think they were important. It therefore came
as a shock to Mandela when, at dawn one day in the streets of Johannesburg, he
emerged with Oliver Tambo from an all-night meeting to find newspapers

proclaiming that Afrikaner nationalists had taken power in the 1948 election.

CHAPTER 4

THE APARTHEID MACHINE
FOR NEARLY FORTY YEARS, SINCE THE ESTABLISHMENT OF THE
UNION in 1910, South Africa had been led by Afrikaner generals—Botha,
Hertzog and Smuts—who had fought courageously against the might of the
British army in the Anglo-Boer War, but whose main preoccupation in office
had been to ensure a stable balance between the Boers and the British that would
underpin the Union.
The task had not been an easy one. The Anglo-Boer War had left a legacy of
bitterness among the Boers that endured for generations. Faced with guerrilla
warfare for which they were ill-prepared, British military commanders devised a
scorched-earth strategy in which Boer villages were razed to the ground,
thousands of Boer farmsteads destroyed and cattle and sheep slaughtered or
carried away on such a scale that by the end of the war the Boers of the Orange
Free State had lost half of their herds and those in the Transvaal, three-quarters.
Captured burghers were deported overseas in their thousands. Women and
children were rounded up and placed in what the British called concentration
camps, where conditions were so appalling that some 26,000 died there from
disease and malnutrition, most of them under the age of sixteen.
In the aftermath of the war, the British authorities made every effort to reestablish Boer farmers on the land and to resuscitate the shattered economy of
their new colonies. Yet the war had destroyed much that reconstruction could
never replace, reducing a large part of the Boer community to an impoverished
rural people. A growing number drifted to the towns, hoping to find work. But
the towns were the citadels of British commerce and culture, where Boers from
the platteland, possessing no skills or education, found themselves scorned and
despised for their poverty, their country ways and their language. Many were
forced to live cheek by jowl with Africans in slums on the ragged edges of
towns, like the western areas of Johannesburg, and seek work in competition
with cheap black labour. Urban poverty became as common as rural poverty.

Even though the Union was launched in 1910 with much goodwill on all
sides, with General Botha as prime minister and General Smuts and General
Hertzog as members of the cabinet, fear and resentment of British domination
ran deep. Many Afrikaners never accepted the idea of being part of the British
Empire and mourned the loss of their own republics. Everywhere they were
reminded of the presence of British authority. ‘God Save the King’ became the
official anthem. The national flag was a British Red Ensign, with the Union coat
of arms in a lower corner. Most civil servants were English-speaking. The
British dominated industry, commerce and the mines and controlled banks and
finance houses. They also held an almost complete monopoly of industrial skills
and training. Moreover, under the 1910 constitution, on questions of war and
peace South Africa was not a sovereign independent state but was bound by
decisions of the British government. When General Botha took South Africa into
the 1914 war with Germany, a group of his old Boer War comrades rose in
rebellion.
General Hertzog was prominent among those Afrikaners who feared that the
sheer weight of British influence would eventually engulf the Afrikaner people.
Dropped from the cabinet in 1913, he formed the National Party in 1914,
proposing a ‘two-stream’ policy for South Africans by which Afrikaners and
English would develop separately their own culture and traditions until the
Afrikaner stream attained an equal status with the English. As prime minister
from 1924, Hertzog achieved many of his goals. South Africa was recognised by
Britain as a sovereign independent state and given Dominion status. A new
national flag was approved. Afrikaans, a vernacular derived from a mixture of
Dutch, Malay, Portuguese creole and Khoisan speech, became an official
language for the first time.
But the problem of white poverty continued to grow. In the depression years
of 1928-32, the scale of misery affecting poor whites was immense. A Carnegie
Commission report estimated that in 1930 nearly half of the white population
was living in ‘dire poverty’. At least nine out of ten of these poor-white families
were said to be Afrikaans-speaking. In rural areas, the commission reported,
many families were living in hovels woven from reeds or in mud huts with
thatched roofs similar to those used by Africans. One third of these dwellings
were said to be ‘unsuitable for civilized life’. Many white families lived a
narrow and backward existence. More than half of the children did not complete
primary education: ‘Education was largely looked upon, among the rural

population, as something foreign, as a thing that had no bearing on their daily
life and needs.’
In an attempt to deal with the problems of poor-white unemployment, Hertzog
devised what was known as a ‘civilized labour’ policy. In practice this meant
that, wherever feasible, whites replaced black workers in the public service and
state-owned corporations like the railways. Such measures, however, were not
sufficient to keep pace with the flood of rural immigrants seeking work in towns.
Struggling to cope with the consequences of depression, Hertzog agreed in 1932
to take his National Party into a coalition with Smuts’s opposition South Africa
Party in what became known as Fusion government. The following year, the two
parties merged as the United Party.
It was out of this maelstrom of misery and hardship that a new form of
Afrikaner nationalism emerged. It was not simply a return to the old nationalism
of the past, of the kind once espoused by Hertzog, aiming to defend Afrikaner
traditions and interests. This was a new nationalism, hardened by new ideology
and driven by a ruthless determination to achieve Afrikaner domination. In place
of the idea of Suid Afrikaanse volkseenheid, a unity between all South Africa’s
whites, which Hertzog now advocated, the new nationalists wanted Afrikaner
volkseenheid. In the context of the 1930s, the greatest threat to Afrikanerdom
was seen to come not from the blacks, as it was at a later stage, but from British
imperialism and its allies in the English-speaking population. All the ills facing
the Afrikaner people were attributed to the evil designs of British policy,
stretching back to the early nineteenth century, when Britain gained control of
the Cape and imposed its rule over the Boer inhabitants.
Powerful myths, myths that endured for generations, were used by nationalist
politicians and intellectuals to gain popular support. Afrikaners were portrayed
as members of an exclusive volk created by the hand of God to fulfill a special
mission in South Africa. Their history, their language, their culture, being
divinely ordained, were unique. They were an organic unity from which ‘foreign
elements’ like English-speakers were excluded. This vision of the Afrikaners as
a chosen people, based on Calvinist ideas, had first been expounded by Paul
Kruger, president of the Transvaal republic. Now it became a central part of the
nationalist creed. At its core, the new nationalism—Christian Nationalism, as it
was called—was essentially a potent mix of the Old Testament and modern
politics.

The driving force behind the nationalist revival was a secret, tightly
disciplined Afrikaner organisation called the Broederbond, which by the mid1930s had extended its influence to every level of Afrikaner society. Its elite
membership, carefully selected and bound together by oath, comprised mainly
professional men—teachers, academics, clergymen and civil servants—many of
them based in urban areas of the Transvaal. Their objective was made clear by
the chairman of the Broederbond, Professor van Rooy, in a private circular
issued in 1934: ‘Let us keep constantly in view the fact that our chief concern is
whether Afrikanerdom will reach its eventual goal of mastery [baaskap] in
South Africa. Brothers, our solution for South Africa’s troubles is . . . that the
Afrikaner Broederbond shall rule South Africa.’
When Hertzog agreed to enter the Fusion government and merge the National
Party into the new United Party, Afrikaner nationalists led by Dr Daniel Malan,
a Dutch Reformed Church predikant who had forsaken the pulpit for politics,
launched a ‘purified’ National Party, claiming to stand for the aims and
objectives of ‘true’ Afrikaners, whom, they said, Hertzog had betrayed. The
impact they initially made was limited. For several years, Malan’s Nationalists
remained in the wilderness. Hertzog dismissed them as a group of fanatics
merely intent on stirring up discord and hatred.
What provided Malan with a breakthrough was the fierce dissension among
Afrikaners that erupted at the outbreak of the Second World War. Hertzog
insisted that South Africa should remain neutral, arguing that the war was none
of its concern. Smuts, a great admirer of Britain and the Empire and a close
friend of Winston Churchill, was adamant that South Africa should stand side by
side with Britain. The Fusion government, meeting on 2 September 1939, was
split: seven ministers wanted an immediate declaration of war against Germany
and six opposed them. The issue went to parliament two days later. By a vote of
eighty to sixty-seven, Smuts took South Africa into the war. Hertzog resigned
and with his supporters threw in his lot with Malan.
A large part of Afrikanerdom was outraged that South Africa had once again
been dragged into another of ‘England’s wars’. Overnight, Afrikaner
republicanism became a potent political force. As Hitler’s armies advanced
across Europe, the surge of pro-German sentiment grew stronger. Nationalist
newspapers cheered each Allied setback. Paramilitary groups supporting Hitler
attracted hundreds of thousands of followers. An elite paramilitary corps—
Stormjaers—was formed to sabotage the war effort. Attacks were made on

railways, power lines and public buildings. The government retaliated by
interning thousands of pro-Nazi activists, among them several Nationalist figures
who were later to achieve high office. As the tide of war turned against
Germany, the heady atmosphere created by early German successes soon
dissipated. But the overall effect was to leave Malan’s National Party as the
main focal point for Afrikaner aspirations.
It was during the war years that Nationalist politicians and intellectuals began
to pay increasing attention to ‘the Native problem’. The wartime economic boom
had drawn massive numbers of Africans into urban areas. More than half a
million were added to the urban African population between 1936 and 1946,
mostly during the war years. In urban areas, blacks outnumbered whites. On a
national basis, as the 1946 census figures showed, the whites were a declining
proportion of the population. Since 1910 the white population had increased by
little more than a million to 2.4 million, whereas the non-white population had
expanded by nearly 4.5 million to 9 million. About 60 per cent of Africans were
living in white-designated areas, either in towns or on farms, while only 40 per
cent were based in the reserves. By sheer weight of numbers, it seemed to the
Nationalists, Africans threatened to swamp the white population. As the problem
of white poverty receded, this new threat—swart gevaar, the black peril—
became their abiding obsession.
As prime minister, Smuts too was obliged to take a closer interest in the mood
of militancy spreading among the African population. He had never previously
paid much attention to ‘the Native problem’, preferring to leave it in the hands of
the Native Affairs Department. But determined to avoid possible disruption to
the war effort, he appointed a commission early in 1942 to investigate the socioeconomic, educational and health conditions of urban Africans. The commission
pointed out, as previous commissions had done, that a Native policy based
essentially on the development of the reserves was an illusion; a large and
permanent African urban population was an unavoidable part of South Africa’s
future. It recommended in particular the abolition of the pass laws, which by
then involved the arrest of 350,000 Africans each year: ‘The harassing and
constant interference with the freedom of movement of Natives gives rise to a
burning sense of grievance and injustice which has an unsettling effect on the
Native population as a whole.’
Smuts himself spoke eloquently on the matter in 1942: ‘A revolutionary
change is taking place among the Native peoples of Africa through the

movement from the country to the towns—the movement from the old Reserves
in the Native areas to the big European centres of population. Segregation tried
to stop it. It has, however, not stopped it in the least. The process has been
accelerated. You might as well try to sweep the ocean back with a broom.’
Yet though Smuts occasionally expressed liberal sentiments about African
rights, he never fulfilled them. His conviction about the virtues of European
civilisation and government ran too deep. Nor was he able to provide any clear
answers to the Native question, believing that for the foreseeable future it was
insoluble. He merely hoped, though without much confidence, that in time there
might be an improvement in race relations. The impression he gave to an
increasingly worried electorate was that his government was beginning to lose
control of the black population and, what was worse, lacked the will to restore
control.
Malan’s Nationalists, meanwhile, put forward a plan which they claimed
would provide a permanent solution to the Native problem: apartheid. The word
had come into common use in the mid-1930s among a group of Afrikaner
intellectuals searching for decisive methods of dealing with the African
population. During the war years, Malan began to mention it in speeches in
public, but it remained a vague concept. Then, in post-war years, Nationalist
intellectuals and theologians defined it more closely.
Apartheid essentially was a simple doctrine. It involved the idea of total racial
separation. Every facet of life—residence, amenities, transport, education and
politics—would be kept separate, wherever possible. This policy would apply to
Coloured and Indian people as well as to the African population. By such means
no race group would then threaten any longer the future of any other. The
survival of the white race would be assured. The blacks, meanwhile, would be
able to preserve their own culture and identity and to develop in their own areas.
All this, the Nationalists asserted, was in accordance with Christian principles of
right and justice. God had ordained the division of nations and wished them to
be kept separate. Texts from the Bible were cited as proof.
These ideas were incorporated into a political manifesto drawn up by a
National Party commission under Paul Sauer and issued in 1948, a few months
before the general election. The reserves, said the Sauer report, were the proper
homelands of the African population. There they would be allowed to develop to
their full capacities. Urban Africans, meanwhile, would be treated as ‘visitors’

and strictly controlled.
Natives in the urban areas should be regarded as migratory citizens not
entitled to political and social rights equal to those of whites. The process
of detribalization should be arrested. The entire migration of Natives into
and from the cities should be controlled by the state, which will enlist the
cooperation of municipal bodies. Migration into and from the Reserves
shall likewise be strictly controlled. Surplus Natives in the urban areas
should be returned to their original habitat in the country areas [white
farms] or the Reserves. Natives from the country areas shall be admitted
to the urban areas or towns as temporary employees obliged to return to
their homes after the expiry of their employment.
Smuts was thought to be in no particular danger from the Nationalist
challenge. With the Allied victory in 1945, his prestige had reached new heights.
Abroad, he was hailed as an international statesman, admired by leaders like
Churchill and Roosevelt and entrusted with the task of drafting the Preamble to
the United Nations Charter, earning widespread applause for the emphasis he
placed on fundamental rights. On his return home from the United Nations
conference in San Francisco in 1945, he was given a tumultuous welcome. His
views about the importance of European rule were common enough at the time,
not only in South Africa but throughout the African continent and in the capitals
of Europe, from where most of Africa was then ruled. Although South Africa’s
racial practices were beginning to attract adverse international attention, they
tended to differ in detail rather than in essence from the discriminatory policies
employed elsewhere in Africa under colonial rule. The platform he put forward
in the election was pragmatic. He endorsed a government report which argued
that the urbanisation of the African could not be reversed and that henceforth
blacks should be accepted as a permanent part of the urban population. Although
some controls over the movement of blacks to the cities were still needed, the
system of migrant labour had become obsolete and wasteful and the idea of
territorial separation of the races was ‘utterly impractical’.
Not even the Nationalists believed that victory in the 1948 election was within
their reach. Their hopes were based on the following election. The ruling United
Party, together with its parliamentary allies, went into the election with a
majority of more than fifty seats. For the Nationalists to win would require a
swing of opinion among the electorate unprecedented in the Union’s history.
Yet, with relentless propaganda, the Nationalists ensured that the swart gevaar

issue dominated public debate, using every opportunity to play on the
electorate’s racial anxieties. The choice for whites, the Nationalists said, was
between ‘integration and national suicide’ on the one hand and ‘apartheid’ and
the protection of a ‘pure white race’ on the other. The 1948 election, said Malan,
would be the most decisive in South Africa’s history. One question
overshadowed all others: ‘Will the European race in the future be able to
maintain its rule, its purity, its civilization; or will it float until it vanishes for
ever, without honour, in the black sea of South Africa’s Non-European
population?’ Only a National Party government, he said, could provide an
effective answer. It would outlaw interracial marriage, control African influx
into the cities, protect white workers from African competition and segregate
whites and blacks to the maximum extent possible. It would also outlaw the
communists and deal effectively with the Indian population. ‘Indians are a
foreign and outlandish element which is unassimilable, ’ said Malan. ‘They can
never become part of the country, and must therefore be treated as an immigrant
community.’ He would call a halt to immigration and begin repatriation. Two
crude slogans used by the National Party summed it all up: ‘Die kaffir op sy
plek’—‘The kaffir in his place’—and ‘Die koolies uit die land’—‘The coolies
out of the country’.
The National Party, together with its small ally, the Afrikaner Party, won 41
per cent of the vote; the United Party alliance won 51 per cent. But the
favourable loading of rural seats gave the Nationalists a decisive advantage.
They gained a tenuous majority of five seats. ‘Today, South Africa belongs to us
once more,’ declared Malan in his election victory speech. ‘For the first time
since Union, South Africa is our own, and may God grant that it will always
remain our own.’ The age of the generals had ended and the age of apartheid had
begun.

Mandela was twenty-nine years old at the time, an impecunious law student
struggling unsuccessfully to pass examinations for a law degree and dependent
on his wife’s earnings to keep his young family afloat. He had developed strong
political ambitions, but had so far failed to make his mark as a political activist.
The Congress Youth League, the small pressure group which he had helped to
launch with the aim of giving ‘force, direction, and vigour’ to the ANC, had
spent four years arguing over ideological positions, showing no propensity for
political action. The ANC, after thirty-six years of efforts in dealing with

governments which professed to be mindful of their ‘trusteeship’ of the African
people, had yet to achieve any significant gains in its campaign for African
rights or in its attempts to halt the inexorable march of segregation. Now they
faced a government whose explicit objective was to keep ‘die kaffir op sy plek’
and which was prepared to use power in a manner which South Africa had never
before experienced.
The ruthlessness of the Nationalists became apparent at first in their handling
not of the African population but of the English-speaking community. Malan’s
government was the first in the history of the Union to consist exclusively of
Afrikaners. The upper echelons of the civil service, the armed forces, the police
and parastatal organisations like the railways were purged of English-speakers
and filled with carefully selected Afrikaners, usually members of the
Broederbond. The state sector became virtually an Afrikaner preserve. The legal
profession eventually faced the same treatment; senior English-speaking
members of the bar were systematically overlooked in the appointment of
judges. The government also favoured Afrikaner business interests, switching
accounts to Afrikaner financial institutions and awarding contracts to Afrikaner
companies. The English-speaking community found itself on the defensive at
every turn. In an acrimonious debate in parliament, English-speaking members
faced accusations of dual allegiance and were questioned on their right to be
considered full South Africans. The English would be given equal treatment,
said one Nationalist speaker, but ‘the country belongs, in the first instance, to
those people who opened it up’.
The Nationalists then turned their attention to the Native problem. Malan, in
his mid-seventies when he came to office, had never shown much interest in
Native policy. His preoccupation had always been to consolidate the Afrikaner
community behind his drive for power. He possessed no grand design for the
African population of the kind that other Nationalist leaders developed later. His
principal aim was to reverse the trend towards interracial integration rather than
to devise some final solution to the Native problem.
His first targets, accordingly, were marriage and sex. In 1949 parliament
passed the Prohibition of Mixed Marriages Act, outlawing marriages between
Europeans and non-Europeans. Few such marriages ever took place—less than
100 a year out of an annual total of 28,000 white marriages—but for the
Nationalists it was a blurring of racial lines they were not willing to tolerate. An
amendment to the Immorality Act extended a ban on sexual intercourse between

Europeans and Natives, in force since 1927, to Europeans and Coloureds. Next
came the Population Registration Act, designed eventually to allocate every
person to one of three racial groups: White, Coloured or African. ‘A national
register is the whole basis of apartheid,’ declared Malan. Some of the early
methods used to determine a person’s race were crude in the extreme. Doubtful
cases were sometimes resolved by white officials with what became known as
the ‘pencil in the hair’ test. If a pencil stayed in the hair, it meant classification
as a Coloured or African; if it fell out it meant classification as a Coloured or
white. Small variations in the texture of hair or the shape of the lips could make
all the difference in determining where people could live and work. The effect in
many borderline cases was to wreck families and ruin careers.
The advent of apartheid prompted Mandela and his radical friends in the
Congress Youth League to demand a more aggressive strategy from the ANC. A
new document was drawn up calling for civil disobedience, boycotts and ‘stayat-home’ strikes on a mass scale.
In December 1949, shortly before the ANC’s annual conference was due to be
held in Bloemfontein, a Youth League delegation consisting of Mda, Sisulu,
Tambo and Mandela called on Dr Xuma at his home in Sophiatown to try to
obtain his support for their plan. The ANC, they told him, had become too
docile. What was needed was mass action along the lines of Gandhi’s passive
resistance campaigns and the protests carried out by the Indian community in
South Africa in 1946. Like Gandhi, the ANC’s leaders had to be prepared to
contravene the law and go to prison.
Xuma was dismissive. Such action would be premature, he said, and would
merely give the government an excuse to crush the ANC in the name of law and
order. Furthermore, he had no intention of going to prison and forsaking his
medical practice. The four activists then gave Xuma an ultimatum: unless he
supported their plan of action, they would oppose his re-election as president at
the forthcoming ANC conference. Xuma reacted furiously to their challenge. ‘I
don’t want your vote,’ he said. ‘And I won’t be dictated to by any clique.’
The ANC’s annual conference was duly held in an atmosphere of unusual
excitement. Many delegates, alarmed by the government’s apartheid programme,
wanted to end all trace of collaboration with government institutions and embark
on more determined action, as the Youth League proposed. The Youth League’s
difficulty was in finding a respectable figure to stand as their candidate against

Xuma. The first person they approached, Professor Matthews, the distinguished
academic, declined the offer.
In the audience as a guest, however, was a man with a remarkable string of
credentials. Dr James Moroka came from a wealthy landowning family in the
Orange Free State. He was a great-grandson of the Tswana chief Moroka, who in
the 1830s had given military protection to groups of voortrekkers entering his
domain. His father was white, but he had taken his mother’s name. After
graduating from the University of Edinburgh in medicine in 1918, he had
returned to South Africa, one of only two black medical doctors in the country,
and established a lucrative practice in Thaba ’Nchu. Local Afrikaners were
among his patients. In accordance with South African custom, he provided one
waiting room for whites and another for blacks, one entrance for whites, another
for blacks. He was also a shrewd businessman, the owner of a large number of
farms, shops and other concerns. At his home in Thaba ’Nchu, he lived the life
of a country gentleman, highly respected in the local community. He had helped
in the building of schools and a hospital for local people and contributed funds to
enable needy white students to train as doctors. He had shown no interest in
politics until the African franchise was threatened in 1936, when he established a
reputation as an outspoken opponent of government policy. As a member of the
Native Representative Council, he used it as a platform from which to continue
his attacks on the government. The only credential he lacked, in fact, was
membership of the ANC; he was involved with another group, the All African
Convention.
In the closing stages of the conference, after Moroka had indicated his support
for the ‘Programme of Action’, the Youth League decided to approach him. At
first he was reluctant to stand against Xuma but finally he agreed. In the election
that followed, the older generation voted for Xuma and the younger for Moroka.
Moroka won and the ‘Programme of Action’ was adopted as ANC policy. The
Youth League’s coup had succeeded.
Other significant changes occurred at the same time. Believing that the
‘Programme of Action’ was ‘too drastic’, the ANC’s long-serving secretarygeneral, the Reverend James Calata, declined to stand for re-election. Walter
Sisulu was elected in his place. Sisulu decided henceforth to devote his entire
time to building up the ANC, relying on Albertina’s wages as a nurse to support
him and his family. Five other members of the Youth League were elected to the
ANC’ s national executive committee, including Peter Mda and Oliver Tambo.

Mandela missed all the excitement. Having decided to abandon his studies for
a law degree, he had taken a job with the law firm of Terblanche and Brigish,
which was not willing to allow him time off to attend the Bloemfontein
conference. His employer, Harry Brigish, a left-wing lawyer, regarded Mandela
as ‘a fine and decent young fellow’ but, like Sidelsky before him, disapproved of
his political activity.
Mandela’s chance to join the national executive committee came two months
later, in February 1950, when Dr Xuma, having failed to be re-elected president,
decided to resign his seat. At Sisulu’s instigation, Mandela was co-opted in his
place. He viewed his new position with mixed feelings. He had enjoyed his days
as a gadfly, attacking the establishment when inclined to do so. Now he was part
of the ANC hierarchy, obliged to accept wider responsibilities.
The leadership of the ANC thus passed into the hands of a new generation of
political activists. Some members of the old guard, like the Reverend Calata,
retained their seats on the national executive committee. But the direction in
which the ANC now moved was towards active opposition to the government of
the kind advocated in its ‘Programme of Action’.
Yet, despite all the efforts of the Youth League, there was still little
ideological clarity. Africanists like Mda and Mandela remained vehemently
opposed to collaboration with communists. Communists like Kotane and Marks
argued in favour of a broader front, trying to balance their loyalty to the cause of
African rights with their commitment to socialist revolution. Others, like
Professor Matthews, favoured a traditional liberal approach. All factions,
however, were agreed on the need for direct action.
The role that Sisulu played as secretary-general, ensconced in new party
headquarters down a dingy corridor in New Court Chambers in Commissioner
Street, became increasingly important. His aim was to weld the different factions
within the ANC into a united organisation and to extend its cooperation with
other anti-apartheid groups, presenting the government with a more formidable
adversary. ‘I had gained sufficient confidence that we would survive as a
national group,’ he said. ‘We didn’t need to be unnecessarily sensitive about
cooperating with other groups.’
The pressure of events came not just from the government but from a massive
outbreak of communal violence in Durban in 1949 between Africans and Indians
which brought together ANC and Indian Congress leaders in an attempt to

defuse the crisis. Tension between the two communities, particularly in the
slums around Durban, where both groups struggled to survive, was often close to
the surface. Many Indians were as contemptuous of Africans as whites were;
Indian traders and landlords were resented in turn as exploiters. In a sudden
conflagration, starting from one small incident, Africans burned down Indian
homes, clubbed their owners to death, raped wives and daughters and looted
stores, killing in all some fifty Indians. Thousands of Indians fled their homes.
Nearly ninety Africans died, most of them in the ensuing police action. ANC
leaders from Johannesburg joined in the efforts in Durban to calm the strife,
recognising the need for a fuller understanding of each community’s problems.
Mandela remained opposed to links with other groups, even when the
communists found themselves under direct assault from the government. Almost
immediately on assuming power, Malan had set up a committee to investigate
the influence of communism in the Union. It reported in 1949 that the
Communist Party represented a danger to ‘our national life, our democratic
institutions and our Western philosophy’. The result the following year was a
piece of legislation eventually called the Suppression of Communism Act, which
gave powers to the government to suppress not only the Communist Party but
other opponents it deemed to be troublesome.
Before the legislation was passed, the communists initiated plans for a oneday strike on May Day 1950, in protest against the government. Support for the
plan was forthcoming from the Indian Congress as well as some ANC branches.
But it was adamantly opposed by Mandela and other members of the Congress
Youth League, who accused the communists of trying to upstage the ANC,
which had also called for a one-day strike in its ‘Programme of Action’ the
previous year but had so far failed to organise one. The Youth League’s bulletin,
African Lodestar, attacked communism as a foreign ideology, equating it with
movements like fascism.
So hostile were Mandela and his colleagues that they took to breaking up
Communist Party meetings, canvassing support for the May Day strike, heckling
speakers and tearing up placards. At an ANC meeting in Newclare, Mandela
pushed the Indian speaker, Yusuf Cachalia, from the platform. In Commissioner
Street, he fell into a heated argument with the young Indian activist Ahmed
‘Kathy’ Kathrada, who accused him and the Youth League of refusing to work
with Indians and Coloureds.

Despite the efforts of Mandela and other members of the Youth League, the
May Day strike achieved considerable success. Thousands stayed away from
work. But in four places—Alexandra, Sophiatown, Benoni and Orlando—the
day ended in violence between police and crowds gathering on the streets in
which eighteen people died. In Orlando, trouble broke out as police were
escorting home workers who had ignored the strike. Mandela and Sisulu were
present at the time, endeavouring to persuade protesters to disperse. When police
opened fire, they were forced to take refuge in a nearby nurses’ hostel. ‘That
day,’ recalled Mandela, ‘was a turning point in my life, both in understanding
through first-hand experience the ruthlessness of the police and in being deeply
impressed by the support African workers had given to the May Day call.’
Two weeks later, angered by the police action, the ANC’s national executive
committee decided to call for another day of protest on 26 June, joining forces
with the Indian Congress. This time, the Youth League, humbled by the lack of
support it had gained on the first occasion, issued a fiery statement in support of
the protest, concluding with the words, ‘Up, you Mighty Race!’
The Suppression of Communism Act, meanwhile, passed through parliament.
It was the first weapon in an arsenal of security measures acquired by the
government that over the next four decades would provide it eventually with
totalitarian control. So wide was the act’s definition of communism that it could
be used to silence anyone who opposed government policy simply by ‘naming’
them. Communism now meant not only Marxist-Leninism but also ‘any related
form of that doctrine’ which sought to bring about ‘any political, industrial,
social or economic change within the Union by the promotion of disturbance or
disorder’, or which aimed at ‘the encouragement of feelings of hostility between
the European and non-European races of the Union’. In effect, the act equated
communism with any determined form of opposition to apartheid. The
government was empowered to ban any organisation, to remove its members
from public office, to place them under house arrest, to restrict their movements,
to prohibit them from attending public or even social gatherings and to proscribe
their writing and their speeches. No reasons had to be given in ‘naming’
communists; nor was there any right of appeal. Such action could be taken,
moreover, against anyone who had ever professed communism.
Meeting in Cape Town in June, before the act took effect, the central
committee of the Communist Party debated whether to continue its work
underground. Among the seventeen members present were Bram Fischer,

Michael Harmel, Yusuf Dadoo, Moses Kotane, and J. B. Marks. The difficulties
of moving from legal work to illegal work without a pause were known to be
considerable. The police were already in possession of membership lists, seized
during raids on party offices at the time of the mineworkers’ strike in 1946.
Attempts to create the skeleton of an underground organisation had already
failed. The central committee decided, therefore, to disband the party to try to
protect its members, announcing its decision on 20 June, four days before the act
became law.
Many communists, however, remained politically active. African members,
who numbered 1,600 at the time, were able to channel their energies into the
ANC; senior figures like Kotane and Marks were already part of the ANC
hierarchy. Indian members, who numbered 250, found a similar home in the
Indian Congresses. Only the 150 white members lacked an immediate base from
which to operate. But it was not long before they were to regroup and continue
their work underground.
The day of protest on 26 June 1950 was the ANC’s first attempt ever to
organise political action on a nationwide basis. Mandela played his part, helping
to man party headquarters in New Court Chambers. But the organisers had left
themselves with too little time to make a success of it. The response in the
Transvaal was poor; only in Port Elizabeth and among Indians in Durban was
there a significant result. No further mass action was attempted for another two
years.

Even when he was breaking up Communist Party rallies and gaining a reputation
as a hotheaded anti-communist, Mandela maintained close friendships with
individual communists and their influence began to tell on him. While some
communists loudly denounced his activities, his group of communist friends
were always ready for discussion. He often visited the home of J. B. Marks, a
wise and genial figure with a record of political activity dating back to the
1920s. Moses Kotane, a pragmatic, clear-thinking man, frequently called on
Mandela in Orlando, talking late into the night, trying to convince him that his
fears about a communist takeover of the ANC were unfounded. Indian
communists like Yusuf Dadoo and his old student friend Ismail Meer, both of
whom had served prison sentences during the passive-resistance campaign,
encouraged him to take a broader view. In no case could Mandela fault their

credentials as dedicated opponents of apartheid.
The influence of a number of white communists was also crucial. Among
them was Ruth First, a sharply intelligent journalist, whom Mandela had first
met as a student at the University of the Witwatersrand in his first term there in
1943. Brought up in Johannesburg in a left-wing Jewish household, she had
immersed herself in political work, joining the Communist Party, serving as
secretary of the Young Communist League and helping to set up a left-wing
club, the Progressive Youth Council, into which she tried unsuccessfully to
entice Mandela. Graduating with a social science degree, she worked briefly as a
research officer for the Johannesburg City Council and helped to compile a
commemorative album for the city’s fiftieth jubilee in 1946. She resigned
abruptly at the outbreak of the mineworkers’ strike to throw herself into strike
activity, producing leaflets from duplicating machines set up in her own lodgings
and driving African organisers to mine compounds to deliver them to strikers.
When police arrested the entire district committee on charges of sedition, First
was asked to become temporary secretary of the Johannesburg party office. Six
months later she became Johannesburg editor of The Guardian, a left-wing
weekly newspaper written mainly by white communists. She made her own
mark as a journalist in 1947 with an exposé of forced labour practices on white
farms in Bethal district in the eastern Transvaal, an investigation she undertook
with Michael Scott. ‘I really respected that lady,’ said Mandela, ‘because of her
intelligence and her commitment.’
For several years, she had a close relationship with Mandela’s Indian friend,
Ismail Meer. Then in 1949 she married Joe Slovo, a law student at Wits who was
as ardent a communist as she was. The son of a poor Jewish immigrant family
from Lithuania, Slovo had left school at the age of fourteen and joined the
Communist Party three years later, throwing himself tirelessly into party work
‘in the certainty that the revolution was around the corner’—a belief that never
really left him. After serving in an army signals unit during the war, he enrolled
at Wits to study law. It was during his final year there that he met Mandela,
spending hours arguing with him about communist preparations for the May Day
strike. After graduating in 1950, Slovo specialised as a defence lawyer in
political trials. The Slovo household in Roosevelt Park in the northern suburbs of
Johannesburg was to become a regular meeting place for political activists in the
1950s.
Then there was Michael Harmel, another journalist and the party’s leading

theoretician. Mandela had met Harmel at his first encounter with communists at
a social gathering to which Nat Bregman had invited him. Taking care to dress
properly for the occasion, with a jacket and tie, as Fort Hare had taught him,
Mandela was disconcerted to find that Harmel, whom he had been told held a
master’s degree, was not wearing a tie. ‘I just could not reconcile this
discrepancy,’ he recalled. Harmel, in fact, possessed few social graces, but it was
precisely this dislike of convention that Mandela found so attractive. He led a
disorganised, forgetful life, but was admired by his colleagues for his analytical
mind and theoretical knowledge. Much of his influence stemmed from his
readiness, as a doctrinaire communist, to provide answers and explanations for
any issue that arose. Drawn to Marxism while studying economics at Rhodes
University, he had joined the Communist Party in 1939 and for nine years served
on the central committee, until the party was disbanded in 1950. He was known
as a forceful debater and one of the most rigid party men in Johannesburg.
The most remarkable communist of all was Bram Fischer. Not only was he an
Afrikaner but he came from the Orange Free State aristocracy. His grandfather
had been prime minister of the Orange River Colony during the era of British
rule and his father had served as Judge-President of the Orange Free State. A
Rhodes Scholar at Oxford University, an accomplished sportsman and a
successful lawyer, he moved with ease in the highest political and social circles
in South Africa, widely admired for his many talents and regarded as having a
brilliant career ahead of him.
But Fischer had taken a different road. After graduating in law from the
University of Cape Town, he had become involved in adult education courses
for Africans in Waaihoek location in Bloemfontein, where he taught reading and
writing in a dilapidated building with winter winds blowing dust through the
makeshift classroom. It was there, he said later, that he came to understand ‘that
colour prejudice was a wholly irrational phenomenon and that true human
friendship could extend across the colour bar. . . . That I think was Lesson
Number One on my way to the Communist Party.’ He participated in meetings
of the Joint Council of Europeans and Africans in Bloemfontein, a liberal
institution with branches around South Africa where whites and blacks, usually
teachers and clergymen, discussed African conditions; he found his encounters
with Africans there a ‘real breakthrough’. A visit he made to the Soviet Union in
1933, while on vacation from Oxford, left him deeply impressed by Soviet
achievements and he subsequently became a true believer in both communism

and the Soviet Union, attracted not so much by ideological considerations as by
the humanitarian ideals that underpinned the communist faith.
His life became filled with efforts to assist the African cause. He served along
with Dr Xuma on the Alexandra Health Committee, the only form of
administration that Alexandra township possessed, he joined the Johannesburg
Joint Council and he helped the ANC to draw up a new constitution. He was
ready at all times to act in defence of those in difficulty with the police, as on the
occasion when he came to the rescue of Mandela’s Indian friends.
His wife, Molly Krige, who was related to the Smuts family, shared his ideals,
standing as a Communist Party candidate in local elections in Johannesburg in
1945, though without success. On summer weekends their house in Oaklands
was open to friends and acquaintances of all races. At the annual dances for The
Guardian which they held in Beaumont Street, up to 200 guests would come.
The impression that Bram Fischer made on Mandela was profound, as much on a
personal level as a political one. But what was especially important in
influencing Mandela’s own outlook was that Fischer was an Afrikaner. In an age
when Afrikaners were coming to be regarded by Africans as the enemy,
Mandela had found an Afrikaner friend.
It was by keeping such company that Mandela’s hostility towards the
communists began to dissipate. Feeling the need to be able to counter their
arguments over doctrinal issues, he started to study Marxist literature, finding
some of the ideas it contained appealing: ‘I found myself strongly drawn to the
idea of a classless society which, to my mind, was similar to traditional African
culture where life was shared and communal.’ He also found aspects of Marxist
economic analysis relevant. Above all there was the communist call for
revolutionary action, together with the practical example that the Soviet Union
set in supporting liberation movements among colonial peoples.
But it was as much the need for allies in facing the onslaught of apartheid
legislation that brought Mandela to recognise the value of collaboration with
other groups. As one by one the pillars of the apartheid system were erected and
ever more draconian measures were introduced to suppress the government’s
opponents, the idea of Africans ‘going it alone’ began to look increasingly
impractical. Following the Population Registration Act in 1950 came the Group
Areas Act, a piece of legislation intended over the years to divide every town
and village in South Africa into separate racial zones, even though this would

involve uprooting whole communities. Then, in March 1951, Malan turned his
attention to the Coloured community, introducing a bill—the Separate
Registration of Voters Bill—aimed at removing the Coloureds of the Cape
Province from the common roll by which they had been entitled to vote since
1853.
Until Malan came to power, the Coloured community had largely escaped the
kind of repressive measures inflicted on the African population by successive
white governments. In the Western Cape, where most lived, the Coloureds could
reside, work and travel where they chose. In areas of Cape Town, they shared
the same streets and sometimes the same houses as whites. They also shared the
common roll. In nine Cape constituencies, their voting power was considerable
and used mainly in favour of Smuts’s United Party in the 1948 election.
In attempting to get rid of the Coloured vote, Malan precipitated both a
protracted legal battle by the Coloured community and a wave of political
protest. A new organisation formed by Coloureds, the Franchise Action
Committee, called for strike action and asked for support from other antiapartheid groups. The support they received came not only from the ANC but
also from white protesters. A group of white ex-servicemen calling themselves
the Torch Commando organised a series of torch-lit rallies in Cape Town, Port
Elizabeth and Johannesburg which drew significant support from the white
population. But the Torch Commando soon reached the limits to which
traditional liberals in South Africa were then prepared to go. While supporting
the campaign for the rights of the Coloured population, it failed to agree over the
admission of Coloureds as members, with the result that Coloured exservicemen withdrew. Thus ended the first and last major protest by whites
against the apartheid system.
Taking stock of all the protest activity under way, by Coloureds, Indians and
Africans alike, Walter Sisulu introduced the idea of a coordinated civildisobedience campaign against the government, involving trained volunteers
from all groups who would deliberately court arrest and imprisonment by
contravening selected laws and regulations in ways similar to the Indian passive
resistance campaign of 1946. If sufficient numbers were arrested, the jails would
overflow and the system would begin to break down.
When he first heard the idea, Mandela was enthusiastic, but he wanted the
campaign to be exclusively African. Although his resistance to the communists

was waning, he remained wary of the influence of Indians in any joint campaign.
His Africanist views were still firmly held. In 1950, he had been elected as
president of the Youth League, the last stronghold of the Africanist camp. For
months, Mandela continued to hold out stubbornly against a joint campaign,
even though the tide of opinion in the ANC was running strongly against him. At
an ANC national executive meeting in June 1951, when joint action with Indian
and Coloured organisations was proposed, his arguments against it were
promptly voted down. At the ANC’s annual conference in December 1951,
when he spoke again in favour of a ‘go it alone’ strategy, he was given similarly
short shrift. Only when faced with an overwhelming vote in favour of joint
action did Mandela commit the Youth League to support it.
In January 1952, an ultimatum calling for the repeal of six ‘unjust laws’,
signed by Dr Moroka and Sisulu, was sent to Prime Minister Malan. Among the
laws cited were the Suppression of Communism Act, the Group Areas Act, the
Separate Registration of Voters Bill and the pass laws, which Malan’s
government had enforced with ever-greater vigour. Unless the government
complied, the signatories warned, a ‘Defiance Campaign’ would start. Malan’s
secretary replied that the government had no intention of repealing the laws and
warned that it would ‘use the full machinery at its disposal to quell any
disturbances’. The date then set for the start of the Defiance Campaign was 26
June, the anniversary of the day of protest in 1950. It was a date that was to
become a focal point in the calendar of resistance activity for years to come.
The biggest names in the campaign were Moroka and Dadoo. Other key
figures included Marks, Sisulu and Yusuf Cachalia, the Indian activist whom
Mandela had once pushed from the platform. Mandela too, despite his prolonged
opposition to joint action, was given a central role, being appointed national
volunteer-in-chief. His main task involved the recruitment, training and
coordination of volunteers. Their mission was to flout apartheid laws through
acts of defiance such as using railway coaches, waiting rooms and platform seats
designated for Europeans only, or by parading on the streets after curfew without
permits, or by entering locations without permits. Whenever possible, the
authorities were to be forewarned of the intentions of each batch of volunteers;
in some cases, full lists of names of the volunteers involved were politely handed
to the police. Following this level of protest would come mass defiance.
Addressing groups of potential volunteers, Mandela warned of the difficulties
and dangers they would face from the authorities, who would retaliate with

arrests, imprisonment and possibly violence. But whatever happened, he told
them, they were to respond to violence with nonviolence. Mandela believed that
nonviolent protest was essential, not on moral grounds, as propounded by Indian
campaigners like Manilal Gandhi, the Mahatma’s son, but for purely practical
reasons: any attempt at violence would be swiftly crushed.
Four days before the campaign was due to start, Mandela addressed a rally in
Durban called the Day of the Volunteers, organised jointly by the ANC and the
Indian Congress. Some 10,000 Africans and Indians turned out to participate. It
was the first occasion that Mandela had addressed a mass audience and he found
the experience exhilarating. The Defiance Campaign, he said, would make
history. It would be the most powerful action ever undertaken by the masses in
South Africa: ‘We can now say unity between the non-European people in this
country has become a living reality.’ For Mandela, the remark had personal as
well as political significance in view of his long-held opposition to interracial
cooperation.
He displayed a remarkable optimism about what could be achieved by such
methods of protest:
I visualized that if the Defiance Campaign reached the stage of mass defiance,
the government would either say to the ANC . . . we will repeal these laws, we
will remove discrimination and from now on everybody in this country . . . is
entitled to vote for members of parliament . . . or, if the government refused to
take this attitude, we would expect the voters, because of the situation, to say, we
can’t go on with a government like this; we think that the government should
make way for a government which is more sensible, more responsible, a
government which will change its policy and come to terms with these people;
and then they would vote it out of power.
The campaign began in a mood of exuberance. Early in the morning, a group
of volunteers in Port Elizabeth marched through the ‘Europeans Only’ entrance
at the railway station, singing freedom songs and accompanied by a cheering
crowd of friends and family. They were promptly arrested by police. The same
cheerful atmosphere surrounded the next planned event later in the day in
Boksburg, east of Johannesburg, when a small group of Africans and Indians,
led by Walter Sisulu and a veteran Gandhi supporter, Nana Sita, walked into the
African location without entry permits, holding up their thumbs in the Congress
salute. Mandela was present, but only as a spectator. He had previously

delivered a letter to the Boksburg magistrate, advising him that a group of
volunteers would enter the location without permits. All the group were taken
off to the police cells. That night, ANC supporters meeting in the Garment
Workers’ Hall in Anderson Street in Johannesburg left the building after the
curfew had started at 11 p.m. and were arrested.
Mandela, who had been attending a meeting of his own with other campaign
leaders in a nearby office at the time, was not due to stage his own act of
defiance until later in the campaign. But emerging on to the streets at midnight
with Yusuf Cachalia, thinking of nothing more than the need for a hot meal and
some sleep, he suddenly found himself under arrest. He felt like explaining that
it was not his turn to be arrested. But, along with Cachalia, who burst out
laughing at the irony of it all, he was taken away in a police truck to the cells in
Marshall Square, a gloomy red-brick police station in the city centre, and joined
the fifty or so volunteers there.
This was Mandela’s first experience of police cells and the treatment meted
out there. In the drill yard that night, a young white policeman pushed one of the
volunteers so forcefully that he fell down some steps and broke his ankle.
Mandela, who had been walking close by at the time, immediately protested,
whereupon he was kicked on the shin and told to keep quiet. Eventually a senior
policeman was called. When Mandela demanded medical attention, he was told
to put in his request the next day. The volunteer spent the night groaning with
pain. Mandela stayed in the cells for two days, before being released on bail.
The campaign quickly caught the popular imagination. The slogan ‘Mayibuye
Afrika!’—‘Let Africa return!’—became a common greeting on the streets. With
almost religious fervour, days of prayer, hymn-singing and church services were
held throughout the country. During July, more than 1,500 people were arrested
for acts of civil disobedience; in September, the peak of the campaign, the
number reached 2,500. In five months, nearly 8,000 people went to prison for
periods ranging from one to three weeks, most of them charged under the
Suppression of Communism Act.
No longer was white help spurned. At a public meeting in November at
Darragh Hall in Johannesburg, Walter Sisulu, Oliver Tambo and Yusuf Cachalia
urged an audience of 200 whites to join forces by forming ‘a parallel white
organisation’ to work in close cooperation with the ANC and the Indian
Congress.

The silence of European democrats to the challenge of the issues
involved in the Defiance Campaign is being construed by NonEuropeans as acquiescence in and approval of the government’s policies,
thus rapidly creating the belief among large numbers of Non-Europeans
that all whites are hostile to them and their aspirations and that the
situation is being transformed into a white versus non-white struggle.
In December, in one of the final acts of defiance, when a group of volunteers
broke permit regulations in Germiston, their number included seven whites, one
of whom, Patrick Duncan, was the son of a former governor-general. Duncan’s
act of defiance gave the campaign both prestige and respectability. ‘It came as a
gift from heaven,’ remarked Cachalia. ‘It stopped the campaign from becoming
racial.’
The government, meanwhile, reacted not in the conciliatory manner that
Mandela had anticipated but with ruthless determination to crush the campaign.
In July, police raided the offices of the ANC and the Indian Congress and the
homes of their officials, confiscating documents and papers, and then arrested
twenty leaders of the campaign in Johannesburg, including Mandela, Sisulu,
Marks, Moroka, Dadoo, and Cachalia, charging them with promoting
communism. Mandela was arrested in the office of the law firm of H. M. Basner,
for which he was working at the time, but, like the others, he was subsequently
released on bail.
Their trial in November became the focus of national attention. For the first
time, ANC leaders faced the prospect of imprisonment for political protest
against the government, an event which distinguished the Defiance Campaign
from all previous protests over the past forty years. Crowds of supporters
gathered outside the Johannesburg magistrates’ court. In a packed courtroom, all
were found guilty of what was termed ‘statutory communism’. But as the judge
in the case, Judge Franz Rumpff, admitted, ‘This has nothing to do with
communism as it is commonly known.’ Furthermore, he accepted that though
the accused had planned acts that ranged from ‘open non-compliance of laws to
something that equals high treason’, they had consistently instructed their
supporters ‘to follow a peaceful course of action and to avoid violence in any
shape or form’. They were sentenced to nine months’ imprisonment with hard
labour, but the sentence was suspended for two years.
But far from being an occasion for demonstrating their solidarity against the

government, the trial became the source of considerable acrimony. For Dr
Moroka, a pillar of respectability in his community, the idea of being convicted
of supporting communism and going to prison for it was too hard to bear.
Breaking ranks with the rest of the accused, he decided to employ his own
lawyer. Mandela’s efforts to get him to change his mind were to no avail. At the
trial, he alone took the witness stand to declare his total opposition to
communism and entered a separate plea of mitigation that stressed his long
friendship with the Afrikaner people and the assistance he had given them. His
final assertion was that he did not believe in racial equality. To have the
figurehead of the campaign forsake it at its climax was a humiliating blow.
To ensure that not only this campaign was stamped out but that no similar one
could ever be started again, the government employed new measures. In
December, banning orders were imposed on fifty leaders and organisers,
preventing some, like Marks and Dadoo, from participating in any ANC or
Indian Congress activity for life and others for lesser periods. Mandela was
banned from meetings of all kinds and restricted to the district of Johannesburg
for a period of six months. New legislation was then introduced which laid down
severe penalties of fines, imprisonment and corporal punishment for anyone
inciting others to commit civil-disobedience offences and which empowered the
government to declare a state of emergency and use emergency regulations
whenever ‘the maintenance of public order was endangered’. The effect was to
make protest virtually illegal.
The Defiance Campaign of 1952 transformed the ANC from an elite group
into a mass movement. The sight of Africans defying the government won it new
prestige. The fear of refusing to submit to white authority lost its sting. Its
membership rose from 7,000 to perhaps as many as 100,000. The campaign
showed, moreover, what could be achieved through African and Indian
collaboration. Abroad, the African cause gained international attention for the
first time.
But the Defiance Campaign also marked a high point in ANC activity. Never
again, during the 1950s, was it able to mount successfully such organised
resistance against the government. Deprived of most of its leaders, fearful of
reprisal from the government’s arsenal of security measures and short of funds,
the movement lost much of its momentum. For another two years, no major
campaigning was undertaken.

Nevertheless, the sense of achievement among those like Mandela who had
participated in it was profound. ‘The campaign freed me from any lingering
sense of doubt or inferiority I might still have felt,’ he said. ‘It liberated me from
the feeling of being overwhelmed by the power and seeming invincibility of the
white man and his institutions.’
But an even more important personal transformation had begun during the
course of the campaign. For practical reasons, Mandela had come to accept that
a multiracial strategy was necessary in dealing with the government, abandoning
the Africanist notions that he had held for so long. In time, his support for a
multiracial strategy developed into a unshakeable conviction about the
importance of a multiracial approach in striving for non-racial democracy which
never wavered, even under the greatest pressure the government could inflict.
What the Defiance Campaign also showed was that Mandela harboured naïve
illusions about both the government and the white population—illusions that
were to remain with him for many years, with disastrous consequences.

CHAPTER 5
THE ‘M’ PLAN
ALONGSIDE THESE POLITICAL DRAMAS, MANDELA’S CAREER AS A
lawyer was slowly taking shape. Although he had abandoned his studies for a
law degree, his intention to qualify as an attorney held firm. After working for
Terblanche and Brigish for about one year, he joined another liberal firm,
Helman and Michel, passing his qualifying exam in 1952. Needing a testimonial
to join the Transvaal Law Society, Mandela went to see Lazar Sidelsky, his old
employer, with whom he had served his articles. Sidelsky took the opportunity to
warn him to stay out of politics. ‘“You’ll end up in jail sooner or later,” I said.
Mandela replied, “For the benefit of my people I must carry on.” I retorted,
“You’ll do more for your people if you set an example to them. Let your people
become educated. Don’t worry about politics.”’ Sidelsky recalled with humour,
‘I felt inclined not to give him that testimonial.’
Mandela’s next employer, Hyman Basner, the first to hire him as a qualified
lawyer, was more accustomed than Sidelsky to the political hurly-burly in which
radical lawyers became involved. A former communist who had served as a
Natives’ representative in the Senate, he was well known for his passionate
support of African rights. ‘A strike, a boycott, a clash between Africans and the
police—where such a thing happened, there would Basner arrive at speed
prepared to speak and, as a lawyer, to defend Africans in court,’ Eddie Roux,
another former communist, wrote of him. It was at the offices of H. M. Basner
that Mandela was arrested on charges under the Suppression of Communism
Act. Unlike Sidelsky, Basner made no objections to Mandela’s political
activities, as long as his work for the law firm was handled properly.
He embarked on his first case in court, armed with a battery of legal books
and brimming with confidence. The magistrate duly found his client not guilty.
‘I started to swell with pride. Then the magistrate said, “Mr Mandela, I have
found your client not guilty, not because of you, but in spite of you.” He said all
the books I had brought had nothing to do with the case, adding, “I hope that,

one day, when another poor accused comes to you, you will at least know what
books to bring.”’
After several months working for Basner, Mandela felt ready to set up his own
law practice, opening an office in August 1952. He then persuaded Oliver
Tambo, who had given up his teaching post at St. Peter’s to take up law five
years before and who had also just qualified as an attorney, to join him in a
partnership.
As partners, as well as political colleagues, they made an interesting contrast.
Tambo was by nature quiet and thoughtful, with a cool, logical mind; deeply
religious, he was still contemplating the possibility of ordination. At St. Peter’s,
he had been immensely popular with his students, and among staff he was highly
respected for his principled approach, arguing resolutely against those who
criticised his involvement as a teacher in politics. ‘Where men cannot help
themselves, they must be helped by others who are able,’ he said. ‘I want to help
lead the struggle for African liberation. How can you claim this is not the role of
the teacher? I refuse to be diverted from it.’
Mandela was altogether more assertive, more combative and more emotional,
quicker to anger and with a liking for action. At the law firm of Kovalsky and
Tuch, where Tambo worked before joining Mandela, a white secretary, Betty
Shein, accustomed to Tambo’s modest demeanour, noticed the contrast with
Mandela, who often came round at lunchtime to discuss ANC business with him.
Mandela, she recalled, would stride into the reception area, glancing around to
see whether anyone was going to greet him; if he encountered only sullen stares,
as was customary when blacks entered a white office, he would call out, ‘Mr
Tambo, please,’ and make a point of sitting in a whites-only chair, causing a
considerable stir, not least because nobody in the office addressed Tambo as
‘Mr’.
Mandela made the same point in magistrates’ court, ignoring the segregation
rules which applied there, choosing the whites-only entrance and always ready
with an answer when challenged. Once, when a supposedly white clerk, whose
features clearly suggested mixed parentage, shouted at him, ‘What are you doing
in here?’ Mandela leaned over the counter towards him, staring straight into his
eyes, and said quietly, ‘What are you doing in here?’
The firm of Mandela and Tambo opened for business in December 1952 in
Chancellor House, Fox Street, a shabby building across the road from the

magistrates’ courts, owned by Indians who were prepared to take on African
tenants. They were soon inundated with clients. Each morning, queues of
Africans crowded into the small waiting room, stretching back into the corridors
and down the stairs. Many of them were victims of the apartheid system, caught
in the web of pass laws, curfew laws, liquor laws, residence laws and
employment laws which made criminals of ordinary people. From Mandela and
Tambo they received a sympathetic hearing and a willingness to act.
Mandela was in and out of court all day, using the courts as an opportunity to
challenge white authority and gaining a reputation as a bold courtroom
performer. In some courts he was treated by officials with courtesy; in others
with resentment and hostility. White witnesses often refused to answer his
questions directly, speaking only to the magistrate. Police witnesses regarded
him with contempt.
One white magistrate in Kempton Park, a village east of Johannesburg, so
resented the appearance of Mandela before him that he did his utmost to prevent
him from proceeding in court. Acting on behalf of an African clerk accused of
fraud, Mandela rose to introduce himself to the magistrate, Willem Dormehl.
MANDELA: I appear for the accused, Your Worship.
MAGISTRATE: And who are you?
MANDELA: My name is Nelson Mandela, Your Worship. I appear for
the accused.
MAGISTRATE: How can you appear for the accused? Are you an
attorney?
MANDELA: Yes, of course, Your Worship.
MAGISTRATE: Where is your certificate?
MANDELA: I don’t usually walk around with my certificate, Your
Worship.
MAGISTRATE: How then am I supposed to know that you are an
attorney?
MANDELA: I suggest you telephone the registrar of the court in
Johannesburg or Pretoria and ask him whether or not my name is still on
the roll of attorneys. . . .

MAGISTRATE: I am not prepared to do that. This case will be
postponed and you can come again with your Certificate of Admission as
an attorney.
MANDELA: May I suggest that we proceed with the case? The accused
faces a number of charges. The case will not finish today. I can produce
my certificate on the subsequent day on which the hearing of the case
will be resumed.
MAGISTRATE: It will be quite irregular to do it that way. The case will
be postponed. Mr Prosecutor, what date do you suggest?
PROSECUTOR: The 22nd, Your Worship.
MANDELA : (in an aside to the prosecutor, but within earshot of the
magistrate) I am not available on the 22nd. Can you make it either the
21st or the 23rd?
PROSECUTOR: I would suggest the 23rd, Your Worship.
MAGISTRATE: Mr Prosecutor, you have already suggested the 22nd. I
have written it down. I am not going to scratch it out or amend my
record. You don’t have to agree to a date suggested by a person who has
not satisfied me that he is entitled to appear in my court. The case will be
postponed to the 22nd.
MANDELA: But. . . !
MAGISTRATE: I have already postponed the matter. I will not hear
another word that you have to say in my court. Call the next case, Mr
Prosecutor.
Mandela sought the assistance of a young white colleague, George Bizos, a
former law student at the University of the Witwatersrand who had recently
qualified as an advocate. Born in a rural village in Greece, Bizos had been forced
to flee at the age of thirteen, along with his father, to escape the German advance
and had arrived in Johannesburg in 1941, the same year as Mandela. They were
to form a lifelong friendship. Bizos agreed to take on Mandela’s previously
arranged case, leaving him free to return to Kempton Park to confront Dormehl.
Mandela duly presented his certificate and the case was allowed to proceed. But
no sooner had Mandela begun a cross-examination of the first witness than the
magistrate made a series of interruptions.

MAGISTRATE: You cannot ask that. The question is not clear to me.
The witness doesn’t have to answer that question.
MANDELA: Would Your Worship record my question and your ruling
that it is not admissible?
MAGISTRATE: You are not here to tell me how to run my court. I will
record that which I consider relevant.
MANDELA : The record must be a fair reflection of what transpires in
court. If you disallow questions, you are supposed to note the question
and the fact that you disallowed it.
MAGISTRATE: I am warning you that you are not here to teach me my
job. Ask your next question.
After some fifteen minutes of interruptions, Mandela’s patience was wearing
thin.
MANDELA: Your Worship makes it very difficult for me . . .
MAGISTRATE: Just one moment. I want to write something down.
(Having done so, Dormehl turned to the accused.) Your attorney has
withdrawn from these proceedings. You have the right to continue . . .
MANDELA: Your Worship . . .
MAGISTRATE: You sit down and keep quiet. (To the accused) You
have the right to conduct your own defence as a result of your attorney’s
withdrawal . . .
MANDELA: Your Worship . . .
MAGISTRATE: Sit down or I will commit you for contempt. (To the
accused) Or you may ask for a postponement in order to get a new
attorney to represent you.
MANDELA: I have not withdrawn from this case. I want it recorded that
I have not withdrawn. I want it recorded that I merely said that you are
making it difficult for me to continue my cross-examination.
MAGISTRATE: I have told you to sit down and keep quiet. You no
longer have locus standi in my court.
MANDELA: I protest. I am still appearing for the accused.

MAGISTRATE: I will count to three and if you have not sat down by
then, I will commit you for contempt and ask the court orderly to take
you to the cells. I order you to sit down.
Mandela remained standing while Dormehl counted slowly to three. The
magistrate then ordered Mandela to be removed from court. The court orderly, a
young constable, moved in his direction. ‘You had better not touch me if you
don’t want any trouble,’ Mandela warned. The constable hesitated. Mandela
picked up his files and walked out of court with the words ‘I’ll be back.’
After discussing with Bizos what course of action to take, Mandela decided to
get his client to petition the Supreme Court, asking Dormehl to recuse himself on
the grounds that he had objected to the client being defended by a black attorney.
When the matter came before Judge Quartus de Wet, Dormehl was given short
shrift. ‘This is the sort of thing that brings the administration of justice into
disrepute in our country,’ de Wet told Dormehl’s lawyer. ‘Tell your client that
the quicker he recuses himself from this case, the better for all concerned.’

Mandela throve on the racial tension in court, determined to show that blacks did
not have to buckle to white pressure. He relished subjecting police witnesses to
relentless cross-examination and taking issue with hostile magistrates like
Dormehl. One of his articled clerks, Godfrey Pitje, recalled, ‘Nelson would walk
into court as if it was his own. He sent shivers through some of the officials.’
His court appearances gained a popular following. Hearing of an impending
Mandela court case, township residents would fill the public gallery, applauding
loudly on occasion, to the fury of court officials. Mandela’s showmanship in
court duly became part of his reputation. He was fond of telling the story of his
defence of an African servant accused of stealing clothes belonging to her
‘madam’. Beginning his cross-examination of the ‘madam’, Mandela walked
over to a table where the stolen clothes were on display, studied them and then,
with the tip of his pencil, picked up a pair of panties. Turning slowly to the
witness box, he asked, ‘Madam, are these . . . yours?’ Too embarrassed to admit
that they were, she replied, ‘No.’ The case was dismissed.
Outside the courtroom, Mandela’s performance was not always so effective.
Among the advocates briefed by Mandela was Harold Wolpe, a communist
lawyer who had studied with him at the University of the Witwatersrand. Wolpe

described Mandela’s briefings as ‘none too meticulous’. In the office, it was
Tambo, with his prodigious capacity for work, who shouldered most of the
burden. A young student from St Peter’s, Fikile Barn, who went to the offices of
Mandela and Tambo on Saturdays, the busiest day of the week, to learn how a
law office functioned, noticed how ‘Mandela would dash in for two hours then
dash out again, while Tambo put in full hours’. Political activity was Mandela’s
favourite occupation.
The law practice of Mandela and Tambo, however, was not secure from the
tentacles of apartheid. Under the terms of the Urban Areas Act, Africans were
not permitted to occupy business premises in the city without ministerial
consent. When they applied for consent, it was never granted. Instead they were
given a temporary permit under the Group Areas Act. When that expired, the
authorities would refuse to renew it, insisting that they should leave the city and
practise in an African township miles away from where their clients could reach
them during working hours. ‘This was tantamount to asking us to abandon our
legal practice,’ Mandela recalled. So they continued to remain in Chancellor
House, but illegally and with the threat of prosecution and eviction hanging over
their heads.
A more serious threat came from the Transvaal Law Society, which in April
1954 petitioned the Supreme Court to have Mandela struck off the role of
accredited attorneys on the grounds that his political activities, for which he had
been convicted under the Suppression of Communism Act, constituted
unprofessional and dishonourable conduct. With Bram Fischer’s help, Mandela
secured the services of a distinguished advocate, Walter Pollack, chairman of the
Johannesburg Bar Council, who agreed to appear pro amico for Mandela. Judge
Ramsbottom, who heard the case, upheld Mandela’s position, finding that there
was nothing dishonourable in an attorney campaigning for his political beliefs,
even if his activities infringed the law.
Despite these hazards, the firm of Mandela and Tambo prospered. For the first
time in his life, Mandela became relatively affluent. He purchased a large
Oldsmobile, indulged his taste for fine clothes and cut a dashing figure across
Johannesburg society, equally at ease at multiracial parties as the back alleys of
black townships. His physical presence was striking—he was six feet two inches
tall and broad-shouldered—and he exuded confidence and energy. When he first
set foot in the Observatory home of two communist friends, Rusty and Hilda
Bernstein, one of their children ran into the kitchen shouting excitedly: ‘There’s

a giant in the front room!’ After that he was known in the Bernstein family as
‘the giant’.
He was able to afford suits from Alfred Kahn, a fashionable tailor favoured by
members of the prestigious Rand Club in Loveday Street nearby. George Bizos
came across him there on one of his errands as a lawyer’s clerk, collecting a list
of customers late with their payments; Mandela was there for a final fitting. He
frequented Kapitan’s, a smart Indian restaurant on Kort Street, as well as cheaper
haunts like Moretsele’s, a café on Pritchard Street, where the proprietor, Elias
Moretsele, a staunch ANC supporter, allowed friends to eat on credit. He was
wealthy enough to return favours to people who had once helped him. Lazar
Sidelsky remembered how one wet, windy night, as he waited on the street for a
bus to take him home, ruing a business failure which had left him financially
crippled, Mandela drew up in his Oldsmobile, offered him a lift home and, on
the way, mentioned that he had not yet repaid a loan of £75—a substantial sum.
Sidelsky brushed the matter aside, saying it was of no account, and Mandela did
not pursue the matter then, but a few days later Sidelsky received in the post a
cheque for £75.
Mandela was also a familiar figure in boxing circles. On most weekday
evenings, he would drop by for an hour or two of training at a boxing club at an
Orlando community centre which he joined in 1950. Like all the other boxing
clubs which flourished in Orlando, it was poorly equipped. There was no ring;
boxers trained on a cement floor. The club, consisting of both amateur and
professional boxers, nevertheless managed to produce several champions.
Boxing was the most popular sport among Africans at the time and boxing
champions were accorded high status. The greatest hero of all was Jake Tuli, an
Orlando boy who became the British Empire flyweight boxing champion. His
triumph abroad was all the more significant since at home African boxers were
not allowed to box white opponents. Mandela was in the heavyweight division.
He enjoyed the tactics of boxing rather than the physical confrontation and his
main interest was in the training sessions, which served as an outlet for stress
and tension. But it all added to his reputation as a dynamic young leader.
Mandela’s political standing, as a result of the Defiance Campaign and his
subsequent trial, had never been higher. Before his six-month ban in December
1952, he had become a well-known figure on the platform at public meetings at
Freedom Square in Fordsburg, in Alexandra, in Sophiatown and in Orlando. In
October 1952, when the Transvaal ANC was searching for a new president to

replace Marks, who had been banned from membership of the ANC for life,
Mandela was chosen for the post. His colleagues sometimes noticed about him a
certain imperiousness, particularly when giving orders. Both Walter and
Albertina Sisulu tried to persuade him to adopt a less lofty manner in public.
‘But,’ Albertina recalled, ‘he was a Xhosa aristocrat and his training from
childhood had made him the way he was, aloof and sometimes a bit arrogant. It
didn’t matter, because the people liked to look up to a leader who was regal and
maybe even a bit distant.’
His family life suffered grievously from all this activity. So little time did
Mandela spend at home during the 1950 protests that his son, Thembi, then five
years old, asked his mother, ‘Where does Daddy live?’ A second son, Makgatho,
was born at this time. Mandela managed to get to the hospital for the birth, but,
as he later observed, ‘it was only a brief respite’. When the banning order was
placed on Mandela’s political activities, Evelyn secretly welcomed it.
The marriage soon ran into serious difficulties. Because Evelyn’s earnings as
a nurse were no longer essential to keep the family afloat, she decided in 1952 to
enroll for a course on midwifery at King Edward VII hospital in Durban. While
she was away, the two children were cared for in Orlando by Mandela’s mother
and sister. She returned at the end of 1953 to find Mandela in the thick of an
affair with a secretary he employed at his office. To Evelyn’s fury, she made free
use of the family home, even following Mandela into the bedroom and the
bathroom. When Evelyn objected to her presence, Mandela became enraged.
Only when Evelyn threatened to throw boiling water over her did the visits to the
house stop. But the affair continued.
Another friendship that Mandela made at this time was also the subject of
much rumour. Lilian Ngoyi was a vivacious and energetic woman from poor
origins who had for years worked as a machinist in a clothing factory in
Johannesburg, until the Defiance Campaign inspired her, at the age of forty-one,
to throw herself tirelessly into political activity. She rose quickly to become the
most prominent woman in the ANC in the 1950s. Her talent as a public speaker,
with a direct, emotional style, was admired by all who heard her.
‘When she spoke from a platform,’ wrote her friend Helen Joseph, ‘she could
do as she wished with her audience; they laughed with her, wept with her.’ In
conversation, her face was alive with expression, her hands constantly on the
move. Mandela, among many others, found her immensely attractive. Living in

Orlando, she often visited Mandela’s house, and her work for the ANC, as
president of the Women’s League, regularly brought them together. Mandela
always denied that they were lovers, but the rumours persisted for many years.
Mandela’s frequent absences from home became a constant source of
argument. Evelyn, knowing of the rumours about his involvement with other
women, took to questioning him about his movements, eventually provoking
Mandela to respond, ‘No policeman asks questions like you.’ Evelyn never
understood Mandela’s deep commitment to political activity, believing his
interest to be no more than a youthful aberration which would in time fade away.
Nor did she become reconciled to the idea of living permanently in
Johannesburg, expecting that they would eventually return to the Transkei to
play a prominent role in the community there, as Mandela himself had once
talked of doing.
Another source of dispute between them developed soon after the birth of a
daughter, Makaziwe, in 1954. Since the death of their first daughter, Evelyn had
prayed fervently for another girl. The arrival of Makaziwe she took to be a sign
from God. ‘It was then that I began my return to my Christian faith,’ she said.
She became a devout Jehovah’s Witness, even attempting to convert Mandela to
her belief, arguing that her religious faith was a higher cause than his politics. A
tussle between religion and politics soon engulfed the Mandela household,
centering on the children. Evelyn would take them to church at every
opportunity, read them Watchtower literature and get them to distribute
Watchtower pamphlets in Orlando; Mandela would instruct them in politics,
earnestly explaining the significance of pictures he had hung on the wall of
Churchill, Stalin, Roosevelt, Gandhi and the storming of the Winter Palace in St.
Petersburg in 1917.
The marriage sank to the level of sullen silence. Mandela became increasingly
cold and distant, spending even more time away from home.

From 1952, Mandela was never free from the attention of the police Special
Branch. His movements, his contacts, his speeches, like those of other prominent
political activists, were all recorded in police dos - siers. Informers and police
agents infiltrated deep into the hierarchy of the ANC as well as the rank and file,
creating an atmosphere of suspicion and mistrust. The sudden increase in ANC
membership, prompted by the Defiance Campaign, made it especially vulnerable

to police infiltration, leading Mandela to warn of ‘many shady characters’ within
its ranks—saboteurs, agents provocateurs, informers, splitters and place-seekers:
‘Outside appearances are highly deceptive, and we cannot classify these men by
looking at their faces or listening to their sweet tongues, or by their vehement
speeches demanding immediate action.’
Police raids on ANC offices and the homes of officials became a constant
hazard. ‘The raids began in the early 1950s,’ recalled Sisulu. ‘Raids on our
homes, raids on the offices. It became impossible to keep any proper records
from that time on. You couldn’t keep a diary, you couldn’t keep minutes, and
not having proper records was very frustrating. There was a lot of harassment,
which made my job as secretary-general very difficult.’
The Special Branch in time acquired more and more powers, acting without
restraint, indifferent to any notion of legal rights and answerable only to
ministers. It had started out as a small unit in 1935 in Marshall Square, keeping
track of illicit gold and diamond dealings, but had developed a political role
during the war, monitoring anti-government organisations like the Broederbond,
before switching its attention in post-war years to the Communist Party. The
Nationalist government had turned it into a political arm, separate from the rest
of the police force, giving it licence to act as it saw fit in dealing with political
dissidents. Special Branch detectives regularly invaded political meetings,
recording speeches, photographing members of the audience, noting car number
plates outside. An attempt to prevent them attending private meetings initially
succeeded. A Supreme Court judge ruled that the police were not entitled as of
right to be present. ‘This is not yet a police state,’ he declared. But the
government soon overcame this by amending the law, enabling the police to sit
in on any meeting they wanted to. The Special Branch tapped phone calls,
intercepted mail, bugged meetings, kept activists under constant surveillance and
used threats and intimidation with their employers and families. It was directly
responsible for making recommendations about banning orders, about
banishment to internal exile and other methods of putting dissidents ‘out of
action’. Its dossiers were never closed.
The activists delighted in trying to outwit Special Branch detectives, regarding
most of them as being inept and incompetent. Between the two sides there were
many cases of cautious familiarity. Special Branch men tended to address ANC
activists by their first names. Occasionally, at the end of the day, the head of the
Johannesburg Special Branch, Major At Spengler, a heavy, thick-set Afrikaner

detective, would call in at a shebeen in a printing works in Market Street, used
by the ANC to produce pamphlets, for a quiet drink with leading activists and
black journalists who congregated there.
Compared to the era of torture, solitary confinement, indefinite detention
without trial and murder which followed, the 1950s were a relatively benign
decade in the annals of the security police. Assaults on political prisoners were
extremely rare, lawyers could gain access to arrested activists without difficulty
and house searches still required a magisterial warrant. When Head Constable
Carl Johannes Dirker, a lugubrious figure who dogged the lives of many activists
year after year, once arrived at Michael Harmel’s house, he was asked whether
he had a warrant. He sheepishly replied that, being in a hurry, he had taken the
wrong file, so Harmel’s warrant was still in his office. ‘What, then, are you
looking for?’ asked Harmel. ‘Politics, man, politics,’ he replied.
However inefficient the Special Branch may have been, government
repression exacted a heavy toll. Banning orders preventing activists from
attending meetings, restricting their movements to specific districts, prohibiting
their involvement in political organisations and trade unions had a debilitating
effect. Mandela recalled in his autobiography:
Banning not only confines one physically, it imprisons one’s spirit. It induces a
kind of psychological claustrophobia that makes one yearn for not only freedom
of movement but spiritual escape. Banning was a dangerous game, for one was
not shackled or chained behind bars; the bars were laws and regulations that
could easily be violated and often were. One could slip away unseen for short
periods of time and have the temporary illusion of freedom. The insidious effect
of bans was that at a certain point one began to think that the oppressor was not
without but within.
The ANC itself suffered from a similar paralysis. Its attempts to hold public
meetings were frequently blocked by the authorities, printers refused to handle
ANC pamphlets for fear of prosecution and most newspapers declined to publish
ANC statements. ‘The old methods of bringing about mass action through public
mass meetings, press statements and leaflets calling upon people to go into
action have become extremely dangerous and difficult to use effectively, ’
Mandela warned an ANC meeting in the Transvaal, held in the aftermath of the
Defiance Campaign. In an endeavour to circumvent police harassment and to
prepare the ANC for the possibility of an outright ban, as had happened to the

Communist Party, Mandela drew up a new plan for political action, advocating a
radical departure from the methods previously adopted by the ANC.
It was popularly known as the ‘M’ Plan, named after Mandela but not given
his full name to avoid implicating him in ANC activity at a time when he was
supposed to be banned. It involved splitting the entire movement into small units
—‘cells’ at street level, ‘zones’ and ‘wards’ covering larger areas of townships
—providing a means of communication throughout the organisation without the
need to call public meetings and issue statements and enabling it to survive
government repression. Part of the plan required branch leaders and other
officials to organise political lectures for the benefit of local members. The
lecturers were often banned members. Mandela himself, despite being banned,
frequently gave lectures in the evening to groups in Orlando.
The ‘M’ Plan, to which the ANC’s national executive attached ‘the highest
importance’, according to Mandela, was implemented in only a few places,
mostly in towns in the Eastern Cape. It placed a huge burden of work on local
officials, far beyond their capacity to carry it out. There were no funds to pay
party workers; everything depended on volunteers working in their spare time.
‘Most people were so busy with their ordinary work that they could not find time
for Congress duties,’ a Natal ANC official reported. The plan also ran into
resistance from branch leaders with strong local bases opposed to changes which
undermined their own influence.
Mandela’s frustration at being hemmed in by the government began to boil
over into reckless talk about the use of violence. Shortly after his six-month ban
expired in June 1953, he addressed a public meeting in Freedom Square in
Sophiatown, telling the crowd that the time for passive resistance had ended, that
non-violence would never defeat a white minority government bent on retaining
power at any cost and that the only weapon that would destroy apartheid was
violence, which Africans would have to use in the near future. With the crowd
clapping and cheering, Mandela went on to sing a freedom song with the words
‘There are the enemies, let us take our weapons and attack them.’ The crowd
joined in. When it was over, Mandela pointed to the police clustered around the
perimeter of Freedom Square and shouted, ‘There, there are our enemies.’ The
crowd cheered and made aggressive gestures at the police. The police looked
nervous, Mandela recalled in his autobiography: ‘A number of them pointed
back at me as if to say, “Mandela, we will get you for this.”’

In secret with Walter Sisulu, Mandela went further. Through the assistance of
communist friends, Sisulu had received an invitation to attend a student festival
in Bucharest in 1953 and he had arranged to extend his journey abroad with
visits to China and the Soviet Union. Before leaving, he agreed with Mandela to
approach the Chinese about the possibility of their supplying weapons for an
armed struggle. The Chinese expressed support for the ANC’s political efforts,
but warned against armed struggle. The idea was premature, they felt. Sisulu was
told, ‘Don’t play about with it.’ On his return, neither of them took the matter
further, nor did they disclose to their ANC colleagues what had occurred.
Loose talk about the use of violence appalled other senior figures in the
ANC’s leadership, in particular its new president, Albert Luthuli, who had been
chosen to replace the discredited Dr Moroka at the annual conference in
December 1952. Luthuli was a man of great moral authority and dignity who
during the 1950s came to personify the ideals of non-racialism and non-violence
espoused by the ANC. Unlike his two predecessors, Xuma and Moroka, he was
at home in the world of popular politics and mass action, having a genuine
insight into the concerns and problems of ordinary people. He also conformed to
the image many whites held of the ‘Good Native’: he was a devout Christian, a
Methodist lay preacher and a tribal chief, with a slow and courteous demeanour.
For fifteen years he had taught at Adams College in Natal, an American mission
high school, and for seventeen years he had served as chief of the Umvoti
Mission Reserve in Zululand. But drawn into the world of African politics in the
1940s, he displayed an unexpected determination to fight for African rights. As
president of the ANC’s Natal region, he had no hesitation in supporting the
Defiance Campaign, nor did he see any conflict in doing so with his role as
chief.
The government thought otherwise. In October 1952, Luthuli was summoned
to Pretoria and given an ultimatum: he was to resign from either the ANC or the
chieftaincy. Luthuli refused to make that choice and was duly dismissed as chief.
In a personal statement about his dismissal, entitled ‘The Road to Freedom is
via the Cross’, Luthuli explained his sense of disillusionment about ‘the path of
moderation’ he had followed hitherto:
Who will deny that thirty years of my life have been spent knocking in vain,
patiently, moderately at a closed and barred door? What have been the fruits of
my many years of moderation? Has there been any reciprocal tolerance or

moderation from the Government, be it Nationalist or United Party? No! On the
contrary, the past thirty years have seen the greatest number of laws restricting
our rights and progress until today we have reached a stage where we have
almost no rights at all . . . in short, we have witnessed in these years an
intensification of our subjection to ensure and protect white supremacy.
He went on:
This stand of mine . . . might seem foolish and disappointing to some liberal and
moderate Europeans and non-Europeans with whom I have worked these many
years and with whom I still hope to work. This is no parting of the ways but ‘a
launching further into the deep’ . . . I have embraced the non-violent passiveresistance technique in fighting for freedom because I am convinced it is the
only non-revolutionary, legitimate and humane way that could be used by people
denied, as we are, effective and constitutional means to further aspirations.
Luthuli went to great lengths to try to reassure whites about African political
intentions. He spoke of the future in terms of African ‘partnership’ in
government rather than absolute control of it, accepting ‘the fact of the
multiracial nature of the country’. The ANC’s goal, he wrote in his
autobiography, ‘is not that Congress shall rule South Africa, but that all Africans
shall participate in ownership and government’.
He placed great faith in the moral impact on whites of the African struggle
and possessed an abiding optimism that whites would sooner or later be
compelled to change heart and accept a shared society. It was such thinking
which set the tone of ANC policy throughout the 1950s.
Mandela’s remarks in Sophiatown about the use of violence consequently
earned him a severe reprimand from the ANC’s national executive. The Special
Branch also exacted its revenge. In September 1953, Mandela was served with
an order under the Suppression of Communism Act requiring him to resign from
the ANC, restricting him to the Johannesburg district and prohibiting him from
attending meetings or gatherings for two years. At the age of thirty-five,
Mandela’s career as a leading ANC activist was brought abruptly to a halt.
Henceforth, his involvement had to be conducted in a clandestine manner. From
being at the centre of political activity, Mandela was forced to remain on the
sidelines, able to exert little influence over the direction the ANC took.
Other setbacks were to follow.

Sophiatown was one of the most vibrant African communities in South Africa. It
was the home of writers, musicians, journalists and politicians like the former
ANC leader Dr Xuma. In its narrow, crowded streets were schools, churches,
cinemas, shops and night-clubs and the only swimming pool for African children
in the whole of Johannesburg. It was famous for its gangsters and its shebeen
queens, for its nightly toll of murders and knife fights, and for its passion for
jazz and dance parties. Drinking establishments like the Back of the Moon and
the Thirty-nine Steps attracted the African elite in business, sports and
entertainment from all over Johannesburg. On Sunday afternoons the Odin
cinema was a regular venue for well-organised ‘jam sessions’, featuring popular
vocal groups like the Manhattan Brothers quartet and their lead singer, Miriam
Makeba, and bringing together white as well as black musicians. Sophiatown
produced its own stars, including Wilson Silgee’s Jazz Maniacs and Dolly
Rathebe, the blues singer who starred in the 1949 film Jim Comes to Joburg and
became one of the most sought-after women of the 1950s. It also boasted an allAfrican female band, the Sophiatown Scottish, who dressed in tartan kilts and
white gloves and paraded through the streets on Sundays to the accompaniment
of drums and trumpets. Its racy, hard-drinking, exuberant style, influenced by
American jazz and gangster movies, set the pace for the rest of black urban
South Africa. Black youths referred to it proudly as ‘the centre of the
metropolis’. The sense of drama and excitement it generated was captured
regularly on the pages of the popular monthly magazine Drum, whose writers,
like Sophiatown’s Can Themba, were at the forefront of a new wave of
investigative journalism, satire, commentary, fiction and musical criticism and
whose readers, as its young English editor, Anthony Sampson, noted, ‘thought
and spoke in jazz and exclamation marks’. Drum used Sophiatown as the
yardstick of what readers wanted to read about. Sophiatown’s resident
community of 60,000 was predominantly African but included substantial
minorities of Coloureds, Indians, Chinese and even some whites attracted to its
bohemian lifestyle.
As famous as Sophiatown’s musicians and writers were its gangs. Two
effectively divided Sophiatown into rival zones: the Berliners controlled the
territory between Ray Street and Johannes Road, while the Americans held sway
between Toby Street and Meyer Street. The Berliners tended to engage in smallscale crime, in particular payroll robberies. The Americans specialised in

stealing goods from city shops and railway delivery trucks, recycling them in
Sophiatown. ‘Sophiatown creaked with stolen property,’ recalled Michael
Dingake, a former resident. Food, liquor, clothes, cutlery, household appliances
and furniture items all sold at a fast pace at give-away prices. Gang leaders liked
to see themselves as folk heroes, courageous and clever enough to become
wealthy at the expense of whites. They dressed in flashy ‘American’ clothes,
drove American-made cars and copied the style of American cinema gangsters,
like Richard Widmark in the film Street with No Name. A motto they favoured
was taken from Willard Motley’s novel about a young American gangster,
Knock on Any Door, which was popular locally: ‘Live fast, die young, and leave
a good-looking corpse.’
Amid the noise and bustle of this urban maze stood an Anglican mission,
whose church, Christ the King, dominated the skyline. Its priest-in-charge,
Trevor Huddleston, was a familiar figure on the dusty streets of Sophiatown,
dressed in a white flowing cassock and large black hat and usually surrounded
by crowds of grubby urchins calling out ‘Fader’. Because of his close-cropped,
German-style hair-cut, he was often referred to in the adult community as ‘die
Jerry’. Huddleston had arrived in Sophiatown in 1943 at the age of twenty-nine
after training in a Yorkshire monastery for a monastic order in the Church of
England called the Community of the Resurrection. Like Michael Scott, he had
become a political activist, but at a much slower pace. Scott complained, during
the Tobruk crisis, that Huddleston had failed to come to his aid; and Huddleston
later admitted that it had taken him a long time to ‘wake up’ to the realities of
South Africa. But once aroused, his commitment to the African cause became
unshakeable. With immense energy, moral zeal and a flair for publicity, he
tackled the authorities over one issue after another, campaigning tirelessly with
diplomats, businessmen and officials for support in improving African urban
life. With the same gusto, he threw himself into the nationalist fray, developing
close friendships with Oliver Tambo and Yusuf Cachalia and earning himself the
enmity of the government. ‘In the Middle Ages,’ said one government minister,
Jan de Klerk, ‘people like Michael Scott and Huddleston would have been
burned at the stake.’ After six years in Sophiatown, Huddleston moved to the
south side of Johannesburg to take up the post of superintendent of St. Peter’s
School in Rosettenville. But his heart remained in Sophiatown. As prominent
churchman Charles Hooper once noted, ‘Made in Sophiatown’ was branded
upon his personality. And it was over Sophiatown that Huddleston was to
engage in his most dogged campaign against the government.

What enabled Sophiatown to develop such a distinctive character was no more
than an accident of history. In 1897 a speculator called Herman Tobiansky
bought 237 acres of land on the slopes of a rocky ridge four miles west of
Johannesburg, intending to establish a new white suburb there. He named it after
his wife, Sophia, and pegged out streets with the names of his children: Edith,
Gerty, Bertha, Toby and Sol. But his plans went awry when the council decided
first to establish a sewerage-disposal site nearby and then a municipal location
for Africans called Western Native Township next door. Unable to attract a
sufficient number of white buyers, Tobiansky resorted to selling his plots to
Africans, Coloureds and Indians, as he was then entitled to do. Sophiatown,
along with its two adjoining districts of Martindale and Newclare, thus
developed as a ‘freehold’ township, its houses of all shapes and sizes lining steep
streets which climbed the hillside. Unlike municipal locations, there was no
fence surrounding it, no superintendent to allocate houses, no policeman to
examine permits at the gate and no restrictions on who came and went. ‘The
streets of Sophiatown were never deserted, they were always full. There was
always life, people going up and down like ants,’ recalled one former resident.
‘Sophiatown had variety, Sophiatown had difference.’
In reality, much of Sophiatown had degenerated into a slum. Though some
impressive houses remained, like Dr Xuma’s, most buildings were decaying and
decrepit, their yards packed tightly with shacks and hovels in which whole
families struggled to survive. Landlords crammed as many tenants as possible
into one property, often charging them exorbitant rents; as many as eighty
people lived on one stand, sharing a single water tap and a single toilet. Much of
the area was a health hazard. Yet despite the squalor, Sophiatown retained a
strong sense of community. ‘Whatever else Sophiatown was, it was home,’
wrote Bloke Modisane. ‘We made the desert bloom; made alterations; converted
half-verandas into kitchens, decorated the houses and filled them with music.
We were house-proud. We took the ugliness of life in a slum and wove a kind of
beauty.’
With the growth of Johannesburg, however, Sophiatown became encircled by
white suburbs. Only a narrow stretch of open veld separated it from the prim
white suburb of Westdene. The residents there soon began to agitate for the
removal of this ‘black spot’. Bowing to white pressure, in 1944 the
Johannesburg municipality approved a scheme for its removal, but then took no
action. The Nationalist government, however, saw an opportunity for enforcing

its apartheid policy and in June 1953 announced plans to move the entire
population to a new site under municipal control called Meadowlands, nine
miles from Johannesburg, close to the existing township of Orlando. It cited the
need for slum clearance in Sophiatown as the reason, although elsewhere in
Johannesburg there were slums under municipal control where conditions were
far worse. No freehold ownership was to be allowed in Meadowlands.
The plan ran into a storm of protest. Father Huddleston formed one protest
committee and Dr Xuma another. The ANC, stirring itself for the first time since
the end of the Defiance Campaign, decided in conjunction with the Indian
Congress to organise a joint protest at the Odin cinema. Among the speakers
invited were Huddleston, Yusuf Cachalia and Mandela, whose six-month
banning order had just expired.
The Odin cinema on that Sunday morning in June 1953 was packed with some
1,200 residents. Huddleston arrived, hotfoot from conducting mass at the Church
of Christ the King, and immediately fell into an altercation with Special Branch
detectives, questioning their right to attend; the Special Branch men grudgingly
withdrew. Shortly after Huddleston had finished his speech, a group of armed
police strode in, marched on to the stage and arrested the next speaker, Yusuf
Cachalia, dragging him towards the exit. The crowd rose to their feet, shouting
and booing. Mandela, fearing an ugly turn of events, jumped on to the stage and
began singing a well-known protest song, getting the crowd to join in.
Huddleston, pursuing Cachalia through the exit, found himself confronting 100
armed police on the street outside. He remonstrated with the officer in charge
and eventually the police withdrew, allowing the meeting to continue. Cachalia
was later released without being charged. ‘I had seen and felt, in those moments,
the terrifying spectre of the police state,’ Huddleston wrote in his book Naught
for Your Comfort. ‘There was the fierce breath of totalitarianism and tyranny in
every attitude, every movement of the police.’
Protest meetings in Freedom Square in the centre of Sophiatown and in other
locations continued week after week. With Special Branch detectives recording
every word in their notebooks, speakers vied with each other to impress the
crowds with their bravado and fearlessness in denouncing the government.
Bloke Modisane recorded, ‘Every Sunday morning we assembled at Freedom
Square, Morris and Victoria Road, to be stampeded into orgiastic reverberations
of resounding slogans by thumb-raising politicians trading on mob passions, and
one after another they mounted the platform almost in an effort to outdo the

other by the sheer volume of noise.’ The crowds responded in kind with shouts
of ‘Asihambi’—‘We will not move!’
Mandela addressed many such meetings, depicting Sophiatown as ‘the battle
between reactionary forces and the forces of liberation’ and raising the spectre of
violent opposition, before being silenced by his second banning order in
September 1953. His involvement in the campaign nevertheless continued. He
was a frequent visitor to the So - phiatown home of Robert Resha, the local ANC
leader well known for his militant views. He was also able to act there in his
professional capacity as a lawyer, advising and defending residents.
The ANC placed great store on the success of its Sophiatown campaign,
believing that it was an issue that would galvanize popular resistance to
apartheid elsewhere. Chief Luthuli called for it to become the ‘Waterloo of
Apartheid’. Resha recruited some 500 volunteers in Sophiatown ready to come
to the assistance of any residents threatened with eviction.
Yet the campaign was marked by confusion and disputes. The ANC entirely
underestimated the willingness of a large number of tenants to escape their slum
conditions and move to better housing at cheaper rents in a new township. Local
organisers found themselves accused of acting simply to defend the interests of
landlords. When Resha’s volunteers appeared in uniform on the streets for the
first time, the black newspaper The World reported sourly that ‘many of the
volunteers were the sons and relatives of property owners’. Moreover, neither
the volunteers nor the residents wishing to stay were given any clear idea from
the ANC about how they should resist or for how long. While urging residents
not to move from an area where their homes were to be bulldozed, the ANC was
unable to organise anything but temporary accommodation elsewhere.
Even as the day of reckoning approached, there was still no sign of a coherent
plan, as Bloke Modisane recorded:
It began to be rumoured around the protest meetings, in and about Sophiatown,
that we would resist, by force if necessary, the will of the government; a
campaign with a top-secret plan was whispered in the wind, the hush-hush Mplan which would be implemented on the night of the day before the first
removals; the top-secret plan was of such priority in secrecy that there was found
no one who knew any details about it, except that it would spring into effective
action on the night before removal day.
The first group of 150 families were warned in December 1954 that they

would have to leave their homes by 12 February 1955. Without making any
contingency plans, the ANC assumed that the government would not act until 12
February. When the government abruptly announced on 8 February that the
removals would take place the following morning, therefore, the ANC was
caught unprepared.
A group of young activists meeting that night were in favour of erecting
barricades and defying the police with whatever weapons came to hand. But the
ANC’s leaders, including Mandela, ordered them to stand down, believing that
violence would have disastrous consequences.
At dawn on 9 February, a large convoy of trucks and armed police moved into
Sophiatown, taking control of every street corner and cordoning off two streets
scheduled for removal. Within a few hours, the trucks were on their way, with
tenants sitting atop stacks of furniture, stoves and bedding. Some were singing,
‘To Meadowlands we will go . . . ’ Once they had gone, the demolition squads
moved in.
There was no resistance, no demonstration, no disruption, just slogans on the
walls saying ‘We Won’t Move!’ The ANC had chosen the ground on which to
stand and had suffered abject failure. Its campaign had been little more than a
propaganda exercise.
Mandela admitted the ANC’s shortcomings, but drew other conclusions. ‘The
lesson I took away from the campaign was that, in the end, we had no alternative
to armed and violent resistance,’ he wrote in his autobiography. ‘Over and over
again, we had used all the non-violent weapons in our arsenal—speeches,
deputations, threats, marches, strikes, stay-aways, voluntary imprisonment all to
no avail, for whatever we did was met by an iron hand.’

The destruction of Sophiatown was but the first of a series of forced removals
which tore apart long-established communities in South Africa’s towns. Tens of
thousands of families were uprooted from their homes under the Group Areas
Act, on the pretext of preserving racial harmony. The Indian communities in
Johannesburg’s western districts of Pageview, Vrededorp and Fordsburg, where
they had lived for seventy years, building substantial houses, temples, mosques,
schools, clinics, cinemas, libraries, businesses and restaurants, were ordered to
quit and move to Lenasia, a ‘group area’ for Indians twenty miles south-west of

the city which the government insisted was to become the sole location for
Johannesburg’s Indians. Pageview was declared a white area in 1956, even
though no whites were living there. A similar fate befell the Indian community
in Durban, which once owned a quarter of the total area of the city. In the
Transvaal, hundreds of Indian businessmen and traders were expelled from
central business districts, to the considerable advantage of white shopkeepers. In
Cape Town, District Six, an area close to the city centre occupied by Coloureds
since 1834, was razed to the ground, its residents forced to move to a bleak tract
of land ten miles away. Compensation was paid to families ordered to leave but
usually at derisory rates. White property speculators were able to amass fortunes
out of the forced sale of houses. In Sophiatown, the new white suburb which
arose from the rubble was named Triomf.

Year by year, the apartheid machine gathered increasing momentum. The
driving force behind it was a Dutch-born ideological fanatic, Hendrik Verwoerd,
who aspired to create in South Africa a new racial order. Appointed as Minister
of Native Affairs in 1950, he had already played a prominent role in shaping
Nationalist doctrine and theories both as a professor of sociology at the
University of Stellenbosch and as editor of the Nationalist paper Die Transvaler.
Verwoerd believed that his own rise to prominence was as much a matter of
divine inspiration as of the policies he propounded and he allowed nothing to
deflect him from his purpose. ‘I do not have the nagging doubt of ever
wondering whether perhaps I am wrong,’ he said.
In 1953, Verwoerd turned his attention to the system of African education. For
more than 100 years it had remained largely in the hands of church missions.
About 90 per cent of all schools were mission schools, administered by some
forty mission bodies. Most were heavily dependent on state assistance for the
payment of teachers’ salaries and school equipment. In many cases they suffered
from low teaching standards, inadequate equipment and overcrowded classes.
There was always a shortage of funds. Less than half of all African children of
school age attended any school at all. But however poor the education offered,
the schools provided a vital lifeline into the world of employment and the chance
of an income. The start of each school year was marked by desperate struggles
by mothers trying to get their children into schools.
Verwoerd decided that control of African education should be wrested from

the churches, explaining his reasons in the long, didactic speeches he was fond
of making.
Racial relations cannot improve if the wrong type of education is given to
Natives. They cannot improve if the result of Native education is the
creation of a frustrated people who . . . have expectations in life which
circumstances in South Africa do not allow to be fulfilled. . . . Above all,
good racial relations cannot exist when the education is given under the
control of people who create wrong expectations on the part of the Native
himself, if such people believe in a policy of equality. People who
believe in equality are not desirable teachers for Natives. Education must
train and teach people in accordance with their opportunities in life,
according to the sphere in which they live.
Bantu education should stand with both feet in the reserves and have
its roots in the spirit and being of Bantu society. . . . There is no place for
him in the European community above the level of certain forms of
labour. . . . Until now he has been subject to a school system which drew
him away from his own community and misled him by showing him the
green pastures of European society in which he is not allowed to graze. . .
. What is the use of teaching a Bantu child mathematics when it cannot
use it in practice? That is absurd.
Under the terms of the Bantu Education Act, which Verwoerd introduced in
1953, church missions were given the choice of turning their schools over to the
government or continuing with them as private schools with gradually
diminishing subsidies. All schools, whatever their status, would have to be
registered by the government. No private schools would be allowed to exist
without government approval. Control of schools would pass not to the
Department of Education but to the Department of Native Affairs. Introducing
the new legislation before parliament, Verwoerd was forthright about its
purpose: ‘Natives will be taught from childhood to realize that equality with
Europeans is not for them.’
Opposition to the Bantu Education Act was widespread, both among churches
and within the African community. Verwoerd’s blunt explanations left little
room for doubt that what was intended, as Mandela noted at the time, was ‘an
inferior type of education, designed to relegate Africans to a position of
perpetual servitude’. The issue was recognised as being of the utmost

importance; the whole outlook of African children for generations to come
would be affected.
But deciding the best course of action to take caused deep dis - sension. Some
churchmen decided to close their schools rather than submit to the government.
The Anglican Bishop of Johannesburg, Ambrose Reeves, shut down all his
schools, which had a total enrolment of 10,000 children. Father Huddleston
decided to close down St Peter’s School. In an article explaining the effect of the
act, he wrote:
There is only one path open to the African: it is the path back to tribal culture
and tradition; to ethnic groups; to the reserves; to anywhere other than the
privileged places habited by the master race. It is because we cannot accept such
principles that we are closing St Peter’s. . . . It has been a decision made in
anguish and only after the most careful thought and prayer. For it means the end
of forty years of labour and devotion.
Other churchmen argued that however harmful the system of Bantu education
might be, the cost of school closures, leaving thousands of children on the streets
without any kind of instruction and throwing hundreds of teachers out of work,
would be too great to bear. ‘A rotten system of education,’ said Archbishop
Clayton of Cape Town, would be ‘better than none’. With the exception of the
Johannesburg diocese, the Anglican Church followed his lead, agreeing to hand
over its schools to the government. Every other missionary body, except the
Roman Catholics and Seventh-Day Adventists, took the same line. Whatever
opportunity there was for the churches to take a united stand against the
government was lost.
The response of the ANC was far more confused. When members of the
national executive committee, including Mandela, met to decide what strategy to
adopt, two options were considered: one was to call for an indefinite boycott of
schools in an attempt to destroy the Bantu Education Act before it could take
root; the other was to call for a temporary boycott. Those in favour of an
indefinite boycott argued that popular resentment against the act was so strong
that their supporters would not be satisfied with a mere protest. Those in favour
of limited action pointed out that the ANC did not have the means to sustain a
permanent boycott; it had neither resources nor time enough to organise an
alternative to government schools and realistically could offer the public next to
nothing in terms of support. Despite his reputation as a firebrand, Mandela spoke

in favour of a pragmatic approach. At the end of a heated session, the national
executive committee recommended a week’s boycott starting on 1 April 1955,
the date on which the transfer of schools into government hands was scheduled
to take place.
The issue was then put to the ANC’s national conference in December 1954.
The dilemma facing the African community was summed up by Chief Luthuli:
‘The choice before parents is an almost impossible one—they do not want Bantu
education and they do not want their children on the streets. They have to choose
between two evils and no rule of thumb which is the greater.’
Ignoring the national executive committee’s recommendation, the conference
voted in favour of an indefinite boycott. Strong doubts remained, however, about
the wisdom of the move. ‘To imagine that the ANC has the power to bring about
such a boycott in a few months would be totally unreal,’ declared the left-wing
journal Fighting Talk. Verwoerd raised the stakes by threatening to ban children
involved in boycotts permanently from school education and to close down their
schools. In March 1955, the national executive committee, worried by the lack
of preparation, announced that the boycott would be deferred.
But some ANC branches, notably those on the East Rand, were determined to
carry on the campaign, regardless of the views of the national executive
committee. Scattered boycotts began in April. Attempts were made to provide
alternative education at improvised schools known as ‘cultural clubs’. But the
clubs lacked equipment, qualified teachers and money and were frequently the
target of police raids. Father Huddleston described one such cultural club set up
in an empty cinema in Benoni: ‘Seated at the table was a young African woman
trying to demonstrate some game, trying to keep fifty, a hundred children
interested, or at least quiet. . . . There was no blackboard; there were no school
books; there were no benches. . . . Such things as would equip a school would
make it illegal.’ An African reporter who visited the same club noted how ‘the
children were unruly and unmanageable’.
The campaign soon collapsed in bitterness and recrimination. Only a small
fraction of parents and schoolchildren were ever involved in the boycott. The
ANC itself admitted that it had amounted to little more than ‘sporadic, unrelated
and ineffectual small incidents in various parts of the country’. Critics, like Dr
Xuma, claimed that ANC leaders had acted ‘for propaganda reasons’ and
‘aroused vain hopes’, in much the same way as had occurred with the

Sophiatown campaign. But whereas Sophiatown had been a local issue, African
education was a national issue of paramount importance to the African
community. By falling at this hurdle, the ANC suffered a far more grievous blow
to its reputation.
As the government’s opponents had feared, Verwoerd soon moved to reshape
African education to his liking. In 1956, new syllabuses were introduced for
primary schools, emphasising obedience, tribal loyalty, rural traditions and use
of the vernacular. Vernacular instruction was made compulsory in all African
primary schools and later extended to the first class of secondary schools.
More was to come. In 1957, the government introduced legislation to
segregate universities. Hitherto, South African universities had been free to
choose whom they accepted as students. African students had been allowed to
enrol for degree courses at the ‘open’ universities of Cape Town and the
Witwatersrand. They had been admitted to the same lectures and the same
student societies as whites. Now separate colleges were to be provided for
Coloureds, for Indians and for Africans. In the case of Africans, they were to be
tribal in character, sited in isolated rural areas—one in Natal for Zulu students,
one in the Transvaal for Sotho, Tsonga and Venda-speaking students, one in
Cape Province for Xhosa students. The university college of Fort Hare, which
had achieved such a distinguished record in producing graduates since the 1920s,
was to be reduced to the status of a Xhosa tribal college.
In an article in Liberation, a left-wing journal run under the auspices of
Michael Harmel, Mandela condemned the legislation as ‘a step to extend Bantu
education to the field of higher education’. Tribal colleges, he said, would be
used by the government to enforce its political ideology at a university level:
‘They will bear no resemblance whatsoever to modern universities. Not free
inquiry but indoctrination is their purpose, and the education they will give will
not be directed towards the unleashing of the creative potentialities of the people
but towards preparing them for perpetual mental and spiritual servitude to the
whites.’
What was needed to fight the government, he said, was not a campaign
conducted on the basis of isolated struggles, but ‘a broad united front of all the
genuine opponents of the racial policies of the government’.

CHAPTER 6

THE FREEDOM CHARTER
FINDING ALLIES IN THE WHITE COMMUNITY WAS AN EXERCISE
FRAUGHT with complications. During the Defiance Campaign, the ANC had
said that it was ‘prepared to work with any white man who accepted the
principle of equality’. But while traditional liberals were genuinely appalled by
the onslaught of apartheid and the trail of destruction it carved through
individual rights and liberties, few were willing to take a determined stand
against the government. Mandela developed a particular dislike for their brand of
politics.
In May 1953, after Malan’s National Party had won a second election victory,
white liberals launched the Liberal Party in an attempt to bridge the gap between
white and black. By white South African standards, it was a brave endeavour.
The Liberal Party opened its membership to all races and advocated the
extension of full political rights to non-whites. With the exception of the
Communist Party, no political party in South Africa had previously gone so far.
Yet its programme was hedged with reservations. The Liberal Party wanted
not full citizenship rights for all but ‘equal rights for all civilized people’—in
other words, a qualified franchise. Furthermore, it opposed the use of passive
resistance, strikes and boycotts, rejecting such tactics as being unconstitutional
and insisting that only ‘parliamentary methods’ should be adopted.
It was also vehemently hostile to having any truck with communists, sharing
the intense distrust of communist intentions held throughout the Western world
at the time. Indeed, one of the motives of the founders of the Liberal Party was
to provide an alternative to the influence of communists among the non-white
population. All this came with a heavy dose of paternalism, with liberals
expressing ‘profound sympathy with the aspirations of all non-European
peoples’ but urging restraint, caution, compromise and gradualism on their part.
Mandela vented his anger on the liberals in a June 1953 article in Liberation.
With South Africa divided by racial discrimination into two hostile camps, he

wrote, there could be no middle course:
The fault of the Liberals—and this spells their doom—is to attempt to strike just
such a course. They believe in criticizing and condemning the government for its
reactionary policies but they are afraid to identify themselves with the people
and to assume the task of mobilizing that social force capable of lifting the
struggle to higher levels. . . .
Talk of democratic and constitutional means can only have a basis in reality
for those people who enjoy democratic and constitutional rights. . . . The theory
that we can sit with folded arms and wait for a future parliament to legislate for
‘the essential dignity of every human being irrespective of race, colour or creed’
is crass perversion of elementary principles of political struggle. No organization
whose interests are identical with those of the toiling masses will advocate
conciliation to win its demands. . . .
The real question is: in the general struggle for political rights can the
oppressed people count on the Liberal Party as an ally? The answer is that the
new party gives organizational expression to a tendency which has for many
years existed among a section of the white ruling class and in the [opposition]
United Party. This section hates and fears the idea of a revolutionary democracy
in South Africa, just as much as the Malans and the Oppenheimers [a prominent
mining family] do. Rather than attempt the costly, dubious and dangerous task of
crushing the non-European mass movement by force, they would seek to divert
it with fine words and promises and to divide it by giving concessions and bribes
to a privileged minority (the ‘suitably qualified’ voters perhaps).
It became clear, therefore, that the high-sounding principles enunciated by the
Liberal Party, though apparently democratic and progressive in form, are
essentially reactionary in content. They stand not for the freedom of the people
but for the adoption of more subtle systems of oppression and exploitation.
Though they talk of liberty and human dignity they are subordinate henchmen of
the ruling circles. . . .
Mandela’s resentment of white liberals spilled over at a meeting of the ANC’s
national executive committee attended by Chief Luthuli and Professor Matthews,
shortly after they and other ANC officials had held talks in private with a
number of white liberals about the formation of the Liberal Party. Mandela
recalled the incident in his autobiography. Along with others who had not been
present, he had wanted to know what had transpired. When told that the

conversations had taken place on a private basis and were therefore privileged,
he retorted: ‘What kind of leaders are you who can discuss matters with white
liberals and then not share that information with your colleagues at the ANC?
That’s the trouble with you, you are scared and overawed of the white man. You
value his company more than that of your African comrades.’
Mandela was quickly rebuked. Matthews, his old teacher from Fort Hare,
responded, ‘Mandela, what do you know about whites? I taught you whatever
you know about whites and you are still ignorant. Even now, you are barely out
of your student uniform.’ Luthuli replied that if he was being accused of being
afraid of the white man, he would have no alternative but to resign. Mandela
beat a hasty retreat and apologised.

There were, however, other white opponents of the government willing to
identify themselves with the ANC and the cause of African nationalism in a way
that white liberals were not prepared to do. In 1953, in conditions of utmost
secrecy, a hardcore of communist activists decided to relaunch the Communist
Party and to devote its energy to the business of liberation. So secret were the
activities of the Communist Party that no word of its existence was heard until
1960, not even by the Special Branch. Its founding conference in 1953 was held
at the back of an Indian trader’s store in a village in the eastern Transvaal to
which many delegates were taken in vehicles without knowing their destination.
The key working group included Moses Kotane, Yusuf Dadoo, Bram Fischer,
Michael Harmel and Rusty Bernstein. Although most members were readily
identified as being ‘former’ communists, their involvement in a well-organised,
tightly disciplined, underground version of the Communist Party was never
suspected.
They operated mainly in small units of four or five people, meeting
clandestinely, often in ‘unmarked’ cars owned by friends and colleagues.
Meetings of the secretariat took place several times each week. National
conferences were also held, with delegates attending from towns across South
Africa, without attracting the attention of the Special Branch. Among white
communists there were a number of notable husband-and-wife teams: Bram and
Molly Fischer, Rusty and Hilda Bernstein, Jack and Rica Hodgson, Joe Slovo
and Ruth First, Brian and Sonya Bunting, and Ben and Mary Turok. In all, their
numbers were small—fewer than 100 members were at the core of Communist

Party activity—but the impact they made was remarkable.
They were particularly adept at keeping alive a radical press. When The
Guardian, run mainly by communists since 1937, was suppressed by the
government in 1952, a new paper, The Clarion, appeared the following week,
using the same staff and the same editor; in Cape Town, a former communist
member of parliament, Sam Kahn, managed to sell a copy to the minister of
justice outside the House of Assembly, smiling as he did so. When The Clarion
was suppressed, People’ s World appeared; after that came Advance and then
New Age, at which point the government tired of the game. During the 1950s,
Ruth First served as the Johannesburg editor of all five papers, as well as editor
of the radical monthly Fighting Talk. Another outlet for left-wing views was
Michael Harmel’s monthly journal Liberation, for which Mandela wrote a series
of articles in the 1950s. All these papers devoted considerable space to
descriptions of Soviet achievements and justifications of Soviet foreign policy.
The main focus of their efforts, however, was a new political organisation, the
Congress of Democrats. Launched in 1953, largely as a result of communist
endeavour, the Congress of Democrats was intended to function as a white
counterpart to the ANC and the Indian Congress, in the way that Sisulu and
Tambo had advocated at the Darragh Hall meeting in Johannesburg at the end of
the Defiance Campaign. Unlike the Liberal Party, it had no qualms about
demanding universal franchise.
Its membership was open only to whites. By agreement with the ANC, it
confined its recruitment to the white community, to avoid competing with the
ANC for black members. But the pool of white sympathisers on which it could
draw for support was tiny. Most white opponents of the government were
attracted more by the incremental, multiracial approach of the Liberal Party than
by the radical vision proposed by the Congress of Democrats. From its inception,
therefore, it became little more than an elite organisation for whites already
committed to the idea of democratic rule in South Africa. Not all its members
were communists, but communists played a key role in its foundation and in its
leadership ranks. ‘But for them, it would not have seen the light of day,’ Rusty
Bernstein admitted forty years later. ‘It was communist pressure which got the
ANC to recognise that they had an ally. Communist Party members effectively
launched it.’
It was Bernstein who gave the keynote address at the inaugural conference of

the Congress of Democrats at the Trades Hall in Kerk Street, Johannesburg, in
October 1953, urging white opponents of white supremacy to ‘take sides’ in the
racial confrontation that was coming and fill ‘the void in the democratic camp’.
A veteran member of the Communist Party, who joined in 1939 while studying
architecture at the University of the Witwatersrand, he preferred a backroom
role, handling propaganda, but was propelled to prominence by the part he
played in launching the Congress of Democrats. Other communists active in the
leadership included Bram Fischer, Molly Fischer, Joe Slovo, Ruth First, Michael
Harmel and Cecil Williams, a theatre producer. The president, Piet Beyleveld, a
trade unionist, joined the underground Communist Party in 1956, mainly as a
result of Bram Fischer’s influence. The post of national secretary was also held
by communists: first by Jack Hodgson, then, when he was banned, by Yettah
Barenblatt and then by Ben Turok.
The presence of so many known ‘former’ communists in the leadership led to
immediate accusations by the Liberal Party that the Congress of Democrats was
little more than a communist front. The evidence of communist influence was at
times incontrovertible: discussion papers were replete with Marxist theories and
concepts, and public pronouncements, notably on foreign affairs, often followed
the party line. A war of words between white liberals and members of the
Congress of Democrats lasted for years.
The ANC too found itself under attack for its alliance with the Congress of
Democrats, not just from white liberals but from its own Africanist wing.
Africanists portrayed the Congress of Democrats as a pernicious fifth column,
intent on subverting the African liberation movement for its own purposes. They
denounced as ‘Eastern functionaries’ those ANC members like Walter Sisulu
who had accepted invitations to attend a communist-sponsored youth festival in
Bucharest in 1953 and subsequently visited Peking and Moscow. When Sisulu
returned from his tour of communist countries in 1953, he was greeted by a
storm of controversy on all sides. Most whites readily identified him as one of
the most dangerous enemies of the state. Africanists nicknamed him ‘Mao Tsetung’.
Chief Luthuli took a more philosophical view of the role of communists. He
developed a close personal relationship with Moses Kotane, the Communist
Party’s general secretary, often seeking his advice. ‘He knew Moses was 100 per
cent a member of the Communist Party,’ remarked Oliver Tambo, ‘but he also
knew him to be 100 per cent ANC, and this gave Luthuli great confidence in

him.’ When Luthuli was restricted to his home area by government banning
order, he would send for Kotane to discuss ANC issues.
‘People ask me why I work with communists and my reply is that I have one
enemy, the Nationalist government, and I will not fight on two fronts. I shall
work with all who are prepared to stand with me in the struggle for the liberation
of our country,’ he said. The ANC, he felt, must not be side-tracked by
ideological clashes and witch-hunts. The time would come when conservatives
and communists within the ranks of the ANC would have to sort out their
differences. In the meantime, he would accept help from anyone subscribing to
the ANC’s aims: ‘We leave our differing political theories to one side until the
day of liberation.’
Nor was Luthuli unduly concerned about the increasing use the ANC made of
anti-colonial rhetoric and its applause of the Soviet Union for its role as an antiimperial power. The unconditional support it expressed for the anti-apartheid
campaign was welcome. Certainly, ANC leaders had ‘picked up the language’,
he said, ‘but they learned the language without becoming communists’.
Mandela was later more forthright in explaining his willingness to collaborate
with communists:
It is perhaps difficult for white South Africans, with an ingrained prejudice
against communism, to understand why experienced African politicians so
readily accept communists as their friends. But to us the reason is obvious.
Theoretical differences amongst those fighting against oppression is a luxury we
cannot afford at this stage. What is more, for many decades communists were
the only political group in South Africa who were prepared to eat with us, talk
with us, live with us and work with us. They were the only political group which
was prepared to work with the Africans for the attainment of political rights and
a stake in society. Because of this, there are many Africans who, today, tend to
equate freedom with communism.
Year by year, Mandela was to draw closer to the communists. His closest
colleague, Walter Sisulu, eventually decided to make the leap, secretly joining
the party in 1955 and becoming a member of its central committee the following
year.

In an attempt to revive its flagging fortunes and to restore a sense of purpose to

the nationalist movement, the ANC developed the idea of holding a national
convention called the Congress of the People to give a vision of the democratic
future it wanted. The idea was first proposed by Professor Matthews, president
of the ANC’s Cape region, at a provincial conference in Cradock in August
1953. What subsequently happened assumed great significance, for not only did
the Freedom Charter that was drawn up become a major landmark in the
confrontation between the nationalist movement and the government, but the
government used it as a pretext to try to crush the nationalist movement by
charging its leaders with treason. For more than four years, Mandela’s life was
overshadowed by the possibility of a death sentence.
Matthews’s original proposal was accepted enthusiastically at the ANC’s
national conference in December 1953 and he was asked to produce a
memorandum to bring the idea into sharper focus.
The main task of the Congress will be to draw up a Freedom Charter for
all people and groups in South Africa. From such a Congress ought to
come a Declaration which will inspire all the peoples of South Africa
with fresh hope for the future, which will turn the minds of the people
away from the sterile and negative struggles of the past and the present to
a positive programme of freedom in our lifetime. Such a charter properly
conceived as a mirror of the future South African society can galvanize
the people of South Africa into action and make them go over into the
offensive against the reactionary forces at work in this country, instead of
being perpetually on the defensive, fighting rearguard actions all the
time.
Three other organisations were invited to join in: the Congress of Democrats,
the Indian Congress and the newly formed Coloured People’s Organization,
based in Cape Town. In March 1954, the four organisations, collectively known
as the Congress Alliance, formed a National Action Council, on which each
organisation had equal representation, to prepare for the Congress of the People.
Teams of ‘freedom volunteers’ were recruited to canvass support for the
Congress and to collect suggestions for what the Freedom Charter might contain.
Thousands of contributions poured in, many written on scraps of paper, pages
torn from school exercise books and bits of cardboard, from church groups,
women’s organisations, sports and cultural clubs. The range of demands was
huge, covering everything from the right to vote to the provision of proper
toilets.

Members of the Congress of Democrats were notably energetic in the
campaign, raising concern in some ANC quarters about the role of their new
allies. Africanist suspicions about white participation were voiced anew. Many
questioned why the Congress of Democrats, with a membership of no more than
a few hundred, had been accorded equal status on the National Action Council
with the ANC, with its far higher membership. An even sharper reaction came
from the Liberal Party, which refused an invitation to participate in the Congress
of the People on account of the prominent involvement of Congress of
Democrats members.
Behind the scenes, the influence of Congress of Democrats members was even
more crucial. A subcommittee formed to sort out all the bits of paper and to
prepare a draft version of the Freedom Charter for debate by delegates to the
Congress of the People included Joe Slovo and Rusty Bernstein. It was
Bernstein, a member of the Communist Party’s central committee and its chief
propaganda expert, who undertook most of the burden of writing the draft
version of the Freedom Charter.
Only a few weeks had been left at the end of the campaign for the task to be
completed before the Congress of the People assembled in June 1955. The
thousands of demands, all stored in a trunk, had first to be sorted into categories
and topics, like land, employment and housing, before the writing could begin.
‘It was one of the most difficult tasks I’ve done in the political field,’ recalled
Bernstein. ‘Many of the demands were contradictory. Some people, for example,
wanted land nationalised; some wanted it redistributed to peasants. It was a
process of gradually and unsystematically selecting what made sense, making a
précis of them. It was not a scientifically based sample. It was a fairly personal
assessment. But I also had to keep my own personal preferences out of it. It was
not a process I enjoyed. I was uneasy about some of the formulations. Some of
them I formulated against my better judgement. In some cases I would
personally have taken a more radical position.’
One clause, later to become the subject of particular controversy, was
rewritten at the last minute. In its original version, the general economic clause
of the Freedom Charter demanded that ‘the land, the forests, the mines of coal,
gold, and diamonds, the quarries, the factories and workshops, and the railways
should be worked for the benefit of the people’. It added, ‘The mines should be
nationalized.’ But a change was engineered by Ben Turok, a prominent COD
official and Communist Party member, who had been given responsibility for

presenting the economic clause at the Congress of the People. Turok’s amended
version demanded the nationalisation of ‘the mineral wealth beneath the soil, the
banks and monopoly industry’. It added, ‘All other industries and trades should
be controlled to assist the well-being of the people.’
The draft version was shown to senior ANC officials, including Mandela, on
the eve of the Congress. ‘We made few changes, as there was little time and the
document was already in good shape,’ said Mandela. Neither Chief Luthuli nor
Professor Matthews had an opportunity to see it beforehand. Luthuli was not
only subject to a banning order restricting him to his home district in Natal but
recovering from a stroke; Matthews was preoccupied with university business at
Fort Hare.
The Congress of the People duly opened on 25 June 1955 on a rough football
field near Kliptown, a ramshackle collection of houses and shacks fifteen miles
to the south-west of Johannesburg. Nearly 3,000 delegates attended—lawyers,
doctors, clergymen, trade unionists, city workers, and peasants—including 320
Indians, 230 Coloureds and 112 whites. It was a multiracial gathering unique in
South Africa’s history. Those present felt a sense of excitement and festivity. It
was also an occasion notable for the number of prominent activists who were
absent, forced to stay away by banning orders. Many nevertheless managed to
watch the proceedings from a distance. Mandela and Sisulu, both banned at the
time, found a safe place on the edge of a crowd of spectators, hidden from the
view of Special Branch detectives monitoring the Congress.
The plan had been for delegates to debate each clause of the Freedom Charter
and decide what amendments, if any, were needed. But the Congress only started
late in the day, because of the delayed arrival of many delegates, and much time
was then taken up with prayers, greetings and an awards ceremony for three
distinguished activists, Chief Luthuli, Father Trevor Huddleston and the Indian
leader Dr Yusuf Dadoo. The following day, when each clause was read out by
individual speakers, there was little time left but for their own introductions. Ben
Turok, introducing the general economic clause, added his own particular twist.
Speaking of the mine owners after liberation, he declared:
They will not have those lovely big Buicks that they drive around in. The whole
system of the big factories and the gold mines in this country are the enemies of
the people. When you walk down one of the streets in Johannesburg, you see a
very impressive-looking building, and outside you see various banks. . . That

money, friends, does not come back to you. It goes to our friends living in Lower
Houghton [a wealthy white suburb]. Let the banks come back to the people, let
us have a people’s committee to run the banks.
Along with everything else that was said from the platform, his words were
recorded by Special Branch detectives.
Clause by clause, the Freedom Charter was approved by a show of hands.
Only two sections were left by four o’clock in the afternoon, when the
proceedings were abruptly interrupted by armed police who surrounded the
delegates. Senior officers mounted the platform and presented the chairman, Piet
Beyleveld, with a warrant to investigate treason. Beyleveld explained to
delegates the reason for the police action, told them he had authorised the
removal of all papers and documents and asked if they wished to proceed with
the Congress. The crowd roared its assent. While police worked their way up
and down the rows of delegates, searching bags, confiscating documents,
recording names and addresses, and taking photographs, speakers on the
platform resumed reading out the Freedom Charter.
It was a document more notable for its modest content and naïve promises
than for any revolutionary intent. The Freedom Charter affirmed the right of all
citizens to vote, to hold office and to be equal before the law. It proposed equal
status for ‘all national groups’ and an end to discriminatory legislation. ‘South
Africa,’ it declared, ‘belongs to all who live in it, black and white.’ It went on to
state that the mines, banks and monopoly industry would be transferred to public
ownership and that land would be redistributed. Other promises included free
compulsory education, minimum wages, free medical care and welfare for the
aged. The tone throughout was one of simple idealism. ‘Rent and prices shall be
lowered, food plentiful and no one shall go hungry,’ the Freedom Charter
proclaimed. ‘Slums shall be demolished and new suburbs built.’ No suggestions
were put forward as to how all this would be achieved.
In the South African context, however, such sentiments were dangerous.
White liberals deplored the ‘socialist’ character of the Freedom Charter, arguing
that left-wing activists in the Congress had clearly got the upper hand, thus
justifying their refusal to take part. A prominent African liberal, Jordan
Ngubane, who had once played a leading role in the Congress Youth League,
claimed that the Freedom Charter’s ultimate aim was ‘to condition the African
people for the purpose of accepting communism via the back door’.

Africanist critics within the ANC were outraged by the clause declaring that
South Africa belonged to ‘all who live in it, black and white’. In the Africanist
view, the only true ‘owners’ of South Africa were Africans. The Africanists
claimed that the ANC, through its willingness to support multiracial objectives,
had yielded to the influence of other racial groups like the Congress of
Democrats and the Indian Congress. Their journal, The Africanist, asserted that
the Charter
did not emanate as a finished document from the ANC. It emanated as such from
the vodka cocktail parties of Parktown and Lower Houghton [a number of leftwing intellectuals lived in these white suburbs]. The black masses who met at
Kliptown were merely pawns in the game of power politics. The whites who
were at Kliptown, apart from the Special Branch, were mainly members of the
Congress of Democrats. They are part of the ruling class in South Africa . . . they
are in reality concerned with the maintenance of the status quo.
What the Africanists wanted, instead of the Freedom Charter, was to return to
the era of ‘go-it-alone’ politics and to revert to the goals of the 1949 Programme
of Action, which emphasised ‘freedom from white domination’. Nothing could
be gained, they insisted, by trying to appease white opinion. The only way by
which white domination would be broken was by black force.
In March 1956, at a special ANC conference called to ratify the Freedom
Charter, the Africanists kept up a noisy barrage of attacks on the ‘Charterists’,
with shouts of ‘Africa for the Africans’. Luthuli had hoped to use the occasion
for a thorough debate about the economic clauses of the Freedom Charter, about
which he and others had serious reservations. But he was obliged to abandon the
idea in order to close ranks against what he called Africanist ‘obstructionism’.
Those who shared his misgivings, he said, were ‘not prepared to split Congress
on it’. The Freedom Charter was adopted without any amendment.
Mandela had no such reservations about the Freedom Charter. In an article for
Liberation in June 1956, he described it as ‘a beacon to the Congress movement
and an inspiration to the people of South Africa’.
It is true that in demanding the nationalization of the banks, the gold
mines and the land, the Charter strikes a fatal blow at the financial and
gold-mining monopolies and farming interests that have for centuries
plundered the country and condemned its people to servitude. But such a
step is imperative because the realization of the Charter is inconceivable,

in fact, impossible, unless and until these monopolies are smashed and
the national wealth of the country turned over to the people.
He denied, however, that this would involve a socialist transformation:
Whilst the Charter proclaims changes of a far-reaching nature, it is by no means
a blueprint for a socialist state but a programme for the unification of various
classes and groupings amongst the people on a democratic basis. Under
socialism the workers hold state power. They and the peasants own the means of
production, the land, the factories, and the mills. All production is for use and
not for profit. The Charter does not contemplate such profound economic and
political changes. Its declaration ‘The People Shall Govern’ visualizes the
transfer of power not to any single social class but to all the people of this
country, be they workers, peasants, professional men or petty-bourgeoisie . . .
The breaking up and democratization of these monopolies will open fresh
fields for the development of a prosperous non-European bourgeois class. For
the first time in the history of this country the Non-European bourgeoisie will
have the opportunity to own in their own name and right mills and factories, and
trade and private enterprise will boom and flourish as never before. . . . The
Charter offers immense opportunities for an overall improvement in the material
conditions of all classes and groups.
Mandela was nevertheless clear about the impact it would make: ‘The Charter
is more than a mere list of demands for democratic reform, ’ he wrote. ‘It is a
revolutionary document precisely because the changes it envisages cannot be
won without breaking up the economic and political set-up of present South
Africa.’
The government thought so too and set out to prove that the Charter’s aims
could not be achieved without violence.

The knock on the door came just after dawn on 5 December 1956. Armed with a
search warrant, Special Branch detectives rifled through every room in
Mandela’s house in Orlando, seizing documents and papers. They then presented
him with a warrant for his arrest. On it Mandela read the words ‘Hoogverraad—
High Treason’. As his children watched, he was driven away in a police car.
At Marshall Square police station, he found a number of colleagues also under
arrest; more arrived during the course of the day. In all, the Special Branch

arrested 156 activists around the country in its swoop, including almost all senior
ANC leaders, among them Chief Luthuli, Professor Matthews, Sisulu, Tambo
and Kotane, as well as prominent white activists like Joe Slovo, Ruth First,
Rusty Bernstein, Ben Turok, Jack Hodgson, Piet Beyleveld and a British-born
social worker, Helen Joseph. Many of those arrested had expected it to happen.
Since the Congress of the People, the police had made more than 1,000 raids on
homes and offices of activists in search of evidence, and the government had
continued to issue dark warnings about treason.
For two weeks, after being formally charged in the magistrate’s court, they
were held in the Fort, Johannesburg’s main prison, a former Boer fortress built
in 1899 on top of a hill near the centre of the city to defend it against the British.
The African section there was notorious for its bullying, bribery and harsh
treatment of prisoners. Thousands of pass law offenders went through its cells
each year, emerging dazed and dumbfounded by the experience.
The African, Coloured, and Indian male prisoners—some 120 people—were
locked into two communal cells with concrete floors, no furniture and two
exposed latrines. They were each given a sisal mat on which to sleep and three
thin, lice-ridden blankets. But far from being daunted by their surroundings,
Mandela and the others relished the opportunity to make contact with their
colleagues after the months of living under bans and restrictions, unable to
attend meetings openly. ‘Our communal cell became a kind of convention for
far-flung freedom-fighters, ’ wrote Mandela. A committee was formed to
organise lectures and entertainment; freedom songs reverberated around the
prison walls. Their white colleagues—seventeen men and six women, all
members of the Congress of Democrats—were meanwhile placed in more
comfortable quarters in a separate wing and provided with mattresses, cushions
and newly-laundered blankets.
As the accused were too numerous to fit into any courtroom, the authorities
converted the army’s Drill Hall in Twist Street into a court of justice for the
preparatory examination of the case. It was a cheerless barn-like building with a
galvanised-iron roof which, during the heat of a summer’s day, felt like an oven.
At one end of the hall stood the magistrate’s table, with other tables for the
prosecutors and defence lawyers. In front of the magistrate’s table were 156
chairs for the accused, in six long rows. Behind them were placed another 150
seats for the public, divided into two groups, one for whites, one for non-whites.

On the ten-minute journey from the Fort to the Drill Hall for the opening
day’s session on 19 December, the convoy of police vehicles with the accused
on board was greeted with cheering and waving from African onlookers. A huge
crowd at the Drill Hall, shouting slogans and bearing placards inscribed ‘We
Stand by Our Leaders’, surrounded the vehicles as they swept into the backyard.
‘The trip,’ said Mandela, ‘became like a triumphal procession.’
The court proceedings quickly degenerated into farce. When the accused were
brought in, the spectators’ section, though packed, contained not a single
African. So many whites had wanted to attend that court officials had simply
moved them into chairs intended for black spectators. When defence lawyers
drew attention to the matter, the magistrate, Frederick Wessel, was obliged to
order that proper arrangements for black spectators be made.
No sooner had the prosecutor, J. C. van Niekerk, begun his opening address
than it became clear that hardly anyone could hear a word he was saying. Court
officials had forgotten to install loudspeaker equipment. No more than twenty
minutes into the case, the court adjourned for lunch. After lunch, just as the
prosecutor was about to start again, the magistrate asked whether any
interpreters were available for those accused who did not understand English.
None was. So, after two minutes, the court adjourned once more. The 156
accused were taken back to the Fort.
When they entered the courtroom the following day, they discovered that a
huge wire cage had been erected overnight for them to sit in. They were led
inside and seated on benches, surrounded by sixteen armed guards. Defence
lawyers, seeking to enter the cage to consult their clients, were told to talk to
them through the wire. Some of the accused, more amused than angry at this
absurdity, wrote signs saying, ‘Dangerous! Do not feed!’ and ‘No monkey nuts’.
The defence lawyers, however, were furious. Maurice Franks, normally a
patient, polite and softly-spoken man, could scarcely contain his outrage: ‘Your
Worship confronts this unprecedented scene which we see before us today, the
accused caged, as Your Worship sees, caged, one might almost say—I am most
anxious not to allow my indignation to get the better of the language I use—. . .
caged like wild beasts. . . . ’ He warned that unless the cage was removed
immediately, the entire defence team would walk out of court. The magistrate
adjourned the case once more, agreed that the cage should be removed and
ordered the front of it to be pulled down forthwith.

Once again, van Niekerk rose to read his opening address. But he had barely
begun when there was a new interruption. In the street outside, as crowds of
supporters pressed close to the entrance, the police ordered a baton charge to
disperse them, causing uproar which overwhelmed the court proceedings. A
burst of gunfire was heard. Everyone in court stood up; the magistrate hurried
away. The Bishop of Johannesburg, Ambrose Reeves, rushed out of the Drill
Hall and ran towards the retreating crowd with his hands in the air, appealing for
calm. A score of people were injured in the police shooting. The court adjourned
once more.
Over the next two days, van Niekerk completed his reading of the charges.
The prosecution’s case was that the 156 accused were members of a countrywide
conspiracy plotting to overthrow the existing state by revolutionary methods
involving violence and to establish a communist state. The Freedom Charter, the
Congress of the People and the Defiance Campaign were all cited as key parts of
the conspiracy. The penalty for such high treason was death.
Despite the gravity of the charges, the accused were then released on bail that
was nominal. The sliding scale fixed for bail was £250 for Europeans, £100 for
Indians and £50 for Africans and Coloureds. They were also required to report
once a week to the police and prohibited from attending meetings. Mandela and
Tambo were back in their office the next day trying to catch up on a backlog of
work.
The court resumed in calmer conditions on 9 January, with the accused seated
in alphabetical order, all races mixed up, in curious contravention of normal
procedure under apartheid. Among their number were clergymen, lawyers,
journalists and a member of parliament. Most were clerks, drivers, factory
workers and labourers.
The defence response to the charges was made by Vernon Berrangé, an
imposing figure, much feared for his rapier-like skills at cross-examination and
secretly a senior member of the underground Communist Party. The Freedom
Charter, he said, contained ideas and beliefs that were shared by the
overwhelming majority of man - kind as well as the citizens of South Africa.
What was on trial was not just the 156 individuals but the ideas they openly
espoused. Not only would the accused defend those ideas; they would show they
were ‘the victims of political kite-flying’ by the government to see how far it
could go in stifling free speech. ‘This trial has been instituted in an attempt to

silence and outlaw the ideas held by the accused and the thousands whom they
represent,’ he went on. It was no ordinary trial, but a battle of ideas between
those who wanted equal opportunities and freedom of thought and expression for
all races and those who sought to confine the riches of life to a minority.
After the preliminary exchange, the preparatory examination settled into a
routine of numbing monotony. For the first six weeks, the prosecution did
nothing else but hand in thousands of documents seized by the police in their
frequent raids on homes, offices and meetings. All the newspapers, magazines,
books and pamphlets collected over three years were duly produced to the court
and numbered one by one. Nothing was left out, not even invitations to dinner
and weddings or letters from girlfriends. A notice over the kitchen at the
Congress of the People saying ‘Soup without meat’ was solemnly read, marked
as an exhibit and handed in. The next exhibit, logically enough, was ‘Soup with
meat’. Extracts from the documents were read out, regardless of their relevance.
As the prosecution case dragged on, many of the accused began to lose interest.
Some took to reading newspapers, tackling cross-word puzzles or playing chess;
others just dozed. ‘The heat beats down in waves,’ wrote Alex La Guma, one of
the accused. ‘Heads nod. Eyelids struggle to keep open. Ears strain to listen.’ To
break the tedium, Mandela often brought a book to read or a legal brief to work
on.
A succession of Special Branch detectives took the witness stand to read out
their notes of speeches made at political meetings. Many admitted that ANC
speakers had often stressed the importance of nonviolence. ‘In the past four
years, I have attended many meetings of the ANC,’ said Detective Wilson
Gumisa. ‘At all meetings an appeal has been made to conduct the struggle in a
nonviolent manner. There is also an appeal to cooperate with Europeans. The
ANC people say this at almost all meetings.’
Others produced more contentious evidence. An African detective, Jeremiah
Mollson, claimed that he had been able to remember verbatim all the speeches
made at a five-hour meeting, recording them word for word when he returned
home. Under cross-examination from Berrangé, he admitted that he had received
only a limited education and that before joining the police in 1953, he had been
‘loafing’ for fourteen years. A week after his first appearance, he was back in
court to give further evidence on speeches. Handed his notes and asked to read
them out, Mollson puzzled over them for some time and then said that there was
a whole page that he could not decipher. Joe Slovo, conducting his own defence,

was quick to pounce:
SLOVO: Do you understand English?
MOLLSON: Not so well.
SLOVO: Do you mean to say that you reported these speeches in English but
you don’t understand English well?
MOLLSON: Yes, Your Worship.
SLOVO: Do you agree with me that your notes are a lot of rubbish?
MOLLSON: I don’t know.
Time and again, defence lawyers were able to demonstrate examples of
fabrication by Special Branch detectives. At other times, they had little difficulty
in dismissing their evidence as gibberish. Some reports of the speeches caused
so much amusement among the accused that the magistrate felt obliged to warn
that ‘the proceedings are not as funny as they may seem’.
In August 1957, eight months after the proceedings had started, the
prosecution announced it would produce evidence linking the ANC directly to
planned violence. Into the witness box walked a confident, bespectacled, middleaged man who said he was a lawyer with a degree from Fort Hare. Solomon
Ngubase told the court he was an official of the Port Elizabeth branch of the
ANC and a member of the national executive who had been present at a meeting
when it had been decided to send Walter Sisulu and David Bopape to the Soviet
Union to procure arms for a Mau-Mau type rebellion against whites in South
Africa.
Under cross-examination by Berrangé, none of this turned out to be true.
Ngubase was not a university graduate, or a member of the ANC, or a lawyer.
He had forged his certificate for a university degree, practised fraudulently as an
advocate for several years, served four jail terms and was currently facing
prosecution on another charge of fraud.
BERRANGÉ: When did you last do an honest day’s work?
NGUBASE: I can’t remember.
BERRANGÉ: You have lived a life of lies and deception?
NGUBASE: I cannot be able to check that.

‘This,’ said Berrangé, sitting down, ‘is the sort of witness the Crown brings
here.’
Another state witness, Andrew Murray, professor of philosophy at the
University of Cape Town, had a more distinguished background but also fell
foul of Berrangé. Murray was reputedly an expert on communism. After
examining various documents like the Freedom Charter and speeches made by
the accused, he had no hesitation in describing them as ‘communistic’. Berrangé
challenged the validity of Murray’s opinion and set out to demonstrate how
difficult it was to be certain that a particular comment was either communist or
bore evidence of communist tendencies. He read out a series of extracts of ‘the
sort of statement that communists make’ and asked Murray to identify them. The
first extract concerned the need for worker cooperation. It was communistic, said
Murray. Berrangé then disclosed that the author was South Africa’s former
prime minister, Dr Malan. He read two more extracts, both of which Murray
described as communistic. The author of one, said Berrangé, was Woodrow
Wilson and the other, Franklin D. Roosevelt, both former presidents of the
United States. The climax came when Berrangé read out a passage which
Murray again unhesitatingly described as ‘communism straight from the
shoulder’. The author, said Berrangé, savouring the moment, was Murray
himself.
In September 1957, the prosecution completed giving its evidence and the
court adjourned. In December, without any explanation, the charges against
sixty-one of the accused were dropped. Most were minor figures in the ANC, but
among them were Luthuli and Tambo. As the ANC’s president, Luthuli was
baffled about the reasoning behind his release. ‘The truth is I would be happier
to see the whole thing through with my comrades,’ he said.
When the court reassembled in January 1958, a different atmosphere
prevailed. To sharpen up its case, the government brought in a new chief
prosecutor, Oswald Pirow, a former justice minister renowned for his pro-Nazi
sympathies, his dislike of Jews and his hatred of communism. Pirow, a man who
believed that Hitler was ‘the greatest man of his age’, was also a formidable
lawyer. New evidence would be produced, he said, to show the existence of a
highly dangerous conspiracy. It would include an inflammatory speech by the
ANC’s Sophiatown leader, Robert Resha, in which he urged his audience to
‘murder, murder’. Later that month, the magistrate found ‘sufficient reason’ for
committing the ninety-five accused to trial in the Transvaal Supreme Court on

charges of high treason.

In its preliminary stages, the treason trial served as a rallying point for antiapartheid activists. The accused became popular heroes. For many blacks, the
ANC emerged as a real force capable of challenging the government. White
liberals raised their own voice of protest against the trial, fearing that its real
purpose was to intimidate the government’s opponents of any kind. ‘Unless
white South Africans defend under all circumstances the democratic values
which they cherish,’ said Alan Paton, chairman of the Liberal Party, ‘the day
may soon come when they lose them.’ A defence fund launched by prominent
whites to assist the accused and their families and to help pay for defence
lawyers received widespread support. In London, Canon John Collins
established a British defence fund which attracted substantial contributions.
Yet the disruption caused both to the accused and to the ANC itself was
severe. Many of the accused lost their livelihoods during the proceedings and
suffered much personal hardship. The ANC, deprived of effective leadership,
fell into disarray. Disputes and dissension, never far beneath the surface, broke
out anew, threatening to wreck the movement from within.
The law practice of Mandela and Tambo, once a thriving concern, was
effectively crippled. Mandela and Tambo attempted to keep it going by working
in the early morning, in the late afternoon and at weekends. But the practice
steadily fell apart, leaving both of them in serious financial difficulties. Added to
all this, Mandela’s marriage finally collapsed.

CHAPTER 7
‘THE FABULOUS DECADE’
WHEN MANDELA WAS RELEASED ON BAIL FROM THE FORT IN
December 1956, a few days before Christmas, he returned home to Orlando to
find that Evelyn had finally moved out. Her leaving did not surprise him. What
he found most distressing, in fact, was that she had taken the curtains with her.
The marriage had seemed irreparable for some time. The long sullen silences
they endured were broken only by fierce rows. According to Evelyn, after one
particular argument, ‘Nelson grabbed me by the throat and shook me and
shouted at me. Some elderly neighbours heard the noise and came in to break it
up.’ She went to live at her brother’s house in Orlando East for a time but
Mandela suggested she should return home: ‘I was desperate to save the
marriage, even if it meant clutching at a straw,’ she said. ‘But there was no
thawing of the freeze.’ She confided in Albertina and Walter Sisulu, both of
whom were anxious to help achieve a reconciliation. But when Walter
approached Mandela, he was told curtly it was none of his business. The only
result was to increase Mandela’s anger. ‘I don’t think Nelson ever forgave me
for that,’ said Evelyn. He came home less and less, took his laundry to a cousin
and started sleeping elsewhere.
The rift between them became common knowledge. In a final attempt to
prevent a breakdown, Evelyn asked first her brother and then Kaizer Matanzima
to intervene. Mandela’s response to both of them was that he no longer loved
Evelyn. According to Mandela, he was also presented with an ultimatum from
Evelyn: he had to choose between her and the ANC. There was no doubt in his
mind where his priorities lay. After yet another terrible argument, Evelyn left the
house to stay in nurses’ quarters, hoping that Mandela would come to realise he
needed her to keep the family together. But this time Mandela never went to see
her, nor did he send any messages. When he was arrested on charges of treason
and taken to the Fort, Evelyn visited him only once. It was one of their last
meetings. By the time he returned, she had moved in with her brother in Orlando

East.
Their children—Thembi, then aged ten years, Makgatho, aged five, and
Makaziwe, aged two—were all adversely affected by the collapse of the
marriage, but the most deeply wounded was Thembi. According to Evelyn, he
‘suffered intensely’. Mandela had taken as much interest in Thembi as he had
time to spare. They regularly went jogging together and to the boxing gym. He
taught him to drive his Oldsmobile. Mandela was affectionate, but also a strict
disciplinarian. A visitor who stayed at the Mandela household, Robert Matji, was
shocked by Mandela’s severity in dealing with Thembi over an incident
involving a school textbook. ‘He set about cross-examining his son as if he was
standing trial in the Supreme Court,’ Matji recalled. ‘If we did anything wrong,’
said Makgatho, ‘we would get a lesson from him that was worse than a beating.’
As the marriage disintegrated, Thembi tended to take his mother’s side. He lost
interest in schoolwork and became quiet and withdrawn. Mandela rarely
managed to brighten him up. In time, Thembi would become increasingly
alienated from his father.

Mandela first caught sight of Winnie Madikizela several months later during a
recess in the preparatory examination at the Drill Hall. Driving past
Baragwanath Hospital, the main black hospital south of Johannesburg, he
noticed a young woman waiting at a bus stop and was immediately struck by her
beauty.
It was perhaps inevitable that they should have met. Winnie, a social worker
at Baragwanath, was a close friend of Adelaide Tsukudu, a nurse at the hospital
who was engaged to Oliver Tambo; they both lived at Helping Hand Hostel in
Jeppe Street. Winnie had already met Tambo and discovered that they came
from the district of Bizana in the Transkei. Several weeks after that first glimpse,
Mandela was buying food in a Greek delicatessen in Bree Street in Johannesburg
when Tambo arrived with Adelaide and Winnie in tow. Tambo introduced them:
‘Winnie from Bizana’, he called her. The next day, Mandela telephoned Winnie
at the hospital, inviting her to lunch. ‘I cannot say for certain if there is such a
thing as love at first sight,’ wrote Mandela in his autobiography, ‘but I do know
that the moment I first glimpsed Winnie Nomzamo, I knew that I wanted her as
my wife.’
Winnie had arrived in Johannesburg four years before, a shy, unsophisticated

country girl, to enrol at the Jan Hofmeyr School of Social Work, a college for
black social workers founded during the war years. Her childhood in Bizana had
been marked by rebelliousness, harsh discipline and family discord. Her father,
Columbus Madikizela, was a Methodist mission school teacher, a successful
farmer and businessman, whose authoritarian manner and fierce temper kept his
children in fear of him. When he entered the room, they were made to stand to
attention and allowed to sit only with his permission. He showed them no
physical affection, never touching or hugging them. The only physical contact he
had, in fact, was to beat them for transgressions.
Her mother, Gertrude, was also a teacher, with similar views on the need for
discipline. Winnie once described her as a ‘religious fanatic’. An ardent
Methodist, she made her children pray at least twice a day in a special private
corner of a field. Winnie was regularly locked into a room with her mother and
forced to pray aloud. Gertrude was also obsessed with physical hygiene and
maintained rigid standards of cleanliness and order in the house. Each evening
the children lined up for an inspection to ensure that they had washed properly.
They had to clean their teeth with ash until the gums bled.
Gertrude’s physical appearance, her light complexion, long hair and blue eyes,
was a frequent source of family comment. In South African terminology, she
was a ‘Coloured’, of mixed ancestry. Columbus’s mother, Seyina, never
concealed her dislike of Gertrude for that reason, referring to her disparagingly
in front of the children as a mlungu, a white person. Columbus sometimes joined
in with his own ‘teasing’.
Winnie’s rebelliousness was evident from an early age. Tall and strong as a
child, she preferred the company of boys and took up boyish pursuits. She was
often embroiled in fights and gained a reputation among other children as a
bully. Arguments usually began when Winnie failed to get her own way. In one
memorable quarrel with an older sister, Winnie pulled out a weapon she had
fashioned from a baking-powder tin with a nail driven through it and slashed at
her sister’s face, ripping her lip and tearing into the flesh of her mouth. The
beating that Gertrude subsequently gave Winnie she remembered for the rest of
her life. Gertrude regarded Winnie as the most wilful and troublesome of her
five daughters and regularly beat her.
Gertrude died when Winnie was ten years old, leaving behind a family of nine
children. Drawn into caring for the younger children, Winnie began to exhibit a

gentler side to her nature. At boarding schools at Emfundisweni and Shawbury,
Methodist mission schools, she lost some of her aggression and showed promise
as a student. In 1952, at the age of eighteen, she passed her matriculation and
gained entrance to the Jan Hofmeyr School of Social Work, arriving there in
January 1953. Her home for the next five years was the Helping Hand Hostel.
By the time she graduated in December 1955, Winnie had acquired the
outward sophistication of a city girl. Tall and slender, with large, dark, luminous
eyes, she possessed a beauty that men found alluring. At college, she proved
herself a cheerful and competent student, and was well regarded for her
enthusiastic nature and willingness to help others. She took up sporting activities
with the same energy, earning herself nicknames like ‘The Amazon Queen’ and
‘Lady Tar - zan’. ‘I solved problems the simple way, using physical force, as I
had done way back in my childhood days,’ she explained.
When she was appointed as a social worker at Baragwanath, the popular
African press—Bantu World and Drum—made much of the story of the once
barefoot girl from Pondoland who, with brains, beauty and determination, had
made her mark in the city of gold. At Baragwanath, she gained a reputation as an
effective and dedicated social worker. A young African doctor, Nthatho
Motlana, recalled, ‘She was an outgoing personality, laughing a great deal, very
cheerful and intensely concerned about other people’s welfare.’
She was courted for a while by Mandela’s kinsman Kaizer Matanzima, who
met her while making an official visit to Baragwanath as a chief from
Thembuland. By coincidence, Matanzima arranged to use Mandela’s house in
Orlando and his car to take Winnie for a candlelit dinner. On his return to the
Transkei, he wrote passionate letters to her and she replied. But Matanzima
appeared to want her for his second wife and Winnie lost interest.
She had known of Nelson Mandela by name for some time, not only because
of his political activities but because he was a patron of the Jan Hofmeyr School.
She had once seen him in a Johannesburg magistrate’s court, representing a
colleague of hers who had been assaulted by the police. But her own interest in
political activity had been negligible; she took a far greater interest in clothes
than in politics. When Mandela telephoned her at Baragwanath asking for help
in raising money for the Treason Trial Defence Fund from the Jan Hofmeyr
School and suggesting they discuss the matter over lunch, she was overawed. ‘I
was petrified,’ she said. ‘I couldn’t work for the rest of the day.’

Mandela was thirty-eight years old at the time, sixteen years older than
Winnie. He had recently been served with a new banning order, restricting him
to Johannesburg for five years and prohibiting him from attending all meetings.
He was on trial for treason, a charge which carried the death penalty. His law
practice was falling apart. He was in serious financial difficulty. His family life
was disintegrating. He rarely had enough time to see his children. To conduct a
whirlwind romance with a twenty-two-year-old girl in those circumstances was
something of an indulgence.
Their first date set the pattern for their future relationship. It was a Sunday.
Mandela was at work in his office. He sent a friend to collect Winnie and
together they walked round the corner to an Indian restaurant. Their lunch was
constantly interrupted by a stream of people wanting to talk to Mandela. On the
street outside, yet others sought his attention. ‘Nelson couldn’t walk from here to
there without having consultations,’ she remarked later. They drove south of
Johannesburg to a stretch of open veld. Walking through the long grass, Mandela
told her of the difficulties he faced with the treason trial and his hopes for the
future. On their way back to the car, the strap on Winnie’s sandal broke. ‘I was
walking with difficulty barefoot,’ she said, ‘so he held my hand as my father
would hold a little girl’s hand.’ When they reached the car, he said, ‘It was a
lovely day,’ and turned and kissed her.
Winnie fitted in to Mandela’s activities as best she could: ‘He did not even
pretend that I would have some special claim to his time.’ When he wanted to
see her, he would send a car for her or telephone her, telling her to be ready at a
certain time. He introduced her to his friends, took her to meetings and arranged
for her to meet his colleagues at the Drill Hall. In an aside to Mandela, Moses
Kotane remarked, ‘Such intimidating and seductive beauty does not go with a
revolutionary!’
A striking couple, they delighted in each other’s company, holding hands and
sitting together intimately whenever they could. Their relationship was
extremely physical. On many occasions, Mandela found it difficult to tear
himself away. But always there were other demands. Mandela took it for granted
that Winnie would follow whatever he decided and rarely consulted her about
his intentions. He never mentioned the matter of his divorce from Evelyn. Nor
did he discuss it with Evelyn. He merely placed a notice in a newspaper stating
that he intended to institute divorce proceedings. Until then, Evelyn had believed
that, though she and Mandela had separated, their marriage would remain

nominally in place. ‘I had heard that Nelson was going out with a social worker
from Baragwanath Hospital,’ she said. ‘It was just one more woman, I had
thought. He would discard her like he had the others.’ The children, meanwhile,
had commuted amicably between her house in Orlando East and his house in
Orlando West, on the occasions that he was there. The news of his intention to
divorce her came as a shock not only to Evelyn but to the children and to many
of their friends. Winnie was sometimes unfairly accused of breaking up the
marriage. Thembi was never reconciled to the divorce.
Averse to any discussion of his private life, Mandela kept the details of his
divorce proceedings to himself. Winnie had no idea that the divorce had been
finalised until one day he suddenly suggested that she should visit a friend, Ray
Harmel, the wife of Michael Harmel, who would make her a wedding dress.
‘How many bridesmaids would you like to have?’ he inquired, by way of
proposing. When Winnie travelled to Bizana to tell her father, Columbus, of the
planned marriage, he exclaimed, ‘But you are marrying a jailbird!’
The wedding took place in Bizana on 14 June 1958, a year after they had first
met. Mandela had to obtain special permission to leave Johannesburg for six
days. The ceremony was held at a local church, with Winnie wearing a wedding
gown of white satin, made for her by Ray Harmel. At a reception at the Bizana
Town Hall, Columbus spoke of his love for his daughter and of Mandela’s
dangerous career as a politician. He expressed deep foreboding for the future:
‘This marriage will be no bed of roses; it is threatened from all sides and only
the deepest love will preserve it.’ He advised his daughter, ‘Be like your
husband, become like his people and as one with them. If they be witches,
become one with them.’
After all the feasts and dancing at Bizana, there was no time for Mandela and
Winnie to travel on to his ancestral home in Thembuland to continue with the
celebrations, as custom required. So Winnie wrapped up a piece of the wedding
cake and took it back to no. 8115, Orlando West, intending that she and her
husband would share it with his family on a later visit when his restrictions were
lifted. It was a journey they never made.

The juggernaut of apartheid, meanwhile, rolled on relentlessly. Race laws by
now covered every facet of life—housing, education, hospitals, employment,
public transport, marriage and sex. In public buildings, on trams and buses, at

airports and railway stations, in restaurants, hotels, cinemas and theatres, on the
beaches and even in the graveyard ‘non-whites’, as they were commonly termed,
were kept separate wherever possible from the white caste. Signs declaring
‘Blanke’ and ‘Nie-Blanke ’ proliferated on park benches, in elevators, in
libraries, in liquor stores and in taxis. New laws were added whenever a gap
could be closed. In 1957, legislation was introduced making it a criminal offence
for Africans to attend church services in white areas without government
permission.
Nothing was allowed to get in the government’s way, neither the courts nor
the constitution. Thwarted in its initial attempts to remove the right of Coloureds
in the Cape to vote by an Appeal Court ruling declaring the legislation invalid,
the government introduced a new bill making parliament a High Court, higher in
authority than the Appeal Court, with power to give the final judgement on
constitutional matters. When the Appeal Court then ruled that the High Court of
Parliament itself was invalid, the government changed the Appeal Court—‘six
old men in Bloemfontein’, as one minister disparagingly described it—by adding
five more judges and by passing regulations requiring a full quorum of eleven
judges to hear constitutional appeals. It also proceeded to enlarge the Senate
from forty-eight to eighty-nine members, elected on a basis which ensured that
the government could obtain the two-thirds majority in a joint session of
parliament needed to pass constitutional legislation. With the Senate duly packed
with its own supporters, in 1956 the government finally succeeded in obtaining
legislation removing the Coloured vote and the Appeal Court, filled with new
government appointments, formally gave its endorsement.
New regulations were introduced to curb still further African entry into
‘white’ areas. Under the dreaded Section 10 of the Urban Areas Act of 1952, the
only Africans entitled to remain longer than seventy-two hours in a white area
were those who could prove either continuous residence in the area since birth or
continuous work in the area for the same employer for ten years or continuous
lawful residence in the area for at least fifteen years. If an African failed to prove
his right to be present in a white area, he was ‘endorsed out’—ordered to return
to a reserve. In 1956, the pass laws were extended for the first time to women,
provoking protests in towns across the country. A crowd of 20,000 women, led
by Lilian Ngoyi and Helen Joseph, marched to the prime minister’s office in
Union Buildings in Pretoria in August 1956 to demonstrate their opposition,
singing a song specially rehearsed for the occasion: ‘Now you have touched the

women, you have struck a rock.’ As her initiation into the world of political
protest, Winnie Mandela spent two weeks in the Fort in October 1958 after
participating in a street protest against the pass laws and consequently lost her
job as a social worker at Baragwanath Hospital. None of the protests had any
effect on the government.
All this was dwarfed by the scheme that Hendrik Verwoerd had in mind.
Elected prime minister by his National Party colleagues in September 1958, after
the death of Hans Strijdom, Verwoerd cast himself in the role of a leader chosen
by God and proceeded to act accordingly. ‘I believe that the will of God was
revealed in the ballot,’ he said on the day of his election.
Verwoerd’s ultimate objective, as he explained it, was total territorial
separation between white and black. He acknowledged that this ‘ideal’ could not
be reached for many years. The journey there would be arduous, but it was
essential that the goal should be clearly stated. Unless white and black were
separated as far as possible, the future would hold nothing but ‘rivalry and
clashes’ between them. The solution lay in giving each race ‘mastery’ over its
own area. Thus the Native reserves would become the homelands of the blacks
—or Bantu, as Verwoerd insisted upon calling them—where they would enjoy
full social and political rights under a system of government suited to their own
tribal background. Those blacks living in white areas would be accorded rights
in the homelands too, which was where their real roots lay, and otherwise treated
as ‘visitors’ and assigned separate locations. For a period of twenty years or so,
according to Verwoerd’s calculations, the flow of Africans to urban areas would
continue to increase. But in the meantime, the reserves would be properly
developed, and in white areas the government would endeavour to separate
white and black in every sphere of life. The time would then come when the
flow would be reversed. At the end of this grand design, Verwoerd confidently
expected, South Africa would consist of flourishing black homelands living side
by side in peace with an ever-prosperous white territory.
Verwoerd’s plans for separate development were far removed from the
previous Nationalist strategy of white baaskap, but his purpose was essentially
the same: to relegate the African population to a permanently inferior status. The
key to his policy was tribalism. By reviving tribal authority and by placing
greater powers in the hands of tribal chiefs beholden to the government, he
intended to establish a new administrative structure for the reserves which could
restore traditional customs and practices and keep African advancement in line

with what the reserves themselves required. For most of the century, the system
of government in the reserves had largely bypassed the chiefs, whose status had
long since declined. Verwoerd’s objective henceforth was to use the chiefs as the
allies of white government, creating small centres of tribally based power on the
periphery of South Africa. By emphasising tribal loyalties, he would keep the
black population divided. A central part of Verwoerd’s strategy became division
of the blacks, which would counter the challenge mounted by African
nationalists, destroy the notion of black majority rule and guarantee the
supremacy of the whites.
Verwoerd had laid the groundwork for his grand scheme when, as Minister of
Native Affairs in 1951, he introduced the Bantu Authorities Act, which was
intended to replace the existing European model of administration in the reserves
with a structure of tribal authorities staffed by African chiefs and officials
appointed and paid by the government. No provision was made for any form of
elected representatives. In the case of the Transkei, tribal authorities were
installed in place of a partly elected district council system. Chiefs were made
responsible for the maintenance of law and order and the implementation of
government measures. Those who refused to cooperate were deposed.
The Transkei was crucial to the success of Verwoerd’s strategy. Covering an
area of 16,000 square miles, it was the only African reserve constituting a
coherent piece of territory. Its black population of 1.5 million was enough to
give it credibility as a separate entity. What was also important was that
Verwoerd had found there a local ally in the business of apartheid: Kaizer
Matanzima.
Matanzima saw in apartheid a means both of restoring hegemony for the
Xhosa-speaking people of the Transkei and of satisfying his own aspirations for
power. Like Verwoerd, he believed in the rule of chiefs. He liked to describe
himself as a ‘Xhosa nationalist’ and was more than willing to forfeit claims in
white South Africa if it meant regaining autonomy for Xhosas at home. Mandela
spent hours arguing with Ma - tanzima, trying to persuade him to oppose the
implementation of the Bantu Authorities Act, but to no avail. In 1955,
Matanzima played a vital role in getting the old General Council, or Bunga, in
the Transkei, to vote itself out of existence and accept the new system. He was
duly rewarded. In 1958, he was appointed Regional Chief of Emigrant
Thembuland and was led to expect further promotion. Mandela recalled,
‘Something snapped inside me when he went over to the Nats.’

In 1959, consulting only a handful of his closest advisers, Verwoerd unveiled
his master plan. South Africa, he announced, would be turned into a ‘multinational state’ by fragmenting the African population into separate ethnic
groups. The Promotion of Bantu Self-Government Bill provided for the
establishment of eight black ‘homelands’, one for each of the major ethnic
groups: North Sotho, South Sotho, Swazi, Tsonga, Tswana, Venda, Xhosa, and
Zulu.
No previous attempt had ever been made to implement territorial segregation
on this tribal basis. Hitherto the whole emphasis of government policy had been
simply to segregate black from white. Now Verwoerd decreed that the African
people were not homogeneous but a collection of separate national groups
divided by language and culture. Their roots lay in separate homelands; there
they would be accorded ‘separate freedoms’. This principle applied not only to
rural but to urban blacks, regardless of how many generations they had lived in
towns; they were all deemed citizens of the new homelands.
Verwoerd’s ‘new vision’, as it was called, was hailed by the National Party as
providing a lasting solution for South Africa. The advantages to whites seemed
conclusive. The whites maintained unfettered control over their own areas, while
claiming to permit blacks equivalent rights in the homelands. The blacks,
meanwhile, were divided into separate ethnic groups, inhibiting their ability to
act as a single community against outnumbered whites. Because each national
group was a minority of the whole, no one ‘nation’ could claim rights on the
basis of numerical strength. Thus the demands for majority rule by African
nationalists were irrelevant. The problem of urban blacks was solved by denying
them any permanent place in towns. In the long term there was the prospect,
according to Verwoerd, that the number of urban Africans might be reduced. On
the basis of Verwoerd’s calculations, the reverse flow back to the homelands
would begin by 1978. All this was to be set in motion in the name of racial
harmony, peace and security. ‘The development of South Africa on the basis of
this bill,’ said Verwoerd, ‘will create so much friendship, so much gratitude, so
many mutual interests. . . that there will arise what I will call a commonwealth,
founded on common interests.’
Mandela took a different view. Writing in Liberation in its May 1959 issue, he
described the bill as ‘nothing but a crude, empty fraud’ to bluff people that the
aim was self-government. ‘The Bantustans are not intended to voice aspirations
of the African people; they are instruments for their subjection. Under the

pretext of giving them self-government the African people are being split up into
tribal units in order to retard their growth and development into full nationhood.’
The burden would fall on millions of Africans, born and living in urban areas,
who had never seen the reserves, who had no desire to go there and who would
now be ‘treated as outcasts’. He contrasted the government’s aims with the
message of the Freedom Charter, which declared that ‘South Africa belongs to
all who live in it, black and white.’
The new system of administration caused deep dissension in the reserves,
splitting apart communities and even families. There was prolonged violence in
the Hurutshe Reserve in western Tranvaal, in Sekhukhuneland, and in
Pondoland. Chiefs and councillors resisting government authority were deposed
and deported. Armoured units and aircraft had to be deployed to crush the
Pondoland revolt.
The Mandela household was directly affected by these events. Not only did
Matanzima throw in his lot with the government but so did Winnie’s father,
Columbus Madikizela, accepting an appointment to serve on Matanzima’s
council in the Transkei. Both became the target of attack. Madikizela’s house
was burned down, his store was burgled and his mother was assaulted. On one
occasion, he only narrowly escaped his attackers by climbing through a small
back window. ANC supporters were involved in the attacks. To have her father
and her husband entrenched in two opposing camps was a difficult experience
for Winnie. But life with Mandela was to bring far greater complications.

It was remarkable, in the circumstances, how much optimism about the future
survived. Since 1948 the Nationalist government had never shown anything but
ruthless determination in pursuit of white supremacy, riding roughshod over all
opponents who stood in the way. The white electorate, meanwhile, had
demonstrated its appreciation by rewarding the National Party with three
successive election victories, with an ever-increasing majority. Yet ANC leaders,
convinced that the handful of whites who supported them represented something
more than a fringe of white politics, still placed inordinate hope in the notion
that eventually enough whites would have a change of heart about apartheid to
bring about the downfall of the government.
The optimists included Walter Sisulu, who, despite being forced to resign as
secretary-general of the ANC and being subjected to a series of banning orders,

managed to play a central role behind the scenes. Writing in the journal Africa
South in 1957, Sisulu reached this conclusion:
As far as the Nationalist Party is concerned, any serious analysis will reveal that
it has reached its high-water mark. There is no possibility of the Nationalists
growing stronger than they are at present. . . . Already there are signs that the
edge of the Nationalist blitzkrieg is blunted in the face of the determined and
growing resistance of the people. . . . In particular, the Europeans of the country
are gradually beginning to see that South Africa has no choice but to follow the
road to a multiracial society.
These views were commonly held among the African elite. In his essay on the
1950s which he called ‘The Fabulous Decade’, the Johannesburg journalist
Lewis Nkosi wrote of how the cause of racial justice and intellectual freedom
seemed to be gathering strength: ‘It was a time of infinite hope and possibility; it
seemed not extravagant in the least to predict then that the Nationalist
government would soon collapse, if not from the pressure of extra-parliamentary
opposition, certainly from the growing volume of unenforceable laws.’
The treason trial had its own effect. Not only was the presence of so many
whites on trial seen by many blacks as evidence that whites too were beginning
to turn against the government but the swift reaction of white liberals in
organising a defence fund for them suggested a wider concern about government
policy. ‘The trial has been an inestimable blessing because it forged together
diverse men and women of goodwill of all races who rallied to the support of the
Treason Trial Fund and to keeping up the morale of the accused,’ wrote Chief
Luthuli. ‘In all humility I can say that if there is one thing which helped push our
movement along non-racial lines, away from narrow, separative racialism, it is
the treason trial, which showed the depth of the sincerity and the devotion to a
noble cause on the white side of the colour line.’
Among the accused themselves, sitting side by side, month after month, there
developed an intense camaraderie. It helped that the accused were seated in
alphabetical order and not in racial groups. ‘The only place in South Africa
where there was absolutely no colour bar was in the treason trial,’ remarked
Bernstein. ‘It produced a core at the centre of people who really thought of
themselves as a united group. I mean, the treason trial was a sort of family of
their own.’ Luthuli observed, ‘By the time the preparatory examination had
drawn to its close, the sense of common purpose among those who reject

apartheid was immeasurably deepened.’
It became fashionable during the treason trial for some of the more
adventurous white liberals in Johannesburg to invite one or two of the more
respectable ANC leaders like Luthuli and Matthews to the northern suburbs for
tea or dinner. Bram Fischer was assiduous in organising dinner parties at
Beaumont Street to introduce the ANC leaders on trial to white politicians and
businessmen, most of whom had never met Africans on a social basis. On one
occasion at Beaumont Street, Mandela encountered the judges who were
presiding at his trial. ‘We never discussed the trial,’ said Mandela, ‘but it helped
to introduce a particular respect by the judges afterwards.’ Luthuli recalled a
meeting with the mining magnate Harry Oppenheimer at which he took the ANC
to task for the ‘extremism’ of its demands, such as the demand for votes, which
made it difficult for him, he said, to persuade ‘liberal-minded people’ of the
justice of its demands. Luthuli replied that it was better for white South Africa to
know the full extent of African demands rather than be introduced to them
installment by installment and taken by surprise. Mandela met Oppenheimer on
another occasion. There was little common ground, but that such meetings took
place at all was seen as an example of the rising importance of the ANC in white
eyes.
Once he was freed from the treason trial, Luthuli went on a speaking tour of
major cities, including Johannesburg and Cape Town, to talk to white audiences,
whom he found notably sympathetic. He even received an invitation to address
an Afrikaner study group in Pretoria on the subject of African aspirations. The
meeting in the Cathedral Hall was interrupted by a group of thirty white thugs,
who assaulted Luthuli and began beating up the audience. Lying on the floor of
the stage with a chair protecting his head, Luthuli was asked by a concerned
white supporter, ‘Are you hurt?’ ‘Oh, I’m used to this,’ he replied, scrambling to
his feet. Though his head was bruised and his jaw painfully swollen, he
continued with his address. ‘It was a good and encouraging meeting,’ he said.
Shortly afterwards, Luthuli received a banning order restricting him to his home
district in Natal for five years and prohibiting him from attending all meetings.
There were encouraging signs from other quarters. The Liberal Party,
adopting a more radical posture, came out in favour of universal adult suffrage
and endorsed the use of tactics like boycotts. On university campuses in
Johannesburg and Cape Town, white students demonstrated against new curbs
placed on African entrants. Among avant-garde whites, multiracial parties were

much in vogue; the more daring went in for illicit affairs.
In the world of music, a new African jazz style known as kwela gained a huge
following among white teenagers. Played originally on the penny whistle, a
cheap, six-hole metal flageolet favoured by African youths in the townships,
kwela-jazz was developed by African musicians into a fast, colourful and
distinctive idiom which became internationally famous. A multiracial Union of
Southern African Artists was formed to assist black performers. At Dorkay
House in Johannesburg, it initiated a series of talent contests which grew first
into small ‘festivals’ and then into township jazz concerts which attracted
enthusiastic white audiences. A performance at City Hall in Johannesburg in
1957 was packed out. The climax of these efforts came in 1959 with the
production of King Kong, a jazz opera on the life of the heavyweight boxing
champion Ezekiel ‘King Kong’ Dhlamini. With a score by Todd Matshikiza,
featuring singers like the Manhattan Brothers and Miriam Makeba and produced
and directed by whites, King Kong was a success from its opening night in
Johannesburg. As Lewis Nkosi wrote:
The resounding welcome accorded the musical at the University Great Hall that
night was not so much for the jazz opera as a finished artistic product as it was
applause for an Idea which had been achieved by pooling together resources
from both black and white artists in the face of impossible odds. For so long
black and white artists had worked in watertight compartments, in complete
isolation, with very little contact or cross-fertilization of ideas. Johannesburg
seemed at the time to be on the verge of creating a new and exciting Bohemia. . .
. There was a surge of optimism, very difficult to prove founded or unfounded,
that art might yet crack the wall of apartheid.
There was a similar sense of exhilaration about the advance of African
nationalists elsewhere in Africa. Ghana’s independence from Britain in 1957
signalled the beginning of the retreat from Africa of Europe’s colonial powers
and the emergence of new black-run states. As the number of African and Asian
members of the United Nations multiplied, so the volume of condemnation of
South Africa’s racial policies rose. Western governments were also becoming
more critical. Foreign support for the anti-apartheid movement was seen to be an
increasingly important factor. ‘World attention,’ said Luthuli, ‘is something
which we of the resistance need and desire.’
All this seemed to enhance the moral advantage that African nationalists in

South Africa perceived they had in their confrontation with the government.
Writing in Africa South in 1959, Walter Sisulu observed:
Nothing has brought greater credit to the ANC in the eyes of Africa and the
world than its steadfast refusal to respond to the vicious persecution of the
Nationalists and their predecessors in the Union Government by a blind and
irrational ‘anti-Whiteism’. It has shown the African people to be larger-minded
than, and morally superior to, their oppressors; it strikingly refutes the ridiculous
claims of ‘white South Africa’ about alleged African ‘immaturity’ and
‘unreadiness for self-government’.
Luthuli also emphasised the moral strength of the ANC’s position:
How easy it would have been in South Africa for the natural feelings of
resentment at white domination to have been turned into feelings of hatred and a
desire for revenge against the white community. Here, when every day in every
aspect of life, every non-white comes up against the ubiquitous sign ‘Europeans
Only’, and the equally ubiquitous policeman to enforce it—here it could well be
expected that a racialism equal to that of their oppressors would flourish to
counter the white arrogance towards black. That it has not done so is no
accident. It is because, deliberately and advisedly, African leadership for the past
fifty years, with the inspiration of the African National Congress . . . has set
itself steadfastly against racial vaingloriousness. We knew that in doing so we
passed up opportunities for an easy demagogic appeal to the natural passions of
a people denied freedom and liberty; we discarded the chance of an easy and
expedient emotional appeal. Our vision has always been that of a non-racial
democratic South Africa which upholds the rights of all who live in our country
to remain as full citizens with equal rights and responsibilities with all others.
The singular achievement of the ANC and its white allies in the 1950s was
that they established a multiracial tradition in politics strong enough to withstand
all attempts by the government to obliterate it. In the long term this was to have
the most profound consequences for South Africa. But at the time, the white
audience they reached was minimal and the signs of change they detected were
misleading. In power was a government determined to enforce its rule whatever
the cost. ‘Alas,’ Nkosi wrote of the 1950s, ‘we didn’t realize how small and
powerless we were.’

CHAPTER 8

A TRIAL OF ENDURANCE
THE TREASON TRIAL REASSEMBLED IN AUGUST 1958, NOT IN AN
ARMY drill hall but in a disused synagogue, with the Star of David hanging
high above the judges’ rostrum. In order to avoid the spectacle of African
crowds milling about in the court precincts, cheering the accused as they came
and went, the venue had been changed from Johannesburg to the more staid
surroundings of Pretoria, thirty-five miles away, where popular support for the
ANC was muted. The Old Synagogue there, a large ornate and empty building
long since given up by the Jewish community, was one of the few locations
available capable of being converted into a ‘Special Criminal Court’ dealing
with ninety-two accused people.
Since none of the accused lived in Pretoria, the government provided a bus for
the journey from the Johannesburg townships where most of them lived. This
meant that in addition to the hours they spent in court each day, the accused had
to endure four hours of uncomfortable travel to get there and back; on some days
they spent as much time in the bus as in court.
To avoid such lumbering journeys, Mandela often travelled to Pretoria with
Helen Joseph, whose fast French car was capable of reaching there in an hour.
After spending a couple of hours in the early morning working in his law office,
Mandela would meet Joseph on the Pretoria road, leaving his car on the roadside
for his return in the afternoon, when he would drive back to the office to put in a
few more hours of work. For amusement on the way, they picked out houses for
themselves for the day when liberation dawned. Joseph described Mandela’s
choice as ‘unpretentious and on the small side’. Mandela thought that Joseph’s
house, with its well-planned garden and green lawns, was too bourgeois.
The defence team assembled for the trial included some of the most
experienced and distinguished lawyers in South Africa. The team was led by
Israel Maisels, a former major in the South African Air Force and chairman of
the Johannesburg Bar, whose accomplishments as a lawyer were widely admired

by the legal profession. In some respects, Maisels was a curious choice. He was
not a ‘political’ advocate; he undertook to lead the defence case on the condition
that it was conducted on a legal basis, not a political basis. But whatever
misgivings the accused had about his approach were soon overcome. A tall,
bespectacled figure, with dark hair receding from a massive forehead, Maisels
dominated the proceedings from the outset, cutting a swathe through the
prosecution’s case.
His second-in-command was Bram Fischer. Fischer’s position in the trial was
unique. As a member of an eminent Afrikaner family and a distinguished lawyer
in his own right, with clients who included the giant mining companies, he was
accorded the highest respect by the Afrikaner establishment. He was also known
as a staunch friend and ally of the accused, whose home in Beaumont Street was
always open to political dissidents and their families and who worked tirelessly
in the courts on their behalf. His name occasionally cropped up in the
prosecution’s evidence. What was not known, except to a few of the accused,
like Bernstein, Slovo, First and Kotane, was that he was a senior figure in the
underground communist movement. Fischer’s quiet demeanour, his courteous
nature and his boyish, gentle face gave little clue as to the complex life he led. In
court, his manner was equally soft-spoken, almost self-effacing, but he was
invariably effective in achieving the results he wanted.
Other members of the defence team included Sydney Kentridge, Tony
O’Dowd and Vernon Berrangé. Mandela was elected to a twelve-member liaison
committee set up by the accused for consultations with the defence team.
Marshalling them all was Michael Parkington, who was an attorney of
exceptional ability but who also seemed an unlikely choice: a former Royal Air
Force pilot and law lecturer at Cambridge University, he was a renowned
conservative and anti-communist.
From the opening moments of the trial, the defence team adopted an
aggressive strategy. Their first target was the judges sitting on the rostrum. Three
had been appointed: Judge Franz Rumpff, who had been involved in the
Defiance Campaign trial; Judge Joe Ludorf, a former National Party official
famous for his defence of a Nazi supporter, Robey Leibbrandt, tried for treason
during the war; and Judge Alexander Kennedy, a Natal judge who in 1957 had
sentenced twenty-two Africans to death in a mass murder trial arising from
disturbances following a police raid. Rising to his feet, Maisels asked for the
recusal of two of the judges, Rumpff and Ludorf, setting out his reasons why the

accused had cause to doubt that they would receive a fair trial at their hands.
After an adjournment, Ludorf agreed to withdraw, but Rumpff did not. Ludorf ’s
replacement was Judge Simon Bekker.
Their next target was the indictment. The indictment charged that the accused
were guilty of high treason because they had conspired and acted ‘in concert and
with common purpose’ to overthrow the state by violence. It also included two
alternative charges of contravening the Suppression of Communism Act. Maisels
opened with a devastating assault on the indictment lasting nearly ten hours,
arguing that it failed to provide in clear terms exactly what charges the accused
had to meet. Fischer followed with a four-hour attack on the two alternative
counts under the Suppression of Communism Act, making the same point about
the lack of particulars.
The court quashed one of the two alternative charges and ordered the
prosecution to supply additional particulars about the other. The court also
ordered the prosecution to tell each accused how he or she was affected by the
difference between allegations of ‘conspiracy’ and allegations of ‘concert and
common purpose’. The prosecution’s response was to drop the remaining charge
of high treason and to delete the words ‘acting in concert and with common
purpose’, leaving only the allegation of conspiracy. In October, after further
protracted argument, the prosecution abandoned the indictment altogether and
was forced to start anew.
A huge party was held at the Slovos’ house in Roosevelt Park that night to
celebrate the event. Towards midnight the house was surrounded by police, who
swarmed in through the doors and windows, accompanied by journalists from
the Afrikaans press, hoping to find blacks drinking illicit liquor. The blacks were
well versed at this game and not a single one was found with so much as a drop
of liquor in his or her glass. The newspaper Die Burger described the celebration
under the headline ‘Many colours at party’: ‘A party at which whites, natives
and Indians were present was held in a Johannesburg suburb last night. There
were about 200 people present. White and non-white drank, danced, sang and
chatted together. The police appeared at 10.30 p.m. In many of the motor cars
white women rode with natives.’
In November, when a new indictment was issued, the charges against sixtyone of the ninety-one accused were suspended, leaving only thirty defendants to
return to court. This group, the prosecution believed, comprised the most

‘dangerous’. They included Mandela, Sisulu, Robert Resha, Lilian Ngoyi, Helen
Joseph, Kathy Kathrada and Duma Nokwe, a young advocate recently appointed
ANC secretary-general. Those relegated to the ‘second division’ included Joe
Slovo, Ruth First, Rusty Bernstein, Ben Turok, Piet Beyleveld, Moses Kotane,
and Professor Matthews.
Under the new indictment, the focus of the trial was narrowed considerably.
The prosecution’s case was limited to proving the intention of the accused to act
violently. Specifically, what was at issue was whether or not violence was the
policy of the ANC and its allied organisations. At the core of the prosecution’s
case was the Freedom Charter. To achieve its aims, according to the indictment,
‘would necessarily involve the overthrow of the State by violence’.
When the trial reassembled in January 1959, the defence immediately asked
for the new indictment to be dismissed as inadequate. The argument over the
indictment continued for month after month. But this time the court eventually
allowed it to proceed. In May 1959, two and a half years after Mandela and the
other accused were arrested, the minister of justice commented: ‘This trial will
be proceeded with, no matter how many millions of pounds it costs. . . . What
does it matter how long it takes?’

Mandela’s home life, meanwhile, was lived in fragments, as Winnie soon
discovered. Not only were there the relentless demands of the treason trial in
Pretoria and Mandela’s constant struggle to keep his law practice alive in
Johannesburg, but he was constantly involved in political meetings and
discussions. He spent as little time at home with Winnie as he had with Evelyn,
though the enjoyment was far greater. His routine was much the same. He rose
before dawn, went for an early-morning run, welcoming the emptiness of the
streets at that time, and had a quick breakfast of toast and orange juice before
heading for the city. He returned home at night, often in the company of
colleagues. ‘He would come home from court and say, “Darling, I brought my
friends here to taste your lovely cooking,” and he would pitch up with ten people
and we would have one chop in the fridge,’ Winnie recalled. ‘I used to be
reduced to tears and he would laugh and run around looking for a packet of
tinned fish from the local shops.’ Money was always tight and much depended
on Winnie’s earnings as a social worker. Even when they were alone together,
there were frequent interruptions from people seeking advice and help. ‘There

never was any kind of life that I can recall as family life, a young bride’s life,
where you sit with your husband and dream dreams of what life might have
been, even if we knew that it would never be like that.’
Their moments for relaxation were few. Mandela was selective about which
parties he went to: ‘I wouldn’t just go to any party. In fact, I missed most of the
parties that were held in Bram’s house and in Joe Slovo’s house.’ On Sunday
evenings they sometimes went to Uncle Joe’s café in Fordsburg to listen to jazz
musicians like Dollar Brand and Kippie Moeketsi. They would occasionally eat
at Indian restaurants to indulge Mandela’s passion for curry. Mandela also found
time to try to teach Winnie how to drive his car, though, inevitably, it ended in a
row. On Saturday mornings he would take his three children to a cinema in
Fordsburg, leaving them there while he rushed off on another mission.
Life at no. 8115, Orlando West, was nevertheless relatively comfortable. The
house possessed electricity, hot water, an indoor bathroom and a telephone.
Mandela’s small study, partitioned off from the front room and furnished with
three cane chairs, a couch, a bookshelf, a display cabinet and a huge picture of
Lenin, provided a retreat into which he enjoyed settling. To add to the comfort,
Winnie added two rooms, decorated the house in new colours and improved the
small garden.
The interruptions, however, never ended. One night, soon after they were
married, there was a sudden, violent banging on the front door. ‘I was convinced
something terrible must have happened,’ said Winnie. ‘But Nelson, who was
wide awake and out of bed in an instant, told me not to be alarmed—it was only
a police raid. They were banging with their truncheons, flashing bright torches
through the windows, shouting at us to open up and making enough noise to
waken the whole neighbourhood.’
She found the experience repugnant as well as frightening:
There were these coarse Boer policemen thumbing through our personal
belongings, pulling books off shelves, turning drawers of clothing upside down,
reading our letters, rough-handling our possessions and all the time passing
derogatory and derisory remarks about kaffirs. And it was all for nothing. They
couldn’t find anything incriminating. After they had gone we tidied up the mess
and I made coffee before we went back to bed. Nelson warned me I would have
to get used to raids like that.
On 4 February 1959, their first daughter, Zenani, was born in Baragwanath

Hospital. Mandela was away in Pretoria at the time, attending the treason trial.

In August 1959, the real trial began. The accused were able for the first time to
plead not guilty. The chief prosecutor, Oswald Pirow, then set out his case. The
essence of the crime of high treason, he said, was ‘hostile intent’. Such intent
was evident in the demands of the accused for full equality. They knew that to
achieve the demands of the Freedom Charter ‘in their lifetime’ would ‘inevitably
result in a violent collision with the state resulting in its subversion’. The
Congress alliance, he said, was part of an international communist-inspired
movement which was ‘pledged to overthrow by violence all governments in
non-communist countries where sections of the population did not have equal
political and economic rights’. The essential element of hostility was to be found
in all the facts: ‘Insistence upon violence runs through the case in an unbroken
thread.’ The speeches made by the accused ‘bristle with references to the spilling
of blood’.
For the next two months, the prosecution, repeating the tedious process
adopted at the preparatory examination, submitted more than 4,000 documents—
books, pamphlets, magazines, newspapers, letters, bulletins and circulars—
seized during the course of 1,000 police raids. Some were read into the record in
full, some in part, while the accused sat in a half-doze. Once again, Special
Branch detectives gave their evidence and, once again, the defence team pointed
out its inaccuracies and unreliability. In all, 150 police witnesses took the stand.
The accused complained that they could not properly hear much of the
proceedings and used to joke that they could all be hanged ‘for what we didn’t
say, for what we didn’t do—and now for what we can’t hear!’
Once again, the prosecution produced its expert witness on communism,
Professor Andrew Murray, undeterred by the humiliation he had received at the
preparatory examination. Murray spent days analysing speeches and documents
written by defendants, concluding that they were communist-inspired. But under
relentless cross-examination by Maisels, he was eventually obliged to admit that
the accused were motivated not by communism but by grievances over
apartheid.
MAISELS: It is clear, is it not, Professor, to summarize this position, that
the laws of the white man—and I use that not meaning of this
government but of successive South African governments —all these

laws in which the black man has, and has had, no say, are such that for a
Native and, to a somewhat lesser extent, the Indian and the Coloured—
they prescribe, and just listen to this catalogue, where he may live.
Correct?
MURRAY: Yes.
MAISELS: Where he may work?
MURRAY: Yes.
MAISELS: What work he may do?
MURRAY: Yes.
MAISELS: What he is to get paid?
MURRAY: Yes.
MAISELS: What schools he may go to?
MURRAY: Yes.
MAISELS: Where he may travel to in South Africa, in his own country?
MURRAY: Yes.
MAISELS: In these circumstances, do you not think that the Native may
well regard himself as oppressed and exploited by the white man?
MURRAY: I think in certain spheres of life, yes.
Murray finally agreed that the Freedom Charter was not a ‘communist’
document but a natural and understandable reaction to the injustices of white
supremacy. Maisels concluded, ‘We know, of course, as a fact that no single act
of violence was committed over the whole period of this indictment by any [of
the accused], notwithstanding all the grievances and the exploitation of
grievances. You know that, don’t you, Professor?’
‘Yes,’ Murray replied.

There was, however, one piece of evidence not so easy for the defence team to
handle. In January 1960, the prosecution produced a tape-recording of the
speech made by Robert Resha to a group of ‘freedom volunteers’ at a closed
meeting at ANC headquarters in Johannesburg, recorded by a microphone

hidden in the ceiling, thirteen days before the accused were arrested in
December 1956. ‘When you are disciplined and you are told by the organization
not to be violent, you must not be violent,’ Resha had said, but ‘if you are a true
volunteer and you are called upon to be violent, you must be absolutely violent,
you must murder! Murder! That is all.’ Here, said the prosecution, was the true
and secret face of the ANC, unmasked of its public pretence of non-violence.
On 10 March 1960, the prosecution closed its case. On 14 March 1960, the
defence case began. But the defence team had hardly got into their stride when a
sudden upheaval occurred that brought the trial proceedings to a halt and shook
the country to its core.

The name of Sharpeville was to leave an indelible stain on South Africa. What
took place there on 21 March 1960 became a permanent symbol of the brutality
of the apartheid regime. The impact was felt around the world. Never before had
South Africa faced such universal condemnation.
The events of that day centred not on the ANC but on a rival organisation, the
Pan-Africanist Congress, which had been launched the previous year by a
splinter group of dissident Africanists. Its leader, Robert Sobukwe, a thirty-fiveyear-old instructor in African languages at the University of the Witwatersrand,
was convinced that he would gain a mass following by promising African rule.
He rejected the idea of white participation in government, derided
‘multiracialism’ as a device to keep blacks in subjection and denounced
communism and communist influence. He placed great faith in the idea of heroic
leadership. Once the masses were given bold, decisive leadership, he believed,
then the fires of rebellion could soon be lit. With mass support, African rule, he
claimed, could be attained in four years.
Though Mandela had once shared many of the views held by Africanists, he
now regarded that as an adolescent phase in his political life. He dismissed PAC
policies as ‘immature’ and ‘naïve’ and abhorred the crude racist statements made
by its more extreme officials. The freedom struggle, he said, required
compromise and discipline, not empty rhetoric which ignored the complex
realities of South Africa.
Sisulu launched a ferocious public attack on the Africanists, describing their
‘inverted racialism’ as akin to that of the ruling National Party. But while

scorning them as ‘armchair revolutionaries’, Sisulu was nevertheless mindful of
the effect they might have. ‘There are men and women amongst them who
genuinely believe that the salvation of our people lies in a fanatical African
racialism and denunciation of everything that is not African,’ he said. ‘And such
a policy is not without its potential mass appeal.’
From the outset, the PAC, like the ANC, possessed no coherent strategy. It
was poorly organised, short of funds and trained leaders and relied on little more
than the notion that the time was ripe for militant action. But determined to force
the pace and establish the PAC’s credentials as the leading nationalist group,
Sobukwe devised plans for a campaign of mass protest against the pass laws.
The slogans chosen were ‘Leaders in Front’ and ‘No Bail, No Defence, No
Fine’. By swamping the prison system, they would make the pass laws
unworkable. The campaign, he believed, would disrupt the economy and
eventually inspire a popular uprising.
Though few preparations had been made, Sobukwe announced that the
campaign would begin on 21 March. On that date, PAC supporters would
present themselves at police stations for arrest. They would say, ‘We do not have
passes. We will not carry passes again. Millions of our people have been arrested
under pass laws, so you had better arrest us all now.’ They would not return to
work until their demands were met. This would be the first step to freedom in
1963.

The PAC’s campaign that day was largely a failure. In the early morning, after
putting his papers in order and making last-minute arrangements for the welfare
of his family, Sobukwe began the three-mile walk from his home to Orlando
police station, being joined along the way by small groups of PAC supporters. In
all, about 170 volunteers presented themselves for arrest in Johannesburg, an
insignificant number. At Pretoria’s Hercules police station, six men arrived
expecting arrest, only to have their names taken and to be sent away. In Durban,
Port Elizabeth and East London there were no demonstrations at all.
But in Sharpeville, a township in southern Transvaal, the response was much
greater. From early in the morning, PAC pickets were active on the streets,
telling residents they should not go to work. By mid-morning, a crowd of several
thousand Africans had gathered outside the police station. Their mood,
according to most accounts, was relaxed and amiable. But they showed no signs

of dispersing. Police reinforcements were called in. At 1.15 p.m., by which time
nearly 300 police were facing a crowd of some 5,000 Africans, a scuffle broke
out near one of the gates to the police compound. A police officer was pushed
over. The crowd surged forward to see what was happening. According to police
witnesses, stones were thrown at them. No order was given to shoot. No warning
shots were fired. In a moment of panic, the police opened fire indiscriminately
into the crowd. The crowd turned and fled. But still the firing continued. Sixtyseven Africans were killed and 186 wounded. Most were shot in the back.
Later in the day, a similar incident, though on a smaller scale, occurred in
Langa, a black township outside Cape Town occupied mainly by migrant
workers. Confronted by a crowd of 6,000 Africans, police mounted baton
charges to break it up. The crowd retaliated by throwing stones. The police
opened fire, killing two Africans and injuring forty-nine others. That night
rioting broke out in the township. The Langa protest then turned into a major
confrontation with the authorities in Cape Town. A strike which began that day
eventually spread until almost all African workers in Cape Town joined it,
bringing industry to a standstill.

At the treason trial in Pretoria that day, Chief Luthuli was on the witness stand,
giving evidence for the defence about the ANC’s policy of non-violence. His
banning order restricting him to his home district in Natal had been lifted to
enable him to travel to Pretoria, where he was staying at the home of white
friends. But he was suffering from high blood pressure and the state of his health
was a cause of constant concern.
As the full extent of the shooting at Sharpeville and Langa became clear, a
small group consisting of Mandela, Sisulu, Slovo and Duma Nokwe held an allnight meeting in Johannesburg to plan what response to make. There was
considerable anger at the PAC’s precipitate action in launching its campaign
without proper preparation. ‘It was a blatant case of opportunism,’ said Mandela.
‘Their actions were motivated more by a desire to eclipse the ANC than to defeat
the enemy.’ In just one day, the PAC, hitherto an insignificant splinter group,
had captured national and international attention. Yet it had neither the means
nor the ability to make any further moves, or manage the surge of black anger
that now followed.
The leadership of the crisis thus fell to the ANC. Mandela’s group decided to

call for a national stay-away on 28 March, to mark it as a day of mourning and to
initiate a campaign of pass-burning. Duma Nokwe was sent to Pretoria to gain
Luthuli’s approval. On 26 March, Luthuli duly announced a day of mourning on
28 March and publicly burned his pass, calling on others to do the same.
Mandela burned his pass in Orlando before a crowd of press photographers and
several hundred onlookers. The response to the strike call two days later in many
large towns was overwhelming. In demonstrations across the country, thousands
of Africans burned their pass books. Violence broke out in Johannesburg’s black
suburbs. In Langa, police brutality in trying to break the week-long strike
provoked a mass march by some 30,000 Africans into the centre of Cape Town.
Many blacks believed that they were on the verge of liberation.
To much of the white population, it seemed that South Africa had indeed
reached a critical turning point. The sight of massed ranks of blacks marching on
the centre of a white city suggested that black patience had finally snapped. As
fear and alarm about the defiant mood of the black population spread, whites
rushed to gunshops in the Transvaal and in Cape Town, clearing out their stocks.
House prices and the stock market slumped. Foreign embassies were inundated
with inquiries about immigration. Liberal whites were convinced that the
government would now have no alternative but to change its policies.
An outburst of international protest against the Sharpeville killings added to
the atmosphere of crisis. Photographs of the shooting, published by newspapers
around the world, made a sharp impact on millions of people who saw them. In
the following days, as reports of demonstrations, marches and police brutality
accumulated, the impression gained abroad was of an evil regime in the throes of
crisis so severe that it might not survive. Western attitudes towards South Africa
became markedly more hostile. A United Nations Security Council resolution
blamed South Africa’s racial policies for causing ‘international friction’. In a
General Assembly debate, British delegates, who had previously stuck to the
argument that South Africa’s racial policies were its own internal affair, now
openly attacked apartheid. The United States added its own condemnation. For
the first time, the General Assembly approved a resolution not just expressing
abhorrence of South African policies but asking for action to be taken. Foreign
investors, meanwhile, fearing imminent upheaval, took their own action. A sharp
outflow of capital hit the value of the currency and halved its foreign exchange
reserves.
To all criticism, both domestic and foreign, Verwoerd remained impervious.

Nothing was to shake his faith in apartheid. The British prime minister, Harold
Macmillan, who paid a visit to South Africa shortly before Sharpeville in
February 1960, held long private discussions with Verwoerd, endeavouring to
explain the consequences of ‘the wind of change’ blowing through Africa but
making no headway. As he recalled in his memoirs:
It was only during these days that I began to realize to the full extent the degree
of obstinacy, amounting really to fanaticism, which Dr Verwoerd brought to the
consideration of his policies. . . . I had the unusual experience of soon noticing
that nothing one could say or put forward would have the smallest effect upon
the views of this determined man.
Far from being willing to make concessions, Verwoerd ordered a massive
crackdown on his opponents. In parliament on 28 March, the government
introduced new security legislation, the Unlawful Organizations Act,
empowering it to proscribe the ANC, the PAC and any other organisations
attempting to further their aims. Government spokesmen claimed that the
nationalist parties were determined on the violent overthrow of the government.
‘Their aim,’ said the minister of justice, François Erasmus, on 29 March, ‘is to
bring to its knees any white government in South Africa which stands for white
supremacy and for white leadership. . . . [They] do not want peace and order . . .
what they want is our country.’ Armed with this new legislation, said Erasmus,
the government would be able to protect innocent Africans and bring an end to
the ANC-PAC ‘reign of terror’.
On 30 March, the government declared a state of emergency and began to
round up hundreds of anti-apartheid dissidents. Officials were empowered to
arrest suspects without warrants and to detain them indefinitely. Large-scale
police raids were conducted in one township after another. In Langa, police units
threw a cordon around the township, cut off water and electricity supplies, then
staged house-to-house raids, dragging men and women on to the streets and
assaulting them with clubs and whips. Four days of continuous brutality
eventually broke the strike.
The knock on Mandela’s door at no. 8115, Orlando West, came at 1.30 in the
morning on 30 March. A posse of armed Special Branch policemen ransacked
the house, searching for papers and confiscating everything they found,
including transcripts Mandela had recently made of his mother’s recollections of
family history which he was never to see again. The police possessed no warrant

for his arrest, gave him no opportunity to contact a lawyer and refused to tell
Winnie where he was being taken. ‘I simply nodded at Winnie; it was no time
for words of comfort.’
At Newlands police station, close to the old site of Sophiatown, Mandela
found a number of colleagues also under arrest, including Sisulu, Resha and
Nokwe. A group of about forty men in all were packed into a small, open yard
and left standing for the rest of the night without food or blankets. In the
morning they were moved into a small cell where the only toilet facility was a
single drainage hole in the floor which soon became blocked. The stench was
overpowering. Still they were given no food or water.
When the cell door was next opened, the prisoners surged through it into an
adjacent courtyard and refused to move until they had been fed. The station
commander, called to the scene, berated Mandela for standing with his hands in
his pockets. At 3 p.m., food finally arrived. At 6 p.m., prisoners were given
sleeping mats and blankets encrusted with dried vomit and ridden with lice, the
stench of which was so foul that the prisoners retched in disgust.
The next morning, when the station commander accused him of being
‘cheeky’, Mandela nearly came to blows with him. ‘I was still raving mad with
temper when in came Special Branch detective Sergeant Helberg and says,
“Hello, Nelson!” in a pleasant way. “I am not Nelson to you, I am Mr Mandela!”
I shouted.’ By this time tempers all round were running high. Before matters
degenerated further, Mandela was told he was to be taken to Pretoria to attend
the treason trial. ‘Fortunately we were told to get into a truck,’ he said.
One week later, the ANC and the PAC were declared illegal organisations. As
the government sought to crush all resistance, wave after wave of arrests took
place. Few dissidents escaped the dragnet. Oliver Tambo was driven across the
border into Bechuanaland (later Botswana) to establish external links for the
ANC. The Indian communist leader, Yusuf Dadoo, also went into exile. Ruth
First, disguised in a red wig, escaped with her children to Swaziland. A small
Communist Party committee, including Michael Harmel, Moses Kotane and Ben
Turok, continued to operate underground in Johannesburg, moving from one
hide-out to another, evading arrest. But scores of other prominent activists, even
Liberal Party members, were incarcerated. The PAC’s headquarters in
Johannesburg were left in the hands of a student who previously had been
working as an office manager. By the beginning of May, the total number of

arrests had reached more than 18,000.
But for the shooting at Sharpeville, the day might have marked no more than
another abortive episode in the annals of African protest. The poor response to
the PAC’s call for mass civil disobedience showed how few were ready to seek
the confrontation with white power that Sobukwe told them would result in the
government’s downfall. Not only did Sobukwe misjudge popular reaction to his
campaign; he also entirely underestimated the government’s real strength and its
powers of repression. Though the government was pitched into a political crisis
of unprecedented magnitude, it was never in danger of losing control.
But this was not the conclusion that prominent opponents of the government
reached. They saw the Sharpeville crisis, the dramatic fall it produced in white
confidence and the torrent of condemnation emanating from around the world as
evidence of a regime that was vulnerable at home and abroad. ‘The type of
despotism we still endure in the Union in this age,’ wrote Michael Harmel, the
leading theoretician of the Congress alliance, ‘is a kind of freak, an anachronism
which cannot hope much longer to survive.’ With so few avenues left open for
political action, Congress activists now began to think in terms of revolutionary
strategy to hasten its end.

In the wake of the Sharpeville shooting, the treason trial acquired a new
significance. The government maintained that the demonstrations and disorder
were all part of a communist-inspired conspiracy to overthrow the state with
which the trial was directly linked, even though the indictment related to events
before December 1956. The accused took a simpler view of the matter. ‘This
trial,’ said Duma Nokwe, ‘is out of date.’
On the day that the state of emergency was declared, the proceedings opened
in some confusion. Mandela and seventeen other accused were absent. Those
who did attend had yet to be arrested. Also missing from the witness box was
Chief Luthuli, who had been in the middle of giving his evidence. When Judge
Rumpff asked for an explanation for his absence, he was told that Luthuli had
been arrested in the early hours of the morning. Rumpff retorted irritably that he
did not see why the state of emergency should stand in the way of the trial and
ordered Luthuli to be brought to court.
When Luthuli duly appeared, in frail health, it transpired that he had been

assaulted by a white policeman in Pretoria Central police station. ‘As we were
being marched to our cells in the dim light of early morning,’ he recalled, ‘I was
obliged to slow down to negotiate a flight of steps. I was instantly slapped hard
across the face from behind. I stooped to gather my hat, and I was hit again.’ He
added, ‘I was angered, but not surprised. Among Africans, the South African
police have long been notorious for this sort of thing.’
The trial soon came to a standstill. The following day, with Mandela and the
missing accused now present, Maisels asked the court to adjourn on the grounds
that the government, by declaring a state of emergency, had effectively made a
judgement on the case. Moreover, defence witnesses would be fearful of giving
testimony which might now lead to their prosecution under the terms of the
emergency regulations. He questioned the propriety of continuing with the trial.
The court was adjourned until 26 April while the judges considered the matter.
Outside the court, as the accused milled about being rearrested, one of them,
Wilton Mkwayi, became separated from the others. When he tried to rejoin
them, a policeman ordered him to leave. When he pointed out he was one of the
accused, he was called a liar, threatened with arrest and once again ordered to
leave. Mkwayi shrugged his shoulders, walked away and went underground.
Meanwhile, the twenty-nine accused were taken to different prisons in Pretoria.
Mandela’s new home, for the next five months, was Pretoria Local. The
conditions there were initially as bad as those at Newlands. The prisoners were
crammed five to a cell six feet by twelve feet, with a single toilet bucket that was
emptied twice a day. The air was foul, the blankets and mats were ridden with
lice and bugs and the food, cold and stale, was doled out on rusty dishes. For the
first ten days, the prisoners were allowed no exercise; nor did they get a chance
to shower.
Mandela became their spokesman, engaged in a constant struggle for
improvements. When he first asked for a separate room so that the accused could
read and study trial documents in quiet, a senior prison officer retorted,
‘Government regulations don’t require you prisoners to read books.’ But slowly,
he gained concessions. The cells were painted and fumigated, new blankets and
toilet buckets were issued, exercise periods were allowed and a large cell was
provided for consultations and legal books. Over the issue of food, Mandela took
the complaint to the court. ‘Speaking with the greatest moderation,’ he said,
addressing Judge Rumpff, ‘it is no exaggeration to say that the food which is

furnished to us in jail, My Lord, with due respect, is completely unfit for human
consumption.’ The standard of food duly improved.
When the trial resumed on 26 April, the judges, accepting assurances from the
minister of justice of an indemnity for the witnesses, decided that the case could
proceed. The accused, however, had agreed on other tactics. To make clear their
protest against the conditions under which the trial was being held during the
state of emergency, Nokwe announced that they would dispense with their
defence law - yers. Maisels duly rose to address the court: ‘We have no further
mandate and we will consequently not trouble Your Lordships any further.’ All
the defence lawyers then walked out. For a moment, the court seemed stunned.
But Judge Rumpff soon carried on as though nothing had happened. The
accused, henceforth, were left to conduct their own defence, with Nokwe acting
as advocate and Mandela as attorney.
Luthuli returned to the witness box, looking tired and weary but nevertheless
resolute under cross-examination. Because of his poor health, his appearance
was limited to two hours a day. After giving testimony, he was taken back each
time to the prison hospital, where he lived. His ordeal did not stop there,
however, as he was himself charged on 104 counts for burning his pass and
inciting others to do the same and faced his own trial. At the treason trial, Judge
Rumpff treated him with great consideration, anxious to avoid any undue strain,
but the prosecutors gave him no quarter, attacking his honesty and integrity. In
all, he appeared in court on twenty-six days and did not finally step down from
the witness box until June.
Luthuli spoke of his belief that moral persuasion and economic pressure
would eventually lead whites to change their policies. There still remained, he
said, goodwill towards the whites, though it was diminishing with each year that
passed. He emphasised the ANC’s policy of non-violence, pointing out that it
could be changed only at a national conference. ‘I have heard no suggestion to
change that policy, not a whisper,’ he said. He would have opposed such a
suggestion, firstly on personal grounds and secondly because it would be
contrary to the interests of the liberation movement: ‘It is not a practical thing.’
As the trial dragged on, week after week, Mandela felt keenly his separation
from Winnie, who was pregnant again, and from Zenani, then a year old. He
made the most of what few visits they were allowed to make to see him, holding
and kissing Zenani if the guards permitted him to do so, but the moments of their

departure were always hard to bear. ‘As Winnie was saying goodbye, and the
guards were ushering them out,’ he wrote, ‘Zeni would often motion for me to
come with them, and I could see from her small puzzled face that she did not
understand why I could not.’
Mandela also managed to arrange a few illicit meetings with Winnie during
visits to Johannesburg he was permitted to make at weekends to help wind up
the affairs of Mandela and Tambo. Accompanied by a Special Branch detective,
he would leave Pretoria once the court proceedings had ended, work in his office
during the day and spend his nights in a Marshall Square police cell, before
returning to Pretoria Local on Sunday. The Special Branch detective, an
accommodating man, allowed him to buy items from a nearby café on his own
and discreetly turned away when Winnie made an appearance. ‘We had a kind of
gentleman’s code between us: I would not escape and thereby get him into
trouble, while he permitted me a degree of freedom.’
On 3 August, with defence lawyers back in court as a result of a relaxation of
the emergency regulations, Mandela finally took the witness stand. Winnie was
present to watch him. Under the guidance of Sydney Kentridge, he was asked to
explain at length about the history of the ANC and its policies, about the Youth
League, the Defiance Campaign, the ‘M’ Plan, the Congress of the People and
the Freedom Charter. He was also questioned about his views on communism,
capitalism and imperialism, about speeches he had given, articles he had written
and books found in his possession. Kentridge’s aim was to concentrate on issues
that he knew the prosecutors would subsequently try to exploit in their efforts to
establish the involvement of the ANC in violence and hence to pre-empt them.
Once Mandela had stated his case, the burden would be on the prosecution to
prove otherwise. His evidence took up 441 pages of the official record.
Kentridge began by examining Mandela on the Youth League, drawing
attention to its anti-communist stand to demonstrate that the ANC’s outlook was
rooted not in communism but in a broader spectrum of views. Mandela related
his own reasons for supporting a resolution to expel communists from the ANC:
. . . from the little knowledge I had at the time about communists I
regarded them as people who were hostile to African nationalism, which
I regarded as being extremely important from the point of view of
mobilizing the African people as such. I was also under the view, My
Lord, that the communists opposed organizations like the ANC and that

they would work to subvert both its policies and its campaigns.
He went on to explain his change of attitude: ‘I came to work with them and I
discovered that the views I held about communists in the ANC were not
justified, both by the outlook and attitude of those persons with whom I worked,
as well as by their devotion and loyalty to the policy of the ANC.’ Asked if he
ever became a communist, he said, ‘I don’t know if I did become a communist.
If by communist you mean a member of the Communist Party and a person who
believes in the theory of Marx, Engels, Lenin and Stalin and who adheres strictly
to the discipline of the party, I did not become a communist.’
Mandela was in the course of explaining the impact of the Defiance Campaign
when Judge Bekker intervened, asking, ‘Well, as a matter of fact, isn’t your
freedom a direct threat to the Europeans?’ Mandela replied:
No, it is not a direct threat to the Europeans, as Europeans. We are not antiwhite; we are against white supremacy and in struggling against white
supremacy we have the support of some sections of the European population. . .
As a matter of fact, My Lord, I think that we in the Congress must take credit for
the fact that there is a movement in this country for racial peace. I think in
numerous speeches which have been made by leading members of the ANC,
some of which have been placed before this court, it is quite clear that the
Congress has consistently preached a policy of racial harmony and we have
condemned racialism no matter by whom it is professed.
Mandela denied that the Freedom Charter meant eliminating private
enterprise.
MANDELA: Apart from those industries [mines and banks] the Freedom
Charter does not call for socialism in this country.
KENTRIDGE: Have you made any study of socialism?
MANDELA: I have read some books . . . pro and against.
KENTRIDGE: And are you interested in socialism?
MANDELA: I am very much attracted to it.
KENTRIDGE: Have you read anything about the system in the Soviet
Union?
MANDELA: Very little, My Lords, but I have.

KENTRIDGE: Do you find that system interesting?
MANDELA: I find it very interesting.
KENTRIDGE: As far as you know what the situation is, is there anything
about the Soviet Union that impresses you?
MANDELA: Yes. I am impressed by the entire absence of the colour bar.
. . Secondly, I am impressed by the fact that the Soviet Union has no
colonies in Africa and as far as I know in any other part of the world. I
am also impressed by the stand which the Soviet Union has taken on the
question of imperialism . . .
KENTRIDGE: Do you hope to introduce the system in the Soviet Union
in South Africa?
MANDELA: No, My Lords. All that impresses me is the ideal of a
socialist society, but I have no intention of copying anything that has
been done in any other country.
Mandela was asked by Kentridge to explain what he meant when, in an article
in Liberation, he described the Freedom Charter as ‘a revolutionary document’
which envisaged changes that could not be won ‘without breaking up the
economic and political set-up of present South Africa’. In reply, Mandela said,
‘It doesn’t mean that we would do away with parliamentary institutions; they
would remain, but the composition would be so radically different that it would
be appropriate to say that the political structure has been broken up.’
Judge Bekker asked him to expand on this point.
I accept that the authorities will not of their own free will legislate that
we should be given these rights. There will have to be a tremendous
amount of pressure put up by the Congress movement. . . . We will have
to launch defiance campaigns, stay-at-homes, a combination of these, and
it will be because of that pressure that we expect the government either to
give in to our demands and to say that we have come to the conclusion
that we can no longer continue with the present set-up. We will repeal all
laws which discriminate against non-Europeans. Either that, or the voters
would say that we can’t have this mass defiance of the laws, we can’t
have this situation of uncertainty and insecurity. We call upon the
government to resign, and to make way for a government which is going
to meet the demands. That is what I have in mind, My Lords, when I say

that these demands cannot be attained without breaking up the political
and economic set-up in the country. I do visualize the exertion of
pressure on a tremen - dous scale.
In their cross-examination of Mandela, the prosecutors tried time and again to
get him to confess on the matter of violence. Phrases like ‘revolutionary
eruption’, ‘seizure of power’ and ‘people’s democracy’, which he had used in
articles and speeches and which other activists had also used, were turned over
again and again in the search for violent meaning. The nub of the prosecutor’s
attack was that in order to achieve the aims of the Freedom Charter the ANC
would have to resort to the violent overthrow of the government.
MANDELA: My own view is that it is not necessary in this country to
employ force and violence in order to bring about either the demands set
out in the Freedom Charter, or even to bring about socialism. I don’t
think it’s necessary at all to do so. . . .
PROSECUTOR: Do you think it’s possible to achieve a transformation
to a communist state in this country peacefully?
MANDELA: You keep on talking about a communist state; I talk about a
socialist state . . .
PROSECUTOR: Is there a possibility that the application of pressure by
the Congress movement might result in strong counterpressure by the
government, the ruling class, and that there would be violence?
MANDELA: That possibility is always there . . . but we believe that our
policy will bring down the government in spite of its intentions. . . . In
this country there is a large body of voters who are hostile to the policy
of the government, and we believe that because of pressure, both
externally and internally . . . the government will be brought to realize
that its policy is futile.
Mandela explained that the kind of state he envisaged could not be achieved
by ‘small concessions’ from the government, like having whites representing
black interests in parliament: ‘You will create that state if the vote is extended to
all sections of the population.’
PROSECUTOR: Do you think that your people’s democracy could be
achieved by a process of gradual reforms? Suppose, as a result of
pressure, the ruling class were to agree next month to a qualified

franchise for the Africans, an educational test perhaps—not a stringent
one—and next year, as a result of further pressure, a more important
concession is made in1962, and so on over a period of ten or twenty
years—do you think that the people’s democracy could be achieved in
that fashion?
MANDELA: . . . In my own view I would say, ‘Yes, let us talk,’ and the
government would say, ‘We think that the Europeans at present are not
ready for a type of government where there might be domination by nonEuropeans. We think we should give you sixty seats. The African
population to elect sixty Africans to represent them in Parliament. We
will leave the matter over for five years and we will review it at the end
of five years.’ In my view, that would be a victory, My Lords; we would
have taken a significant step towards the attainment of universal adult
suffrage for Africans, and we would then for the five years say, we will
suspend civil disobedience; we won’t have any stay-at-homes, and we
will then devote the intervening period for the purposes of educating the
country, the Europeans, to see that these changes can be brought about
and that it would bring about better racial understanding, better harmony
in the country. I’d say we should accept it, but, of course, I would not
abandon the demands for the extension of the franchise to all Africans.
That’s how I see it, My Lords.
Then, at the end of the five-year period, we will have discussions, and
if the government says, ‘We will give you again forty more seats,’ I
might say that that is quite sufficient. Let’s accept it, and still demand
that the franchise should be extended, but for the agreed period we
should suspend civil disobedience, no stay-at-homes. In that way we
would eventually be able to get everything we want; we shall have our
people’s democracy, My Lords . . .
JUDGE KENNEDY: Mandela, assuming you were wrong in your
beliefs, do you visualize any future action on behalf of the government,
by the government? Because I think the evidence suggests that you could
not expect the government to soften in its views. Have you any future
plans in that event?
MANDELA: No, My Lords, I don’t think that the Congress has ever
believed that its policy of pressure would ultimately fail. The Congress,

of course, does not expect that one single push to coerce the government
to change its policy will succeed; the Congress expects that over a
period, as a result of a repetition of these pressures, together with world
opinion, that the government, notwithstanding its attitude of ruling
Africans with an iron hand, that notwithstanding that, the methods which
we are using will bring about a realization of our aspirations.
Mandela said the ANC believed that it would be possible to achieve its aims
through numerical superiority, without resorting to violence.
We had in mind that in the foreseeable future it will be possible for us to
achieve these demands, and we worked on the basis that Europeans
themselves, in spite of the wall of prejudice and hostility which we
encountered, that they can never remain indifferent indefinitely to our
demands, because we are hitting them in the stomach with our policy of
economic pressure. It is a method which is well organized. The
Europeans dare not look at it with indifference. They would have to
respond to it and, indeed, My Lords, they are responding to it.
Mandela’s performance under cross-examination allowed the prosecution to
make no headway in trying to expose the ANC on the question of violence. But
there remained the prosecution’s key piece of evidence, the tape-recording of
Robert Resha addressing volunteers in ANC headquarters. ‘A volunteer is a
person who is disciplined,’ he had said. ‘This is the key of the volunteer—
discipline. When you are disciplined and you are told by the organization not to
be violent, you must not be violent. If you are a true volunteer and you are called
upon to be violent, you must be absolutely violent, you must murder! Murder!
That is all!’
Both Luthuli and Mandela were asked to comment on Resha’s remarks.
Luthuli replied that if a general in the army was at fault, it did not imply he
represented a whole policy. ‘If Resha as a general departs, he departs as Resha.
It has nothing to do with the policy of the African National Congress, definitely.’
Mandela’s view was similarly straightforward.
MANDELA: I understand it to mean that when a volunteer is called upon
to perform a certain task, he must perform that task, but obviously if that
task is contrary to the policy of Congress, we don’t expect any volunteer
to carry out that task.
PROSECUTOR: As far as you are concerned, there is nothing in that

speech which you find inconsistent with the policy of the ANC?
MANDELA: If the speech advocates violence, of course it is totally
contrary to the policy of Congress.
Resha himself spent days in the witness box under examination and crossexamination. Asked by Bram Fischer how he could reconcile his speech with
ANC policy, he replied simply, ‘The example I used in that speech cannot be
reconciled with the policy of the African National Congress.’
Professor Matthews, the concluding witness for the defence, was also asked
about Resha’s speech. ‘Just words,’ said the professor. ‘You know,’ said the
prosecutor, Gustav Hoexter, ‘I think you’re right.’

In the four years that the treason trial had lasted, Mandela had grown
considerably in stature. His skill in handling the defence of the accused, along
with Duma Nokwe, when their lawyers withdrew from the proceedings, added to
his standing as a lawyer. He appeared confident and at ease in the witness box,
holding his own against the attack of the prosecutors, displaying a depth of
knowledge and understanding which even they found impressive. As the
spokesman for the prisoners in Pretoria, he had shown equal determination in
fighting the smaller battles against white authority. He responded instinctively to
challenge. When confronted with difficulties, he tackled them undaunted, giving
a lead to others, always mindful of the need to keep up their spirits. He had
acquired a wider sense of responsibility since his days as a gadfly. Prominent
white activists who had once considered him a ‘lightweight’ came to regard him
as ‘a man ripe for the moment’. His old mentor, Walter Sisulu, the anchor of the
ANC throughout the 1950s, remained as great an influence on him as before.
Mandela’s first reflex in considering many a problem was to ask, ‘What does
Walter think?’ According to Rusty Bernstein, ‘Mandela had good judgement as
an arbitrator and a conciliator. He was not so good on individual judgements, but
usually he consulted and listened, and usually he consulted Walter.’
That habit would continue for years to come, but by 1960 Mandela had
emerged as a leader in his own right.

The state of emergency was lifted on 31 August 1960, enabling Mandela to go

home for the first time in five months. ‘After one has been in prison,’ he wrote,
‘it is the small things that one appreciates: being able to take a walk whenever
one wants, going into a shop and buying a newspaper, speaking or choosing to
remain silent. The simple act of being able to control one’s person.’
The problem remained about what to do next. In prison there had been much
talk about the use of violence. The banning of the ANC had closed off the
possibility of conventional opposition. Agitation for action against the
government was growing among youth groups. The ANC’s leaders, however,
considered the use of violence to be neither a feasible nor a desirable course of
action, on both practical and political grounds. A major concern was the position
of Luthuli, who would never have countenanced the idea. But equally important
was the ANC’s continuing hope that mass action might still shake the
government. As Mandela had explained in his testimony at the treason trial, the
nationalists believed that they could mount sufficient ‘pressure’ on the
government and on the economy to cause a change of mind among the white
population. Though there was scant evidence to support it, they clung to the
notion that such a change was already under way. What was decided, therefore,
at a secret meeting of the ANC’s national executive in September was to
reorganise the ANC on an underground basis, resurrecting the old ‘M’ Plan. A
new working committee in Johannesburg was given responsibility for the task; it
included Mandela, Sisulu, Nokwe, Marks and Kotane.
While the ANC uneasily pondered its next moves, the communists had no
such qualms. Nurtured on theories of revolutionary violence, they read from the
trend of events in South Africa a new revolutionary potential and leapt publicly
into the fray. On 14 July 1960, after seven years of secret underground activity,
the Communist Party distributed leaflets announcing its existence and calling on
workers to rally in the struggle against the government. From his hide-outs in
Johannesburg, moving between ten different houses in five months, Harmel
produced a paper arguing that it was necessary to abandon non-violence as the
sole means of struggle and move to armed methods. Harmel’s view was, ‘No
further progress is possible along the traditional paths or by adhering strictly to
the non-violence slogan in a situation where every democratic demand or
criticism is treated as an act of rebellion or treason.’ Such was the respect in
which Harmel was held that the idea gained immediate credibility. Some
communists, like Ben Turok, regarded him as the ‘Lenin of the movement’.
Among those influenced by Harmel was Bram Fischer. Fischer’s role in the

resistance was becoming ever more extraordinary. During the state of
emergency, his wife, Molly, was imprisoned, leaving him on his own to care for
his children, one of whom, Paul, suffered from permanent poor health and
sometimes hovered close to death. At the treason trial, meanwhile, Fischer’s
responsibilities included handling Robert Resha, the most difficult of all the
accused. At the same time, not only was he providing an important link between
the accused and the outside world, even managing to smuggle a radio into
Pretoria Central for them, but he was also one of the principal links between the
underground party committee, led by Harmel and Kotane, and the outside world,
having to avoid police surveillance all the while. On top of all this, he was
constantly preoccupied with helping the wives and families of detainees. ‘During
the emergency,’ recalled Bernstein, ‘Bram was undertaking everyone else’s
problems.’
Fischer became a reluctant convert to the idea of armed struggle. He had
doubts as to whether an underground movement could mount a campaign of
violence as well as survive the repression that would inevitably follow. He was
also anxious about taking steps from which there could be no retreat. But
ultimately he conceded that every other alternative had been tried, to no avail.
Other leading communists, notably Kotane, were also sceptical. Kotane was
worried that the resort to violence would undermine the ability of an
underground movement to continue with non-violent political work.
The enthusiasts, however, carried the day. They saw themselves in the
tradition of Marxist-Leninist revolutionaries determined to strike against a
brutal, decaying regime. The armed struggle, they believed, would receive
massive support from the oppressed African population. At the forefront of this
group was Joe Slovo, a hardline Stalinist with romantic notions about
revolutionary warfare. At a secret meeting in December 1960 at a private house
in Victoria, a white suburb of Johannesburg, the communists took the decision to
establish an armed force consisting of small squads of saboteurs as a prelude to
engaging in guerrilla warfare.
Mandela was fully informed of these developments. But though he was as
keen as the communists to retaliate against the government, he acknowledged
that the ANC, with its broad constituency of interests, was in no position to
follow suit. Neither was he himself able to offer any leadership on the matter.
For not only was he still preoccupied with the treason trial in Pretoria but he was
also subject to a banning order restricting his movements.

His time was also taken up with endeavours to earn a living as a lawyer.
Though the firm of Mandela and Tambo had closed down, Mandela was
operating on a freelance basis from Kholvad House in the flat in which Ismail
Meer had once lived but which had since been taken over by Kathy Kathrada.
He was not short of clients. The lounge and the passage outside the flat were
often crammed with clients.
All this left Mandela with little enough time to enjoy any kind of family life.
Winnie, heavily pregnant, rarely saw him. Even on the birth of their second
daughter, Zindziswa, in December 1960, Mandela was diverted from attending
by another small crisis. Learning that his son, Makgatho, was ill in the Transkei,
where he attended school, Mandela drove through the night to reach him,
violating his banning order, bringing him back to Johannesburg for surgery, only
to find he had missed the birth.
The treason trial, meanwhile, lumbered on into its concluding stages. The
prosecution’s closing argument, begun on 7 November 1960, finally ended, after
several adjournments, on 6 March 1961. The defence’s closing argument
followed, with Maisels beginning by refuting all charges of violence. ‘We admit
that there is a question of non-cooperation and passive resistance,’ he said. ‘We
shall say quite frankly that if non-cooperation and passive resistance constitute
high treason, then we are guilty. But these are plainly not encompassed in the
law of treason.’
The defence lawyers had expected their closing argument to take up to three
months, so complex were many of the issues involved. But after only two weeks,
while Bram Fischer was engaged in a lengthy analysis of ANC policies, the
judges made a series of interruptions directing him to focus on specific issues.
Finally, on 23 March, in a further dramatic intervention, they adjourned the court
until 29 March to consider whether they could forgo hearing certain aspects of
the defence argument, in the interests of shortening the trial. The clear
implication was that they had already made up their minds in favour of acquittal.
This sudden and unexpected turn of events had an immediate impact on
Mandela’s decisions about his future. His banning order, in place for five years,
was due to expire two days hence, on 25 March. He had planned to use the
opportunity to travel to Pietermaritzburg at the weekend to address a conference
of Congress supporters, called the ‘All-in Conference’, before returning to
Pretoria to resume his place at the treason trial. The purpose of this conference

was to issue demands for a national convention for all South Africans to draw up
a non-racial constitution.
At a hastily convened meeting of the ANC’s working committee in
Johannesburg, it was agreed that if on 29 March the accused were acquitted,
Mandela should immediately go underground to organise support for the
national convention, avoiding any further restrictions on him the government
might seek to impose and surfacing in public on carefully planned occasions to
achieve a maximum of publicity: ‘It was not a proposal that came as a surprise to
me, nor was it one I particularly relished, but it was something I knew I had to
do.’
Accompanied by Sisulu, Nokwe and one of his new lieutenants, Joe Modise, a
tough street-fighter from Alexandra, Mandela went to his house in Orlando to
tell Winnie what would now happen. They had never previously discussed the
possibility that he might leave home; nor was she even aware that his banning
order was due to expire, or that he planned to travel to Pietermaritzburg that
weekend. Mandela never confided in Winnie. She was simply told what to do.
She recalled:
They all stood outside in the driveway of the garage and he sent a child to call
me. On my arrival he simply said, ‘Darling, just pack some of my clothes in a
suitcase with my toiletries. I will be going away for a long time. You’re not to
worry, my friends here will look after you. They’ll give you news of me from
time to time. Look well after the children. I know you’ll have the strength and
courage to do so without me. I know you are capable of that.’
I quickly packed his clothes. I was in tears but I had been conditioned in the
few months we had together not to ask any questions. I only wished him well
before we parted and asked that the gods of Africa take care of him wherever he
would be, and that he would have a chance to spare the children and me a few
minutes sometime. He scolded me for reminding him of his duties.
Mandela did not enter the house. By the time Winnie had finished packing his
bag, he had gone. An hour later, Joe Modise returned to collect it.
Mandela’s sudden appearance at the All-in Conference in an Indian hall in
Pietermaritzburg on 25 March had an electrifying effect on the delegates. He had
not been seen on a public platform since 1952. He was duly elected to head a
National Action Council charged with the task of organising the campaign for a
national convention. The first phase of the campaign was to take the form of a

three-day national stay-away, to be carried out if the government failed to
respond by 31 May to the demand for a national convention, as everyone
expected it to do. Some 1,400 delegates joined enthusiastically in the
proceedings, not knowing that this was to be the last large conference organised
by African leaders in South Africa for many years. It was also Mandela’s last
public appearance. Having made a successful impact, he drove back to Pretoria
to hear the verdict of the treason trial.

It took Judge Rumpff forty minutes in the Old Synagogue in Pretoria on 29
March 1961 to deliver the court’s findings. He reviewed a number of
conclusions which the three judges had reached unanimously. The court found,
he said, that the ANC and its allies had been working ‘to replace the present
form of state with a radically and fundamentally different form of state’; that the
Programme of Action ‘envisaged the use of illegal means’ and that illegal means
were used during the Defiance Campaign; that some ANC leaders ‘made
themselves guilty of sporadic speeches of violence which in our opinion
amounted to an incitement to violence’; that ‘a strong left-wing tendency
manifested itself’in the ANC during the indictment period between 1952 and
1956; and that the ANC frequently revealed ‘anti-imperialist, anti-West and proSoviet’ attitudes.
But although there had been some violent speeches by ANC members—‘a
minute percentage of the total number of speeches made’—there was no proof of
an ANC policy of violent revolution. There was also no proof that the ANC was
a communist organisation or that it had been infiltrated by communists, or that
the Freedom Charter envisaged a communist state.
‘The cornerstone of the case’, said Rumpff, was the ANC’s alleged policy of
incitement to violence. The prosecution’s failure to prove this policy ‘inevitably
meant a collapse of the whole case’:
On all the evidence presented to this court and on our findings of fact, it is
impossible for this court to come to the conclusion that the African National
Congress had acquired or adopted a policy to overthrow the state by violence,
that is, in the sense that the masses had to be prepared or conditioned to commit
direct acts of violence against the state.
In the crowded courtroom, there was not a movement, not a murmur, as

Rumpff delivered his final words: ‘The accused are accordingly found not guilty
and are discharged.’
Once the judges in their scarlet robes had filed out, the spectators’ gallery
erupted in cheers and the accused hugged one another and waved to the
onlookers. In the courtyard outside, Mandela embraced Winnie. As the accused
celebrated their release amid a throng of friends and family, laughing, weeping
and singing, Maisels and Fischer were hoisted high above their shoulders.
Each of the three judges at the treason trial handed down separate reasons for
the conclusions they reached in their joint judgement. In his reasons for
judgement, which ran to 168 pages, Rumpff referred to the evidence given both
by Luthuli and by Mandela to support his findings that communism had not been
adopted by the ANC. In the case of Luthuli, it was because of his openly anticommunist Christian stance; in the case of Mandela, it was because in 1956 he
‘foresaw a non-European bourgeois advance under the Freedom Charter’.
Rumpff was not convinced, he said, ‘that the African National Congress had
acquired a policy which caused it to cross the dividing line between noncommunism and communism in the spectrum of socialist belief’.
Bekker, giving his reasons for judgement, took issue with the prosecution’s
contention that the accused planned to set up a communist system of government
in South Africa: ‘I share the view expressed by Mandela that in order to achieve
this state (as envisaged in the Freedom Charter) the present economic and
political set-up in South Africa will have to be broken.’ But, he went on, he
disagreed with the proposition that the only form of state envisaged by the
Freedom Charter was a communist one:
This definition does not in my opinion necessarily imply a one-party system as
being put forward since in the classes which remain after the exclusion of the
‘few exploiters’ as defined, there may very well be room, for instance, for a
communist party on the one hand and a socialist party on the other. . . . I am
accordingly unable to agree that the one and only inference to be drawn from the
document is that a dictatorship of the proletariat was being advocated.
The court record of the treason trial ran to nearly 10 million words bound in
180 volumes of 200 pages each. Yet no single act of conspiracy or any act of
violence was ever alleged by the prosecution, and many of the claims it made
about the ‘explosive’ nature of the racial situation in South Africa in 1956 and
about speeches ‘bristling with references to the spilling of blood’ it never

managed to substantiate. As an attempt to demonstrate that opposition to the
government was due principally to the work of communists, the trial was clearly
a failure.
The government drew its own conclusions from this outcome. One of the
spectators who went to watch the trial when it was still in its early stages was
John Vorster, an advocate and former Nazi sympathiser who had been
imprisoned without trial during the Second World War for pro-German
activities. Appointed by Verwoerd as his new minister of justice a few months
after the treason trial verdict, with instructions to root out all resistance, Vorster
resolved that if the government’s opponents could not be crushed by the law,
then the law would have to be changed and evidence obtained by other means.
Recalling the meeting on the day in August 1961 that Verwoerd appointed him,
he said, ‘I remember saying to Dr Verwoerd that he should let me deal with the
threat of subversion and revolution in my own way. I told him that you could not
fight communism with the Queensbury rules, because if you did then you would
lose. He agreed with me and said that he would leave me free to do what I had to
do—within reason.’
Vorster appointed a new head of the security police, Hendrik van den Bergh,
who had been interned with him during the war and who shared his views about
how to tackle the problem. As van den Bergh recalled, ‘For me the choice was
between revolution, violence and a bloodbath and the so-called rule of law,
about which there was all the noise. I looked at my children and those of others
and said, “To the devil with the rule of law.’”

On the night that the accused were discharged, Bram Fischer gave a party at
Beaumont Street to celebrate. As the guests arrived, they were watched by
Special Branch detectives waiting in two cars in the street outside. Mandela did
not join them. Nor did he go home. He spent the night in a safe house in
Johannesburg, growing accustomed to a life in the underground.

CHAPTER 9

SPEAR OF THE NATION
A WARRANT FOR MANDELA’S ARREST WAS SOON ISSUED. HE WAS
THE only member of the National Action Committee, given responsibility for
organising the national strike, who had been publicly identified. The names of
other members, like Sisulu, were deliberately not disclosed, since organising a
strike by Africans was a criminal offence. Mandela was therefore certain to face
a prison sentence, unless he could successfully evade capture. There was a large
contingent of ANC supporters ready to help. But what was even more important
was that Mandela had access to the network of Communist Party supporters who
had had eight years of experience of working underground undetected and were
already proficient in the use of secret communications, safe houses and hidden
meetings.
This new style of leadership—operating from an underground headquarters—
caused considerable controversy within the ANC. The ANC was accustomed to
its leaders standing openly in defiance of the government to demonstrate their
willingness to make the same sacrifices they were urging on their supporters.
During the Defiance Campaign, prominent officials had lined up to be arrested
and had openly sought imprisonment. Imprisonment was seen to be as much a
symbol of defiance as the breaking of laws. Mandela’s decision, therefore, not to
seek arrest or to stand trial in connection with charges arising from his
leadership of the strike represented a significant change in how the ANC
believed it should conduct the business of liberation; some critics charged it was
tantamount to ‘running away’.
Mandela’s skill in evading capture, however, soon caught the imagination of
the press and the public. The press dubbed him the Black Pimpernel, an African
version of the Scarlet Pimpernel, a fictional character who evaded capture during
the French Revolution. Mandela moved about the country, from Port Elizabeth
to Cape Town, to Durban, to Johannesburg, urging support for the strike,
meeting journalists and advertising his activities through telephone calls to
newspapers. Much of the work he carried out at night, growing used to spending

his days in hide-outs. He disguised himself with different outfits, dressing in
workmen’s overalls or chauffeurs’ clothes, growing a beard, wearing round,
rimless spectacles, walking and speaking in a manner as unobtrusive as possible.
After dark he often appeared as a night watchman, dressed in a large grey
overcoat and cap pulled over his eyes and occasionally sporting large earrings.
Police efforts to find him—mounting roadblocks, searching houses—proved
fruitless. Mandela was constantly on the move, going from one safe house to
another. There were times, however, when he had a narrow escape. An African
policeman in Johannesburg recognised him in his chauffeur’s uniform, but
passed by with a smile. Once while he was waiting in his car at a traffic light,
Colonel Spengler, the head of the security police on the Witwatersrand, who had
known him for ten years, drew up alongside but did not glance his way.
Mandela adapted to the solitary nature of underground life without difficulty:
‘I welcomed the opportunity to be by myself, to plan, to think, to plot.’ But he
was never able to overcome his longing to see more of Winnie. With Winnie, the
discipline by which he was determined to live fell away. ‘His meetings with
Winnie were foolhardy,’ said Rusty Bernstein. ‘They were high-risk. This was
his Achilles’ heel. Otherwise he was extremely cautious.’ On one occasion when
a scheduled meeting with Winnie fell through, Mandela was so disappointed that
he simply drove off to look for her. He eventually managed to see her after
getting a friend to telephone her. Winnie recalled:
I saw him frequently when he was underground. I waited for that sacred knock at
the window in the early hours of the morning. I never knew when. I never had an
appointment made. At the beginning he used to come home for an hour or so
early in the morning, depending on the political situation. Later, they were
watching me twenty-four hours a day and I had to slip out through police
cordons to go to him.
Then, someone would come and order me to follow him in my car. We would
drive a kilometre or so from the house, we would then meet another car, we
would jump from that one into another, and by the time I reached him I had gone
through something like ten cars. I never knew where I was. His hide-outs were
all over the country. The people who arranged this were, of course, mostly
whites.
She never knew the identity of these white couriers. ‘I would just find myself
at the end of the journey in some white house; in most cases when we got there

they were deserted. You could see that arrangements had been made for families
to stay away while we were there together.’
The dates chosen for the three-day stay-at-home were 29-31 May, to coincide
with the day nominated by the government to proclaim South Africa a republic,
31 May. The establishment of a republic, free from all links with the British
crown, had been one of the most cherished objectives of Afrikaner nationalists
since Britain’s defeat of the old Boer republics of the Transvaal and the Orange
Free State in 1902. A referendum among the white electorate in October 1960
had produced a small overall majority in favour of a republic. Verwoerd
intended that Republic Day on 31 May would be remembered as a day of
celebration.
The ANC’s plans for strike action thus became a trial of strength. In April,
Mandela wrote a letter to Verwoerd, on behalf of the National Action
Committee, requesting him to call a national convention or face a massive strike.
‘We have no illusions about the counter-measures your government might take,’
he wrote. ‘During the last twelve months we have gone through a period of grim
dictatorship.’ Nevertheless, he added, ‘We are not deterred by threats of force
and violence.’ Verwoerd did not reply.
Mandela appealed for help from the leader of the opposition United Party, Sir
de Villiers Graaf. ‘Stated bluntly, the alternatives appear to be these: talk it out,
or shoot it out,’ he wrote. ‘It is still not too late to turn the tide against the
Nationalist-created crisis. A call for a national convention from you now could
well be the turning point.’ He did not receive a reply.
In an article in the liberal journal Contact, Mandela appealed for support from
student leaders and sportsmen. He was optimistic about what could be achieved:
‘There are some who are still assailed by doubts and hesitations. We say to them
that the times are critical and momentous. We urge them to join in with us and
together to deliver the knockout punch.’
The counter-measures ordered by Verwoerd far exceeded anything that
Mandela had expected. In the largest mobilisation since the war, the government
called out army and police reserves. All police leave was cancelled. Armed
guards were posted to protect power stations and other essential services. Police
raids were conducted night after night in African townships; helicopters were
used to train searchlights on houses, yards and unlit areas; police vans broadcast
warnings that Africans who went on strike would be sacked and forced out of

towns. Employers threatened mass dismissals. All political meetings were
banned. A twelve-day detention law was introduced. Troops camped in the heart
of Johannesburg, ready for action. It was the biggest show of strength the
Nationalist government had ever mounted.
In parliament, Verwoerd issued warnings not only to ‘agitators’ but also to
‘members of the ordinary public’, including ‘some intellectuals and some
pseudo-intellectuals as well as some newspapers’ who were ‘busy playing with
fire’ by advocating a multiracial national convention. This proposal, he said, was
made by communists and ‘everyone who lends support to this proposition, will,
whatever his personal aims may be, become jointly responsible for what is their
[the communists’] aim’.
Despite this display of might by the government, the strike call on 29 May
was answered by thousands of workers in major towns. Scores of industries and
factories were disrupted. But the overall result did not match Mandela’s
expectations. He described the first day of the stay-at-home as ‘not the national
success I had hoped for’; and on the second day, he called off the campaign.
In the following days, at carefully arranged venues, Mandela gave a series of
interviews to foreign journalists. At one meeting, in a sparsely furnished flat in
Yeoville, north-east of the city centre, he appeared relaxed, dressed in a striped
sports shirt and grey trousers, with a side-parting clipped neatly in his hair,
laughing easily as he welcomed the visitors. Did he concede, asked one
correspondent, that the strike had been a failure? ‘In the light of the steps taken
by government to suppress the stay-at-home, it was a tremendous success,’ he
replied. The mobilisation of the army as well as the police was ‘striking
testimony of African strength and a measure of the government’s weakness’. But
in a television interview, at the house of a white supporter, he struck a far more
sombre note: ‘If the government reaction is to crush by naked force our
nonviolent demonstrations, we will have to seriously reconsider our tactics. In
my mind we are closing a chapter on this question of nonviolent policy.’

The failure of the May strike convinced Mandela that there was nothing further
to be gained from continuing with protest action and that the only alternative
available was to resort to violence. ‘Non - violent, passive resistance is effective
as long as your opposition adheres to the same rules as you do,’ he said. ‘But if
peaceful protest is met with violence, its efficacy is at an end.’ The case for

hitting back at the government, he believed, was now overwhelming. Africans
had to show that their white rulers were still vulnerable and could be hurt.
Mandela conferred first with Sisulu, who agreed that a change in strategy was
inevitable. ‘Looking at the situation, I can’t see what else could have been done,’
said Sisulu. ‘There was this dilemma. The government was acting violently. We
were leading the movement. People were entitled to know how we were meeting
this violence. The time had come for us to make preparations. But this was not
the type of issue that we could have taken to the masses. We had to get the
leadership committed. We needed a small number of people to start it. With
delay, the idea might have fizzled out.’
Mandela and Sisulu both believed that a limited campaign of sabotage would
scare off foreign investors, disrupt trade and cause sufficient damage to the
economy to force the white electorate and the government to alter course. The
government, they assumed, was not strong enough to embark on further
repression. ‘I didn’t think the government could suppress the whole movement,’
said Sisulu.
Mandela raised the issue of armed struggle with the ANC’s working
committee, but ran into a wall of opposition from Moses Kotane. Kotane, in his
characteristically blunt manner, accused Mandela of failing to think through his
proposal carefully. Mandela, he said, had been outmanoeuvred and paralysed by
the government’s actions and now, in desperation, was resorting to revolutionary
language. ‘There is still room,’ he said, ‘for the old methods if we are
imaginative and determined enough. If we embark on the course Mandela is
suggesting, we will be exposing innocent people to massacres by the enemy.’
Kotane’s argument carried the day.
Shortly afterwards, at a meeting Sisulu had arranged, Mandela and Kotane
spent a whole day arguing further over the issue. There was a certain irony about
the confrontation. Kotane, a lifelong communist from peasant origins, a graduate
of the Lenin School in Moscow, secretary-general of the underground
Communist Party, with revolutionary credentials far superior to Mandela’s,
argued adamantly that the potential for conventional political struggle had by no
means been exhausted; it was only because political work had become more
difficult that Mandela was seeking the easy way out and trying to escape the
responsibilities of political leadership. The time for armed struggle had not yet
arrived. An austere, puritanical figure, Kotane was known both for his arrogant

and assertive manner and also for his hard-headed realism.
Mandela, a Xhosa aristocrat, a trained lawyer who had just emerged from a
marathon trial, the outcome of which had depended on convincing a panel of
judges about the ANC’s commitment to nonviolent methods, responded to
Kotane by using arguments fashioned by Kotane’s own colleagues in the
Communist Party in favour of violence. Castro’s recent revolution in Cuba,
Mandela said, had shown how it was not necessary for revolutionaries to wait for
appropriate conditions, as defined in the textbooks of Lenin and Stalin, to
materialise. ‘If you wait for textbook conditions, they will never occur.’
Militants were already forming their own armed units. The leadership was now
falling behind its supporters.
The influence of revolutionary enthusiasts in the Communist Party at this
juncture was crucial. The communists had already formed their own specialist
units for sabotage activity, some fifteen groups of three to four men each, which
had begun trying their hand at cutting telephone and communications links. They
also had ready access to the Soviet Union and China, both quartermasters to
revolution around the world. Plans had already been made to send recruits
outside the country for training.
What further convinced them of the feasibility of guerrilla warfare in South
Africa were the heady examples set by Algeria and by Cuba. By mid-1961,
Algerian nationalists were on the verge of victory over French forces seeking to
defend the white settler population. In Cuba, the example was even more potent.
A group of no more than twelve revolutionaries, including Fidel Castro and Che
Guevara, survived a landing on the island’s coast in a rickety old boat and within
two years had marched into Havana at the head of a 10,000-strong victorious
guerrilla army. Guevara’s ‘detonator’ theory of revolution, the idea that armed
action on its own would create a momentum among the population, had a
dramatic impact on the thinking of South African revolutionaries. ‘The seminal
work was Che Guevara’s Guerrilla Warfare. And many of the errors can be
attributed to that fact,’ said Ben Turok. ‘I remember the discussions at the time.
The point made was, is it wrong to wait for the objective conditions to develop
where violence becomes naturally part of the struggle, or is the situation such
that the subjective element can create the objective, and that’s Che’s argument.
And we became convinced that the subjective could actually play an important
role.’

The communists’ objectives did not stop short at sabotage. Joe Slovo, the key
operational figure in devising the party’s military strategy, believed that
sabotage would provide a bridge to popular armed struggle, drawing in new
recruits and conditioning the population to accept methods of violence,
eventually leading to a broad revolutionary assault on the government. Attaining
this objective was feasible given the mass support enjoyed by the ANC. What
the Communist Party therefore envisaged was ‘a united front of national
liberation’ which would set out ‘to destroy white domination’. When that goal
was reached, the communists would then work to transform South Africa into a
socialist state. These two stages of the revolution became official Communist
Party policy.
The flaws in this revolutionary strategy tended to be overlooked. South Africa
possessed few heavily wooded areas suitable for guerrilla bases. It was
surrounded by white-run African colonies which provided no opportunity for
rear bases. In rural areas, the ANC had never been successful in mobilising
support for its political campaigns; it remained essentially an urban-based
organisation. In urban areas, the black population was subject to a vast array of
controls which had already effectively crippled political action. Above all, the
government had never shown any signs of losing control. Its security apparatus
was formidable, as the crushing of the May strike had just demonstrated.
The communists’ enthusiasm for armed struggle had a marked influence on
Mandela’s own outlook, making it seem more feasible than would otherwise
have been the case. ‘The communists manoeuvred hard for violence,’ remarked
Yusuf Cachalia, Mandela’s Indian activist friend and himself a member of the
Communist Party. ‘They certainly influenced Mandela’s attitude towards
violence.’
At a second meeting of the ANC’s working committee in June, it was agreed
that the issue of armed struggle should be put to the ANC’s national executive
committee and that the Congress alliance, comprising the Indian Congress, the
Congress of Democrats, the Coloured People’s Congress, the South African
Congress of Trade Unions and the ANC, should also be consulted. The venue
chosen for both meetings, to be held on consecutive days, was Tongaat, a small
village surrounded by sugar plantations north of Durban and close to Luthuli’s
home in the Umvoti Mission Reserve, enabling him to attend. About sixty
delegates in all, most of them subject to banning orders, travelled in secret to
Tongaat.

The ANC meeting lasted all night. Mandela presented his case vigorously.
Violence, he said, had become inevitable, whether or not it was initiated by the
ANC. ANC supporters were beginning to lose confidence in the policy of
nonviolence and would eventually resort to violent methods of protest on their
own. If nationalist leaders failed to take decisive action, the undercurrents of
hatred rising among the African population would surface in outbreaks of
terrorism that would have a disastrous impact on race relations. It was both
wrong and unrealistic for African leaders to continue preaching peace and
nonviolence when the government’s only response was to meet their demands
with force. It would be far better for the ANC to channel and control the
momentum towards violence to ensure that it was directed at proper targets. If
the ANC failed to take the lead now, it would be left behind.
Luthuli’s commitment to nonviolence was well known. He believed that
nonviolence was the only justifiable course of action on both moral and practical
grounds. ‘Violence disrupts human life and is destructive to perpetrator and
victim alike,’ he said in 1961. ‘I do not regard peace as a passive thing. The
nonviolent policy I am advocating is a positive one. . . . It demands moral
courage and taxes our physical courage.’
Luthuli held firmly to his views, but, after hours of argument, he agreed to a
compromise. The ANC would remain committed to nonviolence, but it would
not stand in the way of members who wanted to establish a separate and
independent military organisation, nor would it disapprove of ‘properly
controlled violence’.
The following night, at the Congress alliance meeting, the arguments raged
anew. The position was more complex for the ANC’s allies, for while the ANC
was an illegal organisation, the others were still able to conduct political work
legally. Within the Indian Congress, the commitment to nonviolence was held as
determinedly by many members as it was by Luthuli. The Indian Congress
leader, Dr Monty Naicker, was adamantly opposed to armed struggle. Jaydew
Singh, Mandela’s old friend from Kholvad House, declared, ‘Nonviolence has
not failed us; we have failed nonviolence.’ Yusuf Ca - chalia argued
emphatically that any attempt at armed struggle would end in the government
wiping out the entire nationalist movement. ‘It was pure adventurism,’ he said
years later. ‘It was impractical. They had not worked out the consequences.’ Yet
most Indian communists were in favour of armed struggle. The Congress of
Democrats, influenced mainly by white communists, also supported the move.

By the end of a tumultuous night, Mandela had received the authorisation he
wanted to establish a military wing.
The new organisation rapidly took shape. It was given the name of Umkhonto
we Sizwe, meaning the Spear of the Nation, but it became more commonly
known by the initials MK. A high command was formed, consisting of Mandela
as chairman and Slovo as chief-of-staff; Sisulu acted as a political adviser.
Essentially, MK was launched as a joint venture between the ANC and the
Communist Party, with access to all the Communist Party’s resources and its
international connections.
Mandela and Slovo had known each other for more than ten years, but they
had never been particularly close. As students at the University of the
Witwatersrand, they had argued over the role of the communists in the liberation
struggle. They had differed on many occasions since. Slovo was widely known
as an urbane and affable character, a witty raconteur with a liking for wine, song
and red socks, but he was also a narrow ideologue never deviating from the party
line. ‘Slovo and Mandela were often at cross-purposes,’ noted Mac Maharaj, a
Communist Party activist. ‘Their relationship was often abrasive. Joe was unable
to appreciate what Mandela was saying. He was devious in his arguments, taking
contradictory positions. The debate frequently went off the rails.’ But over the
question of armed struggle they found common ground. ‘Slovo was an
enthusiast, determined to make an im - mediate impact,’ Maharaj recalled.
‘Mandela had a liking for the bold stroke.’
The difficulties they faced were immense. None of the conspirators had any
experience of sabotage or guerrilla action. Mandela embarked on the armed
struggle knowing literally nothing in practice about what was involved. Slovo’s
experience had been limited to his role in a signals unit in the closing stages of
the Second World War in Italy; he had never taken part in combat. The
conspirator with the most military experience was Jack Hodgson, a ‘desert rat’
who had served in a tank corps in North Africa and also had knowledge of
explosives gained while working in the mines. An ardent communist and
founding member of the Congress of Democrats, Hodgson became MK’s first
instructor, teaching recruits the basis of bomb-making. He turned his own flat,
on the fourth floor of a block in Hillbrow, into a bomb laboratory and later into a
bomb factory. He was a resourceful man, but nevertheless an amateur.
To make up for his own lack of knowledge, Mandela read everything he could

lay his hands on about guerrilla warfare and war history: authors like Guevara,
Mao Tse-tung, Castro and Clausewitz; books on Algeria, Cuba, Israel, Kenya
and the Anglo-Boer War. ‘He was particularly impressed by a study of the
communist insurrectionary movement in the Philippines,’ Bernstein recalled. At
hide-outs during the day, before leaving for night-time assignments, he spent
hours studying texts and making copious notes. His notes on Mao Tse-tung’s
Strategic Problems of China’s Revolutionary War ran to sixty-five pages.
‘Mandela wanted a theoretical knowledge of guerrilla warfare,’ noted Maharaj.
‘Slovo was less interested.’
Mandela was provided with a support committee, a small group of activists
who arranged everything for him from safe houses to transport and reading
material. Among the group was Kathy Kathrada, who had been sceptical about
the feasibility of armed struggle but who had nevertheless volunteered his
services. Another member was Wolfie Kodesh, a long-time communist ‘foot
soldier’ who had seen army service during the Second World War and was
currently a reporter for the radical journal New Age. The support team also
included a talented young lawyer, Bob Hepple, whom Bram Fischer had
recruited to the Communist Party. The son of a former leader of the Labour
Party, he was heavily involved in trade union activity, trying to keep alive the
South African Congress of Trade Unions. Like Fischer and Slovo, he worked
from offices in Innes Chambers in central Johannesburg, a building used by
many advocates, which provided a convenient cover for meetings of the
conspirators.
Mandela’s life underground, as leader of MK, became more settled than it had
been when he was trying to organise support for strike action in May. After
staying with a family in Market Street for a few weeks, he moved into a small
bachelor flat in Berea with Wolfie Kodesh. Mandela insisted on using a camp
bed, letting Kodesh keep the bed, but Kodesh was considerably ‘peeved’ to find
that it was Mandela’s habit to get up at five each morning to run on the spot. ‘It
went on for well over an hour, followed by exercises,’ Kodesh recalled. Mandela
told Kodesh that he would have to join in, which he did, though without much
enthusiasm. In daytime, Mandela remained inside the flat with the blinds drawn,
venturing out at night, usually in his disguise as a chauffeur. After two months in
Berea, he moved briefly to a doctor’s residence in Johannesburg, then spent two
weeks on a sugar plantation in Tongaat, before returning to Johannesburg to a
new address. It was here that MK was eventually to meet its demise.

Lilliesleaf Farm lay in a secluded, wooded hollow in the Rivonia area, about ten
miles north of Johannesburg. It was a smallholding of roughly twenty-eight
acres, reached only by a dirt road or across the open veld. The farmhouse was
spacious, with whitewashed walls, large curved windows at the front and a high
shingle roof, a desirable residence for a wealthy family. Behind the main
building stood an assortment of outbuildings, storerooms, fuel sheds, work
rooms and servants’ quarters. There was also a large, imposing thatch-roofed
cottage.
Lilliesleaf had been bought by the Communist Party in July 1961 initially for
use as a safe house. Michael Harmel, adopting a false name, had handled the
transaction with an estate agent and Harold Wolpe, the communist lawyer, had
helped set up a dummy company to buy the property. The plan was for
Lilliesleaf to be used, by all outward appearances, as a normal white
smallholding. The main house would be occupied by a party member, Arthur
Goldreich, and his family and the farm worked by African labourers. Goldreich
was a little-known activist. By profession an artist and designer, employed by a
large department store in Johannesburg, he was a flamboyant personality,
charming and talented, who struck many acquaintances as being no more than a
dilettante. But in his youth he had joined Palmach, a branch of the underground
Jewish army in Palestine, and at heart he was a revolutionary enthusiast.
The buildings at Lilliesleaf were in need of renovation and ex - tension, so
before the Goldreichs moved there, a team of African painters and builders was
hired to do the job. It was at this stage that Mandela took up residence in the
thatched cottage at Lilliesleaf, ostensibly as an employee of the white owner
waiting for his arrival. The alias he used was David Motsamayi, the name of one
of his former clients. Mandela knew Goldreich quite well; his house in Parktown
was one of the secret locations where he met Winnie.
Mandela’s routine at Lilliesleaf was much the same as before. He stayed at
home during the day and left for meetings at night. ‘Mandela had time to read, to
think and study at Rivonia,’ said Bernstein. ‘It was a quiet and peaceful
existence. A committee attended to his needs.’ He was joined for a while by
Michael Harmel, whom he knew as an engaging character but who proved to be
a hopeless conspirator. Disorganised and forgetful, he was invariably sloppy
about underground work, infuriating colleagues like Bram Fischer with his

lapses of security. Mandela returned to Lilliesleaf late one night to find the house
lights on, the front door open, the radio at full blast and Harmel fast asleep in
bed. When Mandela woke him up, he complained, ‘Nel, must you disturb my
sleep? Can’t this wait until tomorrow?’
Once the renovations were complete and the Goldreichs had moved into the
main house, it was possible for Winnie and the children to spend weekends with
Mandela. ‘Ironically,’ said Mandela, ‘we had more privacy at Lilliesleaf than we
ever had at home. The children could run about and play, and we were secure,
however briefly, in this idyllic bubble.’ The older children, Thembi, Makgatho,
Makaziwe and Zeni, retained indelible impressions of those times spent with
their father, going for walks, playing in the big, rambling house, being carried
through the orchard. Zeni imagined Lilliesleaf to be her real house, because it
was the only place she could remember where her father played with her. For
years afterwards, she would ask Winnie, ‘Mummy, when are we going home to
see Daddy?’
Meanwhile, the business of organising armed struggle continued apace. The
strategy decided upon by the high command was twofold. First, a sabotage
campaign would be carried out against targets like government buildings and
installations, railways, power plants and telecommunications; second,
preparations would be made for guerrilla warfare if the sabotage campaign failed
to get the government to change its policies. The strict instruction given to all
MK members from the start was that on no account were they to kill or injure
people in planning or carrying out operations. As Mandela later explained,
‘Sabotage did not involve loss of life, and it offered the best hope for race
relations. Bitterness would be kept to a minimum and, if the policy bore fruit,
democratic government could become a reality.’
The high command, based in Johannesburg, was made responsible for
determining tactics and general targets and given charge of training and finance.
Regional commands were to be set up in each of the provinces and, below them,
local commands and cells. The most readily available source of recruits would
be ANC or Communist Party members. An MK constitution was drawn up,
devised largely by Mandela and Slovo.
The bomb-making end of the enterprise was also progressing. Hodgson had
discovered that permanganate of potash, more commonly used in washing
lettuce, mixed with aluminium powder and catalysed by a drop of acid, could

make an effective explosion. Sacks of permanganate of potash were duly
transported to his fourth-floor flat. ‘We spent days with mortars and pestles
grinding this substance to a fine powder,’ recalled Slovo. ‘Permanganate of
potash permeated walls, curtains, carpets, and every crevice.’ Fortunately,
Hodgson’s wife, Rica, was as ardent a revolutionary as her husband.
Hodgson also constructed timing devices using the thin plastic tubing
contained in ballpoint pens. Large quantities were purchased for the purpose:
‘Every drawer,’ recalled Rica Hodgson, ‘seemed to be full of ballpoint pens.’ He
fashioned an incendiary device by using a small bottle of acid and covering the
top with a specific thickness of cardboard or paper. Just before placing the
device in the target area, the saboteur had to turn the bottle upside down.
When the time came for the bombs to be tested, Mandela insisted on
witnessing the event. The site chosen was a brickworks near Kempton Park, to
the east of Johannesburg, owned by Wolfie Kodesh’s brother and not in use at
the time. Explosions there during the day, to loosen clay, were a normal
occurrence. Taking with them a dozen Molotov cocktails and an improvised
bomb, Mandela, Hodgson, Kodesh and an obliging chemist who had supplied
MK with gun-powder and nitroglycerine, drove off one morning in a large 1949
Chevrolet to the brickworks to see the results of their handiwork. The site was
deserted except for a solitary watchman who was taken to one side by Mandela
and persuaded to walk away for a while.
Hodgson first tried out the Molotov cocktails—petrol bombs—on one of the
brickworks’ buildings and then chose a pit in an open space to test the bomb. He
had calculated that the device would explode in fifteen minutes, but after twenty
minutes nothing had happened. Hodgson retrieved the bomb from the bottom of
the pit, adjusted the charge and put the bomb back. Suddenly, a huge explosion
rent the air, throwing up clouds of dust and earth. In an instant the conspirators
fled the scene, piling into the Chevrolet and driving helter-skelter out of the
brickworks. Mandela was buoyed up by the event. This was the first explosion
of the campaign.
The first group of recruits was dispatched to China for training in guerrilla
warfare through an arrangement that the Communist Party had already made
with their colleagues in Peking. The recruits included Raymond Mhlaba, a trade
unionist and Communist Party organiser from Port Elizabeth who had played a
prominent role there during the Defiance Campaign; Joe Gqabi, a reporter for

New Age who had joined one of the first communist sabotage units before MK
was formed; and Wilton Mkwayi, another trade unionist and former treason
trialist who had escaped into the underground during the trial.
Amid all these preparations, there was a growing sense of urgency. Other
armed groups were beginning to surface to challenge the government.
Supporters of the banned Pan-Africanist Congress in the Western Cape were in
the process of forming a military wing called Poqo, a Xhosa expression meaning
‘alone’ or ‘pure’, to emphasise their African origins, still intending to liberate
South Africa by 1963. An odd assortment of dissident whites led by Monty
Berman, a communist recently expelled from the party who had dreamed up the
idea of establishing his own guerrilla outfit while detained in Pretoria prison
during the state of emergency, banded together to form the National Committee
of Liberation and announced their presence in October by dismantling a pylon
carrying power lines in the northern suburbs of Johannesburg, disrupting
telephone services and burning down a government office. This was the terrain
on which MK wanted to establish its own reputation.
Yet however anxious MK enthusiasts were to get started, they were
constrained by an unexpected development. On 23 October 1961, Chief Luthuli
was nominated winner of the Nobel Peace Prize in recognition of his determined
efforts to gain political rights for Afri - cans through nonviolent means. The
award was a serious blow for the government, which had endeavoured to portray
Luthuli as the head of a dangerous communist conspiracy. But it also came at an
awkward time for MK’s high command, for to launch the armed struggle just
when the ANC’s leader had achieved international recognition for his
contribution to peace could have resulted in international humiliation for
Luthuli. No action could be started at least until the award ceremony in Oslo had
taken place on 11 December.
The date finally set for the start of the sabotage campaign was 16 December
1961, a day then known as the Day of the Covenant, on which whites celebrated
their victory over the Zulu chief Dingane at the Battle of Blood River in 1838.
Leaflets dropped on the streets announced the formation of Umkhonto we Sizwe
with the warning, ‘The time comes in the life of any nation when there remain
only two choices: submit or fight. That time has now come to South Africa.’ The
leaflets added:
We hope, even at this late hour, that our first actions will awaken everyone to a

realization of the disastrous situation to which the Nationalist policy is leading.
We hope that we will bring the government and its supporters to their senses
before it is too late, so that both the government and its policies can be changed
before matters reach the desperate stage of civil war.
Bombs exploded that night at government buildings in Johannesburg, Durban
and Port Elizabeth. But not everything went according to plan. Slovo’s
assignment was to plant one of Hodgson’s incendiary devices in the
Johannesburg Drill Hall, where the preparatory examination of the treason trial
had taken place:
I had reconnoitred it on more than one occasion and had chosen the spot which
would have ignited not only the enormous wooden floor but also the hundreds of
wooden chairs which covered it. But when the moment came, I found the
military authorities had decided to have their monthly spring-clean. I entered the
hall through a side door and found myself in the presence of about fifty black
cleaners who were removing the chairs and polishing the floor.
Slovo found another suitable spot, an office with huge wooden cupboards. He
turned the bottle of the incendiary device upside down, which gave him fifteen
minutes for a getaway, and was about to place the carrier bag behind one of the
cupboards when a clipped military voice came from behind him: ‘Can I do
anything for you, sir?’
Slovo was ready with an excuse about looking for an officer who could deal
with an administrative problem about call-up papers for his brother and duly
followed the sergeant-major in search of the officer: ‘I did so with racing pulse,
knowing that the acid in that small bottle had begun to eat away at the flimsy
cardboard. Had our kitchen laboratory calculated the fifteen minutes correctly?’
Fortunately, the officer had left the building and Slovo was politely advised
by the sergeant-major to come back another day. ‘I gave him a sweaty hand and
walked briskly away. As soon as I decently could, I opened the tennis-ball
cylinder box which housed all the ingredients and snatched the bottle. The three
or four minutes which preceded this were perhaps the longest in my life.’
Ben Turok, part of a three-man unit which included Harold Wolpe, was less
fortunate. His assignment was the Native Law Courts, then housed in the same
building as the Rissik Street post office. When Hodgson arrived in his car at an
agreed spot to deliver an incendiary device to Turok, he was clearly still having
trouble with the devices; one of them had caught fire prematurely on the way,

leaving the outside wrapping of Turok’s parcel charred. Turok re - wrapped the
device in an old paper packet which he found in the boot of his own car and
went on his way to the Native Law Courts. The device briefly caught alight but
soon fizzled out due to a lack of oxygen. The police found it virtually intact with
fingerprints on the outside wrapping. Five months later, when Turok was
arrested in a police raid intended to disrupt an antigovernment demonstration,
the police found by chance that his fingerprints matched those on the Rissik
Street bomb package. He was sentenced to three years’ imprisonment. His
defence team included Slovo and his co-conspirator, Harold Wolpe.
Another bomb device on 16 December also proved faulty, blowing up
prematurely at the municipal office in Dube, an African township south of
Johannesburg, killing one saboteur and injuring another. However, the overall
result was judged to be successful.
Yet there was a large measure of improvisation to all this which went far
beyond the crude home-made bombs that were used in the campaign. In the
excitement to strike a blow at the government, armed activity was seen to be the
only meaningful form of action worth pursuing; the need for political
mobilisation, as Kotane had urged, was neglected. Harold Wolpe, Slovo’s
closest friend, was later scathing in his criticism: ‘We weren’t prepared at a
technical level, or at the level of political strategy. We had no knowledge, no
background, we were just naïve.’ Turok was equally succinct: ‘We threw the
first bombs without having an underground.’

Three weeks after MK had initiated its sabotage campaign, Mandela left South
Africa to canvass for foreign support for armed struggle. He was taken by car
across the border into Bechuanaland, a British protectorate, on 11 January 1962
and did not return for six months. He had never been abroad before and found
the experience of being a ‘free man’ for the first time exhilarating: ‘Though I
was a fugitive and wanted in my own land, I felt the burden of oppression lifting
from my shoulders.’
Most of his time was spent in Africa. He travelled from one country to
another, seeking financial assistance, political recognition and military training
facilities from governments known to be sympathetic to the liberation cause.
Much preliminary groundwork had been done by Oliver Tambo, who had set up
an exile base in London after his departure from South Africa in 1960 and had

since established ANC offices in Tanganyika, Ghana and Egypt.
From the start, however, Mandela found himself competing for attention with
the Pan-Africanist Congress, which had also established connections across
Africa and had expended considerable effort in denouncing the ANC as a
communist-front organisation. Time and again, Mandela encountered deep
suspicions in African states about the ANC’s links with white and Indian
communists. ‘There is a widespread feeling that the ANC is a communistdominated organization, ’ he reported. There was a far wider understanding of
the PAC’s objectives of African rule in South Africa than the ANC’s goal of a
multiracial democracy. Since the Sharpeville massacre, the PAC’s standing in
Africa had risen higher than that of the ANC.
At his first stop in the newly independent state of Tanganyika, Mandela was
dismayed to hear President Nyerere suggest that perhaps the armed struggle
should be postponed until Robert Sobukwe, the PAC leader then serving a threeyear sentence for incitement, came out of prison. ‘The PAC has started off with
tremendous advantages ideologically, and has skilfully exploited opposition to
whites and partnership,’ he wrote. ‘Sharpeville boosted them up and the stand of
their leaders during the trial, and the imprisonment of Sobukwe, fostered the
belief that they were more militant than the ANC.’
In Addis Ababa in February, Mandela addressed a conference of the PanAfrican Freedom Movement for East, Central and Southern Africa, a joint
organisation of independent African states and liberation movements. The
question was often asked, he said, how strong was the liberation struggle in
South Africa?
The view has been expressed in some quarters outside South Africa that,
in the special situation obtaining in our country, our people will never
win freedom through their own efforts. Those who hold this view point
to the formidable apparatus of force and coercion in the hands of the
government, to the size of its armies, the fierce suppression of civil
liberties and the persecution of political opponents of the regime.
Consequently, in these quarters, we are urged to look for our salvation
beyond our borders. Nothing could be further from the truth.
He acknowledged the importance of outside help, but added, ‘We believe it
would be fatal to create the illusion that external pressures render it unnecessary
for us to tackle the enemy from within. The centre and cornerstone of the

struggle for freedom and democracy in South Africa lies inside South Africa
itself.’
Before leaving Addis Ababa, Mandela arranged with the Ethiopian military to
return later in the year for six months’ military training to equip himself as a
professional guerrilla leader. ‘If there was to be guerrilla warfare,’ he said, ‘I
wanted to be able to stand and fight with my people and to share the hazards of
war with them.’
From Ethiopia, he travelled to Egypt, Tunisia, Morocco, Guinea, Sierra
Leone, Liberia, Ghana and Senegal. Along the way, he kept notes in meticulous
detail of all the ideas, information and offers of help he received. His notes on
consultations with Algerian officers based in Morocco in March ran to ninetyfour pages. Under a section headed ‘Funds’, he wrote:
£10,000 from Nigeria
£5,000 in Tunisia
£3,000 in Liberia will be yearly amount
£5,000 in Ethiopia
Definite promises from Senegal and the Sudan
All these monies were sent to O.R [Tambo] in London
Money collecting is a job which requires a lot of time. You must be prepared to
wait.
Visit to Socialist countries has become imperative
In June, Mandela visited London for ten days, enjoying the atmosphere of
British style and manners which his school education had taught him to regard
so highly. He met the Labour Party leader, Hugh Gaitskell, the Liberal Party
leader, Jo Grimond, and the editor of the Observer, David Astor, whose
newspaper took a close interest in African affairs. Accompanied by Tambo and
Mary Benson, a South African writer, he went sightseeing to the Houses of
Parliament and Westminster Abbey and took a boat ride on the Thames to
Chelsea.
Then he returned to Addis Ababa to prepare himself for guerrilla war. He
learned how to use an automatic rifle and a pistol, listened to lectures on tactics
and strategy, and gained experience of bombs and mortars. Entries in his diary

recorded:
June 29th: First lesson on demolition. Instructor Lt. Befikadu June 30th: I have
practice in demolition
July 10th: A demonstration on mortar fire
July 11th: We spend 4 hours at the shooting range
July 12th: I spend the day doing fieldcraft drills
July 13th: Lt. Befikadu and I cover 26 kilometres in fatigue marches. We do it in
3 hours.
But Mandela’s training programme was cut short abruptly after three weeks
by a message from Sisulu in Johannesburg insisting that he return to South
Africa. Sisulu was concerned that Mandela’s prolonged absence abroad would
give rise to suspicions that he did not intend to return to South Africa, as he had
repeatedly committed himself to do. The main purpose of Mandela’s trip abroad,
as Sisulu understood it, was for him to make connections there, not to get
involved in military training. As a farewell gesture, the Ethiopians presented
Mandela with an automatic pistol and 200 rounds of ammunition.
During the six months that he had been away, sabotage attacks had continued
sporadically. Most of the attempts were clumsy and ineffectual, none causing
any lasting damage. The white electorate, on the rare occasions that it was
alerted to the danger of sabotage attacks, reacted by demanding tougher
measures from the government, not, as Mandela had calculated, by calling for
reform.
The government duly responded. In June, Vorster introduced the General Law
Amendment Act of 1962, or the ‘Sabotage’ Act, as it was usually called, which
gave new definitions to the meaning of sabotage. Acts of sabotage henceforth
included such offences as tampering with property, possessing firearms,
hindering essential services, putting up a poster and unlawful entry. The
minimum penalty laid down for offences under the Sabotage Act was five years’
imprisonment; the maximum was death.
Vorster was further empowered to order the ‘house arrest’ of anyone he
believed to be a threat to security. He could prohibit persons banned or listed
under the Suppression of Communism Act from preparing anything for
publication, from communicating with each other, from having visitors, from

joining organisations, from attending social gatherings.
The security police were also gaining in experience, building up a network of
informers and keeping an ever-tighter watch on the movement of activists.
Walter Sisulu was arrested by Warrant Officer Dirker six times in 1962. Once,
when police were raiding his home, a reporter arrived and asked why they were
raiding. ‘Just routine,’ a police officer told him. ‘We just want to see what Sisulu
keeps in his house.’ But the conspirators, used to treating the Special Branch
with contempt, neither anticipated the improvement in their techniques nor paid
much attention when they did notice it.

CHAPTER 10

CAPTURE
MANDELA CROSSED THE BORDER FROM BECHUANALAND AT
NIGHT in an Austin car belonging to a prominent white activist, the theatre
producer and playwright Cecil Williams. Williams, a debonair figure, always
immaculately dressed, had played a leading role in the establishment of the
Congress of Democrats and had been incarcerated in Pretoria prison during the
state of emergency. It was thought safe for him to collect Mandela from
Bechuanaland since his car had only recently been purchased and would
therefore not be familiar to security police. The guise in which they travelled,
Mandela the chauffeur driving his boss home to Johannesburg, was spoilt
slightly by Mandela’s determination to wear the khaki training uniform he had
been using in Ethiopia.
They reached Lilliesleaf at dawn and the following night Mandela held a long
meeting with other members of the ANC’s working committee, including Sisulu,
Kotane, Marks and Nokwe, briefing them on the results of his travels. A major
concern was the criticism Mandela had encountered throughout Africa of the
ANC’s links with communists and its cooperation with whites and Indians.
Mandela was convinced that, to circumvent foreign hostility, the ANC needed to
distance itself from its Congress allies and assume a leading role of its own,
publicly re-establishing its African credentials. He proposed that he should visit
Luthuli at his home in Natal to ascertain his views. The working committee
approved the idea.
But Kathrada’s support committee thought the risks were far too high. ‘We
worked on the assumption that the police knew he was back in the country,’ said
Kathrada. ‘We thought we should be extra careful, much more careful than we
had been before his departure to Africa. We thought we should first send an
advance party.’ Kathrada himself volunteered to do the advance work, but
Mandela opposed the idea. He wanted to leave for Natal as soon as possible. He
suggested that he drive down to Durban with Cecil Williams in the Austin car.
Kathrada again voiced his objections to the plan—‘Cecil Williams was a marked

man’—but he was overruled. Kathrada could not even persuade Mandela to
shave off his Guevara-type beard to alter the appearance by which he had
become familiar from press photographs; Mandela relished the image it gave
him of being a revolutionary leader.
Before leaving, Mandela arranged to meet Winnie. It was, Winnie recalled, ‘a
hurried meeting . . . our last private moments together’. In Mandela’s absence,
Winnie had become the target of constant police harassment. She told a
newspaper reporter in June:
The police have been making visits and searched at my house every night for
almost three weeks. Whenever my children and I are about to sleep, Security
Branch police arrive. They ask me where my husband is and sometimes search
the house. Sometimes they joke and at other times they are aggressive, which
frightens the children. There are rumours that Nelson is back, but I have not seen
or heard from him.
In the company of Williams, Mandela sped off to Durban to sound out two
Indian friends, Monty Naicker, the Indian Congress leader, and Ismail Meer,
before travelling on to Groutville to meet Luthuli. Both Naicker and Meer were
close friends of the chief and Mandela wanted to be able to tell Luthuli that he
had already spoken to them about his proposal. Both opposed any move that
would unravel the Congress alliance.
In Groutville, Mandela met Luthuli in an Indian-owned house. Luthuli was in
the fourth year of a five-year banning order restricting him to his home in the
Umvoti Mission Reserve. As president of the banned ANC, known to be in
touch with ANC envoys and couriers who visited him from time to time, he was
under frequent surveillance by the police. Luthuli listened to Mandela’s
argument and agreed to think about what he had said.
Mandela returned to Durban for further secret meetings and also found time
for a quick rendezvous with one of Winnie’s sisters, a nurse. At an Indian house
in Reservoir Hills, he met members of the MK regional command, briefing them
on his trip abroad and listening to their complaints about the lack of finance and
transport. He assured them that help would be forthcoming. One of the members
present was Bruno Mtolo, a trade unionist trained in sabotage activity by Jack
Hodgson. ‘We left Mandela feeling very much heartened and ready to continue
the struggle,’ he said.
Later that evening, Mandela was given a ‘welcome home’ party at the home

of a photo-journalist, G. R. Naidoo, with whom he was staying. Among the
friends who came were the Meers, the Singhs and Monty Naicker. ‘Nelson cut a
large military figure in khaki, his laugh booming the familiar welcome as he
embraced each friend,’ wrote Fatima Meer, in her account of the party. ‘They
drank and ate and discussed politics. They laughed a lot, excited by their
intrigue. The police were looking for Nelson and here they were partying with
him, virtually under their noses.’
The next afternoon, 5 August, Mandela rejoined Cecil Williams for the
journey back to Johannesburg. Along the way, they discussed sabotage plans.
Mandela noticed that the main Durban-Johannesburg railway ran parallel to the
road for some distance, making it a suitable target for sabotage. As was his habit,
he made a note of the idea in a small notebook he invariably carried with him. In
the notebook were jottings of ideas he had heard and conversations he had had in
the last few days, implicating people whom he had met. Mandela was also
carrying a loaded revolver.
At the small town of Cedara near Howick, their car, with Williams at the
wheel and Mandela in the passenger seat, was overtaken and stopped by police
cars. For a brief moment, Mandela thought of trying to escape up a wooded bank
to his left, but decided against it. He quickly hid the gun and the notebook in the
gap between the two front seats. A police officer came directly to the window by
the passenger’s seat and asked who he was. ‘David Motsamayi,’ replied
Mandela, using his alias. The officer asked him other questions about where he
was going and where he had come from. Mandela gave him a few perfunctory
answers, but the officer soon lost patience: ‘Ag, you’re Nelson Mandela, and this
is Cecil Williams, and you are under arrest!’ Mandela and Williams were taken
to Pietermaritzburg. The hidden notebook and the revolver were never
discovered by the police.
Mandela’s arrest caused turmoil among the conspirators. ‘There was a great
deal of panic,’ recalled Sisulu. Wolfie Kodesh was deputed to find Winnie at the
offices of the Child Welfare Society in Fox Street in central Johannesburg,
where she worked. He came across her as she was about to leave the building.
Winnie recalled:
The way this man looked! He was white like a ghost, his hair was standing on
end. I noticed he hadn’t shaved and was wearing a dirty shirt and trousers as if
he’d just jumped out of bed; you could see something drastic had happened. This

was one of the men who used to be along the line when I was taken to see
Nelson underground.
‘Winnie could see by the expression on my face that something terrible had
happened,’ said Kodesh. ‘She asked, “Is it Nelson?” I said, “Yes. We think he’ll
be appearing in the Johannesburg court tomorrow.”’
Everyone was convinced that Mandela had been betrayed. Suspicion about
who the culprit was ran wild. Even Sisulu was suspected in some quarters, for it
was he who had insisted that Mandela should return to South Africa.
There were persistent rumours that the United States Central Intelligence
Agency was involved. Mandela’s links with communists had made him a target
for US officials embroiled with the Soviet Union in a murky struggle for
influence in a number of newly independent African states and obsessed with the
need to contain communist encroachment in Africa. The CIA was active
throughout southern Africa, keeping track of the activities of liberation
movements there, determined to prevent what it saw as communist-supported
armed intervention ‘under the guise of African liberation’. It found an ally in the
South African government, which was only too willing to collaborate.
Intelligence information was exchanged on a regular basis.
The CIA covert-operations section in Johannesburg had expended
considerable energy penetrating the ANC. Its chief undercover agent, Millard
Shirley, the son of American missionaries who had been born in South Africa,
had cultivated contacts at all levels of the organisation. A stocky, balding figure,
with a reputation as a heavy drinker and a womaniser, he passed himself off as a
reporter for an American television news network, readily gaining access to
dissident groups. He was known by South African intelligence to possess a highranking ‘deep throat’—a Durban-based Indian in the ranks of the Communist
Party there.
Two pieces of evidence subsequently came to light linking the CIA to
Mandela’s arrest. The first concerned the local CIA agent in Durban at the time,
Don Rickard, a consular officer who, at the end of his tour in South Africa, was
heard boasting at a diplomatic party of the role that he had played in Mandela’s
arrest. The second concerned Paul Eckel, the CIA station chief based at the U.S.
Embassy in Pretoria. Eckel, who died in 1986, confided what had happened to
another U.S. official, and in 1990 that official, then retired, told an American
journalist, Joseph Albright, what Eckel had said: ‘We turned Mandela over to the

South African Security Branch. We gave them every detail, what he would be
wearing, the time of day, just where he would be. They picked him up. It was
one of our greatest coups.’
Given Mandela’s amateurish conduct in the days before his arrest, it was
equally possible that the South African police already knew of his whereabouts
from their own efforts. Mandela had been carried away by romantic notions of
his role as ‘Commander-in-Chief ’, the showman of the law courts now wanting
to become the showman of the battlefield, wearing army fatigues and khaki,
carrying a gun, though never intending to use it, flaunting his presence at
gatherings of the faithful. These were dangerous pretensions at such a time. In
all, Mandela survived in the field in South Africa as head of Umkhonto since its
launching in December 1961 for no more than five weeks. And in that time, as a
result of keeping notebooks, he came close to incriminating a considerable
number of other people.
He chastised himself for his own foolhardy behaviour. ‘In truth, I had been
imprudent about maintaining the secrecy of my movements,’ he wrote. ‘In
retrospect, I realized the authorities could have had a myriad of ways of locating
me on my trip to Durban. It was a wonder in fact that I wasn’t captured sooner.’
When asked in later years about evidence of the CIA’s involvement in his arrest,
his response was, ‘Let bygones be bygones. Let’s forget about that, whether it is
true or not.’

Whatever suspicions the security police had about Mandela, they possessed no
evidence linking him to the sabotage campaign. When he appeared in the
magistrates’ court in Johannesburg on 8 August, he was charged on two counts:
first, inciting workers in essential occupations to act illegally; and second,
leaving the country without a valid travel permit. Mandela decided to represent
himself, as this gave him the opportunity to turn the trial into an attack on the
government, and chose Slovo as his legal adviser.
While Mandela was held in the Fort awaiting trial, Slovo used his access to
him as his legal adviser to plot his escape. The conspirators at Rivonia spent
hours floating schemes to smuggle him out of the Fort. In the end they decided
that the Fort was impregnable, but that the Johannesburg magistrates’ court
offered better possibilities.

During the lunch break, when court proceedings were adjourned, the accused
were taken down steps leading to a basement, where they were locked in
individual cells. All that was needed to spring Mandela was a key enabling him
to leave the basement, climb the steps to the deserted courtroom above and from
there reach the street outside, where a getaway car would be waiting. To ensure
that Mandela was not recognised, a disguise would be smuggled in to him—a
wig, moustache and beard. Slovo was given the task of obtaining measurements
for the disguise during his frequent visits to the Fort. As he and Mandela sat in
an interview room, attended by a prison warder, they exchanged written notes
and bits of cotton until eventually, after several weeks, all the measurements
were gathered. The disguise was duly made by a professional wigmaker and
smuggled to Mandela by Winnie sewn in the shoulder padding of his finest suit.
He was also given the vital key. Wolfie Kodesh was briefed to provide the
getaway car.
Mandela, however, changed his mind about the feasibility of the escape plan,
concluding that if it failed it would do fatal damage to the ANC. In a note to
Slovo passed across the desk in the interview room, he explained his views,
adding at the end, ‘Please destroy this after you have finished reading it.’ But
Slovo decided that the note was interesting enough to be saved as a historical
document and it was to reappear in unfortunate circumstances. As it happened,
two days before the trial was due to open on 15 October in Johannesburg, the
authorities decided to switch the venue to Pretoria.
Congress supporters had meanwhile set up a Free Mandela Committee and
organised a series of rallies under the slogan ‘Free Mandela’. To prevent further
demonstrations, the government prohibited ‘any gathering related to Mandela in
any place in the Republic of South Africa’ for two days at the beginning of his
trial. On 20 October, it banned all gatherings in protest at the arrest or trial of
anyone for any offence for a period of six months.
Mandela’s appearance in court at the Old Synagogue on 15 October caused a
sensation. He entered wearing a traditional Xhosa leopard-skin kaross instead of
a suit and tie. In the spectators’ gallery, the crowd of his supporters rose to their
feet with shouts of ‘Amandla!’—‘Power!’—and ‘Ngawethu!’—‘It is ours!’
Winnie was among them, wearing a traditional beaded headdress and a long,
embroidered Xhosa skirt. Mandela saluted in acknowledgement, with a clenched
first raised high, and turned to smile at Winnie.

On each day that Mandela appeared in court he wore the same kaross. When
the prison authorities tried to confiscate it from him, he retorted that they had no
jurisdiction over his attire in court and threatened to take the matter as far as the
Supreme Court if they interfered. All they managed to do was to prevent him
from wearing it on his way to the court from prison and back.
Right from the start, Mandela sought to place the government and its system
of justice on trial rather than himself. Given permission to address the court
before he was asked to plead, he immediately asked for the recusal of the
magistrate, J. van Heerden, on the grounds that he did not consider himself
legally or morally bound to obey laws made by a parliament in which he had no
representation. Nor did he believe he would receive a fair and proper trial:
In a political trial such as this one, which involves a clash of the aspirations of
the African people and those of whites, the country’s courts, as presently
constituted, cannot be impartial and fair. In such cases, whites are interested
parties. To have a white judicial officer presiding, however high his esteem, and
however strong his sense of fairness and justice, is to make whites judges in their
own case. It is improper and against the elementary principles of justice to
entrust whites with cases involving the denial by them of basic human rights to
the African people . . .
No African, he said, enjoyed equality before the law.
The white man makes all the laws, he drags us before his courts and
accuses us, and he sits in judgement over us.
It is fit and proper to raise the question sharply, what is this rigid
colour bar in the administration of justice? Why is it in this courtroom I
face a white magistrate, am confronted by a white prosecutor and
escorted in to the dock by a white orderly? Can anyone honestly and
seriously suggest that in this type of atmosphere the scales of justice are
evenly balanced?
Why is it that no African in the history of this country has ever had the
honour of being tried by his own kith and kin, by his own flesh and
blood?
I will tell Your Worship why: the real purpose of this rigid colour bar
is to ensure that the justice dispensed by the courts should conform to the
policy of the country, however much that policy might be in conflict with

the norms of justice accepted in judiciaries throughout the civilized world
...
I hate discrimination most intensely and in all its manifestations. I
have fought it all during my life; I fight it now, and will do so until the
end of my days. Even although I now happen to be tried by one whose
opinion I hold in high esteem, I detest most violently the set-up that
surrounds me here. It makes me feel that I am a black man in a white
man’s court. This should not be.
Mandela concluded by explaining that he had decided to speak frankly
because the injustice to which he had referred contained the seeds of ‘an
extremely dangerous situation for our country and our people’. ‘I make no threat
when I say that unless these wrongs are remedied without delay, we might well
find that even plain talk before the country’s courts is too timid a method to
draw the attention of the country to air political demands.’ His application for
the recusal of the magistrate was refused.
The prosecution proceeded to produce some sixty witnesses—policemen,
journalists, township superintendents and printers—who gave evidence about the
preparations for the three-day strike in May 1961.
On the third day of the trial, Mandela made a surprise application once again
for the recusal of the magistrate, van Heerden. His legal adviser, Bob Hepple,
who had replaced Slovo after the government refused to lift the banning order
restricting Slovo to Johannesburg, had noticed during the previous day’s lunch
break that van Heerden had left the courtroom in the company of Warrant
Officer Dirker of the Special Branch. Dirker had given evidence on the first day
of the trial and was due to be cross-examined by Mandela at a later stage.
Together with another member of the Special Branch who had been present
throughout the trial, assisting the prosecution, they climbed into a blue
Volkswagen car and sped off for lunch. It was this incident which prompted
Mandela to ask for the magistrate’s recusal. But before doing so, in a gesture of
remarkable cordiality, he sent van Heerden a private note advising him in
advance of the action he was about to take and explaining that there was nothing
personal about the matter.
Confronting him in court, Mandela said that the incident had created the
impression that the court had associated itself with the state’s case: ‘I am left
with the substantial fear that justice is being administered in a secret manner. It

is an elementary rule of justice that a judicial officer should not communicate or
associate in any manner whatsoever with a party to these proceedings. I submit
that Your Worship should not have acted in this fashion.’
Van Heerden’s reply was brief: ‘I can only say this, that it is not for me to
give you reasons. I can assure you, as I here now do, that I did not communicate
with these two gentlemen, and your application is refused.’
On the fourth day of the trial, the prosecution closed its case and Mandela rose
to present his defence. He had given the court the impression that he would call a
large number of witnesses. But he had long since decided to call none. He knew
that the charges were accurate and he had already made the statement about the
unfairness of the political and legal system that he wanted to make. Instead of
calling witnesses, he said simply, ‘Your Worship, I submit that I am guilty of no
crimes.’
There was a considerable pause, then the magistrate, clearly taken aback,
asked, ‘Is that all you have to say?’
‘Your Worship, with respect, if I had something more to say, I would have
said it.’
The court was adjourned until 7 November, when, in accordance with court
procedure, Mandela was to be allowed to address the court with a plea in
mitigation before the magistrate gave his sentence.
On 7 November, before the court was called into session, Mandela and Hepple
were conferring in an office in the Old Synagogue when the prosecutor, P. J.
Bosch, came in and asked for a private meeting with Mandela. He apologised for
having to ask the court to send him to prison and reached out to shake his hand.
When Bosch walked out of the room, Hepple noticed that he was in tears.
The court was packed again with spectators. Winnie was present, in Xhosa
dress, as well as a number of Mandela’s relatives from the Transkei. As Mandela
took his place in the dock, he turned to the gallery, raising his arm in a clenchedfist salute, and called out ‘Amandla!’ The crowd rose and responded:
‘Ngawethu!’
The magistrate read out his judgement. Mandela, he said, was ‘the leader,
instigator, figurehead, main mouthpiece and the brain’ behind the organisation
which had called the 1961 strike. ‘To incite people to commit a crime by forcing
them to protest a law was the same as committing the crime itself,’ he continued.

Mandela had shown no remorse but seemed proud of his achievements and had
stated in no uncertain terms that he would continue his activities whatever the
sentence passed on him. ‘We are living under abnormal and trying conditions,’
the magistrate said, and if law and order were not maintained, anarchy would
reign; the court was not concerned with politics but with the maintenance of law
and order.
Mandela followed with an hour-long address to the court intended not as a
plea in mitigation but as a political testament explaining why he had taken the
action which had led to his trial and why he would do it again if necessary:
The whole life of any thinking African in this country drives him continuously to
a conflict between his conscience on the one hand and the law on the other. . . .
The law as it is applied, the law as it has been developed over a long period of
history and especially the law as it is written and designed by the Nationalist
government is a law which, in our view, is immoral, unjust and intolerable. Our
consciences dictate that we must protest against it, that we must oppose it and
that we must attempt to alter it . . .
Throughout its fifty-year existence the ANC had done everything possible to
bring its demands to the attention of successive South African governments. It
had sought at all times peaceful solutions for the country’s ills and problems.
Every attempt had been treated with contempt and met by force. In 1961, as
secretary of the Action Council, he had approached the prime minister seeking to
gain support for a national convention. But he had not even been treated with the
courtesy of an acknowledgement. Instead,
the government . . . set out, from the beginning of this campaign, not to treat
with us, not to heed us, nor to talk to us, but rather to present us as wild,
dangerous revolutionaries, intent on disorder and riot, incapable of being dealt
with in any way save by mustering an overwhelming force against us and the
implementation of every possible forcible means, legal and illegal, to suppress
us. The government behaved in a way no civilized government should dare
behave when faced with a peaceful, disciplined, sensible and democratic
expression of the views of its own population. It ordered the mobilization of its
armed forces to attempt to cow and terrorize our peaceful protest. It arrested
people known to be active in African politics and in support of African demands
for democratic rights, passed special laws enabling it to hold them without trial
for twelve days. . . . If there was a danger during this period that violence would

result from the situation in the country, then the possibility was of the
government’s making. They set the scene for violence by relying exclusively on
violence with which to answer our people and their demands . . .
He warned of the danger of further violence to come:
Government violence can do only one thing and that is to breed counterviolence. We have warned repeatedly that the government, by resorting
continually to violence, will breed, in this country, counter-violence amongst the
people, till ultimately, if there is no dawning of sanity on the part of the
government—ultimately, the dispute between the government and my people
will finish up by being settled in violence and by force. Already there are
indications in this country that people, my people, Africans, are turning to
deliberate acts of violence and of force against the government in order to
persuade the government, in the only language which this government shows by
its own behaviour, that it understands. . . .
Perhaps the court will say that despite our human rights to protest, to object, to
make ourselves heard, we should stay within the letter of the law. I would say,
sir, that it is the government, its administration of the law, which brings the law
into such contempt and disrepute that one is no longer concerned in this country
to stay within the letter of the law.
His own experience illustrated this: ‘The government has used the process of
law to handicap me, in my personal life, in my career and in my political work in
a way which is calculated, in my opinion, to bring about a contempt for the
law’—by restricting him, banning him, harassing him.
By order of the government, in the name of the law, I found myself
restricted and isolated from my fellow men, from people who think like
me and believe like me. I found myself trailed by officers of the Security
Branch of the police force wherever I went. In short I found myself
treated as a criminal—an unconvicted criminal. I was not allowed to pick
my company, to frequent the company of men, to participate in their
political activities, to join their organizations. I was not free from
constant police surveillance. I was made, by the law, a criminal, not
because of what I had done, but because of what I stood for, because of
what I thought, because of my conscience.
Can it be any wonder to anybody that such conditions make a man an
outlaw of society? Can it be wondered that such a man, having been

outlawed by the government, should be prepared to lead the life of an
outlaw, as I have led for some months, according to the evidence before
this court?
It has not been easy for me during that past period to separate myself
from my wife and children, to say goodbye to the good old days when, at
the end of a strenuous day at an office, I could look forward to joining
my family at the dinner table, and instead to take up the life of a man
hunted continuously by the police, living separated from those who are
closest to me, in my own country, facing continually the hazards of
detection and arrest. This has been a life infinitely more difficult than
serving a prison sentence. No man in his right senses would voluntarily
choose such a life in preference to the one of normal, family, social life
which exists in every civilized community.
But there comes a time, as it came in my life, when a man is denied the
right to live a normal life, when he can only live the life of an outlaw
because the government has so decreed to use the law to impose a state
of outlawry upon him.
Mandela concluded with a passionate denunciation of racial discrimination
and the system of minority rule in South Africa that went with it:
I hate the practice of racial discrimination, and in my hatred I am sustained by
the fact that the overwhelming majority of mankind hate it equally. . . .
Nothing that this court can do to me will change in any way that hatred in me,
which can only be removed by the removal of the injustice and the inhumanity
which I have sought to remove from the political, social and economic life of
this country.
Whatever sentence Your Worship sees fit to impose upon me for the crime for
which I have been convicted before this court, may it rest assured that when my
sentence has been completed, I will still be moved, as men are always moved, by
their consciences; I will still be moved by my dislike of the race discrimination
against my people when I come out from serving my sentence, to take up again,
as best I can, the struggle for the removal of those injustices until they are finally
abolished once and for all.
Mandela’s articulate defence of African rights, his manner and bearing before
the court, his skill in dealing with court officials and witnesses alike, marked

him out as a leader of distinction. No courtroom in South Africa had ever heard
such a powerful indictment of the government. However, the import of his words
was largely lost in South Africa at the time. Van Heerden took no more than a
ten-minute adjournment after Mandela had finished his address before
pronouncing sentence. The press coverage was limited. Mandela was on the list
of persons whose statements could not be published and although the
government had decreed that reporting of judicial proceedings was permissible
‘as long as it is not abused by creating a forum for such persons’, newspapers
were unsure of the consequences. One of Johannesburg’s major newspapers, The
Star, quoted only a few sentences from his address.
But Mandela’s performance, while making little impact in South Africa, had
gained worldwide attention. His 1962 trial marked the start of his international
reputation. The pleas that he had made for human rights in South Africa were
fully understood in Western countries, even if governments there felt little
inclination at the time to respond. In the short term, none of this was to make any
difference. Mandela’s fate was to be sentenced to three years’ imprisonment for
incitement and two years’ imprisonment for travelling abroad without valid
documents, five years in all, with no possibility of parole. In the long term,
however, the words that Mandela spoke in the Old Synagogue and the reputation
he gained there were to be remembered far beyond any term of imprisonment.

The net was meanwhile closing in on other conspirators. Walter Sisulu was
arrested two days after Mandela on similar charges of incitement for his role in
organising the May 1961 strike. He was granted bail by the court, but then
placed under twelve-hour house arrest, confined to his house in Orlando between
6.30 p.m. and 6.30 a.m. every day, all weekends and public holidays, required to
report to a police station every day and prohibited from receiving any visitors at
home. Two weeks later, Sisulu’s mother, who lived with him and whom
Mandela cherished as much as his own, died in the house. When friends and
relatives came to mourn, Albertina tried to explain that Sisulu could not speak to
them. He made an urgent application to the chief magistrate in Johannesburg for
permission to receive mourners in his home but was turned down. Later that
evening, when the visitors had left and the house was in darkness, with the body
awaiting removal for the funeral the next day, the police raided the house and
arrested Sisulu on charges of violating his house arrest. The charges were later
withdrawn.

Like Mandela, Sisulu was found guilty of incitement but the sentence he was
given was more severe: six years’ imprisonment rather than three. Sisulu decided
to appeal and, as the law then required, he was granted bail, pending an appeal.
The government responded by placing him under twenty-four-hour house arrest,
prohibiting him from setting foot outside at any time. A few weeks later, Sisulu
disappeared underground. Albertina was subsequently arrested and held in
solitary confinement for three months.
Mandela’s bomb-maker, Jack Hodgson, was placed under twenty-four-hour
house arrest in his Hillbrow flat for five years and his wife, Rica, under twelvehour house arrest. As both were banned persons, they needed special ministerial
dispensation to communicate with each other. The Hodgsons were eventually to
flee the country. Michael Harmel and Moses Kotane were placed under twentyfour-hour house arrest; Kathy Kathrada, Rusty Bernstein and Cecil Williams
were placed under twelve-hour house arrest. So too was the civil rights
campaigner Helen Joseph. Several leading figures, including Harmel and
Kotane, made plans to leave. Others, like Kathrada, went underground.
One by one, the remnants of radical opposition were obliterated. The
Congress of Democrats was outlawed in September 1962. All public gatherings
on the Johannesburg City Hall steps, a traditional venue for dissidents, were
banned, except for divine services. The radical newspaper New Age was banned
in November 1962. It reappeared the following week under the name Spark, but
Spark was soon forced to close as a result of bans imposed on its editorial staff.
Another radical journal, Fighting Talk, in which Bernstein had played a
prominent role, was closed down three months later. A clause in the Sabotage
Act made it illegal to possess any copies of banned news - papers, with a penalty
of three years’ imprisonment.

Under Verwoerd’s rule, white society became increasingly insular and inbred. It
was a society which expected conformity and so regarded dissent, however
trivial, as a form of treachery. ‘Opposing apartheid,’ observed a prominent
Afrikaner critic, ‘is worse than murder to some Afrikaners. You endanger the
nation by refusing to conform.’
The national radio network was turned into a propaganda arm of the National
Party. Each commentary, each news bulletin conveyed the government’s view of
the world. Independent views were rarely heard. ‘No useful purpose can be

served by causing the public distrust of our leaders’ policies,’ remarked one
director-general of the South African Broadcasting Corporation. All attempts to
introduce television were blocked because of the ‘negative’ effects it might have.
The press was exempted from direct controls, but otherwise forced to steer its
way through a minefield of legislation. Often unsure of what they could print,
editors resorted more and more to self-censorship. Outright attacks on apartheid
were rare. The English-language press continued to expose the worst excesses of
government policy, but the costs both for newspaper proprietors and for editors
and reporters were usually high. Under constant official pressure, they slowly
gave way rather than face statutory controls.
An equally tight grip was kept on literature and entertainment. In March 1963,
Verwoerd’s government set up a Publications Control Board with power to ban
any publication, film, record or art show, including the work of South African
writers, artists and sculptors. Besides the usual test for obscenity and blasphemy,
a publication could be banned if it brought the country into ridicule or contempt;
or if it was prejudicial to the safety of the state, the general welfare or peace and
good order. Thousands of works were subsequently banned, including those by
prominent South African and Western writers. In defending the frequent use of
censorship laws, government ministers were given to explain that behind many
prohibited works lurked the menace of communism. ‘When we think of
literature containing filth, then we must think of the communist tactic behind it,’
said the minister of education, arts and science, Jan de Klerk, introducing the
Publications and Entertainment Bill in 1963. ‘It is known to the government that
it is a communist tactic throughout the world to use filth to break the backbone
of the nation; to use filth to attack a nation on the cultural and social front, to
paralyse people and make them an easy prey for communism.’
Through rigorous control of the media, Verwoerd had little difficulty in
convincing most whites that the coalition of forces ranged against South Africa
—communist states, the Afro-Asian bloc, ‘leftists’ and ‘liberals’ in Western
countries and revolutionaries from within—was sufficiently threatening to
warrant any action the government took to protect the nation. Each new piece of
legislation strengthening the government’s hand, each inroad made into civil
liberties, evoked less and less protest from within the white community. Those
advocating concessions or conciliation were simply accused of endangering
white survival. Though government action was often taken in the name of
defending Western civilisation, there was never any doubt about what the

ultimate purpose was. ‘Our motto,’ declared Verwoerd, ‘is to maintain white
supremacy for all time to come over our own people and our own country, by
force if necessary.’

Pretoria Local, a large red-brick building behind a crenellated wall on the
western side of the main road leading to Johannesburg, was a familiar place to
Mandela. It had been his home for five months during the 1960 state of
emergency and also during his trial for incitement. But when he returned there
from the Old Synagogue on 7 November, it was to a different regime: he was no
longer a prisoner awaiting trial but a convicted criminal, and he was treated
accordingly.
Still in a fighting mood, he tried to take on the prison authorities in his
customary fashion. Issued with the standard prison uniform for Africans—a pair
of short trousers, a khaki shirt, a calico jacket and rubber sandals—Mandela
refused to wear the short trousers. When dinner arrived—cold, stiff porridge—he
refused to eat it and demanded better food. The solution devised for him by the
prison commander, Colonel Jacobs, was to allow him to wear long trousers and
to receive better food but to separate him from other prisoners, in solitary
confinement. Mandela replied that he had no difficulty with that.
He soon learned differently:
An hour was like a year. I was locked up in the bare cell, literally with nothing,
nothing to read, nothing to write, nothing to do, and no one to talk or turn to. I
was guarded by two warders during exercise time. The one was an African. I
tried to talk to him. He spurned me, afraid no doubt of his white colleague. I
suffered the isolation for two months and finally concluded that nothing was
more dehumanizing than isolation from human companionship.
So Mandela exchanged his long trousers and improved rations for the
company of fellow prisoners. He was assigned to a small group of political
prisoners, a trade unionist, a reporter for New Age and several PAC members,
including Robert Sobukwe.
Sobukwe by now considered himself a veteran of the prison system.
Convicted of incitement for his role in the anti-pass demonstrations of March
1960, he had been moved through a series of prisons—Pretoria Central,
Boksburg, Stofberg and Witbank—before reaching Pretoria Local in 1961. He

was due for release in May 1963.
Despite their political rivalry, the two men struck up a cordial relationship in
prison, choosing to sit next to each other while sewing old mailbags on a
concrete ledge in the prison courtyard and addressing each other respectfully by
their clan names. Sobukwe advised caution and patience in dealing with the
prison system. ‘You’ve got to pull through five years,’ he told Mandela. ‘There
is no point in putting their backs up against you. They can be very vicious.’
The conditions in Pretoria Local were primitive. Mandela was given his own
cell, measuring about six by seven feet, complete with toilet bucket. The cold at
night was intense. He slept on a thin sisal mat on a cement floor with only two
thin blankets for cover. The food was bad and discipline strict. When Mandela
and Sobukwe went together to see Colonel Jacobs to complain about conditions,
Jacobs dismissed them curtly. Mandela began to argue, but Sobukwe restrained
him: ‘Nel, Nel, don’t be rash. You’ve got to live here.’

While Mandela and Sobukwe were sewing mailbags in Pretoria and arguing
about whether Shakespeare or George Bernard Shaw was the greatest English
writer, South Africa faced a new phenomenon: the underground PAC movement
known as Poqo initiated an insurrection against the government which included
the murder of whites among its aims. ‘The white people shall suffer, the black
people will rule,’ said a Poqo pamphlet. ‘Freedom comes after bloodshed.’
Poqo was poorly organised but inspired a large following, notably in the
Western Cape, with visions of an imminent black uprising. Its attacks were
random and haphazard, but they created widespread alarm. Poqo supporters were
responsible for the killing of African policemen and informers, for an uprising in
Paarl in November 1962 in which a mob of 250 men attacked a police station
and rampaged through the town killing two whites, and for the murder of five
whites, including a woman and two young girls, sleeping at a roadside camp
near the Bashee River bridge in the Transkei in February 1963.
In March 1963, plans for a more general uprising were prepared by a group of
PAC leaders based in exile in Maseru, the capital of Basutoland, then a British
protectorate. Instructions were sent to Poqo supporters to manufacture their own
weapons with whatever materials were to hand and to collect food and clothing.
On a given date, they were to launch simultaneous attacks on strategic points

such as police stations and power installations before turning their attention to
massacring whites indiscriminately.
The plan began to go wrong when Potlake Leballo, a volatile figure who had
inherited the PAC’s leadership from Sobukwe, gave warning of the uprising two
weeks before it was due to start at a press conference in Maseru, claiming that
100,000 armed followers were waiting for his signal. As a result of Leballo’s
impetuous announcement, the colonial authorities in Maseru raided the PAC’s
premises, seized lists of 10,000 names, arrested PAC officials and closed down
their office. In South Africa, police began to round up hundreds of PAC
supporters. The date set for the uprising passed by with only a few incidents
reported.
The Poqo campaign, together with the sporadic sabotage attacks from
Umkhonto, gave Verwoerd’s justice minister, John Vorster, the opportunity he
needed to acquire virtually unlimited security powers. The General Law
Amendment Act introduced on 1 May 1963 empowered the police to arrest
without warrant and detain any person suspected of having committed sabotage,
or any offences under the Suppression of Communism Act or the Unlawful
Organizations Act, and any person suspected of possessing information about
such offences. Detainees could be held in solitary confinement, without access to
lawyers and family, until they had replied ‘satisfactorily’ to all questions put by
police interrogators. The initial period for which they could be held was ninety
days. But the police were entitled to renew the order again and again ‘until this
side of eternity’, according to Vorster. The act expressly prohibited the courts
from ordering the release of a detainee. Scores of men and women now vanished
into jails, to be subjected to solitary confinement and prolonged interrogation.
A new breed of police interrogators moved on to the seventh floor of the
Grays, an oblong concrete block on Von Weilligh Street used by the security
police as their headquarters. They were men prepared to use any method
necessary to obtain information from detainees. The most notorious of all was
Lieutenant Theunis Swanepoel, a former sergeant previously known for beating
confessions out of prisoners, whose ugliness stood out at first sight. A broadshouldered, heavy-set man with close-cropped ginger hair, he had a bullfrog-like
head, tiny eyes and a face that was pockmarked and blotched—features that
were to become all too familiar to detainees.
The interrogators soon began to produce results. A favourite method was

‘statue’ torture. Detainees were forced to stand in a small chalk square for
periods which ranged from six hours to sixty hours. If they tried to sit down,
they were jerked to their feet again; and if they fainted or lost consciousness,
they were revived and forced to stand again. A communist activist, Ivan
Schermbrucker, described in a note smuggled out of prison how he was made to
stand until exhaustion brought him to the ground after twenty-eight hours of
standing: ‘I fell twice, had cold water thrown over me and was pulled to my feet.
. . . I nearly committed bloody suicide by jumping out of the window. This is
torture . . . they threatened to keep me standing for four days and nights and even
longer.’ Other methods included electric shocks and physical assaults.
The General Law Amendment Act of 1963 effectively marked South Africa’s
transformation into a police state. As the legislation passed through parliament, a
lone MP, Helen Suzman, voted against it. One of its first victims was Robert
Sobukwe. Due for release on 3 May, having completed his three-year sentence in
full, Sobukwe was held under a clause of the act which enabled the minister of
justice to keep in prison indefinitely anyone convicted under security laws, even
after they had served their sentence.
Sobukwe was taken from Pretoria Local to serve his time on Robben Island.
Mandela was soon to follow him there.

1. Nelson Mandela at nineteen, in Umtata, Transkei

2. Mandela’s first wife, Evelyn Mase, was devoted to religion

3. Walter Sisulu, Mandela’s mentor and life-long friend

4. At the newly opened offices of Mandela and Tambo in Chancellor House, Fox
Street, Johannesburg

5. Boxing in the heavyweight division

6. Mandela outside court in Pretoria, during the treason trial, 1958

7. After a whirlwind romance, Mandela married Winnie Madikizela in June
1958

8. Addressing the Pietermaritzburg All-in Conference, March 1961, Mandela’s
last public appearance before going underground

9. Wearing a beaded Thembu necklace, Mandela posed for this photograph
while on the run from the police in 1961

10. Mandela with Ruth First, a communist activist

11. Communist comrades: Ruth First, Bram Fischer (standing), Joe Slovo and
Rusty Bernstein on the podium at a Communist Party meeting in the late 1940s

12. With Moses Kotane, secretary-general of the underground Communist Party,
during the treason trial in 1958

13. With Oliver Tambo in Addis Ababa, 1962

14. Outside Westminster Abbey during his ten-day visit to London, 1962

15. Crushing stones in the prison yard at Robben Island

16. With Walter Sisulu in the prison yard at Robben Island, 1964

17. Winnie with Zindzi, September 1962

18. Winnie with Zindzi and Zenani at the start of the Rivonia trial, December,
1963

19. Winnie visits Mandela in the police cells a few days after his arrest in August
1962

CHAPTER 11

OPERATION MAYIBUYE
FAR FROM BEING DAUNTED BY THE GOVERNMENT’S INCREASING
USE of repression, the conspirators were keen to develop more ambitious plans.
Revolutionary enthusiasts like Slovo argued that the phase of limited sabotage
had effectively run its course and that the only remaining option was to commit
Umkhonto to revolutionary violence. Since the first recruits had been sent out of
the country for military training in China in September 1961, some 300 others
had followed for training elsewhere in Africa and in Eastern Europe, providing a
trained core of activists ready for guerrilla operations. Arthur Goldreich had
travelled to China, the Soviet Union and East Germany, seeking military aid for
Umkhonto and obtaining information on the manufacture of arms.
Slovo found a powerful ally for his arguments in Govan Mbeki, a talented
political organiser from Port Elizabeth who had joined the MK high command at
Lilliesleaf Farm after going underground in 1962 to avoid house arrest. A writer
and journalist, employed by New Age as its Port Elizabeth editor, he had been
part of the group in the 1950s which had turned Port Elizabeth and other towns
in the Eastern Cape into one of the most successful areas of ANC activity.
Detained for five months during the state of emergency in 1960, he had
subsequently recruited and run a sabotage unit based in Port Elizabeth until
arrested in 1962 under the Explosives Act on a charge of having instructed men
in the manufacture of homemade bombs. While being held in prison for five
months, three of them in solitary confinement, he had managed to continue work
on his study of the Transkei, which was later published as The Peasants’ Revolt.
Unlike other MK activists, he was a staunch believer in the power of the
peasantry to change South African society and in the importance of rural areas as
the main theatre of resistance. Acquitted of the explosives charge, he was served
with a house-arrest order, but went underground and based himself at Lilliesleaf.
At the age of fifty-two, eight years older than Mandela, Mbeki was a veteran
communist activist, having first been attracted by communism during his days as
a student at Fort Hare in the 1930s. He was a close friend and collaborator of

Ruth First, Slovo’s wife. And like Slovo, he was a hardline, narrow ideologue,
unshakeable in his convictions and certainties.
Slovo and Mbeki began work on a new MK strategy which they completed by
April 1963 and which was given the codename Operation Mayibuye. The
proposals they put forward in their six-page memorandum were on a scale that
no one had previously contemplated. ‘The time for small thinking is over,’ they
declared.
Part 1 encapsulated their argument for proceeding to guerrilla warfare:
The white state has thrown overboard every pretence of rule by democratic
process. Armed to the teeth, it has presented the people with only one choice and
that is its overthrow by force and violence. It can now be truly said that very
little, if any, scope exists for the smashing of white supremacy other than by
means of mass revolutionary action, the main content of which is armed
resistance leading to victory by military means.
The political events which have occurred in the last few years have convinced
the overwhelming majority of the people that no mass struggle which is not
backed up by armed resistance and military offensive operations can hope to
make a real impact. This can be seen from the general mood of the people and
their readiness to undertake even desperate and suicidal violent campaigns of the
Leballo type. It can also be gauged by their reluctance to participate in orthodox
political struggles in which they expose themselves to massive retaliation
without a prospect of hitting back. . . . We are confident that the masses will
respond in overwhelming numbers to a lead which holds out a real possibility of
successful armed struggle. . . .
The objective military conditions in which the movement finds itself make the
possibility of a general uprising leading to direct military struggle an unlikely
one. Rather, as in Cuba, the general uprising must be sparked off by organized
and well-prepared guerrilla operations during the course of which the masses of
the people will be drawn in and armed.
After disposing of the arguments against military action, Slovo and Mbeki
turned to drawing up detailed plans of operation. Hundreds more activists would
leave South Africa for guerrilla training. They would return by sea and by air in
trained groups, thirty-strong, armed and equipped to be self-sufficient for at least
a month while they linked up with local guerrilla bands: ‘Our target is that on
arrival the external force should find at least 7,000 men in the four main areas to

join the guerrilla army in the initial onslaught.’ Lists of targets were drawn up.
‘We are convinced that this plan is capable of fulfilment, ’ they said. ‘But only if
the whole apparatus of the movement both here and abroad is mobilized for its
implementation and if every member now prepares to make unlimited sacrifice
for the achievement of our goal.’
Plans were also drawn up to manufacture hand grenades, bombs and other
armaments inside South Africa. A new property near Krugersdorp named
Travallyn was purchased for use as an arsenal. The man given responsibility for
arms manufacture at Travallyn was Denis Goldberg, a thirty-year-old engineer
from a well-known communist family, previously president of the Congress of
Democrats. The scale of the operation envisaged at Travallyn was considerable.
‘Production requirements’ were estimated at 48,000 land mines, 210,000 hand
grenades and 1,500 time devices for bombs. Goldberg opened negotiations for
production equipment from factory owners, wholesale distributors and
machinery merchants, using a string of pseudonyms, and obtained quotations for
iron castings which matched designs for a hand grenade made by Goldreich. He
also approached two firms of timber merchants for wood for 48,000 boxes in
which to store all the armaments.
The contents of Operation Mayibuye were debated at length again and again
at Lilliesleaf. The revolutionary enthusiasts—Slovo, Mbeki, Goldreich and
military figures like Wilton Mkwayi and Joe Gqabi, who had returned from
training in China and had joined the high command—wanted its immediate
adoption. But others had deep misgivings. ‘These people were so involved they
lost all objectivity,’ recalled Kathrada. ‘They were in a hurry, very impatient to
get things going. To my mind, it was just impossible.’
Sisulu believed that the plan was ‘unrealistic’. Bram Fischer subsequently
referred to it as ‘an entirely unrealistic brainchild of some youthful and
adventurous imagination’. The exact status of Operation Mayibuye was a matter
of dispute for years to come. Slovo and Mbeki insisted that the document had
been properly approved as official policy. Others denied that. In early June,
Slovo left South Africa to apprise Oliver Tambo and the ANC’s external mission
of Operation Mayibuye and to set in motion arrangements for seeking support
for it from African governments.
The comings and goings at Lilliesleaf Farm were so frequent as to make it
resemble more a business enterprise than the secret headquarters of a

revolutionary movement. Slovo often went there, driving from his office in Innes
Chambers in town, as many as three times a day; so did Fischer, Bernstein and
other leading conspirators. Living there were not only Goldreich and his family,
but at times Sisulu, Kathrada and Mbeki, when they needed temporary quarters.
Goldberg often drove across from Travallyn. Meetings of the MK high
command and of the central committee of the Communist Party took place there.
A variety of MK personnel passed through. There were even social events. The
farming activities at Lilliesleaf provided some form of cover. But the farm
workers themselves were amazed at how careless the conspirators seemed. ‘You
people are asking for prison if you carry on like this,’ the black foreman told
Kathrada. Kathrada raised the security issue over and over again. Bernstein was
also worried. ‘I began to sense that, in the top MK echelons, there was a growing
gung-ho spirit of recklessness—though in their cloak and dagger operations they
would probably have called it necessary boldness. It was not shared by those of
us who still lived and moved about in fear in the real world outside the fence.’
Though it was generally agreed that further meetings should take place
elsewhere, still the conspirators kept coming back to Lilliesleaf and still they
took few precautions.
Yet the risks were becoming manifestly greater by the day. A major police
raid on 24 June caught several figures who knew the whereabouts of Lilliesleaf.
They included Bartholomew Hlapane, a member of the Communist Party central
committee, and Patrick Mthembu, a member of MK’s high command, who had
been part of the first group trained in China and had since become boastful about
his exploits. Another supporter arrested at the same time was Brian Somana, a
journalist friendly with Winnie Mandela who had been one of the drivers used to
take her to Lilliesleaf.
Two days later the conspirators staged an exercise in bravado with
consequences they did not foresee. Using a house in Parktown belonging to
Goldreich, they erected a radio transmitter to make an ‘Inaugural Broadcast by
Radio Liberation’. The taped broadcast was introduced by Mbeki:
This is the radio of the African National Congress, calling you from
underground in South Africa. Our radio talks to you for the first time today, 26
June, but not for the last time. . . .
The government imposed a twenty-four-hour house arrest order on Walter
Sisulu. We could not accept this. . . . Our Congress decided that Walter Sisulu

should leave his home. . . . Today he continues to lead our organization and the
people. . . . Here is Walter Sisulu to speak to you from the African National
Congress underground headquarters.
A recording from Sisulu followed:
I speak to you from somewhere in South Africa. I have not left the country. I do
not plan to leave. Many of our leaders of the African National Congress have
gone underground. This is to keep our organization in action; to preserve the
leadership; to keep the freedom fight going. Never has the country, and our
people, needed leadership as they do now, in this hour of crisis. . . .
Whether anyone other than the conspirators and their friends heard the
broadcast was difficult to discover. But a copy of the text was delivered to a
South African news agency in the hope of gaining some publicity. The copy
quickly found its way into the hands of the security police. They saw it not as an
irritating stunt but as a breakthrough in their search for the conspirators. Since 20
April the whereabouts of Sisulu had remained a mystery to them. Some believed
he had left the country. Sisulu’s broadcast gave them a new target. In
questioning detainees in prison, the priority became to locate Sisulu’s base.

After spending nearly six months of his five-year sentence in Pretoria Local,
Mandela was suddenly ordered one night in late May 1963 to pack his
belongings. Taken to the prison’s reception office, he found three other prisoners
waiting there. The prison commander, Colonel Aucamp, told them curtly that
they were to be transferred to another prison. When they asked where, he
replied, ‘Die Eiland.’
The journey was 1,000 miles. The prisoners were shackled together and put
into the back of a closed van with a single toilet bucket for use on the way. Not
until they reached Cape Town on the following afternoon were they allowed out
of the vehicle. At the dockyard, still chained together, they boarded the Robben
Island ferry, clambering down a steep, narrow ladder into the hold used to
accommodate prisoners for the hour-long passage. Mandela caught his first sight
of the island from the harbour at Murray’s Bay, when he was led back on deck
as the light was fading. ‘Green and beautiful, it looked at first more like a resort
than a prison,’ he wrote.
Lying six miles north of Green Point and three miles west of Bloubergstrand,

guarding the entrance to Table Bay, Robben Island possessed a reputation as a
desolate and forbidding place. Roughly oval in shape, less than three miles long
and one mile wide, it was surrounded by the icy currents of the Atlantic Ocean,
providing an effective barrier to escape. In summer months, the view of Table
Mountain to the south, however magnificent, was a constant reminder to
prisoners of another, different world from which they were barred. In winter,
northwesterly winds drove dark rain clouds across the mountain, obscuring the
view, and kept the island damp and cold. The flat landscape of the island offered
little protection against these winter winds and winters there were always colder
than on the mainland.
The history of Robben Island had been marked over three centuries largely by
misery and misfortune. Named by Dutch mariners after the thousands of seals
—robbe—that once lived there, it had been used by successive generations as a
dumping ground for the miscreants and misfits of society—convicts, political
prisoners, lepers, lunatics and paupers. Its quarries had provided the mainland
with stone and lime since the seventeenth century. In 1841, convicts had built a
small Anglican church there. In 1864, a lighthouse had been constructed on
Minto’s Hill, the highest point on the island, rising seventy feet above sea level.
During the Second World War, the military had taken possession, installing a
new harbour at Murray’s Bay, on the northeastern side of the island, an airstrip
at its northern end, and gun emplacements, observation towers and residential
quarters for its garrison of some 3,000 people. During the 1950s the island was
used as a training centre by the South African navy. Then, in 1961, it had been
handed over to the prisons department to be used once more as a penal colony
for the first time in 100 years.
The prison administration set out deliberately to create an establishment
feared for its harsh and brutal regime. Prison life for Africans in South Africa
was generally grim, but Robben Island attained special notoriety for its violent
and vindictive treatment of prisoners. White warders there were given free rein
to beat and bully inmates into submission. The daily fare they meted out
included assaults, arbitrary punishment and a range of other abuses. Individual
warders, like the Kleynhans brothers, became infamous for their cruel and
sadistic conduct.
The first groups of prisoners to be sent to Robben Island were hardened
criminals, some of whom were considered to be too dangerous to be kept in
maximum-security prisons on the mainland, men accustomed to leading lives of

violence. ‘Most of the prisoners were disfigured,’ an ANC arrival recorded,
‘their shaven heads covered with scars, their eyes bloodshot, their noses askew,
their teeth knocked out, and their bodies full of tattoos, often obscene.’ The
convicts operated in gangs, which warders used to their own advantage,
patronising some with privileges and employing them to keep others under
control. Convicts served warders as enforcers and informers. Murders, assaults
and rapes among prisoners were commonplace. When more general forms of
discipline were needed, warders organised what was called a ‘carry-on’, during
which they encircled groups of prisoners and continued to beat them with
batons, pick-handles and rubber pipes, forcing them to get up once they had
fallen so that they could be knocked down once more. ‘After about half an hour
the command came to stop,’ an ANC witness said, describing a carry-on. ‘The
prisoners staggered away to assemble across the yard and about 200 formed up
in front of us. Blood was pouring from their heads; their clothing was torn to
ribbons; their faces were unrecognizable. They were barely able to walk; unable
to move their arms; moaning; crying.’
The first groups of political prisoners sent to Robben Island were PAC
members, many of them arrested as a result of the abortive Poqo uprising in
April 1963. Regarded as terrorists and murderers of whites by white warders,
political prisoners were treated with an extra measure of contempt. They were
mixed in with common-law prisoners. Younger prisoners were often forced to
become ‘wyfies’ to convicts, with the active encouragement of warders as a
means of humiliation. The small number of ANC members initially imprisoned
on the island had to contend with not only persecution from warders and
convicts but open hostility from PAC members, who denounced them as sellouts to whites and communists. Only a handful were there when Mandela
arrived.
On the quayside as Mandela disembarked from the ferry stood a group of
white warders shouting taunts that were familiar to all new arrivals, ‘Dis die
Eiland!’—‘This is the Island!’—‘Hier julle gaan vrek!’—‘Here you will die!’
The prisoners were told to line up in pairs and jog along the path to the prison
compound as their guards screamed, ‘Haak! Haak!’, an Afrikaans term used for
driving cattle. Determined not to give in to any intimidation, Mandela took the
lead with Stephen Tefu, a Communist Party trade unionist, signalling that they
should walk slowly and deliberately, not run as commanded. A white warder,
one of the Kleynhans brothers, shouted at them, ‘This is not Johannesburg, this

is not Pretoria, this is Robben Island, and we will not tolerate any
insubordination here. Haak! Haak!’ Mandela and Tefu continued to walk at a
leisurely pace. Kleynhans ordered them to halt. ‘Look, man, we will kill you, we
are not fooling around, your wives and children and mothers and fathers will
never know what happened to you. This is the last warning. Haak! Haak!’
Mandela replied, ‘You have your duty and we have ours.’
At the prison compound, the prisoners were told to strip. Each item of
clothing was searched and then flung on a wet floor. By the time they put them
back on, their clothes were soaking. A belligerent prison officer arrived and
started to berate one of the prisoners about the length of his hair. Mandela
attempted to intervene. The officer cut him off. ‘Never talk to me that way, boy!’
he shouted and advanced threateningly, ready to strike. Though frightened,
Mandela managed to stand his ground: ‘If you so much as lay a hand on me, I
will take you to the highest court in the land and when I finish with you, you will
be as poor as a church mouse.’ Mandela was as surprised by his own bravado as
the officer was. The officer asked for his ticket. ‘Five years! You are in for five
years and you are so arrogant! Do you know what it means to serve five years?’
Mandela replied, ‘That is my business. I am ready to serve five years but I am
not prepared to be bullied. You must act within the law.’
After this initial confrontation, Mandela settled down to a routine which, by
Robben Island standards, was relatively benign. He and his three colleagues
were given a spacious cell with large windows and its own toilets and showers.
The cell, remarked Mandela, was one of the best he had ever seen. Coloured
warders stationed on the island at the time were cooperative in supplying them
with extra food, tobacco and news. They were kept isolated from all other
prisoners. But the manual tasks they were given were far less arduous than the
gruelling work in the quarries other prisoners had to undertake.
In July, Mandela was permitted a visit by Winnie, the first time he had seen
her since starting his prison sentence eight months before. Their meeting took
place in a building at the harbour. They were separated by two sections of wire
mesh, about a yard apart, reaching up to the roof, which prevented them from
seeing each other properly. There was nowhere for them to sit. To make
themselves heard, they had to shout to each other, while white warders stood
alongside listening to every word, ready to terminate the meeting if they touched
on any forbidden subject. After thirty minutes, their brief encounter was over. ‘It
was horrible,’ Winnie recalled. ‘I was so depressed when I came away, but at

least I had seen Nelson and he appeared pleased and relieved to see me.’
Mandela’s stay on Robben Island ended as abruptly as it had begun. Later in
July, without warning, he was transferred back to Pretoria Local and held in
solitary confinement. He was given no explanation for the move, but from some
fleeting glimpses he had of other prisoners being held there, he began to discern
that something had gone seriously wrong.

The meeting of conspirators at Lilliesleaf Farm on 11 July 1963 was intended to
be the last time they gathered there for business. The risk of discovery was
considered to be too great. Too many people knew of its existence and some of
them were currently in the hands of the security police. Bernstein went there
only with the greatest reluctance, persuaded to go ‘just this once more’. So
strong was his sense of foreboding that at the last minute, having at first set out
from his home in Observatory carrying a critique he had written of Operation
Mayibuye, which was due to be discussed that afternoon, he returned home and
hid it instead in his garage. Others arrived there in disguise. Goldberg brought
Sisulu, Mbeki and Mhlaba from Travallyn in his Volkswagen Combi. Sisulu had
acquired a lighter complexion, a Chaplinesque moustache and darker hair.
Mbeki wore a blue boiler suit and a balaclava, dressed ostensibly as a farm
labourer. Goldberg had grown a beard and moustache. Kathrada, who had been
staying overnight at Lilliesleaf preparing a radio broadcast, had dyed his hair
red, passing himself off as a Portuguese with the name of Pedro Perreira. They
were joined by the lawyer Bob Hepple, who came on secretariat business.
Goldreich was expected to arrive later in the afternoon for the discussion on
Operation Mayibuye.
Even though the conspirators acknowledged the extent of the danger at
Lilliesleaf, the old habits of life there died hard. Needing dental treatment, Sisulu
had arranged for a white dentist to visit him at Lilliesleaf half an hour before the
meeting was due to start at 3 p.m. The dentist duly came and went.
The security police, meanwhile, had begun to move in. The information they
had obtained pointed to a house in extensive grounds in the Rivonia area. For
several nights, Lieutenant van Wyk drove up and down tracks and byroads in
Rivonia, taking with him an informer, searching for landmarks. On the third
night they identified Lilliesleaf Farm.

At the Grays, a task force for the raid was assembled, led by van Wyk with
Warrant Officer Dirker as second-in-command. The raid was set for 1 p.m., but a
senior officer recently seconded to the security police, discovering that no search
warrant had been issued, ordered van Wyk to obtain one. So the raid had to be
postponed for two hours, to 3 p.m.
As the conspirators settled down around the table in the thatched cottage at
Lilliesleaf, a dry-cleaning van belonging to a well-known Johannesburg firm
moved slowly down the approach road. In front were two men in white
dustcoats; inside were ten more men and a police Alsatian. A farm employee
stopped the vehicle, saying there was no one at home. Van Wyk ordered the raid
to begin.
They found Sisulu, Mbeki, Kathrada, Bernstein, Hepple and Mhlaba in the
thatched cottage. Three of them—Sisulu, Mbeki and Kathrada—tried to escape
through a window but were quickly caught outside. They found Goldberg in the
main house. Goldreich was captured when he returned to Lilliesleaf later in the
day. Subsequently, three more conspirators were arrested: the lawyer Harold
Wolpe; a member of the Johannesburg high command, Andrew Mlangeni; and
another communist activist, Elias Motsoaledi.
The importance of the Rivonia raid, however, went far beyond the capture of
leading conspirators. For during their search of the premises at Lilliesleaf and
later at Travallyn, the police acquired a massive haul of incriminating documents
revealing the full extent of the conspiracy and its international connections. The
most significant document was Operation Mayibuye, with its grandiose plans for
guerrilla warfare, a copy of which had been found hidden in a heating stove
standing in a corner of the thatched cottage. But there was a host of other
documents relating to revolutionary methods, arms production, guerrilla
recruitment and training, and contacts with China, the Soviet Union and East
European governments. The Lilliesleaf haul included 106 maps indicating
targets like police stations, post offices, government offices, railway lines,
telephone lines and power pylons. At Travallyn, the police also found bombmaking equipment and sketches and diagrams for the production of hand
grenades.
Mandela was implicated in all this. More than ten documents were in his
handwriting. They included his notes on basic and advanced military training
and warfare; his diary covering the period from January to June 1962, containing

details of his tour of Africa, his discussions with Algerian officials and his
military training course in Ethiopia; and monographs he had copied out on such
subjects as ‘How to be a Good Communist’ and ‘Dialectical Materialism’. Other
items found belonging to Mandela were copies of his press releases and
statements, his library of books on warfare, his passport in the name of David
Motsamayi, and correspondence and photos. Among them were letters from
Winnie beginning ‘My dearest love’ and a photograph he liked to keep of her.
Nothing illustrated more the amateurism of Mandela’s revolutionaries than
that one year after his arrest on relatively minor charges they should be caught in
a hide-out they knew to be unsafe in possession of useless documents
implicating him in offences that could have led to his death by hanging.

CHAPTER 12

THE RIVONIA TRIAL
THE CONSPIRATORS WERE HELD UNDER THE NINETY-DAY
DETENTION law, kept in solitary confinement, incommunicado and without
access to lawyers. All but two were imprisoned in Pretoria Local. But Arthur
Goldreich and Harold Wolpe were detained in police cells at Marshall Square in
Johannesburg and from there they fashioned their escape on 11 August by
bribing a young Afrikaner prison guard. Out of sheer vindictiveness, the security
police then arrested Wolpe’s law partner and brother-in-law, James Kantor, a
criminal lawyer with a reputation as a playboy but with no political connections.
No evidence was ever produced implicating Kantor in the conspiracy.
Meanwhile, the government whipped up a public mood of hysteria and fear.
Ministers and police officials openly proclaimed the guilt of the detained men,
though none of them had yet been charged with any offence. Their arrests were
described by the commissioner of police as ‘a major breakthrough in the
elimination of subversive organizations’. The head of the security police,
Colonel van den Bergh, boasted that the underground was smashed, its leaders
apprehended and that nothing remained to be done other than to mop up the
remnants. The government was portrayed as being on the verge of victory over
all its opponents and critics. ‘It was a time when to be a nonconformist, to act
offbeat, to speak against the stream, even to think against the stream, was fraught
with peril,’ said Joel Joffe, a young lawyer witnessing these events.
Like an increasing number of young white professional people, Joffe had
made plans to emigrate. He had never been politically active, but he had grown
to dislike life in South Africa, with its suffocating atmosphere of paranoia and
injustice. He was on the point of leaving for Australia when he was approached
by Hilda Bernstein, who had been searching for a lawyer willing to help defend
her husband in court in the event of charges being laid against him. Mrs
Bernstein had encountered considerable difficulty finding an instructing attorney
prepared to undertake the task. The hazards for any lawyer acting on behalf of
the Rivonia conspirators were severe, both at a professional and at a social level.

Joffe was sceptical about what could be achieved. ‘She was asking that I should
embark on a case of unknown duration in the defence of people I did not know,
whose actions I knew nothing about and on a charge which had not been
formulated, ’ said Joffe. ‘I felt that even if I were to agree, it would be a waste of
time.’ Given all the evidence the government claimed to have, the trial would
surely be a mere formality.
Joffe was nevertheless sufficiently appalled by the manner in which his fellow
lawyers had shunned Mrs Bernstein—‘I really am too busy’—to decide to take
the case. Within the next few weeks, he received other approaches: from
Albertina Sisulu, from Annie Goldberg, the frail mother of Denis Goldberg, and,
later, from Winnie Mandela.
He had yet to ascertain what charges were to be brought against the
conspirators. He went to the Grays to see Colonel George Klindt, the new head
of the Johannesburg security police, and Dr Percy Yutar, the deputy attorneygeneral of the Transvaal, who had been appointed to take charge of any legal
proceedings arising from the Rivonia raid and who had set up offices within
security police headquarters. Neither was helpful. ‘It was all very smooth, all
patently false,’ said Joffe. ‘They were obviously lying and determined to be as
unhelpful towards me as they possibly could.’
Joffe also began to assemble a defence team, although there were no funds
available to meet their costs. The obvious starting point was Bram Fischer. No
one outside a small group of conspirators knew of Fischer’s real role in the
underground. His public reputation was that of a radical lawyer involved in
political cases like the treason trial; he was also known as a skilled advocate
appearing on behalf of giant mining companies in some of the most abstruse
financial cases in the South African courts. Fischer’s political sympathies were
evident, but not his involvement in clandestine activity. When Joffe approached
Fischer for his help, he had not the slightest inkling of what he was really asking
Fischer to do. For Fischer the dilemma was only too clear. The evidence
obtained by police at Lilliesleaf was likely to implicate him; his handwriting was
on several documents seized there. But what was even more hazardous was that
he would be called upon to question witnesses in court who could betray him at
any moment. Fischer did not hesitate to offer his help. He was more than willing
to assist in the preparation of the case, but, without being able to explain his
reasons, he said he was reluctant to be part of the defence team at the trial.

Two other advocates agreed to serve on the defence team. One was Mandela’s
Greek friend George Bizos, by now well versed in political trials. The other was
Arthur Chaskalson, one of the most promising young advocates in the country,
who had no political associations but a deep commitment to the defence of
people who would otherwise have gone undefended.
Together, Joffe, Bizos and Chaskalson put tremendous pressure on Fischer to
agree to lead the defence team. Not knowing of his involvement in the
underground movement, they were unable to understand his reluctance to do so.
They insisted that no other advocate could put so well the argument that the
conspirators had done no more than the Afrikaner rebels who had taken up arms
against the government in 1914 and who had received prison sentences rather
than the death penalty. Fischer eventually agreed to lead the defence team and
persuaded Vernon Berrangé, then living abroad, to join them. The conspirators,
however, understood full well the risks that Fischer was taking. When Rusty
Bernstein first heard Fischer would be acting on their behalf in the trial, he
turned to the others and said, ‘He deserves the Victoria Cross.’
Nearly three months had passed since the conspirators’ arrest and Joffe could
still not obtain any information about who the defendants might be and what
charges they might face. Then, on 7 October, without his knowledge, the
conspirators were taken from their cells, one at a time, to a prison office. There
they were formally charged with offences under three acts of which they were
given only the numbers. They were told they would appear in court within fortyeight hours and that they were no longer being held as ninety-day detainees but
as awaiting-trial prisoners. Mandela was included on the same charges, but he
was to remain in the category of a convicted prisoner.
The same day, hearing rumours on the legal grapevine that the conspirators
were due to appear in court the following morning, Joffe phoned Percy Yutar,
the prosecutor, and was told that the prisoners would indeed be appearing then in
the Supreme Court in Pretoria. Along with Bizos and Chaskalson, Joffe duly
travelled to Pretoria the next day, only to find that no one there knew anything
about the case. From the attorney-general, Rudolf Rhein, the lawyers eventually
ascertained that the prisoners would appear in the Supreme Court on the
following day, but they were still not told who the defendants were or what the
charges were, merely that they would find the defendants in Pretoria Local.
After a long wait and various arguments about whether white and black

prisoners could mix together, the defendants were eventually produced.
Mandela’s appearance had changed considerably. His large frame had withered;
he looked thin and underweight. His face had a sallow complexion, his cheeks
were sunken and the skin under his eyes hung in bags. He was dressed in drab
prison garb: short trousers, a khaki shirt and sandals. But his mood on seeing his
fellow prisoners was buoyant. For the first time in months, he was able to talk to
friends, to touch them, to laugh with them.
The sense of reunion was not shared by all the defendants. Of the eleven
prisoners present, seven of them—Mandela, Sisulu, Mbeki, Kathrada, Mhlaba,
Bernstein and Goldberg—had all played leading roles in the conspiracy. Two
others—Elias Motsoaledi and Andrew Mlangeni—had been arrested before the
Rivonia raid and were at a lower level of Umkhonto, but both had been involved
in sabotage activity; unknown to the police, Mlangeni had been trained in China,
as had Mhlaba. But for James Kantor, a flamboyant thirty-six-year-old, on
friendly terms with police and criminals alike, who counted Colonel Klindt
among his clients, the abrupt change in his fortunes was hard to bear. He was in
a state of shock, his face haggard and drawn, his extrovert nature crushed. All
the accused knew that he had nothing to do with the conspiracy and urged him to
arrange a separate defence.
The predicament of the eleventh prisoner, Bob Hepple, was also acute. Hepple
had played an active part in the underground movement, but as a secondary
figure, passing messages, providing a conduit between the underground and the
outside world, fixing arrangements. His arrest at Lilliesleaf with the others had
been more a matter of coincidence than an indication of involvement in MK’s
military plans. In solitary confinement, his police interrogators, flourishing a
copy of Operation Mayibuye, had told him he was certain to be sentenced to
death unless he collaborated. ‘I didn’t want to die for Operation Mayibuye, ’ he
said years later. ‘I was going to be hanged for a plan which I thought was crazy
and for which I had no responsibility.’ To the dismay and consternation of his
fellow prisoners, Hepple announced that during his detention he had been
‘asked’, as he put it, to give evidence against the others. He was still considering
what to do, he said. All the excitement of the reunion vanished. As Hepple left
the room, the others continued their consultation in a more sombre mood.
The following day, 9 October, the prisoners were driven in a special prison
van from Pretoria Local, accompanied by an armed convoy, to the Supreme
Court on Church Square, an ornate nineteenth-century building, three storeys

high, with columns, marble facings and brass rails, known as the Palace of
Justice. On the other side of Church Square stood the Raadsaal, the seat of the
old Transvaal Republic government, and, in the centre, a massive bronze statue
of President Kruger. Armed policemen were everywhere, both outside and inside
the Supreme Court.
From the basement cells, Mandela, the first accused, led the procession of
prisoners up the steps into the courtroom, raising a clenched fist as he emerged.
This was the first glimpse of him in public for a year. Dressed in shabby prison
garb, short trousers, a khaki shirt and sandals, he had lost so much weight and
his skin was so pallid from prison life that to friends in the spectators’ gallery he
seemed almost unrecognisable. But his smile was still full of its old confidence.
The judge assigned to the case was Quartus de Wet, Judge-President of the
Transvaal, sixty-five years old, a moody, complex character with a reputation for
being self-willed, obstinate and impatient with legal quibbles. He shared the
common white view in the virtues of white supremacy. Yet unlike many other
judges at the time, he did not owe his position to any allegiance to the National
Party. He had been appointed to the bench in 1947, before the Nationalists came
to power.
Percy Yutar rose to call ‘the case of the state against the National High
Command’, and, for the first time, produced an indictment, handing one copy to
the court and passing another to Bram Fischer. The accused were charged under
the Sabotage Act and the Suppression of Communism Act with complicity in
more than 200 acts of sabotage aimed at aiding guerrilla warfare and facilitating
violent revolution and armed invasion of the country. The Sabotage Act carried
the death penalty. In addition to the defendants in court, the indictment listed
twenty-four co-conspirators, including Goldreich, Wolpe, Harmel, Slovo,
Hodgson, Kotane and Tambo.
Significantly, the accused were not charged under the common law of treason.
Prosecution for treason would have required a preparatory examination, useful to
the defence, with two witnesses to every overt act, and proof beyond reasonable
doubt. Mindful of the abortive treason trial, Yutar decided to proceed under the
Sabotage Act, which shifted much of the onus of proof from the prosecution to
the defence. But his decision was to have a marked influence on the outcome.
Fischer immediately rose to apply for an adjournment, asking for at least six
weeks to allow the defence time to prepare its case against such grave charges

and for the accused to recover from their ordeal of solitary confinement. Yutar
opposed any postponement. In a high-pitched voice, he spoke of witnesses who
had to be called before the end of the month, adding, with a theatrical flourish, ‘I
fear for their safety.’ The judge decided that a three-week pause was quite
sufficient and adjourned the court until 29 October.
Immediately after the adjournment, the court reconvened to hear a bail
application from Kantor. The case against Kantor was so flimsy that his lawyers
were convinced that he should have no difficulty in obtaining bail. After an
eloquent address by his lawyer, Harold Nicholas, the judge turned to Yutar and
asked simply whether there were any indications that Kantor had been involved
in the acts of sabotage alleged against the accused. Yutar assured the judge that
there was no doubt whatsoever that Kantor was fully involved. He was denied
bail.
The accused and their lawyers were to develop a contempt and hatred for
Yutar that lasted far beyond the trial. A small, bald, dapper fifty-two-year-old
who held himself ramrod-erect in court, he had ambitions to become the first
Jewish attorney-general ever appointed in South Africa. He made no secret of
his Jewish origins and seemed determined to prove that Jews could be as loyal as
any other subjects of the apartheid state. He harboured a particular dislike for
Jewish communists, of whom there were a considerable number, and felt no
qualms about ingratiating himself with the security police. When Joel Joffe,
himself a Jew, had met Yutar a few weeks beforehand at security police
headquarters, Yutar had made a point of praising his police colleagues. ‘I have
been at the Grays for three weeks now, and in all that time I have not heard a
single word of anti-Semitism from any of these people,’ he had said. He saw his
mission as being to present the accused as violent, vicious, self-interested
individuals seeking to overthrow the government for their own aggrandisement.
In court, when he thought events were going his way, Yutar resorted to open
gloating; when the tide turned against him his voice rose to a high-pitched
squeak. He also had a passion for publicity. On the day before the case began,
Yutar found time to give interviews to reporters and to hand them advance
copies of the indictment, which defence counsel had not yet been able to obtain.
During the three-week adjournment, the accused and their lawyers gathered
daily to assess the indictment and to work out their line of defence. Restored to
the company of his friends and allowed two half-hour visits a week and one meal
a day sent in from outside prison, Mandela’s spirits soon revived. But the

outlook for the conspirators was bleak. Mandela was convinced that the trial
would result in a death sentence and insisted that they had to prepare themselves
for that eventuality. He felt a sense of personal responsibility for what had
happened. ‘He was conscious of obligations over and above others,’ Bernstein
recalled. ‘He had no concern for his own position,’ said Joffe. ‘His aim was to
turn the trial into a showcase against the government. ’ It was this quality of
leadership, of standing firm in adversity, of accepting a greater responsibility for
the course of events, of maintaining dignity and confidence in the face of a death
sentence, that was to leave its mark on the Rivonia trial.
The accused were determined to use the trial for the purposes not of seeking a
lesser punishment but of openly proclaiming their political views and the reasons
why they had resorted to violence. They would not deny responsibility for
sabotage, nor would they attempt to refute evidence obtained by the prosecution
that they knew to be true. They would refuse only to provide further information.
The matter of a sentence was less important to them than the need to explain in
public the stand they had taken.
Observing the discussions, Joffe noted the influence of Sisulu on Mandela and
the others:
He was a man of deliberation and slow judgement. At no time during the whole
of that period did I ever hear Walter make a hasty judgement, or venture an
appraisal of anybody or anything without first weighing it carefully, deliberately,
generally against his own immediate, instinctive reactions. On every issue, the
other prisoners gave the greatest weight to Walter’s opinions. It seemed to me
throughout the case, neither Nelson nor anyone else made any decision without
first seeking Walter’s opinion. After a short time, we on the defence team found
ourselves behaving the same way.
The immediate concern of the lawyers was the indictment. It contained vague
and general allegations, making it impossible to discern precisely what the
offence was, by whom the offence had been committed and in what way the
accused, either individually or jointly, were alleged to be connected with it.
When the lawyers asked the prosecution for further particulars, the replies they
were given were curt: either, ‘These facts are known’ or ‘These facts are
peculiarly within the knowledge of the accused.’ The prosecution, said Joffe,
was clearly following a simple precept: ‘You are guilty. Therefore you know
what you did. Therefore we don’t have to tell you.’ The lawyers decided to ask

the court to dismiss the indictment.
When the accused reappeared in court on 29 October, each in turn emerged
from the stairwell, faced the public gallery, gave the ANC’s clenched-fist salute
and shouted ‘Amandla!’ to which their supporters in the gallery replied with a
loud, ‘Ngawethu! ’ Only Kantor and Hepple did not give the salute, but simply
smiled at friends. To prevent further outbursts, the prisoners were subsequently
brought into court after the judge had taken his seat and opened the session.
Fischer immediately opened his attack on the indictment, speaking slowly and
carefully, weighing up each word, exposing the defects of the indictment one by
one. Some of the sabotage acts, he said, had been committed before any
Sabotage Act existed in South Africa and therefore could not be offences in
terms of the act under which the accused had been charged. He pointed out that
Mandela had been charged with having committed 156 acts of sabotage which
had taken place while he was in prison. Fischer deplored the lack of particularity
and the unsatisfactory, even ludicrous answers given when the defence asked for
further particulars. The state, he said, had decided the accused were guilty and
therefore the defence was a waste of time. Fischer’s crushing exposure of the
indictment was followed up with further ridicule from Kantor’s counsellor,
George Lowen.
The judge then turned to Hepple, who was unrepresented, to ask whether he
wished to say anything about the indictment. But before he had time to reply,
Yutar, sensing that events were moving against him, sprang to his feet to
announce that all charges against Hepple were being withdrawn, adding, in a
voice of triumph, that Hepple would be the first witness for the prosecution
against the accused. Hepple turned pale, rose to his feet and was accompanied
from the dock by Captain Swanepoel down the stairwell to the cells below.
Hepple’s defection was a considerable coup for Yutar. His fellow prisoners
had been expecting it; Hepple had discussed with them the possibility of
inducing Yutar to release him and then skipping the country. However, to the
public, it seemed that Yutar had gained a star witness. But he was still left with
an indictment virtually in tatters after Fischer and Lowen had finished with it.
Ignoring the legal arguments presented by the defence team, Yutar asserted that
their application was neither genuine nor sincere, but merely an attempt to harass
and embarrass the state. With increasing desperation, he resorted to ‘begging’
and ‘imploring’ the court not to reject the indictment, promising to provide

whatever further particulars the judge wanted. De Wet replied testily that it was
not his responsibility to tell the state what particulars were required to make a
good indictment. Yutar continued, ‘I would earnestly beg Your Lordship, nay
crave Your Lordship, not to squash the indictment, but to order that the state
does what it undertakes to do, that is to supply further particulars.’
It was all to no avail. De Wet threw out the indictment. Technically the
prisoners were free men. Their friends and relatives and the security police
rushed forward. Amid pandemonium, Swanepoel leapt into the dock and struck
each of the accused on the shoulder, declaring, ‘I am arresting you on a charge
of sabotage.’ Within a few minutes, the prisoners were herded down to the cells
again.
On the same day, bail applications were due to be heard first for Kantor and
then for Bernstein. The judge appeared sympathetic to Kantor’s case and at one
stage asked his defence counsel what he considered would be a reasonable sum
for bail. The discussion was nearly at an end when Yutar suddenly intervened to
announce that he was in possession of a confidential secret document showing
that escape plans had been made for the accused. What had prompted Yutar’s
latest claim was the discovery among the Rivonia documents of the escape notes
which Mandela had exchanged with Slovo in 1962 and which Slovo had decided
to preserve for posterity. Kantor’s application was rejected; so was Bernstein’s.
Back at Pretoria Local, the accused continued with the preparation of their
defence in a consulting room on the ground floor specially set aside for them.
Assuming that the room was bugged and that everything they said was overheard
by the security police, they communicated with each other by using a simple
coded language or by writing down messages and then burning them in ashtrays
before their daily sessions were over. Prison warders watched this procedure
through a door window with some distress. Before long, Captain Swanepoel was
seen pacing up and down the corridor, glancing through the window whenever
he passed. The prisoners realised how badly Swanepoel wanted to get his hands
on their messages and laid a trap for him. On a piece of paper Mbeki wrote, ‘It’s
so nice to have Lieutenant Swanepoel with us again’, waited for Swanepoel to
pass by and then passed it ostentatiously to Joffe. Joffe studied the message for
some time, whispered in a conspiratorial manner to the prisoners and then,
placing the message in an ashtray, fumbled for his matches. Swanepoel dashed
into the room, seized the ashtray with the message in it and rushed outside. He
did not appear outside the door again.

A new indictment was eventually produced. But it was still so badly flawed
that the defence lawyers decided to apply again for its dismissal. This time,
however, de Wet was in no mood to countenance further delay and he ordered
the case to proceed.
But now yet another drama intervened. Yutar’s first witness, Bob Hepple, had
managed to flee the country and he surfaced in Dar es Salaam, the Tanganyikan
capital, stating that he had no intention of testifying against the accused, whom
he admired and supported. He spoke of threats and broken promises made by the
police, and revealed the mental and physical torture to which detainees under the
ninety-day law were subjected. What no one knew at the time was that his
escape had been arranged by Bram Fischer, who had met him in secret on three
occasions at huge potential risk to himself.
The trial eventually began on 3 December 1963. The accused were asked by
the registrar of the court to plead.
MANDELA: The government should be in the dock, not me. I plead not
guilty.
His remark caused some consternation. There was angry muttering among the
police.
SISULU: It is the government which is guilty, not me.
DE WET: I don’t want any political speeches here. You may plead
guilty, or not guilty. But nothing else.
SISULU: It is the government which is responsible for what is
happening. I plead not guilty.
GOLDBERG: I associate myself with the statements of Mr Mandela and
Mr Sisulu. I plead not guilty.
And so it went on, except for Kantor, who said simply, ‘I am not guilty, My
Lord.’
Then Yutar rose to give his opening address. He had spent con - siderable
effort on it. He had also decided to arrange for it to be recorded by the statecontrolled radio network; a small black microphone had appeared overnight in
front of his desk. Broadcasting court proceedings was unprecedented in South
African history. No attempt had been made to consult defence counsel on the
matter. No sooner was Yutar on his feet than Fischer rose to demand the removal

of the microphones. De Wet looked uncomfortable but ordered them to be
dismantled.
The ‘cornerstone’ of the state’s case was Operation Mayibuye, said Yutar.
‘The accused deliberately and maliciously plotted and engineered the
commission of acts of violence and destruction throughout the country.’
The planned purpose . . . was to bring about in the Republic of South
Africa chaos, disorder and turmoil which would be aggravated, according
to their plan, by the operation of thousands of trained guerrilla warfare
units deployed throughout the country at various vantage points. These
would be joined in various areas by local inhabitants as well as specially
selected men posted to such areas. Their combined operations were
planned to lead to confusion, violent insurrection and rebellion, followed
at the appropriate juncture by armed invasion of the country by military
units of foreign powers. In the midst of the resulting chaos, turmoil and
disorder it was planned by the accused to set up a provisional
revolutionary government to take over the administration and control of
this country.
Yutar went on to give details of the Rivonia headquarters, the arsenal at
Travallyn and the plans for training in sabotage and guerrilla warfare in African
states. Documents and witnesses would be produced, he said, to substantiate all
this.
The extent of the conspiracy, as Yutar outlined it, left the defence lawyers
feeling considerably shaken. ‘From that moment on, we saw the case in a very
simple light,’ said Joffe. ‘For most of the accused the only possible verdict was
“guilty”. The case was therefore, as far as we were concerned, a battle to prevent
the death sentence being carried out.’
During the next three months, the prosecution presented 173 witnesses,
hundreds of documents, photographs and maps and a whole library of captured
books on guerrilla warfare. All Mandela’s papers found at Lilliesleaf were
produced. ‘Nelson felt that he had been let down by that,’ Sisulu recalled.
Mandela had once asked Sisulu during a chance meeting in Pretoria Local in
1962 to ensure that his documents were removed from Lilliesleaf. Sisulu had
raised the matter with Mbeki, but nothing had been done: ‘Nelson felt that the
fact that he was linked to the whole business was because we were responsible
for not taking appropriate steps.’

But prosecution witnesses also inflicted damage. The state’s key witness was
Bruno Mtolo, a member of MK’s Natal regional command, an active saboteur
for three years whom Mandela had met on his journey to Durban in August 1962
and who had also visited the Rivonia headquarters in 1963, where he had held
discussions with Sisulu and Mbeki. Arrested by the security police in August
1963, Mtolo had decided within hours to defect, claiming he had become
disillusioned with MK’s leadership and with the extent of communist influence
over the ANC, even though he himself was a Communist Party member. Mtolo
implicated not only Mandela, Sisulu and Mbeki but a host of other people in MK
activities.
Another key witness was Patrick Mthembu, a member of the Johannesburg
regional command, who had trained in China and had worked closely with all
the conspirators, both during the days when the ANC was a legal organisation
and during Umkhonto operations. Mthembu had spent two periods in solitary
confinement. He was offered indemnity against prosecution in exchange for his
testimony.
Just before the Christmas recess, Kantor was finally granted bail. Over the
months of the trial he had developed a warm relationship with Mandela.
Knowing of Kantor’s anguish at being separated from his wife, Barbara, who
was pregnant, Mandela had once come over to him and put his arm around his
shoulder. ‘Tell Barbara I apologize,’ said Mandela. ‘What for?’ asked Kantor.
‘Because you are here,’ he answered simply.
In January 1964, while sitting in the dock, Kantor wrote a note for Mandela,
which was passed along the row of accused. It said, ‘Barbara and I have thought
about and discussed godfathers at length. We have come to the conclusion that,
whether the baby is a girl or boy, we would consider it an honour if you would
agree to accept this office as an adjunct to the more disreputable positions you
have held in the past.’ Mandela’s reply took some time to arrive, reaching
Kantor just before the tea adjournment: ‘I would be more than delighted, and the
honour is mine, not the baby’s.’ As the court rose for the tea break, Mandela
hung back as the other accused left, pretending to arrange his papers, and
exchanged a quick word with Kantor. ‘Now they dare not hang me,’ he said,
beaming broadly.
In April 1964, soon after the prosecution concluded its case, Judge de Wet
found Kantor not guilty and discharged him. He left the court wearing the tie

Mandela had offered him in exchange for his own as a token of good luck before
the hearing started.
During the five-week adjournment allowed to the defence to examine the
evidence and prepare their case, the prison authorities at Pretoria Local provided
a new consultation room for the conspirators and their lawyers. It was long and
narrow and down the middle of it the prison building staff had constructed a
wooden counter topped by a heavy metal grating, dividing the room in half. Bar
stools had been placed on either side, one side for the lawyers, the other for the
conspirators. When the lawyers were first ushered into the new consultation
room, the prisoners were already seated on their side of the partition, lined up in
a long row like customers at a milk bar. Mandela stood up, smiled politely and
said, ‘What will it be today, gentle - men? Chocolate or ice-cream soda?’ The
prison commander, Colonel Aucamp, a malevolent official with whom Mandela
had previously clashed, was not amused. The lawyers protested that the
arrangements, with nine accused in a single line along the counter on one side
and five lawyers sitting on bar stools on the other, made a proper consultation
virtually impossible. Exhibits and notes had to be slid through a tiny space under
the metal bars. But Colonel Aucamp refused to allow any changes. To add to
their difficulties, the lawyers and their clients now had to assume that the new
contraption contained listening devices relaying everything that was said to
officials outside. They resorted again to passing notes on any issue considered
important.
The conspirators were clear about their objective in the trial. They wanted an
opportunity to explain to the world their reasons for embarking on a campaign of
violence against the government and the circumstances which had forced them
to do so. They would admit to initiating the sabotage campaign; they would
admit to making contingency plans for guerrilla warfare to be implemented if the
sabotage campaign failed to change the government’s mind; but they would
deny that they had already decided to embark on guerrilla warfare, as the
prosecution contended. They therefore needed to clarify the circumstances under
which Operation Mayibuye was drawn up. They also wanted to make clear that
the sabotage campaign had been carried out with express instructions that under
no circumstances should human life be endangered at any time. They would
therefore contest prosecution claims of murder and injury. They would also deny
that the intervention of foreign forces had been contemplated, as Yutar had
further claimed.

The case against individual conspirators, however, was not of equal strength.
The evidence against Bernstein was negligible; he had merely been discovered at
Lilliesleaf with the others. The evidence against Kathrada and Mhlaba was also
limited. The evidence against Mlangeni and Motsoaledi showed mainly that they
had been involved in the recruitment and transportation of volunteers for
military training abroad, making them lower-level operatives in the conspiracy.
Goldberg was identified as a sabotage expert involved in preparations for
armaments manufacture. Only Mandela, Sisulu and Mbeki were fully implicated
as leading figures in the conspiracy. The solution agreed upon, therefore, was
that six of the conspirators would make admissions of guilt on certain charges.
The remaining three—Bernstein, Kathrada and Mhlaba—would continue to
plead not guilty.
In order to ensure that the court heard a clear and coherent account of their
political aims and ideals, the accused decided that Mandela should open the case
for the defence by reading a statement from the dock, unhindered by crossexamination or questions from the bench. This procedure also enabled Mandela
to avoid any suggestion that he was retracting from the position he had taken at
his previous trial in 1962 of refusing to enter the witness box because of the
inherent injustice of the legal system. The disadvantage for Mandela was that a
statement from the dock was not accorded the same legal weight as ordinary
testimony and thus rendered him more vulnerable before the court. But Mandela
regarded whatever sentence he received as being of secondary importance to the
need for public understanding of the conspirators’ beliefs.
Mandela spent about two weeks drafting his speech, working mainly in his
cell in the evenings. He showed the draft to his fellow prisoners, who suggested
a few changes, and to Bram Fischer. Fischer was worried about the content,
about the damage it would do to Mandela’s prospects in court, and took it to a
highly respected advocate, Harold Hanson, for his opinion. Hanson told Fischer,
‘If Mandela reads this in court they will take him straight out to the back of the
courthouse and string him up.’ Fischer urged Mandela to modify the speech, but
to no avail. ‘I felt we were likely to hang no matter what we said, so we might as
well say what we truly believed,’ said Mandela. ‘Bram begged me not to read
the final paragraph, but I was adamant.’
On 20 April 1964, the conspirators were taken back to the Palace of Justice to
commence their defence. Both Winnie and Mandela’s mother were present in
court. In his opening remarks, made in his customary quiet and calm manner,

Fischer announced that certain aspects of the state’s evidence would be
conceded by the accused, but other parts would be challenged. They would deny
that Umkhonto was a section of the ANC—‘the military wing’, as the state
claimed—but seek to show that the leaders of Umkhonto and the ANC
endeavoured to keep these two organisations entirely distinct. ‘They did not
always succeed in this,’ he said, ‘but . . . every effort was made to achieve that
object.’ They would also deny emphatically that the ANC was a ‘tool’ of the
Communist Party, as the state claimed, and that the aims and objectives of the
ANC were the aims and objectives of the Communist Party. They would further
deny that Umkhonto had adopted Operation Mayibuye and had decided upon
guerrilla warfare.
DE WET: Will that be denied?
FISCHER: That will be denied. Here the evidence will show that while
preparations for guerrilla warfare were being made from as early as 1962,
no plan was ever adopted, and the evidence will show why it was hoped
throughout such a step could be avoided.
Fischer paused, while the judge finished making notes, and then announced
that Mandela would make a statement from the dock. Yutar was caught by
surprise. He had been misled into believing that he would have the benefit of
cross-examining Mandela. As Mandela rose slowly, adjusting the spectacles
which he used for reading, Yutar jumped to his feet, his shrill voice rising in
complaint.
YUTAR: My Lord! My Lord! I think you should warn the accused that
what he says from the dock has far less weight than if he submitted
himself to cross-examination!
DE WET: I think, Mr Yutar, that counsel for the defence have sufficient
experience to be able to advise their clients without your assistance.
Standing in the dock, Mandela began reading his statement slowly and with
calm deliberation, his voice carrying clearly across the courtroom. Gradually, as
he spoke, the silence in the courtroom became more profound.
I must deal immediately and at some length with the question of
violence. Some of the things so far told to the court are true and some are
untrue. I do not, however, deny that I planned sabotage. I did not plan it
in a spirit of recklessness, nor because I have any love of violence. I

planned it as a result of a calm and sober assessment of the political
situation that had arisen after many years of tyranny, exploitation and
oppression of my people by the whites.
I admit immediately that I was one of the persons who helped to form
Umkhonto we Sizwe, and that I played a prominent role in its affairs
until I was arrested in August 1962.
He went on to explain the reasons behind the formation of Umkhonto:
Firstly, we believed that as a result of government policy, violence by the
African people had become inevitable and that unless responsible leadership was
given to canalize and control the feelings of our people, there would be
outbreaks of terrorism which would produce an intensity of bitterness and
hostility between the various races of this country which is not produced even by
war.
Secondly, we felt that without violence there would be no way open to the
African people to succeed in their struggle against the principle of white
supremacy. All lawful modes of expressing opposition to this principle had been
closed by legislation, and we were placed in a position in which we had either to
accept a permanent state of inferiority or to defy the government. We chose to
defy the law. We first broke the law in a way which avoided any recourse to
violence; when this form was legislated against, and then the government
resorted to a show of force to crush opposition to its policies, only then did we
decide to answer violence with violence.
But the violence which we chose to adopt was not terrorism. We who formed
Umkhonto were all members of the African National Congress and had behind
us the ANC tradition of non-violence and negotiation as a means of solving
political disputes. We believed that South Africa belonged to all the people who
lived in it, and not to one group, be it black or white. We did not want an
interracial war and tried to avoid it to the last minute.
Mandela referred to the time in mid-1961 when the decision to turn to
violence was taken.
For a long time the people had been talking of violence—of the day
when they would fight the white man and win back their country—and
we, the leaders of the ANC, had nevertheless always prevailed upon
them to avoid violence and to pursue peaceful methods. When some of

us discussed this in May and June of 1961, it could not be denied that our
policy to achieve a non-racial state by non-violence had achieved
nothing, and that our followers were beginning to lose confidence in this
policy and were developing disturbing ideas of terrorism. . . .
After a long and anxious assessment of the South African situation, I,
and some colleagues, came to the conclusion that as violence in this
country was inevitable, it would be unrealistic and wrong for African
leaders to continue preaching peace and non-violence at a time when the
government met our peaceful demands with force.
This conclusion was not easily arrived at. It was only when all else had
failed, when all channels of peaceful protest had been barred to us, that
the decision was made to embark on violent forms of political struggle,
and to form Umkhonto we Sizwe. We did so not because we desired such
a course, but solely because the government had left us with no other
choice.
He outlined what he thought could be achieved by the use of violence.
The initial plan was based on a careful analysis of the political and
economic situation of our country. We believed that South Africa
depended to a large extent on foreign capital and foreign trade. We felt
that planned destruction of power plants and interference with rail and
telephone communications would tend to scare away capital from the
country, make it more difficult for goods from the industrial areas to
reach the seaports on schedule and would in the long run be a heavy
drain on the economic life of the country, thus compelling the voters of
the country to reconsider their position.
Attacks on the economic lifelines of the country were to be linked with
sabotage on government buildings and other symbols of apart - heid.
These attacks would serve as a source of inspiration to our people. In
addition, they would provide an outlet for those people who were urging
the adoption of violent methods and would enable us to give concrete
proof to our followers that we had adopted a stronger line and were
fighting back against government violence.
In addition, if mass action were successfully organized, and mass
reprisals taken, we felt that sympathy for our cause would be roused in
other countries and that greater pressure would be brought to bear on the

South African government.
He dealt with the relationship between the ANC and Umkhonto. The ANC, he
said, was a political organisation with a political function to fulfil. Its members
had joined on the express policy of non - violence. It could not undertake
violence without a change in the whole nature of the organisation. Nevertheless,
it had been prepared to depart from its fifty-year-old policy of non-violence to
the extent that it would no longer disapprove of ‘properly controlled violence’.
Umkhonto remained a small organisation, recruiting its members from different
races and organisations and trying to achieve its own particular objective of
sabotage. Although there had been some ‘overlapping of functions’ and although
the distinction between the two may have become ‘blurred’, the distinction was
still clear: ‘The fact that members of Umkhonto were recruited from the ANC,
and the fact that persons served both organizations . . . did not, in our view,
change the nature of the ANC or give it a policy of violence.’
He also dealt with the relationship between the ANC and the Communist
Party: ‘It is true that there has often been close cooperation between the ANC
and the Communist Party. But cooperation is merely proof of a common goal—
in this case the removal of white supremacy—and is not proof of a complete
community of interests.’ The ANC, unlike the Communist Party, admitted only
Africans as members. Its chief goal was for the African people to win unity and
full political rights. The Communist Party’s main aim, on the other hand, was to
remove the capitalists and to replace them with a working-class government. The
Communist Party sought to emphasise class distinctions, while the ANC sought
to harmonise them. The ANC had never at any period of its history advocated a
revolutionary change in the economic structure of the country, nor had it ever
condemned capitalist society.
He turned to his own political allegiances. He described himself as ‘an
African patriot’, a socialist influenced by Marxist thought, but not a communist.
He was attracted by the idea of a classless society, partly as a result of his
reading of Marxist literature, partly as a result of his admiration for early African
societies in which the land, then the main means of production, belonged to the
tribe. But there were aspects of Marxist thinking with which he fundamentally
disagreed:
From my reading of Marxist literature and from conversations with Marxists, I
have gained the impression that communists regard the parliamentary system of

the West as undemocratic and reactionary. But, on the contrary, I am an admirer
of such a system.
The Magna Carta, the Petition of Rights and the Bill of Rights are documents
which are held in veneration by democrats throughout the world.
I have great respect for British political institutions and for the country’s
system of justice. I regard the British parliament as the most democratic
institution in the world, and the independence and impartiality of its judiciary
never fail to arouse my admiration.
The American Congress, that country’s doctrine of separation of powers, as
well as the independence of its judiciary, arouses in me similar sentiments.
I have been influenced in my thinking by both West and East. All this has led
me to feel that in my search for a political formula, I should be absolutely
impartial and objective. I should tie myself to no particular system of society
other than that of socialism. I must leave myself free to borrow the best from the
West and from the East.
He went on to outline the conditions in which the African population lived
and worked, comparing them to the affluent lifestyle of the white population.
Africans were fighting against two features that were the hallmark of African
life: poverty and lack of human dignity.
Africans want a just share in the whole of South Africa, they want a
security and a stake in society.
Above all, we want equal political rights, because without them our
disabilities will be permanent. I know this sounds revolutionary to the
whites in this country, because the majority of voters will be Africans.
This makes the white man fear democracy.
But this fear cannot be allowed to stand in the way of the only solution
which will guarantee racial harmony and freedom for all. It is not true
that the enfranchisement of all will result in racial domination. Political
division, based on colour, is entirely artificial and, when it disappears, so
will the domination of one colour group by another. The ANC has spent
half a century fighting against racialism. When it triumphs it will not
change that policy.
This then is what the ANC is fighting. Their struggle is a truly national

one. It is a struggle of the African people, inspired by their own suffering
and their own experience. It is a struggle for the right to live.
Mandela stopped reading his statement at this point, put down his papers and
turned to face the judge, speaking his final words from memory:
During my lifetime I have dedicated myself to this struggle of the African
people. I have fought against white domination, and I have fought against black
domination. I have cherished the ideal of a democratic and free society in which
all persons live together in harmony and with equal opportunities. It is an ideal
which I hope to live for and to achieve. But if needs be, it is an ideal for which I
am prepared to die.
In the courtroom there was complete silence as Mandela sat down. For
perhaps thirty seconds the silence continued. Then from the public gallery there
came a great sigh, like the release of breath, and the crying of women.

Mandela’s statement, lasting more than four hours, was followed by the
evidence of Walter Sisulu. Sisulu was the key witness for the defence, his
knowledge of the ANC and of Umkhonto being greater than anyone else’s. Upon
him lay the burden of convincing the judge that Operation Mayibuye had been
considered as a plan of action but not adopted as a policy, the issue which the
defence lawyers considered was the ‘hairline’ around which the prospect of a
death sentence revolved. As Fischer led him through his evidence, Sisulu
explained how he had been present when Operation Mayibuye had first been
placed before the high command as a plan for consideration. The implications of
launching guerrilla warfare were so far-reaching that the high command had
sought the views of the ANC and other organisations. Among members of the
high command itself, opinion was deeply divided. ‘There was a strong argument
against the plan,’ said Sisulu. Several meetings were held to discuss it further.
The last meeting had adjourned without taking a decision. ‘My view was that
conditions did not exist at that time for Operation Mayibuye.’
Sisulu was subjected to five days of cross-examination, withstanding a
barrage of questions, gibes and taunts from Yutar. ‘It was a feat of considerable
merit, and under extremely difficult conditions,’ remarked Joffe. ‘For over a
week, Sisulu was kept in complete isolation with no human contact at all, day
after day in the witness box being hammered by judge and prosecutor.’ One by

one, the other accused—Kathrada, Mhlaba, Bernstein, Mbeki and Goldberg—
took their turn in the witness box to face the same treatment. Motsoaledi and
Mlangeni made short statements from the dock, admitting their guilt as minor
participants in Umkhonto. Motsoaledi described how he had been assaulted
during his period in solitary confinement and how his wife, the mother of seven
children, had been detained under the ninety-day law and rearrested when she
had completed ninety days. Mlangeni described how he had been assaulted and
tortured with electric shocks in police custody.
On 20 May, Yutar arrived in court carrying four volumes containing a
summary of evidence which he proceeded to read out as his closing argument.
Much of it amounted to a political attack on the accused. ‘The deceit of the
accused is amazing,’ he said. ‘Although they represented scarcely more than 1
per cent of the African population [a reference to the ANC’s membership] they
took it upon themselves to tell the world that the Africans in South Africa are
suppressed, oppressed and depressed.’ He repeated his assertion that not only
had guerrilla warfare been agreed upon but that a date had actually been set.
Then de Wet intervened. ‘Mr Yutar,’ he said, ‘you do concede that you failed
to prove guerrilla warfare was ever decided upon, do you not?’
Yutar looked stunned and stammered a submission that preparations were
being made.
De Wet replied testily, ‘Yes, I know that. The defence concedes that. What
they say is that preparations were made in case one day they found it necessary
to resort to guerrilla warfare. But they say that prior to their arrest they never
considered it necessary, and took no decision to engage in guerrilla warfare. I
take it that you have no evidence contradicting that, and that you accept it?’
‘As Your Lordship pleases,’ Yutar replied, in a strangled voice. He then
concluded by arguing that the case was one of not only high treason par
excellence but murder and attempted murder, even though no such charges had
been made against the accused.
Arthur Chaskalson rose to refute that the trial had anything to do with murder
or attempted murder. He proceeded to demonstrate from the testimony of state
witnesses, like Mtolo, that Umkhonto’s clear policy was sabotage in
circumstances where life was not endangered. The indictment, he pointed out,
alleged military training and sabotage. The defence conceded, he said, that
Umkhonto recruited men for military training and that members of Umkhonto

committed acts of sabotage. The defence denied, however, that they committed
all the acts of sabotage they were charged with.
As he began to demonstrate from evidence that there were other organisations
committing acts of sabotage at the time, de Wet intervened to say that he already
accepted this as a fact. In one stroke, a major part of the state’s case—that
Umkhonto had been responsible for all acts of sabotage—fell away.
Fischer then rose to deal with the two most serious contentions: first, that the
high command had decided to embark on guerrilla warfare; and second, that
Umkhonto was the military wing of the ANC—acceptance of which could have
made every member of the ANC liable to prosecution for sabotage or treason.
Fischer had spent months preparing his submissions on these points, but before
he could develop his argument on the first issue de Wet cut him short, saying, ‘I
thought I had made my attitude clear. I accept no decision or date was fixed
upon for guerrilla warfare.’ When Fischer moved on to the second issue, de Wet
again intervened, saying he accepted that though the two organisations
overlapped, they were in fact separate.
All that remained to be determined were the verdict and the sentence. In the
case of six accused—Mandela, Sisulu, Mbeki, Goldberg, Motsoaledi, and
Mlangeni—they had already admitted guilt. The fates of Bernstein, Kathrada and
Mhlaba were less certain. But the centre of interest, as it had been throughout the
trial, was on whether or not the conspirators would receive the death penalty.
During the three-week adjournment before the sentence was announced,
Mandela settled down to write a London University law examination, which he
was to pass.
As the Rivonia trial reached its climax, the outcome stirred intense interest
internationally. Mandela’s defiant statement of his beliefs, his testimony
declaring his willingness to die for the cause of democracy in South Africa and
his bearing before the court had captured worldwide attention. Demonstrations
were held in Europe and the United States. Students at the University of London
elected Mandela as president of the student’s union midway through the trial. On
9 June, two days before the judge was due to give his decision, the United
Nations Security Council urged the South African government to end the trial
and to grant an amnesty to the defendants and to all others who had been
restricted or imprisoned for opposing apartheid; Britain and the United States
abstained on the vote. In London, an all-night vigil was held at St Paul’s

Cathedral.
It took Judge de Wet three minutes on 11 June 1964 to find all the
conspirators except Bernstein guilty. He reserved sentence for the following day.
Bernstein was immediately surrounded by security police, arrested as he tried to
reach the defence counsel’s table, hustled down to the cells with the others and
charged with new offences.
That evening, the defence lawyers called at Pretoria Local to confer with the
prisoners. The lawyers were pessimistic about the sentence they thought likely.
Recent sentences imposed by South African courts had established some harsh
precedents. An eighteen-year-old youth had been sent to prison for ten years for
attempting to leave the country in order to be trained by the ANC as a motor
mechanic. Another ANC supporter had received twenty years’ hard labour for
recruiting a man for military training abroad. Several young men had been
sentenced to ten years for attending a single meeting at which sabotage was
discussed, even though there was no evidence that the accused had done any
more than listen to the discussion.
Yet the lawyers found the prisoners as resolute as ever. Joel Joffe recalled:
They were calm, living now in the shadow of death. The strain and the tension
were becoming almost unbearable, yet the only matter that they wanted to
discuss was how they should behave in court if the death sentence was passed.
We told them that the judge would ask the first accused, Nelson Mandela,
‘Have you any reason to advance why the death sentence should not be passed?’
Nelson decided that he would have a lot to say. He would tell the court that if
they thought by sentencing him to death they would destroy the liberation
movement they were wrong; he was prepared to die for his beliefs and knew that
his death would be an inspiration to his people.
We pointed out that such an address was hardly designed to facilitate an
appeal. Nelson’s answer was simple. If sentenced to death he would not appeal.
Mandela, Sisulu and Mbeki had already decided among themselves not to
appeal. They believed that an appeal would undermine the moral stand they had
taken. It might be interpreted by their supporters as an act of weakness. ‘Our
message was that no sacrifice was too great in the struggle for freedom,’ said
Mandela.
That night, after the lawyers had left, dismayed at their decision and hoping

they would change their minds, Mandela scribbled a few lines which he intended
to use if he were sentenced to death. ‘I meant everything I said,’ he wrote.
‘I was prepared for the death penalty,’ Mandela said in his autobiography. ‘To
be truly prepared for something, one must actually expect it. One cannot be
prepared for something while secretly believing it will not happen. We were all
prepared, not because we were brave but because we were realistic.’
The following morning, outside the Palace of Justice, a large crowd gathered
silently, some carrying banners declaring, ‘We are proud of our leaders.’ Inside,
the courtroom was packed. Winnie and Mandela’s mother were once again
present.
Before sentence was passed, the court heard two pleas in mitigation. The
defendants were at first reluctant to allow anyone to speak on their behalf but
then agreed on condition that nothing was said that could be construed as an
apology. A number of names were suggested, but most of those approached
declined to undertake the task. Bram Fischer finally gained the assistance of two
distinguished South Africans: Harold Hanson, a highly respected advocate, and
Alan Paton, the writer. As leader of the Liberal Party, a devout believer in non violence and a known anti-communist, Paton had often been critical of the
accused, but when approached for his help Paton asked one simple question:
‘Are their lives in danger?’ On being told yes, Paton said, ‘In that case, there is
no question at all. I will give evidence if I am called.’ Joel Joffe remarked later,
‘He was almost the last of a breed that had become nearly extinct in South
Africa—the liberal of principle and courage, who is not afraid to raise his voice
against the stream.’
Paton spoke of Mandela, Sisulu and Mbeki as ‘men well known for their
courage, determination and ability’. He added, ‘I have never had any doubt
about their sincerity, their deep devotion to the cause of their people and their
desire to see that South Africa become a country in which all people participate.’
He told the judge that the exercise of clemency in this case was of great
importance for the future of the country.
In a move virtually unprecedented in the South African courts, Yutar rose to
launch an attack on Paton’s character. ‘I propose to cross-examine this witness
with Your Lordship’s leave. And I don’t do so in order to aggravate the
sentence, but in order to unmask this gentleman and make perfectly clear that his
only reason for going into the witness box, in my submission, is to make

political propaganda from the witness box.’
Yutar implied that Paton was a fellow-traveller of the Communist Party and
that he moved readily in communist circles. He questioned his actions in asking
countries abroad to maintain their concern about the injustices of apartheid. As
the smears continued, Paton became angry and confused. The security police
witnessing the spectacle tittered.
It was left to Harold Hanson to restore some sense of propriety to the
proceedings. He spoke eloquently, saying a nation’s grievances could not be
suppressed, people would always find a way to give voice to those grievances.
‘It was not their aims which had been criminal,’ said Hanson, ‘only the means to
which they had resorted.’ He reminded the judge that his own Afrikaner people,
during their struggle against British imperialism, had conducted armed uprising,
rebellion and treason and had appeared for such offences before courts which
had decided to show leniency. Two Boer generals, de Wet and Kemp, charged
with high treason after leading an armed rebellion against the government in
1914, had been sentenced to no more than six years’ imprisonment.
De Wet appeared to pay scant attention to these arguments. He neither looked
up nor made notes. When Hanson had finished, he nodded to the accused to rise.
I have heard a great deal during the course of this case about the
grievances of the non-European population. The accused have told me
and their counsel have told me that the accused, who were all leaders of
the non-European population, were motivated entirely by a desire to
ameliorate these grievances. I am by no means convinced that the
motives of the accused were as altruistic as they wish the court to
believe. People who organize a revolution usually take over the
government and personal ambition cannot be excluded as a motive.
De Wet paused for a moment, then continued, his voice quieter than before,
making it hard for the public gallery to hear what he was saying:
The function of this court, as is the function of the court in any other country, is
to enforce law and order and to enforce the laws of the state within which it
functions. The crime of which the accused have been convicted, that is the main
crime, the crime of conspiracy, is in essence one of high treason. The state has
decided not to charge the crime in this form. Bearing this in mind and giving the
matter very serious consideration, I have decided not to impose the supreme
penalty. . .

There was a gasp of relief, but the judge was continuing:
which in a case like this would usually be the proper penalty for the crime, but
consistent with my duty that is the only leniency which I can show. The sentence
in the case of all the accused will be one of life imprisonment.
Mandela smiled at his comrades and turned to look for Winnie and his mother
in the gallery. But there was consternation among many there who had not heard
the sentence. Goldberg’s mother cried out in desperation, ‘Denis! What is it?’
‘Life!’ he shouted back, ‘Life! To live!’ Then they all disappeared out of sight
for the last time, down the courtroom steps to the cells below.
Their lawyers stood in silence, then each shook hands silently with Bram
Fischer. ‘It had been his responsibility in the first place to save their lives,’
remarked Joffe, ‘and it was his victory in the first place that they would live.’
The outcome of the Rivonia trial made little impact on white public opinion
other than to reassure the white population that the government had succeeded in
overcoming serious threats to their well-being. The press praised the police, the
prosecutor and the judge. Reaction abroad, however, was very different. ‘The
verdict of history,’ prophesied the London Times, ‘will be that the ultimate guilty
party is the government in power—and that already is the verdict of world
opinion.’ The New York Times concurred: ‘To most of the world, these men are
heroes and freedom fighters. The George Washingtons and Ben Franklins of
South Africa.’
From his own lonely outpost in the mission village of Groutville, to which he
was restricted, Chief Luthuli, who had remained so adamantly opposed to
violence, issued his own verdict:
In the face of the uncompromising white refusal to abandon a policy which
denies the African and other oppressed South Africans their rightful heritage—
freedom—no one can blame brave just men for seeking justice by the use of
violent methods; nor could they be blamed if they tried to create an organized
force in order to ultimately establish peace and racial harmony.
For this, they are sentenced to be shut away for long years in the brutal and
degrading prisons of South Africa. With them will be interred this country’s
hopes for racial cooperation.
His words could not be quoted in South Africa and so went unheard.

In the early hours of 13 June 1964, Mandela and the other African prisoners
were taken from their cells in Pretoria Local and put on a military transport
aircraft for the flight to Robben Island. As dawn came, they could see below the
mountains and forests of the Western Cape. The terrain excited Mandela. He saw
it ‘not as a tourist but as a strategist, looking for areas where a guerrilla army
might hide itself’. Even after being sentenced to life imprisonment for a forlorn
and futile campaign of violence against the government, he could still not shake
off his ambition to be a guerrilla leader.

In terms of the objectives that Mandela set out in court during the Rivonia trial,
Umkhonto’s sabotage campaign was a total failure. The impact on the economy
was negligible. Foreign investors, far from being frightened away, became more
deeply involved. Foreign governments, while vociferous in condemning
apartheid, were still content to sit on the sidelines. There was much debate about
economic sanctions but little action.
The white electorate remained largely unaffected by the sporadic nature of
sabotage attacks and reacted by demanding not reform, as Mandela had
anticipated, but tougher action, thus allowing the government to take ever more
repressive counter-measures in the name of law and order. At each successive
election, the National Party gained higher levels of white support.
By making unlimited use of the ninety-day detention laws, the security police
soon broke the back of all underground resistance. Subjected to solitary
confinement and prolonged interrogation, allowed no visitors or reading material
except the Bible, detainees were constantly taunted with the threat that they
could be held in such conditions indefinitely. Their ‘cracking point’ varied.
Writing of her own experience of being held incommunicado for 117 days, Ruth
First, a member of the Communist Party’s central committee, noted, ‘Men
holding key positions in the political movement, who had years of hard political
experience and sacrifice behind them, cracked like eggshells. Others, with quiet,
reticent, self-effacing natures, who had been woolly in making decisions and
slow to carry them out, emerged from long spells of isolation shaken but
unbroken.’ Where interrogation methods failed, torture usually succeeded.
‘Under torture,’ said Ben Turok, ‘many victims found to their regret that they
knew too much and that the police knew that they knew.’

In the wake of the Rivonia raid, Umkhonto endeavoured to establish a new
high command, whose members included Wilton Mkwayi, a China-trained
saboteur, and David Kitson, a young Communist Party instructor who had been
due to attend the Lilliesleaf meeting in July 1963 but had fortuitously been
confined to bed with influenza. A key figure in setting up the new arrangement
was Bram Fischer, who, even during the course of the Rivonia trial, remained
actively involved in the underground. Fischer and Kitson would meet in Greek
cafés on Nuggett Street in Johannesburg, where Fischer would pass on funds for
Umkhonto obtained from abroad and even copies of maps and sabotage targets
captured from Lilliesleaf which had been handed to Fischer by the prosecution in
the normal course of court proceedings. However ingenious such activities were,
they came to naught. Soon after the end of the Rivonia trial, Kitson and Mkwayi
were arrested. By mid-1964, Umkhonto was effectively crushed.
The same fate befell the other sabotage group, the National Committee of
Liberation, or the African Resistance Movement as it eventually became known.
The ARM was little more than a collection of white middle-class dissidents,
about fifty in number, former communists, Trotskyists and Liberal Party radicals
who had set themselves the task of helping to bring about the downfall of
apartheid without any clear idea of how this was to be achieved other than by
random sabotage strikes. Following the departure abroad of its founder, Monty
Berman, the ARM’s main organiser became a twenty-four-year-old former
student leader based in Cape Town, Adrian Leftwich. Leftwich was a competent
administrator who kept detailed records of ARM members and activities in his
flat.
Though some members began questioning the wisdom of continuing with
sabotage, Leftwich remained an ardent enthusiast. In April 1964, at an ARM
meeting in Johannesburg, when a Coloured member, Eddie Daniels, argued that
sabotage was a counterproductive strategy that should be abandoned, Leftwich
attacked his attitude as cowardly. What he proposed instead was a series of
sabotage attacks to coincide with the sentencing of the Rivonia trialists. On 10
June, a number of power pylons were toppled.
The security police responded with a series of raids on the homes and offices
of dissidents they had so far neglected. Leftwich’s flat, with its large archive of
ARM documents, was one of them. Within a few days, Leftwich had ‘cracked’,
supplying his interrogators with all the information on members, addresses and
operations they required to roll up the organisation. Leftwich went on to

compound this betrayal of his friends and colleagues by testifying against them
in one trial after another, gaining his own freedom in exile in return.
The end of the sabotage era was marked by an incident which to most whites
justified all the security measures the government had enforced. On 24 July, one
of the few remaining activists still at large, John Harris, a Liberal Party member,
filled a suitcase with explosives and a detonator and left it in the white section of
Johannesburg’s main railway station. It exploded, killing an elderly woman,
maiming a child and injuring a score of other whites. Harris was subsequently
hanged, the only white saboteur ever to be executed in South Africa. More than
any other episode, the bombing was used by the government to assert the evil
nature of all anti-apartheid opponents.
One last defiant stand was taken against the government, a personal stand
made by Bram Fischer. For the duration of the Rivonia trial, Fischer had
acquired a form of immunity which no one expected to last once the trial was
over. He had managed to avoid being identified by farm workers and servants at
Lilliesleaf called as witnesses in the trial by making sure he was engaged on
other legal business elsewhere when they appeared in court. But his handwriting
on documents found at Lilliesleaf provided evidence less easily circumvented.
One document identified by a handwriting expert as being written by Harold
Wolpe was passed by the prosecutor in court to Fischer, who looked at it without
a trace of concern and then passed it to the rest of his team, who, aghast, saw
only too clearly that it had been written by Fischer. But the prosecution had
other examples of Fischer’s handwriting which they chose, for reasons of
convenience, not to identify at the time. Percy Yutar would simply say, ‘There is
a document here, My Lord, which is in somebody else’s handwriting . . . ’
Fischer’s fate, in fact, was already sealed. Unknown to him, the senior ranks
of the Communist Party had been penetrated by a police agent, Gerard Ludi,
providing the security police with enough information to wipe out its entire
structure. What evidence they lacked was subsequently obtained from a senior
figure in the Communist Party, Piet Beyleveld, who agreed to testify against his
former colleagues, including Fischer, in exchange for his own freedom. A
member of the party’s central committee, Bartholomew Hlapane, also defected
and was used as a state witness in one trial after another.
Not only was Fischer’s political world on the verge of disintegration, but his
personal life was suddenly afflicted by personal tragedy. On the day after the

sentence in the Rivonia trial was given, Fischer and his wife, Molly, left
Johannesburg by car for a holiday in the Cape. On the way there, approaching a
bridge over a river, Fischer swerved to avoid a motorcyclist. The car left the road
and plunged into a waterhole some thirty feet deep. Fischer managed to escape,
but Molly was pinned in the back and drowned.
In September 1964, Fischer and thirteen other white communists were
arrested and charged with membership of the illegal Communist Party. Fischer at
the time was acting chairman of the central committee, the last survivor of the
original 1950s central committee. Released on bail, he was given permission to
fly to London to argue an international patents case before the Privy Council,
which his client subsequently won. In London, friends tried to persuade him to
remain there, but Fischer believed not only that it would be dishonourable to
jump bail but that his place was in South Africa. He returned to face trial.
But in January 1965, Fischer decided to go underground in a last act of
defiance against the might of the apartheid state. He explained his reasons in a
letter to the court:
What is needed is for white South Africans to shake themselves out of their
complacency. . . . Unless this whole intolerable system is changed radically and
rapidly, disaster must follow. . . . To try to avoid this becomes a supreme duty,
particularly for an Afrikaner, because it is largely representatives of my fellow
Afrikaners who have been responsible for the worst of these discriminatory laws.
. . . If by my fight I can encourage even some people to think about, to
understand and to abandon the policies they now so blindly follow, I shall not
regret any punishment I may incur.
He concluded, ‘I can no longer serve justice in the way I have attempted to do
during the past thirty years. I can do it only in the way I have now chosen.’
Using a variety of disguises, Fischer evaded capture until November 1965.
Brought to trial, he was found guilty of conspiring, along with the Rivonia
trialists he had defended, to commit sabotage and, at the age of fifty-seven,
sentenced to life imprisonment.
Fischer was the last of the conspirators to remain at large in South Africa. By
1965 no active revolutionaries survived there. Those activists who managed to
evade arrest soon fled the country, joining a small coterie of exiles based in
London. Rusty Bernstein, released on bail after the Rivonia trial, was one of
them. Others, like Ruth First and Wolfie Kodesh, accepted the government’s

offer of a one-way exit permit.
How widespread resistance against the government had been was shown in a
series of trials across the country. Nearly 8,000 people were charged with
offences linked to political defiance. Most were convicted and imprisoned, some
for life, some for fifteen or twenty years, others for lesser periods. Nearly fifty
men were sentenced to death. Most of the trials were held in relative obscurity.

In trying to explain the collapse of Umkhonto, Joe Slovo spoke of ‘an heroic
failure’. The reality, however, was that right from the start the conspirators had
made a fatal miscalculation about the power of the government and the ways in
which the government was willing to use it. They also underestimated the
effectiveness of police techniques. ‘Having talked of fascism for a decade or
more, the movements were nevertheless caught by surprise when the police
behaved like fascists,’ noted Ben Turok. All the other mistakes and errors
committed by the conspirators—the ‘mood of carelessness and bravado’ which
Slovo admitted had overtaken the conspirators, the neglect of political work
among their African constituency that Kotane wanted to continue, the failure to
develop a real underground organisation of the kind that Mandela had once
proposed—all this merely compounded the process of defeat. Whatever reasons
were given, what was ultimately proved was that a collection of amateur
revolutionaries were no match for the brute strength of the South African state.
The price for this miscalculation was huge. With the nationalist movement
destroyed, a silence descended for more than a decade. On Robben Island,
Mandela and his colleagues became largely forgotten men.

CHAPTER 13
PRISONER 466/64
THE WINTER OF 1964 ON ROBBEN ISLAND, WHEN MANDELA AND
SIX other Rivonia prisoners arrived there, was the coldest that anyone could
remember. So fierce were the Atlantic winds sweeping across the island that
prisoners working in the quarries were numbed to the bone, hardly able to raise
their picks; at night they huddled together in groups, desperate for warmth. On
the day that the Dakota aircraft bringing the Rivonia men landed, it was bitterly
cold, wet and windy.
In the year since Mandela had left the island, a new maximum security prison
had been constructed, close to Murray’s Bay harbour, not far from the old prison
buildings. A special section within it, a single-storey rectangular block with a
cement courtyard in the centre, had been built at the southeastern corner of the
compound to house prisoners whom the authorities wanted to isolate from the
mass of the prison population. This prison within a prison was intended to be the
home of the Rivonia group for the rest of their lives.
Mandela’s cell, like the others in B Section, was no more than about seven
feet square. A barred window looked out on to a cement courtyard and beyond it
to a high wall patrolled by guards. The walls of the cell were damp. There was
no bed. Mandela was provided with a sisal mat on which to sleep, three flimsy
blankets, a toilet bucket and a plastic bottle of water. In the winter months, his
cell was so cold he slept fully dressed in prison garb. Outside the cell was fixed a
white card giving his name and identification number: 466/64.
As well as the Rivonia group, a number of other political prisoners were
brought to the isolation section, or the koeloekoetz, as it was known, from the
main communal prison blocks. Among them were Zephenia Mothopeng, a PAC
leader; Dennis Brutus, a Coloured poet and writer, once active in campaigning
for a sports boycott of South Africa, who had been imprisoned for contravening
his banning orders; Neville Alexander and Fikile Bam, both members of an
obscure Maoist group known as the Yu Chi Chan Club, which had dabbled with

the idea of guerrilla warfare; and Andrew Masondo, a mathematics lecturer from
Fort Hare University, who had become an MK saboteur. In the following months
this group was joined by other se - nior MK figures, including Wilton Mkwayi,
Joe Gqabi, Mac Maharaj and Michael Dingake. Another arrival was Eddie
Daniels, a Coloured member of the ill-fated African Resistance Movement.
Together with the Rivonia group, this motley collection of prisoners, numbering
in all about thirty, provided Mandela’s companions for the years ahead.
Though the prison buildings were new, the regime remained as harsh and as
brutal as before. Prisoners in the general section were crowded into large
communal cells where few toilets were available. Food rations were meagre.
Prisoners reporting sick were often turned away by hospital orderlies, castigated
for laziness when they were seriously ill; some gained admission to hospital only
when it was too late to save them.
Several incidents had occurred to add to the island’s infamous reputation. For
work purposes, prisoners were divided up into different teams or spans, as they
were known. Most were sent to work in the stone quarries; others went to the
harbour, the laundry or the stores. The work most dreaded was with the
landbouspan, the agricultural team run by Piet Kleynhans, one of three
Kleynhans brothers then employed on Robben Island. One of the tasks of the
landbouspan was to push a huge grass roller, seven feet high and weighing
several tons, on which Kleynhans would sit perched on the crossbar, shouting
and swearing and flicking a leather whip at the prisoners. The roller was so
heavy that as many as fifty prisoners were needed to move it, hauling it by a
heavy handle and long chains attached to each side and pushing from the back.
The work began in the early morning and went on for hour after hour, with
guards routinely lashing out at prisoners with canes and hosepipes, cursing them
for their laziness.
One morning, Kleynhans singled out for punishment a PAC leader, Johnson
Mlambo, whom he had heard complaining about the work. While other prisoners
continued hauling the roller round in circles, Kleynhans instructed two convicts
to dig a hole deep enough to hold a man and then ordered Mlambo to get into it.
The convicts then filled in the hole with soil, leaving only Mlambo’s head jutting
out above the ground. He remained there for the rest of the morning, his head
baking in the sun. At midday, Kleynhans, clearly enjoying himself, went up to
Mlambo and asked him, ‘Kaffir, soek jy water?’—‘Kaffir, do you want water?’
‘Nee ek sal jou nie water gee nie, ek sal hou whisky gee, die beste

whisky!’—‘No, I won’t give you water, I’ll give you whisky, the very best!’ As
other warders looked on laughing, Kleynhans pulled out his penis and urinated
on Mlambo’s face. Shortly afterwards, at the lunch break, Mlambo was dug out
of the hole and told to join other prisoners for the afternoon work shift on the
roller. Mlambo was later to lose an eye; it was gouged out by another PAC
prisoner during a fight over food.
In March 1964, the prison authorities ordered a carry-on—a mass assault—
involving political prisoners who had complained about work conditions in the
stone quarry. One of their main targets was Andrew Masondo, whose arm was
severely injured in the beatings that took place. The carry-on was witnessed by
Dennis Brutus, who had arrived on Robben Island only the day before: ‘We saw
dozens of prisoners running wild or crawling vainly under barbed-wire fences
while the batons, staves and pick-handles of the warders fell indiscriminately
and mercilessly.’ Later in the day, Brutus himself, still recovering from a police
bullet wound in the stomach, was caught up in the carry-on when he and other
prisoners were ordered to wade into the sea to collect seaweed. There, in the
water, they were set upon by warders armed with batons and rubber pipes:
I do not think I will ever be able to erase from my mind the images that day of
terror and violence by the sea with the bright water and the bright sunlight, and
the men struggling with shiny masses of seaweed and on the sharp slippery rocks
. . . and all the time men were beaten and kicked and the batons thwacked.
All attempts at taking legal action against the prison authorities were thwarted.
Prisoners queueing at the dispensary for medical attention were frequently
assaulted. One warder named Mostert, a huge ox of a man, made a practice of
walking along the queue, punching prisoners as he went, until only the most
courageous remained standing. He used to say, to justify his conduct, ‘If you
don’t run away, then you are really sick, you actually need treatment.’
Since Mandela’s first incarceration on Robben Island, the prison staff had
become exclusively white. No longer were there any Coloured warders to offer a
friendly hand. An atmosphere of racial hostility was ever present. White warders
regarded themselves as members of a master race and accordingly required
prisoners to adopt a servile manner. They insisted on being addressed as ‘baas’
and referred contemptuously to prisoners as ‘kaffirs’, ‘hotnots’ and ‘koelies’.
They were used to dealing with hardened criminals, employing only the most
brutal methods, and treated political prisoners with similar vindictiveness,

handing out punishment at the slightest sign of defiance. Their objective was to
destroy the morale of prisoners, to strip them of dignity and self-respect. It was
what the system required.
From previous experience, Mandela knew how crushing the effects of prison
life could be. The burden to be carried was not just constant abuse from warders
and hardship at work, but the sheer tedium of prison routine, stretching for ever
into the distance, week after week, month after month, year after year.
Mandela’s first prison sentence had at least been limited to a fixed term of five
years. The Rivonia trial had meanwhile engaged his full attention, keeping him
close to lawyers, relatives and friends. But back on Robben Island, the full
impact of his new sentence now took its toll. At the age of forty-six, the prospect
before him was spending the rest of his life in a cell.
The first weeks were particularly difficult. Prisoners in the isolation section
were subjected to rigid control, their every move dictated by a posse of warders
ready to pounce on any infringement of the regulations. The routine was
deadening. The morning bell rang at 5:30 a.m. Prisoners were required to roll up
their mats and blankets and clean their cells, but were not allowed out until 6:45
a.m. Mandela used the time for exercising. In the cramped space of his cell, he
found that by standing at an angle he could wave his arms about. At 6:45 a.m.,
prisoners were let out to clean their toilet buckets in sinks at the end of the
corridor, giving them a brief opportunity for a few whispered words if warders
were not lingering about there. Back in their cells, breakfast, consisting of maize
porridge and what was described as coffee, was delivered to them by convicts
from the general section. At inspection after breakfast, prisoners were required
to doff their cloth caps to warders as they passed by. If the buttons on their
canvas jackets were undone or if they failed to doff their caps, they were
punished with either loss of meals or solitary confinement.
They were then taken out to the courtyard, where for hour after hour, sitting
cross-legged in four rows, forbidden to talk, they bashed away with five-pound
hammers at piles of stones in front of them, crushing them into fine gravel. Not
until lunch break at noon were they permitted to rest. Lunch consisted once
again of boiled maize and a drink known as phuzamandla made from maize and
a bit of yeast. In the afternoon, they were allowed to exercise for half an hour
under strict supervision, walking in silence around the courtyard in single file,
before resuming their places at the rock piles.

Work ended at 4 p.m., when they were given half an hour to clean up using
the seawater showers and buckets in a bathroom at the end of the corridor.
Supper, consisting of maize porridge with a piece of vegetable or meat gristle
added, came at 4:30 p.m., delivered to the cells by convicts. At 8 p.m., the night
warder ordered everyone to go to sleep, but each cell’s single light bulb
remained glowing throughout the night. At weekends, prisoners were kept inside
their cells all day, except for half an hour of exercise. No prisoner was allowed
to possess a watch or clock. Everyone was ruled by bells and the whistles and
shouts of warders.
All political prisoners were automatically given the lowest classification,
category D, according them a minimum of privileges. Category D prisoners were
allowed to have only one visitor in every six months and to write and receive
only one letter in the same period. Sometimes letters were handed over so
heavily censored that they made no sense; sometimes they were never handed
over at all. No study privileges were permitted. The only way for prisoners to
gain a higher classification and hence more privileges was through what the
authorities deemed to be good behaviour. Prisoners who eventually won a high
classification could be threatened with demotion and hence the loss of privileges
—visits, letters and studies—if they were insufficiently compliant.
The only solace in this grim schedule was the company of friends. The
courage that each man showed fortified the determination of others to stand firm.
Walter Sisulu, in particular, proved a constant source of strength for Mandela
and for many other prisoners, always ready to comfort them in moments of
anguish and despair, no matter how hard his own burden at the time. ‘Even when
his own wife and children were put in jail, he was an inspiration,’ recalled
Kathrada. ‘I could always turn to him for help.’
But inmates in the koeloekoetz were far from being a harmonious group. The
old rivalry between the PAC and the ANC provoked continual bouts of friction.
In the general section, hostility between the two groups was an open sore. The
reaction of PAC members to the outcome of the Rivonia trial was typical. ‘They
were very disappointed when none of the Rivonia people was sentenced to
death,’ recalled an ANC prisoner, Ebrahim Ismail Ebrahim. There was also
friction between Neville Alexander and ANC members. Alexander, an
intellectual with a doctorate in literature from Germany, initially dismissed ANC
prisoners as ‘ordinary nationalists inferior to us socialists . . . almost
collaborators’. Nor was it long before members of the Rivonia group were

embroiled in their own disputes.
Mandela’s plan for survival on Robben Island involved challenging the
system with a series of complaints aimed at improving prison conditions. Prison
life he came to regard as a microcosm of the apartheid system outside, requiring
a similar struggle for basic rights. Striving for better conditions gave him both a
set of attainable objectives and a sense of purpose otherwise missing in the
monotony of prison routine. He hoped to achieve results through negotiation
rather than confrontation. This meant according a measure of respect to the
prison authorities which several of his own colleagues found difficult to accept.
PAC members refused outright to have any dealings with the prison authorities,
never lodging complaints of any kind, regarding such contacts as a form of
collaboration. Mandela’s argument was that not only would each advance raise
the morale of prisoners but the process of negotiation itself would require the
prison authorities to show a measure of respect for prisoners’ interests. It would
help break down the walls of prejudice.
The complaints procedure had hitherto been a meaningless ritual. Once a
week, prisoners were lined up and asked if they had any complaints or requests.
Many complaints were made—about food, about clothes, about blankets, about
visits—but no note was ever taken and nothing was ever done. Prisoners who
pursued complaints about assaults faced reprisal. No one succeeded in gaining
redress.
Mandela’s first complaint was about the prison clothes he was given to wear.
African prisoners were issued with a pair of short trousers, a coarse collarless
khaki shirt, a canvas jacket and a thin jersey. In true apartheid tradition, Indian
prisoners, like Kathrada, were allowed long trousers. Mandela objected to
wearing short trousers on the grounds that they were demeaning, intended to
remind Africans of their position as ‘boys’. Though his initial protest was
ignored, after two weeks he was given a pair of long trousers. Since no other
African prisoner was given long trousers, he declined to accept them and
continued to wear short trousers. But he had made a start. When he complained
about the dampness of his cell, he was told by a prison official, ‘The dampness
of the cells will eventually be absorbed by your bodies.’
Along with other political prisoners in the isolation section, he refused to
address warders as baas. In the general section, any such refusal would incur
swift punishment—a beating, a loss of meals or solitary confinement if

necessary. But the koeloekoetz men stood firm and warders left the issue alone.
When the quotas of stone-crushing set for prisoners working in the courtyard
were repeatedly raised, they resolved not to meet them. The warders threatened
them, but did not succeed in getting their way.
With each case of complaint, Mandela took on the authorities in a polite but
resolute manner, in the process gaining not only the attention of warders but the
respect of critics within the prisoner community. Neville Alexander, who was
serving a ten-year sentence, recalled, ‘We were terribly impetuous and would
have run ourselves suicidally against the prison walls.’ But Mandela and Sisulu
had argued that, by adopting a dignified and disciplined approach, ‘eventually
we would break through’. The impact that both men made on Alexander was
considerable: ‘Nelson and Walter taught me to respect people, to disagree with
them, but to continue to respect them.’
Though prison regulations stipulated that each prisoner was permitted to speak
only for himself, not on behalf of others, the prison authorities soon found it
expedient to use Mandela as a spokesman for prisoner interests. When an official
from the International Red Cross arrived on Robben Island, Mandela was singled
out to talk to him and on subsequent occasions he continued to act as the
prisoners’ representative. Mandela dwelt at length on prisoners’ grievances over
food, clothing, letters and such matters as the conduct of warders, unsure of
whether any worthwhile result might be achieved. Not long afterward, African
prisoners were issued with long trousers.
He became adept at concealing his emotions behind a mask, rarely letting any
sign of anger or bitterness emerge and never betraying doubt or despair before
others. He built around himself a wall of self-discipline, steeling himself to face
whatever ordeal prison might hold. He came to distrust emotion, prizing reason
and logic above all else, recognising that bitterness would bring him no closer to
his goal. Time and again, he held back his anger at the taunts and insults from
prison staff. Warders enjoyed goading Mandela by letting him know that they
were withholding a letter for him—his main lifeline to the outside world. ‘It
required all my self-discipline not to explode at such times,’ he wrote.
‘Afterward, I would protest through the proper channels, and sometimes get it.’
With other prisoners, Mandela exercised the same degree of self-control,
never showing any sign of weakness, always conscious of the effect his
leadership had on them. Only Sisulu was privy to the inner man. With everyone

else, even with old friends like Kathrada, Mandela distanced himself with a
measure of aloofness. Kathrada noted his ability in prison to react in a cool
manner, no matter how serious the issue was: ‘He would return from a meeting
with a prison official, having heard of some momentous issue or having had a
message of great importance, then come back to the cells, joke with us, talk to
us, then relate what had happened very casually.’ Kathrada often found it
difficult to tell what was in his mind.
His darkest moments, he faced alone. Some of them came during periods of
solitary confinement. As he wrote in a manuscript while in prison:
The worst part of imprisonment is being locked up by yourself. You come face
to face with time and there is nothing more terrifying than to be alone with sheer
time. Then the ghosts come crowding in. They can be very sinister, very
mischievous, raising a thousand doubts in your mind about the people outside,
their loyalty. Was your sacrifice worth the trouble? What would your life have
been like if you hadn’t got involved?
He also had to endure times of great personal anguish, but never betrayed how
deeply he had been hurt.
Whatever doubts and despair he suffered, in the company of others he
remained steadfast, always seeking to bolster their morale. And he never gave up
hope that one day he would emerge from prison a free man. ‘I never thought that
a life sentence truly meant life and that I would die behind bars,’ he said in his
autobiography. ‘Perhaps I was denying this prospect because it was too
unpleasant to contemplate.’

Yet, events in prison were not the only cause of Mandela’s concerns. In August
1964, two months after he had been back on the island, Mandela was allowed a
visit from Winnie. They met in a cramped cubicle in the visiting room, separated
by a partition, able to see each other only through a pane of thick, smudged
glass. Their conversation was carried on through holes drilled in the partition.
Both had been warned that the only topics permitted were family and personal
matters. Warders stood by on either side of the partition, listening carefully to
what was said, ready to interrupt if unfamiliar names were mentioned or if the
conversation seemed to stray beyond bounds. They were given just thirty
minutes together.

Winnie appeared to Mandela to be under tremendous strain. He had known
that his imprisonment would leave her exposed to hardship and hazards with few
sources of support. In a letter written to her on the eve of his first term of
imprisonment, he had tried to offer her every encouragement for the long and
lonely road she faced, urging her to act with fortitude and dignity and warning of
the traps that would be set for her. It was a letter full of love and inspiration
which Winnie cherished, reading it time and again until it was seized by security
police during one of their periodic raids on her house in Orlando West.
What worried Mandela most was that Winnie’s impetuous and headstrong
nature would lead her into ever deeper trouble. In the treacherous world of South
African politics, she was a novice, naïve and gullible, and easy prey for the
security police. The story often told about her during her early years of marriage
was that while Mandela was engaged in serious debate in the front room of their
house, Winnie would be found in the back reading a women’s magazine. She
had joined the ANC Women’s League and done a two-week spell in prison for
her part in protesting against pass laws, but among political activists she was
regarded as being a lightweight.
Once Mandela was in prison, however, Winnie became more ambitious. She
saw herself as Mandela’s heir, capable of acting on his behalf. Towards other
activists, she adopted a superior manner, making herself unpopular with them.
‘Winnie always acted on her own,’ recalled Rusty Bernstein. ‘She wouldn’t
cooperate with anyone. She refused to take advice. She was an individual piece
of militancy, a rogue element.’
She also had a propensity for becoming involved with shady characters. She
maintained a long friendship with Maude Katzellenbogen, the partner of a
corrupt Indian businessman, Moosa Dinath, convicted of fraud, who had once
tried to inveigle her into a reckless scheme to free Mandela from prison in
Johannesburg, even though she knew he had dubious connections with the
government.
She also developed a close relationship with Brian Somana, a journalist who
had acted as her driver on journeys to see Mandela at Lilliesleaf Farm. Somana
had been arrested in June 1963, shortly before the police raid on Lilliesleaf took
place. In activist circles, he was widely suspected of being a police informer,
possibly the source of their information on Lilliesleaf.
On Robben Island, Mandela was aware of both Somana’s role as a police

informer and Winnie’s involvement with him. One of his own colleagues in the
isolation section, Fikile Bam, had encountered them while he was on the run
from the police in August 1963. A graduate of the University of Cape Town, he
had known Winnie since his youth in the Transkei; his sister had been her close
friend. While a student at St Peter’s in Johannesburg, he had been befriended by
Oliver Tambo, who had enabled him to gain experience of the workings of the
law by arranging for him to help out at the firm of Mandela and Tambo on
Saturdays. He subsequently became involved with Neville Alexander’s Maoist
group in Cape Town.
Wanted by the police for distributing literature on guerrilla warfare in Cape
Town, he fled to Johannesburg, where Winnie, hearing of his predicament,
offered to arrange his escape to neighbouring Bechuanaland and turned to
Somana for help. On the day arranged for his escape, Somana turned up driving
Winnie’s car, with Mandela’s two daughters in the back. They had travelled only
a short distance when they ran straight into a roadblock manned by police, who
had clearly been expecting them. Bam was to spend ten years on Robben Island.
Word soon spread that Winnie was not to be trusted, making her more isolated
and vulnerable than before. Bram Fischer warned her about Somana and tried to
persuade her to leave South Africa to get her out of the way, but she refused to
heed him. In London, Oliver Tambo told colleagues that they should no longer
take Winnie into their confidence.
Despite all this, Winnie and Somana remained close. According to Somana’s
wife, they lived together in Winnie’s Orlando house from May 1964, when the
Rivonia trial was still under way, until December 1964. On one occasion,
Somana was arrested in Winnie’s house during a 5 a.m. police raid. Winnie was
subsequently cited in Somana’s divorce case, though she flatly denied adultery.
She also became involved with Somana in a business enterprise which he was
able to finance from a sudden and unexplained flow of funds. According to
Winnie’s testimony in a subsequent court case, concerning an arson attack on
her garage, their business partnership foundered ‘because of rumours that it was
financed out of reward money offered by the police for the capture of Walter
Sisulu’.
There was nothing that Mandela could do from Robben Island to curb
Winnie’s wayward conduct. He blamed himself for being unable to offer her the
protection she evidently needed, and his sense of guilt and frustration mounted

as the security police instigated a campaign of persecution against Winnie which
continued year after year.
The first banning order on Winnie, issued in 1963, restricted her movements
to the Johannesburg area and prohibited her from attending meetings and social
gatherings. Only by obtaining official permission was she allowed to travel to
Pretoria to attend the Rivonia trial or to Cape Town to visit Mandela in prison on
Robben Island. A second banning order, in 1965, restricted her movements
further, forcing her to leave her job as a social worker with the Child Welfare
Society in Johannesburg, a position she cherished. She took a succession of other
jobs, working in a furniture shop, a dry-cleaning shop and a shoe-repair shop,
but at each place she was fired after security police paid a visit to her employers.
She was charged on several occasions with violating her banning order, often for
no more than trivial infringements, usually ending up with a suspended sentence
or a fine.
Her house was often raided. In her autobiography, she recalled an incident in
which a white police sergeant walked into her bedroom without knocking while
she was half-dressed and put his hand on her shoulder: ‘All I remember is
grabbing him, and throwing him on the floor, which is what he deserved. I
remember seeing his legs up in the air and him screaming, and the whole
dressing-stand falling on him. That is how he broke his neck (he did recover).’
In the subsequent court case, Winnie was defended by George Bizos. She
wrote:
I would listen to him as I would listen to my father. He treats me in the same
way as Nelson does. He weighs the same authority with us. So he says to me
outside court, ‘I want you to behave like a lady in front of the magistrate and not
like an Amazon!’ Nelson always says to me—‘Zami, you are completely and
utterly undisciplined! You need a great deal of taming!’ I don’t think I’m
undisciplined. But you have to use the language they understand: to have peace,
you must be violent.
Winnie won the case.
As well as harassing Winnie, the security police turned their attention to her
two daughters, Zeni and Zindzi. The terms of Winnie’s banning order prohibited
her from entering any educational establishment, so she was always obliged to
depend on relatives or friends to help with the children at school. The first
nursery school which Zeni attended asked her to leave after a few days,

according to Winnie, on instructions from the security police. Both Zeni and
Zindzi were later expelled from a Coloured primary school after the police
intervened. Eventually, they were taken to schools in Swaziland, where
Mandela’s other three children were being educated.
The anguish that Mandela suffered on learning of these events was acute. ‘To
see your family, your children, being persecuted when you are absolutely
helpless in jail, that is one of the most bitter experiences, most painful
experiences I have had,’ he recalled.

After six months of pounding stones in the prison courtyard, Mandela and his
colleagues in the isolation section were sent to work in the lime quarry. Each
morning they set out on a twenty-minute march towards the centre of the island
where the quarry was sited. Warders made sure they were kept well away from
all other groups of prisoners, isolating them like lepers. On the way, they passed
near the small house where the PAC leader, Robert Sobukwe, was being held in
relative comfort but confined to a solitary existence, with no one to talk to other
than warders and the occasional visitor he was permitted. He complained to one
visitor that he was forgetting how to speak. Occasionally the koeloekoetz group
caught a glimpse of him in his garden.
The lime quarry was a huge crater carved out of a hillside, blindingly white in
the sunlight. There was no shade other than a few tin sheds at the base. The heat
in summer was stifling; in winter, it became bitterly cold. All day long, with
only a break for lunch, the prisoners toiled away with picks and shovels, digging
out seams of lime from the rock, their faces and bodies covered in white dust,
their eyes aching from the dazzling glare. In the late afternoon, they trudged
back to the prison cells, exhausted.
The glare, in particular, caused them severe problems. ‘The reflection from
the lime catches the sunlight and throws it back on to you and it can be
extremely sharp and scorching,’ said Maharaj, who spent twelve years on the
island. To protect their eyes, the lime quarry prisoners repeatedly put in requests
for sunglasses. It took three years before permission was granted and even then
the prison authorities made the prisoners pay for the sunglasses themselves.
For all the hardship that working in the lime quarry involved, it also provided
the prisoners with an opportunity to engage in day-long discussion and debate.

Working in small groups of four or five, they talked endlessly about the politics
and history of the African struggle for rights, analysing the past in terms of what
successes and failures had occurred. They had time too to dwell on a whole
range of other issues, some serious, some trivial. They debated the merits of
circumcision, argued over beauty competitions and spent days trying to sort out
whether tigers were indigenous to Africa. Discussions in the quarry became the
main event of the day. ‘The lime quarry was, even at the worst of times, a site
for intellectual stimulation,’ recalled Michael Dingake.
Mandela gained the reputation of being a hard taskmaster in these discussions.
He gave short shrift to anyone putting up flimsy arguments. Some prisoners
regarded him as being dogmatic and overbearing. ‘He can be harsh with
colleagues,’ agreed Sisulu, ‘even with me.’ Writing about his experiences on
Robben Island, Dingake referred to Mandela’s ‘direct, fiercely candid approach’
and recalled arguments with him from which he emerged ‘bloodied’ and
‘humiliated’. ‘In argument against someone with insubstantial facts, Nelson can
be vicious,’ he wrote. ‘Very few people like to be cross-examined and exposed
in their vagueness and ignorance.’
Mandela had no time, added Dingake, for idle chat or gossip. ‘Every day, but
every day,’ he wrote, ‘he had numerous appointments with individuals, always
on his own initiative, to discuss inter-organizational relations, prisoners’
complaints, joint strategies against prison authorities and general topics.’
Not all the discussions were amicable. A serious rift developed between
Mandela and Govan Mbeki which resulted in a direct challenge to Mandela’s
leadership. Mbeki was even more inclined to be dogmatic in argument than
Mandela. A hard, uncompromising communist, intolerant of contrary opinion, he
clashed with Mandela over the issue of Operation Mayibuye. Mbeki was
adamant that the plan had been officially approved. Mandela disagreed. The feud
between them opened up a fault line within the small ANC community in the
isolation section. Mbeki was supported by other hardline communists, including
Raymond Mhlaba, Joe Gqabi and Andrew Masondo. A fierce row flared up in
the quarry between Mandela and Gqabi, who considered himself, after six
months’ training in China, to be better qualified on guerrilla warfare tactics than
Mandela. On one issue after another, the rift widened. An acrimonious dispute
developed over the relationship between the ANC and the Communist Party,
with Mbeki insisting that they were one and the same and Mandela maintaining
they were separate entities with the same objectives. At times the feud degen -

erated into accusation and counter-accusation. Some inmates were accused of
being ready to abandon the armed struggle; others of fomenting racial hostility.
A memorandum smuggled out of prison to ANC officials in exile spoke of
‘extreme tension and bitterness’ between Mandela and Mbeki. For several years
they were hardly on speaking terms. Eventually the feud was brought formally to
an end and Mandela’s leadership reaffirmed, but the fault line remained. ‘It
resurfaced time after time again,’ said Maharaj.
The warders in charge of the lime quarry span differed in deciding how much
discussion to allow prisoners. One warder, known to them as
‘Mazithulele’—‘the quiet one’—for his soft-spoken and tolerant manner, usually
positioned himself at some distance from the group and took a lenient view of
how much work they did. He was there on the first day that Michael Dingake
worked in the lime quarry, shortly after his arrival on Robben Island in 1966.
‘The whole morning I did nothing but give a report to Mandela and Sisulu,’ he
wrote. ‘Three of us had our right feet on our spades and conversed. Mazithulele
sat under a bush and never interfered.’
His replacement, however, a warder named van Rensburg, who sported a
swastika tattoo on his wrist, enforced much harsher discipline. He stood close to
the prisoners, constantly shouting at them to work harder and accusing anyone
he considered was not exerting himself of ‘malingering’. All this was
accompanied by a stream of racial abuse. Van Rensburg issued so many charges
against prisoners that they responded by forming a legal committee, consisting
of Mandela, Bam and Maharaj, to advise them on how to defend themselves
before the prison’s administrative court. Mandela’s advice was always the same:
ask the court for ‘further particulars’, a tactic which often had van Rensburg
stumped.
Even under van Rensburg’s supervision, the prisoners managed to keep up
their discussions and the work songs that lightened their day. But the risk of
punishment was never far away. One day, the long-running debate over the
question of tigers in Africa took on political overtones. As tempers ran high,
everyone stopped working and ignored calls from the warders to get back to
work. Finally, van Rensburg marched over and bellowed in English, ‘You talk
much, but you work too few!’ At which point, the prisoners collapsed in
laughter. The upshot was that Mandela and Masondo were taken away in
handcuffs for a spell of solitary confinement on a spare diet of rice water.

When they were first taken to the lime quarry, the prisoners were told that
their work there would last six months. Officials of the International Committee
of the Red Cross were given regular assurances by the prison authorities that
digging at the lime quarry had stopped, but Mandela and other members of the
Rivonia group were to spend thirteen years there.

During a tour of inspection of Robben Island in 1965, the Commissioner of
Prisons, General Steyn, questioned Mandela, in his role as spokesman for the
isolation section, about prisoners’ requests for study privileges. ‘What is it you
want about things like studies?’ he asked. ‘What is it you want?’ Mandela at the
time was the only prisoner on Robben Island entitled to study; soon after
entering prison in 1962, he had gained permission to complete his law degree
with London University and he had pursued his studies intermittently ever since.
His colleagues in the isolation section hoped to gain the same right, even though
they were category D prisoners. Replying to the general, Mandela said, ‘You
should let the atmosphere of a university prevail here on the island.’
The following year, the prison authorities granted permission to prisoners to
study. They were allowed to register with the University of South Africa for a
degree or with the Rapid Results College for secondary school education. Those
who had yet to reach secondary-level education were helped by inmate teachers
like Neville Alexander. Most prisoners took to the task with enthusiasm, even
though it came at the end of a hard day’s work at the quarry. ‘At night, our cell
block seemed more like a study hall than a prison,’ recorded Mandela.
The conditions in which prisoners began their studies were primitive. Their
cells were permanently damp and in winter bitterly cold. They were given
neither desks nor chairs. After complaints, the prison authorities installed in each
cell a wooden board attached to walls at chest-height to serve as a makeshift
stand-up desk. It took six months of more complaints before they were willing to
provide wooden stools and to lower the stand-up desks.
Strict rules were imposed on study activities. Books and periodicals deemed
unsuitable were banned. In Mandela’s case, study material prescribed by the
University of London fell victim to the prison censors, making it difficult for
him to meet examination standards. Students were not allowed either to lend
books to those who were not students or even to exchange books with prisoners
studying the same subject. Students able to afford books they needed were thus

unable to help those too poor to buy them. Applications for library books were
always carefully scrutinized. Warders were often deliberately obstructive,
delaying the delivery of mail and books. Students who failed to abide by study
conditions risked losing the privilege altogether.
While working at the lime quarry, prisoners formed their own study groups.
‘Our economics class was a very lively class,’ wrote Dingake. ‘Not even van
Rensburg managed to curb the animation of its members. The “laymen” in
economics stood and watched as we argued noisily over our supply and demand
curves and drew them on the ground to demonstrate their gradients and
elasticity.’ Mandela and Fikile Bam often worked alongside each other in the
quarry, discussing law.
Mandela also took up the study of Afrikaans and encouraged others to do the
same. To those colleagues who argued that Afrikaans was the language of their
oppressor, Mandela replied that it was a vital means of understanding the mind
of their oppressor, useful in the longer term as well as in prison. It was long-term
possibilities that Mandela always managed to keep in sight.
With the help of the International Committee of the Red Cross, graduate
prisoners were given permission to teach literacy courses to other prisoners. As
Govan Mbeki recalled:
We took people from the lowest level, who came to the island illiterate. I
remember one group I had. I started with them when they were illiterate, started
them up. And by the time they left Robben Island they were able to write letters
home—they didn’t require anybody to write letters for them and to address their
envelopes. And they spoke English. Upon completing each stage of their
courses, students were issued with certificates headed ‘The University of
Robben Island’.
In addition to these approved activities, the koeloekoetz men began to develop
their own political education courses. The courses grew out of a series of
informal talks on ANC history given at the lime quarry by Sisulu, who was
renowned for his encyclopedic knowledge of the organisation. Other lectures
were added. Kathrada talked about the Indian struggle for political rights,
Maharaj expounded on Marxism and Mandela taught a course in political
economy. The lectures became part of a course of study known as Syllabus A,
which was spread over two years. When prisoners in the general section heard of
the lectures, they asked to become involved. Copies of the lectures were

smuggled out to them.
University activity became the only real source of stimulation that prisoners
enjoyed. Many attributed their ability to endure Robben Island to their study
privileges. ‘It is one single thing that really keeps you together,’ said Dikgang
Moseneke, who graduated with a school-leaving certificate and then went on to
obtain a degree in political science and English.
However, just as much as study privileges were prized by inmates, so they
became a weapon in the hands of the prison administration, subject to the whims
of prison officials.

The kitchens on Robben Island were notorious not just for turning out food that
was barely edible but for corruption. They were manned by common-law
convicts who ensured that the tastiest foods were kept back for themselves, their
friends and the warders who supervised them. The official rations allowed to
prisoners were meagre enough, but what emerged from the kitchens was even
less adequate. ‘Lunch and supper, especially the supper of African prisoners,
were sometimes so full of sand and miscellaneous kinds of dirt and insects that
even the strong stomachs of the most hard-bitten would somersault,’ said Ne ville Alexander. ‘Hungry people would sometimes leave food uneaten.’
Complaints about food were commonplace, but nothing was ever done to
improve the system.
A particular grievance of political prisoners was the discrimination the
authorities applied between food for Africans and food for Coloureds and
Indians. African prisoners received what was termed an ‘F diet’; Coloureds and
Indians were placed higher on the scale with ‘D diet’. Both diets were based
largely on maize, but D-diet prisoners were given bread and extra helpings of
meat, vegetables and coffee. The regulations were quite specific. D-diet
prisoners, for example, were allowed two ounces of sugar a day; F-diet
prisoners, one and a half ounces. Sharing food with prisoners with different diets
was forbidden and resulted in punishment.
It was a shortage of food which in 1966 precipitated the island’s first major
act of defiance. At the stone quarry, where about 600 prisoners from the general
section were working, food for lunch arrived as usual in half-drums transported
on two wheeled trolleys. When the bell for lunch rang, the prisoners formed

queues, with Coloured and Indian prisoners in front and Africans behind,
waiting patiently while a common-law convict doled out food on plates set out in
long rows, starting with Coloured and Indian plates and moving on to the
African ones. No one was allowed to take a plate until all the food had been laid
out.
The food ran out. About 100 plates stood empty. The usual rou - tine when
this happened was for warders to send prisoners back to the kitchens for more
food, but on this occasion the warder in charge of the quarry span, a large redfaced man named Delport, universally hated as a ‘slave-driver’, gave the order to
reduce the F-diet rations already doled out. When two prisoners stepped forward
to protest, Delport told them, ‘You either take your food or leave it.’ Though Ddiet prisoners at the front of the queue were not affected, they decided to refuse
their food. One by one, prisoners filed past the plates without taking them.
In the afternoon, they resumed work in the quarry having had nothing to eat,
then trudged back to the prison and again refused their food. In hurried
discussions, ANC, PAC and other prisoners agreed to continue the hunger strike
for as long as possible in protest not just against food rations but against all the
other grievances they had raised—over working conditions, arbitrary
punishment, beatings and other malicious treatment meted out by warders. There
were fears that the prison authorities might retaliate by ordering mass assaults.
No one was sure what the outcome would be, but the prevailing view among
prisoners in the general section was that the time had come to take a stand. The
warders, meanwhile, remained confident that the strike would soon collapse.
It was not until the second day of the strike that Mandela and others in the
isolation section heard of what was happening. A note wrapped in plastic telling
them a hunger strike was under way arrived in their food drum but gave no
details. Mandela was sceptical about the value of hunger strikes, arguing that
they tended to harm prisoners more than the authorities. He favoured work
strikes or go-slow action instead. But on hearing the news, he and others readily
agreed to join. When prisoners in the general section in turn learned of
Mandela’s involvement, their spirits revived.
Each day, the prison authorities produced ever more appetizing food, steaming
hot, laced with vegetables and soaked in fat. But still the resolve of prisoners, in
both the general and the isolation sections, held firm. Even the sick and elderly
insisted on taking part. Patients in hospital who refused food were turned out of

their beds and told they would have to work in the quarry. In a pathetic straggle,
they stumbled along the road, some in bandages, some crawling, accompanied
by a warder shouting, ‘No food—no medicine.’
By the fifth day of the strike, the prisoners were beginning to flag. The
journey to the quarry, normally half an hour, took an hour. The hospital group
hobbled along several hours later. Work in the quarry tailed off. Prisoners started
to collapse. In the afternoon, the hospital group was taken back to the prison
compound in a van.
On the sixth day, prisoners sat around listlessly in the quarry, not even
pretending to work. Nobody had the energy even to speak. Those who collapsed
were carted away in wheelbarrows. But just when it seemed to the survivors that
they could endure no more, a senior officer arrived and, after a few taunts, asked
what their complaints were. Everyone began to shout at once. A deputation of
prisoners was organised to present their case at a meeting with prison officials.
The officials duly promised to investigate all the complaints the prisoners raised.
For a few days, a more lenient regime prevailed on Robben Island. The food
improved, the warders were more restrained and there were fewer beatings. It
was not long, however, before the prison administration took its revenge. Some
sixteen prisoners deemed to be ringleaders of the strike were sentenced to an
extra six months’ imprisonment. The improvements turned out to be temporary
as the old methods soon returned. Yet the atmosphere on the island was never
quite the same as it had been before. The prisoners regarded the strike as a
success. They had defied the administration and survived.

As the number of ANC prisoners on Robben Island rose month by month,
reaching about 1,000 by 1966, Mandela and his colleagues devised ways and
means of setting up their own forms of organisation to maintain internal
discipline and control, and to circumvent the authorities. An elaborate network
of committees was established—disciplinary, political, educational, literary,
recreational—to deal with every aspect of prisoners’ lives and to keep open
channels of communication between different sections. At the apex was a
committee known as the High Organ, consisting of four members of the old
national executive: Mandela, Sisulu, Mbeki and Mhlaba. Mandela served as its
head.

Every opportunity was used to keep the leaders in the isolation section in
touch with the mass of prisoners in the general section. Messages were hidden in
drums of food, in toilets, which the warders rarely searched, or in matchboxes
discarded by warders on their way to the quarries and surreptitiously picked up
by prisoners. The prison hospital was a regular contact point to exchange
information. The penalties for being caught in possession of messages or any
illicit piece of paper were severe: messengers risked a prolonged spell in solitary
confinement or the loss of study privileges. The danger from searches carried out
by warders or from tip-offs by informers was ever-present. But despite the
hazards, the communications system functioned effectively enough.
A perpetual war was also conducted over the possession of newspapers.
Prisoners were always desperate for news of the outside world. ‘Newspapers are
more valuable to political prisoners than gold or diamonds, more hungered for
than food or tobacco,’ wrote Mandela. ‘They were the most precious contraband
on Robben Island.’ The prison authorities equally relentlessly endeavoured to
prevent prisoners gaining access to newspapers. Raids in search of newspapers
were commonplace.
Despite the risks, prisoners stole newspapers from careless warders, bribed
corrupt ones, retrieved them from rubbish dumps and took them surreptitiously
from visiting doctors and priests. Every scrap of newspaper, whether it had been
used to wrap warders’ sandwiches or for toilet purposes, was seized upon. Old
newspapers were as valued as recent ones. Each item, however trivial, was
memorised or copied, passed on and talked about for days. The disposal of
newspapers, torn into minute shreds and flushed down toilets, took hours. Some
cuttings ended up being eaten.
In the isolation section, Kathrada was given the task of organising
communications and newspaper distribution. To minimise the risk, he first took
cuttings, then handed them on to other prisoners to make short summaries which
were then passed down the line. But there were frequent casualties. Mandela was
once caught in his cell reading a newspaper which a warder had inadvertently
left lying on a bench at the end of the corridor and which had so engrossed him
he failed to hear the footsteps of an approaching officer. It cost him three days in
isolation on a diet of rice water.
Prisoners also had some success in managing to talk individual warders into
adopting a more tolerant regime. As a matter of policy, the ANC’s High Organ

took the view that warders who accorded fair treatment to prisoners should be
respected in return and that others should be encouraged to act similarly. The
results were usually worthwhile. Mandela recalled:
We soon became aware that in terms of our daily lives a warder in our section,
an ordinary warder, not a sergeant, could be more important to us than the
commissioner of prisons or even the minister of justice. If you went to the
commissioner of prisons or even the minister of justice and said, ‘Sir, it’s very
cold, I want four blankets,’ he would look at the regulations and say, ‘You can
only have three blankets . . . more would be a violation of the regulations and if I
give you four blankets I’ll have to give others four blankets.’ If you went to a
warder in your section and said, ‘Look, I want an extra blanket,’ and if you
treated him with respect, he’d just go to the storeroom, give you an extra blanket
and that’s the end of it. If you said, ‘Can I have some gravy today from the
kitchen,’ he just went to the kitchen and got you gravy.
Mandela developed cordial relationships with a number of indi - vidual
warders. ‘With junior officers who knew their position, Nelson was charming
and fatherly,’ Dingake recalled. ‘Many young warders were friendly to him,
occasionally soliciting advice from him in connection with their jobs or social
problems.’ With senior officers, with whom he was frequently at odds over
prison practices, his relationship was far more abrasive.
Prisoners were particularly effective in encouraging warders, often poorly
educated, to study, like them, hoping it would bring a more enlightened
approach to their prison duties. More and more warders turned to graduate
prisoners to help them with their courses. ‘Eventually, we ended up teaching
them subjects like history, maths, English and even Afrikaans,’ said Neville
Alexander.
On occasion, they resorted to blackmail. An elderly warder on night duty in
the isolation section whom Maharaj had befriended asked him one night for help
with writing an essay for a newspaper competition he wanted to enter. Maharaj
agreed. Two weeks later the warder asked for more help; he had reached the
final round, needed to produce another essay and offered Maharaj a cooked
chicken in return. After consulting Mandela and Sisulu, Maharaj agreed to write
the essay in exchange for a packet of cigarettes. The warder duly handed one
over. Once Maharaj had the packet of cigarettes with the warder’s fingerprints
on it, he threatened to expose him to the prison authorities unless he allowed him

to borrow his newspaper each night. The warder, fearful of losing his job and
pension, duly obliged. For three hours every night, Maharaj transcribed items
from the newspaper, handing it back before the warders changed shift, and then
passed his work on to other prisoners to copy so that nothing could be traced
back to him. This nightly transaction went on for six months until the warder
was transferred.
The struggle for improvements in conditions, meanwhile, slowly began to
show results. In 1967, the authorities allowed prisoners in the general section to
start playing football on Saturday mornings. Football and other outdoor sports
like rugby and cricket became the mainstay of long, dreary weekends when
prisoners were otherwise kept locked up in cells. Within months, the Makana
Football Association on Robben Island boasted some twenty-six sides in three
divisions. Training was carried out in cells during weekdays. ‘Sport was very
important on the island,’ said Steve Tshwete, an ANC prisoner. ‘It relieved the
tension and anxiety about family, about home and about survival in prison
itself.’
Prisoners in the isolation section were excluded from participating in generalsection sports; nor were they permitted to attend as spectators. For a time they
managed to get a view of football matches by peering through the tops of
windows in the isolation section facing the pitch. Mandela’s voice could be
heard booming out, ‘Good move, well played!’ But the authorities soon put a
stop to that by painting over the windows. The only relief to the monotony of
weekends in the early years, apart from brief exercise periods, came from the
visits of priests on Sundays. For the first two years, prisoners were confined to
their cells while the priest preached from the head of the corridor, but during the
third year services were conducted in the courtyard outside, allowing inmates to
bask in the sun.
A notable boost to morale was provided by a visit in 1967 by Helen Suzman,
the only member of parliament to take an interest in the welfare of political
prisoners. Before her arrival, the warders moved Mandela out of his customary
cell, no. 4, which was close to the entrance of the corridor, to no. 18, at the end
of it, in the hope that by the time Suzman reached him, she might have little time
left to speak to him. But this ploy was quickly thwarted when Suzman stopped at
the first cell and was told by Eddie Daniels not to waste time talking to him but
to go straight to the end of the corridor to talk to Mandela.

Mandela put his hand through the bars of the cell door and said, ‘How do you
do, Mrs Suzman, I’m very pleased to meet you.’ Suzman was struck by his
remarkable degree of self-assurance. With both the commissioner of prisons and
the commanding officer of Robben Island standing close by, Mandela proceeded
to list grievances over food, clothing, study facilities, labour conditions and the
harsh treatment meted out by warders, singling out by name van Rensburg, the
warder with the swastika tattoo, for whom he harboured an abiding hatred.
Suzman promised to take up all these issues with the minister of justice.
In a subsequent meeting with the minister, when she threatened to expose van
Rensburg’s conduct in parliament, the minister hastily agreed to his removal.
The prisoners had struck back and won. But it was to be another seven years
before Suzman was given permission to return to Robben Island.

CHAPTER 14

A DOUBLE ORDEAL
HOWEVER MUCH MANDELA LOOKED FORWARD TO VISITS FROM
HIS family, they were occasions tinged as much by sadness as by joy. In 1968, a
family group of four visited him: his mother, Nosekeni, his son Makgatho, his
daughter Makaziwe and his favourite sister, Mabel. He had not seen the children
for more than five years; they were now teenagers and had grown up without
him. His mother he had last seen across the courtroom in Pretoria on the day in
1964 that he was sentenced to life imprisonment. Because they had all travelled
such a distance, his mother coming from the Transkei, the prison authorities
extended the visiting time allowed from thirty to forty-five minutes.
His oldest son, Thembi, did not join them, even though he was living nearby
in Cape Town at the time. Thembi never visited his father on Robben Island. The
bitterness that he felt at the break-up of his parents’ marriage never left him. As
a boy of ten, he had become withdrawn and silent. Sisulu, who took an
avuncular interest in him, once remarked to Mandela, ‘Man, that chap is quiet.’
At school in Swaziland, he had fallen in love with a young girl, Thoko, who
became pregnant and was obliged to return to her home in Cape Town. Thembi
followed her there, finding a job as a clerk. Their first child, a daughter, was
followed by a second daughter—Mandela’s first grandchildren. But though
Robben Island could be seen across the water from Cape Town, Thembi made
no effort to go there.
Mandela’s mother appeared to him to have aged considerably. She had lost
much weight. ‘When she left I looked at her walking out and I had the feeling I
had seen her for the last time,’ he recalled. Several weeks later, after he had
returned from a gruelling day in the lime quarry, a warder with whom he had
become friendly, James Gregory, handed him a telegram. It was from Makgatho,
telling him that his mother had died of a heart attack. He sought permission from
the authorities to attend her funeral in the Transkei, but was refused.
In the following months, he pondered much over the life of his mother, an

unschooled woman, widowed at an early age and bewildered by his commitment
to politics rather than his family. He felt troubled by how little he had done to
help her. ‘Her difficulties, her poverty, made me question once again whether I
had taken the right path,’ he wrote in his autobiography. ‘That was always the
conundrum: had I made the right choice in putting the people’s welfare even
before that of my own family?’
An even more painful blow came the following year when another telegram
arrived from Makgatho, this time saying that Thembi had been killed in a car
accident. The news was again conveyed by James Gregory, who recalled the
moment in his autobiography:
In his eyes I could see the sternness I was to recognize when he struggled to
maintain self-control. It was a distancing from me and from others, and in some
ways his face receded into a fixed expression, tight lines around his mouth.
Those lines always went deeper the more worried, sad or angry he became. At
that time, he simply said, ‘Thank you, Mr Gregory,’ and walked away.
Mandela was devastated. He returned to his cell and stood before the barred
window looking out. He did not emerge for dinner. Eventually Sisulu went to
see him, and stayed with him, holding his hand. A night warder reported that
throughout the night he stood before the window, staring out, not moving. The
next morning, he wrote a request asking to be allowed to attend the funeral. His
request was denied.
Mandela’s anguish over the persecution of Winnie also intensified at this time.
In May 1969, in the middle of the night, the security police arrested Winnie at
her home in Orlando, detaining her under the new Terrorism Act, which enabled
them to imprison her without charge and without any access to legal
representation, in solitary confinement, indefinitely.
The two Mandela daughters, Zenani, aged ten, and Zindzi, aged nine, were at
home at the time, on holiday from school in Swaziland, and watched as their
mother was taken away. They were sent to stay with one of Winnie’s sisters. On
Robben Island, the prison authorities made sure that Mandela knew of Winnie’s
arrest by leaving newspaper cuttings in his cell.
Winnie’s arrest was part of a round-up of several hundred dissidents whom
the security police wanted out of the way. In an amateurish fashion, Winnie had
tried her hand at underground political activity, exposing both herself and others
to considerable risk. She acquired a duplicating machine on which to run off

ANC pamphlets and news-letters sent from abroad and accepted an offer from
her friend Maude Katzellenbogen to keep it in a room in her house, safe from
police raids, not suspecting Katzellenbogen’s motives. She also used
Katzellenbogen’s address as a mail drop for letters from abroad sent to cover
names. She was later to discover that the police had detailed information about
the pamphlets and the cover names.
Winnie also became increasingly involved with an employee of the United
States Information Agency, Mohale Mahanyele, asking him first to act as her
driver, then introducing him to clandestine ANC meetings and eventually
persuading him to allow her to use USIA offices for reproducing ANC
pamphlets on duplicating machines at weekends and as an address for overseas
mail. She talked to Mahanyele endlessly about the need for black liberation, but
whenever he asked what steps needed to be taken, her reply was always the
same: force, she would say, the overthrow of the government. So much time did
Mahanyele spend with Winnie that his irate wife threatened to tell everything to
the police. Meanwhile, Mahanyele’s employers had become suspicious about the
amount of foreign mail he was receiving.
Winnie’s imprisonment had a marked effect on her character. She was taken
to Pretoria Central Prison and placed in a solitary confinement cell, five feet
wide and ten feet long. The bedding she was given consisted of a sisal mat and
three blankets filthy from months of use without being washed. The only other
items she was allowed were a toilet bucket, a plastic bottle of water and a mug.
The smell from the toilet bucket was terrible. A single light bulb burned all night
long. The only time she was allowed out of the cell was for brief exercise
periods. She had no access to a bath or shower.
After two weeks, she was taken to be interrogated. Her chief interrogator was
Swanepoel, now a major, notorious for his brutal methods. For five days and
nights she was questioned over and over again, one interrogator following
another. Their purpose was not so much to find out what she knew, for, as
Winnie soon realised, they were already well informed about her meetings, her
pamphlets and her address lists. What they wanted to do was to break her spirit,
to turn her into a collaborator. They presented her with statements from men
who said they had slept with her. They told her of how other prisoners under
interrogation had betrayed her. They offered to release her if she cooperated. On
the sixth day, utterly exhausted and suffering from fainting fits and heart
palpitations, she capitulated, confessing to everything her interrogators

demanded.
Back in her cell, Winnie was then subjected to months of solitary
confinement. The only contact she had was with white warders, who treated her
maliciously. Every day she was required to strip off her clothes for inspection.
She was given a Bible to read, but otherwise there was nothing to occupy her.
She started to talk to herself. She spent hours unthreading a blanket, then
weaving it into threads. The food she was given was so foul she began to suffer
from malnutrition. Two months after her arrest, Swanepoel walked into her cell
and asked her who Thembi Mandela was. When she replied that he was her
stepson, Swanepoel told her curtly, ‘Well, he is dead. He was killed in a car
accident’, and then left. Winnie broke down and wept. There were times in
solitary confinement when she hovered on the borders of insanity.
It was not until after she had spent nearly six months in prison that the
government produced any charges against her. In October 1969, she was one of
a group of twenty-two defendants accused of offences under the Suppression of
Communism Act. The others included four women who had also been held in
solitary confinement, one of whom, Rita Nzanga, had been savagely assaulted
during interrogation.
On the first day of their appearance in the Pretoria magistrates’ court, there
was some confusion about who was to act as their legal representative. When
Winnie was arrested in May, her relatives had turned for help to Joel Carlson, a
civil rights lawyer well known to Mandela and highly respected by political
activists. But for several months, the security police had been engaged in an
elaborate ploy to ensure that Winnie was not represented by Carlson. Maude
Katzellenbogen was used to spread rumours discrediting him. Her partner,
Moosa Dinath, who had been involved in the scheme to free Mandela from
Johannesburg’s Fort prison, was sent to Robben Island in July to try to persuade
Mandela to let another lawyer, Mendel Levin, represent Winnie instead of
Carlson. Mandela turned down the suggestion. But Winnie, in solitary
confinement, fell for it, agreeing not only to give Levin a power of attorney but
to write a letter to political colleagues in London saying that Carlson was not to
be trusted.
Both Levin and Carlson appeared in court, Levin announcing that he was
acting as Winnie’s legal representative, Carlson admitting that he was not clear
of his status but determined if possible not to let the security police win the day.

The matter was decided when the magistrate agreed to adjourn the case to give
the defendants an opportunity to consult with their relatives. Winnie’s sisters,
who were in court, had received a message from Mandela on Robben Island
insisting that no one other than Carlson should be allowed to represent Winnie
and were now able to advise her of the fact. Levin was duly obliged to withdraw.
The indictments against Winnie and the other accused, several of them trade
unionists, were largely of a minor nature. They were accused of attempting to
revive the ANC by organising meetings, distributing banned literature, recruiting
members and staging funeral rallies. Mohale Mahanyele was produced as a chief
witness. The government had hoped to portray their activities as part of a
dangerous communist conspiracy against the state and, with the help of a
compliant defence lawyer, gain a notable victory in court. But the defence team
assembled by Carlson, which included George Bizos and Arthur Chaskalson,
soon turned the trial to their own advantage by winkling out the fact that no less
than five state witnesses had agreed to give evidence only after they had been
subjected to police torture. To avoid further embarrassment, the government
abruptly announced in February 1970 that it was withdrawing the charges.
Winnie’s ordeal, however, was not over. Along with other defendants, she
was immediately re-detained and taken back into solitary confinement, in the
hands once again of vengeful white warders. In June, the government brought
new charges against her and the others, this time under the Terrorism Act.
Winnie did not attend the court hearing, as she was in the prison hospital
suffering from malnutrition. When the trial opened in September, their defence
counsel, Sydney Kentridge, called for an acquittal, pointing out that the charges
the accused faced under the Terrorism Act were virtually identical to the ones
they had faced under the Suppression of Communism Act which had resulted in
their acquittal. The judge duly acquitted them.
After 491 days in prison, Winnie was finally free to go home. But within two
weeks, she was served with a new five-year banning order, restricting her to
Orlando West, prohibiting her from receiving visitors at home and placing her
under house arrest each night and during weekends. The restriction order was
lifted briefly in November, when she was allowed to visit Mandela on Robben
Island for the first time in two years—for thirty minutes.
Mandela had been tormented by Winnie’s imprisonment. He later described it
as a desperately distressing experience, more difficult to contend with than

anything else he had known in prison. He spent sleepless nights worrying about
her plight, worrying too about who was looking after his daughters, who was
paying the bills at home.
The impact on Winnie herself, by the time she emerged from prison, was
indelible. Recalling the experience some twenty years later, she remarked, ‘It is
in fact what changed me; what brutalised me so much that I knew what it is to
hate.’

The atmosphere on Robben Island deteriorated markedly in 1970. A new prison
commander, Colonel Piet Badenhorst, was appointed at the end of the year to
enforce a tougher regime and to stamp out all signs of prisoner resistance. He
had a reputation for being one of the most ruthless and authoritarian officers in
the prison service, feared alike by prisoners and by warders. Renowned for his
incessant use of foul and abusive language, he brought with him a team of handpicked warders eager to do his bidding, one of whom became known as ‘The
Devil’. Badenhorst himself was given the name Kid Ruction.
Mandela had made a practice of asking for an interview with all new prison
commanders, but Badenhorst ignored him. Two weeks after he arrived on the
island, Badenhorst put in an appearance at the lime quarry to find little work
under way there. A group of koeloekoetz men were standing about trying to
explain to one of the new warders the work norms that prevailed at the quarry.
Badenhorst singled out Mandela: ‘Mandela, jy moet jou vinger uit jou gat trek,’
he shouted—‘Mandela, pull your finger out of your arse.’ Then he drove away.
Within minutes, a truck was sent to pick up the prisoners. They were taken
back to the isolation section and paraded before Badenhorst. Swearing profusely,
he accused sixteen prisoners of refusing to work and summarily demoted all of
them to the next lowest grade of classification, so that those who had reached C
grade and gained study privileges were demoted to D grade and instantly lost
their ability to study. The effect on prisoners was devastating, but their protests
were to no avail.
The prison’s legal procedures, which prisoners had been able to exploit to
their advantage, were suspended. Every decision, every punishment, now came
at the whim of warders without explanation or recourse to prison courts. ‘For
every imaginable triviality, real or pretended, the prisoner would be marched off

to the office by a warder who would give a verbal “report”, duly distorted or
invented, and the prisoner would be marched back to his cell, usually without
being asked to explain his “conduct” or to comment on the “report”,’ re - corded
Neville Alexander. This arbitrary system of dispensing punishments caused
massive resentment. ‘Except for the brutality of assaults,’ wrote Alexander, ‘no
other facet of life and experience on Robben Island caused so much bitterness.’
Some prisoners were sent to the ‘segregation section’—in effect, into solitary
confinement—for periods lasting as long as six months.
Cell raids and body searches in the cells became more frequent and more
aggressive. Increasingly rigorous censorship was applied to reading material and
to letters. Outgoing letters were confiscated, recreation facilities were drastically
curtailed and food rations were cut.
In May 1971, in response to a hunger strike started by some Namibian
prisoners which other prisoners joined, Badenhorst let loose his warders on a
night rampage through the prison. Several Namibians were savagely beaten. The
isolation section was raided by warders armed with batons, screaming and
shouting. On a bitterly cold winter’s night, prisoners were kept standing naked
for an hour while their cells were searched. ‘They stripped me and told me to put
my hands against the wall,’ recalled Sisulu. ‘I was worried because I had flu. I
thought that their plan might be that I become ill and eventually die.’ Mbeki,
who was also ill, suffered severe chest pains and collapsed. All complaints were
ignored.
The following year, when three judges made a tour of Robben Island,
accompanied both by the commissioner of prisons, General Steyn, and by
Badenhorst, Mandela was asked to act as a spokesman for the prisoners. The
judges suggested that he might prefer to speak to them in private, but Mandela
replied that he would rather speak in front of the prison officials so that they
could have an opportunity to respond to his criticisms. He related the incident of
the beatings that had taken place in the general section and how the matter had
sub - sequently been covered up. When he had finished, Badenhorst intervened
to ask aggressively whether he had witnessed the beatings. Mandela replied that
he had not, but trusted the account that had been given to him. Wagging his
finger in Mandela’s face, Badenhorst retorted, ‘Be careful, Mandela. If you talk
about things you haven’t seen, you will get yourself into trouble. You know
what I mean?’

Ignoring Badenhorst, Mandela turned to the judges and said, ‘Gentlemen, you
can see for yourself the type of man we are dealing with as commanding officer.
If he can threaten me here, in your presence, you can imagine what he does
when you are not here.’
Three months later, Badenhorst was transferred from Robben Island.

A more benign regime followed Badenhorst’s departure. In 1973, prisoners
regained the right to legal representation. By court order, they could no longer be
arbitrarily demoted or deprived of meals or placed in solitary confinement. Study
privileges were restored, though many obstacles to study remained. Their living
conditions also improved. From 1973, prisoners’ bedding consisted of two sisal
mats, a felt mat and five blankets. They were entitled to two sets of clothing and
given underwear for the first time. Hot water was provided. Political prisoners
gained access to the kitchens for the first time, ensuring a fairer distribution of
food. Though food for African prisoners was still graded differently, prisoners
were allowed to pool their food. Medical treatment improved. Prisoners were
permitted to travel to the mainland for dental visits or for specialist hospital
treatment. The numbers of letters and visitors allowed to prisoners were
increased. Category D prisoners, restricted to one letter and one visit every six
months in 1964, were now permitted one letter and one visit every month.
Photos of family members and friends, once banned, were now allowed. Both
letters and photos were shared with fellow prisoners and often circulated for
several months before being returned to their owners. The censors, however, still
acted with a heavy hand, sometimes reducing a letter to a mere greeting
—‘Darling husband’—and sometimes withholding it altogether. Photos were
subject to censorship. Mandela asked Winnie to send him a photo of Oliver
Tambo, but it was prohibited.
Recreational facilities were extended. Tennis courts were built for prisoners in
the general section. In the isolation section, part of the courtyard was turned into
a volleyball court. Table tennis was the most popular pastime in prison. Indoor
games, like draughts, chess and bridge, also flourished. Films were shown once a
fortnight. Musical instruments were allowed. Records were played over the
intercom system for three hours every morning and at weekends. In the general
section, prisoners formed a band, consisting of saxophone, trumpet, clarinet,
flutes, harmonicas, guitars and penny whistles. Choral singing was performed to

such a high standard that even warders were known to listen.
At Christmas time, the prison authorities allowed prisoners to stage a concert
and a play and to hold competitions. The food remained the same, but prisoners
were given an extra mug of coffee for supper and entitled to purchase a small
quantity of sweets. It was the one day of the year, said Mandela, when the prison
authorities showed any goodwill towards men.

Mandela’s routine, after ten years of his life sentence, was as disciplined and
purposeful as he could make it. He woke early, often long before the first bell
was sounded at 5:30 a.m. He started the day with a burst of physical exercise,
running on the spot for up to forty-five minutes and performing as many as 100
fingertip push-ups, 200 sit-ups and fifty deep knee-bends. Once his cell door was
opened at 6:45 a.m. and he had dispensed with the tasks of tidying his cell and
cleaning his toilet bucket, he jogged around the cement courtyard, clad in shorts,
T-shirt and running shoes, before heading to an exercise hall for some skipping
and shadow-boxing. He also took his turn scrubbing and polishing the floors and
cleaning the toilets of B Section along with everyone else. Vigorous exercise he
always found helpful to reduce tension. When a flu epidemic hit the isolation
section in 1974, Mandela, who was spared the outbreak, made the rounds each
morning collecting the toilet buckets of his sick colleagues, emptying them,
cleaning them and then returning them to the cells.
After breakfast, eaten sitting at a long communal bench with other prisoners,
he fell in for the journey to the lime quarry, passing through the prison gates,
taking off his cap at each one on the order to do so. The regime at the quarry was
relatively lenient. Much of Mandela’s time was spent in giving lectures,
participating in debates and listening to the discussions of fellow inmates.
Though he was sometimes harsh and dogmatic in debate, he was also
acknowledged to be a good listener, always eager to draw his colleagues into
discussion and quick to understand the points they were making. He preferred to
examine issues by hearing differing viewpoints, then reaching a conclusion, in a
manner that he had first witnessed as a boy at the Great Place at Mqhekezweni.
His grasp of detail and his memory for it were put to good use. ‘His capacity to
retain what he hears made him an excellent reporter after interviews with
authorities,’ wrote Dingake. ‘He could be detailed not only in the substance of
the point made, but in reporting expressions and innuendoes of the participants.’

The lime quarry routine was changed in 1973 when the koeloekoetz group
were given alternative work occasionally collecting seaweed, wading into the
sea, lining it up in strips on the beach and loading it into the back of a truck for
use eventually as fertilizer. In winter, it was bitterly cold work, but Mandela
much preferred it. From the shore, he could see the skyscrapers of Cape Town in
the distance and watch the shipping move to and fro from the harbour. Seaweed
duties also gave prisoners the opportunity to cook themselves delicious seafood
stews for lunch and to collect shells and pieces of coral to decorate their cells.
Returning to the prison at 4 p.m. for a shower and supper, Mandela was
locked up in his cell for the rest of the night by 5 p.m. He used the time for study
and writing letters. He also surreptitiously undertook legal work for prisoners in
the general section who wanted help preparing judicial appeals. As an A-grade
prisoner, he was entitled to three outgoing and three incoming letters each
month, as well as two half-hour visits of two people at a time each month.
His cell, seven feet square, had taken on a more homely appearance. As a
result of high blood pressure, from which he had suffered for more than ten
years, in 1973 Mandela was provided with a bed; and because of back problems,
he was given a chair instead of a bench. On a bookshelf stood a picture of
Winnie which he would dust affectionately each day, rubbing his nose against
hers.
Weekends were spent either in the confines of the courtyard or in the cells.
Mandela devoted considerable time to trying to improve relations between the
ANC and the PAC, seeking out PAC leaders in the isolation section, believing
that if the two organisations could settle their differences on Robben Island, that
might provide a basis for national reconciliation. Both the ANC and PAC
participated in a prisoners’ committee known as Ulundi which represented all
groups in the isolation section. But every other attempt at producing a united
front proved fruitless.
On Sundays, Mandela attended church services of whatever denomination had
been chosen for the day, listening with equal attention to the sermons by
Catholic, Hindu, Muslim and Dutch Reformed Church priests who visited the
island. Though brought up in the Methodist Church and still regarding himself as
a staunch member, he favoured a broad attitude towards religion. The priest
whom Mandela most appreciated and who always gained the largest
congregation was an Anglican minister named Father Hughes, a burly

Welshman who endeavoured to lace his sermons with titbits of news and words
of encouragement. One of his favourite quotations was: ‘I groused and groused
because I had no shoes until I saw a man who had no feet.’ Father Hughes
brought with him a portable organ with which he accompanied the prisoners,
praising them for their singing. During Kid Ruction’s regime, the portable organ
was prohibited. Mandela took holy communion on a regular basis: ‘The
sacrament gave me a sense of inner quiet and calm.’ But he spoke of himself as
not being particularly religious or spiritual: ‘I am just an ordinary person
interested in trying to make sense of the mysteries of life.’
For relaxation, Mandela enjoyed playing draughts, competing each year in the
draughts competition and occasionally winning it. His style of play was slow and
deliberate, with each move considered carefully. Once a fortnight he watched a
film show in the isolation section, though he tended to become bored with the
mediocre selection of films on offer.
His favourite occupation, though, was gardening. He had acquired a love of
gardening and growing vegetables during his schooldays at Clarkebury, working
in the garden belonging to the principal, Reverend Harris. Soon after arriving on
Robben Island, he had asked the authorities for permission to start a garden in
the courtyard, but it had taken years for them to agree. Given a narrow patch of
earth alongside a perimeter wall, he worked assiduously to nurture plants in the
dry, stony soil, studying horticultural techniques from library books, and he took
immense satisfaction in the resulting tomatoes and onions he produced.
The highlight of Mandela’s routine was the arrival of a letter or a visitor from
his family, especially Winnie. She was the focus of his emotions. Without a
letter from Winnie, he said, he felt as dry as the desert. A letter from her was like
the coming of the summer rains. His own letters in return were full of love and
affection and a deep longing for her presence. He constantly referred to
memories of their time together, of touching her hand, hugging her, tasting the
delicious dishes she cooked, and of the hours they had spent in the bedroom.
On the occasions when they met in the visiting room, separated by a panel of
thick glass, Winnie was always careful to dress with flair, knowing that he
would cherish the details for weeks to come. Each time, he said, he felt like
lingering in the room after she had gone to savour the moment a little longer but
forced himself to leave lest emotion overtook him. His next letter would be full
of compliments about her dress and about the effect her beauty had on him.

Winnie was also the focus of his main concern. There seemed to be no respite
from the harassment the security police meted out to her, nor to her propensity
for becoming entangled with police informers and other dubious characters. In
1970, she was charged with violating her banning order when her sister, Beauty,
came to her house with her husband, two children and brother-in-law to pick up
a shopping list. She was sentenced to six months’ imprisonment, but on appeal
the sentence was suspended and the conviction was eventually overturned. In
1971, she was again charged with violating her banning order, this time after a
family friend, the photographer Peter Magubane, also a banned person, was
found by police hiding under her bed. She was sentenced to twelve months’
imprisonment, but once again on appeal the sentence and conviction were set
aside. Interspersed with all this, Winnie faced random police raids, some
mysterious gunshots and a night when she awoke to find three intruders in her
house.
Then, in 1973, she was again accused of violating her banning order, this time
when Peter Magubane brought her daughters, Zeni and Zindzi, who were on
holiday from school in Swaziland, to meet her for lunch near her place of work.
Sentenced to one year’s imprisonment, she appealed but won only a reduction in
her sentence to six months. In September 1974, therefore, she was back in
prison, serving her time in Kroonstad in the company of two other political
prisoners.
News about Winnie that reached Mandela on Robben Island always seemed to
involve controversy and trouble. In 1975, one month after her last visit to
Robben Island, Winnie sent Mandela a message saying that her request for
another visit had been turned down on the grounds that Mandela himself did not
want to see her. Mandela immediately made an appointment to see the head of
prison, Lieutenant Prins, to lodge a protest. After Mandela had explained the
matter, Prins responded rudely, ‘Ag, Mandela, your wife is only seeking
publicity.’ He then went on to make a remark so offensive about Winnie that
Mandela lost his temper, shook his fists and let loose a torrent of abuse. It was
one of the rare occasions on Robben Island when Mandela lost his self-control.
When charges were brought against him, Mandela prepared counter-charges.
The case was subsequently dropped.
Mandela was also concerned about his children. Makgatho had turned into a
feckless character. Expelled from school for involvement in a student strike, he
had left without passing matriculation and failed subsequent attempts to do so.

He had since married and fathered a son. Once or twice a year he went to
Robben Island to see Mandela, on one occasion arriving there drunk. Mandela
constantly urged him to return to his studies and Makgatho made promises, but
he never fulfilled them.
Makaziwe had shown greater aptitude at school, becoming the first of
Mandela’s children to pass matriculation, but to his deep disappointment, instead
of proceeding to university, she had decided to get married. Mandela tried to
persuade her to postpone marriage until after she graduated, but she would not
listen. She had two children in quick succession, then the marriage failed.
Mandela’s other two daughters, Zeni and Zindzi, had been tossed about in the
turmoil of Winnie’s own life. Both had been deeply affected by the succession of
raids, arrests, imprisonments and dark dramas that beset their mother. Only
school in Swaziland and the help of good friends in Johannesburg had provided
a source of stability. Of the two, Zindzi had adapted most readily to the hurlyburly surrounding Winnie. At the age of twelve, after witnessing police break
down the door of their house in Orlando West during the 1972 Christmas
holidays, she wrote an appeal to the United Nations Special Committee on
Apartheid, asking for help in providing protection for Winnie:
Hardly a month goes by without the newspapers reporting some incident
concerning Mummy, and her friends and family feel that the public is being
conditioned to expect something terrible to happen to her. I know my father,
who is imprisoned for life on Robben Island, is extremely concerned about my
mother’s safety, and has done everything in his power to appeal to the
government to give her protection, but without success.
Because of prison regulations, Mandela never set eyes on either of his
daughters until 1975, when Zeni was sixteen and Zindzi was fifteen. He was by
then virtually unknown to them, a man familiar only through old photographs.
For their first visits, he took particular care with his appearance, anxious to
create a favourable impression. It was a nervous moment for all of them. Trying
to put the girls at ease, Mandela gestured towards the warders surrounding him
in the cubicle, saying, ‘Have you met my guard of honour?’
Zindzi recalled:
I had heard so much about my father that I was rather apprehensive about seeing
him for the first time. He was more a great figure than a father. But when we
met, even through the glass partition and speaking on telephones, I found it very

easy. He is so versatile and charismatic that in just a few minutes he seemed to
change the whole atmosphere. The warders were breathing down our necks all
the time, but he put me at my ease at once, recalling little incidents from the time
when I was a baby.
That same year, Mandela embarked upon the writing of his memoirs, hoping
that they might be published to coincide with his sixtieth birthday in 1978. He
worked mainly at night, sleeping during the day, having informed the prison
authorities that he was unwell and would not be going to the quarry. Each bit of
work was passed on to Sisulu and Kathrada for comments, which they jotted
down in the margins. The manuscript was then handed to another colleague,
Laloo Chiba, who produced a copy of it in microscopic shorthand. The plan was
for Mac Maharaj to smuggle the copy out of prison when his twelve-year
sentence came to an end in 1976. The original manuscript, meanwhile, would be
buried at a spot in the courtyard, to be dug up and destroyed once Maharaj’s
copy was safely out of the country.
In four months, Mandela completed 500 pages. Because it was too bulky to
bury in one spot, the manuscript was divided into three, each part wrapped in
plastic, placed in a tin container and then hidden in a separate hole in the ground
at one end of the courtyard.
But the plan went awry a few weeks later when, unexpectedly, a team of
prison labourers arrived in the isolation section to dig a trench for the
foundations for a new wall in the same area of the courtyard. Mandela managed
to retrieve two of the packages and to destroy them, but the third was discovered.
The punishment for Mandela, and for Sisulu and Kathrada, whose handwriting
was also on the manuscript, was severe. All three were stripped of their study
privileges for four years.
The routine on Robben Island, meanwhile, continued relentlessly, week after
week, month after month. Then, in June 1976, the atmosphere deteriorated
dramatically. Returning to the prison compound, tired and dirty after a day
collecting seaweed in bitterly cold conditions, the prisoners rushed to the
showers to find that there was no hot water. On following days, even when the
rain and the cold made work almost impossible, they were forced outside again.
Attempts to negotiate with the authorities proved fruitless. There was a rare
disagreement between Mandela and Sisulu about what form their response
should take. What neither knew at the time was that an eruption of political

violence had occurred in South Africa, sending tremors across the country, with
effects that reached even the sequestered world of Robben Island.

CHAPTER 15

SOWETO
WHITE SOCIETY, DURING THE FOURTEEN YEARS THAT MANDELA
HAD spent in prison, had become increasingly prosperous and secure.
Throughout the 1960s, South Africa experienced one of the highest rates of
economic growth in the world, second only to that of Japan. Foreign trade with
Western countries rose by leaps and bounds. Foreign investors from the United
States, Britain, France and Germany competed vigorously for positions in new
industries. The annual net flow of foreign capital into the country in 1970 rose to
a level six times higher than that of the pre-Sharpeville era. The economic boom
also brought to South Africa a flood of white immigrants, mainly from Europe:
between 1960 and 1970 there was a net gain of some 250,000. All this gave
white South Africans a growing sense of confidence about the future. Black
resistance had been crushed and the security apparatus seemed capable of
meeting any contingency. Many whites believed the apartheid system to be
invincible.
The benefits of National Party rule were noticeable particularly among the
Afrikaner community. With government assistance, a new class of Afrikaner
financiers, businessmen and managers had moved into commanding positions in
industry, commerce and banking, areas once the preserve of English-speaking
whites. State enterprises like railways, harbours, steel production, electric power
generation and heavy engineering were manned at a senior level almost
exclusively by Afrikaners and used as training fields for Afrikaner scientists and
business leaders. Government contracts and concessions were frequently steered
towards Afrikaner companies. The civil service was virtually an Afrikaner
preserve. Afrikaner farmers, consisting of three-quarters of the total number,
also fared well under National Party rule, assisted by subsidies, research funds,
modernisation programmes and favourable prices fixed by state marketing
boards.
The Afrikaner working class prospered as never before. By 1970, more than
80 per cent of the Afrikaner population were living in towns and cities. White

jobs were given whatever protection was needed from black competition.
Almost every skilled trade and craft was reserved for white workers. When
unskilled whites felt threatened by black competition, the government made use
of legislation it had introduced in the 1950s, enabling it to reserve any
occupation for whites only. Some orders applied to entire industries, like
production jobs for the clothing, building, metallurgical and mining industries.
Others affected only small, specific areas protecting a handful of employees, like
the jobs of traffic policemen in Cape Town and passenger-lift operators in
Johannesburg. At a more general level, white workers were protected by two
cardinal principles the government used to determine its labour policy: first, no
white worker could be replaced by a black worker in the same job, and second,
no white worker could work under a black.
The English-speaking community, of course, shared in the prosperity; few
other communities in the world possessed such a high standard of living. The
northern suburbs of Johannesburg, where many English-speakers congregated,
were said to have the greatest concentration of swimming pools outside Beverly
Hills. Whatever reservations English speakers might have held about the nature
of National Party rule, the success it enjoyed made them compliant citizens.
The system seemed strong enough to withstand any shock. When Hendrik
Verwoerd, the driving force behind grand apartheid, was assassinated in the
National Assembly by a deranged parliamentary messenger in 1966, the white
community took the prime minister’s death in its stride. No shift in policy was
considered necessary. Verwoerd’s successor, chosen by the National Party, was
John Vorster, who, as minister of justice, had made such a success of smashing
black opposition. Immediately upon being elected, Vorster declared, ‘My role is
to walk further along the road set by Hendrik Verwoerd.’
The impact of grand apartheid on the African population was felt with
dramatic force during the 1960s as the government worked systematically to
stem the flow of Africans from rural to urban areas and to destroy all notion that
urban Africans could have a permanent place in ‘white’ towns. With remorseless
vigour, the government strove to reduce the urban African population wherever
possible, stripping urban Africans of what few rights they possessed and ridding
white rural areas of vast numbers of blacks. A government circular in 1967
stated: ‘No stone is to be left unturned to achieve the settlement in the
homelands of non-productive Bantu at present residing in the European areas. ’
Among those whom the circular defined as ‘non-productive’ were ‘the aged, the

unfit, widows and women with dependent children’. A government minister
estimated that of 6 million Africans in white areas, 4 million were ‘surplus
appendages’ suitable for deportation to black homelands.
As the policy took effect, the number of prosecutions under pass laws rose
sharply, reaching 700,000 in 1968. Countless thousands found themselves
‘endorsed out’ of urban areas. In the Transvaal and the Orange Free State,
massive urban relocation programmes were carried out. African townships
considered to be within commuting distance of a homeland were ‘deproclaimed’
and their residents moved to new rural townships built in the homelands. In
some cases, the entire African population was moved, as happened at Nelspruit
and Lichtenburg. In other cases, government officials concentrated on removing
the unemployed, the elderly and disabled, women and children, leaving behind
African workers to live in all-male hostels and visit their families on a weekly or
monthly basis.
In place of a stable, urban population, what the government wanted was a
workforce composed principally of migrant labour. With migrant workers
circulating continuously between black homelands and white-owned enterprises
in urban areas, the government saw a means of reconciling the white need for
labour with its own determination to prevent permanent black urbanisation.
African workers could be turned into commuters if they lived in homelands close
enough to urban areas, or weekly migrants if the distance was too far.
Alternatively, African workers could be engaged in the traditional manner on
annual contracts, housed in all-male compounds and released to visit their
families in the homelands at the end of the year. In 1970, it was estimated that
more than 2 million men spent their lives circulating as migrants between their
homes and urban employment. Many of them were deprived of all normal family
and social life, confined for months on end to a bleak and barren existence in
overcrowded barracks that were notorious for high rates of drunkenness and
violence. Others spent hours each day travelling long distances to work in
packed buses and trains, rising before dawn and returning home late into the
night.
Black townships were deliberately kept as unattractive as possible. Few urban
amenities were ever provided. Black businessmen were prevented by
government restrictions from expanding their enterprises there. No African was
allowed to carry on more than one business. Businesses were confined to
providing ‘daily essential necessities’, like wood, coal, milk and vegetables.

There could be no banks or clothing stores or supermarkets. Restrictions were
even placed on dry-cleaners, garages and petrol stations. Nor were Africans
allowed to establish companies or partnerships in urban areas, or to construct
their own buildings. These had to be built and leased from the local authority.
The largest urban area in the country, Johannesburg’s South Western
Townships, which included Mandela’s home district of Orlando, was typical of
the bleak urban landscape enforced by the government. Known from 1963 as
Soweto, it consisted mainly of row upon row of identical four-room brick
‘matchbox’ houses with hardly any public facilities. Only a small proportion of
houses had electricity or adequate plumbing. There were few paved roads or
proper pavements, no modern shopping centres or office blocks, and not a single
pharmacy or bakery. Because of restrictions placed on African trading rights,
three-quarters of the groceries consumed by Sowetans were purchased in white
shops in Johannesburg. More than 1 million people lived there in circumstances
which became increasingly cramped. From the mid-1960s, the construction of
family housing in all urban areas virtually came to a halt. Priority was given
instead to building housing in the homelands and hostels in urban areas for
migrant labour. By 1970, the average number of people living in each house in
Soweto had risen to thirteen. By 1972, the housing backlog was even greater
than it had been in the 1940s.
The effect of apartheid in rural areas was equally severe. Leaving ‘no stone
unturned’ in its drive for racial separation, the government began to excise
scores of African settlements surrounded by white farming areas where Africans
had lived in relative peace and quiet for generations. In the government’s
terminology, these settlements were known as ‘black spots’, small fragments of
land in what was deemed to be ‘white’ South Africa which stood out as irritating
blemishes on the apartheid map. Some land was held by title deed, purchased by
African farmers in the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries; some was
mission land scheduled for African use under the Natives Land Act of 1913,
small African reserves which had survived intact the era of white occupation but
which were now considered to be ‘badly situated’. In all, there were an estimated
300 black spots.
The elimination of black spots began in earnest in the 1960s. Whole
communities were uprooted and forced to leave their homes. Many were dumped
in areas often unsuitable for cultivation, lacking water supplies, far from main
roads and out of reach of hospitals or clinics. Any sign of resistance was dealt

with by armed police. A Franciscan priest, Father Cosmas Desmond, who made
a journey the length and breadth of South Africa to ascertain the full extent of
the forced removals policy in 1969, later described how he found a ‘laby - rinth
of broken communities, broken families and broken lives’. Between 1960 and
1970, nearly 100,000 Africans lost their homes during the elimination of black
spots. Many more were to follow.
In white farming areas, where the white population was constantly
preoccupied with die beswarting van die platteland—the blackening of the white
countryside—the government acted with similar vigour to reduce the black
population. White farmers were encouraged to adopt more mechanised
production methods and to replace permanent black workers with casual
employees and single migrant workers. An estimated half a million full-time
black workers lost their employment on white farms during the 1960s.
Thousands of African labour tenants—‘squatters’—were also turned off white
land. The only Africans whom the government wanted in white farming areas
were hired labourers, preferably migrants.
The impact of all these changes in ‘white’ South Africa on black homelands
was devastating. Already overcrowded and impoverished, homelands had to
cope with an endless flow of displaced Africans—labour tenants, squatters,
redundant farm labourers, urban dwellers—‘superfluous’ people, as they were
described, all scrabbling for survival. During the 1960s, the homeland
population nearly doubled. Once in the homelands, most African men had no
alternative but to offer themselves up to the migrant labour treadmill. The
government, for its part, pronounced itself well pleased with the results of its
policy. ‘The elimination of the redundant non-economically active Bantu’ in
white areas, said a government minister in 1969, was ‘a tremendous
achievement’.

For ten years, while the apartheid system bit ever deeper into the lives of the
African population, little sign of protest emerged. The repression used to crush
Umkhonto we Sizwe had made an impact too deep to be forgotten easily. Even
traditionally militant areas like the townships of the Eastern Cape were cowed
into silence.
But in the early 1970s, a new generation of black activists arose from the
ranks of the student population. It was a generation which drew its inspiration

not from the concept of multiracial struggle that the ANC had championed but
from a sense of black assertiveness more in line with the Africanist tradition of
black politics. The black consciousness movement of the 1970s filled the
vacuum left by the collapse of the ANC and the PAC. It found an articulate
spokesman in Steve Biko, a medical student from the Eastern Cape, who argued
that ‘group power’ would achieve black liberation. Biko was contemptuous of
the cowed and submissive attitude of the black population. ‘The type of black
man we have today has lost his manhood,’ he wrote in a student newsletter in
1970. ‘Reduced to an obliging shell, he looks with awe at the white power
structure and accepts what he regards as the “inevitable position”.’ What was
needed, said Biko, was a massive effort to reverse the negative image that blacks
held of themselves and to replace it with a more positive identity. Black
oppression was first and foremost a psychological problem. It could be
countered by promoting black awareness, black pride, black capabilities and
black achievement. The term ‘black’ was used to include Coloureds and Indians
equally with Africans as victims of racial oppression. No help was wanted from
white liberals or any other white sympathisers. The slogan used was: ‘Black
man, you are on your own.’
As the black consciousness movement gathered momentum, it found outlets in
literature, poetry, music, theology and in local community projects promoting
education, health and welfare. A host of youth clubs, discussion groups and
cultural organisations sprang into existence.
The stirring of black discontent eventually prompted the government to take
reprisals. In 1973 it issued banning orders on Biko and seven other leaders of the
movement. But its actions failed to prevent the spread of black consciousness. A
dramatic boost to black morale occurred in 1974 when Portuguese rule in
Mozambique and Angola collapsed, paving the way for African liberation
movements there to take control. When South African troops were obliged to
withdraw from Angola in early 1976, having failed to prevent a Marxist guerrilla
organisation from gaining power there, black students again celebrated the
defeat of white power.
The issue that finally ignited student anger was the system of Bantu education
designed by Verwoerd to limit African education to the needs of the white
economy. It had produced a legacy of inferior schooling, poorly trained teachers,
overcrowded classrooms and inadequate equipment. Government expenditure
had been kept to a minimum: in the early 1970s it spent sixteen times more on

white education per pupil than on black education. Because of deliberate
restrictions on places in middle and higher schools, hundreds of thousands of
children—‘push-outs’, as they were known—left school with no greater
prospects than menial work or unemployment. Those who managed to complete
secondary school were faced with a whole range of apartheid restrictions
affecting the kind of employment for which they could apply.
Into this potentially explosive atmosphere the government stumbled with yet
another regulation. In 1974, it decided that an old ruling, originally made in
1958, that half of the subjects in secondary schools not taught in the African
vernacular had to be taught in Afrikaans and the other half in English should be
enforced the following year. Because of the practical difficulties involved, the
ruling had hitherto been ignored. African teachers in training college continued
to receive their instructions almost exclusively in English. Many teachers were
unable even to converse in Afrikaans. In one protest after another, teachers’
organisations, school boards, principals and parents sought to persuade the
government to change its mind, but the government remained adamant.
The epicentre of the resistance was Soweto. Students, denouncing Afrikaans
as the language of the ‘oppressor’, began to boycott classes in Afrikaans,
organised school strikes and then planned a mass dem - onstration. On 16 June
1976, a dozen columns of students marched through Soweto carrying placards,
chanting slogans and singing freedom songs. They were met by armed police
who opened fire, killing a thirteen-year-old schoolboy. As news of the shooting
spread, students went on the rampage, attacking government buildings, beer
halls, bottle stores, vehicles and buses. Two whites were killed. For three days,
Soweto was the scene of running battles between groups of students and riot
police in armoured convoys, often firing indiscriminately. Clashes spread to
other townships in the Transvaal. At least 150 people were killed during the first
week of the Soweto revolt, most of them black schoolchildren.
In July, the government retreated on the Afrikaans issue. But by then the
students had set their sights on bringing down the whole Bantu education
system. Some believed that the government itself could be toppled. Time and
again they returned to the streets, showing remarkable resilience in the face of
police firepower and displaying a level of defiance and hatred of the apartheid
system rarely seen before. As soon as one set of student leaders was detained or
dis - appeared into exile, others stepped forward, ready to take their place.

Yet for all the courage shown, the student revolt lacked any sense of direction.
Marches, demonstrations and arson attacks produced little discernible result
other than an endless series of police raids and a high cost in casualties—at least
600 dead and 4,000 wounded. From September onwards the momentum of the
revolt began to ebb. By December it had virtually died out.

The prison population on Robben Island had undergone several changes over the
years. When Mandela was first sent there in 1963 it consisted mainly of
hardened criminals divided into rival gangs which constantly fought each other
for ascendancy. Murder, assault and sodomy were commonplace. There
followed an influx of PAC prisoners, many on short sentences of two or three
years. ANC prisoners, at first a small minority, eventually outnumbered them. In
the early 1970s, the criminal population was steadily reduced. The number of
political prisoners also fell as those on short sentences departed. By the mid1970s, political prisoners numbered only 400, many of them middle-aged or
growing old, long accustomed to a prison routine which they themselves had
done much to shape.
The arrival in 1976 of young, unruly black consciousness activists, as
determined to confront the prison system as they had been to confront the
apartheid system outside, shook the prison to its core. They regarded the settled
habits of the older inmates, in particular their willingness to conform to prison
regulations, with contempt, as being little different from the submissive attitude
to authority shown by their parents and teachers for so many years. Normal rules
like standing up in the presence of prison officers and taking off their caps were
simply ignored.
Such conduct came as a shock to the older generation of prisoners. In his
autobiography, Mandela described an incident he witnessed in which a prison
officer told a newly arrived prisoner to take off his cap. ‘What for?’ retorted the
prisoner. Mandela recalled, ‘I could hardly believe what I had heard.’ The young
militants were prepared neither to submit to prison discipline nor to heed the
advice of old stalwarts on how best to handle the prison authorities. They
considered conditions on Robben Island to be barbaric and cared nothing for
explanations about how much they had improved as a result of the efforts of the
first political prisoners to arrive there.
Most of the 1976 intake were placed in a new part of the prison known as

Section E. But several prominent activists, including two Indians, Strini
Moodley and Saths Cooper, were sent to the isolation section. Mandela made a
point of catching up with the ideas behind black consciousness. But the gulf in
attitude remained. After watching a documentary on an American motorcycle
gang known as Hell’s Angels which depicted them as being reckless and violent,
while portraying the police as being decent and trustworthy, the ANC prisoners
were all harshly critical of the bikers for their lawlessness. But Moodley
compared their rebelliousness to the rebelliousness of the Soweto students and
accused the ANC men of being elderly middle-class intellectuals who favoured
right-wing authority.
Both the ANC and the PAC expended considerable energy in trying to recruit
black-consciousness supporters to their side. The friction this caused lasted for
several years and resulted in serious bouts of violence. In 1977, Mosiuoa Lekota,
a black-consciousness leader who decided to join the ANC, was attacked with a
garden fork by former comrades. After leaving Robben Island, Saths Cooper
observed caustically, ‘When the sordidness of prison behaviour is examined,
there is little difference between common-law and political prisoners generally.
Where the former are often organized into deadly rival gangs, the latter are
organized into often warring political groupings.’ It was a struggle in which the
ANC’s older generation of prisoners was largely successful in winning over
black-consciousness activists.
Meanwhile, the tempo of life on Robben Island changed in other ways. In
1977, the authorities ended hard labour in the quarries, which had been
Mandela’s principal occupation for thirteen years. From 1978, political prisoners
were allowed to listen to censored newscasts broadcast over an intercom system.
From 1980, they could buy newspapers and periodicals, albeit heavily censored
beforehand by prison staff. A tennis court was constructed in the courtyard.
Mandela’s days were now spent largely at leisure. Most of the time he
occupied by reading. ‘He would read for hour after hour in unbroken
concentration,’ recalled Kathrada. Because of the four-year ban on his studies,
the books he read were mainly novels obtained from the prison library. He
subscribed to a wide range of newspapers and periodicals, including Afrikaans
publications. He kept up his correspondence as regularly as he was permitted,
worked diligently on legal briefs for fellow prisoners, played tennis and tended
his garden patch.

For all the new comforts of prison life, Mandela worried that it was leaving
him further and further behind as the outside world moved on. The arrival of the
1976 activists was a reminder not just of how much he was out of touch with
political developments, with new ideas and thinking, but of how much time had
passed. Most of the new prisoners had been mere infants at the time his prison
life had begun.
The departure of close friends added to his sense of being stranded. Fikile
Bam and Neville Alexander had gone in 1974 after serving ten years. Mac
Maharaj left in 1976, taking with him Mandela’s manuscript. Eddie Daniels
went in 1979 and Michael Dingake in 1981. The Rivonia group remained, with
not the slightest sign that they would ever be released.
Each year brought news of the death of old colleagues. Albert Luthuli, in poor
health and with failing eyesight, had died in 1967, struck by a train while taking
a walk near his home in Natal. In 1968, Z. K. Matthews, Mandela’s old
professor, had died in the United States. J. B. Marks died in Moscow in 1972,
Robert Resha in London in 1973, Moses Kotane in Moscow in 1974 and
Michael Harmel in Prague in 1974. Bram Fischer died in 1975, suffering from
cancer and released from Pretoria prison for only the last few weeks of his life.
Robert Sobukwe, who had been released from solitary confinement after six
years on Robben Island, died in Kimberley in 1978. In a letter of condolence to
Robert Resha’s widow, Mandela remarked, ‘It seems that the old and stable
world we knew so well is beginning to crumble down, leaving us with nothing
but painful memories.’

As a resident of Soweto, Winnie was drawn swiftly into the tumult of the student
uprising. She played a leading role in the Black Parents Association, formed by a
group of local leaders to act as intermediaries between the students and the
authorities. The BPA helped organise funerals and raised money for medical and
burial expenses. Winnie herself renewed her reputation for militant behaviour
when she went to a local police station in the company of an African bishop and
ended up by shouting and throwing objects at the police, accusing them of
murder. ‘There was the usual flare-up,’ she said. ‘I don’t think Bishop Buthelezi
had ever seen anything like that in his life. I wanted to restrain myself because of
him but it was difficult.’ One of her BPA colleagues, Dr Nthatho Motlana, a
close friend of the Mandelas who acted as guardian to Zeni and to Zindzi,

recalled how Winnie’s conduct would scare them: ‘Often I would say, you are
bloody foolhardy, you are going to get us all locked up, and when they
threatened to lock her up she just said, “Do it, man!’”
In August 1976, Winnie and ten other women were detained under the
Internal Security Act and taken to the Fort. She remained there, without being
charged, for five months. During the school holidays, Zeni and Zindzi went to
stay in Johannesburg with the banned activist Helen Joseph and visited their
mother each week, taking fruit, clothes and newspapers. Released at Christmas,
Winnie was once more issued with strict banning orders, confining her to her
house in Orlando between 6 p.m. and 6 a.m. each day.
As the first anniversary of the student uprising drew near, the government
devised yet another form of punishment for Winnie: banishment. In May 1977,
without warning, armed police arrived at her home in the early morning, took
her to a local police station and piled all her furniture and belongings into a
truck. She was then driven 300 miles to a barren township on the edge of a small
platteland dorp in the Orange Free State called Brandfort and prohibited from
travelling outside the locality. Zindzi went with her.
The house she was given—no. 802—possessed neither water nor electricity. It
consisted of three tiny rooms, far too small for all her possessions, most of which
had to be taken away to be stored at the local police station. When she arrived,
the floors were covered with mounds of earth left behind by local builders. The
local population had been told that Winnie was a dangerous criminal and
instructed to avoid her. She spoke neither of the two languages used locally,
Sesotho and Afrikaans. Under the terms of her banning order, she was confined
to the house every night and allowed no visitors; during the day, she was
forbidden to be in the company of more than one person at a time. Her
movements were constantly watched. Her neighbours on both sides were
policemen. Every day a security policeman kept her under surveillance, spending
most of his time in a car parked on a low hill nearby and using binoculars.
Friends in Johannesburg were quick to help, driving down to Brandfort with
supplies of groceries, cosmetics and household items. But they too were
subjected to police harassment. After four white women friends were given
prison sentences for refusing to make statements to police about their visits to
Winnie, the number of visitors from Johannesburg declined sharply.
At shops in the white section of Brandfort, Winnie faced open hostility from

staff. Brandfort was a typical rural settlement, with a few shops on either side of
the road, a petrol station, a post office, a railway station, two small hotels, two
churches, two banks, an Afrikaans school and a police station, and had been long
accustomed to a quiet routine and an orderly existence. Blacks who came to shop
in Brandfort were usually dealt with by being served through separate small
windows. When Winnie took Zindzi to a clothes shop to buy her a black
mourning dress to mark the first anniversary of the Soweto revolt in June, she
was confronted by an angry white shop assistant who tried to prevent her from
entering. The common practice was for blacks to stand outside the shop and
point to the clothes that interested them. Winnie’s altercation with the shop
assistant eventually required the police to break it up. At other shops, when staff
complained about her presence or asked her to go to the non-white section, she
exploded, shouting and swearing at them.
The persistent attention of the police affected not only Winnie but Zindzi too.
Friends who visited her were questioned aggressively about their meetings.
Sometimes they were prevented from meeting her at all. Only sixteen years old,
she fell into a deep depression, weeping continuously and unable to sleep. From
Robben Island, Mandela brought an urgent application for an interdict against
the security police to restrain them from intimidating or harassing Zindzi. In a
statement to the court, Zindzi described how the police had burst into the house
while she was in the company of her teenage friends, demanding names and
addresses, issuing threats and evicting everyone present, then calling on them in
their homes and detaining them for questioning. As a result, she said, her friends
were terrified of visiting her. The court ruled that Zindzi was entitled to receive
visitors in peace, even though Winnie was subject to a banning order.
The atmosphere in Brandfort remained grim, but Winnie was loath to let
Zindzi go back to Johannesburg. ‘I literally couldn’t let her out of my clutches,
clinging to perhaps the last semblance of a family unit,’ she said in her
autobiography. When, after two years in Brandfort, Zindzi did return to
Johannesburg, to stay with Helen Joseph, Winnie described in a letter to a friend
how her daughter’s company had helped cushion her from the pain of exile and
spoke of the loneliness that followed her departure: ‘The empty long days drag
on, one like the other. . . . The solitude is deadly.’
Mandela found Winnie’s plight all the more difficult to bear since he knew
nothing about Brandfort or the surroundings in which she found herself. Apart
from brief glimpses through blurred glass in the visitor’s room and letters

carefully written to avoid censorship, his connection with Winnie’s life, which
he cherished so much, was based above all on shared memories of people and
places that were once familiar to him. However bleak the circumstances, he
could always picture Winnie at their house in Orlando, cooking in the kitchen,
reading in the lounge or waking up in the bedroom. But house no. 802, the
Location, Brandfort, was as alien to him as it was to Winnie. It was two years
before he saw a photograph of it.
Amid the gloom about Winnie, there were some more cheerful items of family
news. In 1978 a collection of poetry which Zindzi had written as a young
teenager, long before her days in Brandfort, was published in the United States,
together with photographs by Peter Magubane. Zindzi dedicated the book to her
parents. She also wrote an article for the magazine True Love. Mandela was
highly impressed by her abilities and hoped writing might become her
profession.
But it was Zeni who occasioned one of the most memorable days of
Mandela’s prison life. In 1977, at the age of eighteen and eight months pregnant,
Zeni had married Prince Thumbumuzi, a son of King Sobhuza of Swaziland
whom she had met while at school there. Neither Mandela nor Winnie was in
favour of the marriage at first. Both considered Zeni far too young and wanted
her first to complete her secondary education and preferably to obtain a
university degree before settling down to marriage. Mandela asked George
Bizos, his friend and legal adviser, to interview the prince on his behalf. Bizos
reported favourably and the marriage duly proceeded.
The following year, a few weeks before Mandela’ s sixtieth birthday, Zeni
brought her husband and her baby daughter to Robben Island. Because she was a
member of the royal family of Swaziland, with diplomatic status, she was
accorded the privilege of meeting Mandela in a room usually used for legal
consultations. As Zeni entered the room, she gave the child to her husband and
rushed to Mandela, hugging him tightly. Then Mandela took the baby and sat
holding her for the rest of the visit. It was his first experience of normal human
contact with his family since his imprisonment.

Whatever signs of black discontent there were, the government pressed on with
its policies of grand apartheid as determinedly as before and found willing
accomplices among the black population to make them work. The key figure

was Mandela’s kinsman, Kaizer Ma-tan zima. Since the 1950s, Matanzima had
proved to be apartheid’s most dependable ally, steering the Transkei towards
self-government, overcoming whatever opposition stood in his way and laying
the foundations for a personal dictatorship which ministers in Pretoria were only
too content to support.
The Transkei’s first general election in 1962, in which Matanzima stood as a
champion of separate development while his opponents advocated a multiracial
future both for the Transkei and for South Africa, resulted in a clear rejection of
apartheid. Three out of every four candidates elected favoured a multiracial
solution. But by relying on the support of chiefs, whom he had previously
ensured were entrenched as a permanent majority in the legislative assembly,
Matanzima succeeded in obtaining his own election as chief minister. He then
proceeded to claim that he had a mandate to implement separate development
policies. ‘The people of the Transkei,’ he told the assembly, ‘have, through the
ballot box, expressed their uncompromising rejection of the policy of
multiracialism.’ One of the ministers in his new government was Winnie’s
father, Columbus Madikizela.
After thirteen years of controlling public resources and patronage, using his
chiefly connections and in the last resort locking up his leading opponents,
Matanzima succeeded at his fourth election in 1976 in capturing seventy-one of
seventy-five seats. He then used his election victory to claim that it constituted a
mandate to launch Transkei as an independent state. Independence for the
homelands had become the ultimate goal of apartheid’s architects, the final
solution for the African population. By bestowing independence on all ten
homelands, the government would finally remove all claim that the African
population had to South African citizenship. It would also provide proof to the
international community, so officials in Pretoria believed, that the South African
government had fulfilled its obligations to provide full rights to the African
population.
In October 1976, the Transkei was duly pronounced to be an independent
state. Overnight, 1.6 million Xhosas living there and 1.3 million Xhosas living in
‘white’ areas lost their South African citizenship. Ministers in Pretoria
announced that South Africa was henceforth a country of 22 million people, as
opposed to 26 million beforehand.
Other homelands followed suit. In 1977, Bophuthatswana, the homeland of

the Tswana people, consisting of nineteen major pieces of land spread across
three of South Africa’s provinces, was made independent, despite evident
opposition; in all some 1.8 million Tswana lost their South African citizenship.
In 1979, Venda opted for independence, even though the chief minister had lost
an election on the issue. In 1981, Ciskei’s leader decided to accept Pretoria’s
offer, ignoring the advice of a distinguished panel of experts and an adverse
opinion survey. Foreign governments took the view that independence for the
homelands was nothing more than a device to perpetuate white supremacy and
withheld all recognition. Pretoria was nevertheless jubilant. ‘If our policy is
taken to its full logical conclusion as far as the black people are concerned, there
will not be one black man with South African citizenship,’ declared a
government minister.
For an elite group of African politicians, chiefs, civil servants and traders,
self-government and independence brought substantial rewards. Cabinet
ministers, members of legislative assemblies and civil servants gained
increasingly from high salaries, loans, land and housing, as the South African
authorities sought to establish a prosperous middle class which would underpin
the homelands system.
The Pretoria government tried to entice Mandela into the process. In 1973, the
minister of prisons, James Kruger, arranged to meet Mandela on Robben Island
and offered to remit his life sentence on condition that he recognised the
Transkei authorities and agreed to settle there as a Transkei citizen. Several
subsequent offers were made, but Mandela turned them all down.
Matanzima also made attempts to see Mandela on Robben Island, but his
approaches too were rejected. Yet though they remained political adversaries,
family business continued. Matanzima played a prominent role in the
arrangements leading up to Zeni’s wedding and he was instrumental in
persuading the South African authorities to allow Winnie to attend. He also
helped Mandela’s first wife, Evelyn, take over a trading store in Cofimvaba in
the Transkei from departing whites.
The independence process began to falter when Chief Mangosuthu Buthelezi,
political leader of some 5 million Zulus, the largest ethnic group in the country,
decided to have no truck with it. Buthelezi’s role in the apartheid system was a
complex one. In his youth he was marked down by the authorities as a
troublemaker. While studying at Fort Hare he had joined the ANC’s Youth

League and in his final year he had been expelled for taking part in political
protest; among those whom he openly admired were Chief Luthuli and Mandela.
Buthelezi was nevertheless prepared to work within the apartheid system.
Elected as chief minister of KwaZulu in 1976, he developed the art of opposing
Pretoria’s homelands policy while at the same time playing a leading role in it.
Cooperation was justified, he argued, on pragmatic grounds. The homelands
policy enabled Zulus to acquire vital administrative experience which they
would be able to use to good effect in a multiracial South Africa in the future
and it provided them too with a platform from which to oppose apartheid.
Using his position as a member of the Zulu royal family, Buthelezi built up a
powerful cultural and political movement, Inkatha ye Nkululeko we Sizwe
(Freedom of the Nation), which gained support not only in KwaZulu but in
urban areas as well. Within a few years, In - katha claimed to have 350,000 paidup members, making it the largest black political organisation allowed to
function in South Africa’s history. Buthelezi himself, according to some opinion
polls, was regarded by many Africans as a more important national leader than
Mandela. In 1978, he won the first election in KwaZulu with nearly a clean
sweep of the seats. As head of the KwaZulu government he possessed
considerable powers of patronage and control and used them ruthlessly. In many
respects he resembled a tribal potentate, intolerant of criticism, brooking no
opposition, given to making interminable speeches and constantly reminiscing
about the past exploits of the Zulu people. In sum, he seemed an ideal partner for
the government. But having lent the homelands system greater credibility than
any other homeland leader, he then delivered it a crippling blow by refusing
independence.
The apartheid system was in trouble in other ways. The economic boom of the
1960s, together with the increasing use of advanced production techniques, had
resulted in such a serious shortage of skilled labour that further economic growth
was hampered. The reservoir of white skills had simply run out and white
immigration was not sufficient to fill the gap. White businessmen, for reasons of
self-interest, argued that the only solution was to scrap the job reservation
system giving whites a monopoly of skilled work and to allow blacks to move
upwards in the labour market. They were critical of the government’s vast
system of labour controls which treated millions of workers who passed through
it as ‘an undifferentiated mass’. What they wanted was a black labour force that
was better educated, more highly skilled and stable. They also favoured legal

recognition of black trade unions, which would allow them to conduct industrial
relations on an orderly basis. A rash of strikes in 1973 pointed to the urgent need
for improved labour conditions. The Soweto uprising in 1976 intensified all
these arguments and added new ones. What employers now feared was the
emergence of a new generation of radical activists who, in their hatred of
apartheid, might turn against the free-enterprise system as well.
Foreign criticism of apartheid also flared up in the wake of Soweto. The
spectacle of armed police shooting schoolchildren in the streets brought
worldwide condemnation. International opinion was again outraged the
following year by the death of the black-consciousness leader Steve Biko, in
particular the manner in which he died. After five days of brutal interrogation at
security police headquarters in Port Elizabeth, during which he suffered severe
head injuries, Biko was put naked into the back of a police truck, close to
collapse, provided with nothing more than a blanket and a bottle of water, and
driven for 700 miles to a prison hospital in Pretoria, where he died a few hours
after arriving, lying on a mat on a stone floor. He was the forty-sixth detainee to
die in police custody. News of his death unleashed a new wave of fury and
violence on the streets which the government eventually brought to a halt by
outlawing virtually every black-consciousness organisation in the country and
detaining dozens of black leaders, as well as a number of white critics.
In Washington and Westminster, there were demands for economic boycotts
and sanctions against South Africa. At the United Nations Security Council,
members voted for a mandatory ban on arms sales to South Africa.
Representatives from thirteen Western governments attended Biko’s funeral to
mark their own form of protest. Far more damaging was the reaction of foreign
investors, who no longer looked at South Africa as such a stable or profitable
haven. Foreign capital, which had been a vital factor in helping South Africa to
achieve high rates of economic growth, began to flow out. Several prominent
American and British banks terminated their South African business.
Multinational companies with subsidiaries in South Africa faced intense
criticism from anti-apartheid groups, some demanding their withdrawal. For the
first time, the costs of sustaining apartheid began to affect white interests.

CHAPTER 16
FREE MANDELA!
APART FROM MEMBERS OF HIS FAMILY AND HIS LAWYERS, FEW
OUTSIDERS had been permitted to see Mandela since his imprisonment in
1964. The only regular outsiders he met were officials from the International
Committee of the Red Cross, who in public maintained a discreet silence about
their visits. Other outsiders were allowed visits only if it suited the interests of
the government. A reporter and photographer from the London Daily Telegraph
were admitted to Robben Island in 1964. Photographs taken on this occasion
showing Mandela and Sisulu talking together in the courtyard while prisoners
worked on piles of stones behind them were used in the foreign press time after
time; but in South Africa itself, their publication was banned. A visit by a
representative of the American Bar Association was discussed by prisoners for
many months for the manner in which the American lawyer, perspiring heavily
and somewhat inebriated, began to argue with Mandela about conditions on
Robben Island, comparing them favourably to prison conditions he had observed
in the United States.
In 1970, a former British defence minister, Denis Healey, who had previously
met Mandela during his visit to London in 1962, was given an hour to talk to
him in the presence of prison officials. ‘I was relieved to find that intellectually,
morally and physically, he was fighting fit,’ Healey reported. ‘He wasn’t in any
way cast down by his experiences of the last eight years.’ In 1973, an Australian
journalist, David MacNicoll, described Mandela wearing ‘well-fitting fawn
moleskin coat and trousers, comfortable soft brown leather shoes, and red-andblue striped woollen socks’. His eyes, he noted, were alert and humorous.
Public interest in Mandela’s fate during these years hardly stirred and he
remained a largely forgotten figure. During the early 1970s, he wrote, when
there was no sign of any break in the apartheid system, the Rivonia prisoners had
to force themselves not to give in to despair. But in the wake of the Soweto
uprising and the repression that followed it, as anti-apartheid protest both at

home and abroad gathered momentum, Mandela in prison became a potent
symbol of opposition to the government. In March 1980, the Soweto newspaper
The Post started a campaign demanding his release with the banner headline
FREE MANDELA! Neither his photograph nor his words could be published.
To many people he seemed linked more to a distant past than of any relevance to
the future. But the campaign caught the public imagination, attracting support
from white university students and liberal politicians, as well as a host of black
organisations. A growing number of whites were becoming openly disenchanted
with the apartheid system. They included not just a large part of the Englishspeaking community but the Afrikaner elite—businessmen, academics,
professionals and journalists—more affluent and broad-minded than before, and
more susceptible to foreign opinion about the iniquities of racial discrimination.
At a white election in 1977, the opposition Progressive Federal Party, which
advocated the removal of racial discrimination and an extension of the franchise
to all blacks, had attracted some 17 per cent of the vote. Afrikaans-language
newspapers were as outspoken as English-language newspapers in suggesting
that the government needed to negotiate with radical black leaders as well as
traditional ones.
On the eve of the twentieth anniversary of Sharpeville, in March 1980, Zindzi
Mandela addressed a huge gathering organised by white students at the
University of the Witwatersrand supporting the call for Mandela’s release. ‘I
have not joined you as a daughter calling for the release of her father. I have
joined as part of my generation who have never known what a normal life is,’
she said. ‘I’ve seen the suffering of my people escalating to boiling point. I’ve
seen the thunderous eruption of the Soweto volcano when my generation could
take it no longer.’ Mandela, when he was free, had offered solutions to South
Africa’s problems. ‘The call for Mandela’s release is merely to say there is an
alternative to the inevitable bloodbath.’
The campaign to release Mandela was taken up in one country after another,
making him one of the most famous prisoners in the world. In New York, the
United Nations Security Council said his release was the only way to achieve
‘meaningful discussion of the future of the country’. In London, students
nominated him as a candidate for the post of chancellor at the University of
London; he received some 7,200 votes, losing only to Princess Anne.
Winnie shared in some of the limelight. The story of her banishment to a
remote, impoverished township after so many years of persecution was reported

around the world. Foreign journalists and diplomats regularly made the journey
to Brandfort to talk to her. With characteristic energy, she had set about trying to
make life at Brandfort more tolerable. She organised home improvements,
established a garden and studied for a social science degree by correspondence.
She acquired a companion, a young Rastafarian artist called ‘M. K.’ Malefane,
who was introduced by Zindzi and subsequently moved into her house. Her
grandchildren came to stay with her.
She was also largely successful in overcoming the suspicions and hostility of
township residents, organising a series of welfare projects for the local
community. She started a day-care centre, a soup kitchen, a mobile clinic and a
sewing group, obtaining donations from relief organisations, foreign embassies
and private individuals. As news of her work spread abroad, foreign funds for
her projects flowed in. Letters of support arrived from church organisations,
trade unions and academic institutions.
The attention that Winnie received in Brandfort added to her sense of her own
importance. She enjoyed being known as ‘Mother of the Nation’, a title the press
began to repeat endlessly. Her behaviour became increasingly imperious. She
came to see the struggle against apartheid more and more in personal terms. The
darker side of her character surfaced. She took to drinking heavily, running up
huge accounts at the local liquor store for champagne, Cinzano and spirits. In
some households in the neighbourhood, she was feared for her temper rather
than admired. The mother of a nine-year-old boy complained that Winnie had
assaulted him with her belt buckle. While denying the charge, Winnie asserted
she had the right to discipline children who played on her premises. She was
acquitted. In another incident, she was convicted of assaulting a woman with a
bottle and a shoe. Winnie’s propensity for settling matters through physical force
became more marked.
As the clamour for Mandela’s release continued, the government decided to
move him from Robben Island to a prison on the mainland near Cape Town
called Pollsmoor. Robben Island itself had become a part of the legend the
government was anxious to destroy. Without warning, one night at the end of
March 1982, Mandela was told he was to be transferred immediately from the
island, along with Sisulu, Mhlaba and Mlangeni. Kathrada joined them a few
months later.
Leaving Robben Island after eighteen years was an unsettling experience for

Mandela. He had become accustomed to its routine. It was a place where he felt
comfortable. But above all, it had become a focal point of resistance to
apartheid. All the hardships that had been endured, all the campaigns for
improvements that had been fought, all the efforts made to turn the island into a
university had become part of a powerful tradition which he had helped to shape
and to lead. Prisoners leaving Robben Island often did so with a sense of
achievement rather than of loss. The prison community there was remembered as
a valued part of their lives. The bonds of friendship and loyalty forged were
greater than anything experienced outside. One of Mandela’s companions, Mac
Maharaj, reflecting years later on the decades of struggle against apartheid,
remarked, ‘Paradoxically, some of the happiest times in that whole long struggle
were in the company of my comrades on Robben Island.’
Mandela was now cut off from all this. His abrupt departure meant that he had
no time even to say farewell properly to friends with whom he had shared so
many ordeals. Nor was there the slightest prospect that he would ever be
released. Responding to the campaign for his release, the prime minister, P. W.
Botha, denounced him as an ‘arch-Marxist’ committed to violent revolution who
would have to serve the sentence of life imprisonment imposed on him by a
court of law.

Botha first made a name for himself in politics as a roughneck breaking up his
opponents’ meetings. He climbed through the ranks of the National Party to
reach the post of defence minister, and then emerged unexpectedly as prime
minister in 1978 as the result of a vicious struggle for power between two rival
camps within the party, the verkrampte wing, the name given to its more
narrowminded, reactionary members, and the verligte wing, the name given to
its more openminded, enlightened ones. Like Verwoerd and Vorster, Botha was
an authoritarian figure, singleminded, ruthless and intolerant of opposition. His
commitment to the cause of white supremacy was no less tenacious than theirs,
but he preferred a pragmatic approach to the conduct of government rather than
an ideological one. His objective was to modernise apartheid, to rid it of its more
impractical encumbrances, to make it function more effectively. This was an
objective supported by Afrikaner businessmen, increasingly frustrated by the
costs of apartheid, and by the military establishment, which had become openly
critical about the lack of urgency shown by the government in tackling the
fundamental issues thrown up by the Soweto revolt. As defence minister for

twelve years, Botha was close to the military’s way of thinking. What the
military wanted above all were defensible political goals.
Botha began his term of office by emphasising the need for change. ‘We are
moving in a changing world,’ he said. ‘We must adapt, otherwise we shall die.’
In one speech after another, he repeated the same message across the country: ‘A
white monopoly of power is untenable in the Africa of today. . . . A meaningful
division of power is needed between all race groups. . . . Apartheid is a recipe for
permanent conflict.’
The air was thick with the promises of reform. Botha declared himself to be in
favour of removing ‘hurtful unnecessary discrimination’ and suggested that laws
banning interracial marriage and sex should no longer be regarded as ‘holy
cows’. Petty apartheid, once a key government objective, aimed at keeping
blacks apart from whites in the use of public amenities such as park benches,
post office windows, museums and libraries, began to fray at the edges. White
officials, accustomed to abusing blacks at will, were now told to handle them
with respect.
Proceeding with extreme caution, Botha also initiated moves to improve
conditions in black urban areas. After thirty years of harsh legislation designed
to prevent the African population from putting down roots in white areas, the
government finally recognised their right to live there permanently, according
them property rights. Restrictions on African, Coloured and Indian businessmen
were eased. New housing programmes were started. An electrification project
for Soweto was set in motion. Plans to remove Alexandra, the black ghetto north
of Johannesburg surrounded by affluent white suburbs, which Verwoerd had
condemned as a ‘black spot’ and marked down for destruction, were abandoned.
A similar reprieve was given to the Crossroads squatter settlement outside Cape
Town, whose inhabitants had achieved international fame by defying the
government’s forceful efforts to expel them and raze the settlement to the
ground. Botha made his personal contribution towards trying to establish better
relations with the black community by paying a visit to Soweto, the first prime
minister ever to set foot in a black township, proclaiming as he did so, ‘We are
all South Africans.’
Labour conditions also improved. African workers were permitted to join
registered unions. Most job reservation laws were scrapped. In the field of
education, the government committed itself to the goal of providing equal,

though separate, education for all population groups, while emphasising that ‘the
historical backlog cannot be overcome overnight’. By 1983 only seven times as
much was spent on white children per capita as on African children, compared to
the sixteen times of 1968. The government’s purpose henceforth was to create
stable black urban communities with a vested interest in the free-enterprise
system.
Alongside this programme of reform, Botha began to develop a national
security system designed to overcome any challenge mounted against the
government either internally or externally. He was convinced that South Africa
was the target of an internationally organised communist strategy to overthrow
the government and replace it with a Marxist regime beholden to the Soviet
Union. Botha had a fixed and simple view of world politics, believing that they
revolved around a struggle between communist and anti-communist forces, with
South Africa and its vast mineral resources and maritime facilities the glittering
prize. Whatever ills befell South Africa, whether it was domestic unrest,
international pressure or regional threats, he attributed ultimately to Moscow’s
grand design. Every adversity was seen as part of a ‘total onslaught’ that South
Africa faced. In this scheme of things the ANC was to figure prominently.
In its years of exile since 1960, the ANC had met with mixed fortunes. Oliver
Tambo had travelled the world seeking to build support in as many different
quarters as possible and gaining widespread respect for his skill at diplomacy in
the process. The Soviet Union had given most support, providing funds,
equipment and training. But assistance had also been forthcoming from Sweden,
Denmark, Norway and Holland and a host of political parties, trade unions,
student groups and church organisations across the Western world. At the United
Nations, the ANC had been granted observer status since 1974 and allowed
access to international agencies from which the South African government had
been banned. The number of ANC ‘embassies’ around the world surpassed the
number maintained by the South African government.
But as for its main task of confronting the regime at home, the ANC had little
to show. At a conference in 1969 at its military headquarters in Morogoro in
Tanzania, where guerrilla training camps had been established four years earlier,
the ANC formed a revolutionary council with responsibility for conducting
guerrilla warfare and expressed its strategy for the first time in revolutionary
terms. Among the members of the revolutionary council were Tambo, the
ANC’s president since the death of Chief Luthuli in 1967, Yusuf Dadoo, the

Indian communist leader, and Joe Slovo, still the chief of staff of Umkhonto we
Sizwe. For the first time, too, the ANC opened its membership to whites,
Coloureds and Indians.
Yet for all the enthusiasm shown for revolutionary ideas, the ANC’s years in
exile were marked more by internal dissension and disputes than by any
headway made in implementing them. Located 1,000 miles away from the
borders of South Africa, unable to find a way through the surrounding white
buffer states of Angola, Rhodesia and Mozambique, the guerrillas in Tanzania
succumbed to boredom, frustration and inertia. In the leadership, splits
developed over the decision to allow whites to join the ANC’s ranks and over
the role of members of the Communist Party. Attempts made to infiltrate agents
into South Africa were often amateurish, detected well in advance by Pretoria’s
spies, who penetrated deep into the organisation.
The change in the ANC’s fortunes came when Angola and Mo - zambique
were taken over by nationalist guerrilla movements in 1975 and the Soweto
revolt the following year brought an army of eager recruits. In the wake of the
uprising, some 14,000 youths left South Africa, most of them joining the ANC.
Many went to military camps established in northern Angola under the control of
ANC instructors. The more promising recruits were sent for training in the
Soviet Union and East Germany. The capital of Mozambique, Maputo, less than
fifty miles from the South African border, became a key operational centre, to
where much of Umkhonto’s command structure was transferred. Joe Slovo
moved there in 1977, with his wife, Ruth First. ANC groups were also set up in
Botswana, Swaziland and Lesotho to help establish an internal network and to
supervise the flow of recruits.
From 1977, Umkhonto began a low-level sabotage campaign, selecting targets
mainly with a high propaganda value, intending more to re-establish a political
following among the black population and to raise its morale than to threaten the
economy or white security. Its targets included police stations in black
residential areas, administrative buildings, railway lines and electricity
substations. A number of informers, security policemen and state witnesses were
assassinated. From 1980 more ambitious targets were selected. That year, ANC
guerrillas attacked industrial plants in Sasolburg and Secunda, destroying fuel
storage tanks; in 1981, rockets were fired at the Voortrekkerhoogte military
base; in 1982, bombs exploded in the Koeberg nuclear power station near Cape
Town, damaging one of the reactors and two transformers; in 1983, a car-bomb

attack was made outside a military building in Pretoria, killing sixteen people
and injuring more than 200—the most serious sabotage incident in South
Africa’s history.
The government retaliated against neighbouring states with a combination of
military might and economic coercion intended to force them into submission
and to expel the ANC. Its main target was Mozambique. From bases in the
Transvaal, the South African military trained, armed and directed a rebel group
whose purpose was to create havoc in Mozambique, attacking bridges, railways,
road transport, schools and clinics. Direct military raids were made on ANC
targets in Maputo. In 1982, a parcel bomb sent to the Eduardo Mondlane
University in Maputo killed Ruth First. Mozambique was also subjected to
economic pressure. Similar methods were used against Angola, Lesotho and
Swaziland. Assassination squads were used at home and abroad.
Unable to withstand the pressure, South Africa’s neighbours capitulated, one
by one, to its demands. In 1984, Mozambique expelled some 800 ANC
members, allowing only a mission of ten to remain. Deprived of its most
important forward positions, the ANC was forced to operate from headquarters
in Lusaka, Zambia, hundreds of miles away from the front line.

Botha, meanwhile, proceeded with a plan for constitutional change, which he
confidently expected would become the centrepiece of his reform programme.
He intended to expand the political base of the white population by incorporating
the Coloured and Indian communities into the white political system, providing
them with political rights while ensuring that political power remained securely
in the hands of the whites. The terminology he used for describing this exercise
was ‘a healthy form of power sharing’. Much emphasis was placed on the
importance of ‘group rights’, a term which, according to the government, meant
that each race group was allowed to govern itself without interference or
domination by any other group, but which in practice added up to little more
than the old system of racial separation run by whites. Parliament was to be
divided into three chambers: a House of Assembly for whites, a House of
Representatives for Coloureds and a House of Delegates for Indians. Each
chamber was to be given responsibility for its ‘own’ affairs, such as education,
health and housing, leaving other major portfolios, such as law and order and
finance, in the hands of the government. A new office of state president was to

be established, giving the head of government greatly increased powers. No
representation was accorded to the black population. Botha’s view was that
blacks had been given sufficient political representation through the homelands
system. All that he was prepared to concede to urban blacks were elected local
councils.
Botha’s proposals, as he had expected, caused uproar in the verkrampte wing
of the National Party, which regarded any attempt to tamper with Verwoerd’s
doctrine of total separation as heresy. A group of Nationalist MPs broke away to
form the Conservative Party, advocating a return to absolute apartheid, a
geographical separation of the races, with homelands for Coloureds and Indians
as well as Africans. New extremist groups sprang up competing for the loyalty
of the volk. But Botha was vindicated by the results of a white referendum in
November 1983 in which two-thirds of the white electorate voted in favour of
the new constitution.
What Botha did not anticipate was the extent of opposition to the new
constitution organised by anti-apartheid groups. In August 1983, delegates
representing more than 300 organisations, including trade unions, youth groups,
student bodies and community associations, met in Mitchell’s Plains, a Coloured
township near Cape Town, to launch the United Democratic Front to coordinate
protest against the new constitution in the broadest display of public opposition
to apartheid in nearly thirty years. The UDF was a conscious effort to revive the
style of nationalist politics adopted by the Congress movement of the 1950s. It
functioned as a popular front rather than as a political organisation. It set out
only the broadest aims—to create a united democratic South Africa free from
homelands and group areas and based on the will of the people—leaving its
affiliates to decide their own activities. Its purpose was to draw together as wide
a range of opposition forces as possible, cutting across lines of class and colour.
White organisations, such as the National Union of South African Students, were
welcomed into its fold and soon some 600 organisations were members. Among
the leaders were veterans from the 1950s Congress campaigns, including Archie
Gumede, a Durban lawyer who served as chairman of the Release Mandela
Committee, Helen Joseph, the veteran civil rights activist, and Albertina Sisulu.
Like Winnie Mandela, Albertina Sisulu had endured years of imprisonment,
solitary confinement, house arrest and harassment, and was greatly admired and
respected by anti-apartheid activists. At the time, she was being held in prison, in
solitary confinement, without charge. One of the patrons chosen by the UDF was

Nelson Mandela.

Mandela was kept informed of these events. In his new abode in Pollsmoor
Prison, he was allowed to receive a wide range of newspapers and magazines,
including Time magazine and the Guardian Weekly from London, reading every
edition from cover to cover. He was also able to listen to local radio stations.
Overall, living conditions in Pollsmoor for Mandela and his colleagues were a
considerable improvement on Robben Island. They were allocated a spacious
room on the top floor of a prison wing, with an adjacent section containing
toilets and showers. They were given proper beds with sheets. They were served
meals with meat and vegetables and allowed to buy special provisions each
month. They were provided with two rooms for use as a library and for study
purposes and a wide variety of books and films. They also had access to a large
roof-top terrace for exercise; tennis matches on the roof were taken very
seriously. They were free to get up when they wanted.
Despite these improvements, however, they all hankered for the life on
Robben Island. They missed their comrades there, the openness of the island, the
views across the sea to the mountains on the mainland beyond, the sounds of the
birds, the roar of the surf, the flowers and wildlife. Pollsmoor, by contrast, was a
modern concrete building, where the only view was of the concrete walls which
surrounded them. Their terrace, though half the size of a football pitch, was
covered in black rubberised matting and contained by high concrete walls,
painted white, which during the summer became unbearably hot. The only
glimpse of the outside world they had was a partial sight of the ridges of the
nearby Steenberg mountain; all the rest was sky. As Mandela later told a visitor,
he came to know what Oscar Wilde meant by ‘the little tent of blue that
prisoners call the sky’. They made repeated requests to be transferred back to
Robben Island, but to no avail.
To compensate for their drab surroundings, Mandela constructed a large
garden on the terrace using sixteen oil drums sliced in half and filled with rich,
loamy soil taken from the prison grounds. Mandela’s garden became a centre of
interest not only for his colleagues, who helped with the work, but also for the
prison commander, Brigadier Munro, a gardening enthusiast, and prison staff,
who provided him with seeds and manure. Each morning, after his normal round
of exercises, Mandela put on an old straw hat and gardening gloves and tended

his plants for two hours. The size of the garden steadily grew. At one stage, there
were 900 plants—onions, aubergines, cabbages, cauliflowers, beans, spinach,
carrots, cucumbers, broccoli, beetroots, lettuces, tomatoes, peppers, strawberries
and a variety of herbs. The produce went both to common-law prisoners and to
warders.
The visiting arrangements at Pollsmoor were also much improved. Instead of
the dingy, cramped, box-like compartments on Robben Island, Pollsmoor had
spacious cubicles fitted with large glass partitions through which visitors and
prisoners could see each other clearly from the waist up and with modern
microphones which enabled them to hear properly.
For Mandela, a moment of pure joy came in March 1984 when he was
allowed his first ‘contact’ with Winnie. The government conceded contact visits
only after prolonged pressure from the International Committee of the Red
Cross. For the occasion, Mandela was taken to a room separate from the main
visiting area which his personal warder, James Gregory, had endeavoured to
make more pleasant with some comfortable furniture. Winnie arrived at the
prison in the company of Zindzi and Zindzi’s youngest son, Gadaffi, not
knowing how different this visit would be. Accompanied by Gregory, she was
shown into the room, where Mandela was sitting in a large, easy chair. He stood
up as Winnie rushed across the room towards him, squealing with delight. They
hugged and kissed, laughing with pleasure. It was a moment of which Mandela
had long dreamed, the first time he had touched Winnie in nearly twenty years.
Then he embraced Zindzi, whom he had last held as a baby. For the rest of the
visit, Mandela held Gadaffi in his arms. The following day, Winnie, Zindzi and
Gadaffi returned for a two-hour visit. In two days, Mandela used up his entire
quota of visits for the month.
But, as always with members of his family, trouble was never far away. In
June 1984, Zindzi was attacked by her boyfriend, Patrick Moshidi, the father of
Gadaffi, who punched, kicked and stabbed her in the hand and head, leaving her
for dead unconscious on a hillside. She was found and taken to hospital, where
she spent several days in intensive care. In August 1984, while Winnie was
visiting doctors in Johannesburg, her house in Brandfort and the adjacent clinic
were wrecked by petrol bombs. While waiting for repairs to be completed,
Winnie remained in her house in Orlando West, technically in defiance of her
banning order.

Mandela’s relationship with Makgatho and Makaziwe was also uneasy.
Makgatho stopped visiting his father in 1983, hating the constant goading about
his failure to improve his education. Makaziwe also seemed to disappoint him.
After she had succeeded in obtaining a degree from Fort Hare, Mandela made
clear his view that she should study for a higher degree abroad. When she took a
job as a social worker instead, he wrote her a scathing rebuke, condemning her
lack of ambition. She subsequently went on to study abroad, but became largely
estranged from her father.

Throughout 1984, a mood of tension was spreading among the black population.
An economic recession, more severe than anything South Africa had known for
fifty years, cast thousands into unemployment. The inflation rate climbed,
causing a squeeze on black living standards. Rural areas were hit by a
devastating drought. Student groups were active once more, protesting at low
educational standards. The elections for Coloured and Indian representatives to
the new tricameral parliament in August raised the temperature still further. A
low turn-out of voters—less than one in five Coloureds and Indians thought
there was any point in voting—suggested massive disapproval of the new
constitution. African resentment at being excluded from parliament reached new
heights. The new system of local government for African townships, introduced
in 1983, also provoked widespread opposition. Rent increases imposed to help
finance new councils brought sharp protests. Local councillors, elected in poorly
attended polls, were denounced as ‘stooges’ and ‘collaborators’.
In September, outbreaks of violence began. They were sporadic at first,
ignited by local grievances, flaring up with great intensity, shifting from one area
to the next and gradually drawing in more and more of an urban population that
was alienated and hostile. At the forefront were groups of black youths
—‘comrades’, as they came to be known—determined to destroy ‘the system’
and ready to defy armed police and soldiers in the dusty and decrepit streets of
the townships with stones, catapults and petrol bombs. Many saw themselves as
the shock troops of revolution and believed that it was within their reach.
Students joined the fray, forsaking their classrooms once more. ‘Liberation
before Education’ became their slogan. The townships’ revolt, however, was not
solely a ‘children’s war’, as it had been in 1976. This time the revolt was part of
a popular movement involving entire communities—parents, teachers, workers,
churchmen and women. Nor were the aims of the black activists confined to

resolving particular grievances. This time the objective was to overthrow
apartheid.
Urged on by the ANC in exile to mount ‘a people’s war’ and make the
townships ungovernable, young comrades enforced consumer boycotts,
organised rent strikes, attacked government buildings, set up ‘people’s courts’
and hunted down ‘collaborators’—township councillors, local policemen and
others deemed to support ‘the system’. Their trademark became ‘the necklace’
method of killing—a tyre filled with petrol thrown over a victim and set on fire.
The government responded with a show of military might intended to
demonstrate to the white electorate as well as to the truculent black population
that it was fully in command. A combined force of paramilitary police and
troops moved into the townships around the industrial centres of southern
Transvaal, the epicentre of the first cycle of violence. Opposition groups replied
with their own show of strength, calling for a two-day stay-away, demanding the
withdrawal of the army and the police from the townships. As well as student
groups and local UDF affiliates, labour unions undertook to support the stayaway, lending their weight for the first time to a mass protest over political
grievances. The stay-away was the most successful of its kind in nearly thirtyfive years. Convinced that forceful action would curb the ‘unrest’, the
government ordered the detention of union and community leaders.
White business leaders were appalled both at the mayhem and at the
government’s lack of any clear strategy for dealing with black grievances other
than repression, and joined in open criticism of government policy. Abroad,
there was mounting anti-apartheid activity. From late 1984, the anti-apartheid
movement in the United States gained significant momentum for the first time,
attracting support for campaigns aimed at getting US corporations to withdraw
from South Africa.
Confronted by a rising clamour for major reform at home and abroad, Botha
had only a limited stock of ideas upon which to draw. He was prepared to make
modifications to the apartheid system but only where they did not diminish white
power and privilege. He accepted the need to allow Africans in urban areas
greater status, promised to open central business districts to all races, agreed to
suspend the forced removals policy, repealed laws prohibiting sex and marriage
across the colour line and talked of possible changes to influx controls.
Botha also came up with what he believed was a subtle solution to the

Mandela problem. Demands for Mandela’s release were by now universal.
Western governments saw this as an essential prelude to a negotiated settlement
between the government and the black population. Botha’s plan was to offer to
release Mandela on condition that he publicly renounced the use of violence. If
he refused, then the international community would understand why the
government could not release him and the blame for his imprisonment would
rest with Mandela himself and not the government.
Addressing the House of Assembly on 31 January 1985, Botha declared:
The government is willing to consider Mr Mandela’s release in the Republic of
South Africa on condition that Mr Mandela gives a full commitment that he will
not make himself guilty of planning, instigating or committing acts of violence
for the furtherance of political objectives, but will conduct himself in such a way
that he will not again have to be arrested. It is therefore not the South African
government which now stands in the way of Mr Mandela’s freedom. It is
himself. The choice is his. All that is required of him now is that he should
unconditionally reject violence as a political instrument. This is, after all, a norm
which is respected in all civilized countries of the world.
Mandela’s reply was forthright. It was read out in public by Zindzi on 10
February at a mass rally at a stadium in Soweto called by the UDF to celebrate
the award of the Nobel Peace Prize to the anti-apartheid activist Bishop
Desmond Tutu.
I am surprised at the conditions that the government wants to impose on
me. I am not a violent man. My colleagues and I wrote in 1952 to Malan
asking for a round-table conference to find a solution to the problems of
our country, but that was ignored. When Strijdom was in power, we
made the same offer. Again it was ignored. When Verwoerd was in
power, we asked for a national convention for all the people in South
Africa to decide on their future. This, too, was in vain.
It was only then, when all other forms of resistance were no longer
open to us, that we turned to armed struggle. Let Botha show that he is
different than Malan, Strijdom and Verwoerd. Let him renounce
violence. Let him say that he will dismantle apartheid. Let him unban the
people’s organization, the African National Congress. Let him free all
who have been imprisoned, banished or exiled for their opposition to
apartheid. Let him guarantee free political activity so that people may

decide who will govern them.
I cherish my own freedom dearly, but I care even more for your
freedom. Too many have died since I went to prison. Too many have
suffered for the love of freedom. I owe it to their widows, to their
orphans, to their mothers and to their fathers who have grieved and wept
for them. Not only I have suffered during these long, lonely, wasted
years. I am not less life-loving than you are. But I cannot sell my
birthright, nor am I prepared to sell the birthright of the people to be free.
I am in prison as the representative of the people and of your
organization, the African National Congress, which was banned.
What freedom am I being offered while the organization of the people
remains banned? What freedom am I being offered when I may be
arrested on a pass offence? What freedom am I being offered to live my
life as a family with my dear wife who remains in banishment in
Brandfort? What freedom am I being offered when I need a stamp in my
pass to seek work? What freedom am I being offered when my very
South African citizenship is not respected?
Only free men can negotiate. Prisoners cannot enter into contracts. . . .
I cannot and will not give any undertaking at a time when I and you, the
people, are not free.
These were the first words heard from Mandela in public since his final
address in the Supreme Court in Pretoria more than twenty years before. The
crowd erupted in a wild display of cheering and chanting.

CHAPTER 17

TALKING WITH THE ENEMY
THE AMOUNT OF ATTENTION FOCUSED UPON MANDELA MADE THE
government acutely concerned about his conditions in prison. There was a
constant worry that he might die, setting off an avalanche of condemnation and
protest. Rumours of his ill-health and ill treatment frequently circulated,
sometimes started deliberately by Winnie. During one visit she paid to Mandela
in 1983, he complained he had been issued with a new pair of shoes which were
a size too small and pinched his toe. He said he would return them and get
another pair, and was subsequently treated in hospital for a sore toenail. But as
Winnie reported the matter, Mandela had been forced to wear shoes that were
too small for him and as a result had had to have a toe amputated. Articles in the
foreign press referred to such ill-treatment and suggested the prison authorities
in Pollsmoor were trying to break his spirit. When the veteran opposition MP
Helen Suzman visited Mandela to ascertain the truth, she asked how his foot was
after the operation. Mandela at first looked blank and then said, ‘Oh, you mean
the toenail that was removed. That’s fine. It was my fault really, as I ordered the
wrong size shoe.’ He took off his sock, held his bare foot up to the glass partition
and wiggled his toes.
To demonstrate that Mandela was in good health and being well treated, the
government allowed a number of foreign visitors to interview him. Just before
Christmas in 1984, Nicholas Bethell, a member of the British House of Lords
and of the European Parliament, met him in the prison commander’s office. His
account of the meeting appeared in a British newspaper in January 1985.
Mandela entered the room in the company of two senior prison officers—‘a sixfoot-tall, lean figure, with silvery hair, an impeccable olive-green shirt and wellcreased navy blue trousers’. His manner was self-assured. He was anxious to put
Bethell at his ease and invited him to sit down at the commander’s desk, where
he could take notes. He confirmed that he was in good health: it was not true, he
said, that he had cancer or that he had had a toe amputated. He was
complimentary about the helpful attitude of senior officers. He listed a number

of complaints—a damp patch on the wall of his room, the lack of contact with
other political prisoners, the need for more family visits—but mentioned nothing
to cause Bethell undue concern. ‘The problem is, therefore, not one of brutal
prison conditions,’ said Bethell. ‘It is that Mandela and his friends are in prison
at all.’
Mandela explained his position about the armed struggle:
The armed struggle was forced on us by the government. And if they want us
now to give it up, the ball is in their court. They must legalize us, treat us as a
political party and negotiate with us. Until they do, we will have to live with the
armed struggle. . . Of course, if there were to be talks along these lines, we in the
ANC would declare a truce.
When the interview ended, Brigadier Munro invited Bethell to visit Mandela’s
quarters.
We walked in slow procession up flights of stairs and around corners,
with Mandela leading the way as if showing me around his home. He did
not open doors for me; this was done by sergeants with heavy keys after
much saluting and clanking. Always, though, Mandela was the one who
showed the way, inviting me to go first through every door and plying
me with questions on Britain and the world . . .
Mandela introduced Bethell to his cell mates and proudly showed him his
vegetable garden before saying goodbye. As a sergeant opened the grey, heavy
steel door, Mandela shook hands, saying, ‘Well, Lord Bethell, this is my frontier,
and this is where I must leave you.’
A few weeks later, Samuel Dash, a professor of law at Georgetown
University, met Mandela and he too testified to his commanding personality. He
described him as looking younger than his sixty-six years. ‘He appeared
vigorous and healthy with a calm, confident manner and dignified bearing that
seemed incongruous in our prison surroundings. Indeed, throughout our meeting
I felt that I was in the presence not of a guerrilla fighter or radical ideologue, but
a head of state.’
Dash asked him if he took any encouragement from suggestions that the
government might repeal laws banning interracial marriage and ease influx
controls. Mandela smiled. ‘You are speaking about pinpricks,’ he replied.
‘Frankly, it is not my ambition to marry a white woman or to swim in a white

pool. The central issue is political equality.’
Mandela outlined three basic principles for a future South Africa: a unitary
state without homelands; non-racial elections for parliament; and one-person
one-vote. Dash asked how this programme would affect the white population,
many of whom feared that political equality would mean subjugation at the
hands of an embittered black majority. Mandela stressed that this was a
fundamental concern of the ANC’s leadership. ‘Unlike white people anywhere
else in Africa, whites in South Africa belong here—this is their home,’ Mandela
said. ‘We want them to live here with us and to share power with us.’
But, Dash asked, how could he reconcile such moderate positions with the
ANC’s avowed goal of overthrowing the regime by force? Mandela replied that
he wished the changes he sought for South Africa could be achieved peacefully.
And he conceded that blacks would suffer most if they resorted to violence.
‘However,’ he said, ‘if white leaders do not act in good faith towards us, if they
will not meet with us to discuss political equality, and if, in effect, they tell us
that we must remain subjugated by the whites, then there is really no alternative
for us other than violence. And, I assure you, we will prevail. ’ Because of the
military power of the South African government, blacks could not defeat the
white regime in direct combat, but, over time, ‘we can make life most miserable
for them’.

A second cycle of violence, more intense and more prolonged, began in March
1985, centred on the townships of the Eastern Cape. Army units were sent in to
quell the violence but their efforts made little impact. In June, the focus of
‘unrest’ shifted to the mining towns of the East Rand. In July, Soweto erupted.
As well as the daily chronicle of violence, there was an upsurge of boycotts,
stay-aways, rent strikes, marches and demonstrations. Funeral services were
turned into political rallies where ANC flags and banners were openly flaunted,
all adding to the climate of insurrection.
In July, Botha declared a state of emergency in thirty-six magisterial districts
in the Eastern Cape, the East Rand, the Vaal Triangle and Johannesburg, giving
the police and the army virtually unlimited powers to deal with the local
population. Security forces arrested hundreds of community leaders, student
activists, church workers and union officials, hoping to break the back of local
opposition. Assassination squads were once more at work.

The daily spectacle of violent protest and government repression, shown on
television screens around the world, provoked a chorus of international
condemnation and calls for action against Botha’s government to force him to
undertake major reforms and open negotiations with black leaders, including
Mandela. Foreign investors, taking fright at the continuing violence and the
possibility of international action, began unloading their South African shares.
American banks decided to stop rolling over loans to South African borrowers,
starting a chain reaction which pitched South Africa into a major financial crisis.
In an attempt to restore foreign confidence, government officials promised
that major reforms were imminent and pointed to an address that Botha was due
to make at the opening of a National Party conference in Durban on 15 August
as a likely occasion on which they would be unveiled. The foreign minister, Pik
Botha, travelled to Western capitals bearing the glad tidings and pledging that a
formula would be found that would permit the unconditional release of Mandela.
International interest in what Botha would say was intense.
But Botha never reacted well to pressure, either from the international
community or from cabinet ministers anxious to proceed faster with reform. In a
truculent performance that was watched on television around the world, Botha,
wagging his finger, contemptuously dismissed demands for more change. ‘I am
not prepared to lead white South Africa and other minority groups on a road to
abdication and suicide,’ he said. He offered not a single new reform, blamed
violence in the townships on ‘communist agitators’ and the foreign media, and
castigated his critics at home and abroad, warning, ‘Don’t push us too far.’
It was a display of intransigence which worked well with Afrikaner audiences
but made South Africa a leper in the world’s financial markets. Foreign investors
deserted South Africa in droves. The value of the rand plunged. The government
was forced to suspend trading on the foreign exchange market, to close the
Johannesburg stock exchange for five days and to impose a unilateral
moratorium on the repayment of foreign debt.
The tide of opinion against South Africa was so strong that even conservative
Western leaders like Ronald Reagan and Margaret Thatcher, previously
outspoken in their opposition to sanctions as a means of dealing with South
Africa, were obliged to agree to a package of measures. Though the action taken
in Washington and London was of largely token significance, it was a sign of the
strength of hostility towards South Africa that it was taken at all. At a

Commonwealth conference in October, Thatcher joined other Commonwealth
leaders in calling on Botha to dismantle apartheid, end the state of emergency,
lift the ban on the ANC and release Mandela.
White business leaders, appalled by the unending cycle of black anger,
government ineptitude, disinvestment, financial mayhem and international
sanctions, lined up to condemn the government’s failure to introduce meaningful
reforms, and demanded urgent action, including the release of Mandela and
moves to establish a new political system involving ‘genuine power sharing’. In
September, a small group of businessmen, led by the chairman of the AngloAmerican Corporation, Gavin Relly, took the audacious step of flying to Zambia
for talks with Oliver Tambo and other ANC leaders. The meeting took place at a
lodge in a wildlife park, with the ANC members dressed impeccably in suits and
ties and the businessmen wearing more casual attire, looking almost unkempt by
comparison. ‘What we are concerned with,’ Relly told Tambo, ‘is not so much
whether the following generation will be governed by white or black people, but
that [South Africa] will be a viable country and that it will not be destroyed by
violence and strife.’ Tambo replied that he personally abhorred violence—‘I
even take insects out of the bath’—but warned that the conflict was bound to
escalate unless apartheid was dis - mantled. At the end of the meeting, the
participants all declared their satisfaction with the outcome. ‘It was one of the
nicest days I’ve ever spent,’ said Relly. ‘A picnic among South Africans talking
about their future together.’ Botha denounced the businessmen for their
‘disloyalty’ and for showing ‘signs of weakness towards the enemies of South
Africa’.
From Pollsmoor, Mandela took his own initiative, writing to the minister of
justice, police and prisons, Kobie Coetsee, pressing him for a meeting to discuss
talks between the ANC and the government. He received no reply.
By the end of 1985, now anxious to improve South Africa’s standing with
foreign banks and foreign governments and to head off the possibility of another
debt crisis and a more punishing round of sanctions, Botha was ready to move
ahead with further reforms. Apartheid, he declared in January 1986, was ‘an
outdated concept’. Finally conceding the inevitability of African urbanisation, he
agreed to scrap the pass laws and influx controls that were once considered vital
protection for the white population and had for much of the century constituted a
crippling burden for the African population. He pledged his commitment to
‘power sharing’ and proposed to establish a new national forum to represent

African interests which he hoped would appeal to moderate African leaders. He
talked of a ‘single South Africa’ with ‘one citizenship’ for all South Africans,
shedding all further notion of turning South Africa into a country of separate
homelands, as Verwoerd had planned. He also agreed to allow a Commonwealth
negotiating team, the Eminent Persons Group, to visit South Africa as part of a
mission to promote a dialogue between the government and black political
leaders, including Mandela and ANC officials in exile.

The circumstances of Mandela’s imprisonment now began to change. In
November 1985, he had been admitted to the Volks Hospital in Cape Town for
surgery on an enlarged prostate gland. While recuperating from the operation, in
a tightly guarded section of the hospital, he had received an unexpected visitor:
the prisons minister, Kobie Coetsee. By chance, on the day before the operation,
Coetsee had boarded the same flight from Johannesburg to Cape Town as
Winnie, who was on her way to see Mandela in hospital. Coetsee had stopped by
her seat in the economy section to assure her of the government’s concern for
her husband’s health and later, during the flight, Winnie had marched through to
the first-class section to talk to him. As a result of this encounter, Coetsee
decided to pay Mandela a visit.
Mandela was amazed by the visit, but immediately took command of the
situation, introducing Coetsee and the commissioner of prisons, General Johan
Willemse, who was with him, to his nurses, inviting them to sit down, making
sure they were comfortable and engaging in pleasantries. Coetsee was struck by
his natural dignity and ease of manner. Mandela, for his part, sensed a change of
atmosphere from previous meetings with government officials. Coetsee was
altogether more gracious and cordial. Little of substance was discussed, but
Coetsee hinted that he was looking for a way to put Mandela ‘in a situation
between prison and freedom’.
Upon leaving hospital in December, Mandela was told that he would not be
rejoining his colleagues on the top floor at Pollsmoor but given separate quarters
on the ground floor of a separate wing. His new quarters consisted of a large
main room, comfortably furnished, with a private bathroom next door, and two
other rooms, one for exercise and the other for study. Mandela was not happy to
be separated from his colleagues. To meet with them henceforth, he had to put in
an official request. But he realised that his new circumstances facilitated the

possibility of discussions with the government, an objective he had always held.
He also realised that his ANC colleagues would fear that, in isolation, he might
be tricked into making a deal with the government which they could not support.
He therefore asked George Bizos, his lawyer and friend, to fly to Lusaka to
assure Tambo he would take no decisions without their approval. He wrote twice
to Coetsee proposing talks, but was disheartened to receive no reply. He spent
his days listening avidly to radio news broadcasts, devouring newspapers,
exercising hard and continuing his studies, waiting for some signal from the
outside world.
The opportunity for talks came not from the government but from the
Commonwealth Eminent Persons Group. In early 1986, the Commonwealth
negotiators, led by General Obasanjo, a former military leader of Nigeria, and
Malcolm Fraser, a former Australian prime minister, began shuttling around
southern Africa, endeavouring to find a common basis for negotiation between
the South African government and the ANC. After some hesitation, Botha
agreed to let Obasanjo meet Mandela in February and then for the group of
seven to see him in March and then in May.
The prison authorities made sure that Mandela was well turned out for the
occasion. A tailor was summoned to take his measurements for a new pin-stripe
suit. He was also given a shirt, tie, underwear, shoes and socks. The prison
commander, Brigadier Munro, inspected the result. ‘Mandela,’ he said, ‘you
look more like a prime minister now, not a prisoner.’
When they met him at Pollsmoor’s guest house, the Commonwealth team
were equally impressed. ‘We were first struck by his physical authority—by his
immaculate appearance, his apparent good health, and his commanding
presence,’ they reported. ‘In his manner he exuded authority and received the
respect of all around him, including his jailers.’
At the start of their second meeting, both Coetsee and Willemse put in an
appearance. Mandela urged them to stay to listen to the discussion. He had
nothing to hide from them, he said. If only the government and the ANC could
sit down and talk, some of the differences between them which arose solely
through a lack of contact could be eliminated. The fact of talking was essential
in the building of mutual confidence. But the two men went away.
Mandela expounded at length on his hopes for a multiracial democracy in
South Africa. He acknowledged the fears that whites held about majority rule

and stressed the importance of providing minority groups with a real sense of
security. He emphasised that he was a nationalist, not a communist, whose
principles were unchanged from those to which he subscribed when the Freedom
Charter was drawn up in 1955.
He was questioned extensively on the issue of violence. Mandela explained
that he was not yet in a position to renounce violence, but stressed that violence
could never provide an ultimate solution to South Africa’s problems; only
negotiations could. The Commonwealth team found him ‘reasonable and
conciliatory’. They planned one further meeting with him before concluding
their assignment.
Botha, however, was becoming impatient with the whole process. During the
course of their endeavours, the Commonwealth team had drawn up a ‘possible
negotiating concept’ which went far beyond anything he was willing to
contemplate. In exchange for a commitment from the ANC to suspend violence
and enter into negotiation, the South African government would have to release
Mandela and other political prisoners and detainees, withdraw the military from
the townships, lift the ban on the ANC and the PAC, suspend detention without
trial and permit normal political activity. Botha had held back from terminating
the whole exercise only because of the threat of further sanctions.
Yet Botha was also faced with signs of a growing white backlash. Opinion
polls and parliamentary by-elections showed a clear resurgence of support for
extreme right-wing parties which accused the government of dealing leniently
with township unrest for fear of offending foreign opinion. Added to fears about
black unrest and the government’s failure to suppress it, there was deep alarm
about how far the government was prepared to go with its reform programme. A
chance remark by the verligte foreign minister, Pik Botha, that he could foresee
circumstances in which South Africa might one day have a black president, sent
a shockwave through the white community. Botha denied any such notion, but
the damage was done. National Party officials reported mass defections to rightwing parties.
Black activists meanwhile, convinced that they had the government on the
run, were becoming ever more defiant. Black leaders predicted the government’s
downfall. The ANC in exile declared 1986 to be the ‘Year of Umkhonto we
Sizwe’ and talked of ‘turning every corner of our country into a battlefield’. In
scores of townships across the country, the tide of black militancy was thought

to be unstoppable. On May Day, workers and students staged a nationwide
strike, the largest anti-apartheid protest in South Africa’s history. An even larger
three-day general strike was planned for 16 June to mark the tenth anniversary of
the Soweto uprising.
Under pressure from every quarter, Botha reacted impetuously with a display
of belligerence and ill-temper that brought upon him universal condemnation.
On 19 May, the day the Commonwealth Eminent Persons Group was due to
meet cabinet ministers, Botha ordered air strikes against targets in three
neighbouring capital cities, Lusaka, Harare and Gaborone, claiming that they
were ANC bases. In parliament subsequently he bragged that the raids were just
a ‘first instalment’ and that they showed ‘South Africa has the capacity and the
will to break the ANC’. The Commonwealth team immediately cut short its
mission.
Next Botha ordered outright repression of all black opposition. Under a
nationwide state of emergency declared on 12 June, the security forces set out to
decapitate all black resistance through mass arrests and tight control of township
activity. The army surrounded whole townships and moved into schools. Prisons
were soon filled with community leaders, trade unionists, church workers,
students and other anti-apartheid activists. Strict censorship was imposed on the
media, prohibiting all but official information on security force activities and
black resistance. Defending his proclamation of a state of emergency, Botha
claimed he faced a choice akin to that ‘between war and a dishonourable, fearful
peace’. He acknowledged that there would be a price to pay in terms of
sanctions. But he declared that South Africa would not ‘crawl before anyone’ to
avert the threat of sanctions and was quite prepared to ‘go it alone’.

Despite the repression, Mandela was determined to find a way out of the
deadlock. Soon after the state of emergency was declared, he wrote a note to
General Willemse saying he wanted to see him on a matter of national
importance. Willemse responded by arranging to meet Mandela in his residence
in the grounds of Pollsmoor a few days later. When they met, Mandela told
Willemse he wanted to see Kobie Coetsee to raise the question of talks between
the government and the ANC. Then and there, Willemse telephoned Coetsee at
his official residence in Cape Town and was told to bring Mandela around
immediately for a meeting. Within minutes Mandela was on his way to

Savernake, Coetsee’s residence, eight miles away. Coetsee welcomed him with a
glass of sherry and apologised that he had not been given a chance to change out
of his prison clothes. To Mandela, the sherry, his first drink in twenty-four years,
was like nectar.
Their discussion lasted for three hours. Mandela found Coetsee both
knowledgeable about the central issues involved and willing to listen. He asked
Mandela under what circumstances the ANC would be willing to suspend its
armed struggle and whether he envisioned constitutional guarantees for
minorities in a future South Africa. The two men, both lawyers, formed a liking
for each other which was to endure for many years. Towards the end of their
discussion, Coetsee asked what the next step was. Mandela replied that he
wanted a meeting with Botha. Coetsee made a note of this and said he would
send his request through the appropriate channels. They parted on good terms.
Mandela told no one of this encounter, neither his colleagues in Polls moor
nor those in exile in Lusaka. He wanted the talks process to gain some
momentum before disclosing that it was under way. But, to his frustration, he
heard nothing more for months from Coetsee. He wrote him a letter but received
no reply.
The difficulty was President Botha. He had been informed about Coetsee’s
discussion with Mandela and was willing to allow Coetsee to stay in touch with
him. But his interest in Mandela was limited to finding ways and means of
releasing him from prison, and he had no intention of engaging in talks about
political change. Botha had reached the limits of his reform programme. He
believed that the reforms he had introduced to South Africa were of major
importance and yet had earned him little credit, either at home or abroad. He
certainly had no intention of contemplating the idea of talks with the ANC. In
his view the ANC was an organisation under communist control, bent on
destroying white civilisation. It was at the centre of the ‘total onslaught’ the
country was facing. Its links with the Soviet Union and other communist states,
the support it received from Marxist regimes in Mozambique and Angola, and,
above all, its alliance with the South African Communist Party were all cited by
Botha as evidence of the ANC’s true nature. The only answer to this ‘total
onslaught’ was ‘total strategy’ and with this the government was already
succeeding.
For the rest of his term of office, Botha concentrated more and more power in

the hands of his security officials. A complex web of committees was
constructed to give the State Security Council direct control over a vast range of
government activity. The security network covered the entire country, reaching
down to every level of society and designed to meet any contingency. Specialist
teams were set to work on every subject, from manpower and transport to
cultural affairs and community services. The underlying belief was that
economic welfare and social improvements would win the hearts and minds of
the local population. As the defence minister, Magnus Malan, caustically
remarked, once blacks had toilets, they would not want democracy. To ensure
more effective control of the townships, the government coopted allies in the
black community—councillors, policemen, businessmen, traders and vigilante
groups—providing them with the means necessary to defend their position
against radical activists. In the war against ‘enemies of the state’, all methods,
including assas - sination, were considered by security officials to be legitimate.
At a meeting of the State Security Council in February 1986, Botha, impressed
by a magazine article he had read about a ‘third force’ operating against the
Mafia in Italy, suggested the need for a similar ‘third force’ in South Africa ‘to
combat terrorism and unrest’.
The state of emergency, meanwhile, effectively crippled organised black
opposition. With thousands of activists in detention, opposition groups fell into
disarray. Youth organisations, once at the forefront of the township revolt, lost
all vigour. The UDF was reduced to a mere shadow of its former self. After two
years of bitter conflict, the black opposition movement had proved to be no
match for a government armed with totalitarian powers and prepared to use
them.
Botha’s tough, aggressive posture on security found ready support from the
white electorate. In the 1987 election, he succeeded in holding on to his twothirds majority in parliament. But what the result also showed was a massive
lurch to the right. The extreme right wing picked up nearly 30 per cent of the
vote. In all, more than 80 per cent of the white electorate voted for right-wing or
extreme right-wing parties which rejected all notion of fundamental change to
the apart - heid system. Liberal opposition parties fared badly. Political debate
henceforth was conducted more in terms of right-wing demands to curb reform
than liberal demands to increase it. All this served to reinforce Botha’s
determination to hold firm.
Yet even within the heart of the Afrikaner establishment, there were critics of

Botha’s kragdadigheid approach who believed that it had no long-term future.
One of them was Pieter de Lange, chairman of the Broederbond, which had
played a highly influential role in Afrikaner nationalist politics since the 1920s.
De Lange embarked on a personal campaign to convince Afrikaners of the need
for fundamental changes conceding political rights to the black population and
established his own contacts with ANC officials in exile in 1986. Other groups
too—opposition politicians, churchmen and academics—found their way to
Lusaka and Harare for meetings with the ANC. Botha, meanwhile, denounced
all such contacts and did his best to obstruct them. A group of respected Dutch
Reformed Church clergymen who wanted to talk to the ANC he branded as
‘naïve’ and ‘childish’ and threatened to confiscate their passports.

Even though Mandela heard nothing from Coetsee for months on end, there were
signs that the government was planning a different role for him. On Christmas
Eve in 1986, he was given his first taste of freedom outside prison in twenty-four
years. After breakfast, the deputy commander of Pollsmoor, Lieutenant-Colonel
Gawie Marx, called by his cell to ask whether he would like to see something of
Cape Town. Together they drove along the coast road to Cape Town and
meandered in the car through its streets. Mandela was riveted, watching the
ordinary activities of people out shopping, walking their dogs, sitting in the sun:
‘I felt like a curious tourist in a strange land.’ On the way back to the prison,
Marx asked Mandela if he would like a cold drink and stopped the car at a café:
‘He just left me there, sitting alone in the car with the keys in the ignition.’ As he
waited for Marx to return, Mandela became more and more agitated and intense,
wondering whether he should try to make a run for it, and was greatly relieved
when Marx reappeared.
Other trips were arranged for him. He was taken to coastal resorts and fishing
villages, to the mountains and inland to the edge of the Great Karoo. He walked
on beaches, took tea in cafés and ate fish and chips. Once he visited the home of
one of his warders, meeting his wife and children. Only a handful of trusted
prison staff and guards knew of these secret journeys. No word of them leaked
out. Nor was he ever recognised in public. No photograph of him had been
allowed to be published in South Africa since his imprisonment. The last
photographs taken of him in the 1960s, for anyone who could remember, showed
a heavily built middle-aged man. Now he was a lean, grey-haired, elderly figure,
with creases and furrows etched on his face and a slightly fragile air.

He also spent hours whiling away the time in vegetable gardens at the
southern edge of the prison grounds in the company of his warder, James
Gregory. Together they would sit in the lush, long grass on the banks of a small
reservoir, watching the flights of wild geese and ducks and reminiscing about
their childhoods and their families. Mandela took a close interest in Gregory’s
family. ‘It was not merely politeness but genuine interest,’ said Gregory. ‘He
was genuinely concerned for people, all people, and when he asked about their
welfare, he took time to listen. It was not just a polite refrain.’ When Gregory’s
son, Brent, joined the staff at Pollsmoor, he was astonished when Mandela
greeted him as a friend, saying he had known all about him since his schooldays.
‘It was like meeting an uncle for the first time,’ said Brent.
In 1987, Coetsee resumed his secret discussions with Mandela, seeking a
formula that would enable the government to grant him an ‘honourable release’.
By publicly requiring Mandela to renounce violence, Botha had made the task
more difficult. Having taken such a firm stand, he would only appear weak if he
subsequently released Mandela unconditionally, and Botha was a man obsessed
by the need to appear tough and in control. ‘He wanted this thing to be done. He
knew it had to be done,’ recalled Coetsee, ‘but he didn’t want to appear weak.’
Mandela, however, had no interest in negotiating his own release unless it was
part of a package of measures including the lifting of the ban on the ANC. As he
had made clear when first rejecting Botha’s conditional offer of release, there
was no point in being freed if he was not then free to engage in political activity.
He continued to press for a meeting with Botha. He was also concerned to secure
the release of his older colleagues, including Sisulu, who was seventy-five, and
Mbeki, who was seventy-seven, and asked for Coetsee’s help in this matter.
By 1988, the government had decided to take the discussions with Mandela a
stage further. A secret committee was formed to explore the political issues that
Mandela had long wanted to raise. It was headed by Coetsee and included two
senior officials in the prisons department, General Willemse, the commissioner,
and Fanie van der Merwe, the director-general, providing the meetings with the
ostensible cover, if any word leaked out, that they were concerned with no more
than discussions about prison conditions.
The presence of the fourth member of the committee, Niel Barnard, however,
signified their true importance. Barnard, a thirty seven-year-old former
academic, was the head of Botha’s National Intelligence Service, a member of

the inner circle of his advisers. He was an ardent Afrikaner nationalist and a
committed supporter of the ‘total onslaught’ school, but he took a pragmatic
view of the government’s options. Along with other senior government officials,
he believed that splits could be found within the ANC between nationalists and
communists which the government would be able to exploit to its advantage,
opening the possibility of an accommodation with moderate nationalists. As well
as the ‘Mandela initiative’, Barnard was monitoring secret talks which had
begun in England in October 1987 between a number of prominent Afrikaners
and ANC officials in exile.
Before agreeing to attend the first meeting of the committee, Mandela decided
to consult his colleagues on the third floor. He was less than frank in what he
told them. Meeting them one by one, at the insistence of the prison authorities,
he gave them no idea of the extent of his talks with Coetsee which had begun
two years previously. Nor did he reveal that the government had set up a special
committee to handle the talks which included Botha’s intelligence chief.
Sisulu, his oldest friend and mentor, was highly sceptical about the idea of
talks. ‘I was not against negotiations in principle,’ he recalled. ‘But I would have
preferred the government to take the initiative to talk to us rather than our
initiating talks with them.’ Mandela retorted that if he was not against the
principle of negotiations, it did not matter who took the initiative. Realising that
Mandela had already made up his mind, he did not try to stand in his way. Years
later Sisulu acknowledged, ‘I would have hesitated. I would have wanted certain
things done. I might have lost the chance.’ Kathrada was even more adamant in
his opposition. By initiating talks, he said, it would appear that they were
capitulating. Only Mhlaba and Mlangeni were in favour.
Mandela was no more forthcoming with Tambo. When Tambo asked, in a
message conveyed by Bizos, what it was that he was talking to the government
about, Mandela sent only a terse reply, giving no detail. His colleagues,
meanwhile, feared that in isolation from the other prisoners, he would misjudge
events and compromise the struggle. Many of them were averse to any idea of
dialogue. ‘I knew it would be opposed by our own people as well as those on the
government side,’ Mandela said. What he wanted was to present his ANC
colleagues with the fait accompli of a dialogue before any of them could disrupt
it.
The first meeting of the committee was held in May 1988 in the office of the

prison commander at Pollsmoor. It was a tense occasion, with much suspicion on
both sides. Mandela had never met Barnard before. Barnard was conscious of the
fact that in Mandela’s eyes he was ‘a youngster’, half Mandela’s age. The
second meeting, which took place at Willemse’s house, over sherry and supper,
was more relaxed. To put Barnard at ease, Mandela always greeted him in
Afrikaans and allowed him to conduct his side of the talks in Afrikaans.
Subsequent meetings occurred regularly, almost every week.
Once the preliminary discussions were over, the talks centred on three main
issues: the armed struggle, the ANC’s alliance with the Communist Party and the
question of majority rule. The government representatives insisted that the ANC
would have to renounce violence before the government would agree to
negotiations and before Mandela would be allowed to meet Botha. The
government’s position had always been clear: it would not negotiate with any
organisation involved in violence. To change its position now would involve a
loss of credibility. Mandela’s reply was that if the government adopted peaceful
methods, so would the ANC.
They were equally adamant that the ANC would have to sever its link with the
Communist Party before negotiations could begin. The Communist Party, they
maintained, dominated and controlled the ANC. No progress could be made
until the link was broken. Mandela explained at length the reason behind the
alliance. They had similar aims in overthrowing apartheid, but different longterm interests. No move would be made to break the alliance merely because the
government wanted it to end.
The government side was also sceptical about the fate of the white minority
under majority rule. Their interests, they suggested, would be trampled on. They
questioned Mandela on what protection for minorities the ANC would offer.
Mandela referred them to the Freedom Charter, which stated that South Africa
belonged to all who lived in it, black and white, and tried to reassure them that in
any future dispensation the majority would depend heavily on the skills and
experience of the whites.
Mandela’s grasp of the issues and, in particular, his knowledge and
understanding of the Afrikaner people greatly impressed those present. Mandela
knew ‘more about the Afrikaners’ history than many Afrikaners themselves,’
recalled Coetsee. Yet the questions, and the answers, soon became repetitive. As
Mandela’s seventieth birthday passed by in July—marked by a huge festival

concert in London but by no particular celebration in Pollsmoor—he became
increasingly restless. ‘You don’t have the power,’ he told Barnard. ‘I want to
talk to the man with the power, and that is P. W. Botha. I want to talk to him.’
On the basis of these secret sessions, Coetsee and Barnard succeeded in
persuading Botha to agree to a meeting. ‘I spent an hour with him telling him
there was no way he could lose out if he saw Mandela,’ Barnard recalled. ‘“If
the meeting goes wrong and jumps the tracks and all that,” I said, “you will still
be remembered as the one who tried to keep things moving forward to a
solution. But if it goes well it will be the beginning of South Africa’s settlement
politics, and history will acknowledge you for that.”’ The meeting was arranged
for the end of August 1988.
Yet to Mandela’s immense frustration, he fell ill. A persistent cough had
troubled him for some weeks. Just before a meeting with one of his lawyers,
Ismail Ayob, at the end of July, he began to vomit. At first, doctors diagnosed
flu, aggravated by dampness in his ground-floor rooms, but Mandela continued
to feel sick. On 12 August, he was taken to Tygerberg Hospital near Cape Town,
where he was found to have tuberculosis. He immediately underwent an
operation to remove fluid from his lungs. Because the tuberculosis had been
arrested at an early stage, no long-term damage was likely and Mandela
recovered more quickly than expected. But the prized meeting with Botha, for
which he had striven for more than two years, had to be postponed.
In September, he was moved to a luxury private clinic, the Constantiaberg,
near Pollsmoor, the first black patient ever to stay there. His meetings with
Coetsee and the secret committee resumed. Then in December he was taken to a
new location, the Victor Verster prison-farm near Paarl, in the heartland of the
Cape wine-growing district, thirty-five miles from Cape Town—a place intended
to be half-way between prison and freedom.
The house he was given was the most spacious and comfortable home in
which he had ever lived. A whitewashed single-storey residence, it stood in an
isolated part of the farm, at the end of a winding dirt road, shaded by tall fir trees
and surrounded by fields and a wood. It contained a large lounge and four
bedrooms, with a garden full of flowers and fruit trees and a swimming pool, all
enclosed behind a high wall.
The keys were left in the doors for Mandela to use as he chose. The cupboards
were stocked with provisions, wines and spirits, courtesy of the government. On

hand to greet him was the prison commander, Brigadier Keulder, who told him
that if he needed anything, he just had to ask. The following day, Coetsee arrived
with a crate of wine as a housewarming gift. The prison staff assigned to him
included James Gregory, whom he had known for twenty-two years and whom
he regarded as a friend, and Jack Swart, a warrant officer who served as his
personal chef, providing him with whatever meals and delicacies he fancied.
Mandela particularly enjoyed Swart’s homemade ginger beer. Gregory’s son,
Brent, was also a member of the staff.
Mandela soon settled into a comfortable routine. Each morning, he was
examined by a doctor. He toured the garden, taking a proprietorial interest in the
plants. He tried out the swimming pool. Ignoring protests from his household
staff, he insisted on making his own bed and on doing his share of washing the
dishes. He finally succeeded in passing his law degree. He watched television.
He entertained his lawyers and members of his family in style. His four
comrades from Pollsmoor paid him a visit, Sisulu marvelling at his ‘five-star
hotel’ conditions ‘complete with room service’. On Christmas Day in 1988,
Winnie, Zindzi and Zindzi’s two children came for the day, the first proper
family gathering Mandela had enjoyed in twenty-six years.
But as for his main immediate objective of opening a dialogue with Botha, he
made no further progress. In January, the seventy-three-year-old president
suffered a stroke and once again, the meeting had to be rescheduled. And then
the sense of tranquillity he had just begun to experience was disrupted by a
massive scandal involving Winnie with which he had to contend.

CHAPTER 18

THE FOOTBALL CLUB
AFTER A SERIES OF ALTERCATIONS WITH POLICE, ARRESTS AND
COURT appearances, Winnie eventually succeeded in 1986 in re-establishing
her right to live in Soweto, nearly nine years after her banishment to Brandfort.
Her battle to stay in Johannesburg, in defiance of government banning orders,
attracted worldwide attention. As the result of one arrest, in December 1985,
when she was dragged from her Orlando home ‘kicking and screaming’,
according to eyewitnesses, governments in Britain, the United States and France
issued strong protests. A posse of journalists and television crews followed her
about, waiting for the next encounter. Winnie relished the attention she received.
With the township revolt then in full swing, she endeavoured to play a leading
role as a militant activist. She attended funeral rallies, making speeches which
became ever more extreme, gaining for herself a loyal following among black
youths. A speech she made at a rally in Munsieville in April 1986 which
endorsed the necklace method of killing, by which several hundred victims had
died, brought her lasting notoriety. ‘We have no guns, we have only stones,
boxes of matches and petrol,’ she said. ‘Together, hand in hand, with our boxes
of matches and our necklaces we shall liberate this country.’
The damage that Winnie did to the African nationalist cause by those words
was considerable. Necklace murders had become a symbol to much of the world
of the anarchic black-on-black violence afflicting the townships which the
government was eager to claim was all that lay behind the black revolt. The clear
implication of Winnie’s speech was that she not only supported such methods
but also advocated that whites too should be burnt.
The ANC in exile, anxious to prove to Western governments that it was not a
‘terrorist’ organisation, as leaders like Britain’s Margaret Thatcher maintained,
were appalled. Messages were sent to Winnie telling her to refrain from any
more speechmaking. In Pollsmoor, Mandela was furious and summoned her for
an angry reprimand. But Winnie was not inclined to take orders from anyone and

her activities became even more rash and ruthless.
She gathered around her a group of township youths who became known as
the Mandela United Football Club. Forming football teams in the name of
popular political leaders was a fashionable pursuit at the time; a Sisulu Football
Club already existed in Orlando. Winnie allowed them to stay in rooms at the
back of her Orlando house and provided them with track suits and money. She
acquired a ‘coach’, a thirty-eight-year-old local man named Jerry Richardson, a
skilled football player but someone with limited intelligence, a meagre education
and a reputation as a police informer. Like other members of the group, he
became dependent on Winnie, calling her ‘Mummy’ and functioning as her
henchman. Zindzi too was involved in Mandela United, sometimes playing the
role of ‘mascot’; two of her boy-friends were leading members.
From its origins as a football club, Mandela United rapidly descended into a
world of brutal crime. Winnie used it initially as a personal bodyguard, to
accompany her to rallies and funerals and to guard her house. Its members were
subject to her own strict rules. They were required to return home by a certain
time each night, signing in and out of the house in a special register. Failure to
sign the register meant a whipping, from Winnie as well as from other youths.
Looking for more recruits, club members roamed the township, accusing those
who did not want to join them of being police informers or ‘sell-outs’. Many
who were coerced into joining subsequently found it difficult to leave. No one
could resign voluntarily from the club. Stories began to circulate of youths being
taken to Winnie’s house and never seen again.
Mandela United soon began operating as a vigilante gang. Victims accused of
theft and other crimes or of being police informers were brought to Winnie’s
house for interrogation by a ‘disciplinary committee’ and for whatever
punishment it decided to order. The head of the disciplinary committee for some
time was Sizwe Sithole, the father of one of Zindzi’s children. Punishment
varied according to the offence, but included kicking, punching, whipping and
beating. A favourite form of punishment was known as ‘breakdown’, in which
victims were thrown high into the air and left to hit the floor. Other forms of
torture were also used.
In May 1987, a teenage youth, Peter Makanda, was abducted, along with his
brother, by members of Mandela United, who accused them of being informers.
They were taken to Winnie’s house and savagely beaten. Makanda was hung by

the neck with a plastic rope from a rafter until it broke; his head was placed in a
plastic bag and his face was pushed into a bucket of water. Both brothers were
then tortured with knives. A large ‘M’ for Mandela was carved on Makanda’s
chest and the words ‘Viva ANC’ sliced down the length of one of his thighs.
Battery acid was smeared into the wounds. The brothers claimed that Winnie put
in an appearance soon after they were first beaten, returning a few hours
afterwards. They later managed to escape from a garage, but others were not so
fortunate. Subsequent evidence linked Mandela United to eight known murders
of local residents, mostly teenagers.
The activities of Mandela United were an evil mess that no one was anxious to
deal with. The fear of reprisal deterred many families from making complaints.
Parents who suspected that Mandela United were responsible for the
disappearance of their children never had any proof as no bodies were ever
found. The police were not keen to be seen persecuting Winnie any more. The
activities of her gang of vigilantes were no different from those of scores of
others which had sprung up during the township revolt. Kangaroo courts, like the
one she was running at no. 8115, Orlando West, were relatively common.
When the Makanda brothers reported their ordeal to the police, three members
of Mandela United were arrested. But Winnie herself was never charged in
connection with the crime; nor was she called as a witness or even questioned.
Black political leaders were no keener to confront the problem of Winnie’s
criminal behaviour. She thus enjoyed a kind of immunity which not only
induced greater fear of her but increased her sense of her own power. She
seemed untouchable.
Only murmurs of these events reached Mandela in Pollsmoor. Neither the
local nor the foreign press delved into Winnie’s increasingly wayward activities
for fear that their reports would be used by the government for propaganda
purposes and serve only to discredit the anti-apartheid struggle. They were also
concerned that rumours about Winnie and Mandela United might have been
manufactured by the government in the first place. Friends and lawyers visiting
Mandela were careful not to draw attention to Winnie’s conduct or to her heavy
drinking to avoid alarming him.
But other embarrassments involving Winnie surfaced. Within a year of
returning to Soweto, she ordered the construction of a mansion in an exclusive
area known as Beverly Hills, where a black elite of businessmen, lawyers, and

doctors lived. By Soweto standards, the house, containing fifteen rooms, was
vast. Known as ‘Winnie’s Palace’, it attracted hostile criticism from the local
community. It hardly fitted the revolutionary image that Winnie was attempting
to establish. Where the money came from was something of a mystery. While
spending large sums on clothes, cars and her bodyguard, Winnie always pleaded
poverty.
Some funds came as a result of a business relationship struck up with a black
American entrepreneur, Robert Brown, which led to yet another scandal. Brown
was a former civil rights campaigner who switched his attention to South Africa
and began to raise substantial funds in the United States for the anti-apartheid
cause. He soon realised that there was a fortune to be made from the Mandela
family. In collaboration with Winnie, he proposed to copyright and market the
Mandela name and prevent others from cashing in on it. Their negotiations had
just reached an amicable conclusion when an incident involving Mandela United
suddenly erupted, focusing public attention on its activities.
On 28 July 1988, a crowd of teenage pupils from the Daliwonga High School
marched on Winnie’s house, smashed the doors and windows and then set fire to
it. The attack was part of a running feud between them and Mandela United,
made in revenge for the detention of a group of Daliwonga students who had
been accused of rape, found guilty and then beaten up in the back rooms of
Winnie’s house.
All the Mandela family records, their photographs, letters and gifts, and even
the slice of wedding cake that Winnie had been saving for Mandela’s release,
were destroyed in the fire. As local residents gathered in the street, none of them
ventured to help. They watched in silence as the house burned down.
Winnie appeared to be devastated by the attack. With the street full of people,
she drove slowly towards the burning house, saw what had happened and went
away. At her office in Soweto, friends found her in a state of shock. Robert
Brown was there, full of self-importance, trying to dictate who would be allowed
to see her. Members of Mandela United had barricaded the building. To her old
friend Amina Cachalia, Winnie said, ‘I don’t know what is happening to my
life.’
Accompanied by Brown, Winnie flew to Cape Town shortly afterwards to see
Mandela, both to tell him of the arson attack and to get his approval for the deal
with Brown. Mandela had been forewarned by his lawyer, Ismail Ayob, about

Brown’s attempt to control the Mandela name and he had been outraged. He told
Winnie that he would have nothing to do with the scheme and authorised a
statement disclaiming any connection with Brown. ‘If the family name needed
protection it could be protected by the African National Congress,’ his statement
said.
He also told Winnie to disband her ‘football team’ and decided not to press
charges against the Daliwonga students. To limit further damage, he asked a
group of influential community leaders, including the Reverend Frank Chikane
of the South African Council of Churches, Cyril Ramaphosa, a prominent trade
unionist, and Aubrey Mokoena of the Release Mandela Committee, to form a
‘crisis committee’ to take control of the matter. The burden of these events
added to the exhaustion that Mandela was already feeling as a result of his
tuberculosis, which had still to be diagnosed. Shortly afterwards, he collapsed
and was taken to Tygerberg Hospital.
But Winnie refused to disband Mandela United. While the house in Orlando
was being rebuilt, she moved into a house in Diepkloof Extension in another part
of Soweto, taking members of Mandela United with her. It was not long before
they resumed their murderous activities.
Two incidents became notorious. In November 1988, a gunfight erupted
between police and two MK guerrillas who were hiding in Jerry Richardson’s
house in Soweto. Richardson had been asked by Winnie to give them temporary
shelter. Just before the shooting started, Richardson, who was in the garden,
raised his arms in the air and surrendered to the police. The two guerrillas were
killed. Richardson was detained for two weeks but then released. He was already
suspected in the local community of being a police informer. The shooting of the
two guerrillas further increased local suspicion.
Members of Mandela United singled out for retribution two local youths, Lolo
Sono and Siboniso Tshabalala, who had been friendly with the guerrillas and
who had been seen at Richardson’s house shortly before the gunfight started.
Summoned to Winnie’s house, Sono was savagely beaten. Battered and
bleeding, he was then taken by Winnie and other club members in a minibus to
his parent’s home. According to Sono’s father, Winnie accused the youth of
being a police spy. The father denied it and pleaded with Winnie to let the boy
go, but she refused and drove away with him. Neither Lolo Sono nor Siboniso
Tshabalala were seen again. The police were informed of the incident, but took

no action.
The second incident, however, the death of a fourteen-year-old boy named
‘Stompie’ Moeketsi Seipei, finally ensnared Winnie. This time, by chance, a
body was found and witnesses eventually came forward.
Stompie was an obstreperous and boastful youth who had gained a reputation
for being both a fervent activist, able to cite the Freedom Charter by heart, and a
police informer who had ‘cracked’ in detention. Along with other homeless
youths, he had found lodgings in a church manse in Orlando East run by a white
Methodist minister, Paul Verryn, who was highly respected in the
neighbourhood for his commitment in helping the local community. The manse,
with only three bedrooms, was always overcrowded; on some nights as many as
forty people stayed there.
On 29 December 1988, shortly after Winnie returned home from her
Christmas visit to Mandela in Victor Verster prison, she ordered the abduction of
four occupants of the Methodist manse, including Stompie, after being told by
another occupant, Xoliswa Falati, a troublesome thirty-five-year-old woman who
had quarrelled with Stompie and with Verryn, that Verryn had engaged in
homosexual practices at the manse. The victims were brought to Winnie’s house
at Diepkloof Extension and there, according to the three survivors, Falati
repeated her accusations about homosexuality and claimed that Stompie was an
informer. All four were then interrogated and beaten mercilessly to extract
confessions. Winnie, who had been drinking and who was in a foul mood, was
accused of leading the assaults, punching and slapping each of the victims. ‘You
are not fit to be alive,’ she told them. Members of Mandela United joined in,
throwing their victims into the air, shouting ‘breakdown’ as they did. Winnie,
according to one of the victims, Kenny Kgase, watched ‘with a look of
satisfaction’. She called for a sjambok—a rawhide whip—to be brought and,
humming a freedom song, lashed the victims. Stompie, deemed to be a ‘sell-out’,
came in for especially brutal treatment, and eventually he confessed to being a
police informer. The following day, he was beaten again and again. On 1
January, he was taken away.
News of the abductions quickly spread around Soweto. On 4 January, a
member of the crisis committee, Aubrey Mokoena, questioned Winnie about
them, but she denied that any of the youths were at her home. On 6 January,
when Dr Nthatho Motlana, an old friend of the Mandela family, went to see

Winnie, she admitted that they were at her home, but refused to allow him to see
them.
Then, on 7 January, one of the kidnap victims, Kenny Kgase, managed to
escape. He immediately alerted Methodist Church elders to what had happened
to him and the three others. Led by Bishop Peter Storey, the Methodist Church
now became central in trying to free the missing youths, coordinating its efforts
with the crisis committee but avoiding contact with the police to minimise
complications.
On 11 January, four members of the crisis committee went to Winnie’s house.
This time she claimed that she was protecting the youths from Verryn and that
they were staying at her house at their own request. On the following day, when
the committee members were finally allowed to see the two remaining kidnap
victims, Pelo Mekgwe and Thabiso Mono, both of whom had clear injuries, they
claimed at first that they were staying at Winnie’s house of their own free will.
However, a club member, Katiza Cebekhulu, who had participated in the
beatings, told a different story. Finding himself alone with the committee
members, he decided to confess his involvement. ‘I am going to die anyway so I
may as well tell the truth.’ Cebekhulu told the committee members that he
believed that Stompie was dead, but they decided that it would not be ‘prudent’
to confront Winnie at that stage.
To help resolve the issue, the Methodist Church and the crisis committee
sought assistance from Oliver Tambo in Lusaka and from Mandela in Victor
Verster. A human rights lawyer, Fink Haysom, was commissioned to fly to
Lusaka to brief Tambo. As he listened to Haysom’s account, Tambo, appalled,
threw up his hands and covered his face. ‘What must I do?’ he exclaimed. ‘We
can’t control her. The ANC can’t control her. We tried to control her, that’s why
we formed the crisis committee. You must tell the crisis committee they must do
more!’
In Victor Verster, after being informed of the details by Ismail Ayob on 14
January, Mandela issued an instruction that the two youths should be released.
After further prevarication from Winnie, they were set free on 16 January and
handed over to Bishop Storey. There was, however, still no word of the
whereabouts of Stompie.
Having collected a considerable amount of evidence, the crisis committee
decided to call a meeting of community and church leaders in Soweto. This was

duly held on the night of 16 January, shortly after Mekgwe and Mono had been
released. Both of them attended, as did Kgase and Cebekhulu. Bishop Storey
was also there, together with Paul Verryn. In all, there were about 150
participants. The meeting heard from Mekgwe and Mono how they had been
abducted, taken to Winnie’s house and beaten, first by her and then by club
members. Cebekhulu confirmed their account of the beatings. When asked
whether Stompie was dead, Cebekhulu replied, ‘Yes’, but was unable to say
where his body might be found. Storey asked the meeting at large if anyone
knew of any misconduct on the part of Verryn. About a dozen residents from the
manse were present, but no one spoke against him.
Another victim of Mandela United, Lerotodi Ikaneng, a former member of the
club who had decided to quit despite being accused by Zindzi of being a ‘sellout’, described how, on 3 January, Jerry Richardson and other members of the
gang had tried to murder him using a pair of garden shears, leaving him for dead;
the wound across his neck was still raw.
On the basis of the evidence it possessed, the crisis committee resolved that
Winnie should be ostracised. It proposed that ‘all progressive organisations
should no longer give her a platform’; that she should ‘desist from creating an
impression that she speaks on behalf of the people’; that all ‘progressive
lawyers’ should refrain from helping her any longer; and that she should be
ordered immediately to dismantle her football club. A report sent to Tambo in
Lusaka confirmed that Winnie had participated in the beatings at her house. It
spoke of ‘this new ghastly situation that is developing before our eyes’, and
added, ‘She seems to think that she is above the community. She shows utter
contempt for both the crisis committee and the community.’ The committee
ended their report with a pitiful plea: ‘Help us map out the way forward.’
The crisis was to spread further. On 27 January, a popular Indian doctor, AbuBaker Asvat, was murdered in his surgery in Soweto. Asvat had been a close
friend of Winnie, always ready to respond to her requests for help. He was a
prominent political activist involved not with pro-ANC organisations but with
the black consciousness movement. Members of his family had noticed in recent
weeks that he had become increasingly troubled and anxious. Their first reaction
to the murder was to assume that he had been killed for political reasons. But
other possibilities soon emerged. The crisis committee knew that Asvat had been
called to Winnie’s house on 31 December to examine Stompie, whom he found
to be brain-damaged. Asvat had subsequently reported his findings to the crisis

committee. He was therefore a key witness to the circumstances surrounding
Stompie’s disappearance. Asvat had also been involved in the case as a result of
a visit that Winnie had paid to his surgery, bringing with her Cebekhulu, who,
after joining in the assaults of the four kidnap victims, had become distraught.
Winnie’s explanation was that he had been sexually abused by Verryn. Asvat
examined Cebekhulu, found no evidence of sexual abuse, but noted on his
medical record that he was mentally confused and occasionally hysterical.
According to the record book and the medical card completed in Asvat’s
surgery, Winnie brought Cebekhulu to see him on 30 December, the day after
the abduction took place. The date in the record book was written by Asvat’s
nurse, Albertina Sisulu; the date on the card was stamped with a date stamp. This
evidence of Winnie’s whereabouts on 30 December was to assume considerable
significance at a later stage.
On 26 January, the day before Asvat’s murder, as press inquiries about the
activities of Mandela United began to mount, he was visited in his surgery by a
new patient, Jerry Richardson. Richardson said he had been referred by Winnie
and complained of an abscess. Asvat made a note in red on Richardson’s patient
card: ‘Sent by Winnie’. He found little wrong with Richardson, but told him to
return the next morning for a penicillin injection. Friends and family who met
Asvat later that day described him as being tense and frightened. Richardson
duly returned the next morning. In the afternoon, two youths arrived at the
surgery, shot Asvat dead and escaped.
Winnie’s conduct following the murder was strange. Late that night, she
arrived at Asvat’s house, in the company of Richardson and Zindzi, went straight
up to Asvat’s widow, Zhora, and asked: ‘Who do you think did this?’ Then she
sat silently on the floor. The following day she gave a press interview claiming
that Asvat had been murdered because he possessed evidence of Verryn’s sexual
misconduct, drawing attention for the first time to a possible link between the
kidnapping at the Methodist manse and Asvat’s murder. The implication was
that the Methodist Church was involved in Asvat’s murder. In a subsequent
television interview, she referred to ‘a gigantic cover-up by the Church’.
Even now, with public and press attention gathering pace, the activities of
Mandela United still continued. On 11 February, as a court subsequently heard, a
club member known as Dodo rushed to tell a local community activist, Dudu
Chili, who had been involved in a long-standing feud with Winnie, that Winnie
had just finished chairing a meeting at which it had been decided that Chili’s

son, Sibusiso, and Lerotodi Ikaneng, whom Richardson had once tried to
murder, should be killed. According to Dodo, Winnie had said, ‘They have
become too problematic.’ On 13 February, Sibusiso Chili was intercepted by two
Mandela United members, but the alarm was raised and, in the ensuing fracas, it
was one of the club members, Maxwell Madondo, who died. In retaliation, club
members attacked Mrs Chili’s house, setting it on fire and shooting dead her
thirteen year-old niece.
The end of Mandela United, however, was nigh. On 15 February, two forensic
pathologists, alerted by press reports about Stompie’s disappearance, identified
his body in the mortuary at Diepkloof. The body, with knife wounds, had been
found lying on an open stretch of wasteland on 6 January by a local woman and
had been left unidentified in the mortuary ever since.
Now that they had a body, the police began to round up suspects, acting on
information from the three kidnap victims, Kgase, Mono and Mekgwe.
Richardson and other members of the club were arrested. Winnie’s house in
Diepkloof Extension was raided. In one of the rooms there, police found a
handwritten hit-list with eleven names on it, including those of three Chili
brothers, Lerotodi Ikaneng and two of Albertina Sisulu’s sons. Police also
arrested two illiterate youths in connection with the murder of Dr Asvat.
Winnie herself remained curiously immune from police interrogation. She was
questioned about the sjamboks found on her premises but denied any knowledge
of them. She was not required to make a statement in connection with either
Stompie’s death or Asvat’s murder. A statement made by one of the two youths
charged with Asvat’s murder clearly implicated her. He claimed that his
accomplice had said, ‘Look, I’ve been bought by Winnie Mandela and I must go
and shoot Dr Asvat dead.’ But the statement was never produced in court. The
official motive for the murder was said to be robbery.
The verdict of the black political establishment about Winnie, however, was
far more direct. On 16 February, the day after Stompie’s body had been
identified, Murphy Morobe, a prominent political leader, read out a statement
issued in the name of the Mass Democratic Movement, an umbrella organisation
representing a huge array of community associations and trade unions, censuring
her for criminal activity. He began:
We have now reached the state where we have no option but to speak publicly
on what is a very sensitive and painful matter. In recent years, Mrs Mandela’s

actions have increasingly led her into conflict with various sections of the
oppressed people and with the Mass Democratic Movement as a whole. The
recent conflict in the community has centred largely around the conduct of her
so-called football club, which has been widely condemned by the community. In
particular, we are outraged by the reign of terror that the team has been
associated with. Not only is Mrs Mandela associated with the team, in fact it is
her creation.
Morobe then directly linked Winnie to Stompie’s death. ‘We are outraged at
Mrs Mandela’s obvious complicity in the recent abductions. Had Stompie and
his colleagues not been abducted by Mrs Mandela’s “football team”, he would
have been alive today.’ He went on, ‘We are not prepared to remain silent where
those who are violating human rights claim to be doing so in the name of the
struggle against apartheid.’ Winnie had ‘abused the trust and confidence’ of the
community. Because of her conduct, he said, ‘the Mass Democratic Movement
hereby distances itself from Mrs Mandela and her actions’.
The press which had once devoted considerable space to eulogising Winnie
now spoke of her as a ‘fallen idol’. An article by Nomavenda Mathiane reflected
the particular anger and contempt felt for her in Soweto. ‘Headlines like “Fallen
Idol” create the impression that blacks had revered the “Mother of the Nation”.
The fact is that this title is a mystery, and many black people have never known
where it came from,’ she wrote. ‘The title was made popular in the eyes of the
outside world, which shows that if a small group of people set out with a
determination to create a lie they can succeed.’

In his remote prison cottage at Victor Verster, Mandela was unable to grasp the
full extent of the problem. He was well aware of Winnie’s wayward nature, but
he believed that she had committed no more than ‘errors of judgement’ in
becoming involved with rough elements in Soweto. He wanted the matter to be
dealt with internally by the nationalist movement, not through the kind of public
denunciation by the Mass Democratic Movement, which was bound to have the
effect of undermining the anti-apartheid struggle and bolstering the
government’s credibility.
On her visits to Mandela, Winnie always maintained that she had done
nothing wrong. A passage of conversation recorded by Mandela’s warder, James
Gregory, in his autobiography gives some idea of the course of their discussions.

When Mandela asked Winnie about a newspaper report that she had whipped the
kidnap victims with a sjambok, she laughed and said, ‘Why would I do a thing
like that?’
Mandela replied, ‘That is not an answer to my question.’
‘You of all people should know that you cannot trust what you read in the
newspapers. You know how they twist and bend each and every little fact. How
can you sit there and look me in the eyes and tell me you believe the newspaper
and not me? How can you?’
‘Just get rid of these people around you. They are bad for you, this is poor
judgement to have them near you, to surround yourself with them. You must get
rid of them.’
‘No, these are people, young boys, who have been rescued from the streets.
They need help and I am providing it. I cannot abandon them. They have already
been abandoned once in their lives.’
The brief glimpses of Winnie that Mandela had enjoyed during prison visits
over the years had given him little understanding of the changes in her character
that had occurred. In Mandela’s company, Winnie was warm and vivacious, full
of laughter, dressed to dazzle. He remained deeply in love with her, hoping that
one day, when he was set free, he could resolve all the difficulties that had
accumulated during his years in prison and pick up the threads of a happy
married existence.

CHAPTER 19
BOTHA’S TEA PARTY
AS THE FURORE OVER MANDELA UNITED SUBSIDED, MANDELA
concentrated his attention on preparing for the meeting he sought with Botha. To
clarify the issues, he drew up a ten-page memorandum which he sent in March
1989, after Botha had recovered from his stroke. ‘The deepening political crisis
in our country has been a matter of grave concern to me for quite some time,’ he
began, ‘and I now consider it necessary in the national interest for the African
National Congress and the government to meet urgently to negotiate an effective
political settlement.’
His task, he said, was a limited one—namely, to bring the country’s two major
political bodies to the negotiating table. An early meeting between the
government and the ANC would constitute the first major step towards lasting
peace.
Two central issues will have to be addressed at such a meeting: firstly,
the demand for majority rule in a unitary state; secondly, the concern of
white South Africa over this demand, as well as the insistence of whites
on structural guarantees that majority rule will not mean domination of
the white minority by blacks. The most crucial task which will face the
government and the ANC will be to reconcile these two positions.
Mandela addressed the obstacles that stood in the way of talks, in particular
the government’s demands, elaborated by the secret committee, that the ANC
should first renounce violence, break its alliance with the Communist Party and
abandon its demand for majority rule.
The position of the ANC on the question of violence is very simple. The
organization has no vested interest in violence. It abhors any action
which may cause loss of life, destruction of property and misery to the
people. It has worked long and patiently for a South Africa of common
values and for an undivided and peaceful nonracial state. But we consider
the armed struggle a legitimate form of self-defence against a morally

repugnant system of government which will not allow even peaceful
forms of protest. . .
It is perfectly clear on the facts that the refusal of the ANC to renounce
violence is not the real problem facing the government. The truth is that
the government is not yet ready for negotiation and for the sharing of
political power with blacks. It is still committed to white domination and,
for that reason, it will only tolerate those blacks who are willing to serve
on its apartheid structures. Its policy is to remove from the political scene
blacks who refuse to conform, who reject white supremacy and its
apartheid structures and who insist on equal rights with whites. This is
the real reason for the government’s refusal to talk to us, and for its
demand that we should disarm ourselves, while it continues to use
violence against our people.
As he had done countless times with members of the secret committee,
Mandela defended the ANC’s alliance with the Communist Party:
Cooperation between the ANC and the South African Communist Party goes
back to the early twenties and has always been, and still is, strictly limited to the
struggle against racial oppression and for a just society. At no time has the
organization ever adopted or cooperated with communism itself. Apart from the
question of cooperation between the two organizations, members of the SACP
have always been free to join the ANC. But once they do, they become fully
bound by the policy of the organization set out in the Freedom Charter. As
members of the ANC engaged in the anti-apartheid struggle, their Marxist
ideology is not directly relevant. The SACP has throughout the years accepted
the leading role of the ANC, a position which is respected by the SACP
members who join the ANC.
He firmly dismissed any suggestion for an end to the alliance:
No self-respecting freedom fighter will take orders from the government on how
to wage the freedom struggle against that same government and on who his
allies in the freedom struggle should be. . . . No dedicated ANC member will
ever heed a call to break with the SACP. We regard such a demand as a purely
divisive government strategy.
It is in fact a call on us to commit suicide. Which man of honour will ever
desert a lifelong friend at the insistence of a common opponent and still retain a
measure of credibility among his people? Which opponent will ever trust such a

treacherous freedom fighter? Yet this is what the government is, in effect, asking
us to do—to desert our faithful allies. We will not fall into that trap.
Mandela was equally dismissive of the government’s rejection of majority
rule. The principle of majority rule was a pillar of democracy around the world.
It was a principle which was fully accepted in the white politics of South Africa.
It was a principle that would have to be accepted in the future if a peaceful
settlement was to be reached:
Majority rule and internal peace are like the two sides of a single coin, and white
South Africa simply has to accept that there will never be peace and stability in
this country until the principle is fully applied. It is precisely because of its
denial that the government has become the enemy of practically every black
man. It is that denial that has sparked off the current civil strife.
Mandela concluded by saying that the move he had taken in approaching the
government provided Botha with an opportunity to overcome the political
deadlock in South Africa.
I hope you will seize it without delay. I believe that the overwhelming
majority of South Africans, black and white, hope to see the ANC and
the government working closely together to lay the foundations for a new
era in our country, in which racial discrimination and prejudice, coercion
and confrontation, death and destruction, will be forgotten.
While waiting for the date of the meeting to be fixed, Mandela invited many
old friends to visit him at Victor Verster. His memory for detail with regard to
people and places from the distant past was astonishing. He was assiduous in
bringing himself up to date with all that had happened to his visitors, with births
and marriages and divorces and deaths, remembering the details long into the
future. He made a particular effort to track down his old employer Lazar
Sidelsky, who had helped him forty years before in starting his career as a
lawyer. They joked about the suit that Sidelsky had given him. Mandela said
later that it was one of the most memorable visits in prison he had ever had. A
steady stream of political activists also came to Victor Verster and to them
Mandela paid the same courteous attention. Though Winnie was told she could
remain at Mandela’s cottage whenever she wished, she never stayed overnight,
claiming that it would not be appropriate while other ANC people languished in
prison cells.
The meeting with Botha was finally set for 5 July 1989. Mandela was

provided with a new suit, tie, shirt and shoes. His blood group was checked in
case of emergency. He prepared himself by reading every newspaper and
magazine he could lay his hands on, reviewed his memorandum and checked his
notes. The officials who went with him were anxious that he should make a good
impression; one of them retied his tie for him before he set out from Victor
Verster.
Mandela approached the meeting with some trepidation. Since Botha’s stroke
in January, his temper was said to be even more ferocious than before. His own
colleagues found him increasingly irascible; he refused to listen to advice and
harboured resentments against them. Mandela resolved that if Botha resorted to
his finger-wagging habit, he would interrupt to say he found Botha’s behaviour
unacceptable and leave.
Arrangements for the meeting were carried out in the utmost secrecy. Mandela
was driven to a basement garage beneath Tuynhuys, the Cape Dutch mansion
alongside parliament in the centre of Cape Town which served as the president’s
official residence. Accompanied by prison officials, he took a lift to the ground
floor and stepped out into a wood-panelled lobby in front of the president’s
office, where he met Coetsee and Barnard. Both were worried that Botha’s
temper might erupt during the encounter. Barnard noticed that Mandela’s
shoelaces were not properly tied and quickly knelt down to retie them. ‘I realized
just how nervous they were,’ said Mandela, ‘and that did not make me any
calmer.’
As Mandela entered the president’s office, Botha walked towards him from
the opposite side of the room, his hand outstretched, smiling broadly. Instead of
the grim, cantankerous figure he had expected to meet, Mandela found Botha ‘a
charming man indeed’, unfailingly courteous and friendly: ‘The thing that
impressed was that he poured the tea.’
Their conversation amounted to little more than a polite discourse on South
African history and culture. Mandela mentioned that he had recently read an
article in an Afrikaans magazine about the 1914 Afrikaner rebellion and drew
parallels between their rival nationalisms. The African nationalist struggle, he
said, was not unlike the 1914 Afrikaner rebellion: the one pitted Afrikaner
brother against brother; the other was a struggle ‘between brothers who
happened to be different colours’. No policy matters were discussed and no
negotiations took place. Towards the end of the half-hour meeting, Mandela

asked for the unconditional release of all political prisoners. Botha replied that
he was afraid he could not do that. They parted amicably, Botha saying what a
pleasure the meeting had been and Mandela concurring.
When news of the meeting leaked out a few days later, the meeting was
described, fairly accurately, as ‘a courtesy call’. The symbolic importance of
Botha sitting down with a prisoner whom he had hitherto denounced as a
‘communist terrorist’ was real enough. But Botha was still no nearer to
addressing the central issue of political reform that Mandela had raised in his
memorandum. It was a matter he never seriously contemplated.
Six weeks later, on 14 August, after months of friction with his cabinet
colleagues, Botha announced his resignation as president in a long, rambling
television address. The man who succeeded him, Frederik Willem de Klerk, was
chosen because of his solid conservative credentials.

CHAPTER 20

A STEP TO FREEDOM
DE KLERK HAD BEEN A DEDICATED DISCIPLE OF THE APARTHEID
system throughout his political career. He came from a prominent Afrikaner
family at the heart of the political establishment which had ruled South Africa
since 1948. His father, Jan, had served as a cabinet minister under three prime
ministers, including Verwoerd. His uncle by marriage, Hans Strijdom, was a
former prime minister outspoken in his support of white supremacy. His
grandfather, a friend of Paul Kruger, leader of the old Transvaal republic, had
also made his mark as an activist in the Afrikaner cause. The household in which
the young de Klerk grew up, therefore, was steeped in the traditions of Afrikaner
politics and history.
His own rise within the National Party was rapid. After establishing a
successful law practice in the Transvaal town of Vereeniging, he entered
parliament in 1972 and in 1978, at the age of forty-two, became the youngest
member of John Vorster’s cabinet. What was notable about his political record,
in seventeen years as a member of parliament and cabinet minister, was his rigid
loyalty to the National Party and all that it stood for. He conformed faithfully to
every party policy of the time. Over the years, he had spoken out adamantly
against integrated sport, mixed marriages, trade union rights for blacks and black
demands for permanent residence in white South Africa. Above all, he was a
forceful proponent of the National Party’s commitment to ‘group rights’—
keeping apart, wherever possible, South Africa’s four main racial groups. In
Botha’s government, he was given control of the white ‘own affairs’ portfolio
and distinguished himself as a zealous advocate of white interests. Whites, he
said in 1989, must be guaranteed a ‘community life, their own living areas,
schools, institutions and systems’. Each group should have its own power base,
he said, and make its own decisions about community issues.
In cabinet, de Klerk was noted for constantly throwing up obstacles to reform.
As minister of education, he fought to keep blacks out of white universities. He
also sponsored a bill that would have enabled him to use financial pressure to

force universities to crack down on anti-apartheid agitators on campus—a
measure that the Supreme Court subsequently ruled to be invalid. At a public
meeting in 1987, he urged whites to report people of other racial groups living in
segregated white areas, even though the authorities by then tended to ignore
informal integration. When the verligte foreign minister, Pik Botha, suggested in
1986 that South Africa might one day have a black president, it was de Klerk,
rather than P. W. Botha, who insisted that he should publicly retract his
statement. In his eleven years in cabinet, there was not a single piece of reform
with which de Klerk had been associated.
When the time came to choose a new head of the National Party after Botha’s
sudden and unexpected resignation from the post in February 1989, de Klerk
was the favoured candidate of the verkrampte camp, which wanted to stand fast
against further reform and believed that he was the man to do it. The verligte
camp, meanwhile, put forward three candidates, split the vote and enabled de
Klerk to be elected. As head of the National Party, he was in line to succeed
Botha as president.
Examining his record, the press considered it unlikely that de Klerk would get
to grips with the fundamental issues facing South Africa any more than Botha
had. De Klerk had never shown any particular flair or talent. He was amiable,
shrewd and polished but without charisma or vision. Above all else, he was a
party man. His main difference from Botha was that he appeared to be more
open and communicative. It was noted that his wife, Marike, was an archconservative. In a speech she gave at an old-age home, she had referred
contemptuously to Coloureds as ‘a negative group of ‘non-persons’ who were
South Africa’s historic ‘leftovers’.
His older brother, a prominent verligte and newspaper editor, had no great
expectations of him. ‘He is too strongly convinced that racial grouping is the
only truth, way and life,’ Willem de Klerk wrote in a magazine article published
in March 1989. ‘He is too dismissive of a more radical style.’ He predicted that
his brother would follow a cautious, centrist path, holding ‘the middle ground by
means of clever footwork, small compromises, drawn-out studies and planned
processes, effective diplomacy and growing authority through balanced
leadership and control’. That, Willem wrote, ‘is his style, his nature, his talent
and his conviction’. So, there would be no leap of faith in a liberal direction.
From the vantage point of the president’s office, however, de Klerk began a

reassessment of South Africa’s prospects. Forty years of National Party rule had
left the white population powerful and prosperous; the Afrikaner community, in
particular, had fared well, fulfilling their long-held ambition of acquiring wealth,
skills and economic strength. The government’s ability to defend the apartheid
system was still formidable. Its powers of repression had hardly been tested. Its
security forces were more than a match for any threat from either township
activists or trained guerrillas. It possessed enough allies within the black
community—homeland leaders, urban politicians, vigilante groups—to make the
system work. At a regional level, its hegemony over southern Africa remained
unchallenged. At an international level, despite the world-wide opprobrium that
South Africa aroused, it faced no serious threat; sanctions were a costly rather
than a damaging imposition.
What struck de Klerk, in assessing the government’s options, was the lack of
any viable political strategy. The whole emphasis of Botha’s policy in recent
years had been security management. South Africa was, in effect, being ruled by
security managers with enormous powers at their disposal. All Botha’s efforts to
lure ‘moderate’ African leaders into a dialogue with the government, offering
them a ‘national forum’ in which to make their views known, had come to
naught. Not a single reputable African politician had stepped forward to support
it. Even conservative leaders like KwaZulu’s Chief Buthelezi demanded far
more from Botha, including the release of Mandela and the lifting of the ban on
the ANC, before they were willing to enter negotiations.
De Klerk had long been mindful of the need to find a political accommodation
with the black population. While acting zealously to protect white interests, he
acknowledged that blacks too had an equal right to run their own institutions.
‘We must provide for urban blacks own political institutions, own political
power bases, own legislatures, own executives, so that they can get the same
degree of self-determination as the “homeland” blacks, as the whites have within
the House of Assembly and as the Coloureds have in their own Chamber,’ he
said in 1987. ‘When that is attained, every South African will elect leaders with
important and visible powers.’
The advice he received in 1989 from several quarters, from senior figures in
the Broederbond, from the National Intelligence Service, from verligte
politicians in the cabinet and from other prominent Afrikaner intellectuals and
journalists, was that the modernised form of apartheid he envisaged would no
longer work. If the whites were to preserve the power and privileges they had

enjoyed for so long, a more fundamental change was needed. While the
government faced no immediate difficulty, the longer political reform was
delayed, the weaker its position would become. Without reform, the cycle of
black opposition would become increasingly widespread and violent. The fate of
neighbouring Rhodesia, where the white-minority leader, Ian Smith, had turned
down one favourable deal after another, only to find himself embroiled in a
seven-year long guerrilla war and negotiating a belated settlement which led to
the advent of a Marxist government, provided a potent example. ‘When the
opportunity was there for real constructive negotiations, it was not grasped,’
concluded de Klerk. ‘We must not make that mistake.’ A phrase that Pieter de
Lange, the Broederbond chairman, used in a memorandum advocating reform
became embedded in de Klerk’s thinking: ‘The greatest risk is not to take any
risk.’ De Klerk later remarked, ‘We had to escape from a corner where
everything stagnated into confrontation.’
De Klerk’s dilemma, however, once he had accepted the argument that a new
political dispensation was necessary, was that there was no way of embarking on
negotiations for one without the inclusion of the ANC. No credible African
leader would participate until Mandela had been released and the ban on the
ANC was lifted. But the risks for de Klerk in doing so were considerable. The
government had devoted years of propaganda to telling South Africa’s whites
that the ANC was a bunch of communist terrorists. It had repeatedly committed
itself not to negotiate with any leader or organisation engaged in violence. By
abandoning this position, it would be conceding a significant victory to the
ANC. The result might be further violence as black radicals took to the streets to
push the revolution forwards. Moreover, any concession to the ANC was bound
to undermine his support within the white community and boost the threat from
his right-wing opponents which he constantly feared.
On the other hand, the timing for a new initiative seemed propitious. The
collapse of socialist governments in Eastern Europe in 1989 not only deprived
the ANC of one of its main sources of financial, logistical and military support
but also undermined its sense of ideological direction. The Soviet Union,
meanwhile, had made clear its intention of disentangling itself from regional
conflicts. A deal in 1989 over the independence of neighbouring Namibia, which
South Africa controlled, required the withdrawal of Cuban troops from Angola,
once seen as part of the communist threat to South Africa. In a matter of months,
the spectre of ‘total onslaught’ which had dominated government thinking

during the Botha era, receded. The fear that the ANC could be used as ‘a Trojan
horse’ by the Soviet Union fell away. De Klerk’s principal strategist, Gerrit
Viljoen, a former head of the Broederbond, recalled, ‘We recognised it as a
unique opportunity in the course of history, a God-given opportunity—we
thought of it very much in Christian terms—to ensure that conflict in South
Africa could be resolved.’
De Klerk quickly grasped the importance of these strategic openings. He was
not a man driven by any sense of moral imperative about the need to bring
apartheid to an end. The church to which he belonged, the Gereformeerde Kerk,
the strictest of the Dutch Reformed Churches, had spent decades justifying the
apartheid system on biblical and moral grounds. De Klerk himself believed
firmly that apartheid had been an ‘honourable’ attempt to assist the separate
development of black tribal groups as well as whites. It was only ‘wrong’, he
once said, because it had become ‘unworkable’. He also carried with him none
of the ideological baggage which had so influenced previous National Party
leaders. He was essentially a pragmatist, determined above all else to protect
Afrikaner interests. Group rights remained his lodestar and he was confident of
securing them in any new political dispensation.
De Klerk found that considerable preparatory work had already been
undertaken. Mandela’s persistent efforts since 1986 to establish a dialogue with
the government had done much to foster a climate conducive to negotiations.
Both Kobie Coetsee and Niel Barnard were convinced that Mandela was a man
with whom the government could do business. By inviting Mandela to tea at
Tuynhuys, whatever his motives, Botha had already accorded him a measure of
respectability that belied years of government propaganda.
Other reports that de Klerk received were also promising. A group of
prominent Afrikaners regularly meeting ANC officials in secret in England were
impressed by the ANC’s willingness to enter realistic discussions. Among the
group was Willem de Klerk, who, after each meeting he attended, wrote a frank
assessment of ANC intentions which he passed on to his brother. He spoke of
the meetings as ‘a bridge-building exercise’ notable for producing a degree of
understanding between the two asides.
In August 1989, the ANC set out publicly for the first time its proposals on
how to proceed towards a negotiated settlement. ‘A conjuncture of
circumstances exists which, if there is a demonstrable readiness on the part of

the Pretoria regime to engage in negotiations genuinely and seriously, could
create the possibility to end apartheid through negotiation, ’ said the ANC’s
Harare Declaration. It listed five preconditions for negotiation: lifting the state of
emergency; ending restrictions on political activity; legalising all political
organisations; releasing all political prisoners; and stopping all armed violence,
enabling constitutional negotiations to proceed.
On his journeys abroad, de Klerk was readily assured by Western
governments of support if he changed course. From one capital to the next, the
advice he was given was the same: lift the ban on the ANC, release political
prisoners and start talks. He was left in no doubt that any initiative he took which
excluded the ANC would be dismissed by Western governments as worthless.
The mood of much of the white population favoured change. A new
generation of white South Africans disliked being treated as pariahs by the rest
of the world, subjected to sports boycotts, travel bans, trade sanctions and hostile
comments. Businessmen were adamant about the need for a more stable political
system that would encourage economic growth and rid South Africa of the cost
of sanctions. Economic prosperity was becoming more important to white South
Africa than racial division.
A general election in September 1989 provided some clue as to where the
white population stood. De Klerk, fearing the threat from extreme right-wing
parties vehemently opposed to reform, campaigned on a right-wing platform,
denouncing as traitors white liberal opponents who had been in contact with the
ANC and standing firm in defence of group rights. He made no mention of any
political initiative. The result gave the National Party a thin margin of victory.
Only 48 per cent of 2.2 million whites voted for the National Party, the first time
in thirty years it had received less than an absolute majority. The extreme rightwing Conservative Party gained about 30 per cent of the vote. The liberal
Democratic Party took 21 per cent. In the months ahead, de Klerk was to argue
that two-thirds of the white electorate—the National Party vote plus the
Democratic Party vote—had given him a mandate for reform.
The first sign of change came one week after the election when de Klerk,
against the advice of his own security managers, gave permission for a
demonstration against police brutality to proceed through the streets of Cape
Town, an event that during the Botha era would have resulted in outright
repression. The shock for many whites of seeing on the television news the

spectacle of tens of thousands of anti-apartheid demonstrators swarming through
Cape Town was considerable. De Klerk reasoned that if he did not permit
orderly demonstrations, then he would soon face disorderly ones.
His next step signalled far more radical change ahead. In October, Walter
Sisulu, Ahmed Kathrada and four other ANC life prisoners were set free after
twenty-five years’ imprisonment. Sisulu was dropped off at his small, redbricked house in Soweto in a police van. His homecoming, at the age of seventyseven, was marked by one of the greatest celebrations that Soweto had ever
experienced. At home to welcome him was his beloved Albertina, whose own
ordeal during his years in prison had matched that of Winnie Mandela. As well
as her own spells of imprisonment, solitary confinement and house arrest, one of
Albertina’s sons had been banned and detained, another had served a prison
sentence for resistance activity and yet another son and daughter had gone into
exile. Yet through it all, Albertina had been a rock of stability. The Sisulus
settled down to a ‘second’ marriage better, they said, than the first: this time
there were no restrictions, no banning orders, no police raids, no prison.
Mandela was the last of the Rivonia group to remain in prison. Mbeki had left
in 1987 and now the others had gone. Mandela had negotiated their release
during the secret sessions of Coetsee’s committee and he expected his own to
follow soon. His discussions with the committee, meanwhile, continued to range
widely over political issues, taking on greater significance with the addition of
Gerrit Viljoen, de Klerk’s principal strategist, to the team.
On 12 December, Mandela was taken to the president’s office in Cape Town,
to the same room where he had sipped tea with Botha. The encounter was
amicable and businesslike. ‘He met me on the basis of equality and discussed
issues objectively,’ Mandela recalled. Mandela was impressed by de Klerk’s
willingness to listen. Mandela made clear his opposition to the idea of ‘group
rights’, which he saw as a means of perpetuating white domination. De Klerk
replied that group rights were intended to deal with the problem of white fears of
black domination, an issue which Mandela himself acknowledged needed to be
addressed. Mandela’s response was that the idea of group rights did more to
increase black suspicions than to allay white fears, at which de Klerk rejoined,
‘We will have to change it, then.’
Mandela raised the question of his own release. There was no point in his
leaving prison unless the ban on the ANC was also lifted, since he would then be

working for an illegal organisation and face arrest once more. The best way
forward, he said, was to unban all illegal organisations, release all political
prisoners and lift the state of emergency, as the ANC had demanded. De Klerk
listened carefully. By the end of the meeting, Mandela had concluded that de
Klerk was a man with whom he could do business.
De Klerk had yet to decide how far to take his reforms. The issues were
thrashed out at a special bush conference, or bosberaad, in northwestern
Transvaal in December, attended by the entire cabinet and some fifty officials
and advisers. There was heated debate about the lifting of the ban on political
organisations, in particular the Communist Party. The defence minister, Magnus
Malan, a leading figure in the ‘total onslaught’ school, argued vehemently
against unbanning the Communist Party. Others pointed out that if any
opposition group remained unbanned, its allies would launch vociferous
campaigns in its support, undermining the credit the government would
otherwise gain.
De Klerk believed that there would be considerable advantage in seizing the
initiative and capturing the ‘moral high ground’. The government was acting
from a position of strength and would continue to do so. Its ability to remain
firmly in control was not in doubt. The chances were that the ANC, poorly
organised and ill-prepared for peace, would fall into disarray, leaving the
government to forge ahead in a new alliance with conservative black leaders like
Buthelezi and moderate black organisations.
Only a handful of trusted advisers were privy in advance to the decisions de
Klerk announced in parliament in Cape Town on 2 February 1990. He did not
inform the National Party’s parliamentary caucus. He did not even tell his wife.
No one expected such sweeping measures.
In a calm, confident manner, de Klerk announced that he was lifting the ban
on the whole spectrum of liberation organisations: the African National
Congress, Umkhonto we Sizwe, the South African Communist Party and the
Pan-Africanist Congress. He further announced that emergency regulations
would be eased; media restrictions would be abolished; political prisoners would
be released; exiles would be allowed to return home; capital punishment would
be suspended; and apartheid laws like the Separate Amenities Act would be
repealed. ‘It is time for us to break out of the cycle of violence and break
through to peace and reconciliation,’ he declared, outlining new aims towards

which the government would work. These included a new democratic
constitution, universal franchise and the protection of minorities as well as of
individual rights. He asked black leaders to join him. ‘Walk through the door
and take your place at the negotiating table together with the government,’ he
said. ‘The time for negotiations has come.’
De Klerk left his announcement about Mandela’s release for his grande finale.
Mandela, he said, ‘could play an important part’ in negotiations for a peaceful
settlement. He would be released ‘unconditionally’ and ‘without delay’.
The boldness of de Klerk’s reforms set South Africa on an entirely new
course. In effect, he had pronounced the death sentence of apartheid. The central
issue had always been political power. None of the reforms hitherto
implemented by National Party leaders had come close to addressing that issue.
Now, in a stroke, de Klerk had conceded one-person one-vote and opened the
way for its attainment. But the route there was to be marked by greater turmoil
than anything South Africa had previously experienced.

The arrangement for Mandela’s release were soon enmeshed in argument. On 9
February, seven days after de Klerk’s announcement, Mandela was taken to
Tuynhuys, where de Klerk informed him that he would be released in
Johannesburg the following day. Mandela was intensely annoyed at de Klerk’s
decision to free him without consultation and without warning. He told de Klerk
that he needed a week’s notice so that proper preparations could be made both
by his family and by party officials; otherwise the results would be chaos. He
wanted to be able to walk out of the gates of Victor Verster to visit nearby Paarl
to thank the people there for their kindness during his stay there, and then to
address a public meeting in Cape Town. Cape Town had been his home for
nearly three decades. He would make his own way back to Johannesburg in his
own time, he said.
Negotiations over the exact time and place of his release continued for five
hours. Mandela remembered the experience as ‘a conflict between my blood and
my brains’, wanting to leave prison as soon as possible but recognising the risks
in doing so. The difficulty for de Klerk was that the government had already told
the foreign press of Mandela’s imminent release and could not afford delay. The
compromise eventually reached was that Mandela would be released from Victor
Verster prison at precisely 3 p.m. on Sunday 11 February. De Klerk poured

glasses of whisky to mark the occasion. Mandela, disliking strong spirits,
pretended to drink. He left the meeting in a thoroughly bad mood.
On the morning of 11 February, Mandela rose at dawn and went through a
shortened version of his exercise routine. The prison doctor called by to give him
a brief examination. Mandela joked, ‘It’s a bit late to find something wrong.’
Members of his reception committee arrived to discuss the day’s schedule. They
dismissed Mandela’s idea of making his first speech to the citizens of Paarl.
They wanted him instead to drive, as planned, straight to the Grand Parade in
Cape Town to address a mass rally of supporters from the balcony of City Hall.
A crowd of thousands had been gathering there since the early morning. The
details of Mandela’s speech had been worked over for hours. Many ANC
officials were worried by the rumours circulating about his secret talks with
government officials which had created the suspicion that he had done a deal
with them. They felt it important that Mandela should make clear his loyalty to
the ANC and to the party line.
The house was soon full of dozens of people. Amid all the excitement and
activity, Mandela took time to say warm farewells to the prison staff who had
become his friends. To Warrant Officer Gregory, who had known him for
twenty-three years, he wrote a short note: ‘The wonderful hours we spent
together during the last two decades end today. But you will always be in my
thoughts.’ The two men shook hands and embraced. ‘We will see each other
again,’ said Mandela.
The schedule for his release soon began to go awry. Winnie’s party, flying in
from Johannesburg, arrived late. The final meal was delayed. It was 4 p.m.
before the cavalcade of cars taking him to Cape Town was ready to leave. As
Mandela was driven through the prison grounds, the families of prison guards,
all of them white, stood in their gardens and waved goodbye.
Within sight of the prison gates, Mandela alighted and, with a slightly fragile
air, walked the last few yards, hand-in-hand with Winnie, towards a waiting
crowd of supporters and the ranks of the world’s media.
The size of the crowd, plus the hundreds of photographers, television crews
and reporters gathered to witness the occasion, astounded him. He had expected
no more than a few dozen people. ‘Only when I saw the crowd did I realize that I
had not thought carefully enough about the events of the day,’ he said later. As
everyone pressed to get nearer, Mandela and Winnie were hustled back into their

car and driven away through the throng.
On his way to Cape Town, passing through the vineyards and orchards of
some of the richest Afrikaner farms in the country, Mandela remarked on the
number of whites he saw standing by the side of the road to catch a glimpse of
him. Some even saluted as he drove by. He was to mention it again and again
over the next few days. The numbers were, in fact, relatively small, but that they
were there at all impressed him. At one point, he stopped the car to thank a white
family for their support.
The mood of the crowds awaiting Mandela in Grand Parade had meanwhile
become increasingly restless. By mid-afternoon, some 50,000 people had
assembled in front of the City Hall, where a huge banner had been draped over
the upper balcony saying ‘Nelson Mandela, the nation welcomes you home’. On
the edge of the square, groups of youths began breaking into shops and looting
them. The police retaliated with shotguns and pistols. An emergency aid post
was soon filled with scores of wounded victims. When ANC officials appealed
for calm and discipline, they were rewarded with jeers, whistles and slow
handclaps. Skirmishes between youths and police continued for hours while the
crowd waited for Mandela’s arrival. Much of the blame for the disorder on
Grand Parade that day was attributed to the ANC’s poor organisation.
When Mandela’s car eventually reached Grand Parade, the driver, instead of
taking him to the rear of the City Hall as planned, tried to find a way through the
crowd at the front. The car was soon engulfed by a sea of people pressing close,
hammering on the windows, the bonnet, the boot. For more than an hour,
Mandela was trapped by his own supporters while ANC officials struggled to
secure an exit route for the car. Once freed, the driver, instead of heading for the
rear entrance, sped away from City Hall just to avoid the crowds. To calm him
down, Mandela gave him directions to the house of his attorney, Dullah Omar.
He had been there for only a few minutes when an agitated telephone call came
through from Archbishop Desmond Tutu at the City Hall telling him that unless
he arrived soon there might be serious disturbances.
By the time Mandela finally reached City Hall, it was almost dark. Most of the
crowd had dispersed and the 10,000 or so who remained found it difficult to see
him. Mandela also discovered at the last moment, as he reached for his speech,
that he had left his reading spectacles behind at Victor Verster. Fortunately, he
was able to use a pair belonging to Winnie, but they were ill-fitting and kept

slipping from his nose.
The speech that Mandela made that evening, the first public speech he had
made since the Rivonia trial, was broadcast around the world. It was a crude,
partisan speech, reflecting the narrow, parochial interests of ANC officials who
had had a hand in drafting it at Victor Verster. There was no sense of vision or
wider purpose, no call for national reconciliation. It consisted mainly of
messages that party officials wanted to transmit to their own constituency.
Mandela went to great lengths to allay suspicions that he had done a secret
deal with the government. He was, he said, ‘a loyal and disciplined’ member of
the ANC. ‘My talks with the government have been aimed at normalising the
political situation in the country,’ he said. ‘I wish to stress that I myself have at
no time entered into negotiations about the future of the country, except to insist
on a meeting between the ANC and the government . . . Negotiations cannot take
place above the heads or behind the backs of our people.’
The armed struggle would continue, he said, until the conditions were right for
negotiations to start. The government had yet to fulfil the ANC’s demands for
lifting the state of emergency and releasing political prisoners. This was not the
time for the ANC to relax its efforts: ‘Now is the time to intensify the struggle
on all fronts.’
He paid tribute to a long list of organisations for their contribution to the
struggle and made the point of singling out for special praise his old friend Joe
Slovo, the Communist Party’s general secretary—‘one of our finest patriots’.
Mixed in with the party rhetoric were a few conciliatory remarks: ‘We express
the hope that a climate conducive to a negotiated settlement would be created
soon so that there may no longer be the need for the armed struggle.’ De Klerk,
he said, had gone further than any other National Party leader in taking ‘real
steps to normalise the situation’. In words that would come to haunt him, he
described de Klerk as ‘a man of integrity’. But the overall tone was
uncompromising.
It was a speech which raised doubts about the quality of Mandela’s leadership.
Was he a man who would inspire his people to make peace and achieve national
reconciliation or would he stir up anew black militancy against whites? To
whites, his speech seemed needlessly militant. To many blacks, it seemed
ambiguous, calling them to arms at one moment and suggesting negotiations the
next.

Mandela spent his first night of freedom at Bishopscourt, the elegant residence
of the Anglican archbishop, Desmond Tutu, in an affluent suburb on the slopes
of Devil’s Peak. Tutu himself had long been a prominent anti-apartheid activist,
receiving the Nobel Peace Prize in 1984.
The next morning, in the garden at Bishopscourt, Mandela faced the world’s
media, presenting a very different image from the night before. He exuded an
inner calm and confidence, displaying a spirit of generosity entirely missing
from his Grand Parade address. His charm of manner captivated journalists. He
answered questions with an agility and ease that they found all the more
remarkable because of his years of isolation from the modern world. He
graciously paid tribute to the press for remembering him and his colleagues
during their long ordeal, and when he recognised the names of questioners
familiar to him from his endless reading of newspapers, he greeted them in
personal terms. Most remarkable of all was the absence of any trace of bitterness
about his long years of imprisonment.
His message now was full of hope and conciliation. He recognised, he said,
that whites were concerned about the demand for one-person one-vote and
wanted structural guarantees to ensure that they were not dominated by blacks:
‘We understand that fear. The whites are fellow South Africans. We want them
to feel safe.’ He appealed to them to help build a new South Africa: ‘We
appreciate the contribution they made towards the development of this country.’
He referred again to de Klerk as ‘a man of integrity’. In his discussions with
him, de Klerk had proved to be very flexible:
As an organisation, of course, we are concerned not so much with the personal
virtues of an individual. Our policy and strategies are determined by the harsh
reality of the fact that the National Party has a policy which is not progressive.
And that is what determines our attitude. But I am confident that, if Mr de Klerk
is able to carry the National Party with him in the new line he has taken, he
himself wants to normalise the situation as soon as possible. Therefore I think
that very soon obstacles to negotiation will be removed and it will be possible
for us to sit down and talk.
It was a masterly performance. At the end of the conference, the journalists
present, some 300 in all, broke all professional rules and burst into applause,
something most of them had never done before. The press that morning had been
highly critical of the previous day’s mayhem on Grand Parade and of the tenor

of his speech from the balcony. In a matter of fifty minutes, Mandela had won
them over.
From Cape Town, Mandela and Winnie then flew to Johannesburg. Mandela
was determined to live in their house in Orlando West, no. 8115, which held so
many memories for him, even though it was now too small for his needs. Since
the fire in 1988, it had been solidly rebuilt, but it still consisted of only four
rooms. He rejected suggestions that he should move to Winnie’s mansion in
Beverly Hills, considering it both too ostentatious and too remote from the
community. But on arriving in Johannesburg, he was told that the house in
Orlando was surrounded by a throng of supporters, so he was obliged to stay at a
friend’s in the northern suburbs.
The following day, he was given a tumultuous welcome at a football stadium
in Soweto packed to capacity and surrounded by even greater crowds outside. It
was only then, after the rally had ended, that Mandela finally returned home,
after twenty-seven years.

Mandela was asked once how different was the man who emerged from prison
after twenty-seven years from the one who went in. He replied, with
characteristic brevity, ‘I came out mature.’ Mandela disliked talking about
himself and allowed few glimpses of his personal thoughts or emotions. The
years of his imprisonment had turned him into a intensely private person. Even
with his closest friends, his true feelings remained hidden. He was anxious never
to betray the slightest sign of weakness either to them or to prison staff,
determined to stifle the anger that lay within. Self-control became an abiding
habit. On his release, he was articulate and fluent in discussing political matters,
but uneasy and reticent when asked to describe his emotions as he came out of
prison. ‘I must confess that I am unable to describe my emotions,’ he replied. ‘I
was completely overwhelmed by the enthusiasm. It is something I did not
expect. I would be merely rationalising if I told you that I am able to describe
my own feelings. It was breathtaking, that’s all I can say.’ His close friend
Amina Cachalia, who had known him for forty years, observed,’ He had to learn
how to communicate again.’
He preferred to discuss his role as a member of a team of colleagues than his
position as an individual. ‘I find it difficult to personalise the collective
experience of prison.’ The comradeship of his fellow prisoners, their strength in

adversity, was one of his favourite themes.
But there were other themes that were unexpected. Mandela did not regard his
years in prison as wasted. ‘One of the advantages was the ability to sit down and
to think,’ he said. ‘We had the opportunity of reflecting on past mistakes and
planning how we would handle problems when we were released from prison. It
was a rewarding experience.’
Not once did Mandela express bitterness towards the white community for his
ordeal, only against the system they imposed. The cause of non-racial
democracy, he knew, could only be impeded by hatred and resentment of the
white community. It was the knowledge that the cause for which he had been
imprisoned was morally right that had done so much to fortify him there. ‘It was
not so much the inner strength of any individual that enabled us to go through
some of the harshest experiences you can imagine, but that we stood for a good
cause.’ That cause would only be undermined by any expression of racial
animosity.
He often felt anger about whites, he said, but not hatred. His hatred was
directed at the system. His anger was directed at individuals, never against
whites as a group. ‘I have felt anger, especially at the police, who have subjected
my wife and family to harassment while I was in prison. But anger is a
temporary feeling. You soon forget it, particularly if you are involved in positive
activities and attitudes.’
Though warders in prison were part of a repressive system, he judged them
individually and formed friendships with some. ‘We had many friends among
warders who tried as much as possible to make our conditions as comfortable as
possible.’ He cited the example of James Gregory: ‘Even though Gregory was a
warder and had to carry out unpopular and even repressive policies, as an
individual he was a gentleman and we became great friends.’ It was the attitude
of such men that ‘wiped out any bitterness which a man could have’ about losing
twenty-seven years of his life.
While the outside world had expected Mandela to dwell on the suffering he
and his colleagues had endured in prison, he himself was more interested in
explaining what they had learned there, the understanding they had gained, the
reasons for their lack of bitterness, the strength of their commitment to
democracy which had sustained them. The example he set was of profound
importance. For, if after twenty-seven years in prison, Mandela could emerge

insisting on reconciliation, it undermined the demands of those seeking revenge
and retribution.
Only on one issue, the persecution of Winnie and their two daughters, was
Mandela forthcoming about his own personal feelings. He spoke of the pain and
guilt he felt at knowing that his family was exposed to harassment and insecurity
without him there to protect them: ‘It is not a nice feeling for a man to see his
family struggling, without security, without the dignity of the head of the
family.’ Their suffering, he said, was greater than his own. Mandela made it
clear that he felt he owed Winnie a huge debt for what she had endured on his
behalf. It was a debt, he said, that he intended to pay off now that he was free. In
the coming months Winnie was to exploit to the full his sense of guilt for her
own benefit.
Old friends remarked on how much his appearance and his manner had
changed. Hilda Bernstein, whose family used to know him as ‘the giant’, noted,
after her first meeting with him:
Nelson has changed a lot. He is still so upright, bearing himself with dignity, but
he is thin, his face, once round and full-cheeked, has narrowed; his eyes, the
voice, the smile are the same, but the prison years have robbed him of his air of
fun and gaiety. He is sober, immensely dignified, conscious of the expectations
arising from the role into which he has been cast.
Reporters watching him descend the stone steps in the gardens at
Bishopscourt observed how he walked with the stiff gait of an elderly
gentleman. Despite his aristocratic bearing, he seemed at times almost frail.
There was much speculation about the state of his health, about whether, at the
age of seventy-one, he would stand up to the stresses and strains of leadership in
the days that lay ahead. The years in prison had taken their toll. He had suffered
from high blood pressure, from tuberculosis and from back pains. He was also
afflicted by an eye ailment acquired as a result of working in the lime quarry; his
eyes were sensitive to sharp light. Mandela himself admitted ‘there are signs of
old age, wear and tear, which we must expect’. But he described his health as
‘reasonably good’ and pointed out that each day he continued with the same set
of rigorous exercises he had carried out in prison over the years. Concern about
his health was to mount in coming months as he put himself through a punishing
schedule of rallies, meetings, press conference, interviews and long trips abroad.
In prison, Mandela’s dream of what he would do when he was set free was to

take a leisurely drive to the Transkei, to visit the village of Qunu where he grew
up and to wander in the hills and valleys where he had played as a boy. Yet so
great were the demands upon him that it was to be several months before he
managed to get to Qunu.
What he craved for most of all was to resume the settled family life that he
had forsaken when he went underground in 1961. Yet that too was to be denied
him. For Winnie, the focus of all his longing in prison, showed no interest in
sharing the intimacies of married life with him. She had found a new lover, half
her age, and she made it clear that she had no intention of giving him up.
Thus Mandela’s homecoming did not bring the joy and happiness for which
had yearned so long. But as with all the other suffering he had endured, he hid
the pain and humiliation behind the mask which he had become accustomed to
wearing.

The task facing Mandela was daunting. The ANC had been plunged into deep
disarray by the unexpected change in government policy. Its entire strategy for
more than twenty years had been based on plans for a revolutionary seizure of
power, not on the possibility of peaceful negotiations. Trained guerrillas,
brought up on songs about how Um - khonto would march across the Limpopo
to take Pretoria by storm, hankered for action. Many activists in the townships
were equally reluctant to forgo the prospect of revolution. Distrust of the
government’s intentions was intense. Many were convinced that de Klerk’s
reforms were no more than a device to subvert the armed struggle. Within the
ANC’s hierarchy in exile, there had long been disagreement between a small
group amenable to the idea of negotiations and a far larger group committed to
armed struggle outright. The Harare Declaration in August 1989 setting out a
host of preconditions to negotiation had aroused fierce controversy which
remained unresolved. This division between those who wanted to seize power
and those who had advocated a negotiated compromise was to afflict the ANC
for years to come.
Mandela himself was distrusted. Rumours of his involvement in secret talks
with the government had led many to conclude that he had gone soft. ‘The word
was,’ said Mac Maharaj, ‘that Madiba was wearing a three-piece suit, drinking
wine, you name it, he was a sell-out.’ Prominent activists inside South Africa
questioned his right to leadership and pointedly referred to him as ‘an ordinary

ANC member’.
The disarray within the ANC was compounded by the illness of Oliver
Tambo. In August 1989, after presiding over the drafting of the Harare
Declaration, he had suffered a stroke, leaving him partially paralysed and
depriving the ANC of a guiding hand at a critical time. The vacuum in
leadership still had to be filled.
New tensions emerged between the external wing of the ANC and its internal
surrogate, the United Democratic Front. In exile, the ANC had been used to
acting as a secretive, autocratic organisation. Decisions had been taken by a
revolutionary council and passed down the chain of command. The covert nature
of operations meant that there had been little room for dissent. Those who
opposed the party were more than likely to be accused of being collaborators. Its
headquarters were a cramped, single-storey building off an alleyway in
downtown Lusaka, where it had gained a reputation for chronic inefficiency. Its
guerrilla army was notably unsuccessful. The casualty rate for MK guerrillas
entering South Africa was high; many of those who were captured were turned
into informers and used to assassinate colleagues. A senior defence force
official, General Constand Viljoen, described MK as ‘the weakest of enemies’,
while an internal ANC document produced in early 1990 admitted, ‘We do not
have the capacity within our country to intensify the armed struggle in a
meaningful way.’ Yet the idea of revolution, of being a revolutionary
organisation, still held immense appeal. The standing of Umkhonto within the
liberation movement remained high. And the secretive, tightly-knit clique which
had made all the ANC’s decisions for more than twenty years had no intention of
letting their authority slip away.
However, the internal leaders of the UDF, which had borne the brunt of the
struggle against the government during the 1980s, were as determined as the
ANC’s ‘old guard’ to maintain their own spheres of influence. As a coalition of
more than 600 groups, community organisations, youth groups and trade union
affiliates, the UDF had evolved a tradition of politics that was highly democratic
and decentralised, based on constant contact and discussion between officials
and supporters and collective decision-making—a style that was entirely alien to
the Lusaka exiles. Scores of local and regional leaders were used to operating
from independent power bases of their own and were hostile to the idea of taking
orders from a national executive.

There were tensions too as different generations of leadership asserted
themselves: the elderly veterans of the 1950s, like Mandela, emerging from
years of imprisonment; the Soweto generation of the 1970s, who in exile had
served as guerrilla commissars; and the radical young leaders of the 1980s’
internal revolt, with their trade union allies, who had provided much of the
backbone of anti-government protest.
Mandela’s task, after first re-establishing his own leadership credentials, was
to weld this massive, disorganised and restless constituency into a coherent
political force capable of negotiating a transfer of power from a government
possessing huge advantages and determined to secure for itself all the power it
felt was needed to protect white interests.
Two weeks after his release, Mandela flew to Lusaka to give the ANC’s
hierarchy a full account of his dealings with the government and to convince
them that the time was right to pursue negotiations. There remained strong
distrust of the government’s intentions, but Mandela succeeded in removing
doubts about his own role and in overcoming some of the resistance to the idea
of negotiations. Of crucial importance, Mandela managed to win over
Umkhonto’s chief of staff, Chris Hani, a hardline guerrilla commander well
known for supporting attacks on white civilian targets. ‘I think we’re going to
learn from him that we need to be better South Africans,’ said Hani, ‘to forgive
and forget and to look forward to building a new South Africa.’
Mandela quickly became close to the ANC’s old guard. He was nominated to
join the thirty-five members of the national executive committee based in
Lusaka and given the rank of deputy president. He felt more at ease in their
company than in the rumbustious world of the UDF, where his freedom of
leadership was constantly challenged. He possessed a strong authoritarian streak
and a preference for taking action on his own responsibility, for dealing directly
with other leaders rather than waiting for consultations to be completed. His
independent style of leadership frequently brought him into conflict with party
officials inside South Africa, who insisted upon consultation and set out to curb
his autonomy of action. Outwardly, at press conference and public rallies,
Mandela appeared to speak with undisputed authority. In reality, he had to
struggle to assert his authority and was often outmanoeuvred.
Among the intrigues surrounding Mandela’s leadership, Winnie was hard at
work with her own agenda, seeking to control access to her husband. She swiftly

took revenge on the group of prominent activists who had publicly condemned
her involvement in the criminal activities of the Mandela Football Club,
endeavouring to exclude them from the inner circle. Several people received
threatening telephone calls. ‘Stay away from Mandela,’ Winnie told one
prominent activist, Azhur Cachalia. ‘If you don’t, you’ll see what will happen.’
Winnie also enlisted Mandela’s help to further her own ambitions for high
office within the ANC. Her drive for party posts was unrelenting. She began by
seeking election as head of the ANC branch and the Women’s League in
Orlando West to give her a local power base. Mandela dutifully went from door
to door, calling on residents to vote for her. She then set her sights on regional
and national posts. Mandela indulged her, seemingly oblivious of her true nature
and also of the risks to his own reputation in doing so. The full horror of
Mandela United was soon to be played out in public during the trials of its
members for murder.
Mandela also succumbed to pressure to move out of his ‘matchbox’ house in
Orlando into Winnie’s fifteen-room mansion in Diepkloof Extension which had
hitherto remained empty. It was more appropriate to his needs, but he felt uneasy
there and it was never a place he came to regard as home.
Much of the time during his first months of freedom he travelled the world, to
Africa, Europe and North America, urging foreign governments to maintain the
pressure of sanctions, seeking funds for the ANC and thanking anti-apartheid
groups for their support over the years. Everywhere he went he was acclaimed a
popular hero. In an age largely bereft of political morality, he was seen as a man
of great moral authority, whose quarter-century of imprisonment for defying an
evil system of government and for holding firm to the principles of democracy
gave him a status no other politician could match. Western leaders—President
Bush in Washington, Prime Minister Thatcher in London, President Mitterrand
in Paris, Chancellor Kohl in Bonn, the Pope in Rome—all accorded him a warm
welcome. He became the first private black citizen to address a joint session of
the United States Congress. Politicians and show-business personalities alike
vied to be seen in his company. Special events were organised to celebrate his
visits—a ticket tape parade in New York, a pop concert in London, a grand
ceremony on the terrasse of the Trocadéro in Paris.
The only time Mandela stumbled on his triumphal progress was when he
decided to air his views on international affairs. In the United States, he spoke

admiringly of the Cuban leader, Fidel Castro, and the Libyan leader, Colonel
Gaddafi, the foremost bogeymen of the United States administration. Both ran
dictatorial regimes notable for human rights abuses, but both had given support
to the ANC, so Mandela singled them out for praise: ‘There is no reason
whatsoever why we should have any hesitation hailing their commitment to
human rights.’ When questioned on television about the morality of ignoring
human rights violations in countries like Cuba and Libya, he replied, ‘We are a
liberation movement, which is fully involved in a struggle to emancipate our
people from one of the worst racist tyrannies the world has seen. We have no
time to be looking into the internal affairs of other countries.’ The effect of these
remarks on Mandela’s reputation was instantaneous. ‘You could positively hear
his Q-factor—the attractiveness quotient with which America rates its celebrities
—crashing through the floor,’ reported one correspondent.
The controversy soon passed, but it showed Mandela to be both naïve and
perverse. His principal purpose in visiting the United States was to gain the
support of the Bush administration in maintaining sanctions against South
Africa, an issue which was of crucial importance to the ANC in its confrontation
with de Klerk’s government. In speech after speech he stressed the need for
sanctions to remain in place. But he swiftly undercut his own efforts by praising
regimes regarded by the United States administration as its enemies and
damaged his moral authority by implying that human rights abuses in countries
which supported him were none of his concern.
His travels also took him, finally, to Qunu. It had remained much as it had
always been, a scattered collection of circular thatched huts on a hillside close to
the main road leading to Umtata. There was still no electricity, no shops, no
roads, just grass tracks linking the homesteads, and a cemetery where many of
Mandela’s relatives were buried. Most of the inhabitants were old men, women
and children, just as they had been during Mandela’s childhood. But the poor
soil had since eroded and there was an unkempt air about the village.
Mandela had not seen it for thirty-four years. Many of his relatives there had
never set eyes on him or only dimly remembered him as a child. He arrived with
Winnie in a black Mercedes, dressed impeccably in a dark blue suit, blue shirt
and blue and yellow tie. The villagers lined up to greet him in their threadbare
Sunday suits, old-fashioned dresses and battered, mud-caked shoes. Before
taking part in a traditional homecoming feast, Mandela visited the simple grave
of his mother, marked only by upturned bricks and stones in an open field below

the site where the family rondavel had once stood. It had been demolished after
the death of his mother in 1969, as there had been no one to pay for its upkeep.
Mandela was struck by the poverty of the village: ‘The poverty that was here
when I last visited this place, that poverty is still there. My heart is very sore
indeed on account of the poverty staring me in the face.’
In the hope that one day he might come and live among them, the village
community awarded him a plot of land. Mandela welcomed the invitation and
duly built a country house based on the design of his prison cottage at Victor
Verster. When friends expressed surprise, Mandela explained that the Victor
Verster house was the first spacious and comfortable house in which he had
lived, he had liked it and had become accustomed to it.

Meanwhile, preparations for a preliminary meeting between the ANC and the
government made hesitant progress. Each side was distrustful of the other. When
the ANC presented its list of delegates to the meeting, de Klerk was horrified to
find that it included Joe Slovo, general secretary of the Communist Party, whom
the government had regarded for years as the evil genius behind the ANC’s
terror campaign. In the government’s eyes, he was ‘Moscow’s man’, the chief
link between the Soviet Union and the ANC, the gatekeeper for Soviet arms,
money and training. De Klerk insisted that Slovo should be excluded. Mandela
refused to give way, adamant that government would have no say in determining
the ANC’s representatives.
But when in May 1990 the two sides finally sat down together at Groote
Schuur, the gabled mansion at the foot of Table Mountain in Cape Town which
South Africa’s prime ministers and presidents used as their official residence, the
atmosphere was unexpectedly cordial. The government’s delegation consisted
entirely of Afrikaners. The ANC’s delegation comprised seven blacks, two
whites, one Coloured and one Indian; among them was Slovo, silver-haired,
portly and looking more like a benign grandfather than a terrorist mastermind.
‘Within a matter of minutes,’ said a senior ANC official, ‘everybody understood
that there was nobody in the room with horns.’ Much was made of the personal
‘chemistry’ between de Klerk and Mandela. Though they came from different
backgrounds and different generations—Mandela was seventy-one, de Klerk
was fifty-three—Mandela respected de Klerk’s credentials as an Afrikaner
leader: de Klerk came from a powerful lineage, a matter to which Mandela

attached considerable importance. ‘I find him to be an honest person, very
capable and a strong leader,’ remarked Mandela about de Klerk. ‘He is sincere in
his efforts to bring about fundamental political changes in the country.’
It was a promising beginning. Both sides emerged with a clear understanding
of the obstacles that lay in the way of negotiations. The ANC wanted the
government first to lift the state of emergency, to allow political exiles to return
home and to release all political prisoners. The government wanted the ANC to
declare an end to its armed struggle.
In June, de Klerk lifted the state of emergency. But further progress was
impeded by disputes over the return of exiles and the release of prisoners and by
the discovery by security police of an underground MK operation named
Operation Vula, which had been kept secret from Mandela. When Mandela
returned from an overseas trip in July, he was determined to push the peace
process forward. Political violence was on the increase; right-wing extremists
were gathering momentum. There was a clear danger of the process faltering
altogether.
Slovo had reached a similar conclusion. Though he was known more as a
revolutionary enthusiast than a pragmatic thinker, after long years in exile he had
come to recognise the advantage of using compromise to attain his objectives.
He believed that in order to create the right climate for negotiations, it was
necessary for the ANC to suspend the armed struggle unilaterally. De Klerk, he
reasoned, needed to demonstrate some benefits from his reforms to appease his
critics, otherwise he would stall.
When Slovo approached Mandela with the idea of suspending the armed
struggle, Mandela’s first reaction was negative. But he soon realised that it
would provide him with the opportunity of seizing the initiative from de Klerk.
If the proposal came from Slovo it would carry far greater authority with the
ANC than if it came from him. He was already under suspicion of having ‘gone
soft’, but Slovo’s revolutionary credentials were beyond reproach and he would
carry the day.
At a meeting of the ANC’s national executive committee in July, Slovo made
his proposal and Mandela supported him. There were fierce objections, but after
several hours their view prevailed. On 6 August, at a meeting in Pretoria, the
ANC signed an agreement suspending the armed struggle launched nearly thirty
years before.

The practical effect of the Pretoria Minute, as it was known, was negligible.
Umkhonto had long since halted guerrilla operations. But the rhetoric of
revolution was deeply rooted among the mass of ANC supporters. Many looked
upon themselves as soldiers of the revolution. By abandoning the armed
struggle, Mandela provoked a furore within the movement. Slovo calculated that
90 per cent of ANC supporters considered the decision to be a ‘sell-out’.
Militants attacked Mandela’s liking for ‘personal diplomacy’ with de Klerk and
set out to curb his room for manoeuvre.
But even as the row was underway, it was overshadowed by a far greater
crisis emerging from the green rolling hills of Natal, where a vicious struggle for
power had developed centred on the controversial leader of the KwaZulu
homeland, Mangosuthu Buthelezi.

20. Zindzi participating in the campaign to release Mandela and other political
prisoners in 1985

21. A moment of liberation experienced around the world: Mandela, with
Winnie, on his release from Victor Verster prison in February 1990

22. After the first round of official talks between the ANC and the government at
Groote Schuur in May 1990, Mandela and de Klerk address the press
23. Mandela with Joe Slovo, a key adviser during negotiations, pictured in June
1991

24. Mandela with Slovo in May 1990

25. Election fever: Mandela on the campaign trail in KwaZulu-Natal in April
1994

26. Casting his vote in South Africa’s first general election

27. Flanked by Thabo Mbeki and his daughter Zenani, Mandela at his
inauguration as president in Pretoria in May 1994

28. With Betsie Verwoerd, the widow of Hendrik Verwoerd, the architect of
grand apartheid, in Orania, 1995

29. With Percy Yutar, the Rivonia prosecutor, whom he invited to lunch

30. Madiba magic: wearing a Springbok cap and jersey, Mandela celebrating

with rugby captain François Pienaar after South Africa’s victory in the 1995
Rugby World Cup

31. With Queen Elizabeth during a state visit to Britain in July 1996

32. A new lease of life: Mandela with Graca Machel

33. & 34. Revisiting Robben Island: hard labour in the lime quarry; his prison
cell for eighteen years

35 & 36. Odd bedfellows: Mandela and de Klerk clashed frequently, but
attending de Klerk’s seventieth birthday celebrations in 2006, Mandela paid him
a warm tribute

37. Passing the baton: Mandela with Thabo Mbeki, pictured in 2003

CHAPTER 21

THE THIRD MAN
IN THE EARLY DAYS, BUTHELEZI REMAINED ON GOOD TERMS
WITH THE exiled leaders of the ANC. When he launched the Inkatha
movement in 1975, they regarded it as a useful ally in the anti-apartheid
campaign. They also approved his election in 1976 as KwaZulu’s chief minister,
confident that he would prove to be a stumbling block to the government’s drive
to establish ‘independent’ homelands. But the relationship turned sour in 1979,
after Buthelezi met Oliver Tambo in London, with the ANC accusing Buthelezi
of building Inkatha into ‘a personal power base’ and Buthelezi accusing the
ANC of trying to hijack Inkatha for its own ends.
During the 1980s, the feud became increasingly acrimonious. From the
government’s standpoint, Buthelezi was no moderate. His demands for the
release of Mandela and other political prisoners, for the lifting of the ban on the
ANC, for the abolition of all apartheid measures and for negotiations for a new
constitution were no different from those made by radical groups like the UDF.
But, to the fury of radical activists, he vociferously opposed the armed struggle,
sanctions and disinvestment and praised the free enterprise system. The ANC
and UDF dismissed him as a traitor to the nationalist cause. Buthelezi, for his
part, resented any challenge to his authority. In a letter to Oliver Tambo in 1984,
he wrote: ‘In this part of South Africa, we come from warrior stock and there is
a resilient determination in KwaZulu and in Inkatha which even the full might of
the state will never be able to flatten. Do your colleagues really think they can
flatten us on the way to their envisaged victory?’ As the townships’ revolt got
under way, the level of rhetoric reached new heights. From Lusaka, the ANC
denounced Buthelezi as ‘a counter-revolutionary’, ‘a puppet’, and ‘a snake
poisoning the people of South Africa [which] needs to be hit on the head’.
Once regarded as the most popular African politician in the country, Buthelezi
showed signs of losing his support. One opinion poll concluded that between
1977 and 1988 Inkatha’s support in the Witwatersrand region, the industrial
heartland of South Africa, declined from more than 30 to less than 5 per cent.

Even more serious for Buthelezi, there were clear indications that Inkatha’s
support in its home base of KwaZulu-Natal was rapidly eroding, notably among
urban blacks. Pro-ANC youth groups and trade unions were becoming
increasingly active. In 1987, Inkatha embarked on a recruitment drive.
The ugly contest that followed engulfed KwaZulu and Natal in spasms of
violence for years to come. Buthelezi possessed considerable advantages. Since
the 1970s, he had run KwaZulu from his capital at Ulundi as a one-party state,
controlling its parliament, its police and its civil service. As a member of the
Zulu royal family, he could rely on the support of a powerful network of Zulu
traditional chiefs—amakhosi—whom he in turn rewarded with power and
privilege. The Zulu system of loyalty and obedience to its hierarchy assured
Buthelezi of bedrock support among more traditionally minded communities,
particularly those in the deep rural areas of KwaZulu. Migrant workers on the
Witwatersrand, coming from those rural areas, bore him the same allegiance. His
party, Inkatha, was a well-organised political movement with a clear hierarchy
and chain of command, able to hold regular meetings and rallies. It drew support
from the Zulu establishment, from chiefs, councillors, legislative assembly
members, indunas, businessmen, civil servants and other government employees.
In 1985, it established a trade union wing, the United Workers’ Union of South
Africa, Uwusa, in an endeavour to compete with the pro-ANC Congress of
South African Trade Unions, Cosatu. Above all, it could count on the support of
the KwaZulu police, which had been established in 1980 and which Buthelezi, as
minister of police, had turned into a formidable paramilitary force. In addition to
regular policemen, special kitkonstabels were recruited, mainly from the ranks of
Inkatha, some with criminal records. They were given limited training, then sent
back to their communities, armed with pump-action shotguns. ‘We must prepare
ourselves not only to defend property and life, but to go beyond that and prepare
ourselves to hit back with devastating force at those who destroy our property
and kill us,’ Buthelezi told the KwaZulu legislative assembly in 1984. The
following year, Inkatha’s central committee resolved that the whole of KwaZulu
and Natal should be turned into a ‘no-go area’ for the UDF ‘regardless of
consequence’.
In meeting the challenge posed by pro-ANC activists in the 1980s, Buthelezi
and the government found themselves making common cause. Buthelezi was
given every encouragement to deal forcefully with the threat. In 1986, he
secretly arranged for army training in the Caprivi Strip for a covert paramilitary

force of 200 men able to undertake offensive operations against pro-ANC
activists. When pro-ANC groups began to make headway in the Natal Midlands
in 1987, heavy police reinforcements were deployed to help curb them. At a
police ceremony in the provincial capital, Pietermaritzburg, in 1988, the minister
of law and order, Adriaan Vlok, declared, ‘The police intend to face the future
with moderates and fight against radical groups. . . . Radicals, who are trying to
destroy South Africa, will not be tolerated. We will fight them. We have put our
foot in that direction, and we will eventually win the Pietermaritzburg area.’
Buthelezi’s strategy was to appeal to Zulu pride and sense of martial tradition,
and to assert the notion that the Zulu people and Inkatha were synonymous.
Zulus, he said, were a ‘mighty nation’ with a ‘glorious heritage’ who needed to
stand together in the face of enemies who did not want ‘the Zulu nation to unite’.
He liked to recount how he had learned politics at his mother’s knee, listening to
tales of Zulu resistance to British settlers in the nineteenth century and how his
great-grandfather, Cetshwayo, had routed the British army at the battle of
Isandhlwana in 1879. In public, he frequently appeared in traditional Zulu dress,
draping a leopard skin across his shoulders and holding a shield, a stick and a
gleaming spear in his hand.
His opponents in Natal were Zulus from the ranks of urban blacks, from
community groups, the landless, the unemployed and, above all, the youth, all
struggling for survival in crowded shack settlements and townships and resentful
of the power and patronage enjoyed by the Zulu establishment. The numbers of
this constituency were forever swelling. Between 1979 and 1989, the population
of greater Durban more than trebled from under 1 million to 3 million.
The ANC’s main organiser in this Zulu civil war was its Natal Midlands boss,
Harry Gwala, a modern-day Stalinist and former Robben Island prisoner who
had clashed with Mandela there. A diminutive man in his late sixties and
suffering from motor neurone disease, which left him partially paralysed, with
arms hanging limply from his sides, he was driven by a hatred for Buthelezi and
all that he stood for. Gwala wanted a military victory over Buthelezi and
harboured dreams of marching on Ulundi to occupy his headquarters. His
uncompromising militancy made him the hero of the ANC’s youth in the region.
The conflict became essentially territorial. Inkatha leaders, usually known as
‘warlords’, formed armed groups—‘impis’—to drive out their opponents.
Radical pro-ANC groups responded in kind. Gwala publicly declared that

Inkatha warlords should be killed. Hit squads operating in his area, some of them
belonging to Umkhonto, succeeded in wiping out scores of middle-ranking
Inkatha officials. Police were frequently accused of collusion in Inkatha attacks,
of harassing radical groups but failing to deal with the activities of warlords and
known killers and of standing by while the impis went to work. Attackers were
sometimes transported, heavily armed, in buses in broad daylight. Assassinations
were commonplace; massacres were carried out. Many areas became ‘no-go’
areas for one side or the other. Mixed in with this political rivalry were the
activities of criminal gangs and violent disputes over land, water and housing.
By 1990, more than 3,000 people had been killed.
In prison, Mandela had been confident of being able to settle the conflict once
he was set free. He knew of Buthelezi’s difficult nature. Everyone who had had
dealings with Buthelezi found him to be a prickly personality, volatile,
unpredictable, hyper-sensitive and at times paranoid. But Mandela believed that
a personal meeting would enable them to resolve their differences. He was
careful to keep in touch with him, writing respectful letters. When he left prison,
Bu - thelezi was one of the first people whom he phoned, to thank him for his
long campaign to secure his release. At his first press conference, he steered
clear of the usual ANC rhetoric:
We have differences with Dr Buthelezi. Firstly, on the question of violence.
Secondly, on the attitude towards government structures. And thirdly, on the
question of sanctions. These are fundamental differences, but nevertheless, he is
a figure with a following. It may not be as big and may not command as much
resources as we command, but he has a following and it seems to me correct to
try and settle problems in which he is involved amicably.
Within days of his release, Mandela proposed that they should meet. But he
ran straight into vehement opposition from the ANC’s national executive
committee. Mandela said he thought they would ‘throttle’ him for suggesting it.
Determined to make contact nevertheless, Mandela urged Walter Sisulu to
take up an invitation to visit the Zulu king, Goodwill Zwelethini, who was also
Buthelezi’s nephew. ‘Mandela believed that we needed Buthelezi, we needed the
king, we needed the Zulus,’ Sisulu recalled. But an immediate dispute broke out
over the venue of the meeting. Zwelethini had invited Sisulu to meet him at
Ulundi, but the ANC was wary of according any hint of recognition to the
KwaZulu homeland by visiting the capital. Sisulu proposed instead a meeting at

the king’s palace at Nongoma, but Zwelethini saw no reason to agree to the
change. And so another opportunity for peace was lost. Sisulu subsequently
conceded that it had probably been a mistake for him to refuse to go to Ulundi.
Buthelezi’s supporters, meanwhile, considered that the king had been snubbed,
resulting in another bout of violence.
Mandela’s efforts at exerting leadership over the crisis came to nothing. Two
weeks after his release, he addressed a huge rally of ANC supporters in Durban,
urging an end to the fighting. South Africa, he said, stood on the threshold of a
new era but Natal was in flames, ‘brother fighting brother in wars of vengeance
and retaliation’. He made a dramatic appeal to all Zulus to lay down their arms:
‘Take your guns, your knives and your pangas [machetes] and throw them into
the sea. Close down the death factories. End this war.’
But no one paid much attention. Gwala argued publicly that the quickest way
to establish peace throughout Natal was to win the war against Inkatha. He cited
as examples of a ‘peaceful solution’ several Midlands areas that had become
totally peaceful after his supporters had killed or chased away all Inkatha
members.
After another round of slaughter in March, Mandela and Buthelezi agreed to
meet outside Pietermaritzburg at a rural settlement called Taylor’s Halt, an
Inkatha stronghold in the KwaZulu homeland. Announcing his decision,
Mandela said that when people were dying there was no time to stand on
ceremony. ‘We must unite,’ he said. But Gwala and other ANC leaders in Natal
were enraged by the announcement, all the more so as they had not been
consulted beforehand. Early the next morning, they confronted Mandela at his
Soweto home, warning him that if he went ahead with the Taylor’s Halt meeting,
it would result only in boosting Buthelezi’s prestige and in convincing him that
violence paid political dividends. Mandela made his planned trip to
Pietermaritzburg, but never went to Taylor’s Halt and never met Buthelezi.
Instead, Gwala’s men took him to a local township to see the charred remains of
an ANC supporter and to meet distraught families of the latest victims.
The snub to Buthelezi was fatal. ‘It was important for Buthelezi to feel
welcomed, embraced and part of the process,’ reflected Jacob Zuma, the ANC’s
intelligence chief, himself a Zulu. If Mandela had embraced him right at the
beginning, he believed, the conflict could have been overcome. By allowing
Gwala to dictate terms, Mandela lost a crucial opportunity for reconciliation.

Buthelezi drew his own conclusions. ‘They think they are going to marginalise
me,’ he said. ‘They say Inkatha must be smashed and finished. . . . It is not
possible.’
The conflict now spread beyond Natal. In protest against the continuing
violence in the region, the ANC and its trade union ally, Cosatu, organised an
‘isolate Buthelezi’ campaign which, on 2 July, brought 3 million workers out on
a ‘stay-away’, closing most factories in Natal. Inkatha was proclaimed ‘an
enemy of the people’. In the Transvaal townships, the houses of many Inkatha
officials, notably township councillors, were petrol-bombed.
On 14 July, Buthelezi took the initiative. He turned Inkatha into a fully
fledged political party, the Inkatha Freedom Party, opened its membership to all
races and launched a recruitment campaign in the Transvaal, concentrating on
township hostels along the Reef. What followed became known as the Reef
township war, which brought a level of violence to South Africa that had never
been witnessed before.
The hostels were a natural recruiting ground for Inkatha. More than fifty
hostels in townships in the East Rand and West Rand were occupied mainly by
Zulu-speaking workers from rural areas of Kwa - Zulu and Natal who had come
to the Reef in search of work. The conditions in which they lived were appalling.
The hostels were generally overcrowded, squalid and insanitary blocks providing
only rudimentary facilities. Township residents tended to sneer at people who
lived there. But for the occupants they offered a vital base from which to earn a
living. Coming mostly from a traditional rural background, they tended to resent
the undisciplined behaviour of township youths. They were notably hostile to the
coercive tactics used by radical groups in the townships to enforce boycotts,
stay-aways and other forms of anti-apartheid protest. The only reason hostel
dwellers endured such grim places was to work and earn money for their
families in rural areas, for most homesteads in rural Zululand were dependent on
remittances from migrants in Johannesburg. Their fears about the ANC were
aggravated by demands made by local ANC leaders at public rallies that hostel
dwellers should vacate hostels to make way for returning exiles who needed a
home, and by suggestions that hostels should be upgraded to family units, which
might also have led to single migrants being thrown out. Inkatha officials
exploited these fears, warning hostel residents that they were in danger of losing
their ‘homes’ as a means of gaining support. To complicate matters further, there
was the ethnic factor. For years, permanent residents and hostel dwellers,

whether of Zulu, Xhosa or mixed origin, had lived together peaceably. But
Inkatha now used Zulu allegiance as the basis of its recruitment campaign. Its
adversaries in the squatter settlements surrounding hostels were often Xhosas
supporting the ANC. Ethnic tensions rapidly mounted. Rumours abounded of
imminent attack by Zulu or by Xhosa fighters.
On 22 July, the Reef township war broke out. It started in Sebokeng, a
township thirty-five miles south of Johannesburg, in a battle between residents
and hostel dwellers which flared up shortly after an Inkatha rally was held there.
The ANC had forewarning that Inkatha attacks were planned. ANC lawyers had
written both to the minister of law and order, Adriaan Vlok, and to local police
commanders, urging them to ban the rally, but to no avail. In the morning,
busloads of Inkatha supporters arrived from Johannesburg hostels armed with
what were known as ‘traditional weapons’—spears, clubs, axes and iron bars. In
the violence that followed, some thirty people were killed, mostly ANC
supporters.
The next day, Mandela went to the Sebokeng morgue and then visited the
hospital to express his solidarity with the survivors. His anger about what had
happened was directed not so much against Inkatha and Buthelezi as against de
Klerk. At a meeting with the president on 24 July, Mandela demanded an
explanation: ‘I said, “You were warned beforehand. You did nothing about it.
Why? Why is it there have been no arrests? In any other country, where thirtytwo people had been slaughtered in this way, the head of state would come out
condemning the matter and giving his sympathies to the next of kin. Why have
you not done so?”’ According to Mandela, de Klerk could offer no proper
response, nor did he provide him with any explanation.
The violence spread rapidly from one township to another as hostel dwellers
launched attacks on nearby squatter settlements and residential areas, setting off
endless cycles of revenge and retaliation. Within days several hundred were
dead. Zulu hostel dwellers expelled Xhosa-speakers and other non-Zulus from
hostels, turning them into Zulu fortresses. Zulu families in surrounding areas,
facing persecution, sought protection there. As communities split, Zulus came to
be identified as Inkatha supporters and Xhosas as ANC supporters, regardless of
their real allegiances. Many Zulu-speakers living near hostels were forced to
align themselves with hostel dwellers as their only means of defence against
revenge attacks by township residents. Thousands abandoned their shacks and
homes to escape the violence. Some townships became divided into rival

territories, with large ‘nogo’ areas of wrecked and deserted houses separating
them. In August, 500 people died over an eleven-day period.
The role of the police, as in Natal, became increasingly controversial. Police
refused to disarm Zulu impis of their spears, axes, knives, sticks and iron bars,
on the grounds that these were traditional weapons that Zulus were entitled to
carry. They were also accused of standing by while hostel dwellers launched
their murderous raids into surrounding territory or of actually assisting them.
There had been a long history of brutal conflict between police and radical
groups in the townships. The two sides had, in effect, been at war since the
Soweto revolt of 1976. To many in the police, the ANC was still ‘the enemy’
and a justifiable target for Inkatha supporters.
But the suspicion soon grew that something more sinister was happening. In
September, twenty-six people died and more than 100 were injured when a sixman gang ran through a Johannesburg commuter train shooting passengers at
random; a second gang, lying in wait on a station platform, attacked survivors
trying to escape from the train. The attack had all the hallmarks of the kind of
terrorist activity carried out for years in Mozambique by rebels trained and
supported by South African military intelligence.
All this coincided with a wave of public disclosures about dirty-tricks
operations conducted by police and army units in the 1970s and 1980s in their
campaign against the ANC and other government opponents. In October 1989, a
black policeman, under sentence of death for the murder of a white farmer,
earned a stay of execution by claiming that he had been a member of a security
police assassination squad set up to eliminate government opponents. He
identified its commander as Captain Dirk Coetzee. The following month,
Coetzee, having fled the country, admitted his involvement with assassination
squads during the 1970s and 1980s. He had commanded a special counterinsurgency unit based at a secluded police farm called Vlakplaas, west of
Pretoria, where hit squads comprised of ANC defectors and Mozambique rebels
were trained and used in neighbouring states and inside South Africa for
clandestine operations, including murder, abduction and bomb attacks. He
claimed that assassination squads were still at work. In March 1990, an official
inquiry into the conduct of the security forces, the Harms Commission, which de
Klerk eventually agreed to set up with limited terms of reference, was told of
similar activities at home and abroad carried out by a defence force covert unit
known as the Civil Cooperation Bureau, established during the 1980s. The unit

was still active, with an annual budget of 28 million rands. The verdict of the
inquiry was that the CCB operated as a law unto itself and had its own political
agenda. Its actions had ‘contaminated the whole security arm of the state’. In
July 1990, the government announced that the unit would be disbanded.
With all this evidence of security force involvement in murder and dirty tricks
at hand, it seemed all the more plausible, in the wake of several train massacres
and attacks on squatter settlements, to suspect a conspiracy of right-wing
elements in the military and the police bent on wrecking the negotiation process.
Mandela raised the question of a ‘third force’ with de Klerk in private in August.
In September, he voiced his concern publicly, suggesting that renegades in the
security forces were trying to disrupt negotiations.
De Klerk’s predicament was considerable. He was an outsider to the security
establishment. During the decade of total strategy, when defence and security
officials were given a free hand to run guerrilla operations in Mozambique and
Angola and mount whatever dirty tricks they considered necessary inside South
Africa, de Klerk was preoccupied with domestic issues like education. When he
became president, he had never held a security portfolio. Unlike Botha, he had
no inside knowledge of how the security establishment worked, nor did he share
the sense of camaraderie that prevailed there. Along with a large section of the
National Party, he disliked the way in which the security establishment had
tended to usurp the role of parliament and the National Party itself. Soon after
taking office, he had dispensed with the elaborate system of national security
management which Botha had constructed as part of his total strategy. But key
personnel wedded to that strategy were still in place, not only within the security
establishment but also within his own cabinet, including the minister of defence,
Magnus Malan, and the minister of law and order, Adriaan Vlok. They believed
the ‘enemy’ was still the ANC and its communist allies and acted accordingly.
Security bosses had also become ac - customed to operating autonomously. As
the Harms inquiry noted, the CCB had ignored requests from the president, the
minister of defence and the chief of the defence force: ‘Requests by parliament,
the auditor-general and the commission were treated with contempt.’ At cabinet
meetings, when de Klerk raised questions about the third force, Malan and Vlok
were quick to dismiss it as propaganda. De Klerk had no interest in pursuing the
matter. He depended heavily on the security establishment to keep tight control
of the turbulence churned up by his reforms and feared antagonising them. All
he was prepared to admit was that ‘a few rogue individuals’ might be involved.

Otherwise, he stuck to the standard government explanation for the violence that
it was all caused by ‘black-on-black’ rivalry.
Mandela was unable to believe that de Klerk did not possess the power to
clean up the security forces and to put a stop to the violence.
But initially he was willing to attribute his failure to do so to de Klerk’s
‘problems with his own constituency’. In November 1990, after a massive
Inkatha attack on a squatter camp known as Zonkizizwe, outside Germiston on
the East Rand, which resulted in a rout of all residents and its occupation by
Inkatha supporters, Mandela went to see de Klerk and Vlok to ask why the
police had taken no action to restore the shacks to their original owners. De
Klerk, according to Mandela, seemed totally unaware of the incident. But Vlok’s
response was to ask rudely, ‘Who owned the land anyway on which your people
were living? ’ The land, in fact, belonged to the local authority, which had made
it available for squatters generally. De Klerk promised to investigate the matter,
but though Mandela repeatedly brought up the issue of Zonkizizwe with de
Klerk in the following months, he never received any response.
Their relationship nevertheless remained in good working order. In a press
interview in December 1990, Mandela said:
I still regard de Klerk as a man of integrity, and I think he feels the same about
me. We have developed enormous respect for each other. I can call him at any
time. I can get him out of bed or out of cabinet meetings. I believe he and
perhaps the majority of his cabinet are still as committed to the peace process as
we are. But he has problems with elements inside his government—especially
his security establishment, which is riddled with right-wingers who are not with
him at all—and he is not being frank with me about that.
For month after month the clashes continued, with varying degrees of intensity.
Police action to stamp out the violence merely curbed it temporarily. Not only
had it become endemic but there were signs that it was escalating out of control.
Since the 1970s, a culture of violence had developed among successive
generations of black youths. They had been at the forefront of the Soweto
uprising of the 1970s and the township revolt of the 1980s. At each stage the use
of violence had become more widespread and more extreme. For over a decade
their schooling had been disrupted by boycotts, protests and street battles. They
had become known as ‘the lost generation’. But they were also a generation
which had experienced raw power.

Now, in the political struggles of the 1990s, the same atmosphere of
revolutionary violence prevailed. Mandela himself had helped stoke up the mood
of defiance, declaring, in his first public address after his release from prison, the
need for the armed struggle to continue. For months on end, as the ANC
endeavoured to bolster its standing in confronting the government, it flaunted the
rhetoric of armed struggle, giving township activists licence to pursue opponents
at will. Their targets were often township councillors supporting Inkatha and
local police. In the first seven months of 1990, more than 400 attacks on black
councillors and police were recorded. Necklace executions once again became
commonplace. Guns, in particular AK-47s, were now readily available,
smuggled in mainly from Mozambique and Angola. The townships were hit not
just by political violence but by a soaring crime rate.
The Reef war added a new dimension. In response to the ferocious attacks
organised by hostel dwellers, young comrades in surrounding residential areas
and squatter camps set up self-defence units with the help of Umkhonto. Some
SDUs succeeded in offering protection for local communities, but others waged
an often indiscriminate war of retribution on hostel dwellers, widening the cycle
of violence. Some broke up into factions and engaged in their own form of
territorial warfare; others were taken over by criminal gangs, becoming
notorious for extortion, rape and murder, and adding to the soaring level of
violent crime. All lacked political control. At the base of this anarchic activity
was a vast underclass of youths roaming the streets—unskilled, unemployed,
undisciplined, fed on revolutionary slogans, but now angry and resentful of how
little the revolution had brought them.
Mandela endeavoured to address some of these issues at his public rallies. ‘I
must make it clear that the level of crime in our country must be eliminated,’ he
said on his homecoming to Soweto. ‘All students must return to school and
learn.’ But such simple exhortations were lost in the maelstrom.
Mandela’s belated efforts to reach an accommodation with Buthelezi were no
more successful. After hundreds of deaths, the ANC’s national executive
committee agreed in September 1990 to a summit meeting between Mandela and
Buthelezi. But it was not until the end of January 1991, after hundreds more
deaths, that it finally took place, at Durban’s Royal Hotel.
Buthelezi was in a truculent mood. Before arriving in Durban, he had
collected together statements made by ANC officials vilifying him from the

previous five years and he proceeded to read them out, page by page, to the
assembled delegates and the media. He then catalogued all the political
differences separating Inkatha and the ANC.
Mandela chose not to respond in kind. In his own speech, he went out of his
way to appease Buthelezi, thanking him for his efforts to secure his release from
prison and emphasising the common goals of their two organisations. The
summit ended with the signing of what was supposed to be a peace agreement
setting out a code of conduct for dealing with each other. But neither side
possessed the will to make it work. Within weeks, hundreds more had died.
The government blamed the ANC and Inkatha. The ANC blamed the
government. Inkatha and the ANC each blamed the police for supporting the
opposing faction. The police still refused to disarm Zulus carrying traditional
weapons. And so the killing went on.
But Mandela’s attitude towards de Klerk changed. He began to suspect that de
Klerk was pursuing a ‘double agenda’—talking to the ANC while at the same
time supporting the violent activities of its opponents. Every plea he made to de
Klerk for help in protecting ANC victims, like the Zonkizizwe squatters, failed
to get any response. Time and again, de Klerk would promise to ‘investigate’ but
did nothing. Mandela’s own standing among his supporters was being
undermined as a result. He began to fear that he had put too much trust in de
Klerk, as his critics in the ANC had argued all along.
In March 1991, Inkatha launched attacks in Alexandra township, north of
Johannesburg, and succeeded in gaining control of the Madala Hostel, a massive
building standing on a hill overlooking the township, which had formerly been
occupied by migrant workers from mixed ethnic groups. In three days of
fighting, forty-five people were killed. The government belatedly sent in police
and army reinforcements and declared Alexandra to be an ‘unrest area’ subject
to emergency control. Despite this, one week later, Inkatha was allowed to hold
a political rally there. Busloads of supporters, many armed with traditional
weapons, arrived from other areas. Six more people died that day. One week
later, at Daveytown, east of Johannesburg, police opened fire on an ANC
demonstration, causing at least twelve deaths.
The ANC was besieged with pleas for help, yet still Mandela could not get a
response from de Klerk. At a private symposium in Cape Town on 3 April
organised for visiting members of the United States Congress, Mandela launched

into a tirade against de Klerk, accusing him of connivance in the violence. He
had betrayed his trust, he said, and ignored his requests for help. The following
day, at a meeting of the ANC’s national executive committee, Mandela
apologised for the misjudgement he said he had made of de Klerk. His critics, he
said, had been right all along.
Mandela never regained his trust of de Klerk. Their personal relationship
henceforth was marked more by abrasive encounters than signs of cooperation.
Mandela now joined others on the national executive committee in advocating a
tougher line. In an open letter to the government, the ANC warned that talks
would be suspended in May unless the government agreed to seven demands.
These included the dismissal of Malan and Vlok; the dismantling of all army
counter-insurgency units; the banning of the carrying of traditional weapons in
public; the phasing out of migrant-worker hostels; and the appointment of an
independent commission to investigate complaints of police misconduct.
De Klerk’s response was to call a multiparty conference on violence in May.
But the ANC boycotted it on the grounds that the government already knew
what to do to bring the violence to an end. De Klerk in turn accused the ANC of
‘playing politics’ while parts of the country were left ‘ankle-deep in blood’.
The evidence of security force involvement in the mayhem, meanwhile,
steadily mounted. Press investigations revealed the fact that 200 Inkatha hit-men
had been trained secretly by South African military intelligence in the Caprivi
Strip in 1986, before being deployed in Natal and the Transvaal. Buthelezi
confirmed the training, but said the men had been attached to KwaZulu officials
to act as bodyguards. A former army sergeant alleged that a special forces unit
had been involved in train massacres and a string of other incidents. In June
1991, a former military intelligence officer claimed that the army was fully
involved in the funding and supply of weapons to Inkatha with the aim of
fanning violence. A defence force spokesman dismissed the allegations as
‘ridiculous’, but in July 1991, in what became known as Inkathagate, the
government was forced to admit that it had secretly channelled funds to Inkatha
and its affiliated trade union, Uwusa. Government funding for Uwusa had been
going on since its establishment six years previously. In the case of Inkatha, the
security police had given funds to help it organise two political rallies, one in
November 1989 and the other in March 1990, to shore up support for Buthelezi.
In an internal police memorandum, Major Louis Botha, head of the Durban
security police, reported that Buthelezi had thanked him profusely for the funds

and signed a receipt for them.
De Klerk’s reputation at home and abroad was irreparably damaged by the
disclosures. No longer did his denials that he was pursuing a ‘double agenda’
carry much weight. The worldwide acclaim he had received for launching his
reforms now seemed to belong to another era.
Buthelezi’s reputation suffered as well. For all his claims of independent
leadership, he was shown up to be dependent on hand-outs from Pretoria.
Inkatha, claimed Mandela, had ‘permitted itself to become an extension of the
Pretoria regime, its instrument and surrogate’.
For Mandela too, the disclosures caused considerable embarrassment,
providing ammunition for radical critics who questioned his judgement. He was
deeply shocked by the cavalier way in which de Klerk tried to gloss over the
scandal and continued to dismiss his complaints about security force
involvement in ‘third force’ activity. ‘We believed,’ he said, ‘that President de
Klerk was a man of integrity. But subsequent events have shown that perhaps we
were hasty and that there was a little bit of naïvety on our part because he has
turned out to be a totally different man from what he was initially.’

CHAPTER 22
WINNIE’S TRIAL
THE DRAMA OF THE MANDELA FOOTBALL CLUB WAS MEANWHILE
being played out in the courts. Winnie’s name figured prominently in one trial
after another, but the government was wary of taking action against her, anxious
to avoid any embarrassment that could damage the fragile peace process. ‘We
are proceeding carefully, so as not to give any indication that we are acting
vindictively against Mrs Mandela,’ said the minister of law and order, Adriaan
Vlok. ‘It is also very difficult for the police to find witnesses prepared to testify
against her. In the past, such witnesses have either suddenly changed their minds
or just disappeared.’
A serious difficulty arose in January 1990, two weeks before Mandela’s
release, when Sizwe Sithole, the head of the ‘disciplinary committee’ based at
Winnie’s house and the father of Zindzi’s three-month-old son, was found dead
in a police shower room. Arrested on an arms charge, Sithole had spent nearly
four hours telling police at Protea station about a number of serious crimes he
said involved Winnie and Zindzi. A commission of inquiry under Judge Richard
Goldstone which the government swiftly set up to investigate Sithole’s death
found that he had committed suicide, a verdict that no one disputed. One of the
main reasons Goldstone gave for Sithole’s suicide was that he had been
overcome by remorse for having implicated Winnie and Zindzi. The police went
to considerable lengths to keep Winnie’s name out of the affair and took no
action on the evidence they had been given.
The main body of evidence against Winnie emerged during the trial of the
football club’s coach, Jerry Richardson, for the murder of Stompie Moeketsi
Seipei. The trial had originally been due to start in February 1990, the day after
Mandela’s release from prison, but it was postponed until May 1990. Richardson
was the only person accused of the murder, but six others were charged on four
counts of kidnapping and four counts of assault with intent to cause grievous
bodily harm. The state prosecutors planned to bring charges against Winnie if

the case against Richardson resulted in a conviction.
Winnie did not appear in court. She had declined to testify as a witness,
ignoring requests from Richardson’s attorney to take the stand on his behalf. But
even in her absence, she overshadowed the proceedings. In their evidence, the
three kidnap victims—Kenny Kgase, Thabiso Mono and Pelo Mekgwe—related
how Winnie had told them they were not fit to be alive; how she accused
Stompie of being a sell-out; how she beat them using her fists and then whips;
and how members of the football team joined in afterwards.
Richardson, for his part, denied killing Stompie. He also denied that Winnie
had been present on 29 December 1988, when Stompie and the other kidnap
victims were brought to her house. But his testimony was riddled with lies.
When his defence counsel, Henti Joubert, came to sum up, he admitted
Richardson had lied to protect Winnie and to prevent her from being involved in
the affair: ‘He is protecting himself from others because if he mentions their
names his life won’t be worth much.’ Joubert portrayed Richardson as a poorly
educated and somewhat retarded man who had been easily exploited by the likes
of Mrs Mandela.
The question of whether or not Winnie had been present during the beatings at
her house was obviously crucial. Eighteen months after the event, having
previously made no mention of it to anyone, she now chose to claim that she had
been on a visit to Brandfort at the time. Both the defence and the prosecution in
the Richardson murder trial asked the court to make a finding on the matter.
On 24 May 1990, in the Rand Supreme Court, Justice O’Donovan found
Richardson guilty of the murder of Stompie and guilty on other counts of
kidnapping, assault and attempted murder. He was subequently sentenced to
death. The judge also ruled on the question of Winnie’s involvement: ‘The court
finding on this issue is that Mrs Mandela was present on 29 December for at
least part of the time.’
Winnie was also implicated in other trials involving members of Mandela
United Football Club. In August 1990, Charles Zwane was brought to trial,
charged with nine counts of murder, eight counts of attempted murder, one count
of arson and the unlawful possession of firearms. One of the crimes with which
Zwane was charged was a firebomb attack in February 1989 on the home of
Dudu Chili, a well-respected community leader and friend of Albertina Sisulu,
with whom Winnie had been engaged in a long-running feud over the activities

of Mandela United. Chili’s thirteen-year-old niece had died in the attack.
Zwane’s defence counsel, S. Jacobs, argued, as Richardson’s counsel had
done, that Zwane had fallen under the influence of Mrs Mandela. He asked Dudu
Chili to give her assessment of Winnie’s influence.
JACOBS: Did Winnie Mandela really have the power of life and death
over these people? If she made a decision to kill, would the people kill?
CHILI: I believe so.
JACOBS: Say, for example, she took a decision that Mr X should be
killed—a notional person—and she ordered Mr Y to do it, if Mr Y did
not carry out his orders, did you think Mr Y would be in danger himself?
CHILI: I should think so, because they seem to fear her so much.
Zwane was sentenced to death nine times for the murders.
The most incriminating piece of evidence against Winnie came during the trial
of Sibusiso Chili, Dudu Chili’s son. Along with five others, Sibusiso Chili had
been charged with the murder of a member of Mandela United, Maxwell
Madondo, who himself had been sent on a mission to kill him. Chili was
convicted of Madondo’s murder but was sentenced to only one year’s
imprisonment. The reason for such leniency was a statement agreed upon by the
prosecution and the defence that was placed on the court record: ‘The admission
the state will make is that the deceased, Maxwell Madondo, was a member of the
Mandela Football Club and that a decision was made by Mrs Winnie Mandela
and the football club to kill accused number one, Chili, and accused number six,
Ikaneng.’
On 17 September 1990, the attorney-general, Klaus von Lieres, announced
that Winnie would be charged with four counts of kidnapping and four charges
of assault with intent to cause grievous bodily harm, making her the eighth
accused in the Stompie murder case.
None of these events stopped Winnie seeking positions of political power
within the ANC or Mandela from assisting her at every opportunity. Winnie
portrayed the government’s decision to prosecute her as part of its political
campaign to discredit the Mandelas and the ANC. Mandela took the same view.
Shortly after his release from prison, he was asked in a television interview
whether he saw the Richardson trial as another government set-up. ‘Well, I have

no doubt that it is,’ he replied. ‘The way the South African police have
conducted themselves in the investigation of the so-called offence has been
totally disgraceful. And it is clear that their intention was not to investigate the
commission of any crime, but it was partly to destroy the image of the family.’
Regardless of what evidence was produced against Winnie, Mandela never
changed his line of reasoning. He threw his full weight into getting the ANC to
declare publicly its support for her. He seemed besotted by Winnie, immune to
wiser counsel, determined at whatever cost to foster her ambition and prepared
to endure in silence her affair with the lawyer Dali Mpofu. Senior ANC officials
referred to Winnie as ‘Nelson’s blind spot’. Despite considerable opposition
from within the ANC, Mandela succeeded in securing her election to the
Johannesburg regional executive committee, her position as head of the regional
Women’s League and her appointment in August 1990 as head of the ANC’s
social affairs department. Her appointment as head of social welfare brought
letters of complaint from more than 100 ANC branches around the country.
As well as obtaining Mandela’s support, Winnie cultivated her own power
base among party militants and youth activists, preaching belligerence, exhorting
the masses to fight. This won her support from revolutionary enthusiasts but set
her at odds with Mandela’s own efforts towards a negotiated settlement. On tour
with Mandela in the United States in 1990, she struck a sour note in Harlem with
talk of going ‘back to the bush to fight the white man’. Two days after the ANC
agreed to suspend armed struggle in August 1990, Winnie described the
agreement as merely a strategy. She enjoyed dressing up in designer battle
fatigues to address party rallies and took to wearing a Communist Party pin. She
projected herself as a champion of the poor and downtrodden, spending much
time visiting squatter camps around Johannesburg and helping the victims of
violence. She became renowned for her strong-arm methods of obtaining votes
in her election campaigns, openly issuing threats to anyone she thought might
not support her. Her ambition appeared insatiable.
Winnie’s trial opened on 4 February 1991 in Johannesburg’s Rand Supreme
Court amid much political fanfare. The ANC’s secretary-general, Alfred Nzo, an
‘old guard’ exile doggedly loyal to the Mandelas, declared the trial to be part of
a ‘continuing campaign of political harassment’. Members of the regional branch
of the ANC’s Women’s League, which Winnie chaired, were on hand outside
the court to cheer her: ‘Mother of the Nation, we are with you.’ Winnie had also
organised a Winnie Mandela Support Ad Hoc Committee composed of friends

and admirers. The opening session of the trial was attended by prominent
activists like Joe Slovo, Chris Hani and Alfred Nzo, who arrived, at Mandela’s
personal request, to show solidarity with Winnie. Her defence team was led by
the Mandelas’ old friend George Bizos. It was also notable for including her
lover, Dali Mpofu.
From the start, the trial was marked by one drama after another. Four of the
eight accused jumped bail and failed to appear. One of the three key state
witnesses, Pelo Mekgwe, also went missing. At first it was thought he had been
abducted, but he subsequently surfaced in Lusaka, saying that he had left South
Africa with the help of ANC officials and alleging that he had been bribed by
Winnie not to testify. Mekgwe’s disappearance so frightened the two remaining
key witnesses, Kenny Kgase and Thabiso Mono, that they refused to testify.
Without their testimony, the trial would inevitably have collapsed. After a spell
in the police cells, Kgase and Mono changed their mind. The trial proceeded.
The state prosecutor, Jan Swanepoel, began the trial by disclosing that he
would introduce two other kidnapping cases in which Winnie had taken part as
similar-fact evidence, thus demonstrating that the Stompie incident was not an
isolated case. One involved the kidnapping of two people in September 1988 and
their subsequent assault, during which Winnie was present. The other involved
the abduction in November 1988 of the Sowetan youth Lolo Sono, whose father
had pleaded with Winnie to release him just before he disappeared.
In March, Kgase and Mono took the stand, repeating the evidence they had
given during the Richardson trial, testifying how Winnie had led the assault on
them and how Stompie had been so badly beaten that he could barely walk.
Despite relentless cross-examination from Bizos, they remained steadfast in their
main version of the events.
By the time Winnie took the stand in April, the ANC had decided to distance
itself from the trial and from Mandela’s adamant defence of Winnie. Winnie was
told by senior ANC officials that the trial concerned her and not the ANC. Apart
from Mandela, no senior figures attended court sessions any more.
Winnie’s defence was to deny everything. She claimed that the Mandela
United Football Club had ceased to exist by the time of the incident. She knew
nothing about any of the ‘boys in the back’ living on her premises. Nor had she
met any of the four kidnap victims there.
Winnie claimed that on the evening of 29 December 1988, hours before Jerry

Richardson, Xoliswa Falati and her driver, John Morgan, had gone to fetch the
four victims from the Methodist manse, she had left Soweto for Brandfort,
arriving there sometime after ten. She produced two witnesses to corroborate her
stay. One of them, Thabo Motau, a seventeen-year-old youth who lived opposite
the Mandela house in Orlando West, testified that he had driven Winnie to
Brandfort on 29 December. The other, Norah Moahloli, a schoolteacher who
lived in Brandfort, testified that Winnie had stayed with her there. Winnie
claimed that she had remained in Brandfort until 31 December, returning to
Soweto in the evening. But no witnesses other than Moahloli were produced to
corroborate her claim.
At least two pieces of evidence directly contradicted Winnie’s version. One
was a statement made to the police in February 1989 by John Morgan, who was
one of her co-defendants. Morgan had told police that on 29 December he had
seen Winnie slap Stompie, accusing him of having had sex with the Methodist
minister Paul Verryn. Later that night, he said, he had used Winnie’s vehicle to
take Falati and her daughter back to the Methodist manse. The next day he had
driven the vehicle back to Winnie’s house, where he washed it. Winnie was at
home that day and had told him to drive her to her office in Commerce House.
Zindzi went with her. Faced with this statement in court, Morgan claimed that
police had tortured him into making it. But the judge, Michael Stegmann,
dismissed his assertion as false.
The other piece of evidence about Winnie’s whereabouts on 29 December
concerned the visit she made with Katiza Cebekhulu to Dr Asvat’s surgery.
According to Winnie’s version, the visit took place on 29 December, before she
left for Brandfort. According to Asvat’s medical records, Winnie visited him on
30 December. But Asvat’s medical records were not produced as evidence
during the trial. Nor was his nurse, Albertina Sisulu, asked to testify.
Cebekhulu himself never gave evidence; he was one of the four defendants
who disappeared on the eve of the trial. He had previously made a statement to
police implicating Winnie in the beating of Stompie and describing Dr Asvat’s
visit to Winnie’s house to examine Stompie shortly before he was taken away to
be killed. But the statement was not produced in court. Like Pelo Mekgwe,
Cebekhulu subsequently surfaced in Lusaka, under ANC auspices.
Judge Stegmann’s judgement, given over six hours on 13 May 1991,
contained a devastating indictment of Winnie’s character. He described her as ‘a

calm, composed, deliberate and unblushing liar’. He continued, ‘She gave her
evidence in a manner which impressed me with her wariness, her unwillingness
to commit herself to anything clear-cut or definite, and, in short, with a
remarkable absence of candour. ’ She had gone to extraordinary lengths, he said,
to distance herself from the football team bearing her name: ‘It is odd to
encounter a leader who went to as much trouble as Mrs Mandela to distance
herself from the club which adopted her name and many of whose members
lived in her own backyard.’
Stegmann was in no doubt that Winnie had masterminded the kidnapping of
the four youths. ‘To imagine that all those took place without Mrs Mandela as
the moving spirit is like trying to imagine Hamlet without the prince,’ he said.
He remained uncertain, however, about her involvement in the beatings. The
prosecution had failed to prove that her Brandfort alibis were false, so there
remained a reasonable possibility that she had gone there before the assaults
began, as she had claimed. Nevertheless, she must have known about the
kidnappings and beatings subsequently, but she wilfully ignored the victims’
plight. When pressed by Soweto leaders to release the youths, she refused to free
them. By continuing to hold them for twenty days and to give accommodation to
those who had committed the assault, she had associated herself with the crime.
At the very least, Stegmann concluded, Winnie was an accessory after the fact to
all that had happened. He found her guilty on four counts of kidnapping and of
being an accessory to the assaults.
Sitting listening to this judgement on his wife, Mandela seemed an old and
crumpled figure, drained of all dignity. Loyal to the last, after the verdict had
been given he embraced Winnie, kissing her on the lips, but even though he
managed to control the distress he felt, he was grim-faced and disheartened.
Winnie herself, though shaken by the remarks Stegmann had made about her,
quickly recovered her poise. ‘As long as you know now that I didn’t assault any
child,’ she declared to journalists gathered around her in the well of the court,
‘that is all that matters to me.’ She left the court with a clenched-fist salute,
maintaining that she had been exonerated.
The following day, Stegmann sentenced her to a prison term of five years on
the kidnapping charge and an additional one year for her role as an accessory to
the assaults. Winnie, he said, bore the brunt of the moral blame for the criminal
actions of those in her immediate circle:

Your position of leadership was not something which entitled you to play fast
and loose with the liberties of others to serve your own purposes. You
fundamentally misunderstood or ignored the responsibilities which came with
your position as leader. In this case one of the worst features was your complete
absence of compassion towards the victims of the assaults, suffering in your own
backyard, just outside your window.
Stegmann sentenced her co-defendant, Xoliswa Falati, to six years’
imprisonment, and John Morgan, the driver, to one year’s imprisonment
suspended for five years. George Bizos immediately announced his intention of
appealing against Stegmann’s verdict and applied for bail.
Mandela was not present in court to hear sentence passed on Winnie, but he
continued to protest her innocence. ‘My faith in her has been fully vindicated,’
he said, after learning of the sentence. ‘I also believe that she did not know there
was anyone at the back of the house against his will.’ The last word in the matter
had not yet been spoken, he said: ‘We trust that soon her name will be cleared
completely.’

Shortly after Mandela’s release from prison, photographers taking pictures of
Mandela and Winnie at their home in Soweto asked the couple to move closer to
one another. Winnie shyly demurred, whereupon Mandela moved his chair
closer, put an arm around Winnie and said, ‘I am the only man in the world who
can control this woman.’
The reality, however, was different. Mandela himself was a victim of
Winnie’s own manipulation. For twenty-seven years in prison, Winnie had been
one of his greatest sources of strength. The sense of guilt he felt for her own
plight during those years, he once told her in a letter, ravaged every part of his
being. He emerged from prison obdurately loyal to her. It made no difference
that she had become a criminal menace or that she was unfaithful to him.
Mandela’s loyalty was beyond reason and Winnie exploited this fact to the full.
In a plea of mitigation against the sentence Winnie was to be given, George
Bizos pointed out to Stegmann that by kidnapping standards her crime had been
relatively minor. Indeed, at a time when murders and massacres in South Africa
were commonplace, whether carried out by the police, the third force, Inkatha or
the ANC, the crimes of which Winnie had been convicted were in themselves of

little consequence.
Yet behind the trial lay a larger reality. Winnie had been the head of a
criminal gang which had been involved in murder, rape, arson and assault. Her
activities had contaminated the reputations of the ANC and of Mandela, upon
whom the future of South Africa was seen largely to depend. Mandela
compounded the problem by wilfully refusing to come to terms with what had
happened. Even after her conviction, he continued to support Winnie’s drive for
power and office. Time and again she was to become embroiled in scandal,
causing one embarrassment after another; and time and again, she was to survive
the consequences. But the burden of all this was to be carried by Mandela,
making the monumental tasks he already faced that much harder.

CHAPTER 23

CODESA
BY MID-1991, EIGHTEEN MONTHS AFTER DE KLERK’S BOLD
REFORMS, South Africa was mired in crisis. The country was afflicted by
appalling bouts of violence from which there seemed no escape. In Natal, a
small-scale civil war was under way. The government’s reputation, as a result of
Inkathagate, had been seriously damaged. Distrust was manifest on all sides.
Little progress had been made towards even starting negotiations. To make
matters worse, economic recession was exacting a heavy toll.
The ANC had considerable trouble putting its own house in order. It found the
business of converting itself from an underground liberation movement into a
properly constituted political organisation—establishing party offices, recruiting
members, raising funds, organising the return of thousands of exiles and
ensuring the welfare of returning guerrillas—an immensely difficult process,
almost beyond its means. The result, more often than not, was chaos.
Internal disputes overshadowed all else. So great was the furore over the
ANC’s decision to suspend the armed struggle that the national executive
committee decided to postpone the holding of the ANC’s first national
conference inside South Africa for thirty years until July 1991. At a substitute
‘consultative conference’ in December 1990, Mandela was the target of
sustained criticism over his autocratic style, his failure to consult more
frequently about policy issues and his cordial relationship with de Klerk. When
he and Tambo put forward a proposal advocating the phased lifting of sanctions
against South Africa, ANC militants countered with their own resolution
insisting that sanctions should be maintained unchanged and received
overwhelming support from cheering delegates. In his concluding remarks,
Mandela noted ruefully, ‘One of the most disappointing features of the
conference was that there was hardly a word of praise.’ He acknowledged that he
and the national executive committee had been wrong not to keep the party
membership informed about their contacts and agreements with the government.
He said he accepted the criticism ‘without qualification’ and promised to make

‘radical adjustments’ to the ANC’s leadership. But he also defended his right to
continue with what he called ‘confidential’ discussions with the government. It
was simply not practical, he said, to refer every problem back to a party
conference.
Not just Mandela but Winnie too was the target of attack from critics within
the ANC intent on curbing her ruthless ambition. In April 1991, Winnie made a
determined bid, with Mandela’s support, to be elected president of the ANC’s
Women’s League. Two other candidates stood for election, Gertrude Shope, an
exiled leader who had been head of the ANC’s women’s division in Lusaka, and
Albertina Sisulu. In order to ensure that Winnie was not elected, Albertina
withdrew from the election and publicly called on her supporters to cast their
votes for Shope. The result was a crushing defeat for Winnie, who gained less
than a third of the vote.
At the ANC’s national conference in July 1991, at the age of seventy-two,
Mandela was elected president, in place of his ailing friend Oliver Tambo. But
many of the same criticisms of his leadership were voiced once more. One
former UDF leader, Mosiuoa Lekota, openly denounced Mandela for his
tendency to try to impose his will on internal decision-making, and received a
huge cheer for doing so. There was strong criticism too of the disorganised state
of the ANC, attributed by many delegates to the incompetence of the ‘old guard’
on the national executive committee. A confidential internal report presented to
the conference noted: ‘We lack enterprise, creativity and initiative. We appear
very happy to remain pigeon-holed within the confines of populist rhetoric and
clichés.’ Attendance at recent rallies had been low, those rallies had been poorly
organised, membership recruitment had fallen far below expectations and, the
report concluded, ‘Clearly we have not utilized our full potential to mobilize
millions of our people into effective action.’
In the election for party posts, half of the old guard were swept away and
replaced by former UDF leaders whom Mandela and Winnie had previously
contrived to exclude from influence. Despite Mandela’s strenuous efforts, the
key post of secretary-general went to Cyril Ramaphosa, whose election brought
rapturous applause from delegates. Ramaphosa represented the new generation
of political activists. As a student, he had served two prison sentences for
political activity. A lawyer by training, he had thrown himself into trade union
activity, building up membership of the mineworkers’ union from 6,000 to
340,000 and helping to launch the trade union federation, Cosatu. His abilities as

a successful organiser and as a skilful negotiator were held in high regard by
mining company executives, with whom he was often in conflict. He was
familiar with the democratic approach of the UDF and held no particular
reverence for old-guard politicians from the Mandela generation who considered
length of service the principal qualification for party office. In the months
preceding Mandela’s release from prison, when speculation about it was rife, he
remarked in a magazine interview that Mandela should not expect just to walk
out of prison and take over the ANC. His standing, he said, was ‘no different
from the status of any other member of the ANC’; he was just ‘one of those
people who may have to be considered for a leadership position’. Ramaphosa
was also one of the few individuals in the ANC hierarchy prepared to stand up to
the malevolence of Winnie Mandela. As one of the authors of the original report
exposing her crimes, he was fully aware not only of her guilt but also of the
damage that would be done to the ANC if she was allowed to continue her
relentless drive for power. Aged only thirty-eight when he was elected secretarygeneral, Ramaphosa quickly made his mark both on the ANC and on the whole
negotiation process.
Despite these curbs to his personal authority, Mandela was successful in
gaining support for his efforts in steering the ANC back towards talks with the
government, suspended since May, even though none of the demands it had
made at the time had been met. Mandela argued that for the ANC to continue
postponing talks because of political violence effectively gave a veto to
rightwing factions around de Klerk which did not want negotiations to proceed.
They should be seen as ‘a victory for the ANC’ and ‘a defeat’ for the
government, not the reverse. Negotiations, he said, were ‘a theatre of struggle’.
Any further delay would play into the hands of the enemy: ‘It can never be in
our interest that we prolong the agony of the apartheid system. It does not serve
the interests of the masses we represent and the country as a whole that we delay
. . . the achievement of the objective of the transfer of power to the people.’
Mandela also put forward for the first time the idea of a ‘transitional government
of national unity’ in which power would be shared with de Klerk’s despised
National Party.
Although Mandela regained the initiative for negotiations, revolutionary
enthusiasts were hard at work, preaching the virtues of mass action. Their day
was yet to come.
The first attempt at negotiation between the three main rivals—Mandela, de

Klerk and Buthelezi—was largely a disaster. In September 1991, they were
brought together for the first time to attend a national peace conference at the
Carlton Hotel in Johannesburg organised by a group of business, church and
civic leaders. The atmosphere at the conference was extremely tense. One week
before, gunmen, assumed to be Umkhonto members, had ambushed an Inkatha
march in Thokoza, a township near Johannesburg, killing twenty-three people
and injuring eighteen others. Inkatha gunmen retaliated with an indiscriminate
attack on buses, taxis and trains.
While delegates to the conference were discussing ‘codes of conduct’ inside
the hotel, on the street outside hundreds of Inkatha supporters, armed with
traditional weapons, paraded up and down in front of the hotel in a show of
support for Buthelezi. By the time he got round to telling the demonstrators to go
home, little sense of accord remained. At a subsequent press conference, when
de Klerk sought to play down the incident, saying that the Inkatha demonstrators
had committed ‘no crime’ and had ‘apparently enjoyed themselves’, Mandela
reacted in fury, jumping up from his seat to grab the microphone and asserting
that if the demonstrators had belonged to the ANC the police would have used
force to disperse them. The press conference, intended to mark agreement on a
peace accord, degenerated into an ugly public wrangle. Buthelezi demonstrated
his disdain for the process by refusing to participate in a three-way handshake
with Mandela and de Klerk, suggested by press photographers. When the
photographers persisted, Buthelezi, keeping his hands tightly gripped on his
ceremonial fly whisk, snapped that he was not going to ‘perform like a clown’
for them. In October, South Africa experienced one of its worst months of
violence on record.
Merely finding a starting point for negotiations proved highly contentious.
Mandela and de Klerk held several meetings during September and October but
found little common ground on how a new constitution should be formulated.
Mandela insisted that the constitution should be drawn up by an elected
assembly, so that each party’s influence on the final document would be
proportionate to its national support. De Klerk wanted an unelected conference,
comprising all political parties ‘with a proven basis of support’, to deliberate
upon two crucial issues: the composition, functioning and decision-making
process of the actual constitutional negotiating conference, and the broad
principles to be contained in a new constitution. He opposed the idea of a
constituent assembly, fearing that it would allow a single party or alliance of

parties emerging from an election with a commanding majority virtually to write
its own constitution—in effect predetermining constitutional issues which were
supposed to be the subject of negotiation. Mandela demanded an interim
government; de Klerk said he had no intention of handing over power before the
new constitution was in place.
The two men were also locked in a long-standing dispute over the status of
Umkhonto we Sizwe. De Klerk demanded that the ANC should disband its
guerrilla army and put its arms caches under joint control. He maintained it was
a ‘private army’ no longer permissible under the terms of the national peace
accord signed in September 1991. Mandela refused, telling de Klerk that for the
ANC to demobilise its armed wing when it was subject to armed attack would be
tantamount to suicide.
All that was finally agreed was to hold a multiparty conference, to be known
as the Convention for a Democratic South Africa, or Co - desa, as it was
popularly called, together with a date, an agenda and a venue. It had taken nearly
two years to get that far.

On 20 December 1991, in a cavernous and gloomy trade exhibition hall near
Johannesburg’s international airport, there assembled the widest cross-section of
political groups that had ever met in South Africa. The only similar gathering
that had ever taken place was a national convention in 1908-9, when
representatives from the Transvaal, the Orange Free State, the Cape and Natal
agreed to establish the Union of South Africa. On that occasion no Africans were
present.
Invitations to Codesa had been sent to twenty-three parties, nineteen of which
had accepted. In addition to delegations from the government, the National Party
and the ANC, there were representatives from the Inkatha Freedom Party; the
Communist Party; the Transvaal and Natal Indian Congresses; four
‘independent’ homeland governments; four ‘self-governing’ homeland parties;
three parties from the Indian and Coloured parliaments; and the liberal
parliamentary opposition party, the Democratic Party. Those who refused
invitations included the far-right Conservative Party; the extremist Afrikaner
Weerstandsbeweging; and the Pan-Africanist Congress. Four days beforehand,
the PAC had held a special conference in Cape Town which had decided to
boycott negotiations altogether, with delegates shouting, ‘One settler, one bullet.

‘
One other notable absentee was Buthelezi. Although Inkatha was present,
Buthelezi had decided to stay away in protest that his demand for two additional
delegations, one headed by the king of the Zulus, Goodwill Zwelethini, the other
representing the KwaZulu administration, had been turned down. Five days
before Codesa opened, addressing supporters outside Durban, he had warned
that Zulus should not be left aggrieved ‘lest what happens in this country
emerges as so terrible and so destructive that the civil wars [in Angola and
Mozambique] are child’s play by comparison’. Thereafter Buthelezi’s
contribution to the negotiations process was to consist largely of a similar
mixture of threats and bluster.
Codesa’s first plenary session, known as Codesa 1, was intended to be largely
a formality. Before handing over to a series of working groups, delegations were
asked to sign a Declaration of Intent, consisting mainly of expressions of
goodwill, which committed them to an undivided South Africa, a multiparty
democracy with universal suffrage, a separation of powers, an independent
judiciary and a bill of rights. Inkatha immediately adopted a dissident role,
refusing to sign on the grounds that the reference contained to an ‘undivided’
South Africa implied that the federal system it wanted had been ruled out. Only
when an amendment was later inserted, giving an assurance that the offending
clause did not preclude a federal system, did Inkatha sign.
One speaker after another stepped up to the podium to express goodwill. The
National Party’s contribution was memorable for the way in which its chief
delegate, Dawie de Villiers, endeavoured to offer an apology for apartheid. His
party, he said, had hoped that ‘a policy of separation’ would bring peace to the
country, but apartheid had produced instead conflict, injustice and misery: ‘In so
far as that occurred, we deeply regret it.’
The last two delegates due to speak were Mandela and de Klerk. What
occurred, broadcast live on radio and television, sent a shockwave across the
country. Mandela had originally been scheduled to speak last, but the previous
evening de Klerk had asked him on the phone if he could speak last instead.
Several of Mandela’s colleagues had misgivings, but Mandela saw no reason not
to accord de Klerk the favour.
Mandela, in his address, duly spoke of the importance of the occasion, as
other delegates had done. Then de Klerk went to the podium for the final speech

of the day. He too began by citing the historic significance of the gathering. He
spoke of the need to overcome mutual distrust and suspicion, and of his support
for the idea of ‘power-sharing’.
But then he turned his speech into an attack on the ANC. The ANC, he said,
had failed to honour an agreement to dismantle Umkhonto, and he went on to
question whether the ANC’s commitment to agreements reached at the
convention would be worth the paper they were written on if it did not abandon
the armed struggle. His clear intention was to belittle Mandela and to
demonstrate to his own followers his toughness in handling the ANC. He spoke
in the manner of a headmaster dealing with an errant child.
Mandela was infuriated, not just by de Klerk’s accusations but by his
deception in trying to get in the last word. Once again, he had trusted de Klerk
against the advice of his own colleagues, only to be proved wrong. Seething with
anger, he insisted on the right of reply and strode to the podium to denigrate de
Klerk in full public view, his voice manifesting all the contempt and loathing he
felt for the man:
I am gravely concerned about the behaviour of Mr de Klerk today. He has
launched an attack on the ANC and in doing so he has been less than frank. Even
the head of an illegitimate, discredited minority regime, as his is, has certain
moral standards to uphold. He has no excuse just because he is the head of such
a discredited regime not to uphold moral standards. . .
If a man can come to a conference of this nature and play the type of politics
he has played—very few people would like to deal with such a man. . .
The members of the government persuaded us to allow them to speak last.
They were very keen to say the last word here. It is now clear why they did so.
He has abused his position, because he hoped that I would not respond. He was
completely mistaken. I respond now.
The ANC, he said, had shown its commitment to peace by suspending the
armed struggle. As de Klerk well knew, it had agreed to turn in its weapons only
when it was part of a government collecting those weapons: ‘What political
organisation would hand over its weapons to the same man who is regarded by
the people as killing innocent people?’ He had warned de Klerk on countless
occasions that it served no useful purpose to attack the ANC publicly, yet ‘he
continues to do exactly that and we’re going to stop it’.

He went on to accuse de Klerk of pursuing a double agenda towards the ANC,
of talking peace and cooperation while simultaneously ‘conducting a war’
against it. Even while negotiating, the government was secretly funding covert
organisations that committed violence against the ANC. It was all well and good
for de Klerk to pretend, as he had done at the time of the Inkathagate scandal,
that he knew nothing about the large sums of money being channelled through
the police to the ANC’s main rival, but, he said, ‘if the head of state doesn’t
know when as much as 7 million rands is spent, then he’s not fit to be a head of
the government’.
Mandela concluded by saying he was nevertheless willing to continue to work
with de Klerk: ‘I am prepared to make allowances because he is a product of
apartheid. Although he wants these democratic changes, he has sometimes very
little idea of what democracy means.’
Caught off guard by Mandela’s venomous outburst, de Klerk began by taking
notes. Then he put down his pen and stroked his bald pate, becoming
increasingly agitated. By the time Mandela had finished, he was apoplectic. He
returned to the podium to make an angry rebuttal of Mandela’s accusations.
The two sides, he said, had met innumerable times over the previous ten
months to try to resolve the issue of Umkhonto. Both he and Mandela had
intervened personally to try to break the deadlock, but to no avail. They had last
discussed the matter on 12 December and had agreed that further high-level
consultations were needed: ‘The friendly exchanges that went on over the past
few days resulted in absolute stalemate.’
Hence his decision to raise the issue in public. It was an issue that had to be
solved before other agreements could be reached. Otherwise, de Klerk said, the
government would be faced with an ANC carrying ‘a pen in one hand and
claiming the right to still have arms in the other hand’.
The spectacle on prime-time television of a white head of state being given a
dressing-down by a black politician, accusing him of duplicity, trickery and even
collusion in murder, was an altogether new experience for South Africans. Even
though the two men made the point of shaking hands afterwards, it was evident
that they had lost all mutual respect. Neither of them understood the other’s
predicament over the issue of armed struggle. Both were under strong pressure
from their own constituencies to take a firm stand. But by choosing a ceremonial
occasion to bring the dispute into the open, de Klerk not only ruined the display

of goodwill it was intended to convey but incurred severe damage to his own
reputation as a strong leader. In front of the cameras, a discernible shift in power
had taken place.
The relationship between Mandela and de Klerk never recovered from this
incident. De Klerk believed that Mandela had neither the authority nor the
political will to ensure that the ANC adhered to agreements with the
government. Mandela was all the more convinced of de Klerk’s double agenda
to destroy the ANC. Their lack of trust made the search for a settlement even
more complicated, just as negotiations were beginning.
The differences in their objectives were already fundamental. De Klerk
entered the negotiations with the purpose not of transferring power but of
striking a unique power-sharing deal which would ensure that government in a
democratic South Africa was subject to a white veto. His model of majority rule
was not the standard version—‘simple majority rule’, as he disparagingly
referred to it—but a constitution which would entrench the position of minority
parties in government and restrain majority parties through an elaborate system
of checks.
He had moved on from the idea of group rights to the idea of blocking
mechanisms. What he proposed was government through an enforced coalition,
with a rotating presidency, in which decisions were taken by consensus, thus
giving the white minority an effective veto over the majority. He wanted extra
representation for white minorities in an upper house of parliament with veto
powers, coupled with the requirement for certain legislation in the lower house
to obtain specially high majorities before passage. He also wanted regional
authorities to be given autonomous powers to curb the possibility of centralised
authoritarian rule. Summing up his position, he said, ‘A party that wins 51 per
cent of the vote should not get 100 per cent of the power.’
In de Klerk’s view, the purpose of Codesa was to settle, in a multiparty forum,
as many of these constitutional details as possible before the negotiating circus
moved on to an elected assembly, where the influence of minority parties was
bound to be reduced. He wanted Codesa first to draw up an ‘interim’
constitution, setting out principles that would include permanently entrenched
power-sharing, the devolution of power, protection for minorities and other
checks and balances, before proceeding with elections for a constituent assembly
and an interim government that would rule for at least ten years.

He repeatedly insisted that the National Party would never surrender to
‘simple majority rule’, leaving the fate of the white minority of 12 per cent in the
hands of a non-racial electorate. It would demand a guaranteed share in power,
whatever the outcome of the popular vote, and it would hold out for as long as
was necessary to obtain one. Only when the National Party’s future was secure
was he prepared to relinquish sole power.
Mandela embarked on the negotiations with the aim of achieving unfettered
majority rule in the shortest possible time. He assumed that the government’s
vulnerability to international pressure, popular unrest and economic disruption,
the very factors which he believed had led de Klerk to release him and lift the
ban on the ANC in the first place, would work to his advantage in securing a
speedy victory.
His aim was to move on rapidly from Codesa to an interim government and to
an elected assembly empowered to determine a new constitution. The ANC
wanted a radical rupture with the past. In Mandela’s view, Codesa’s purpose was
merely to decide what measures were needed before an assembly could be
elected. He was anxious to achieve quick results. The slow progress so far made
on the road to majority rule since 1990 had added to the volume of criticism he
faced from within the ANC. Moreover, the ANC’s support in the townships was
being undermined daily as a result of the level of violence there and its inability
to provide protection.

While Codesa’s working groups grappled with these issues, there were signs that
de Klerk’s support within the white community was dwindling. Since the
announcement of his reforms in February 1990, the right wing had kept up a
barrage of attacks on de Klerk, denouncing him as a traitor and a sell-out—‘the
only leader in the Western world who is negotiating himself, his party and his
people out of power,’ railed the Conservative Party leader, Andries Treurnicht.
Treurnicht’s objective became the establishment of an independent white state
—an Afrikaner volkstaat. He offered no suggestions as to what its borders might
be or how it might be brought about. There was not a single magisterial district
in South Africa where whites, let alone Afrikaners, actually constituted a
majority of inhabitants. But it was an idea with immense appeal to the
Conservative Party, as well as to other factions on the far right. ‘We in the
Conservative Party are adamant that there is a territory which belongs

historically and otherwise to the white nation,’ said Treurnicht. ‘While we accept
that there are whites who are prepared to live under an ANC government in a
unitary state, there are others—we believe, the majority—who will never submit
themselves to a communist terrorist regime. . . Unless any future constitutional
dispensation addresses the problems of ethnicity and self-determination, it will
be a waste of time and a recipe for discord.’ He pledged ‘a third freedom
struggle’ in pursuit of Afrikaner self-determination, alluding to the possibility of
resistance similar to that of the Boers in the two wars against British imperial
rule in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. ‘You do not have
enough jails to keep Afrikaner nationalism imprisoned,’ he declared. ‘We warn:
this is an unfair government which no longer represents the volk.’
Treurnicht’s Conservative Party represented the respectable face of the far
right. Other groups advocated outright violence. The most prominent was the
Afrikaner Weerstandsbeweging, the Afrikaner Resistance Movement, which
used Nazi-style insignia and rituals and paraded with swastika-like banners and
guns. Led by Eugene Terre’Blanche, a former policeman who specialised in
rightwing oratory and bombast, the AWB was the moving force behind the
formation of scores of ‘commando’ units. ‘We refuse to be put under an ANC
government,’ declared Terre’Blanche. ‘That night there will be war in South
Africa. . . . We will fight, as our forefathers fought, until we have won.’ In one
town after another, white vigilante groups sprang up ‘to protect white property,
women and children against blacks’. Along with vigilante action came a spate of
bomb attacks and ‘driveby’ shootings. In August 1991, hundreds of AWB
members, armed with knives, guns and teargas canisters, clashed with police in
Ventersdorp in an attempt to prevent de Klerk from addressing a public meeting
there.
The first electoral shock for de Klerk came in a parliamentary by-election in
the Orange Free State in November 1991, when the National Party lost its seat to
the Conservative Party in a spectacular swing against the government. In
February 1992, the National Party suffered another stunning defeat in the
Afrikaner university town of Potchefstroom. The government’s faltering support
was of more than usual significance, for de Klerk had repeatedly promised that
the white electorate would be allowed the final verdict on any agreement made
about South Africa’s future constitution. Rising white opposition to the
government therefore placed the whole outcome of the negotiations in jeopardy.
Rather than delay the matter any further, within days of the Potchefstroom

defeat de Klerk announced the holding of a white referendum on the reform
process on 17 March. A clear majority in favour, he said, would obviate the need
for the government to return to the white electorate. The risks he took were
considerable. A defeat for the government would almost certainly have led to
civil war. All the resources of the white establishment were thrown into securing
a ‘Yes’ vote. De Klerk explicitly promised the electorate that he would prevent
majority rule. The National Party’s advertising campaign was based on the
slogan, ‘Vote Yes, if you’re scared of majority rule’. The Conservative Party
campaigned for a ‘No’ vote, claiming that the choice for Afrikaners was between
‘the survival of the Afrikaner volk and two cars in the garage’. The ANC did its
best to support the ‘Yes’ campaign, reassuring whites about its good intentions
in the negotiating process and promising job security for civil servants.
The result was a triumph for de Klerk. About 85 per cent of the white
electorate of 3.3 million turned out to vote and some 68 per cent said ‘Yes’.
Only one out of fifteen regions recorded a majority ‘No’ vote—Pietersburg, in
the strongly conservative northern Transvaal. Even Pretoria, which had for so
long symbolised Afrikanerdom in all its might, produced a 57 per cent ‘Yes’
vote. ‘Today,’ said de Klerk, ‘we have closed the book on apartheid. It doesn’t
often happen that in one generation a nation gets an opportunity to rise above
itself. The white electorate has risen above itself in this referendum.’

In the euphoria which followed the referendum, there seemed few other
obstacles remaining in the way of a settlement. Negotiators in several of the
working groups held behind closed doors at Codesa reported making significant
progress. Indeed, Codesa was noted for its convivial and cosy atmosphere, where
participants, wining and dining at the state’s expense, were afforded every
opportunity to settle their differences. As the deadline approached for the second
plenary session, scheduled for 15 May, public expectations were high.
The reality, however, was that the two main participants—the government and
the ANC—had come no closer to agreement on what the real role of Codesa
should be, let alone the details of a new constitution. In the working groups
dealing with the central issues of power-sharing and majority rule, the
differences were as fundamental as ever. The government was prepared to
haggle indefinitely, believing that the slower the transition proceeded, the better.
Its confidence was bolstered by the result of the referendum, which had finally

dispensed with the rightwing threat de Klerk feared so much. The ANC,
however, was alarmed not only by the lack of progress being made at Codesa but
also by signs that it had begun to lose touch with its constituency as the
negotiations dragged on. Radicals within the ANC were highly critical of its
handling of the negotiations and demanded a more aggressive approach.
When Codesa 2 reached deadlock on 15 May, Mandela and de Klerk met over
coffee late that night in their first encounter since the opening day in December.
Though they could not find a way out of the impasse, both were anxious to avoid
a public confrontation. ‘The whole of South Africa and the world is looking at
you and me,’ Mandela told de Klerk. ‘Let us save the peace process. Let us reach
some kind of agreement. Let us at least fix a date for the next round of talks.’
They agreed to address the convention the following day in a constructive
manner, de Klerk speaking first, Mandela last.
De Klerk reiterated the government’s position on the need for ‘proper checks
and balances’ to ensure that ‘no majority should ever be able to misuse its power
. . . to dominate or to damage the interests of minorities’. He rejected once more
the idea of ‘simple majoritarianism’ of ‘a winner-takes-all’ electoral system.
Following him, Mandela tried to disperse the gloom which had descended
over the convention, stressing the areas of agreement that had been reached
there. But there was no disguising the fact that the negotiating process, on which
so many hopes were based, had foundered.
The ANC now drew up alternative plans. It was just the opportunity for which
revolutionary enthusiasts had been waiting.

CHAPTER 24
WINNIE’S DOWNFALL
THE DOWNFALL OF WINNIE BEGAN NOT AS A RESULT OF HER
CRIMINAL activities but because of her affair with the young lawyer Dali
Mpofu. When they met, Winnie was fifty-five and Mpofu was twenty-five. An
articled clerk for the law firm representing members of Mandela United, he was
intelligent, charming and had a liking for older women. While a law student at
the University of the Witwatersrand, he had struck up a relationship with a white
lecturer ten years his senior, Terry Oakley-Smith, the daughter of a retired
British diplomat. She became pregnant, but soon after the birth of their son in
1989, Winnie lured Mpofu away. When Oakley-Smith confronted Winnie about
their involvement one night outside Mpofu’s flat, pointing out that Winnie was a
grandmother, she was given a foretaste of the kind of threats Winnie habitually
used against her adversaries. ‘Winnie’s reply was something along the lines of,
“Listen, my girl, you’ll be sorry for this. You don’t know who you’re dealing
with,”’ recalled Oakley-Smith, who then received a barrage of threatening phone
calls from Winnie, often late at night when she was drunk, telling her in a slurred
voice to keep away from Mpofu. She was so worried by the threats that she
made a statement to her lawyers in case she came to harm.
When Mandela in prison learned that Mpofu had moved in with Winnie, he
sent her a letter telling her to get ‘that boy’ out of the house. Mpofu left, but the
affair continued. From the moment that Mandela returned home to Johannesburg
in February 1990, Winnie showed no interest in sharing his bed. The pain and
humiliation for Mandela were some of the worst experiences he had known.
They made him, he later recalled, ‘the loneliest man’.
While the affair remained relatively discreet, Mandela bore it with fortitude,
enjoying what he could of Winnie’s company, but Winnie soon began to flaunt
her lover in public. In March 1991, she appointed Mpofu as her deputy in the
ANC’s department of social welfare, even though he had no qualifications for
the job. The department which was responsible for the welfare of thousands of

returning exiles, former political prisoners and the victims of political violence
became notorious for its chaos under Winnie’s rule. When Ramaphosa took over
as secretary-general in July 1991, two months after Winnie’s conviction for
kidnapping and assault, he quickly set about reorganising the ANC’s
administration, trying to turn it into a more professional organisation and to rid it
of embarrassing encumbrances like Winnie. But initially he ran straight into
opposition from Mandela, who regarded his plans for reorganisation as much a
threat to his own authority as to Winnie’s position.
Winnie, however, soon overstepped the mark. In October 1991, she took
Mpofu with her on a spending spree to the United States. Ostensibly, they went
to raise money and recruit artistes for a ‘Children of Africa Concert’, scheduled
to be held in Nigeria later in the year. But they raised no funds, signed up no
artistes, and instead drew considerable attention to their extravagant lifestyle.
Mandela was outraged when he learned of what had happened. But Winnie
ignored him and made plans for another trip to the United States with Mpofu,
without informing him.
After two years of forlorn hope of re-establishing a family life, he moved out
of Winnie’s ‘palace’ in Soweto. He lived for a time at the opulent mansion of
one of South Africa’s wealthiest Afrikaners, Douw Steyn, an insurance magnate,
in the northern suburbs of Johannesburg, before purchasing a comfortable twostorey house in Houghton which he came to regard as home. He rarely spoke to
Winnie after that.
The Winnie saga was still to cause him endless embarrassment though. In
March 1992, just weeks before her appeal was due to be heard, she became
embroiled in an ugly wrangle with her co-defendant, Xoliswa Falati. Falati,
whose appeal was due to be heard at the same time, had been told by her lawyer
that there were no funds to pay for the costs of her appeal and that therefore she
would have no option but to serve her sentence of six years’ imprisonment. The
news came as a severe shock to Falati, who had hitherto assumed that the
Mandelas would see that she was properly represented. Her lawyer suggested
that she contact Mandela and, when she did, Mandela reassured her that he
would take care of the problem.
The following day, 28 March, Falati received a telephone call from Winnie
telling her to get out of the room at the back of the garage at Mandela’s old
house in Orlando, where she had been allowed to stay. Falati called Mandela for

help again. He told her to ignore Winnie and to stay in the room.
That night, after a few drinks, Winnie burst into Falati’s room, brandishing a
small pistol and shouting at her to get out. ‘She came at me like a mad woman,’
Falati said later. ‘I saw her pistol and just pushed her and ran.’ Winnie’s driver
stopped her at the gate. ‘For a moment I thought I was going to be shot. Winnie
was drunk and screaming at me that I was going to prison.’ After throwing
Falati’s clothes out into the street, Winnie locked the room and stormed off.
When she had gone, Falati made two telephone calls, one to Mandela and one
to the local newspaper, The Sowetan, telling them what had happened. The
Sowetan immediately sent a reporter and a photographer to the scene. When they
arrived, Falati began telling them how she had ‘protected’ Winnie and how
Winnie was ‘dumping me now that I have served my purpose’. Shortly
afterwards, Mandela arrived, clearly embarrassed by the whole business, asked
Falati not to talk to the press and urged the reporter not to write the story. He
later telephoned The Sowetan’s editor three times to inquire about the paper’s
intentions. When the editor and the reporter called on Mandela to discuss the
incident, he pleaded with them to play it down. It could ruin Winnie’s chances of
a successful appeal, he said. Mandela’s intervention, however, made The
Sowetan all the more determined to publish the story and it duly appeared on 30
March.
Winnie’s petty act of vengeance against Falati reignited the whole controversy
over the murders of both Stompie Moeketsi Seipei and Dr Asvat. Fearing for her
life, Falati agreed to tell ANC officials all that she knew. Falati now claimed that
she had lied at her trial to try to save Winnie from being convicted; that Winnie
had been involved in the torture of Stompie and had ordered the murder of Asvat
because he had seen Stompie in her house shortly before his death; that she had
ordered other deaths, including the murder of a senior journalist on The Sowetan
who had been investigating her criminal activities; and that only four months
before she had drawn up a list of five other people whom she wanted
assassinated, including Cyril Rama - phosa. Falati’s allegations duly appeared in
the press. She said she was not prepared to go to prison for ‘an ungrateful
woman’.
Still more damaging evidence against Winnie surfaced. Her driver, John
Morgan, who had received a one-year’s suspended sentence for his role in the
kidnapping, now claimed, like Falati, that he had lied in court to ‘protect’

Winnie. In a press interview published on 12 April, he said that Winnie was not
only present at the house during Stompie’s beating but led the assault. He
described how, pointing to Stompie’s prostrate body, she told him ‘to pick up the
dog and dump him’—which, he said, he refused to do. ‘I knew he was dead
because he had already been stabbed and had blood on his neck.’ Morgan made
the same allegations on national television.
Press investigations now added further details. From Lusaka, the missing
witness, Katiza Cebekhulu, told a lawyer acting on behalf of the Christian
Science Monitor that Winnie had ordered Dr Asvat’s murder because he could
have given evidence of her part in Stompie’s death. In Johannesburg, Dr Asvat’s
family now demanded that the case of his murder be reopened.
Mandela was left with no option other than to distance himself publicly from
Winnie. He still felt personally responsible for what had happened to her, but the
extent of the damage both to the ANC and to his own reputation could now be
contained only by an announcement of their separation. The media was already
critical of his role in trying to suppress The Sowetan’s story about Winnie.
Ramaphosa and Sisulu went to see him to press him to reach a decision.
For a man as intensely private as Mandela, with such a strong dislike of
discussing his personal affairs and difficulties even with friends, the ordeal of
having to announce the end of the marriage which he had cherished so deeply
before the massed ranks of the world’s media required all the discipline he could
muster. He accomplished it with great dignity, but with barely disguised anguish.
Flanked by his old friends Walter Sisulu and Oliver Tambo, in a room at the
ANC’s headquarters in Johannesburg, he made a statement to journalists on 13
April notable for its generosity, paying tribute to ‘Comrade Nomzamo’, as he
called Winnie, for her devotion to him and to the anti-apartheid struggle:
Owing to the pressures of our shared commitment to the ANC and the struggle
to end apartheid, we were unable to enjoy a normal family life. Despite these
pressures our love for each other and our devotion to our marriage grew and
intensified. . . .
During the two decades I spent on Robben Island, she was an indispensable
pillar of support and comfort to myself personally. . . . Comrade Nomzamo
accepted the onerous burden of raising our children on her own. She endured the
persecution heaped upon her by the government with exemplary fortitude and
never wavered from her commitment to the freedom struggle. Her tenacity

reinforced my personal respect, love and growing affection. It also attracted the
admiration of the world at large. My love for her remains undiminished.
However, in view of the tensions that have arisen owing to differences
between ourselves on a number of issues in recent months, we have mutually
agreed that a separation would be best for each of us. My action was not
prompted by the current allegations being made against her in the media. . . .
Comrade Nomzamo has and can continue to rely on my unstinting support
during these trying moments in her life.
I shall personally never regret the life Comrade Nomzamo and I tried to share
together. Circumstances beyond our control, however, dictated it should be
otherwise. I part from my wife with no recriminations. I embrace her with all the
love and affection I have nursed for her inside and outside prison from the
moment I first met her.
Reading the statement had left Mandela drained and exhausted. Rising from
his seat, he appealed to the press: ‘Ladies and gentlemen, I hope you appreciate
the pain I have gone through.’ Then, in silence, he walked stiffly from the room.
Behind the scenes, Ramaphosa now went to work to force Winnie’s
‘retirement from politics’. He wanted her resignation both from her position as
head of the social welfare department and from membership of the ANC’s
national executive committee. But Winnie fought back tenaciously. All that she
agreed to do was to resign as head of the social welfare department.
On 15 April, at a press conference announcing her resignation from the
department, she remained defiant, protesting her innocence of any crimes and
blaming her predicament on those who wished to destroy her and discredit the
ANC:
The step I am taking is not because of the false allegations being made against
me but because of the devotion that I have for the ANC and my family. Over the
years, many have tried to divide and weaken the ANC. They have failed, and
they will fail again. I have taken this step because I consider it to be in the best
interest of the ANC, whose cause and policies I will support until the end of my
life.
Winnie lost no time strengthening her popularity with radical youth groups
and squatter communities, determined to present herself as the champion of the
poor and dispossessed, with a powerful constituency of her own. Within days,

she appeared at one scene of township violence after another, berating the
government and Inkatha and fulminating against the negotiations process. ‘We
are certainly not going to keep on talking to a government that is killing our
people,’ she said. On national television, she declared, ‘As far as I am
concerned, my political career goes on as if nothing had happened.’
She used her position as leader of the ANC’s Women’s League in the
Johannesburg region to instigate a march demanding her reinstatement as head
of the social welfare department, an action that created turmoil in the Women’s
League. One attempt after another was made to dislodge her, but she clung on
with a vengeance.
The end, however, was nigh. In May 1992, ANC officials announced that they
were conducting an investigation into charges that Winnie and her dismissed
deputy, Dali Mpofu, had been responsible for the disappearance of 400,000
rands from the department of social welfare. While the investigation was
proceeding, they came into possession of a letter Winnie had written to Mpofu
on 17 March 1992, one month before her resignation as head of the department.
The letter was leaked to South African newspapers and appeared in print on 6
September 1992, making her position untenable.
It was four pages long, written by hand, mostly in English but with occasional
phrases in Xhosa, and blazed with anger and venom about Mpofu’s affairs with
other women. Winnie admitted that she had agreed to Mpofu having another
relationship ‘as a cover to defuse our problem’, even though she ‘shuddered at
the thought of you lying and pretending to love this other woman’. But that did
not mean Mpofu could go ‘running around fucking at the slightest emotional
excuse’. She accused him of deceiving her and complained about his ‘shabby
treatment’ of her: ‘You have hurt and humiliated me as a woman.’ She grumbled
about his indifference to how ‘the situation is deteriorating at home’—she had
not been speaking to Mandela for five months. Yet Mpofu had not bothered
because he was out every night satisfying himself with another woman.
Amid this tirade were references to bank accounts which proved fatal. Winnie
berated Mpofu over his lack of concern about her financial problems, mentioned
how much money she had spent on him and spoke of her fears about the
investigation into the accounts of the social welfare department. ‘I tell you I’m in
trouble with the Simmons Street a/c which reflects over R160,000 drawn over a
period for you,’ she wrote. ‘You don’t even bother to check how we can

overcome this.’ Mandela, she said, had ordered an inquiry into her account. Her
secretary at the department of social welfare, Ntombi, was talking to the
investigators: ‘I tell you Ntombi is gossiping about the cheques we used to ask
her to cash for in the name of the Dpt and how I gave you all that money.’
Mandela was shown a copy of the letter before it was published in the press.
He recognised the handwriting and the style and knew that certain details, such
as Winnie’s assertion that they had not spoken for five months, were accurate.
He decided to ask George Bizos to take a copy to Winnie to check its
authenticity. According to Mandela, ‘she broke down and wept’.
Four days later, Winnie resigned from all her remaining posts in the ANC,
from the national executive committee and the Women’s League, with an
emotional outburst against her ‘enemies’ inside and outside the organisation and
displaying deep-rooted delusions about her own importance. In a rambling
statement to a press conference, she gave no clear explanation of why she had
decided to resign other than to say it was ‘primarily in the interest of my dear
husband and my beloved family’.
Addressing herself to her family ‘and to all my people in South Africa, in our
squatter camps, in our villages, in the violence-torn and poverty-stricken areas’,
she said, ‘There is no reason to be overwhelmed by a sense of isolation and
abandonment. I have only been a mere servant to you and I will always be.’
However, Winnie’s ambition was not so easily thwarted.

In October 1992, a glittering wedding reception, attended by 800 guests, was
held in the ballroom of the Carlton Hotel in Johannesburg to celebrate the
wedding of Zindzi Mandela and Zwelibansi Hlongwane, a shop-owner several
years her junior. Zindzi’s life had been marked by personal dramas as much as
her mother’s. She had borne four children from four different fathers, one of
whom savagely assaulted her, leaving her for dead, and another of whom, a
Mandela United gangster, committed suicide. Beneath the glamour of the
occasion, there were turbulent undercurrents. Mandela treated Winnie as if she
did not exist, not addressing a word to her. He appeared so grim at times that an
old friend, Helen Suzman, passed up a note to him: ‘Smile, Nelson! You look
like John Vorster used to in parliament! ’ He read the note, burst into a radiant
smile briefly, then lapsed again into a sphinx-like stare.

In his speech to the guests, he reflected on the plight of his family: ‘We
watched our children growing without our guidance and when we did come out
[of prison], my children, for example, said, “We thought we had a father and one
day he’d come back. But to our dismay, our father comes back and he leaves us
alone almost daily because he has now become the father of the nation.”’
Mandela said he had often pondered on whether the struggle had been worth the
loss of a normal family life but had always concluded, ‘It was, it is, the correct
decision that we should commit ourselves.’

CHAPTER 25

THE SUNSET CLAUSE
SOON AFTER THE CODESA NEGOTIATIONS REACHED DEADLOCK,
THE ANC announced a campaign of mass action: a series of rolling strikes,
demonstrations and boycotts across the country, intended to force the
government to back down at the negotiating table. The campaign was to be
organised with the help of the ANC’s allies, the trade union federation, Cosatu,
and the South African Communist Party. Its climax would be a general strike.
Most groups within the ‘tripartite alliance’ regarded mass action as a
necessary component of the negotiating process. A show of strength on the
streets, bringing industry to a halt, would make the government more amenable,
they believed. A radical faction within the Communist Party, however, saw mass
action not as a means of gaining compromises but as a way of bringing the
government down. These ‘insurrectionists’, as they were known, pointed to
events in Eastern Europe, especially to Leipzig, where street demonstrations had
helped topple the East German regime three years before, and believed that the
same result could be engineered in South Africa.
Among those favouring the ‘Leipzig option’ was Ronnie Kasrils, a member of
the Communist Party’s central committee, a former Umkhonto intelligence chief
and a member of the ANC’s national executive committee. A middle-aged man
driven by boyish enthusiasm for revolutionary exploits and clearly bored by the
proceedings at Codesa, which he rarely attended, Kasrils had been agitating for
months for mass action. With the failure of Codesa, he was given his chance and
put in charge of organising the ANC’s campaign. He dubbed it Operation Exit.
The ANC’s strategy carried high risks. Mass action was to be launched at a
time when many townships were in turmoil. The Reef war continued unabated.
All previous experience of strikes, boycotts and demonstrations showed that they
led to an upsurge in violence as supporters resorted to coercion to get their way.
The risk now was that the turmoil and the violence might become
uncontrollable.

The date chosen for the start of the mass action campaign was 16 June, the
anniversary of the beginning of the Soweto revolt in 1976. Dressed in a track
suit and wearing a baseball cap, Mandela marched at the head of a column of
ANC supporters through the streets of Soweto to the Orlando football stadium to
launch the campaign. Addressing the huge crowd packing the stands, he
explained the need for mass action: ‘The National Party wants a system where
people can vote but the result is fixed beforehand. All parties, they say, would
have veto powers.’ So if an ANC majority in government wanted to change
apartheid policies on education or housing, they would be able to do so only
with the consent of the white minority. Negotiations had not budged de Klerk, he
said, so the time had come for a change of strategy. In the face of violence
deliberately planned by the security forces and their ‘vigilantes’, the ANC’s
codeword for Inkatha, it was imperative, he said, that ANC supporters set about
the protests peacefully. It was even more imperative to resist suggestions from
within the ANC’s ranks to take the violence to white areas. ‘This would be a
disaster of the first magnitude. We don’t want innocent people killed, black or
white.’
A mass stayaway the ANC organised for 16 June was judged to be a success.
The following night, however, there occurred an incident of such brutality that,
just like Sharpeville and Soweto, its name came to be remembered around the
world and to represent another grim landmark in the passage of South Africa’s
violent history. It plunged South Africa into a crisis far worse than anyone had
expected.
On 17 June, a group of Inkatha hostel dwellers in Boipatong, a small township
in the Vaal Triangle, forty miles south of Johannesburg, attacked a nearby shack
settlement, kicking in doors, smashing windows and then hacking, stabbing and
shooting residents at random in a killing spree that lasted more than four hours,
leaving forty-five residents, mostly woman and children, dead. It was the fourth
mass killing that week in a black area near Johannesburg. The police were once
again accused of collusion. Two days later, three people died when police
opened fire on a crowd which had gathered to protest at the massacre.
The event propelled Mandela into the radical camp. He suspended all talks
with the government, saying, ‘I can no longer explain to our people why we
continue to talk to a regime that is murdering our people and conducting war
against us.’ His language became increasingly intemperate. He described the
activities of the National Party and its Inkatha allies as similar to Nazi attacks on

Jews. ‘They are killing our people in an effort to stop the ANC getting into
power,’ he said. The negotiations process was ‘completely in tatters’. When
hardline members on the ANC national executive committee argued that
negotiations had proved useless and should be abandoned altogether, Mandela
was inclined to agree. Among rank and file supporters, there was a huge
groundswell in favour of reverting to armed struggle. Placards waved at Mandela
during a rally to mark the Boipatong massacre read, ‘Mandela, we want arms
now’ and ‘Victory through battle not talk’.
Mandela refused to believe that de Klerk did not have the power to curb the
violence. In his mind, there were only two possible explanations for why it
continued: either the security forces were out of control or de Klerk was
conniving with them. ‘In my view, he might not be aware of every attack. But
generally speaking, the fact that the police and security services are involved, he
would know very well,’ Mandela said in July. ‘A head of state who does not
know the things that are happening is not fit to be a head of state.’

Much to de Klerk’s embarrassment, there was a continuing trickle of evidence
implicating security forces in violent activity. In April 1992, a white police
captain and four black ‘special constables’ were convicted of the killing of
eleven people—six women, three men and two children—in a small rural
settlement in Natal whom they believed were supporters of the ANC. The
‘special constables’ were Inkatha men who had been selected and trained by the
police. The judge’s verdict was that the massacre was part of a security force
operation to disrupt the community, oust an established ANC-aligned residents’
association and give Inkatha control of the area. The judge said he was
convinced that there had been a conspiracy among senior officers reaching up to
police headquarters to cover up the crime. In his evidence, the police captain,
Brian Mitchell, said he saw himself as a soldier in a civil war in which the
enemy were pro-ANC groups. The murders had been carried out in 1988, but
Mitchell’s views were still common among white police officers.
The military were also implicated. In May 1992, the press published the
contents of a military intelligence signal proposing the ‘permanent removal’ of
three prominent black activists in the Eastern Cape. Two weeks after the signal
was sent, the killing of two of them took place, along with two other activists.
The incident occurred in 1985, but the disclosure seven years later of military

involvement not only stirred black anger against the army but reinforced all the
fears and suspicions already harboured about the activities of a ‘third force’. The
man who authorised the signal was Brigadier Christoffel van der Westhuizen,
then head of joint operations at the Eastern Cape Prov - ince command. In 1992,
van der Westhuizen, promoted to the rank of general, was chief of military
intelligence.
It was the Department of Military Intelligence that was the main focus of
suspicions. For years, the DMI had been in control of special force operations
supporting Renamo rebels in Mozambique and Unita rebels in Angola fighting
to overthrow Marxist governments. It had also been involved in training Inkatha
members. The units which the DMI had run across South Africa’s borders—like
32 Battalion, composed mainly of Portuguese-speaking mercenaries—had
returned to South Africa once the DMI’s campaign of destabilisation in
neighbouring countries had come to an end and once the war with Swapo
guerrillas in Namibia was over. Many senior officers were bitterly resentful of
the outcome. In a 1992 message to soldiers who had fought in Angola and
Namibia, Colonel Jan Breytenbach, a former commander of the much-feared 32
Battalion, reflected their discontent. ‘You did not lose in Angola,’ he told them.
‘You did not lose in Namibia. You were betrayed by politicians under foreign
pressure.’ From their bases in South Africa, these special force units provided a
ready source of recruits for disgruntled officers intent on organising covert
operations. Other irregular units included Koevoet, a police counter-insurgency
force once used in Namibia, many of whose members were now active in the
South African police force. All had been trained to hunt down ANC or Swapo
cadres in the streets and shebeens of southern Africa and were prone to violent
and lawless conduct.
But as well as anti-ANC groups at work in the townships, the ANC’s own
self-defence units were running amok. SDUs had been set up with the help of
Umkhonto with the aim of protecting ANC communities from Inkatha attacks.
By mid-1992, about eighty-five SDUs were in operation. But many of them had
spun completely out of ANC control and had been taken over by gangsters,
warlords and renegade Umkhonto guerrillas. In July 1992, the Communist Party
leader, Chris Hani, writing in the party’s publication Umsebenzi, admitted that
they often served as fronts and shelters for criminals. They had brought about, he
said, ‘an alarming revival of kangaroo courts and kangaroo politics’. Some had
been infiltrated by police and army agents intent on subverting them.

The task of sorting out the evidence was given to a judicial commission into
public violence and intimidation, headed by Judge Richard Goldstone, which
had been set up as a result of the 1991 national peace accord. In May 1992,
Goldstone published an interim report which concluded that the primary cause of
the violence was not security force activity, as Mandela maintained, but the
political battle between supporters of the ANC and Inkatha: ‘Both sides resort to
violence and intimidation in their attempts to gain control over geographic
areas.’ There would be no lessening of violence ‘unless and until the leaders and
supporters’ of the two factions agreed to disarm and ‘abandon violence and
intimidation as political weapons’.
The commission exonerated de Klerk himself and his government from any
direct involvement in political violence. It had received no evidence justifying
allegations of ‘any direct complicity in or planning of current violence’, no
credible evidence of a ‘third force’ at work. But it sharply rebuked the
government for failing to implement earlier recommendations it had made,
including the need to impose security measures at hostels and to ban the carrying
of all dangerous weapons. The commission also noted that its previous
recommendation regarding the withdrawal from townships of 32 Battalion,
whose members had been found responsible for rape and other assaults during
‘peacekeeping’ operations, had been blocked by the army commander, General
George Meiring. The government, said the commission, ‘must be able to
demonstrate that it has control over its security forces’.
Police actions were also severely criticised. An independent inquiry into the
Boipatong massacre, carried out with the help of British experts, concluded in
July 1992 that while there was no evidence of police or government complicity,
the police were to blame for ‘a failure of leadership at all levels’. The inquiry
castigated the police for ‘serious incompetence’ throughout its organisation.

For month after month, as the mass action campaign continued, South Africa
was convulsed by strikes, protests and boycotts. All that was left publicly of the
negotiations process was an angry exchange of memoranda between Mandela
and de Klerk. In July, Mandela issued a list of fourteen demands the government
would have to meet before talks could be resumed. De Klerk responded with a
thirty-one-page memorandum, deriding Mandela as a ‘captive’ of
‘insurrectionists’ in the Communist Party and warning of harsh measures to

prevent chaos in the country. Mandela answered with a twenty-four-page
rebuttal, labelling de Klerk a liar and blatant propagandist suffering from selfdelusion. Negotiations to bring about democracy had failed, he said, because ‘the
ruling National Party keeps looking for ways to exercise power even if it loses a
democratic election’. His letter contained lengthy appendices charging the
government with responsibility for political violence: ‘The acts of omission and
commission by government in numerous cases can only be explained in terms of
direct complicity in the violence in order to make party political gains at great
cost in black lives and economic damage to our country.’ Mandela ended with a
stern admonition to de Klerk:
Find a way within yourself to recognize the gravity of the crisis. . . . Find a way
to address the demands we have placed before you . . . so that negotiations can
become meaningful and be vested with the urgency that the situation requires.
Failure to respond in this way can only exacerbate the crisis. You may succeed
in delaying, but never in preventing, the transition of South Africa to democracy.
In August, the ANC alliance brought the campaign to a climax with a general
strike by several million workers. Much of the country’s business and industry
came to a halt or was forced to reduce output. The strike was followed by mass
marches. In Pretoria, Mandela led more than 50,000 supporters through the heart
of the city to the seat of white government, Union Buildings. ‘Today we are at
the door of Union Buildings,’ declared Ramaphosa. ‘Next time, F. W. de Klerk,
we are going to be inside your office.’ Mandela hailed the strike as
‘unquestionably one of the great events in our history’.
Yet for all the fervour that mass action achieved, it produced nothing in terms
of forcing any movement in the government’s position. Nor was it a strategy that
ANC supporters could afford to continue indefinitely. The ANC was divided
over what to do next. Some wanted to seek a way back into negotiation. The
initiative, however, lay with Kasrils and his group of insurrectionists. They
argued that though mass action might not bring Pretoria to its knees, it would
work against weaker governments in the homelands, in KwaZulu,
Bophuthatswana and Ciskei, the allies of Pretoria which had so far kept a tight
clamp on all ANC activity.
Ciskei was a particularly tempting target. It was ruled by a military dictator,
Brigadier Oupa Gqozo, who had only recently seized power and had
increasingly resorted to repressive measures to stay there. All the ANC’s efforts

to engage in political activity in Ciskei had been blocked. Mandela had spoken
several times on the phone to Gqozo about the clampdown, and had met him
twice in Bisho, the Ciskei capital. ‘In one of our meetings, we agreed that we
should each lead delegations of ten,’ said Mandela. ‘His delegation was
composed of seven whites and three Africans. All these whites were seconded
from South Africa. We got nowhere.’
The insurrectionists believed that a mass march on Bisho from neighbouring
King William’s Town, a few miles away across the ‘border’ in white South
Africa, would trigger a switch of allegiance by the Ciskei army and public
servants, causing the homeland administration to collapse. Kasrils travelled to
Ciskei on a reconnaissance mission and pronounced it ripe for popular
insurrection. ‘I have just spent a week in Ciskei and I have never encountered
such hatred for a despot,’ Kasrils told a reporter. Once Gqozo was overthrown,
the next targets would be Lucas Mangope in Bophuthatswana and Buthelezi in
KwaZulu.
On 3 September, the ANC sent a memorandum to de Klerk demanding that
Gqozo be removed as ruler of Ciskei and replaced by an interim administration
that would permit free political activity. De Klerk refused, pointing out Ciskei’s
‘independence’. He sent Mandela three letters warning of the dangers of a
bloody confrontation and pleading with him to call off the march. Gqozo himself
issued a warning that he would meet with force any attempt to march on his
capital.
The march was set for 7 September. The night before, Gqozo sought an urgent
court order prohibiting the march. A local magistrate granted permission for the
march to take place but ordered that it should not proceed beyond Bisho’s
independence stadium, just over the border from white South Africa but more
than a mile from the town. The Ciskei police and military, commanded by white
officers seconded from Pretoria, were ordered to stop the marchers there.
In the morning, a column of 70,000 marchers set out from King William’s
Town along the road to Bisho. Their aim, according to one leading activist, was
‘to drive the pig from the barn’. The border was closed by a line of razor wire,
with Ciskei troops deployed behind it. But scouting ahead of the column, Kasrils
noticed a gap in the outer fence of the independence stadium alongside the road,
which seemed to offer a route into the centre of Bisho. Returning back down the
hill to colleagues, Kasrils urged that he should lead a breakaway group from the

main column, storm through the gap and head on to Bisho. ‘It’s going to be a
cinch,’ he was overheard to say.
But Kasrils had failed to spot a detachment of Ciskei troops covering the gap
from trench positions. As his breakaway group raced through the gap, the troops
opened fire. Kasrils and other ANC leaders survived. But twenty-eight marchers
were killed.
The day of the insurrectionists was over.

A mood of deep despondency hung over South Africa during those months in
1992. The cycle of violence seemed endless, destroying all prospect of a political
settlement. The economy was sunk in the third year of recession, with no end in
sight. A catastrophic drought had laid waste to farming areas. The very
institutions of government, it seemed, were rotten: the police proven
incompetent and the military contaminated by dirty tricks. A wave of corruption
scandals beset the administration. In the case of one government department
dealing with the homelands, a judge concluded that ‘millions, if not billions’ of
rands had been pilfered and misspent. Corruption was everywhere in the air.
White civil servants and politicians scrambled to top up their pension schemes
and fix long-term contracts before the day of reckoning. Security officials
insisted on indemnities. The columnist Shaun Johnson wrote in The Star, ‘If you
stand on a street corner in Pretoria late at night, I am sure you can hear the sound
of shredders shredding. Of assets being stripped. Of pockets being stuffed.’
The ANC added to the growing list of scandals. An internal inquiry confirmed
allegations made by former ANC members that torture and executions had taken
place in its camps in Angola during the 1980s. The ANC refused to disclose the
names of its torturers, but the press published them, revealing that several were
serving in high places in the ANC. One of them was a member of Mandela’s
own bodyguard. What was worse, ANC leaders like Oliver Tambo and Chris
Hani were accused of failing to stop the ill-treatment of its prisoners. Mandela
accepted ‘collective responsibility’ for the incidents, but the overall result was to
leave the ANC’s leadership discredited.
On top of all this was the crippling stalemate within the political arena. After
nearly three years of effort, the politicians had little to show and nothing to offer.
Each side denied its own responsibility. While they squabbled in public, the field

was left open to insurrectionists like Kasrils to pursue their revolutionary
fantasies. Whatever confidence there was about the country’s future was rapidly
ebbing away, both at home and abroad.
So deep was the crisis that it induced a willingness to compromise that had not
existed before. In the wake of Bisho, Mandela reasserted his leadership, called a
halt to mass action and severely reprimanded Kasrils. The priority, he said, was
to haul South Africa ‘out of the quagmire’. Both he and de Klerk bore
responsibility to see that it happened. In a gesture of conciliation to de Klerk,
only one week after the Bisho shooting, he compressed the ANC’s fourteen
preconditions for resuming talks to three. ‘If Mr de Klerk can just say to me,
“You have expressed your three concerns, I give you my undertaking that I will
address them,”’ Mandela said in a press interview, ‘then I will be able to go back
to my people and say, “Look, he has met us. Let us meet him.”’
Behind the scenes, ever since talks had been broken off two key negotiators,
Cyril Ramaphosa from the ANC and Roelf Meyer from the government side,
had kept in touch in private, trying to pick up the pieces. Meyer had been
appointed the government’s chief negotiator in June 1992, a few weeks before
the Boipatong massacre. He represented a new generation of Afrikaner leader,
anxious to move ahead with the reforms that de Klerk had initiated in 1990. He
was less concerned to protect white privileges from the past than to secure an
accommodation for whites in the future that would last. With Ramaphosa, he
struck up an effective working relationship. Meyer was forty-five; Ramaphosa
was forty. Meeting in private in hotel rooms, they managed to establish a
measure of trust which survived amid the turmoil and provided the basis for the
negotiation process to resume.
Meyer and Ramaphosa became convinced that the way out of the impasse was
for the government and the ANC to reach a bilateral understanding before
multiparty talks continued. For de Klerk, however, the drawback of this
approach was that bilateral talks between the government and the ANC were
likely to jeopardise his hopes of forging an electoral alliance with regional black
leaders like Buthelezi. Buthelezi’s national support was considered to be of
minor importance, but his following in KwaZulu-Natal, according to opinion
polls, was still substantial. His pro-capitalist policies were far more compatible
with National Party ideology than the ANC’s plans for ‘redistribution’.
Moreover, a significant section of the cabinet, the National Party, the military
and the police, as well as a coterie of white businessmen in Natal, much

preferred Buthelezi as an ally to the prospect of having to do business with the
likes of Mandela.
But de Klerk’s overriding concern was to get the negotiations under way
again. Reciprocating Mandela’s gesture of conciliation, he issued a public
invitation to him to join him in a summit meeting to find a way of ending the
spiral of violence. Mandela responded positively. The harsh rhetoric he had
employed against de Klerk for months on end was dropped. In his garden in
Houghton late one Sunday afternoon, he mused quietly about de Klerk’s
difficulties. ‘I phoned him two days ago,’ he said, ‘and I must say he sounded a
bit down. He is a very brave chap, you know, very bright and confident, and it
was worrying to hear him sounding so down.’ In the hurly-burly of South
African politics, such moments were rare, however, and soon forgotten.
The date for the summit was set for 26 September, less than three weeks after
the Bisho shooting. For ten days beforehand, the two sides, led by Meyer and
Ramaphosa, negotiated night and day over the three conditions set by the ANC
for resuming talks. All were highly contentious. Two of them required action
against Inkatha: the ANC demanded that Inkatha hostels should be fenced and
that Inkatha members should be prohibited from carrying traditional weapons in
public. These were demands opposed outright by the pro-Buthelezi faction
within de Klerk’s cabinet. The third demand de Klerk himself opposed. It
involved the release of a number of ANC prisoners, three of whom had been
sentenced to death for murder, including an Umkhonto member, Robert
McBride, who had killed three young white women in a bomb attack outside a
bar on Durban’s beach-front. In the white community, the idea of releasing such
convicted murderers was anathema.
Two days before the summit, the ANC’s negotiators reported to Mandela that
only one obstacle lay in the way: de Klerk had balked at the release of the three
murderers; he had said he would ‘never’ release them. They proposed a backdown to ensure that the summit went ahead. But Mandela would have none of it.
‘De Klerk needed us more than we needed him,’ Mandela recalled. ‘He
desperately needed that summit.’ Ramaphosa described Mandela’s stubbornness
over the issue: ‘He has nerves of steel. Once he has decided that a particular
issue has to be pursued, everything else matters very little. And he can be very
harsh when dealing with an opponent who is unreasonable, very brutal in a calm
and collected sort of way.’

Mandela spoke to de Klerk on the phone. Either de Klerk agreed to release the
prisoners, he said, or there would be no summit. Mandela advised de Klerk
against adopting intransigent positions, against saying he would ‘never’ release
the prisoners: ‘Because you know in the end you are going to give in. Because if
you don’t, we are going to humiliate you. And I will see to it that that happens.’
Ramaphosa feared that Mandela had gone too far and told him so, but
Mandela remained relaxed. He laughed and said, ‘This chap, I have had enough
of him. We hold the line here today.’ After several more phone calls, de Klerk
agreed to release the three men.
At the summit meeting, Mandela applied the same techniques. Facing strong
opposition from members of his cabinet over the Inkatha issues, de Klerk
attempted to prevaricate and asked for more time to study the matter. ‘Very well,
Mr de Klerk, you can have the time,’ Mandela replied, ‘provided you understand
that when we leave here to have a press conference, I shall say that this meeting
has been a total failure.’ De Klerk hastily convened a ‘working committee’ led
by Meyer to study the issue; it met over the lunch break and duly approved the
concession.
The summit ended with Mandela and de Klerk signing what was termed a
Record of Understanding, thus breaking the deadlock on constitutional
negotiations. But its real significance went even further, for it marked the point
at which the government was no longer able on its own to control the transition
process, as de Klerk had assumed it always would. Henceforth, government
action had to take into account the requirements of the ANC. No deal could be
done without it. The summit also marked the point at which Mandela gained a
psychological ascendancy over de Klerk which he was never to lose. Another
shift in the balance of power had occurred.
Buthelezi reacted to the accord between the government and the ANC with a
fit of rage, seeing it as a move to leave him on the sidelines while they
constructed their own deal. He denounced de Klerk’s ‘appeasement’ of the ANC
and warned that his followers would never give up carrying traditional weapons
and would tear down any fences erected around Inkatha hostels ‘with their bare
hands’. He poured scorn on the ANC’s threat to march on his capital, Ulundi,
reminding it of the grim fate of a British army column which had invaded
Zululand in 1879. Zulus, he said, were ready for ‘another washing of the spears’.
Buthelezi now played the tribal card for all it was worth, presenting himself as

the defender of all Zulus against external enemies like the ANC and its
communist allies bent on their destruction. At mass rallies, he warned Zulus that
their very existence was at stake, that their foes planned to wipe KwaZulu ‘off
the face of the earth’. Claiming that secret deals were being made, he broke off
negotiations with the government, determined to wreck the process.
Meanwhile, the search for a settlement between the government and the ANC
began in earnest. It received a dramatic boost in October from an unexpected
quarter: Joe Slovo. Slovo believed that what the ANC needed at this juncture
was some ‘shock therapy’ about its own negotiating position. Just as he had
taken the initiative in arguing for the suspension of the armed struggle in 1990,
so now he took the lead in proposing a highly controversial compromise in
negotiations. Writing in the Communist Party journal African Communist, Slovo
suggested that as an alternative to making a bid for total power, it might be
necessary for the ANC to offer the government ‘a sunset clause’ in a new
constitution which would entrench power-sharing in a government of national
unity for a fixed period. The ANC might also have to give ground by offering
guarantees on regional government, by accepting an amnesty for security
officials and by honouring the contracts of civil servants, either by retaining
them or by compensating them. ‘The ANC is not dealing with a defeated enemy;
an early seizure of power is not realistic; the capacity of the white civil service,
army and police to destabilize a newly born democracy is enormous; and a
sunset clause should be inserted in the new constitution to provide for
compulsory power-sharing for a fixed number of years.’ To emphasise the point,
Slovo warned, ‘All we will achieve when we have won the election is to gain
political office. We would not gain state power in the sense of having a complete
transformation on day one of the police, the armed forces, the judiciary and the
civil services.’ Coming from a figure with such impeccable revolutionary
credentials, these ideas carried all the more weight.
Slovo’s suggestions created a furore within the ANC and the Communist
Party. Hardline communists like Harry Gwala contemptuously dismissed them
as ‘bourgeois reformism’. Pallo Jordan, an independent Marxist, claimed Slovo
was advocating total ‘capitulation’. The Slovo scenario, he said, aimed at
nothing less than enabling ‘the liberation movement and the regime to ride
blissfully into the sunset together’. Members of the ANC national executive
committee sceptical of the outcome of the negotiations argued that the National
Party would never abandon power, no matter what was offered.

But in other quarters in the ANC, the idea of ‘sunset’ clauses for the white
community had gained a certain currency. Mandela himself had long believed
that a multiparty coalition might be needed in the early years of democratic rule
to help assuage the fears of minorities. ‘It may not be enough to work purely on
one-person one-vote,’ he said in 1991, ‘because every national group would like
to see that the people of their flesh and blood are in government.’
The ANC’s negotiating commission developed Slovo’s ideas into a document
of its own, entitled ‘Negotiations: A Strategic Perspective’, which was formally
adopted in November. Because of the pressure on the ANC to achieve results
and the government’s ability to ‘endlessly delay’, it said, there was a need to
make compromises and to pursue a swift negotiation process. This process
would have to address questions of job security, retrenchment packages and a
general amnesty for ‘all armed formations and sections of the civil service’. Of
crucial importance, the ANC argued in favour of a government of national unity.
The way forward, it suggested, was for the government and the ANC to reach a
bilateral agreement on those issues before including other parties in a multiparty
forum. Government negotiators were quick to discern the makings of a deal on
this basis.
De Klerk was still a long way from accepting the idea of majority rule, even
under a government of national unity. His goal remained a constitution which
would ensure that blacks could not govern without the agreement of whites. But
his authority was steadily being eroded. In November 1992, the Goldstone
Commission uncovered a secret operation set up in 1991 by the Department of
Military Intelligence to run a dirty-tricks campaign against the ANC, using a
covert unit based in Pretoria which employed a network of ‘prostitutes,
homosexuals, shebeen owners and drug dealers’ to compromise ANC and
Umkhonto leaders by involving them in criminal activity. The existence of the
unit, run by the army’s senior intelligence officer, provided the most damning
evidence so far of a deliberate strategy at high government level to discredit the
ANC.
A subsequent investigation carried out by the chief of defence force staff,
General Pierre Steyn, uncovered evidence of military intelligence involvement in
train massacres, assassination, gun-running, smuggling and other criminal
activity. Unable to dismiss the problem any more as a ‘few rogue individuals’,
de Klerk was forced to start cleaning up the military. He sacked or suspended
twenty-three officers, including two generals, and ordered a purge of military

intelligence staff. Special force units like 32 Battalion and the police counterinsurgency unit, Koevoet, were disbanded. Military personnel and their
associates, de Klerk admitted, ‘have been involved, and in some cases are still
involved, in illegal and unauthorized activities and malpractices. There are
indications that some of the activities and some of the individuals might have
been motivated by a wish to prevent us from succeeding in our goals’. The
overall result was to tarnish de Klerk’s reputation and to vindicate Mandela’s
claims about the existence of a third force.
Bilateral meetings between the government and the ANC, starting in
December 1992 with a four-day bush summit or bosberaad held in a wildlife
resort, now began to make steady progress. By February 1993, the two sides
were agreed upon the outline for a new order, which meant de Klerk giving up
many of his original negotiating aims. The new order involved an interim fiveyear government of national unity in which all parties polling over 5 per cent
would be represented proportionately in the cabinet. After five years, the
government of national unity would become a simple majority-rule government.
A transitional executive council, representing all parties accepting the process,
would oversee preparations for elections and would assure a ‘level playing field’
for all the contestants. During the five-year interim, an elected constituent
assembly would draw up the final constitution but it would be based on a set of
principles agreed to previously at multiparty negotiations which would launch
the whole process.
There were critics of this compromise arrangement on both sides, but the most
extraordinary attack of all came from Winnie Mandela. Still awaiting the
outcome of her appeal against convictions for kidnapping and assault, she was
endeavouring to resurrect her political career by adopting hardline positions
popular with militants. Her attack was launched not just against the negotiations
process but against the role of the ANC’s leaders and, by implication, Mandela
himself. The negotiations process, she said, was being conducted between ‘the
elite of the oppressed and the oppressors’, ignoring the interests of the masses:
The NP elite is getting into bed with the ANC in order to preserve its silken
sheets. And the leadership of the ANC is getting into bed with the NP to enjoy
this new-found luxury. The concern is that this new amalgam of power is
promoting its own self-interest and overlooking the plight and needs of the
underprivileged masses. . . . The quick-fix solution sought by our leaders can
only benefit a few and will backfire massively on the country as a whole. The

disillusion that will follow when the masses awaken to the fact that they have not
been included in the new freedom and in the new wealth enjoyed by their leaders
will have worse implications than what we experienced in the 1970s and 1980s,
and will plunge the country irrevocably into yet another vortex of mass violence
and protest.
A new breed of leadership was needed, she said, truly representative of the
aspirations of the ‘oppressed’.
Winnie’s own lifestyle—a grandiose mansion, an expensive wardrobe, a
Mercedes-Benz, a retinue of bodyguards and retainers—was well known for its
luxury and extravagance. Senior ANC officials dismissed her as no more than an
opportunist. ‘Who on earth is she to be speaking of silken sheets?’ demanded
one official. Yet Winnie’s remarks found a ready audience in the shack and
squatter settlements she patronised. And it was this mass of impoverished
people, she believed, who would carry her back to power within the ANC.
In April 1993, multiparty negotiations resumed. No agreement on what the
new negotiating forum should be called had been reached, so it was given no
formal name. The number of groups now represented had expanded from
nineteen to twenty-six. This time, the Conservative Party was present, forsaking
its vow never to sit down with ‘terrorists’. So was its offshoot, the Afrikaner
Volksunie. The Pan-Africanist Congress also attended, even though it still
professed to be committed to the armed struggle and had been involved in recent
murders of white farmers to prove it. Places had also been found for traditional
leaders like the Zulu king, Goodwill Zwelethini, whose presence had been
repeatedly demanded previously by Buthelezi. The participation of so many
parties seemed to augur well.
Then, within a matter of days, South Africa was struck by a cataclysmic event.
On the morning of Easter Saturday in April 1993, as Chris Hani stepped out of
his car in the driveway of his home in Dawn Park, a predominantly white suburb
of the gold-mining town of Boksburg on the East Rand, he was assassinated by a
lone white gunman who had been waiting for him in a red Ford car parked
across the road. As the gunman drove off, an Afrikaner neighbour, who had
heard the shots, memorised the registration number and phoned the police.
Fifteen minutes later, the gunman was arrested on a highway outside Boksburg.
Hani was a hero to millions of black youths, a legendary guerrilla commander
who had risen to become Umkhonto’s chief of staff. A lifelong communist, he

championed the cause of the poor and dispossessed. He was tough, ruthless and
hugely popular, second only to Mandela, according to an independent poll in
November 1992. He was also famous for fiery speech-making. Yet, even though
he had misgivings, Hani had been converted to the cause of negotiation. When
radical activists advocated a break with negotiations, Hani had argued
determinedly in favour of pursuing them. He was pragmatic about the need to
offer security forces an amnesty. When self-defence units in the townships began
degenerating into vigilante gangs, he had been the first to call for their
disbanding. He had moved to the white middle-class suburb of Dawn Park in
1991 in an attempt to break down racial barriers, influencing other black
political and union officials to do the same. A few days before his death, he had
declared, ‘I am now a combatant for peace.’ His following among the youth
remained huge. If anyone was capable of mobilising this vast, unruly
constituency behind the negotiation process, it was Hani. His death at the hands
of a white assassin seemed certain to plunge South Africa into an inferno of
violence.
Mandela was at his house in Qunu in the Transkei on that Easter Saturday,
working on his autobiography with the writer Richard Stengel. After an earlymorning walk in the countryside, Mandela had returned to the study to begin a
taped interview. He had hardly started when his housekeeper interrupted to let
him know that members of the Transkei police rugby team had arrived at the
house and wanted to greet him. Mandela rose stiffly from his chair and went
outside. While he was in the middle of shaking hands with each member of the
team in the driveway, the housekeeper ran out, in tears, telling him of an urgent
telephone call. Mandela excused himself and went inside to be told of Hani’s
assassination. ‘Mandela put down the phone and looked off into the distance, his
face drawn and concerned,’ wrote Stengel, in his own account of the incident.
He then stood up, apologised to Stengel for the interruption and returned to the
driveway to finish shaking hands with the rugby players.
With remarkable speed, the leadership of the crisis was assumed not by the
government but by the ANC and Mandela. On radio and television throughout
the day, ANC officials appealed for peace. Mandela rushed back to
Johannesburg in time to make a national address on television: ‘With all the
authority at my command, I appeal to all our people to remain calm and to
honour the memory of Chris Hani by remaining a disciplined force for peace.’
The circumstances around Hani’s murder grew more ominous. The assassin,

Janusw Waluz, a Polish immigrant who had lived in South Africa for twelve
years, was a member of the extremist Afrikaner Weerstandsbeweging. The
weapon he had used came from a batch of arms stolen from an air force armoury
in 1990 by a well-known Afrikaner extremist. One suspect arrested in
connection with the murder was a prominent member of the Conservative Party.
The possibility of a right-wing conspiracy to wreck the transition aggravated all
the tension.
Seeking to harness the tide of outrage, the ANC announced a week-long
campaign of mass protest, including a national stayaway and memorial services.
The risks of violence breaking out from such action were only too well known.
On the eve of a day of mourning declared by the ANC, Mandela again addressed
the nation on radio and television, appealing for calm in broadcasts he repeated
at 7 p.m., 8 p.m. and 11 p.m.
Tonight, I am reaching out to every single South African, black and
white, from the very depths of my being. A white man, full of prejudice
and hate, came to our country and committed a deed so foul that our
whole nation now teeters on the brink of disaster. A white woman, of
Afrikaner origin [Hani’s neighbour], risked her life so that we may know,
and bring to justice, this assassin. . . . Now is the time for all South
Africans to stand together against those who, from any quarter, wish to
destroy what Chris Hani gave his life for—the freedom of all of us.
He called for discipline and dignified conduct: ‘Chris Hani was a soldier. He
believed in iron discipline. . . . Any lack of discipline is trampling on the values
that Chris Hani stood for. Those who commit such acts serve only the interests
of the assassins.’
By the standards to which South Africa had become accustomed, the events in
the days following Hani’s assassination were relatively orderly. In nearly every
urban area, chanting crowds swept through city centres; in several they left
streets in chaos, with burnt cars and smashed and looted shops. But mostly the
demonstrators heeded Mandela’s call for discipline. Some 4 million workers
participated in the stayaway, again in relative calm. But the sheer size and
intensity of feeling of the protests were something white authority had never
before experienced.
Radical factions were active in clamouring for revenge. At a protest rally at a
squatter settlement in Cape Town, organised by the ANC’s youth leader Peter

Mokaba and by Winnie Mandela, Mokaba was captured on television chanting,
‘Kill the Boer! Kill the farmers!’ Winnie followed by calling on the ANC’s
youth to oust the ANC’s leadership and take the streets by storm. At a memorial
service in Soweto, when Mandela referred to a message of sympathy from the
National Party, he was jeered. Demonstrators were not just angry about Hani’s
murder but impatient at the failure of the negotiation process to deliver concrete
results. ‘Mandela released three years ago: South Africa still not free,’ read one
placard at Hani’s funeral.
The significance of these events, however, went far beyond the question of
violence. It was the time when Mandela emerged as a national leader,
comprehending at once the magnitude of the crisis, seeking to calm white fears
as well as black anger, demanding discipline and receiving it. De Klerk and his
government, meanwhile, were hardly to be seen. From his Cape holiday home,
de Klerk issued statements, clearly partisan in nature, aimed at white
constituents alarmed by the violence. His preoccupation, as one Johannesburg
newspaper noted, was ‘to assure whites that they were safe from the black
hordes’.
In the long struggle between Mandela and de Klerk, no other single event
provoked such a dramatic shift in the balance of power, nor revealed so clearly
to the white community how important Mandela was to their future security.

CHAPTER 26

THE LONELIEST MAN
TWO WEEKS AFTER HANI’S ASSASSINATION, OLIVER TAMBO
SUDDENLY died after suffering a second stroke. Though his first stroke had
left him partly immobilised on his right side, he had remained active as the
ANC’s national chairman, working three days a week at the party headquarters
in central Johannesburg, right up to the day of his death. He was widely revered
for his soft-spoken, lucid manner, always seeking compromise and consensus.
While Mandela inspired admiration, even awe, Tambo inspired love.
Tambo’s death was a colossal blow to Mandela. The trio of Mandela, Sisulu
and Tambo had sustained the African nationalist struggle for fifty years.
Tambo’s friendship, like Sisulu’s, had spanned Mandela’s entire adult life,
starting from their days together at Fort Hare, through the Youth League, their
law partnership and the Defiance Campaign, to the treason trial and the
formation of Umkhonto we Sizwe. Even during his years in prison, Mandela said
in his autobiography, Tambo was never far from his thoughts: ‘Though we were
separated, I kept up a lifelong conversation with him in my head.’ On the day of
his release from prison in 1990, Mandela described as ‘the most wonderful
moment’ the occasion late at night when a telephone call came through from
Tambo in Sweden, where he was recuperating from his first stroke. Their
reunion in Stockholm later in the year was joyous. ‘When we met we were like
two young boys in the veld who took strength from our love for each other,’
Mandela wrote. On the day of Tambo’s death, Mandela spoke to journalists. ‘I
will feel his loss in a unique manner,’ he said. ‘We are bleeding from the
invisible wounds that are so difficult to heal.’ To a friend, he remarked that he
felt like the loneliest man in the world.
His home life compounded the sense of loneliness he felt. Separated from
Winnie, he lived alone in his six-bedroom house in Houghton, frequently with
only bodyguards and servants for company. When Zindzi paid him visits, she
would often find him on his own, eating supper at the large dining-room table by
himself.

In private, with his own children, he remained a stern figure. Zindzi, who
knew little of him until his release in 1990, noted how he avoided bodily contact.
‘He’ll only hold your hand for a moment,’ she said. In a magazine interview, she
described Mandela as ‘a typical African father’, demanding strict obedience. ‘He
thinks very traditionally,’ she said. ‘He is head of the family. . . . His will is law.’
With his son, Makgatho, Mandela still insisted he should pursue his studies.
All his affection he concentrated on his grandchildren. He developed a special
bond with one of Zindzi’s sons, Bambatha, whose father, Sizwe Sithole, had
hanged himself in a police cell shortly before Mandela’s release. Bambatha was
only three months old at the time. For two years, while Zindzi lived with her
parents in Soweto, Mandela was able to spend much time with Bambatha. He
enjoyed putting him to bed at night. ‘He even got up in the middle of the night to
change his nappy and give him his bottle, as if Bambatha were his own son,’
Zindzi recalled. But with older grandchildren, Mandela could be as stern and
demanding as he was with his own children.
In the company of friends, he found it difficult to relax. His circle of friends
was wide and varied, but there were few with whom he was on intimate terms.
With the death of Oliver Tambo, only Walter Sisulu survived of the group of
young firebrands from the 1940s who had played such a central role in his early
life. To Sisulu, Mandela remained as he had always been: warm, kind and
sociable. ‘That type of a nature doesn’t really change,’ mused Sisulu, after fifty
years of friendship. Other old friends included Yusuf Cachalia and his wife,
Amina, a strikingly attractive woman for whom Mandela had a particular
affection. Mandela and Cachalia had once cooked a pigeon pie to celebrate
Amina’s twenty-first birthday and she reminded him of the occasion in a letter
sent to him on Robben Island. Mandela replied, ‘My dear Amina, How dare you
torture me by reminding me of that pigeon meal!’ He wrote too of his lasting
friendship with the Cachalias, citing ‘the powerful links that hold us tightly
together’. When Amina first saw him in Pollsmoor, after twenty-four years, she
was shocked by his thin and emaciated appearance. She noticed that he had
become quieter, more gentle, more measured. She realised too the huge
adjustments he faced upon his release from prison: ‘He had a lot to learn, a
whole new lifestyle.’
But outside a handful of close friends, Mandela kept his distance. The
aloofness that he had shown before his imprisonment had hardened during the
long years he spent there. He evaded intimacy. Even friends like Kathy

Kathrada, who had known him on close terms for so many years in prison, still
found him to be ‘a very cool person—self-contained to an exceptional degree’.
Not once during their prison life did Kathrada ever hear Mandela proclaim any
personal ambition. ‘If he had any inner feelings about what he wanted to be, it
was never evident,’ said Kathrada. ‘In prison we never ever talked even lightly
about his being president of the country.’ As one of Mandela’s key aides upon
his release from prison, Kathrada still found it difficult to tell what went on in
his mind. ‘Take the latest incident involving Winnie, ’ he said. ‘When I would
meet him for work or casually, you would never decipher in his attitude towards
us what was going on in his mind about this matter. He would not even mention
it.’
Mandela was often most at ease in dealing with strangers or ac - quaintances.
He remained courteous and attentive to individuals, whatever their status or their
age. His aides sometimes had to chastise him from rising from his chair to greet
everyone who approached. Soon after his release from prison, when he attended
a friend’s birthday party in an affluent white suburb of Johannesburg, he spent
most of the evening greeting a constant stream of maids, gardeners and domestic
staff from the neighbourhood who came to see him, shaking each one by the
hand and conversing at length with all of them. At luncheons and banquets, he
always made a point of shaking hands with the staff, showing the same courtesy
to them that he would to dignitaries.
He was also attracted to people of wealth and fame. Among his many
acquaintances were millionaires only too willing to ingratiate themselves. The
insurance magnate Douw Steyn lent him a home after he left Winnie. The casino
tycoon Sol Kerzner helped pay for Zindzi’s extravagant wedding and provided a
honeymoon suite at one of his hotels in Mauritius. He dined regularly with the
Oppenheimers and spent holidays with the Menells, another prominent mining
family. Mandela might mock his relations with the rich and famous—at the end
of one of his sessions with Richard Stengel, he remarked, ‘I am having lunch
today with the third richest family in South Africa; I will not starve’—but he
often seemed to prefer their company. When he approached twenty leading
businessmen for at least 1 million rands each to help him with election expenses,
all but one complied.
In the absence of any real family life, all Mandela’s efforts were concentrated
on political work. His daily schedule, for a man of seventy-four, was punishing.
He still arose at about 5 a.m. for his exercises. When he first arrived in

Houghton, he enjoyed an early-morning jog through its leafy streets, but after the
assassination of Chris Hani he confined himself to exercising at home. By 7 a.m.
he was at work in his tenth-floor office in ANC headquarters at Shell House in
central Johannesburg. The rest of the day was filled with meetings, interviews,
speeches, negotiations, conferences, working lunches, fund-raising appearances
and banquets. He liked to be back home by 9.30 p.m. to catch up on his reading.
His foreign trips were as numerous as before.
With increasing frequency, Mandela suffered from bouts of exhaustion. His
doctors pointed out that what was remarkable, in view of his schedule, was not
that he was so tired but that he remained so energetic. Dr Louis Gecelter, who
examined him regularly, concluded that Mandela possessed the mental and
physical attributes of a man of fifty. The explanation, he said, lay partly in the
dietary discipline and exercise routine of twenty-seven years in prison. But it
was also because Mandela was a man for whom life was only just beginning, for
whom the important goals in life still lay ahead.
Within the ANC, Mandela played an elevated role, largely removed from
administrative concerns, internal squabbles and the hard grind of negotiations.
He usually left detail in the hands of officials like Ramaphosa. He was
recognised as being the ANC’s greatest asset, its elder statesman, able to achieve
for the ANC a degree of international respectability and support that would
otherwise be missing. But he was not always sure-footed. His pronouncements,
notably on foreign affairs, sometimes left ANC officials aghast. During a
telephone conversation with President George Bush, he lectured him on the
perils of US policy towards the Iraqi dictator, Saddam Hussein. He also
infuriated the Bush administration by taking Colonel Gaddafi’s side in the feud
over the bombing of Pan Am flight 103. He heaped praise on Cuba as an
‘inspiration to all freedom-loving people’. On British television, he spoke of his
support for the IRA’s ‘struggle against colonialism’. At home, his suggestion
that the franchise should be extended to fourteen-year-old children became a
national joke.
The one subject Mandela would not discuss was Winnie; about her, he
maintained a stony silence. In June 1993, two years after her conviction for
kidnapping and assault, the verdict on her appeal was finally handed down by
the chief justice, Michael Corbett. In reaching its decision, the Appeal Court
heard no new evidence. The allegations made by Xoliswa Falati, John Morgan
and others while the appeal process was under way were not part of the Appeal

Court’s purview. All that the Appeal Court was concerned with was evidence
given during the original trial.
Justice Corbett ruled that there was no doubt that Stompie Moe - ketsi Seipei
and three other young men had been kidnapped and assaulted in Mrs Mandela’s
home in December 1988. He found that the trial judge had been correct in
finding Winnie guilty of kidnapping them. But he accepted Winnie’s claim that
she had been far from home during the beatings and consequently found her not
guilty of being an accessory to the assaults. He reduced her six-year sentence to
a two-year suspended sentence, and ordered her to pay a fine of 15,000 rands
and compensation of 5,000 rands to each of the surviving kidnap victims. With
the threat of a prison sentence now lifted, Winnie was free to pursue her own
political ambitions. Falati, however, lost her appeal and was ordered to serve two
years in prison.
Mandela’s comment on the outcome was terse: ‘I am very happy my
estranged wife will not have to go to jail,’ he said. A few weeks later, he made
his own gesture of contrition to Stompie’s mother when, during a political rally
at her home town of Parys, he insisted she be given a place of honour on the
podium and spoke to her at length, pointedly, for all to see.
On 18 July 1993, at a party to celebrate Mandela’s seventy-fifth birthday,
some 650 guests were invited, but Winnie was not one of them.

In the wake of Hani’s assassination, Mandela was able to force the pace of
negotiations, insisting on swift, tangible progress. On 3 June 1993, negotiators at
the multiparty forum at the World Trade Centre outside Johannesburg voted to
set a date for the first democratic election—27 April 1994—even though
agreement on an interim constitution was nowhere near being in sight.
As the spectre of majority rule moved closer, a motley collection of the
ANC’s opponents—homeland leaders and extreme rightwing groups—banded
together to thwart the process. The central figure was Buthelezi. Though Inkatha
had rejoined the multiparty forum in April 1993, Buthelezi produced proposals
of his own for an autonomous region for KwaZulu-Natal and threatened a ‘go-italone’ approach if a referendum in the territory approved the plan. Buthelezi’s
proposals not only reduced the functions of central government to a minimum,
they concentrated enormous power in the hands of the rulers of KwaZulu-Natal,

with few checks and balances. The case for a federal South Africa was eminently
respectable; it would have suited several minority groups. But Buthelezi,
influenced heavily by white advisers, presented his plan on an all-or-nothing
basis, believing that he was too important for the process to continue without
him. Even his negotiators conceded that Buthelezi’s ego was a significant part of
the problem. Buthelezi also objected to the two-stage approach of the drafting of
the final constitution, insisting that the full text should be drawn up by the
present negotiators before an election rather than by an elected constitutionmaking body in the future. In protest against the setting of the April 1994 date
for the elections, Buthelezi withdrew Inkatha from the negotiations process,
clearly expecting it to founder in the same way as it had done the previous year
when the ANC walked out of Codesa.
Buthelezi found common cause with two other homeland leaders, Lucas
Mangope, the autocratic ruler of Bophuthatswana, and Brigadier Gqozo, the
military dictator of Ciskei. Both hoped to be able to secure a future for
themselves in the kind of federal system proposed by Buthelezi. Mangope had
been an ideal partner in the apartheid system and benefited from it substantially.
Like Buthelezi, he ran a tight one-party system, with control of parliament, radio
and television, and brooked no opposition. At a recent election in October 1992,
all his own candidates had been returned—unopposed. Opinion polls suggested
that Mangope possessed minimal public support—less than 1 per cent—far less
than Buthelezi’s following, but this had never troubled him. As far as apartheid’s
rulers were concerned, Mangope had been far more reliable, more predictable,
than Buthelezi. Whereas Buthelezi had refused ‘independence’, Mangope had
taken it. When Mangope was threatened by a military coup in 1988, the South
Africans had duly come to the rescue. ‘Oh! I never knew how friends could be
so loyal!’ Mangope told the white minister who arrived on the scene to help him.
Despite Mangope’s evident lack of popularity, de Klerk had always considered
him a potential ally for the National Party in an anti-ANC coalition. Like
Brigadier Gqozo in Ciskei, he had refused to allow the ANC to conduct any
political activity in his territory.
Mandela had by now lost all patience with Buthelezi. ‘He reached a point
where he was very, very angry,’ Sisulu recalled. ‘In fact, so angry that when the
whole executive took a lighter line, saying that Buthelezi should be spoken to, he
said no.’ Senior ANC officials, examining Buthelezi’s constitutional proposals,
were convinced that his real objective was secession from South Africa

altogether. They argued that no matter what concessions Buthelezi was offered,
he would still continue to boycott the transition process because he feared the
consequences of an election. They also took the view that though Buthelezi’s
participation in the election was preferable, to ensure a wider legitimacy, it was
not essential. He could therefore be ignored. A hardcore of militants, led by
Harry Gwala, still advocated using force to oust both him and his allies.
In his dealings with Mangope, Mandela found him to be equally obdurate. He
travelled to Mangope’s capital, Mmabatho, near the Botswanan border, to see if
they could come to terms, suggesting that they both address a rally in
Bophuthatswana to make clear their commitment to a peaceful resolution.
Mangope at first agreed, but then changed his mind. ‘The discussions broke
down,’ said Mandela. ‘I have phoned him since on numerous occasions and he
has avoided me.’ As with Buthelezi and Gqozo, Mandela believed that Mangope
posed no serious threat to the transition process.
The real threat, as Mandela and others in the ANC saw it, came from extreme
rightwing organisations. On their own, they were known more for weekend
parades and for fierce rhetoric than for action. They were divided into a host of
splinter groups, constantly squabbling with each other. But what worried
Mandela was the extent of support they had from within the security forces and
from army and police reserve units stationed across the country. ‘The ultra-right
is powerful in the proper sense of the word,’ said Mandela. Their support within
the public service, the army, the police and other strategic institutions was
significant: ‘They are trained and experienced and they know the country better
than we do. . . . They can derail any democratic government in this country.’
The common aim of many extreme rightwing groups was to establish an
Afrikaner homeland, a volkstaat. At the entrance to many platteland towns, road
signs decorated with the flags of the old Boer republics already declared their
allegiance. Demands for a volkstaat were frequently accompanied by threats of
violence. ‘Mandela, give us a volkstaat or you’ll have total war in South Africa,’
the AWB leader, Eugene Terre’Blanche, told supporters at Lichtenburg. A spate
of bomb explosions on railway tracks, power pylons and ANC property in the
Transvaal and the Orange Free State underlined the message.
Yet after nearly four years of talks about a volkstaat, far-right parties still
failed to make clear where it would be located or how it would work. No
explanation was forthcoming about the rights of non-Afrikaners living in an area

declared a volkstaat, or how their opinions would be taken into account. De
Klerk described the idea as ‘a hopeless illusion’.
In May 1993, in an attempt to present a united demand for a volkstaat, a
‘committee of generals’, consisting of retired army and police commanders from
the ‘total strategy’ era, formed an Afrikaner Volksfront, an umbrella group
bringing together twenty-one organisations including the Conservative Party, the
neo-Nazi AWB, the Transvaal Municipal Associations, white trade unions and
farmers’ unions from the Transvaal and the Orange Free State. The AVF’s
leader, General Constand Viljoen, a former chief of the defence staff, hoped to
provide the right wing with a more pragmatic leadership. His own experience of
warfare in Angola, Mozambique and Namibia had led him to conclude that
violence was the worst possible option. He also wanted to establish a respectable
image for the AVF. But he had to contend with the inane antics of the AWB.
On 25 June, at a demonstration organised by the AVF outside the World
Trade Centre, intended to promote its demand for a volkstaat, a group of AWB
supporters led by Terre’Blanche, brandishing shotguns and revolvers, broke
through a police cordon, drove an armoured security vehicle through the glass
front of the building and stormed into the conference chamber, screaming abuse
and assaulting delegates, officials and journalists along the way. They then
occupied delegates’ seats, scrawled slogans on walls and urinated on the floor.
Viljoen’s efforts to restrain the mob were ignored.
Despite such acts of hooliganism and violence, Mandela was determined to
seek a dialogue with the far right to avert what he feared might become a
concerted effort to sabotage the transition to majority rule. In August, at a secret
meeting in a private house in Houghton, Mandela met three of the AVF’s
generals, including Viljoen. He was blunt in presenting his appraisal of the
situation:
If you want to go to war, I must be honest and admit that we cannot stand up to
you on the battlefield. We don’t have the resources. It will be a long and bitter
struggle, many people will die and the country may be reduced to ashes. But you
must remember two things. You cannot win because of our numbers: you cannot
kill us all. And you cannot win because of the international community. They
will rally to our support and they will stand with us.
The meeting achieved an unexpected result. Mandela believed, just as much
as de Klerk, that the idea of a volkstaat was a hopeless illusion. His aim was to

engage the AVF in talks for as long as possible in the hope that rightwing fears
about their future security under majority rule might in time begin to diminish.
He found the generals amenable to further talks. A committee of ANC officials
was set up to meet the AVF generals on a regular basis. What was unexpected
was that Mandela and Viljoen developed an immediate liking for each other.
Mandela felt a genuine sympathy for Viljoen’s concerns about Afrikaner culture,
religion and language, which were in marked contrast to de Klerk’s
preoccupations with pensions and privileges. The degree of trust that Mandela
and Viljoen shared from their first meeting was to have important consequences
in crises that lay ahead.
Meanwhile, negotiators at the World Trade Centre ploughed on, doggedly
assembling a new constitution. The most contentious issue was federalism—the
balance of power between central government and the provinces. The ANC
wanted a strong central government with powers to override the provinces. The
National Party advocated a measure of devolution, but made only a half-hearted
effort to fight for it. The liberal opposition Democratic Party favoured
devolution, but possessed too little weight in the negotiations process to secure
it. Buthelezi was the most insistent on the need for maximum devolution, but he
threw away what chances there were of obtaining greater federal powers by
choosing to boycott the negotiations. Consequently, the first drafts of the new
constitution to emerge from the World Trade Centre in July and August
contained only minor elements of federalism.
Buthelezi denounced the result and, with a warning of civil war ‘or worse’,
threatened to boycott the 1994 elections unless his demands for autonomy were
met. Rightwing parties took the same line. The Conservative Party described the
draft constitution as ‘hostile to Afrikaner interests’ and ‘a recipe for civil war,
further economic deterioration and a spiral of violence’. Its new leader, Ferdi
Hartzenberg, said the Conservative Party would participate in further talks only
when Afrikaner self-determination was ‘unequivocally accepted’.
A new alliance of opposition groups was launched to fight for a federal or
confederal state. Called the Freedom Alliance, it consisted of Buthelezi from
KwaZulu, Mangope from Bophuthatswana, Gqozo from Ciskei, Hartzenberg
from the Conservative Party and General Viljoen from the Afrikaner Volksfront
—a motley crew, but one that possessed a high potential for disruption.
On the Witwatersrand, the Reef war burst out with renewed ferocity.

Townships on the East Rand such as Thokoza and Katlehong became war zones,
their streets lined with deserted, burnt-out houses, wrecked vehicles, barricades
and boulders, as Inkatha hostel dwellers and ANC comrades fought for territorial
possession. Many hostel dwellers found themselves virtually under armed siege;
food and other supplies had to be delivered under paramilitary police protection.
Hit-and-run raids continued relentlessly. In the first ten months of 1993, some
1,300 people died in political violence in the East Rand townships. Similar strife,
though on an even greater scale, occurred in the killing fields of Natal.
Mandela, now that he was close to inheriting the problem of township
violence, no longer saw fit to blame it solely on de Klerk. He still castigated the
government for its failure to deal effectively with the violence, but accepted that
the ANC had an equal responsibility for trying to bring it to an end. However,
the message of peace and reconciliation he tried to convey was often drowned
out.
Arriving in Katlehong to address a rally at a football stadium, Mandela found
a message awaiting him, scribbled on the table next to his microphone. It read,
‘No peace. Do not talk about peace. We’ve had enough. Please, Mr Mandela, no
peace. Give us weapons. No peace.’
After criticising the government, Mandela scolded his own supporters,
undeterred by the angry murmuring in the crowd of some 10,000 people: ‘There
are times now when our people participate in the killing of innocent people. It is
difficult for us to say when people are angry that they must be nonviolent. . . But
the solution is peace; it is reconciliation; it is political tolerance.’
Some in the crowd jeered, but Mandela continued:
We must accept blacks are fighting each other in our townships. So the task of
the ANC is to unite black people as well. . . . We must accept that responsibility
for ending violence is not just the government’s, the police’s, the army’s. It is
also our responsibility. . . . We should put our own house in order. If you have
no discipline, you are not freedom fighters. If you are going to kill innocent
people, you don’t belong to the ANC. Your task is reconciliation. You must go
to your area and ask a member of Inkatha: why are we fighting?
The crowd shouted back. ‘Listen to me! Listen to me!’ he cried above the din.
‘I am your leader. As long as I am your leader, I am going to give leadership. Do
you want me to remain your leader?’ Chastened, the crowd roared back, ‘Yes!’
Mandela went on, ‘Well, as long as I am your leader, I will tell you, always,

when you are wrong. ‘
Back at the World Trade Centre, after seven months of haggling, drafting and
redrafting, deadlocks and deadlines, negotiators struggled through to the last
remaining points of dispute. The most difficult of all—how cabinet decisions
were to be taken in the government of national unity—had deliberately been left
to the end. De Klerk insisted that cabinet decisions should require a two-thirds
majority, potentially a means of minority veto. The ANC’s negotiators wanted
an ordinary majority, but were privately prepared to agree to a 60 per cent
majority if necessary to break the deadlock. Hours before the final plenary
session was due to sit on 17 November, the issue still had not been resolved.
In a final encounter late at night on 17 November, Mandela and de Klerk
confronted each other over the last remaining clause. Mandela was adamant. The
majority in cabinet would decide, he said; he could not run a cabinet in any other
way. There would be no minority veto. Power would be shared voluntarily or not
at all.
As the remains of his power drained away, de Klerk surrendered even on this
point. All that he managed to salvage was an agreement that the cabinet would
function in accordance with a ‘consensus-seeking spirit’. At the very last minute,
de Klerk had been obliged to accept majority rule.
In the early hours of 18 November, the interim constitution was approved by
the plenary session, signalling the end of 341 years of white rule that had begun
when the Dutchman Jan van Riebeeck first set foot on the Cape of Good Hope in
1652. Mandela used the occasion to urge South Africans ‘to join hands and
march into the future’.
After such a marathon endeavour, there was a sense of euphoria about the
outcome. The scent of power was particularly heady for the ANC. Its chief
negotiator, Cyril Ramaphosa, crowed about how the National Party’s negotiating
position at the last hour had ‘collapsed’. Joe Slovo, writing in the African
Communist, proclaimed ‘a famous victory’, adding, ‘We got pretty much what
we wanted.’ Widespread protests at the way the ANC had blocked the use of a
double ballot paper for the election of national and provincial legislatures, which
would have enhanced the chances of smaller regionally based parties, were
dismissed with contempt. The issue, said the ANC, was not negotiable. There
would be no further concessions made to demands for greater regional powers.
Ramaphosa curtly rejected proposals that the name of Kwa Zulu should be

retained by incorporating it into a province renamed KwaZulu-Natal. The name
KwaZulu, he said, was a creation of apartheid and would not feature on maps of
post-apartheid South Africa. The province would be known henceforth simply as
Natal. At early meetings of the transitional executive council, the ANC was
quick to start throwing its weight about. Any sign of trouble from the provinces,
a senior ANC official warned, and they would ‘let the tanks roll in’. As the ANC
celebrated its triumph, whatever prospects there were of broadening the
settlement to include Inkatha and other members of the Freedom Alliance
rapidly degenerated, pushing South Africa towards civil war.

What had been achieved, nevertheless, was remarkable. Four years previously,
South Africa had been in the hands of a ruthless, authoritarian government,
determined to protect white power and privilege, buttressed by formidable
security forces and a vast administrative apparatus, and with access to huge state
revenues. De Klerk had embarked upon his reforms assuming that his
government enjoyed such a preponderance of power that it could set the terms of
any settlement. He scorned all notion of majority rule, holding firm to the need
for group rights. Indeed, even after the new constitutional agreement was
reached, he still argued that separate development for different ethnic groups as
a constitutional option was morally justified. What de Klerk expected to emerge
from the negotiations process was a government coalition of moderate parties
which the National Party would dominate.
Yet stage by stage, he had been forced into compromise. From group rights he
had moved on to the idea of power-sharing through a permanently enforced
coalition, repeatedly insisting that he would never surrender to ‘simple majority
rule’. Whatever the outcome of a popular vote, he said, he would demand a
guaranteed share in power and he would hold out as long as necessary to obtain
one. At the very least there would have to be a white veto in cabinet.
The compromises that de Klerk had been induced to accept came about in part
through skilful negotiation, in part by force of circumstance, like the Hani
assassination, which led to de Klerk’s irreversible commitment to an election
date. But they also reflected changes in the government’s thinking about white
interests and ways of protecting them. Apartheid had brought the whites
unprecedented prosperity. For much of the white community, prosperity rather
than power had become their preoccupation. Like other white communities in

Africa, they had come to accept the old adage: give them parliament and keep
the banks. As Joe Slovo had foreseen when putting forward his ‘sunset clause’,
guarantees about employment, pensions and property were sufficient to break
the log jam in negotiations. But what de Klerk also came to realise was that the
indispensable role played by whites in the civil service, the security forces and
the economy would give them far greater leverage over a new government than
mere constitutional clauses. Even when making his last stand against Mandela
over the issue of the cabinet veto, de Klerk acknowledged that a voluntary
agreement on the need for ‘consensus-seeking’ was likely to give the whites
more influence in cabinet than an entrenched clause in the constitution which an
ANC majority would seek to thwart.
Underpinning the settlement was the extraordinary stature that Mandela had
attained in the four years since his release from prison. His exemplary lack of
bitterness, his insistence on national recon - ciliation and his willingness to
compromise had earned him enduring respect among his white adversaries. The
white community would not vote for him, but they would accept a government
under his presidency.
On a personal basis, the relationship between Mandela and de Klerk never
recovered from the long war of attrition they had fought. In public and private,
their dealings over who was to blame for the violence remained abrasive.
Mandela was infuriated by what he claimed was de Klerk’s indifference to the
loss of black lives. He was also irked by de Klerk’s refusal to condemn the
principle of apartheid. While de Klerk was willing to admit that the apartheid
system had led to injustice and hardship, for which he apologised, he still
continued to speak approvingly of the idea of ethnic separation, provided it was
voluntary.
Even on the occasion when the two men were jointly awarded the Nobel
Peace Prize in Oslo in December 1993, the friction was still evident. In
interviews, Mandela spoke of his ‘disappointment’ with de Klerk’s conduct in
the negotiations and once more accused the government of involvement in
township violence. De Klerk, for his part, appeared to resent being upstaged by
Mandela, believing that his own efforts had been overlooked. In choosing them
as ‘Men of the Year’ for 1993, Time magazine noted that ‘the mutual bitterness
and resentments between de Klerk and Mandela are palpable’, and it asked
rhetorically, ‘How could these two have agreed on anything—lunch, for
instance, much less the remaking of a nation?’

At a political level, however, Mandela recognised how important de Klerk
was to the whole settlement. ‘My worst nightmare is that I wake up and de Klerk
isn’t there,’ Mandela told guests at a private dinner party. ‘I need him. Whether I
like him or not is irrelevant. I need him.’

CHAPTER 27

THE ELECTION ROLLER-COASTER
IN THE ELECTION CAMPAIGN, MANDELA WAS THE STAR
ATTRACTION. Everywhere he went, from one township to another, from one
stadium to the next, he was greeted by huge exuberant crowds eager to catch a
glimpse of him. For many, he was a messianic figure bringing them the promise
of freedom. Long before the election took place, he was regarded as the victor.
Seeing Mandela was an event in itself. He made the most of his appearances,
standing in open vehicles, smiling and waving in obvious pleasure, punching his
fist in the air, ignoring the concerns of his bodyguards in order to stretch out and
shake hands, while cheerful pandemonium erupted all around.
He proved to be a natural campaigner, as much at ease with crowds as with
small gatherings and bystanders, tailoring his speeches and his attire for each
audience. For white businessmen, he chose elegant striped suits; for the
townships, flamboyant shirts. Appearing at a mineworkers’ meeting in a suit, he
apologised, saying that he had not had time to change into something more
casual, then delighted his audience by donning a miner’s helmet. Colourful silk
shirts, buttoned at the neck, soon became his trademark. When a child asked him
why he wore them, he replied: ‘You must remember I was in jail for twentyseven years. I want to feel freedom.’
The manifesto he launched in January 1994 was thick with promises. Using
the slogan ‘A better life for all’, Mandela undertook to introduce what he
described as a ‘gigantic’ programme of public works, providing houses, essential
services, electrification, better schools, roads, clinics and formal employment for
millions of people. The specific targets laid out in the manifesto were ambitious:
jobs and training for 2.5 million people over ten years; 1 million houses to be
built over five years; electrification for 2.5 million rural and urban homes;
running water and flush lavatories for over 1 million families over five years; ten
years of free and compulsory education for all children; free school textbooks to
be doubled in number within one year; affordable access to telecommunications;
and basic health care for all. Other items included land reform, affirmative action

programmes, small business development, lower food taxes and income tax
reductions for low-paid workers.
No explanation was forthcoming in the manifesto about how all these
undertakings would be financed. Like the Freedom Charter of 1955, the
manifesto contained a large number of utopian notions. The objectives
themselves were laudable enough, but amounted to little more than a wish list.
As well as the manifesto, the ANC produced a ‘reconstruction and
development programme’ in an endeavour to provide a policy framework for the
future. But its list of promises and moral imperatives was even longer than that
contained in the manifesto and included everything from paid maternity leave to
a reduction in traffic accidents. Once again, no costs were given, no suggestion
of a funding strategy was made, no priorities were set and policy options were
left wide open.
Finding an agreed economic policy proved to be a difficult business for the
ANC. It re-emerged in South Africa in 1990, a revolutionary organisation laden
with a great deal of ideological baggage, proclaiming the virtues of socialism
and state control despite the collapse of socialist regimes in Eastern Europe. The
Freedom Charter, with its commitment to nationalisation of the banks and
‘monopoly’ industry, was regarded as sacrosanct. When Mandela first came out
of prison in 1990, he was asked whether he had changed his view in any way
about the need for a radical redistribution of wealth in South Africa. ‘No,’ he
replied, without a moment’s hesitation. ‘My views are identical to those of the
ANC. The question of the nationalisation of the mines and similar important
sectors of the community is a fundamental policy of the ANC and I believe that
the ANC is quite correct in this attitude. ’ His remarks caused a wave of panic
among businessmen and sent share prices on the Johannesburg stock exchange
plummeting.
Under pressure from the business community, foreign investors and
international financial institutions like the International Monetary Fund and the
World Bank, the ANC modified its views but still held firm to the ideals of the
Freedom Charter. Time and again, Mandela spoke of the need for a
redistribution of wealth and property. Addressing a panel at the World Economic
Forum in Davos, Switzerland, in 1992, Mandela declared, ‘Taking some key
enterprises into public ownership will itself be a major step towards overcoming
the huge inequality in the ownership of our country’s wealth.’ He was mortified

to find, however, that both de Klerk and Buthelezi, addressing the same meeting
but promising a vigorous free-enterprise system, were given a far more
enthusiastic reception from the world’s top businessmen.
Yet Mandela’s subsequent efforts to shift the direction of ANC policy
encountered strong resistance. At an ANC economic policy conference in 1992,
held after the Davos meeting, when Mandela warned that the ANC would
alienate the business community worldwide if it persisted with its nationalisation
programme, Ben Turok, the Marxist economist who had helped draft the
Freedom Charter’s economic clause nearly forty years before, rose to ask how
Mandela could now turn his back on the Charter. Facing outright opposition,
Mandela withdrew his proposal to drop nationalisation as an option.
The battle continued throughout 1993. Determined to ensure that the ANC did
not lose sight of its socialist principles once it was involved in a government of
national unity, a group of trade unionists, communists and ANC officials
initiated the idea of a ‘reconstruction’ programme setting out a string of radical
proposals. The reconstruction and development programme, as it was eventually
called, went through six drafts before the final version was approved. In the end,
the ANC emerged committed to fiscal and monetary discipline and stressing the
importance of the private sector and the need to develop a favourable investment
climate. Privatisation, as well as nationalisation, was cited as a policy option. No
mention was made of the word ‘socialism’.

On the campaign trail, Mandela went through a routine of explaining how the
reconstruction and development programme would bring more jobs, more
houses, better education and health services. His speeches tended to be dull and
didactic, delivered in a stiff and wooden manner, something of an anticlimax
after the frenzy and excitement surrounding his arrival. While promising a better
future, he spent much time trying to damp down black expectations. Change, he
warned, must be gradual and there must be no dislocation: ‘Do not expect to be
driving a Mercedes the day after the elections. You must have patience. You
might have to wait for five years for results to show.’ Narrowing the gap in
income, employment and education between white and black would not be easy.
Black demands for land and better living standards would have to be addressed
without taking white assets.
Mandela was equally forthright in upbraiding his audience for bad habits: ‘If

you want to continue living in unbridled poverty, without clothes and food, then
go and drink in shebeens. But if you want better things you must work hard. We
cannot do it all for you; you must do it yourselves.’ Mandela also took men to
task for failing to undertake more domestic chores. ‘I make my own bed. I can
cook a decent meal. I can polish a floor,’ he said. ‘Why can’t you do it?’
White audiences sometimes received the same stern treatment. When a white
businessman in Potchefstroom expressed concern about the number of
communists active within the ANC, Mandela responded by admonishing his
audience for being selfish, hypocritical and racist, in the manner of a Dutch
Reformed predikant railing against a congregation of sinners. The Communist
Party and the ANC had fought the brutal system of apartheid together, he said.
Together, members of both organisations had suffered harassment, arrest and
imprisonment: ‘Homes were broken up by a government professing to be
Christian.’ The Communist Party had done none of these things, but rather, ‘You
Christians have done them. Why should we listen to you about our comrades in
the Communist Party?’ Mandela continued: ‘Is this not a sign of selfishness on
your part? You have the temerity to come to me . . . [expecting that] I will say to
an ally with whom we have fought and suffered that we will now abandon them,
on the verge of victory—on your instructions. You, who have no concern for
me.’ Apartheid, he said, had been inflicted on masses of people by ‘a community
which claimed to be committed to religious values . . . You must stand ashamed.
Your community used the word of God to justify [apartheid].’
At the behest of his campaign managers, Mandela and a group of other elderly
inmates, including Sisulu, Mbeki and Kathrada, returned to Robben Island in
February 1994, accompanied by a horde of television crews and journalists. The
event was full of good humour, rarely affording a glimpse of the anguish that
prisoners there suffered. In the cramped space of cell number seven, Mandela
demonstrated how, by standing at an angle, he had been able to wave his arms
about for exercise. Looking through the barred window of the cell, he grinned
broadly at the photographers outside. ‘Could we have one serious one, please?’
pleaded a photographer.
‘My advisers tell me that on this occasion, I should talk about myself and not
be shy,’ he said. He spoke at length of the hardship of working in the lime
quarry, of the isolation of his prison cell, of the stimulation of political
discussions with his colleagues. Only once did he mention personal grief, in
recalling the death of his mother and his oldest son. His favourite topic was the

comradeship of his fellow prisoners. Taking a stroll in the lime quarry, he
recalled, ‘Quarry work was hard at first, but we sang freedom songs as we
worked.’ A television journalist asked, ‘Could you sing a freedom song for us
now, Mr Mandela?’ and he duly obliged. When their duty to the media was
done, Sisulu remarked, ‘It’s nice to know that I’ll be going home at the end of
the day.’
Mandela enjoyed a good working relationship with journalists. He was
attentive to their needs and invariably courteous, apologising whenever he was
late. When a British journalist died in a car accident during the campaign,
Mandela found time in the middle of a hectic schedule to phone his wife,
speaking to her for nearly half an hour. He particularly enjoyed the company of
women journalists, befriending two or three of them, with whom he used to flirt
when the occasion permitted. One was Deborah Patta, a reporter for
Johannesburg’s Radio 702. During the visit to Robben Island, seeing her
struggle with a heavy bag loaded with radio equipment, Mandela asked if he
could carry it for her. Once, at the end of a summit meeting when journalists had
been waiting for six hours, he spotted his friend: ‘Deborah, I am most concerned.
Have you had an opportunity to have any food today?’
Occasionally, amid the constant stream of promises about jobs and housing,
the election campaign was enlivened by an exchange of insults. Mandela derided
de Klerk’s efforts to woo black voters for the National Party: ‘They are a
pathetic collection of weaklings unable to reconcile themselves with the fate of
extinction that stares them in the face.’ The National Party had never served the
mass of South Africans: ‘They only know how to serve the white community.’
De Klerk, for his part, avoided personal attacks on Mandela, but branded the
ANC as ‘a dangerous party’, with no experience, no proven ability and addicted
to policies of nationalisation, communism and socialism which had failed
everywhere else in the world: ‘The ANC would cast us back into the Dark Ages.
It is secretly controlled by communists, militants and extremists. They are quiet
now but they will shout loudly if the ANC wins control.’
There was also controversy about a number of unsavoury characters standing
as candidates, in particular Winnie Mandela. In December 1993, Winnie
managed to claw her way back to election as president of the ANC’s Women’s
League which entitled her to a place on the national executive committee.
Despite her criminal conviction, she was then chosen as a candidate for the party

list for parliament, in effect ensuring her a seat. The return of Winnie came as a
nasty surprise to prominent figures in the ANC hierarchy who had assumed that
her forced resignation from all ANC posts the year before had settled her fate.
When Mandela was asked how he could justify having a convicted criminal on
his list of candidates, he replied glibly that Winnie had been the choice of the
people, a matter with which the ANC could not interfere.
The National Party was quick to take advantage of the event. Full-page
newspaper advertisements appeared containing a large photograph of Winnie
Mandela, her right arm raised in a clenched-fist salute, with a three-paragraph
commentary beneath which said:
On 10 July 1993 Winnie Mandela was convicted of kidnapping a child who later
died from his wounds. On 8 December 1993 she was elected to be the most
powerful woman in the ANC, the president of the ANC Women’s League. After
27 April 1994, Mrs Mandela could be your new Minister of Law and Order, or
even the Minister of Child Welfare. . . . Only your vote can stop this.
The climax of the campaign was a televised debate between Mandela and de
Klerk before a panel of journalists. The questions they were asked and the
ground over which they skirmished, after weeks of campaigning, were largely
familiar to viewers. What counted as much as content was style. De Klerk, more
comfortable on television than Mandela, maintained a conciliatory countenance,
admitting past wrongs, promising reconciliation, focusing on policy issues.
Mandela was grim-faced, more aggressive, resorting to personal attacks on de
Klerk’s character and credibility, tending to dwell on the past evils of apartheid
and sharply critical of the National Party’s record.
But towards the end of the debate, thinking that he had been too harsh on de
Klerk, Mandela made a dramatic gesture. ‘The exchanges between Mr de Klerk
and I should not obscure one important fact,’ he said. ‘I think we are a shining
example to the entire world of people drawn from different racial groups who
have a common loyalty, a common love, to their common country. . . . In spite of
my criticism of Mr de Klerk,’ he went on, looking across to de Klerk, ‘sir, you
are one of those I rely upon. . . . We are going to face the problems of this
country together.’ Then, reaching over to de Klerk, he said, ‘I am proud to hold
your hand for us to go forward.’
De Klerk clasped his hand and smiled wanly.

Throughout the election campaign, the threat of conflict edged ever closer.
Buthelezi’s answer to the ANC’s refusal to countenance any further
constitutional concessions was to reject Inkatha’s participation in the election.
His rhetoric became increasingly belligerent. ‘It is impossible for me to lie to
you and reassure you that the IFP’s opposition to fighting the election under the
present constitution will not bring casualties and even death,’ he told a special
Inkatha congress in Ulundi in January 1994. ‘But we must resist the ANC and
their communist surrogates. We are the only thing that stands in the way of their
quest for power.’ He urged followers to ‘fight back’, telling them, ‘This is a
region where we dominate. No foreign forces shall come into it to rule over us.’
To shore up his position, Buthelezi drew the Zulu king, Goodwill Zwelethini,
into the confrontation. A weak, pusillanimous figure, Zwelethini had been
pushed around for years by Buthelezi, who once spent a whole afternoon in the
KwaZulu legislative assembly heaping abuse on the king, causing him such
distress that he jumped from his seat and ran out of the chamber. Nevertheless,
allegiance to the king was far more widespread among Zulus than any loyalty to
Inkatha. His influence was much greater than Buthelezi’s on his own.
The issue which helped galvanize Zwelethini was the ANC’s insistence on
removing the name of KwaZulu from the map of South Africa. In a
memorandum sent to de Klerk in January, Zwelethini said that this rendered the
new constitution ‘so alien’ that he felt obliged to reject it: ‘It amounts to the
expunging of the very name of my kingdom from the constitution of South
Africa. We cannot, therefore, be expected to regard it as our constitution. This
has sent shock waves throughout the psyche of everyone of our Zulu subjects.’
Goaded on by Buthelezi, by February the king had become more ambitious.
He now demanded a sovereign Zulu kingdom encompassing the whole of Natal,
restoring what he claimed were its 1830s boundaries, before the era of white
conquest. ‘I am asking for something that belongs to me and my people—no one
else,’ he said. In public speeches, he began to use the same kind of rhetoric as
Buthelezi: ‘I will die rather than insult the memory of my great ancestral kings
by handing over the land of their people to our political enemies.’ He duly
rejected the interim constitution and declared he would not abide by the election
results.
Mandela was soon forced to concede that the threat to the election was far

more serious than he had anticipated during the first flush of excitement about
the prospect of majority rule. By the time the official deadline for the registration
of parties had been reached on 12 February, the four key members of the
Freedom Alliance—Inkatha, the AVF, the Conservative Party and
Bophuthatswana—were all standing firm against participation in the election.
Only Ciskei, whose military dictator, Brigadier Gqozo, had succumbed to
pressure from his own troops worried about their career prospects, had thrown in
its hand. Security briefings given to Mandela warned that rightwing groups were
making serious preparations for resistance, stockpiling weapons, ammunition
and medical supplies and organising training. The briefings also warned of
doubts about the loyalty of security force elements that might be required to deal
with rightwing threats at the behest of an ANC-dominated government. The
assessment of the government was that everything possible had to be done to
avoid any kind of confrontation that would enable the alliance to make a
common stand, drawing large numbers of their followers into the fray.
The possibility of active resistance to the election was reinforced by reports
from the Goldstone commission investigating ‘third force’ activity. In February,
Judge Goldstone acquired what he later described as ‘convincing evidence’ of ‘a
horrible network of criminal activity’ involving high-ranking police officers in
Pretoria, Inkatha and the KwaZulu police. This activity, according to Goldstone,
included assassination, train massacres, hostel violence, gunrunning and the
subversion of justice. Factories in the Transvaal had been used by a police covert
unit to manufacture homemade guns which, along with large quantities of other
weapons, had been smuggled to Inkatha and used in attacks in Natal and on the
Reef. Goldstone emphasised that only a small group within the police force was
involved, but he added, ‘The whole illegal, criminal and oppressive system is
still in place and its architects are in control of the South African police.’ Among
the officials whom Goldstone named were the head of police counterintelligence and the police second-in-command. Goldstone recommended that
the police commissioner himself should be removed from office forthwith.
In an attempt to draw the Freedom Alliance into the constitutional process,
Mandela announced on 16 February a series of concessions he had previously
spurned. These included the use of a double ballot for provincial and national
elections; guarantees of wider powers for provincial government; and the
renaming of Natal province to KwaZulu-Natal. Mandela also approved the
inclusion in the constitution of a principle of ‘internal’ self-determination for

groups sharing a common culture and language, intended to meet the anxieties of
both Zulu and Afrikaner nationalists. He proposed that the issue of a volkstaat
should be dealt with by authorising the establishment of a twenty-member
council, to be elected by MPs who supported the establishment of a volkstaat,
enabling the idea to be pursued by constitutional means.
Mandela’s concessions went a long way towards meeting the demands the
Freedom Alliance had made in December. General Viljoen for one was ready to
accept the inclusion of a principle of self-determination and a volkstaat council
as a reasonable basis for agreeing to participate in the election.
But Buthelezi was determined to get more, believing that the election could
not take place without Inkatha. Within hours, without waiting to consult his
colleagues in the Freedom Alliance, he dismissed the concessions as nothing
more than ‘cheap politicking’, adding, ‘Mr Mandela’s supposed concessions do
not even begin to address our demands.’
To keep the electoral process on course, the Independent Electoral
Commission imposed a final deadline for political parties to register of 4 March.
A further short period was to be allowed after that date for political parties to
present their list of candidates, thereby effectively confirming their participation
in the election. The deadline set for that, eventually, was 11 March.
In a final effort to bring Inkatha into the election, Mandela arranged to meet
Buthelezi in Durban on 1 March. Addressing a political rally beforehand,
Mandela declared, ‘I will go down on my knees to beg those who want to drag
our country into bloodshed and to persuade them not to do so.’ The meeting was
only their fourth encounter in the four years since Mandela’s release from
prison. It brought no movement in the dispute over the constitution, but what it
did produce was a deal of minor significance which was to have profound
repercussions. In exchange for Mandela’s agreement to submit their differences
on the constitution to international mediation—a device which Buthelezi hoped
would postpone the election altogether—Buthelezi agreed to register Inkatha for
the election ‘provisionally’.
Buthelezi’s sudden turnabout on the election threw his allies in the Freedom
Alliance into turmoil. Rival groups within each party argued over which course
to take. General Viljoen and his fellow retired generals decided to keep open the
possibility of rightwing participation in the election by registering a new party,
the Freedom Front, arriving at the registration office with only minutes to spare

before the deadline of midnight on 4 March. But their action was immediately
denounced by other Volksfront leaders. The Conservative Party rejected
participation in the election, as did Bophuthatswana’s president, Lucas
Mangope.
Mangope’s refusal to take part in the election plunged Bophuthatswana into
crisis. Accustomed to ruling with an iron rod and relying on the police to silence
opponents, Mangope had little respect for the groundswell of public discontent
building up. Technically, under South African law, Bophuthatswana was still an
independent state. Nevertheless, the adult population of 2 million had been given
the right to vote in the April election. Bophuthatswana’s fate, once the election
had taken place, was to be reincorporated into South Africa as part of North
West Province. Civil servants and other public-sector workers, worried about
their pensions and their future after the election, launched a wave of strikes.
ANC supporters, resentful of Mangope’s curbs on political activity, joined the
fray.
Mangope’s response to the disturbances was to ignore them. ‘I love him
dearly, but he is living in a different world,’ reported South Africa’s
‘ambassador’ to Bophuthatswana, Tjaart van der Walt. ‘I failed to convey a
sense of reality to him.’ Mandela, in his conversations with Mangope, urging
him to let the people of Bophuthatswana decide their future, also admitted
failure: ‘It seems I am talking to a stone. I think we have now given him enough
time. I have tried to reason with him but it is clear he has no vision. Further
pressures will be used and I have no doubt he will not be able to withstand
them.’
Aided and abetted by ANC activists, the strikes spread through
Bophuthatswana,
crippling
civil
service
departments,
schools,
telecommunications, health services, electricity supplies, transport and industry.
Radio and television broadcasts went off the air. Running battles broke out
between police and striking workers and students. Looters began to raid
shopping centres. Policemen started to defect. The demands of the strikers no
longer centred just on pension payments but included demands for
Bophuthatswana’s immediate reincorporation into South Africa, for free and fair
elections and for Mangope’s removal.
Facing popular revolt, Mangope took action with such potential for disaster
that it suggested he had lost all touch with reason. On 9 March, he contacted

General Viljoen, his Freedom Alliance partner, pleading for help from armed
white paramilitary groups in the extremist Afrikaner Volksfront. Mangope’s
only stipulation was that Viljoen was not to include any AWB men, notorious
for their lawless conduct and racist attacks on blacks. Viljoen agreed to
cooperate. On 10 March, he mobilised 4,000 men and dispatched some 1,500 of
them to Mangope’s capital, Mmabatho, carrying only side-arms. The plan was
for the AVF force to rendezvous at the town’s airport with units from the
Bophuthatswana Defence Force, which was commanded by white officers who
would provide them with weapons. As they headed for Mmabatho, many
rightwingers believed that they might be on the verge of establishing a volkstaat.
The plan went awry from the start. The AWB leader, Terre’Blanche, learning
of the instruction to mobilise, issued a call, broadcast on a rightwing radio
station near Pretoria, for his supporters to join in. On the night of 10 March,
hundreds of AWB members, armed with an assortment of shotguns and hunting
rifles, crossed into Bophuthatswana in convoys of pick-up trucks. Their arrival
provoked immediate dissension. White officers in the BDF ordered them out, but
they refused to leave and went on what was described as ‘a kaffir-shooting’
expedition in the streets of Mmabatho, firing at random at bystanders and
terrorising local inhabitants. BDF troops mutinied, leaving Viljoen’s men
without weapons. The operation swiftly collapsed. As the AWB pulled out, one
of its vehicles, carrying three men, was caught in a gun fight with troops
manning a roadblock. One man was killed outright; his two companions
survived but were executed by a policeman as they lay on the ground, in full
view of television cameras. The scene was replayed on South African television
again and again.
As the South African army moved into Mmabatho to restore a semblance of
order, the fate of Mangope remained undecided. De Klerk was willing to allow
him to stay in office, provided he agreed to participate in the election and
allowed free political activity, but Mandela would have none of it, saying that
Mangope had obstructed the electoral process, precipitated the crisis and should
be removed from office immediately. On 12 March, the transitional executive
council duly resolved that Mangope should be deposed. A deputation was sent to
his luxurious house near Zeerust to tell him. Mangope tried to argue, but to no
avail.
These events in Bophuthatswana produced dramatic changes across the
political landscape. The threat of organised rightwing resistance to the election

effectively collapsed. The AWB had been shown up to be nothing more than a
murderous rabble. Fear of the extreme right gave way to ridicule. While
Terre’Blanche tried to claim his men had scored a ‘brilliant victory’ in
Bophuthatswana, many Afrikaners were disgusted by this farcical boasting
carried out in the name of the Afrikaner people.
The Freedom Alliance also collapsed. Appalled by the fiasco of armed
intervention in Bophuthatswana, Viljoen broke with the AVF and, with only
minutes to spare before the deadline at midnight on 11 March, lodged a list of
Freedom Front candidates ready to participate in the election, providing a vital
route for the far-right to remain in the political process. Several prominent
members of the Conservative Party announced they would join him.
Buthelezi’s position became increasingly isolated. Unlike Viljoen, he failed to
register a list of candidates, effectively eliminating himself and Inkatha from the
election. But his options were limited. The only way he could prevent the ANC
from winning control of KwaZulu-Natal at the polls was to stop the election
taking place and force a postponement in the hope that a more favourable deal
might be obtained at a later stage, possibly through international mediation. The
only way of doing this was to threaten violence or to use it. Yet the events in
Bophuthatswana had shown that Mandela and de Klerk were determined to
protect the election process from obstruction and that the South African military
were ready to support them. They were equally adamant that the election would
not be postponed.
Ten days after Mangope’s downfall, Buthelezi’s last remaining ally, Brigadier
Gqozo, capitulated. Faced with striking civil servants and rebellious police,
Gqozo asked Pretoria to take over Ciskei’s administration. Once again, South
African troops moved in to secure control. ‘Two down,’ commented Joe Slovo
gleefully, ‘one more to go.’
In the wake of Bophuthatswana and Ciskei, ANC officials, sensing that
another victory was within their reach, became increasingly arrogant. Slovo
predicted that Buthelezi would be ‘merely a smell in history’ after the election,
boasting that he himself, a non-Zulu, could get more votes in KwaZulu-Natal
than Buthelezi. Ramaphosa spoke recklessly of the need for a military solution,
having no concept of what it involved. For those in Ulundi, the message was all
too clear: the ANC wanted to smash KwaZulu by force.
Yet Buthelezi’s power base was far stronger than the glib pronouncements of

ANC politicians suggested. In the rural backwaters of KwaZulu-Natal lived
several million Zulus ready to obey the command of their traditional chiefs, the
amakhosi, who remained loyal to Buthelezi. Moreover, Buthelezi had the
support of the king. Talk of a military solution in these circumstances was
nothing more than a dangerous fantasy. The military had neither the capacity to
take control of Buthelezi’s administration in Ulundi without precipitating a
revolt nor the means to suppress the insurgency that was bound to follow.
The scale of violence was already immense. Some 10,000 people had died in
KwaZulu-Natal over the previous six years. As the election approached, the
conflict became ever more deadly. A group of fifteen ANC election workers,
after putting up election posters, were shot and hacked to death. Election activity
of any kind became a dangerous business in many areas. The level of
intimidation from both sides soared by the day. ‘Vote?’ said a retired teacher in
Port Shepstone. ‘Why vote? Inkatha is killing us, the ANC is killing us. We are
all going to die.’
After a visit to KwaZulu in March, vainly seeking local assistance for staging
the election, the head of the Independent Electoral Commission, Judge Kriegler,
warned Mandela and de Klerk that without a sufficient degree of stability and
cooperation, free and fair elections in KwaZulu-Natal would be frustrated.
Kriegler spoke of his determination to mount an election. KwaZulu alone
possessed some 2.5 million potential voters, about 60 per cent of Natal’s black
electorate and some 12 per cent of the national electorate. Without its
involvement, the overall election result would be seriously impaired. What was
required, said Kriegler, was a political initiative.
Both sides meanwhile resorted to shows of strength. On 25 March, the ANC
organised a march through the city centre of Durban. Despite fears of violence,
the event passed off relatively peacefully. Inkatha then decided to respond in
kind in Johannesburg, but with calamitous results.
On 28 March, thousands of Zulus, brandishing spears, clubs and cowhide
shields, marched through the streets of the city’s main business district to a rally
at Library Gardens. The demonstration turned into a bloodbath when snipers
opened fire from nearby buildings. For several hours, as Zulus went on the
rampage, the streets in the city were scenes of chaos. At the ANC’s headquarters
at Shell House, ANC security guards shot and killed eight protesters who they
claimed were trying to storm the building; eyewitnesses disputed their account.

By the end of the day, fifty-three people were dead, most of them demonstrators.
The spectacle of central Johannesburg being turned into a war zone set off a
wave of alarm throughout South Africa and far beyond its borders. The prospect
of a peaceful election seemed increasingly remote. Public confidence in the
transition and in the ability of South Africa’s politicians to manage it
successfully rapidly waned at home and abroad. In anticipation of further
violence, a surge of stockpiling began—canned food, candles, batteries, Primus
stoves, toilet paper, guns and ammunition. Foreign investors too lost faith,
withdrawing funds and shelving plans.
The event also tarnished Mandela’s reputation. He was not present when Zulu
demonstrators arrived outside Shell House, but the following day, when police
wanted to search the premises for weapons and for forensic evidence, he
personally refused to allow them entry. Asked later at a press conference if, in a
new government, his law and order minister would allow political opponents to
set conditions for police probes into criminal activity, he replied, ‘Let’s face that
when we are the government. I am entitled to negotiate with law and order
officials. ’ The Johannesburg Sunday Times observed caustically, ‘What a rare
achievement for the ANC. It has succeeded in putting itself above the law before
taking power. In most banana republics it happens the other way around.’ A year
later, Mandela admitted that he had instructed ANC security guards on the phone
that day to shoot to kill demonstrators if necessary to protect the building.
The carnage in Johannesburg set Buthelezi off on another round of wild
rhetoric. ‘The Shell House massacre shows that we have now entered a final
struggle to the finish between the ANC and the Zulu nation,’ he said. The only
way this could be prevented, he claimed, was to postpone the election.
With less than three weeks to go before the polls were due to open, Mandela,
de Klerk, Buthelezi and Zwelethini finally agreed to meet to see if they could
hammer out terms for Inkatha’s participation in the election and decide about the
king’s future status. Mandela believed that the key to defusing the crisis was to
prise Zwelethini away from Buthelezi. He drew up a proposal offering to
entrench the Zulu monarchy with constitutional powers in the new constitution
of KwaZulu-Natal and to provide it with a royal constabulary and a budget,
giving the king a status not even accorded him under the KwaZulu constitution.
The only condition Mandela wanted for all this was Zwelethini’s support for the
election. He hoped to be able to speak to Zwelethini in private in advance of

formal discussions.
The meeting, held on 8 April at Skukuza, a lodge in the Kruger National Park,
was ill-tempered. Mandela found no opportunity to talk to Zwelethini in private.
Surrounded by Buthelezi’s aides, the king appeared as obdurate and
uncooperative as Buthelezi himself. For his part, Buthelezi rejected the idea that
the king’s requirements could be separated from Inkatha’s demands and insisted
that the election be postponed. Mandela refused: ‘That day is sacrosanct.’ The
meeting ended in deadlock. The only matter they could agree on was to allow
international mediation to proceed.
But even this ended in farce. A mediation team, including the former US
secretary of state, Henry Kissinger, and the former British foreign secretary,
Lord Carrington, arrived in Johannesburg only to find that the ANC and Inkatha
could not agree its terms of reference. Buthelezi wanted mediation to include the
election date; the ANC did not. The mediators promptly left.
With the failure of international mediation, Buthelezi had exhausted viable
options. His strategy of obstruction had left him completely isolated. Out of
reach of Buthelezi, King Zwelethini sent an emissary to Mandela telling him that
he wanted to accept his offer on the Zulu monarchy. Inkatha was rumbling with
discontent at the prospect of being denied a legitimate place in the new
dispensation; civil servants in Ulundi were deeply worried about the risk to their
salaries and pensions. Buthelezi himself faced nothing more than a future in the
wilderness.
On 19 April, with only seven days remaining, Buthelezi capitulated, accepting
the offer of a constitutional role for the Zulu monarchy and abandoning all his
other demands.

In the early morning, as the sun rose over the green rolling hills of Natal, Nelson
Mandela stood beside a grave in the grounds of a small rural school in Inanda,
thinking of old friends like Oliver Tambo, Bram Fischer and Albert Luthuli who
would not be voting that day. Mandela had chosen to come to Inanda, near
Durban, to cast his vote, for it was there that the founding president of the ANC,
John Dube, was buried, and it was the school that he had founded which was to
serve as a polling station during the election. After laying a wreath on Dube’s
grave, he walked down the slope towards the school. ‘I did not go into that

voting station alone,’ he said. ‘I was casting my vote with all of them.’
He emerged from the polling station, his face wreathed in smiles, and spoke of
a bright future. ‘This is for all South Africans an unforgettable occasion,’ he
said. ‘We are moving from an era of resistance, division, oppression, turmoil and
conflict and starting a new era of hope, reconciliation and nation-building.’
In their millions, South Africans made their way to the polls, black and white
citizens alike sharing a common determination to make the election a success.
Many walked miles to reach a polling station. Some arrived on crutches and
some in wheelchairs; some dressed in their Sunday-best clothes and some wore
outfits they had made specially for the occasion.
Long queues formed outside polling stations, circling around city blocks and
winding back along dirt roads and across fields. Many arriving in the early
morning were still waiting to vote late in the afternoon, tired and hungry; some
in rural areas had to vote by candlelight. Yet, hour after hour, they remained
patient. And when they finally returned home, having voted, it was with a sense
of profound fulfillment, not just from participating in the election of a new
government, but from exercising a right which had been denied to most South
Africans for so long. Time and again, voters leaving polling stations spoke of
how their dignity had been restored.
On each of the four polling days, South Africa was more peaceful than it had
been for many years. The fever of violence suddenly abated. Even the killing
fields of KwaZulu-Natal fell silent. On the Witwatersrand, members of rival
factions found themselves joining the same queue in townships, swapping
complaints about the long delays.
For many whites, the experience of the election was as moving as it was for
blacks. Standing side by side with blacks, waiting to vote, they felt a sense of
their own liberation. The feelings of relief that the curse of apartheid had finally
been lifted were as strong among the white community which had imposed it as
among the blacks who suffered under it.
There were many incidents which marred the election. Afrikaner extremists
staged a series of bomb attacks, one in the centre of Johannesburg’s business
district, another at its international airport, killing twenty-one civilians and
injuring nearly 200 others. But the effect was to increase the resolve of voters
not to be deterred.

The performance of the Independent Electoral Commission was woefully
defective and at times so incompetent that it threatened the whole electoral
process. Shortages of ballot papers, ballot boxes and other equipment created
chaos at many polling stations. The counting process was equally flawed.
Opportunities for electoral fraud proliferated. Serious disputes arose over the
conduct of the election in KwaZulu-Natal.
But rising above all the muddle and confusion was the clear verdict of the
people. By voting in their millions, free from intimidation and from violence and
with great dignity, South Africans ensured that the birth of their democracy was
a triumph.
The results, moreover, were broadly acceptable to all sides. The vast bulk of
the black electorate provided the ANC with a handsome victory: the ANC
obtained 62.6 per cent of the vote, taking 12.2 million of the 19.5 million valid
votes cast, gaining 252 seats in the 400-seat National Assembly and winning
control of seven of nine provincial assemblies. But the ANC failed to gain the
two-thirds majority which would have given it the power to write the final
constitution on its own, thereby helping to still the fears of minority groups that
it would be tempted to ride roughshod over their interests. Some ANC officials
were disappointed, but Mandela was not one of them. He wanted the final
constitution to achieve a broader measure of support. A majority of the white,
Coloured and Indian communities held fast to the National Party, giving it 20.4
per cent of the vote and control of the Western Cape province. Zulu nationalists
voted for Inkatha, giving it only 10.4 per cent of the national poll but 50 per cent
of the KwaZulu-Natal provincial vote and therefore control of the provincial
assembly a key factor in defusing the potential for another round of political
warfare. Afrikaner nationalists, hoping for a volkstaat, put their trust in the
Freedom Front, but in smaller numbers than General Viljoen had hoped: the
Freedom Front obtained 425,000 votes, less than half the target Viljoen had set
and only 2.17 per cent of the national poll. A diminished band of white liberals
voted for the Democratic Party, giving it 1.7 per cent of the national poll.
Finally, an insignificant rump of black radicals voted for the Pan-Africanist
Congress, which won only 1.2 per cent of the vote.
The victory of the ANC at the polls was as much a personal tribute to
Mandela as it was to the movement he led. His ordeal of imprisonment had
never been forgotten by the people for whom he spoke and was duly
acknowledged when the time came for them to vote. Time and again, it was said,

‘He went to prison for us.’ For blacks, the election was, above all, about
liberation—a celebration of their freedom from white rule—and it was to
Mandela’s leadership that many attributed that liberation.
The transfer of power was accomplished in an atmosphere of much goodwill.
Closing the book on three centuries of white rule, de Klerk chose words of
encouragement fitting for such a historic moment: ‘Mr Mandela has walked a
long road and now stands at the top of a hill. A man of destiny knows that
beyond this hill lies another and another. The journey is never complete. As he
contemplates the next hill, I hold out my hand to Mr Mandela in friendship and
cooperation.’
In his victory speech, Mandela was equally gracious. After congratulating de
Klerk for the strong showing the National Party had made in the election, he
continued: ‘I also want to congratulate him for the . . . four years that we have
worked together, quarrelled, addressed sensitive problems and at the end of our
heated exchanges were able to shake hands and to drink coffee.’
At a victory celebration in the ballroom of the Carlton Hotel in Johannesburg,
which he attended despite a heavy dose of flu, Mandela took to the floor with a
slow, dignified solo dance before an exuberant crowd of ANC luminaries. The
dance was quickly copied in the townships and became known as ‘The
President’s Jive’, performed to much merriment in a stiff, wooden manner with a
fixed smile.
At every opportunity, Mandela sought to calm the apprehensions of whites
and other minorities about the coming of majority rule. The liberation struggle,
he said, had not been a fight against any one group but against a system of
oppression. ‘Nothing we can say can fully describe the misery of our people as a
result of the apartheid repression,’ he told a multi-denominational thanksgiving
service in Soweto. ‘But the day we have been fighting for has come. Let us
forget the past.’ He made an emotional plea for people of all races to ‘hold
hands’ and unite: ‘The time has come for men and women, Africans, Coloureds,
Indians, whites, Afrikaners and English-speaking, to say: we are one country; we
are one people.’
On the occasion of Mandela’s election as president in parliament in Cape
Town on 9 May, the same spirit of reconciliation prevailed. To thunderous
applause, Mandela and de Klerk entered the chamber together. They walked
down the central aisle, shook hands, then went their separate ways, Mandela to

the government side, de Klerk to the opposition benches. Before the swearing-in
ceremony, Mandela left his seat and crossed the floor several times to greet other
opposition leaders, first embracing and shaking hands with Buthelezi, then
General Viljoen and finally Clarence Makwetu of the Pan-Africanist Congress.
Mandela’s nomination as president was proposed by Albertina Sisulu and went
unopposed. The chief justice, Michael Corbett, announced, ‘I accordingly
declare Mr Nelson Rolihlahla Mandela duly elected as the President of the
Republic of South Africa.’ The house erupted in cheering.
Only one note of discord was apparent. After Winnie Mandela had been
sworn in as a member of parliament alongside her husband, she sat next to him
briefly. But Mandela stared straight ahead, ignoring her, according her not the
slightest sign of recognition, his face grim and cold. There was to be no
reconciliation with Winnie.
The day of Mandela’s inauguration, 10 May 1994, was marked by the greatest
celebrations ever seen in South Africa. From all over the world, visiting
dignitaries—heads of state, royalty and government leaders representing some
170 countries—gathered in Pretoria, as much in tribute to Mandela as to mark
South Africa’s rite of passage. The acclaim he received that day from around the
world was unique: no other world leader could match the stature he had achieved
in fighting for the cause of democracy. But even more important was the acclaim
he was accorded by South Africans, both black and white. That too was unique.
For in fighting for so long for national reconciliation in such a divided country,
Mandela had earned measures of trust and admiration that were his alone.
In a glittering array, the guests assembled in the amphitheatre in front of
Union Buildings, the monumental sandstone edifice designed by Herbert Baker,
built during the years of British rule after the Anglo-Boer War and regarded ever
since as the bastion of white power. Among the guests whom Mandela
personally invited were three of his former prison warders.
Inevitably, there were family dramas beneath the surface. Winnie was among
the first of the luminaries to arrive, resplendent in a long green silk dress.
Initially she was shown to a seat among lesser dignitaries, sitting there in fury
until she was allowed on to the main podium with a seat next to Zindzi.
Mandela’s son, Makgatho, remained in Durban, where he was busy with law
exams. His daughter Maka - ziwe, an academic at the University of the
Witwatersrand, attended, but she had previously made it known that she voted

for the Democratic Party. Mandela’s first wife, Evelyn, stayed at home in
Cofimvaba. For his escort, Mandela chose Zenani, who sat alongside him on the
podium, wearing an outsize top hat.
With all duly assembled, the new national flag was slowly raised to the
accompaniment of two national anthems. One was ‘Nkosi Sikelel’ iAfrika’, ‘God
Bless Africa’, the song composed by the Xhosa teacher Enoch Sontonga at
Johannesburg’s Nancefield location in 1897 and first performed in 1899. It had
made a strong impression at the inaugural meeting of the ANC in 1912 and was
officially adopted as its anthem in 1925. The other was ‘Die Stem van Suid
Afrika’, ‘The Voice of South Africa’, a poem written in 1918 by the Afrikaner
nationalist writer C. J. Langenhoven and set to music in 1921. It had become
South Africa’s national anthem after the National Party victory in 1948. Neither
group was familiar with the other’s anthem, but for Mandela, standing to
attention with his hand across his heart in a mark of respect, the playing of the
two national anthems symbolised the true importance of the day’s events.
In his inaugural address as president, Mandela emphasised the need for South
Africans to build a new society from the legacy of apartheid: ‘Out of the
experience of an extraordinary human disaster that lasted too long must be born
a society of which all humanity will be proud.’
He went on:
The time for the healing of the wounds has come. The moment to bridge the
chasms that divide us has come. The time to build is upon us.
We have, at last, achieved our political emancipation. We pledge ourselves to
liberate all our people from the continuing bondage of poverty, deprivation,
suffering, gender and other discriminations. . . .
We enter into a covenant that we shall build the society in which all South
Africans, both black and white, will be able to walk tall, without any fear in their
hearts, assured of their inalienable right to human dignity—a rainbow nation at
peace with itself and the world.
Towards the end of his speech, the 4,000 guests rose spontane - ously to their
feet for an ovation, in a moment of genuine emotion, as he declared, ‘Never,
never and never again shall it be that this beautiful land will again experience the
oppression of one by another and suffer the indignity of being the skunk of the
world.’

As the cheering died down, from a distance, across the hills of the
Muckleneuk Ridge, came the roar of formations of jet fighters and helicopters
trailing the national flag. And as the squadrons passed overhead in a final
affirmation of white loyalty to black rule, saluting their new commander-inchief, the crowds below erupted with an outpouring of enthusiasm. Many who
witnessed that moment of national catharsis were moved to tears.

CHAPTER 28

REINVENTING SOUTH AFRICA
AT THE OFFICIAL LAUNCH OF HIS AUTOBIOGRAPHY IN
JOHANNESBURG in December 1994, seven months after his inauguration as
president, Nelson Mandela joked, in his customary self-deprecating manner, that
such were the rigours of office that he sometimes longed for the relative calm of
prison. The magnitude of the task of transforming South Africa into a fully
fledged democracy after centuries of white-minority rule was indeed daunting.
The entire system that Mandela inherited had been designed largely to serve
white interests. Other than par liament, all the main institutions—the civil
service, the se - curity forces, the business community, the universities, the
media, the stock exchange, the banks and agriculture—were dominated by
whites. As Mandela publicly acknowledged, South Africa’s fortunes still
depended heavily on the skills, expertise and capital of the white community.
Yet while recognising the need to reassure whites about their future under
black rule, he also faced an avalanche of black expectations. In the aftermath of
his election victory, the black electorate was impatient for change. Mandela’s
pledges during the election campaign—of more jobs, more housing, better
education and health services—still reverberated across the country. All at once,
there were so many demands, so many priorities. At the age of seventy-five,
after fifty years as a political activist in the titanic struggle to defeat apartheid,
Mandela confronted yet another challenge as formidable as anything that had
come before. ‘I have discovered the secret that after climbing a great hill, one
only finds that there are many more hills to climb’, he concluded in his
autobiography.
Mandela’s achievement in securing a negotiated revolution in South Africa in
collaboration with its white rulers meant that he inherited an administration both
powerful enough and sufficiently amenable to begin undertaking the ambitious
targets he had set for his government. The old white establishment, comforted by
de Klerk’s presence in the cabinet as a deputy president, Mandela’s constant
efforts to reassure whites about their security and the guarantee on jobs and

pensions given them under the constitution, adapted to the new government with
remarkably few qualms. So peaceful was the transfer of power that it brought
about a swift resurgence of confidence in the future among the white
community.
Yet the scale of change envisaged was immense. South Africa needed not just
a new administration capable of undertaking major programmes of economic
and social development but also a whole new structure of provincial and local
government, involving the incorporation of former homeland territories into 9
new provinces and the redesign of some 800 segregated local authorities into
300 multiracial bodies. The police service, once at the forefront of enforcing
apartheid laws, required a complete overhaul to make it more acceptable to local
communities. The new national defence force required reorganisation to absorb
units from the ANC’s guerrilla army and former homeland armies. The entire
education system, where each race group had previously been segregated,
required restructuring. Whereas white public education offered high standards,
black public education had suffered from decades of deprivation: many buildings
were derelict, one third had no electricity, a quarter had no water, a half had no
sanitation, one third of teachers were unqualified and many more were underqualified.
The legacy of apartheid included a massive disparity in wealth. The average
white income was eight times greater than the average black income. Whites,
making up 13 per cent of the population, earned 61 per cent of total income.
Although the black middle class was growing apace, its share of total income
was still comparatively small. Barely 2 per cent of all private-sector assets were
black owned. According to calculations published in the United Nations Human
Development Report for 1994, if white South Africa was treated as a separate
country, its standard of living would rank 24th in the world, just below Spain’s;
black South Africa on the same basis would rank 123rd, below Lesotho and
Vietnam. Overall, in terms of human development, South Africa ranked only
93rd in the world. Out of a population of 40 million, 22 million lacked adequate
sanitation, including 7.5 million in urban areas; 12 million lacked clean water
supply; 23 million had no access to electricity; and some 2 million children were
without schools. Almost half of all households in South Africa lived below the
poverty line; a quarter lived on an income of less than half of the poverty-line
income; some 8 million were estimated to be ‘completely destitute’. One third of
the population was illiterate.

The assets that South Africa possessed to help it overcome this legacy were
considerable. They included one of the world’s richest stores of minerals, with
44 per cent of world diamond reserves, 82 per cent of manganese reserves and
64 per cent of platinum-group metal reserves. It was the world’s largest producer
of gold, mining a third of world production. Its financial, banking and legal
systems were well established and efficient; the Johannesburg stock exchange
was the tenth largest in the world. Its manufacturing base, though over protected and uncompetitive by world standards, was capable of major
expansion. The infrastructure of roads, railways, ports and airports was well
developed. Telephone and electricity services were reliable. Universities and
technical colleges turned out a ready supply of competent graduates. In statistical
terms, South Africa, with a gross domestic product of $120 billion, ranked as
one of the world’s twenty-five largest economies. In Africa, it stood out as a
giant.
What Mandela discovered on taking office, however, was that South Africa’s
economy was in dire straits. The ANC had expected to inherit an economic
cornucopia; its ambitious development plans were based on that notion. But the
coffers, in fact, were nearly empty. The previous government had run up a
record budget deficit of 8.6 per cent of gross domestic product, and gross foreign
exchange reserves had fallen to less than the equivalent of three weeks of
imports. The government’s domestic debt, moreover, was huge. The cost of debt
service together with current expenditure consumed 92 per cent of government
revenue, leaving only 8 per cent for capital spending. ‘There was simply no
money to do what we had planned’, recalled one of Mandela’s key ministers,
Mac Maharaj. ‘We had to dump our blueprints and start from the beginning’.
The unemployment figures on their own represented a sizeable crisis. Only
about half of the economically active population had formal-sector jobs. Several
million more earned a living in the informal sector—hawkers, small traders,
domestics and backyard businesses. Even so, the official unemployment rate was
calculated as 33 per cent. A high proportion of the estimated 5 million
unemployed possessed no skills or training and had little prospect of ever finding
a job. Of the 450,000 new entrants to the labour market in 1994, only 27,000
were expected to be able to find a job. On average, the formal sector of the
economy could absorb no more than 6 per cent of new entrants to the labour
market. When the new government advertised civil service vacancies for 11,000
managers, clerks and cleaners, more than 1.5 million people applied.

Economic growth in recent years had been dismal. In the longest recession in
its recorded history, South Africa’s GDP had fallen by 0.5 per cent in 1990, by
0.4 per cent in 1991 and by 2.1 per cent in 1992, a drop caused mainly by
drought disrupting agricultural production. Over the four-year period from 1990
to 1993, the aggregate fall in GDP had amounted to 1.8 per cent. Formal
employment between 1989 and 1993 had fallen by more than 350,000. Merely to
absorb the annual number of new entrants into the labour market required an
annual growth rate of 6 per cent. To make any inroads into the rate of
unemployment required a growth rate of between 8 and 10 per cent.
Not only was the economic legacy none too healthy, but, as Mandela
recognised, his ability to make progress on his development objectives depended
heavily on attracting foreign capital. Even with the support of the private sector,
local resources were not sufficient to raise the annual growth rate much above 3
per cent. Yet foreign investors were wary of the ANC’s long history of
advocating nationalisation and state control of the economy and reluctant to
commit themselves until they could see something of the new government’s
track record. Mindful of the need to convince foreign and local investors about
the government’s determination to pursue fiscal discipline and sound economic
management, Mandela stuck to a cautious and conservative approach to
economic policy.
The slow pace of change led to increasing restlessness. Apart from two
measures that Mandela swiftly introduced—free health care for young children
and pregnant mothers and primary school feeding schemes—there was little
tangible evidence of his government de - livering the improvements it had
promised. Fewer houses were built on government initiatives in Mandela’s first
year in office than in de Klerk’s last year. Labour unions, which had helped put
the ANC in power, began to flex their muscles, wanting rewards for their
endeavours. A spate of strikes and threatened strikes suggested that industrial
stability would be difficult to achieve. Within the ANC, too, there was
frustration at the compromises the government was required to make. ‘Are we in
power or just in office?’ asked Tokyo Sexwale, premier of the Gauteng region,
the country’s industrial heartland, in November 1994.
Mandela also had to contend with the legacy of protest politics from the
apartheid era. The culture of protest ran deep. Township residents accustomed to
years of boycotting rent and service charge payments in protest against apartheid
policies showed little inclination to start paying their dues even though a new

government was in power. Outbreaks of lawlessness were commonplace.
Students seized teaching staff as hostages, vandalised buildings and looted
shops. Striking policemen set up roadblocks. Nurses deliberately spread viruses
among their patients. Prison warders allowed dangerous criminals to escape.
Former MK guerrillas in the defence force absconded without leave. Taxi drivers
blockaded central Johannesburg. Squatters invaded vacant houses. Shop workers
went on a looting rampage. Added to all this was an epidemic of violent crime.
Some 200 policemen were killed during 1994.
The scale of disorder was serious enough to prompt Mandela to read the riot
act. Opening the second session of parliament in February 1995, he launched
into a tirade against workers and students who resorted to acts of anarchy and
disruption to secure their demands. ‘Let it be clear to all that the battle against
the forces of anarchy and chaos has been joined. Let no one say that they have
not been warned’, he said. ‘I speak of those who engage in such totally
unacceptable practices as the murder of police officers, the taking of hostages,
riots, looting, the forcible occupation of public highways, vandalisation of public
and private property and so on’. He went on, ‘Some have misread freedom to
mean licence . . . popular participation to mean the ability to impose chaos’. But,
he warned, ‘let me make abundantly clear that the small minority in our midst
which wears the mask of anarchy will meet its match in the government we
lead’.
Mandela was equally blunt about those who demanded immediate benefits
from his government: ‘The government literally does not have the money to
meet the demands that are being advanced. Mass action of any kind will not
create resources that the government does not have. All of us must rid ourselves
of the wrong notion that the government has a big bag full of money. The
government does not have such riches. We must rid ourselves of the culture of
entitlement which leads to the expectation that the government must promptly
deliver whatever it is that we demand’.
It was a sober message to deliver after so much euphoria over the coming of
majority rule. What Mandela was demanding were discipline and belt-tightening
from a population which had been led to expect something different.
Reflecting on the results of his first year in office, Mandela said he was
satisfied with the pace of change. ‘People must be patient’, he said. ‘They must
give us time’. Yet there was a noticeable lack of decisiveness about Mandela’s

administration, a lack of urgency in determining priorities and tackling them, a
tendency to let government business drift. It was as though the sheer size of the
agenda it faced was too daunting. For those hoping for faster results, there was a
growing sense of disillusionment.

The advances that Mandela made in pursuing national reconciliation were far
more immediate. National reconciliation became his personal crusade. From the
moment of his inauguration as president, he strove to establish a new racial
accord, constantly reassuring the white minority of its well-being under majority
rule. Addressing a huge crowd on the lawns below Union Buildings on
inauguration day, he urged a spirit of forgiveness. ‘Wat is verby is verby’, he
said in Afrikaans. ‘What is past is past’.
Towards his old political adversaries, he remained magnanimous. He
described de Klerk as ‘one of the greatest sons of Africa’, praising him for his
contribution to establishing democracy. Mandela had kind words for P. W.
Botha, ‘a first-class gentleman’, he said, ‘the real forerunner, paving the way for
eventual negotiations’. Every year, Mandela made the point of phoning Botha on
his birthday to wish him many happy returns. When asked by a television
interviewer who his hero was, he nominated former prisons minister Kobie
Coetsee, explaining that Coetsee had chosen to meet him at a time when
government enmity towards the ANC was at a peak. Coetsee was duly rewarded
under the new dispensation by being named president of the senate.
Mandela was assiduous in cultivating right-wing politicians, determined to
avert the risk of right-wing resistance. He developed his warm relationship with
General Viljoen, grateful for the role he had played in helping to keep right-wing
extremists inside the political process in the run-up to the election. In parliament,
Viljoen’s small band of Freedom Front members duly became Mandela’s most
loyal opposition. Viljoen spoke of ‘the great mutual trust and regard’ between
himself and Mandela. Mandela also made approaches to the recalcitrant white
Conservative Party, which had boycotted the election, and invited its leader,
Ferdi Hartzenberg, for a series of talks. Even the extremist Afrikaner
Weerstandsbeweging was included in discussions with government ministers.
When the Volkstaat Council began its deliberations soon after the election in
1994, it was accorded due recognition.
The gestures of goodwill he made were manifold. In his opening address to

the new parliament in Cape Town, he recited a moving poem by an Afrikaner
poet, Ingrid Jonker, who had committed suicide in 1965, noting how her dream
of emancipation had now been fulfilled. He spoke again in Afrikaans when
appealing to civil servants to support reforms in government policy. In changing
the name of his official residence in Cape Town from Westbrook, he chose an
Afri - kaans name, Genadendal, meaning ‘Valley of Mercy’. He made the point
of attending a service at the Nederduitse Gereformeerde Kerk in Pretoria, the
church to which Verwoerd and Vorster, Strijdom and Malan had belonged,
surprised by the warmth of his reception from the congregation: ‘If I had gone
there four years ago the security would have had to protect me against assault,
against people who would want to kill me. This time they were there to protect
me from being killed out of love’.
In one particularly memorable event, he organised what he called ‘a
reconciliation lunch’, bringing together the wives and widows of former
apartheid leaders and leading black activists. To his presidential residence in
Pretoria, Mahlamba’ Ndlopfu, came the widows of John Vorster and Hans
Strijdom, of Steve Biko and Moses Kotane. ‘These are the wives of the heroes of
both sides’, said Mandela, introducing his seventeen guests to the press on the
lawn before lunch. ‘We have fought our fights in the past. We have forgotten it
now. We must build a new South Africa. By attending this occasion, each one is
putting an important brick in that new building we are putting up’.
One of the widows he invited, Betsie Verwoerd, replied that at the age of
ninety-four she was too infirm to travel to Pretoria for the occasion, so Mandela
made arrangements instead to pay a courtesy call on her two weeks later at her
home in Orania, a town on the banks of the Orange River in the Northern Cape
province which Afrikaner bittereinders had preserved as a small whites-only
colony.
The burgemeesters of Orania gathered in their Sunday best to greet Mandela
as he arrived in an air force helicopter and conducted him to the nearby
community hall where Betsie Verwoerd, a frail, diminutive figure, was waiting
for him with tea and traditional koeksusters. After tea, she emerged with
Mandela to meet the press, clutching a two-page speech she had written to thank
him for coming. But when she tried to read it without her spectacles, she became
distressed. Peering over her shoulder, Mandela began softly prompting her in
Afrikaans, a half-smile on his lips: ‘I ask the president to consider the volkstaat
with sympathy and also to decide the fate of Afrikaners with wisdom’. When she

had finished, she looked up to him towering above her with a radiant smile of
thanks.
Even more remarkable was the invitation to lunch he sent to Percy Yutar, the
prosecutor in the Rivonia trial who had argued for Mandela to be given the death
sentence and expressed regret when this did not happen. Yutar’s name was still
reviled by liberal lawyers for his conduct of the trial. But Mandela took the view
that Yutar had played only a ‘small part’ in a grand system driven by politicians.
Like others who witnessed Mandela’s efforts at reconciliation, Yutar was struck
by awe at the occasion: ‘I wonder in what other country in the world you would
have the head of the government inviting someone to lunch who prosecuted him
thirty years ago. It shows the great humility of this saintly man’.
So much attention did Mandela devote to reassuring whites that black critics
claimed he was making greater efforts on their behalf than on addressing black
grievances. Mandela brushed aside such criticism: ‘We had to allay the fears of
whites to ensure the transition process took place smoothly. If we had not done
so, the civil war that was threatening would have broken out’. Reassuring
whites, he said, involved no cost. He pointed to opinion polls which showed that
his support among the white community had risen from about 1 per cent before
the election to more than 50 per cent, thus helping to ensure political stability.
The climax to Mandela’s efforts came during the 1995 Rugby World Cup
tournament, which South Africa hosted. This was the largest sporting event in
the nation’s history. Rugby was a sport embraced with almost religious fervour
by Afrikaners. During the apartheid era, when South Africa was expelled from
world rugby, the blow to Afrikaner morale was far greater than was any
economic sanction or oil embargo. The black population generally ignored
rugby, their passion being soccer. Rugby was regarded as a ‘Boer game’, a
symbol of white supremacy. On Robben Island, Mandela used to infuriate
warders by supporting any team that was playing against South Africa’s national
team, the Springboks.
When South Africa won approval to hold the 1995 World Cup, Mandela
began to take a personal interest in the event. Although there was strong pressure
within the ANC to give a new name to the national team, Mandela decided
against any change. He developed a warm relationship with François Pienaar,
the newly appointed Springbok captain, whom he met in Union Buildings in
Pretoria in June 1994. Pienaar confessed to reporters beforehand that he was

nervous about meeting a man of such standing. But he emerged with Mandela
smiling and readily adapted to the role of ambassador for the ‘new South Africa’
that Mandela hoped he would be. Pienaar promised to instruct all members of his
team to learn and sing the words of ‘Nkosi Sikelel’ iAfrika’.
For their team song, the Springboks adopted an old miners’ song in Xhosa,
‘Tshotsholoza’, which was popular with soccer fans and which Mandela and his
fellow prisoners on Robben Island used to sing when working in the lime quarry.
As part of their preparations for the World Cup, team members spent an hour a
day learning the correct pronunciation of the Xhosa words. ‘Tshotsholoza’ soon
became a hit in the white community.
White enthusiasm for the rugby festival was overwhelming. But it was
Mandela who turned it into a national event. He arrived at the Springbok training
ground near Cape Town, gave his personal blessing to the squad, all but one of
them white, and urged blacks to rally behind them: ‘We have adopted these
young men as our boys, as our own children, as our own stars. This country is
fully behind them. I have never been so proud of our boys as I am now and I
hope that that pride we all share’.
In the week leading up to the final match between South Africa and New
Zealand on 24 June, Mandela took to wearing a green rugby supporter’s cap,
adorned with the Springbok emblem. ‘This cap does honour to our boys’, he told
a black crowd. ‘I ask you to stand by them, because they are our kind’. With
boyish enthusiasm, he visited the team at its practice fields and in its dressing
rooms. Pienaar responded by saying he would ‘play his heart out’ for the
president.
As the team took to the field at Ellis Park, Mandela emerged on to the pitch
wearing the green and gold number 6 jersey of the team captain, Pienaar, and a
Springbok cap, sending the overwhelmingly white crowd into a frenzy of
enthusiasm and excitement. The stadium reverberated with chants of ‘Nel-son!
Nel-son!’
The match produced one of the most intense afternoons of physical endeavour
and emotion that any of those present were ever likely to witness. At full time,
the two teams were locked at 9-9, so extra time was necessary. Seven minutes
from the end, a drop goal gave South Africa victory. The crowd went wild.
Presenting Pienaar with the trophy, Mandela said, ‘Thanks for what you have
done for South Africa’. Pienaar replied, ‘Thanks for what you have done to

South Africa’.
The whole of South Africa erupted in celebration, blacks as joyful as whites.
Johannesburg became a giant street party. In the northern suburbs, domestic
workers rushed out on the streets shouting: ‘We’ve done it! We’ve done it!’
Never before had blacks had cause to show such pride in the efforts of their
white countrymen. It was a moment of national fusion that Mandela had done
much to inspire.

The honeymoon period between Mandela and his partners in the government of
national unity, de Klerk and Buthelezi, was memorable but brief. From the
outset, they made strange bedfellows, brought together not so much by common
interest as by a quirk of fate. The antagonisms of the past were too close to allow
for an easy relationship. De Klerk at first loyally played the part allotted to him
as a deputy president, travelling the world, extolling the virtues of the new South
Africa, dutifully maintaining a low profile. But it was a role with which he
became increasingly disgruntled.
Expecting to make a considerable impact on government policy, he found he
had influence but no real power. All his hopes about power-sharing, of making
important decisions in concert with Mandela, were soon confounded. Mandela
listened, but pursued his own agenda. Nor did de Klerk acquire the leverage he
expected to command by acting as the guardian of white interests in the civil
service, the police and the business community. White civil servants rapidly
switched their allegiance to Mandela, accepting him, rather than de Klerk, as the
guarantor of their interests. The police hierarchy, swiftly reshuffled, followed
suit. With the business community, Mandela opened his own direct lines of
communications. As an intermediary representing white interests, de Klerk was
soon redundant.
He also found himself at odds with Mandela in dealing with the past. Mandela
was determined that human rights violations during the apartheid era should be
investigated, not for the purpose of exacting retribution, but with the aim of
providing some form of public accounting and helping purge the injustices of the
past. Unless past crimes were addressed, he said, they would ‘live with us like a
festering sore’. He proposed to establish a truth and reconciliation commission,
empowered to subpoena witnesses and to grant amnesties. Those who came
forward to make a full admission of their crimes would receive pardons.

Otherwise, they risked the possibility of prosecution in the courts. The
commission would then make ‘recommendations on steps to be taken to ensure
that such violations never take place again’. De Klerk said the proposal would
result in ‘a witch-hunt’, focusing attention upon past government abuses while
ignoring ANC crimes. It was likely to ‘tear out the stitches of wounds that are
beginning to heal’. But his rearguard action against it achieved nothing.
Ghosts from the past continued to haunt the new government. A former
policeman testified that the bombing of the Johannesburg headquarters of the
South African Council of Churches in 1988 had been carried out, not by the
ANC, as the government had claimed at the time, but by government agents who
were subsequently congratulated by the minister of law and order, Adriaan Vlok.
Under pressure to prosecute, the police commissioner was obliged to disclose in
January 1995 that two former ministers, Adriaan Vlok and former defence
minister Magnus Malan, together with 3,500 policemen, had secretly been
granted indemnities by de Klerk’s government in its last days in power before
the general election in April 1994.
The disclosure caused outrage. At a cabinet meeting at Union Buildings on 21
January, de Klerk attempted to deny all knowledge of the matter. After a
protracted discussion, the cabinet decided to declare the indemnities invalid. But
just when agreement on the issue appeared to have been reached, Mandela, who
had been sitting quietly listening to the proceedings, launched a ferocious
personal attack on de Klerk, all the old animosity he had felt towards him
resurfacing. What particularly incensed Mandela was not just the covert nature
of the indemnity deal but also the manner in which de Klerk disclaimed any
responsibility for it, just as he had always done with Mandela in past disputes
over government complicity in violence. Mandela came close to calling de Klerk
a liar, rejecting the denial he made, and went on to criticise his conduct in
cabinet, comparing it unfavourably to that of other National Party ministers. In
cabinet, said Mandela, de Klerk spoke in a manner in which ‘white men used to
speak to blacks’. As Mandela continued his attack, de Klerk gathered up his
papers, preparing to walk out, saying he would have to reconsider his position.
Mandela retorted that if de Klerk did withdraw, it ‘would not cause a ripple’.
After the meeting had adjourned, ministers from both sides rallied round,
hoping to find a way to achieve rapprochement. De Klerk declared he had been
‘viciously insulted’. He accused the ANC of becoming increasingly intolerant of
opposition and criticism; its members, he said, ‘tend more and more to become

impatient and to adopt a bully attitude when they are opposed and questioned’.
But he was nevertheless willing to compromise. When Mandela suggested that
they should make ‘a fresh start’, de Klerk accepted. It seemed unlikely, however,
that the coalition would survive its full term. De Klerk was no longer
indispensable.
There were other sources of friction, notably over the conduct of South
Africa’s foreign policy. Despite the overwhelming need to attract Western
investment, Mandela persisted with an approach which emphasised friendship
with countries such as Libya, Cuba and Iran that was likely to deter Western
interest. Foreign policy was frequently an area of confusion and muddle,
determined as much by which governments had made contributions to the ANC
treasury as by other factors. ‘Our foreign policy is largely for hire’, complained
the opposition Democratic Party. ‘If you make a substantial donation to the
ANC, you get special foreign policy consideration’. The foreign minister, Alfred
Nzo, an old friend of Mandela’s, became a figure of public ridicule, universally
criticised for incompetence. Blunders were commonplace. Mandela added to the
toll, describing US aid of $100 million in 1995 as ‘peanuts’. The result was to
squander much of the goodwill for South Africa retained in Western capitals and
to exacerbate tensions with de Klerk.
The final rift with de Klerk came during negotiations over the drafting of the
new constitution in 1996. De Klerk fought hard to secure a clause enshrining the
principle of a forced coalition on a permanent basis. When he failed to get his
way, he decided to withdraw from the government altogether, giving vent to his
frustration at the minor role he had been obliged to play. ‘We felt for some time
now that our influence in the government of national unity has been declining’,
he said in May 1996, after the new constitution had been finalised. ‘The ANC
was acting more and more as if they no longer needed a multiparty government’.
He spoke of the need to provide ‘a strong and vigilant opposition’. Mandela
made it clear that he would have preferred the National Party to remain in the
coalition, but otherwise he accepted de Klerk’s departure with equanimity. As
Mandela had predicted, it caused barely a ripple.

Mandela’s relationship with Buthelezi was far more fractious. Appointed
minister of home affairs in 1994, Buthelezi was constantly at loggerheads with
Mandela over Inkatha’s continuing campaign for greater regional autonomy for

KwaZulu-Natal. The dispute was made more complex by the role of the Zulu
king, Goodwill Zwelethini, whose decision to switch his support to Mandela just
before the election earned him Buthelezi’s lasting enmity. In a spectacular
display of wild behaviour in September 1994, Buthelezi and his bodyguards
barged into a television studio in Johannesburg and during a live discussion
programme began abusing and threatening a Zulu prince speaking on the king’s
behalf.
In the ensuing uproar, rather than force the minister’s resignation, Mandela
subjected Buthelezi to public humiliation, requiring him to apologise to the
cabinet and the nation. As Buthelezi sat alongside him, looking penitent,
Mandela read out a statement he had drawn up after a special session of the
cabinet: ‘The cabinet resolved that this action constituted a serious violation of
the right to freedom of speech and freedom of the press. It also posed a threat to
the safety and security of citizens. It was therefore a direct challenge to the very
constitution which all ministers of the government are sworn to protect and
respect. Accordingly, the cabinet passed a motion of severe censure on Dr
Buthelezi for conduct inimical to good government and the protection of
fundamental human rights’.
Buthelezi duly apologised after explaining that he had not realised the
programme was being broadcast live: ‘I am not such a bumbling fool that I
would go into a live studio and interfere with a programme deliberately’.
For months on end, a row simmered between Mandela and Buthelezi over the
question of international mediation on Inkatha’s demands for greater regional
autonomy in KwaZulu-Natal. Although Mandela had given a commitment
agreeing to international mediation in April 1994 in order to get Buthelezi to
participate in the election, once in power, Mandela failed to honour it, making a
variety of excuses. Hoping to embarrass Mandela over this ‘breach of trust’,
Buthelezi reverted to his favourite tactic of boycott, announcing Inkatha’s
withdrawal from parliament and the constitutional assembly in February 1995.
The boycott had little impact, and two weeks later Buthelezi ended it on the
pretext of allowing more time for negotiation. A month later, when no further
progress had been made in resolving the dispute, he suspended Inkatha’s
participation in the constitutional assembly.
On both sides, the war of words became increasingly reckless, threatening to
re-ignite large-scale violence. In April, Buthelezi called on KwaZulu-Natal to

‘rise and resist’ the central government over its refusal to negotiate greater
regional autonomy. People should be prepared to lay down their lives to
safeguard self-determination against the ANC’s ‘arrogance’ over the issue of
international mediation and the constitution. ‘Let the new struggle for freedom
begin. Let our friends and foes be warned that our march to freedom has begun’,
he said. ‘No amount of intimidation, prevarication and violence can bend into
submission the strength of Inkatha, or undermine our determination to defend
our self-determination, freedom and pluralism’.
Mandela responded in kind, throwing all caution to the wind. At a rally near
Durban, he accused Inkatha of using government funds for KwaZulu-Natal to
foment rebellion there and threatened to cut them off. His remarks were
denounced by opposition groups as being irresponsible, inflammatory and
unconstitutional. When Mandela’s advisers sought to defuse the crisis by
stressing the president would take no action that was unconstitutional, Mandela
weighed in further by saying that if he did not possess the power to cut off funds,
he would acquire it if necessary by amending the constitution.
The crisis blew over a day later when Mandela and Buthelezi met and agreed
to settle their differences in an orderly manner. Appearing in front of the media
afterwards, they smiled and joked for the benefit of the cameras. Mandela
described Buthelezi as ‘my traditional leader, my chief, and my prince’.
Buthelezi declared himself ‘a loyal member of the president’s cabinet’. He
remained in Mandela’s cabinet long after de Klerk had departed.
But the episode raised questions once again about Mandela’s judgement. By
refusing to fulfil his commitment to international mediation, he provided
Buthelezi with a legitimate grievance that he was bound to exploit. The verdict
of the press on the issue was overwhelmingly hostile to Mandela. By then
resorting to the same kind of threats and bluster that Buthelezi habitually used to
further his aims, Mandela risked setting off renewed violence in KwaZulu-Natal
and undermining South Africa’s political stability, upon which so much else
depended. It was an example of impetuous brinkmanship which South Africa
could ill afford.

CHAPTER 29

THE BITTER END
IN SELECTING MINISTERS FOR HIS NEW GOVERNMENT, MANDELA
made one decision which he swiftly came to regret. The appointment of Winnie
Mandela as deputy minister for arts, culture, science and technology caused
immediate controversy. Her record as a common criminal, her involvement in
the criminal activities of the Mandela Football Club, her reputation as ‘a
deliberate and unblushing liar’, as confirmed by a High Court judge, and the
allegations of fraud made against her by an internal ANC commission of inquiry
all served to make her a perverse choice for a government anxious to establish its
international credentials for probity. Mandela’s reasoning was that at a time of
reconciliation, when South Africans were being urged to move on from the past,
there was no reason that Winnie should be excluded. The new coalition
government, he said, with its mixture of ANC, National Party and Inkatha
representatives, contained a number of people ‘whose hands were dripping with
blood’. Moreover, so the reasoning went, Winnie was likely to do less damage
inside the government than outside it. This was a serious error of judgement.
Winnie’s link to the murder of Stompie Moeketsi Seipei would not go away.
Within days of assuming office, she was obliged to take legal action to silence
her fellow convict Xoliswa Falati, who emerged from prison, after serving eight
months of her two-year sentence, seeking revenge and announcing she would
reveal details of ‘atrocities’ she claimed Winnie had perpetrated. In parliament,
the liberal opposition Democratic Party launched a ferocious attack on Winnie,
producing a list of ‘unsolved crimes’ with which it alleged Winnie was
associated.
Winnie’s response was to blame the apartheid regime and to exonerate herself.
She had been ‘criminalised’ by an apartheid court, she said, ‘a court which
studiously ignored the black perspective, black culture, black values and judged
everyone by white standards’.
She denied any personal responsibility for what had happened to Stompie:

My deepest regret is that I failed Stompie, that I was unable to protect him from
the anarchy of those times and he was taken from my house and killed, adding
his life to hundreds, perhaps thousands, who fell victim to the terror of
intolerance and the injustice of the kangaroo courts. . . .
I lived in the terror of those times and was repeatedly burnt by its fires. I did
not flinch. I did not run away. . . . And there are men in this gathering who, in
the calm safety of their Houghtons, literally fiddled and mounted the steps of
power, while our town - ships burned, who today dare to question my
membership of this august House. I say to them, examine your lives and
compare it with mine and then tell me, in all sincerity, who is more fit for this
House.
As well as old scandals, new ones surfaced. Hoping to make money out of a
diamond deal, Winnie hired an executive jet and dispatched her son-in-law
Prince Musi Dhlamini, Zenani’s husband, to Angola, to collect a package of
diamonds from President Eduardo dos Santos. In court, Prince Dhlamini testified
that he took orders from ‘Mummy’ unquestioningly. The deal fell through when
dos Santos said he knew nothing of it, leaving Winnie with a bill for a charter
flight which she refused to pay until ordered by a court to do so.
Winnie’s other money-making activities also aroused controversy. Using the
name of the ANC’s Women’s League, she linked up with a foreign film star,
Omar Sharif, to establish a tourist venture called Road to Freedom Tours, aimed
at encouraging black Americans to visit South Africa’s ‘sites of struggle’, such
as Mandela’s birthplace and his prison cell on Robben Island. Other officials of
the Women’s
League were furious when they learned of what had happened without their
knowledge. Eleven of them, including treasurer Adelaide Tambo, the widow of
Oliver Tambo, resigned in February 1995 in protest against Winnie’s ‘bad
leadership, undemocratic practices and unaccountability’. They presented a
memorandum to the ANC listing her ‘offences’ and accusing her of ‘using her
position as president of the Women’s League to further her own financial and
political aims’.
Another public row resulted from Winnie’s blatant use of her office as an arts
minister to promote a private business venture between her daughter Zindzi and
American concert promoters. When faced with criticism from the local
entertainment industry, Winnie responded by accusing both the media and the

local entertainment industry of being racist. Her ministry, she said, took a ‘dim
view’ of the pop group the Rolling Stones for using a white promoter for a
forthcoming tour of South Africa rather than a black one, suggesting that they,
too, were motivated by racial prejudice.
Winnie also used her ministerial position in an attempt to influence the
outcome of a legal dispute between a local government agency, the Pretoria
regional services council, and an electrical contractor, Costa Livanos, who was
claiming 22 million rands in damages for breach of contract. Writing on
ministerial notepaper, she criticised the regional services council, reminded its
chairman that she was ‘a minister in the government that employs you’ and
suggested that he should settle the matter out of court. In arbitration proceedings,
the regional services council won its case.
Other scandals involved a charitable agency called Coordinated Anti-Poverty
Programmes (Capp), which Winnie had set up in 1992 after being forced to
resign from her ANC posts. Ostensibly, Capp’s purpose was to help destitute
communities, but critics claimed it was no more than a vehicle for Winnie’s selfpromotion. Capp obtained contributions from local businesses and foreign
embassies, but was lax about keeping proper accounts. The focus of its attention
was several squatter communities near Johannesburg, in particular Phola Park, a
fractious and often violent camp on the eastern outskirts of the city. Winnie’s
style was to pay regular visits to Phola Park, gaining huge popularity as the
result of the promises she made. When improvements in Phola Park occurred—a
new school, a larger clinic, a sewerage system—Winnie took the credit for them.
But local leaders and developers claimed her role was a sham. The
improvements there were due not to Winnie, they said, but to the efforts of other
organisers. ‘The only thing she has brought to Phola Park is promises’, said one
local leader. According to one of its employees, the only project Capp actually
undertook was to distribute tents donated by local businesses to residents of
Phola Park.
In February 1995, Capp was cited by the Registrar of Companies for failing to
file financial statements as required by law. A subsequent examination of the
accounts showed that Winnie, as chief executive officer, had made huge expense
claims on the organisation, including an item of 67,200 rands for repairs and
maintenance for six cars.
Even though Mandela had pledged ‘to put the country on a new moral

footing’, he seemed paralysed by Winnie’s antics. One by one, the news items
mounted up: a controversy over huge expense claims she made for her
bodyguards; a questionable friendship with a convicted illegal diamond trader
who lent her a house in Cape Town; a raid she made on the offices of a
traditional leaders’ organisation, seizing furniture and equipment; reports of her
disruptive conduct in the ministry of arts, culture, science and technology. When
the Canadian government refused her permission to enter Canada because of her
criminal record, she resorted to publicly attacking it. Through everything,
Mandela dithered. ‘He seemed to be so tired of the issue’, said a member of a
Women’s League deputation who went to see him to complain about Winnie’s
activities.
Only when Winnie turned to criticising his government was Mandela
provoked into action. Addressing a crowd at a funeral for a black police officer
in Soweto on 5 February, Winnie accused the government of doing more to
appease whites than to redress the racial in - iquities of apartheid. She described
the ANC’s ‘overindulgence’ in reconciliation as a weakness, and she challenged
ANC leaders to demonstrate whether ‘we are in power or just in government’.
Stung by the criticism, Mandela ordered her to retract her remarks or face
dismissal.
Winnie’s initial response was to issue not so much an apology as an
explanation. In a letter submitted to Mandela on 13 February, she wrote:
In this note I will try to clarify my motives and intentions in making the said
comments. First and foremost, I must make it abundantly clear that it was not my
intention to insult the President or to embarrass the Government of National
Unity. I was merely trying to assure the masses that the Government and the
ANC were aware of and concerned about the flaws that the Government must
deal with.
The impression of the people is that we neither care nor know about these
things. I was trying to correct that perception. If in doing so I created a different
impression, that was not my intention. I have always been an honest and
forthright member of the ANC.
I have tried to be equally faithful to the Government, and I mean to remain so.
Mandela swiftly rejected Winnie’s ‘explanation’ and demanded a proper
apology. Another letter was drafted that day, which she was then obliged to sign:

I would like to apologize most sincerely for the impression the speech caused
that I sought to condemn the Government of National Unity.
If such criticism of the Government were intended, I could not have excluded
myself as a member of the Government.
Indeed, I am aware that the GNU is concerned to end racism in our society, is
determined to address this matter vigorously and has instituted programmes in
pursuit of this objective.
I would also like to reaffirm my commitment to the concept and practice of
collective responsibility on the part of Cabinet ministers and deputy ministers
and, on this basis, am prepared to serve the Government loyally, working with
all the members of the Government.
I sincerely regret any embarrassment that the speech might have caused the
President and the Government as a whole and therefore accept this censure
which the delivery of the speech at the funeral occasioned.
But having signed the apology, Winnie then made her real feelings clear in
another letter to Mandela written on 15 February, in which she objected to being
‘made to sign, under duress’:
As you will know, when you were forcibly prevented from exercising your
inalienable right to free speech, I and the children, with others, spoke up for
humanity.
Circumstances forced me into becoming a political activist. The children and I
suffered for refusing to succumb to the oppression of the apartheid regime. We
were banned and banished and were also jailed and physically manhandled.
I continue the long tradition of speaking without fear on matters that are vital
to all the people of South Africa.
As it happened, in a recent speech, I did not realize—as I have since been
advised—that in certain respects I no longer have the right of free speech. I have
made amends for not fully appreciating the consequences of that, and realize that
in some respects, my public statements must be limited.
She then stated her objections to signing the apology: ‘I fail to see how I am
supposed to tolerate such continuing violation of my constitutional and
fundamental rights.’

One week later, defying Mandela’s specific instructions that she should not
travel abroad, Winnie set off for a tour of West Africa. While she was away, yet
another scandal broke. On 1 March, fraud squad officers, backed up by armed
police, raided Winnie’s mansion in Soweto and the offices of Capp in
Johannesburg, seizing documents, letters and bank statements. Winnie was
accused of accepting payments of 72,000 rands from a private building firm in
exchange for using her influence to secure housing contracts. Returning from
West Africa the following day, Winnie immediately launched into legal action,
challenging the validity of the police search warrants. She claimed she was the
victim of a ‘diabolical’ vendetta by ‘charlatans and cowards’ and ‘the forces of
reaction’. The police, she said, merely wanted to discredit her: ‘I feel betrayed.
This has been the ultimate humiliation by my own people. This is not the South
Africa I ruined my life for. . . . I am embittered and annoyed by the secret
manoeuvrings in our movement. The last three weeks have been the most
traumatic period of my political life. As a family, we have never felt so helpless,
so unprotected’.
The range of charges against Winnie was extraordinary. They included open
defiance of the president, use of her public office for personal advantage,
misappropriation of funds and receipt of kickbacks. Yet still Mandela
prevaricated. When a court ruled on 22 March that the police search warrants
used to raid her house were defective and ordered the return of Winnie’s
documents, she returned to the fray with a vengeance, openly challenging
Mandela: ‘I owe my allegiance to the people of South Africa. It is only they who
will determine my political future. No man has the capacity to undermine that
will—no matter who that individual might be’.
Addressing a meeting of the ANC’s Women’s League in Port Elizabeth on 25
March, she resumed her attack on Mandela’s government, accusing it of being
indifferent to the plight of the poor: ‘Nothing has changed. In fact, your struggle
seems much worse than before, when the fight was against the Boers’. She also
criticised government expenditure in connection with a state visit by Britain’s
Queen Elizabeth, an event in which Mandela took particular pride.
On 27 March, Mandela finally sacked his estranged wife from the
government. He gave no reason other than to say that the decision had been
taken ‘in the interests of good government and to ensure the highest standards of
discipline’. He suggested, politely, that Winnie might like ‘to review, and to seek
to improve on, her own conduct in positions of responsibility’.

But Winnie was not yet finished. In a final act of revenge, she challenged her
dismissal in the courts, claiming that proper procedures had not been followed
and enlisting the support of Chief Buthelezi, the minister of home affairs, a man
only too willing to help embarrass the ANC. Rather than face legal proceedings,
Mandela was obliged to reinstate her briefly, before sacking her for a second
time. It was an episode which left Mandela’s government looking weak,
indecisive and incompetent.

Mandela now proceeded with plans to divorce Winnie, hoping that the matter
could be settled in private. He sent several emissaries to her. ‘I asked her to
settle it amicably and not to wash our dirty linen in public’, he said. But Winnie
fought on relentlessly, opposing divorce to the last. Mandela’s case was that his
marriage had irretrievably broken down as a result of Winnie’s ‘brazen public
conduct and infidelity’. Winnie argued that reconciliation was still possible.
The hearing came before the Rand Supreme Court in Johannesburg in March
1996. Mandela arrived there, grim-faced, wearing a grey three-piece suit, ready
to take the witness stand for the first time since the Rivonia trial in 1964.
Winnie, elegantly attired in a gold and black dress, still attractive at the age of
sixty-one, sat at a long wooden table only ten feet away. Apart from a curt
handshake, they avoided looking at each other.
Called as the first witness, Mandela confirmed that when announcing his
separation from Winnie in 1992, he had issued a statement expressing affection
and respect for his wife. He explained: ‘This is my wife, with whom I had in the
past shared some of the happiest moments in our lives. I wanted to make the
parting as painless as possible, especially because of the children. I knew it
would be a terrible experience for them and therefore I expressed affection for
her. And respect, because I respect her very highly’.
Later that year, amid gossip about Winnie’s affair with lawyer Dali Mpofu, a
local newspaper editor had brought Mandela a copy of a love letter written by
Winnie to Mpofu which the paper was about to publish. ‘The contents of the
letter, My Lord, were incompatible with a marriage relationship and even if there
was a possibility of reconciliation, it confirmed my decision never to reconcile
with the defendant’.
They had not talked to each other ‘for years’, except for ‘the exchange of

pleasantries’. Winnie’s avowals of affection for him at political rallies were
‘cosmetic and hypocritical’. The marriage existed ‘only on paper’. He said he
had delayed divorce proceedings because he did not want it to be thought that
they were connected with Winnie’s trial over the Stompie affair, in which he
believed she was innocent.
He was asked by his lawyer, Wim Trengove, about an affidavit Winnie had
obtained as part of her defence from his kinsman Kaizer Matanzima, the former
ruler of the Transkei, who had been his close friend for many years and who had
once tried to woo Winnie. According to Matanzima, writing in his capacity as
paramount chief of Western Thembuland, under customary law the divorce
could not proceed until mediation had been attempted by tribal elders. Members
of the Thembu royal house had tried to intervene, but Mandela had refused to
meet them and had failed to accord them ‘proper respect’.
Trengove told the court that it was ‘inappropriate’ for Matanzima to ‘meddle’
in the Mandela relationship. His status as paramount chief had been accorded
him by the apartheid regime. Mandela regarded him ‘as a sell-out—in the proper
sense of the word’, said Trengove. Moreover, Matanzima had once competed for
Winnie’s affections before her marriage, ‘but lost out to the plaintiff ’. Trengove
nevertheless wanted to ascertain Mandela’s view on the issue of tribal mediation
in matrimonial disputes.
‘I respect custom but I am not a tribalist’, said Mandela. ‘I fought as an
African nationalist and I have no commitment to the custom of any particular
tribe’. Custom was not ‘moribund’, he added. ‘It is a social phenomenon which
develops and changes. For example, my father was a polygamist. In Thembu
custom, you normally have a customary marriage and one of the methods of
observing them is for a man who wants to get married to waylay a girl as she
goes to the river to fetch water and take her home. And the parents will follow. I
am not committed to that kind of custom’.
He expressed ‘shock’ at Winnie’s action in obtaining an affidavit from
Matanzima: ‘Several times he wanted to visit me in jail and I refused, because I
did not want to be tainted by his reputation’.
‘Is there any way that an intervention by him would save your relationship? ’
asked Trengove.
‘Can I put it simply, My Lord? If the entire universe tried to persuade me to
reconcile with the defendant, I would not. And least of all from Matanzima. . . . I

am determined to get rid of this marriage’.
Mandela continued: ‘Ever since I came back from jail, not once has the
defendant ever entered the bedroom whilst I was awake. I kept on saying to her:
“Look, men and wives usually discuss the most intimate problems in the
bedroom. I have been in jail a long time. There are so many issues, almost all of
them very sensitive, I would like to have the opportunity to discuss with you”.
Not once has she ever responded. . . . I was the loneliest man during the period I
stayed with her’.
Listening to Mandela’s testimony, Winnie never looked up, but stared into her
lap or scribbled notes.
In his cross-examination, Winnie’s lawyer, Ismail Semenya, sought to portray
Winnie as a woman who had suffered greatly at the hands of the apartheid
authorities and sacrificed everything for their marriage. Mandela conceded that
Winnie had suffered ‘gross persecution’ and ‘brutal treatment’ at the hands of
the security police, but added that she was not alone. ‘There were many women
who suffered more than she did’, he said, citing as an example Albertina Sisulu.
‘I am saying this not to underestimate the role she played. Just so long as this
does not create the impression that she was all alone in the struggle. . . . She was
no exception’.
When Semenya continued to blame apartheid, Mandela became irritated,
declaring that there were ‘even more serious reasons why I left home’. Three
times he begged Semenya not to force him to divulge any more painful details: ‘I
would like you to know I am not keen to wash our dirty linen in public. I appeal
to you not to put any questions which might compel me to reveal facts which
could damage the image of the defendant and bring a great deal of pain to our
children and grandchildren’.
Having finished his cross-examination, Semenya then asked the court for an
adjournment for several days to allow him time to assemble witnesses. When the
judge, Frikkie Eloff, rejected his request, Winnie intervened with a last
melodramatic flourish, fired her lawyer and asked the court for an adjournment
while she found another. Trengove sprang to his feet to denounce ‘the oldest
trick in the book’. Mrs Mandela, he said, ‘should not be allowed to get away
with a ploy as obvious as that’. Judge Eloff asked Winnie either to call witnesses
or to take the stand herself. With tears in her eyes and a shaky voice, she said she
could not take the stand and needed legal guidance: ‘I am an ordinary person, a

layman. I do not want to be heard. I do not know what to do. I am assuring Your
Lordship that it is not a ploy on my part’. The judge was unmoved, and after a
further offer to Winnie to take the stand, he declared the defence case closed.
While waiting for Eloff ’s verdict during a final adjournment, Mandela sat
slumped in his chair, gazing into the middle distance, his face etched with
misery. The judge returned to grant Mandela a divorce. It was the end of thirtyeight years of marriage—a marriage which, during his long years of
imprisonment, he had cherished above all else.

CHAPTER 30

THE GRAVY TRAIN
AS PRESIDENT, MANDELA MAINTAINED A FRUGAL LIFESTYLE. HE
had the use of two grand state mansions, Genadendal in Cape Town and
Mahlamba’ Ndlopfu, formerly Libertas, in Pretoria, but whenever possible he
preferred to stay at his comfortable suburban house in Houghton, where three of
his grandchildren and a young relative lived with him. He liked to get away from
the formality of official residences; at home, he could relax. His income as
president was substantial. He had an annual salary of 552,000 rands with large
additional allowances, but he donated a third of his salary to a children’s charity
he set up. Much of his other income—royalties from his autobiography and
money from the Nobel Peace Prize—was also given to charity or to the ANC.
Accustomed to a life of austerity, Mandela wanted to set a new style of
leadership, free from the greed and corruption for which National Party rule had
been renowned. The political ‘gravy train’, he had said during the election
campaign, would come to an end: ‘We are not going to live as fat cats’.
The new dispensation, however, offered opportunities for the black elite,
which they seized with alacrity. One of the first acts of the new parliament was
to vote for huge increases in the salaries and allowances of ministers, members
of parliament and the president. Ministers’ monthly salaries were raised to a
level which was three times more than the average worker earned in a year. The
increases had been recommended by a commission set up by the apartheid
government, thereby enabling ministers to claim they were not responsible for
the additional money. Even with the recommended increases, members of
parliament continued to argue in favour of yet higher allowances, insisting that
they found it difficult to make ends meet.
The public reaction was distinctly sour. The black Sunday newspaper City
Press published a cartoon showing two senior ministers in the dining car of the
Gravy Train, with one telling the other: ‘That’s enough gravy. Bring on the
champagne’.

The most damning comment came from Anglican leader Archbishop
Desmond Tutu. After raising the issue of government salaries with Mandela in
private, Tutu decided to make his concern public. ‘The government stopped the
gravy train only long enough to get on it’, he remarked.
The public row that broke out between Mandela and Tutu showed Mandela at
his most evasive. Instead of confronting the issue, he chose to make a personal
attack on Tutu. Addressing an audience in Stellenbosch, he criticised Tutu for
siding with Mandela’s populist critics. ‘A respected leader was unable to resist
the temptation to jump on the bandwagon’, said Mandela. ‘I considered it an act
of irresponsibility on his part’. Mandela went on to chastise Tutu for failing to
raise the issue before going public.
Tutu’s response was first to rebuke Mandela for failing to observe the Ninth
Commandment: thou shalt not bear false witness. ‘What is . . . distressing’, he
said, ‘is the impression the president gives that I did not speak to him personally
about the issue’. Then he added: ‘But it is very distressing that the president
should behave like an ordinary politician, by not answering whether a particular
argument or criticism is true but instead impugning my integrity. It is beneath his
stature’.
When asked why he thought Mandela had reacted so intemperately, Tutu
replied: ‘Yes, it was so unlike him. At no point does he normally denigrate
anybody, which is why this attack on me is so odd. Why? I don’t know . . . but,
well, it’s good to know he’s human’.
Mandela’s belated reaction, several months later, was to announce a cut in the
pay of ministers and of the president. But by then the damage to parliament’s
reputation was severe. MPs found themselves the constant butt of remarks about
their ‘gravy-train mentality’. Mandela’s reputation also suffered from his
handling of the salary issue and a number of other incidents. Despite his stern
pronouncements about the need for belt-tightening and a new moral footing, he
was seen to be ‘soft’ on greed, as lenient with his colleagues as he had been with
Winnie, showing them the same kind of perverse loyalty.
One notorious example concerned the Reverend Allan Boesak, an antiapartheid activist from the Western Cape who had helped found the UDF in the
1980s. Once a leader of the Coloured branch of the Dutch Reformed Church and
head of the World Council of Reformed Churches, Boesak had fallen into
disgrace by 1990 as the result of affairs which led to the break-up of his

marriage and his resignation from all his church posts. Despite local opposition,
Mandela intervened to appoint Boesak as the ANC’s leader in the Western Cape
in the hope that he would bring in the Coloured vote. The Western Cape
subsequently was the only province won by the National Party in the election.
Boesak was replaced as party leader there, but Mandela compensated him with
an appointment as ambassador to the United Nations in Geneva.
A few weeks before he was due to leave for Geneva, the first hint of
corruption surfaced. Investigations into the use of aid money donated by foreign
organisations to a charity known as the Foundation for Peace and Justice, which
Boesak had set up in Cape Town to assist the poor and destitute, suggested that
nearly 3 million rands had gone astray. Determined to establish what had
happened to its funds, the Danish agency Danchurch Aid asked a Johannesburg
law firm to make a thorough inquiry. For six weeks Boesak held out while the
scandal was aired in the press. Only when the Office for Serious Economic
Offences began its own investigation was he finally persuaded to resign from the
foreign ministry.
A further complaint was made by Archbishop Tutu, who called in police to
investigate what had happened to a donation of 423,000 rands made by the
American singer Paul Simon, which Tutu had passed on to Boesak’s foundation.
‘We are distressed and angry’, he said in a statement, ‘that money . . . set aside
for child victims of apartheid cannot be accounted for immediately’.
After a three-month investigation, the Johannesburg law firm issued a 600page report damning of Boesak’s conduct. Boesak, the report said, had ‘enriched
himself substantially’ by diverting funds to buy a luxury house and to pay for an
inflated salary, vacations, his second wedding and his new wife’s business debts.
Only a quarter of the foundation’s income had gone to projects intended by
Scandinavian donors to help apartheid victims. Boesak’s response was to deny
all responsibility, to blame his staff and to claim that he was a victim of racism.
‘I have spent most of my life fighting for the liberation of the people’, he said. ‘I
have found that the justice I have fought for is not for me’.
Meanwhile, the government had asked one of its own legal advisers to
investigate. The adviser produced a three-page report which attempted to pick
holes in the law firm’s report and went on to clear Boesak of misconduct. The
response of the Johannesburg law firm was to describe the government report as
‘preposterous’ and ‘absurd’ and to issue an eighteen-page rebuttal, rejecting it

point by point.
But without waiting to weigh up the evidence and ignoring the work in
progress by the Office for Serious Economic Offences, Mandela duly
proclaimed Boesak innocent. ‘The government has investigated the allegations
against Dr Boesak and found they were baseless’, he declared. He went on to
praise Boesak as ‘one of the most gifted young men in the country’ who
deserved a ‘high diplomatic post’. Boesak pronounced himself vindicated,
demanded a public apology from Danchurch Aid and offered his services to the
government.
In the resulting public furore, Mandela and the government were accused of
covering up corruption, engaging in political cronyism and undermining the
course of justice. The outcry eventually died down, and Boesak did not get a
government job, but the episode showed Mandela again capable of gross
misjudgement in handling public business.
Mandela rode to the rescue of other colleagues caught in dubious
circumstances. When the health minister, Dr Nkosazana Zuma, was pilloried for
using 14 million rands of European Union funds to sponsor an anti-Aids drama
by a local playwright, neglecting to inform European Union officials, Mandela
used his influence with parliament’s health committee, which was set for a
showdown over the issue, to stifle its criticisms. ‘The result’, noted one
parliamentary reporter, ‘was a demonstration of pliant foot-shuffling that
astounded observers’. Though the public protector found that Zuma had misled
parliament, Mandela continued to support her. When journalists pursued the
matter, he accused ‘the white-owned media’ of victimising her, making a racial
issue of it for good measure.
Another colleague whom Mandela protected was the public enterprises
minister, Stella Sigcau, who became ensnared in a controversy over bribery
started by a fellow minister, Bantu Holomisa. The two ministers were old rivals:
Sigcau, a former premier of the ‘independent’ Transkei, had been overthrown in
1987 by a military coup led by Holomisa. In May 1996, Holomisa caused a
storm when he claimed that ten years previously Sigcau had received a cut from
a substantial bribe paid by casino tycoon Sol Kerzner to Transkei ministers to
help him secure exclusive gambling rights in the Transkei. Kerzner had
subsequently been charged with bribery by the Transkei authorities but insisted
the payment was extortion; Sigcau admitted receiving the money but said it was

a gift.
Mandela’s wrath at these exposures was directed not at Sigcau but at
Holomisa for washing the party’s dirty linen in public. Dismissed from the
government, Holomisa retaliated by making ever more sweeping allegations of
corruption within the ANC hierarchy, going so far as to claim that Mandela
himself had agreed to consider ways to have the Transkei bribery charges against
Kerzner dropped in return for a 2 million rand donation to ANC party funds. The
ANC denounced this claim as ‘blatant lies’, but to everyone’s astonishment
Mandela then admitted having received the money on behalf of the ANC. Both
he and Kerzner denied that it had anything to do with the bribery charges,
describing it as merely a private contribution to party funds. Holomisa was later
expelled for bringing the party into disrepute.
The whole affair suggested that Mandela and the ANC were far less interested
in accountability and open government than they professed. What counted more
was party loyalty. Press criticism of Mandela reached unprecedented levels. He
was accused of stifling dissent, acting dictatorially and fostering a personality
cult. ‘He makes much of his commitment to collective leadership but rules his
organization with an iron fist, with people who do not agree with him falling out
of favour’, wrote Kaizer Nyatsumba in the Johannesburg Star. ‘There is allpervasive fear among ANC office-bearers at the moment, with nobody wanting
to be seen to be holding heretical views or differing from the omniscient
leadership’.
Mandela reacted with a display of just the kind of intolerance his critics
accused him of. He singled out black journalists for abuse, claiming that they
were doing the ‘dirty work’ of white newspaper owners. He summoned one
newspaper editor, Khulu Sibiya, of Johannesburg’s City Press, who had
criticised Mandela’s interference with the selection of a new chief justice, for a
dressing-down. ‘I have never seen him so furious’, said Sibiya. ‘The handling of
recent political controversies and the hostility to the press do not augur well’.
The final outcome of the Kerzner case was that in April 1997 charges against
Kerzner were dropped by the Transkei authorities.

It was on Mandela’s watch, just when the government was supposed to be
focused on delivering ‘a better life for all’, that key ministers embarked on a
massive arms procurement programme—submarines, frigates and fighter jets—

that not only impaired plans for improved social services but also dragged the
ANC into a morass of corruption. The case for some measure of defence
modernisation was clear enough. Sanctions during the apartheid era had left the
air force and the navy with obsolete equipment. But what occurred was a $5
billion spending spree designed as much to provide opportunities for kickbacks
to ANC officials as to improve South Africa’s defence capability.
The ANC had come to power in 1994 determined to keep defence spending to
a minimum. South Africa faced no international threat of any kind. Indeed, some
ANC politicians argued that there was no need for a navy at all, only a national
coast guard equipped to protect fisheries from foreign trawlers; as for the air
force, they suggested that its existing fleet of jet fighters was adequate to deal
with any foreseeable circumstances. Joe Slovo was among several cabinet
ministers vehemently opposed to increased defence spending. ‘South Africa’s
greatest defence will be a satisfied population’, said Slovo. ‘We need to ensure
we can deliver better housing, health care and education, because then we can be
secure in the knowledge that any aggressor trying anything in South Africa will
be unsuccessful’.
However, a defence review, set in motion in 1996, gave a cabal of defence
hawks the chance to lobby hard for new arms acquisitions. At the forefront was
Joe Modise, a former township gangster who had risen to become Umkhonto’s
commander in exile and whom Mandela appointed as minister of defence.
Modise made the campaign for an expanded defence force his priority, paying
attention to little else. He was joined by Ronnie Kasrils, the former Umkhonto
intelligence chief, well known for his exploits as a revolutionary enthusiast, who
had been appointed deputy minister of defence. Stressing the need for a reequipped navy, Kasrils argued:
Our trade is totally dependent on imports and exports; 80 per cent in terms of
value and 95 per cent in terms of volume goes through the ports. So we’re an
island economy. . . . For our wealth, our economy, we have to understand how
dependent we are on the sea. If our ports were mined or blockaded, we’d have a
major economic crisis. . . . There’s no war threat around the corner, but in three
years’ time, if the situation turns ugly, we’ll pay through the nose and have a
battle against time to make up capability. War doesn’t wait for you to get
yourself organised.
Hoping for lucrative contracts, foreign arms companies—from Britain,

France, Germany, Italy and Spain—competed vigorously to support the
campaign, offering a variety of incentives such as ‘offset’ deals or ‘industrial
participation schemes’ they said would boost local employment and promote
local technology. In practice, ‘offset’ deals were generally considered to be of
little real value: arms companies tended to inflate the price of their products to
cover the extra cost and rarely fulfilled their obligations. But the promises of
industrial development on offer were sufficient to win over Mandela’s deputy,
Thabo Mbeki. Mbeki envisaged that with an enhanced defence force, South
Africa would be able to project its power and influence across a troubled
continent and help keep the peace.
By the time the first phase of the defence review had been completed in 1997,
the hawks had gained ascendancy. The review argued that there was an urgent
need for new acquisitions for the navy and the air force, including four corvettes,
four submarines, four maritime helicopters, twenty-eight fighter aircraft, forty
utility helicopters and fifty-four battle tanks. The first phase was duly approved
by the cabinet. The cost was estimated to be 12 billion rands—by far the largest
arms package in South Africa’s history. In parliament, Kasrils stressed the
‘offset’ benefits. ‘Far from being a drain on our resources, it will provide a
tremendous boost for our economy and Treasury’.
A cabinet sub-committee headed by Mbeki was placed in charge of selecting
contractors. Air force generals made clear their preference for the purchase of
trainer aircraft from the Italian Aeromacchi company: not only did the aircraft
score the highest in terms of technical suitability, but they were the most costeffective option available. But Modise fought tenaciously for a much more
elaborate package from British Aerospace that included the purchase of Hawk
trainers and Gripen combat aircraft.
The generals wanted neither the Hawks nor the Gripens. In the evaluation
process, the Hawks fared badly, scoring less than half the points awarded to the
Italian aircraft. Similarly, the Gripens were shown to be neither the cheapest nor
the technically preferred option of the combat aircraft on offer. So worried were
the generals about the British proposals that they wrote directly to Mandela
warning him against them.
Modise ploughed on relentlessly. At a meeting in April 1998, he instructed the
evaluation committee to draw up two evaluation reports: one that evaluated all
the aircraft with the cost included and another without the cost included. Even

without the cost included, the Hawk proposal still did not come out on top.
When the secretary of defence, Pierre Steyn, a former air force commander, tried
to block the non-costed option from being considered, Modise overruled him.
The Hawk proposal was subsequently presented to the cabinet in November
1998 as the preferred choice of the air force and the arms acquisition team. Steyn
resigned in protest shortly afterwards.
The final outcome was that in 1999 South Africa placed orders for four
corvettes, three submarines, twenty-eight Gripen combat aircraft, twenty-four
Hawk trainers and thirty helicopters, with a total price tag of 30 billion rands.
Because of the decline of the rand, the real cost eventually rose to 60 billion—
about $5 billion.
There were immediate suspicions that the arms deal had been contaminated by
bribery and corruption. But no evidence surfaced until the post-Mandela era was
under way. The scandal that then erupted was compounded by Mbeki’s
determination to organise a cover-up. Within a few brief years of the advent of
democracy, the ANC so beloved by Mandela was shown to have become just
another grubby political party on the make.

CHAPTER 31

DEALING WITH THE PAST
THE JOURNEY BACK INTO THE DEEP RECESSES OF SOUTH AFRICA’S
violent past—a journey that Mandela insisted should be undertaken—began in
the city hall in East London in April 1996. As members of the newly established
Truth and Reconciliation Commission listened attentively, steeling themselves
for the tales of torture, kidnapping and murder that were to become their daily
fare, the first witnesses came forward to testify—widows anxious to tell of their
ordeals and asking for help in finding out what had happened to their husbands,
how they had died, where their remains were buried.
Amid the grim testimony, the TRC chairman, Archbishop Desmond Tutu,
head of the Anglican Church, sought to imbue the proceedings with a Christian
sense of mission. In his opening remarks, he spoke ardently of the need for
cleansing, for bearing witness, for joining hands, for forgiving. ‘We are charged
to unearth the truth about our dark past and to lay the ghosts of that past so that
they will not return to haunt us’, he told the audience. But Tutu soon discovered
that the task of what he called ‘looking the beast in the eye’ was to prove almost
too gruelling. At the end of the second day, he laid his head on the table and
wept openly. ‘I don’t know if I’m the right person to chair the commission’, he
said later, ‘because I’m weak. I thought I was tough. Until today’.
No other episode during Mandela’s presidency aroused so much controversy
as the TRC. Mandela and de Klerk argued over its terms of reference for months
on end. A large proportion of the white community, like de Klerk, opposed the
whole process, maintaining that the only result would be to open old wounds and
revive old animosities still close to the surface. A common theme in the
Afrikaans-language press was ‘Atrocities were committed on both sides, so let
us just forgive and forget’.
On the ANC side, some argued in favour of Nuremberg-style trials, claiming
that apartheid was ‘a form of genocide’ equivalent to Nazi atrocities during the
Second World War, atrocities for which Nazi leaders were subsequently

prosecuted. Some demanded reparations from the white community on the
grounds that they had been the main beneficiaries of the apartheid system.
There were conflicting views about what the central purpose of a truth
commission should be. Some argued that the overriding imperative was a need
to achieve justice and to bring to account those guilty of gross human rights
violations. Others maintained that truth was at least as important as justice and
that knowledge of the truth alone would contribute significantly to the cause of
peace and stability; avoiding trials would also reduce the risk of a backlash from
security forces, still largely under the control of whites. Mandela himself once
remarked privately that if he were to announce a series of criminal trials, he
could well wake up the following morning to find his home ringed by tanks.
The outcome was a compromise that limited the TRC’s remit to the
investigation of gross violations of human rights—murder, abduction and the use
of torture—in the thirty-four-year period beginning with the massacre at
Sharpeville in 1960. Thus, the wider injustices of the apartheid system—such as
the forced removal of some 3 million people from their homes, the imprisonment
of millions for pass-law offences and the widespread use of detention without
trial—would not be addressed. Only the extremes of apartheid would be
examined, not the system’s normality.
The TRC was given powers of subpoena and of search and seizure, and it was
supported by its own investigative unit. It was required to pay as much attention
to violations committed by liberation movements as by the security police. But
the TRC was not a judicial body or a court of law. It could not carry out
prosecutions or hand out punishment. Its aim was not so much to reach a
judgement about culpability as to establish a process of disclosure. In exchange
for telling the truth, perpetrators who came forward were to be granted amnesty
from prosecution on an individual basis provided the commission was satisfied
that they had made full disclosure of their crimes and that their actions had been
carried out with a political objective. If they failed to come forward, they would
remain at risk of prosecution.
Few people at the time believed that the TRC would establish either truth or
reconciliation, let alone help solve murders and disappearances that had occurred
as far back as ten or twenty years before. The old security police network, the
prime suspect in most cases, had long since covered its tracks and was
determined to thwart any investigation. There was no shortage of victims or

members of their families willing to testify to what they knew, but little solid
evidence about the identity of the culprits or of those who had given the orders.
TRC officials expected few perpetrators to take advantage of the offer of
amnesty.
Against all odds, however, the commission eventually succeeded in breaking
through the barriers of silence. In October 1996, five former members of a police
death squad based in northern Transvaal, fearful of prosecution as investigators
closed in, asked for amnesty for a tally of sixty murders. Their actions, they said,
had all been carried out for political reasons—namely, ‘to uphold the National
Party government and apartheid, to fight communism and to resist liberation’.
Members of other death squads followed suit. Stage by stage, the secret world of
the security police was exposed, and many of the killers and torturers were
forced out into the open.
What was even more unexpected was that once the security police network
began to unravel, the TRC found it possible to probe higher and higher up the
chain of command, reaching the highest levels of government. At the apex of the
security establishment was the State Security Council, where senior generals and
key politicians met regularly to decide what action to take to crush opposition
both at home and abroad. It was here that Botha’s policy in the 1980s of ‘total
strategy’ was fashioned. Summoned to appear before the commission, the
generals and politicians of the apartheid era struggled to explain away
documents obtained by TRC investigators authorising the ‘elimination’,
‘neutralisation’ and ‘removing from society’ of targets they selected. When
Botha himself, a former chairman of the State Security Council for twelve years,
was issued with a subpoena by the TRC, he adamantly refused to attend.
De Klerk made three appearances before the TRC. As the most prominent
Afrikaner leader of the time, he was presented with an opportunity to shoulder
responsibility for past crimes on behalf of his community. But he turned out to
be a small-minded politician, concerned mainly with trying to absolve himself
from personal blame. Although he offered a fulsome apology for all the hardship
and suffering caused by apartheid, he rejected all notion of responsibility for
security force abuses, blaming ‘rogue elements’ for taking ‘unauthorised action’
and ‘lower ranks’ for ‘misinterpreting’ government policy.
The ANC’s appearances before the commission were of even greater
significance, for how it accounted for its own involvement in murder, bombing

and torture had an immediate bearing on its fitness for government. The ANC
was called upon to answer for the activities not just of its combatants but also of
supporters who had carried out ‘necklace’ murders and other human rights
violations. It also had to account for its role in the internecine conflict with
Inkatha, in which thousands had died.
The position the ANC adopted from the outset was that there was little for
which it had to answer. In his first submission to the commission, Thabo Mbeki,
Mandela’s deputy, argued that the ANC had been engaged in a ‘just war’ against
an evil system of government. It would be ‘morally wrong and legally incorrect’,
he said, to equate resistance to apartheid with defence of it. The ANC had
resorted to violence as a ‘last resort’, only after the apartheid regime had blocked
all possibilities of non-violent resistance. It had set out to avoid civilian
casualties, but the brutal activities of the security forces in the mid-1980s had
inevitably led the ANC to broaden its range of targets. Some actions might have
occurred ‘outside the established norms’, but they had to be understood in the
context of irregular warfare.
The ANC’s penchant for self-exoneration caused the TRC serious difficulty.
When senior ANC officials declared that ANC members need not seek amnesty
for bombings and killings on the grounds that their fight against apartheid had
been part of a ‘just war’, Tutu threatened to resign. ‘If parties are able to grant
themselves amnesty, what is the point of having a truth commission?’ The
legislation setting up the TRC was quite clear, he said. It made no provision for a
moral distinction between gross violations of human rights. ‘A gross violation is
a gross violation, whoever commits it and for whatever reason. There is thus
legal equivalence between all perpetrators. Their political affiliation is
irrelevant’.
In its second submission, the ANC was more forthcoming about details of its
armed operations but remained ambivalent about issues such as ‘necklace’
murders, by which at least 400 people had died. When it came to dealing with
internecine warfare with Inkatha, the ANC evaded virtually all responsibility.
Mbeki delivered a long, rambling explanation notable for its misleading answers.
Indeed, many of the answers Mbeki gave were as self-serving as those given by
de Klerk.

There was one episode from the past from which the ANC had struggled to

escape but that had returned to haunt it again and again: the scandal of Winnie
Mandela’s involvement in the criminal activities of the Mandela United Football
Club. Though several of her former associates in the club were serving long
prison sentences for murder, assault, arson and abduction, the only penalty
Winnie had paid was a 15,000 rand fine for ordering the kidnapping of Stompie
Moeketsi. Despite an avalanche of allegations against her, Winnie had otherwise
survived unscathed. She seemed untouchable.
The issue surfaced again during TRC hearings held in Soweto in 1996. In an
endeavour to gain a clearer picture of what had happened, the TRC decided to
hold a separate hearing in 1997. The official title of the hearing was ‘A Human
Rights Violation Hearing into the Activities of the Mandela United Football
Club’, but it was known popularly as ‘the Winnie hearing’.
Fear of Winnie still prevailed. As the hearing commenced, a Johannesburg
newspaper reported that in Orlando, the area of Soweto where the football club
used to operate and where Winnie still lived, witnesses it had interviewed wept
and trembled as they recalled the terrible events of those times. No one was
willing to testify before the commission. ‘Soweto is still a haunted community’,
reported the Sunday Times, ‘where many who were involved live in fear of the
resurrection of past deeds’.
During its own investigation, the TRC had compiled a dossier of eighteen
crimes, including eight murders, about which it wanted to cross-examine
Winnie. Allegations it had heard cast her as a cruel, violent and sadistic bully.
One official said the subpoena summoning her before the commission read like
‘a script from a horror movie’.
What added particular significance to the hearing was Winnie’s relentless
drive for high office. Despite her divorce from Nelson Mandela in 1996 and her
ignominious dismissal as a junior minister from his government the year before,
she had recently launched a campaign to win the post of deputy president of the
ANC in elections due to be held later in the year. If she succeeded, she would
become a leading contender for the job of deputy president in the post-Mandela
era in 1999 and thus only a heartbeat away from the presidency itself.
Winnie’s response to the barrage of accusations was to deny everything and to
assert that it was all part of a campaign by her political enemies to destroy her
reputation before the ANC elections and to eliminate her from the political
arena. She insisted that her testimony be given in public, not behind closed doors

as the commission had initially intended, believing that it would help clear her
name.
Accompanied by bodyguards, she arrived at the Johannesburg recreation hall
hired by the commission for the occasion wearing a stylish white and blue twopiece suit, three strings of pearls, her customary bejewelled glasses and an
assortment of rings and bangles. At the age of sixty-three, she remained an
imposing figure, tall and physically attractive, with an aura of menace. She
brought along her two daughters, Zenani and Zindzi, who smiled their way
through days of gruesome testimony, passing sweets along their row as though
they were watching a movie. Zindzi herself had been fully involved in the club’s
activities.
The commission’s nine days of hearings opened in dramatic fashion. In
previous accounts of the club’s activities, Winnie’s own involvement in the
beatings that went on at her Orlando home had always been a matter of dispute.
But now a new witness came forward with a personal account that left little
room for doubt.
Phumzile Dlamini, a single mother from Soweto, described how, when she
was three months pregnant, she had been beaten savagely by Winnie and
members of the football club. Her child had subsequently been born with
apparent brain damage. The reason for the beating, she said, was that Winnie had
taken a liking to her boyfriend, Shakes, a club member. Shakes had told her how
‘Winnie had come to him in the middle of the night and got under the blanket
with him’, and he had warned Phumzile that if Winnie found out about their own
relationship, there would trouble. When Winnie did find out, she launched a
series of beatings, one lasting five hours. ‘I wanted to lay a charge, but my
brother said the football team will burn our house’.
A string of other witnesses followed implicating Winnie in torture and
murder. The club coach, Jerry Richardson, was brought to the hearing from
prison, where he was serving a life sentence for the murder of Stompie
Moeketsi. Invariably referring to Winnie as ‘Mummy’, he told the commission
that he had once idolised her and had been willing to do anything to please her.
But in prison he had changed his mind. ‘She never came to visit. I have woken
up’.
He admitted that he had been a police informer and that he had betrayed the
two ANC insurgents killed in his house in November 1988. After being detained

by the police for two weeks after the gunfight, he had been released. Even
though this aroused much suspicion within the football club, Winnie allowed
him to stay at her house. There he had seen two youths, Lolo Sono and Siboniso
Tshabalala, both badly beaten and tied hand and foot, whom Winnie had accused
of being police spies. There was a discussion about what to do with them, said
Richardson. A decision was made to ‘dump’ them. ‘Mummy was the one who
gave the go-ahead or the green light for anything to happen’, said Richardson.
‘Mummy was the main decision-maker’. With other members of the football
club, Richardson took the two youths to a wasteland, where they were
‘slaughtered like goats’, and then he returned to give ‘Mummy’ a ‘report-back’.
The following month, said Richardson, Winnie had complained to him about a
twenty-three-year-old activist, Kuki Zwane, a close friend of Winnie’s daughter
Zindzi, who had been spending much time at the Mandela household in the
company of club members. According to Richardson, Winnie said to him,
‘Richardson, Kuki is disturbing me, she’s bothering me’. Winnie claimed she
was a police informer. Richardson duly made a plan to get rid of Kuki. With
other club members, he took her to a stretch of wasteland near a school, then
stabbed her and slit her throat. ‘I reported to Mummy: “Mummy, I have now
carried out your orders. I have killed Kuki”’.
Richardson also gave details about the torture and murder of Stompie
Moeketsi. ‘I think we threw Stompie about seven times in the air and he fell to
the ground. He was tortured so severely that at some stage I could see that he
would ultimately die’. Winnie, he said, joined in the assaults with sjambok and
fists, but she also sat and watched. Eventually, Stompie confessed to being a
‘sell-out’, pleaded for mercy and asked to be taken home. When it became
obvious that Stompie was dying, Winnie ordered Richardson to finish him off.
Taking a pair of garden shears from Winnie’s garage, Richardson and another
gang member dragged Stompie to a piece of wasteland near a railway line and
‘slaughtered him like a goat’. Then they returned to ‘Mummy’s house’ and put
the shears back in the garage. ‘I killed Stompie under the instructions of
Mummy’, said Richardson. ‘Mummy never killed anyone but used us to kill a lot
of people. She does not even visit us in prison! She used us!’
Other witnesses placed Winnie at the centre of the assaults on Stompie. ‘The
first person who started assaulting was Winnie Mandela’, her driver, John
Morgan, told the commission. It was Winnie, he said, who had singled out
Stompie. Katiza Cebekhulu also claimed that Winnie had been the first to start

whipping Stompie with a sjambok. ‘She had a heavy whip in her right hand
which she was hitting him with again and again’. The assaults lasted for about
forty-five minutes, he said, by which time Stompie’s head had ‘gone soft’. Two
kidnap victims—Thabiso Mono and Pelo Mekgwe—confirmed her involvement
in the beatings.
Not a single witness testifying before the commission supported the alibi that
Winnie had invented during her trial about being in Brandfort at the time—the
one factor that had enabled her to escape a prison sentence during her appeal. A
former police captain told the commission that transcripts of her telephone calls
showed that, in fact, she had been in Soweto all along. The wiretap evidence had
been withheld during Winnie’s trial, he said, because it had been ‘too sensitive
to use’.
After eight days of damaging testimony, Winnie took the stand. Her strategy
was to deny everything. She maintained she had no knowledge of what went on
in her backyard. She claimed she had disbanded the football club in 1987 after
Nelson Mandela told her to do so. She knew of no reason that her house had
been burned down in 1988. She denied being present during the assaults on
Stompie and the other kidnap victims. She denied all involvement in murder.
Every piece of evidence implicating her she dismissed as the work of her
opponents and adversaries. Her accusers were either lunatics or liars or pawns of
the security police. ‘Such fabrications are absolutely unbelievable. I do not know
what you are talking about. None of these things took place whatsoever. . . .
Really, for me to have [to] sit here and answer those ridiculous allegations, it is a
source of great pain to me’.
One of the commissioners, Yasmin Sooka, observed caustically, ‘If we
believe your evidence, everyone is lying’.
‘Yes’, replied Winnie, ‘it’s true’.
But when lawyers pursued her relentlessly over her Brandfort alibi, she began
to flounder. Time and again she was questioned about the medical record
showing she had been in Soweto, but she could offer no plausible explanation.
LAWYER: Your alibi is false, is that not so?
MANDELA: That is ludicrous
LAWYER: What I want to put to you is that if you look at the evidence

that is presented before the commission, that the truth, in your hands, is
putty, which you can simply mould to suit your own ends.
MANDELA: That is preposterous. I beg you not to talk to me like that.
At this crucial juncture, as Winnie began to look vulnerable, Archbishop Tutu
intervened. As the lawyers looked on in exasperation, he suddenly invited
Winnie’s victims and members of their families, including Stompie’s mother, to
come forward for reconciliation.
In a grotesque climax to the hearing, Mrs. Seipei came forward to be
embraced by Winnie. The gesture was hollow, a fake event made only for the
cameras, and it reduced the hearing to a charade. Winnie beamed triumphantly.
Mrs Seipei returned to her seat, looking lost and alone. The rest of the
questioning that followed was devoid of all purpose.
The hearing ended in further ignominy. In an emotional summary, Tutu
praised Winnie as ‘a tremendous stalwart of our struggle, an icon of liberation’:
‘We can never forget her outstanding contribution to the struggle and her
indomitable spirit. . . . She was an incredible inspiration. Many, many love you.
Many, many say you should have been where you ought to be, the first lady of
this country’.
Seeing only the need to get the sinner to repent, Tutu pleaded with her to give
some sign of contrition:
There are people out there who want to embrace you. I still embrace you because
I love you, and I love you very deeply. There are many out there who would
have wanted to do so if you were able to bring yourself to say something went
wrong. . . .
I beg you, I beg you, I beg you, please. I have not made any particular finding
from what has happened here. I speak as someone who has lived in this
community. You are a great person, and you don’t know how your greatness
would be enhanced if you were to say: “Sorry, things went wrong, forgive me. I
beg you”.
Winnie’s reply was terse: ‘I will take this opportunity to say to the family of
Dr Asvat how deeply sorry I am. To Stompie’s mother, how deeply sorry I am. I
have said so to her before a few years back, when the heat was very hot. I am
saying it is true, things went horribly wrong. I fully agree with that and for that
part of those painful years when things went horribly wrong . . . for that I am

deeply sorry’.
On that false note, the hearing ended. Outside the hall, Caroline Sono, Lolo’s
mother, shouted: ‘She’s the woman who murdered our children! I will not rest
until I find my son’s remains!’ Nomsa Tshabalala, Siboniso’s mother, described
the hearing as ‘a complete sham’. Winnie meanwhile stood amid a crowd of
supporters, laughing heartily until a motorcade whisked her away.

After two and a half years of endeavour, the TRC completed its journey into the
past. It had travelled further than it had once thought possible, traversing a
landscape littered with shattered lives, reaching hidden areas of the past it never
knew existed. From every corner of the country, it had heard tales of murder,
torture and brutality on a scale it never expected to find. In a relentless repetition
of horror, some 21,000 victims had come forward to testify about their own
ordeals or about the plight of others. Many more tales were never told.
The TRC had listened to politicians and generals, bombers and torturers, spies
and saboteurs. It had heard testimony from every part of the political spectrum,
from extremist Afrikaners, on one hand, to extremist Africanists, on the other. It
had searched through reams of government records, launched investigations into
secret burial grounds and chemical and biological warfare projects and examined
everything from the activities of vigilante groups to necklacing. Even so, the
TRC acknowledged that the picture it had gained was far from complete. In
some places it had barely scratched at the surface. Much more remained buried
than had been exhumed.
Its report, completed in 1998, delivered some damning verdicts. It concluded
that it was Botha’s government in the late 1970s that had entered ‘the realm of
criminal misconduct’. Whereas previous governments had ruled by repression,
Botha’s government had adopted a policy of killing its opponents. It was also
responsible for the widespread use of torture, abduction, arson and sabotage.
Botha, said the report, by virtue of his position as head of state and chairman of
the State Security Council, had ‘contributed to and facilitated a climate in which
. . . gross violations of human rights could and did occur’.
The ‘realm of criminal misconduct’, the report continued, extended into de
Klerk’s period in office. It criticised de Klerk for failing to tackle the activities of
the ‘third force’—the network of security force members and right-wing groups

seeking to wreck any transition that would lead to an ANC government. It also
accused him of failing to make a full disclosure to the commission of gross
human rights violations committed by senior members of his government and
senior police officers. ‘His failure to do so constitutes a material nondisclosure,
thus rendering him an accessory to the commission of gross human rights’.
The TRC was no less forthright in dealing with the ANC. During its armed
struggle, said the report, the ANC had engaged in bombing and land-mine
campaigns resulting in civilian casualties. In fact, the TRC pointed out, the
ANC’s armed actions had ‘ended up killing fewer security force members than
civilians’. While accepting that targeting civilians had not been ANC policy, the
TRC concluded, ‘Whatever the justification given by the ANC for such acts . . .
the people who were killed or injured by such explosions are all victims of gross
violations of human rights perpetrated by the ANC’. The commission also
censured the ANC for regarding state informers and state witnesses as legitimate
targets for assassination. Their killing, it said, constituted gross violations of
human rights. Furthermore, the ANC was held ‘morally and politically
accountable’ for creating a climate during the armed struggle that allowed its
supporters to regard violence against opponents—urban councillors, rural
headmen, members of Inkatha and others perceived to be collaborators of the
system or enemies of the ANC—as a legitimate part of a ‘people’s war’. During
the period from 1990 to 1994, it added, the ANC was responsible for the death
and injury of hundreds of its opponents. It had also contributed to the spiral of
violence by creating and arming ‘self-defence units’ that ‘took the law into their
own hands’ and committed atrocities.
The TRC’s verdict on Winnie Mandela was blunt. She was found to be the
central figure in the Mandela United Football Club, and she was held personally
responsible for the outbreak of killing, torture, assaults and arson in Soweto
during the late 1980s. Though started with good intentions, the club had
developed into her private vigilante unit. Club members had been involved in at
least eighteen murders. Many of the club’s operations leading to the killings had
been launched from her home. Winnie not only had sanctioned the club’s
criminal activities but in some cases had participated in them. Those who
opposed her and the club had been branded as informers, hunted down and
killed.
The TRC delivered judgements on several of the crimes in which Winnie had
been implicated. It found that she had participated in the abduction of Lolo Sono

and Siboniso Tshabalala, both of whom were subsequently assumed to have
been murdered. It said she had been involved in and was responsible for the
attempted murder of Lerotodi Ikaneng.
Of particular significance, the TRC found that Winnie had initiated the
assaults on Stompie Seipei and three other youths abducted from the Methodist
manse on her orders. It dismissed the alibi she had produced during her trial,
namely, that she had been in Brandfort and not at home when the assaults took
place. ‘In all probability’, said the TRC, ‘she was aware of Seipei’s condition’—
that he was close to death after being severely injured during the assaults at her
house. ‘The commission finds . . . that she failed to act responsibly in taking the
necessary action required to avert his death’.

Two months before its report was due to be published in October 1998, the TRC,
in accordance with its statutory obligations, sent summaries of its findings to
some 200 individuals and organisations that it had named in connection with
human rights abuses. Their reaction was uniformly hostile. De Klerk was livid
that he had been named ‘an accessory to human rights violations’ and applied to
the High Court for an interdict preventing publication of a thirty-line passage
referring to him.
Far more of a shock was the ANC’s reaction. Outraged that it had been
roundly condemned for war crimes, the ANC insisted on a meeting with the
TRC, intending to get it to rewrite its findings. The TRC invited the ANC to
make a written submission but refused a meeting. The ANC retaliated by
accusing the TRC of ‘criminalising’ the anti-apartheid struggle. Its findings were
‘capricious and arbitrary’. The TRC had ‘grossly misdirected itself ’.
In an astonishing lapse of judgement, Thabo Mbeki went to the High Court,
just like de Klerk, to apply for an urgent interdict to block publication of the
report. Unable to conceal his anger and frustration, Archbishop Tutu conducted a
series of media interviews warning of the dangers of a new tyranny in South
Africa. ‘We can’t assume that yesterday’s oppressed will not become
tomorrow’s oppressors. We have seen it happen all over the world, and we
shouldn’t be surprised if it happens here’. He urged all South Africans to be on
their guard against government abuse and corruption.
Though nothing came of Mbeki’s ill-fated attempt to muzzle the commission,

it caused severe damage to the ANC’s reputation. When the TRC finally
presented its report to Mandela in October 1998, it was a sombre occasion,
overshadowed by the ANC’s wrecking manoeuvre. Mandela himself made clear
his support for the TRC and its work. ‘We are confident that it has contributed to
the work in progress of laying the foundation of the edifice of reconciliation’.
But there was a cacophony of contrary voices. Mbeki continued to insist that the
TRC was ‘wrong and misguided’. De Klerk accused the TRC of seeking
vengeance, not reconciliation.
In answering criticism levelled at the TRC, Tutu argued that the truth often
turned out to be divisive. ‘Reconciliation is not about being cosy; it is not about
pretending that things were other than they were. Reconciliation based on
falsehood, on not facing up to reality, is not true reconciliation and will not last’.
Though truth might not always lead to reconciliation, he said, there could be no
genuine reconciliation without truth.

CHAPTER 32

PASSING THE BATON
FROM AN EARLY STAGE IN HIS PRESIDENCY, MANDELA BEGAN TO
prepare South Africa for the post-Mandela era. ‘At the end of my term, I’ll be
eighty-one’, he said. ‘I don’t think it’s wise that a robust country like South
Africa should be led by an octogenarian. You need younger men who can shake
and move this country’.
Whatever the faults and failures of his administration, so much confidence, so
much trust, had come to be placed in Mandela that there was deep apprehension
about the prospect of his departure from government. He was seen as not only
the founding father of democracy but also the guarantor of its stability. Rumours
of his ill-health were enough to send the stock exchange and the currency into a
tailspin. For a man in his late seventies, he suffered from relatively few ailments
—an eye affliction, a slight loss of hearing, swollen ankles. His schedule
remained as punishing as ever—early starts, late nights, meetings, speeches,
travel abroad. But any sign of exhaustion or fatigue was greeted with alarm. In
an attempt to quell speculation about his health, Mandela submitted himself to a
three-day ‘executive check-up’ in March 1996 and passed without difficulty. ‘He
has the energy of a man half his age’, a specialist consultant remarked. In a letter
to a Johannesburg newspaper, Mandela wrote: ‘Let me restate the obvious: I
have long passed my teens; and the distance to my final destination is shorter
than the road I have trudged over the years. What nature has decreed should not
generate undue insecurity’. But public concern about a future without him
remained high.
While expressing confidence that he would serve his five-year term as
president in full, Mandela stressed that he had no intention of staying in office
for a second term after 1999, regardless of popular demand. He minimised his
own importance in government, emphasising the talent and ability of his cabinet
colleagues. ‘Many of my colleagues are head and shoulders above me in almost
every respect. Rather than being an asset, I’m more of a decoration’.

Mandela left much of the government’s routine business in the hands of his
key aide, Thabo Mbeki, who served as deputy president beginning in 1994.
Mbeki had been nurtured in the crucible of nationalist politics from an early age.
His father, Govan Mbeki, a hardline communist and ANC stalwart, had
dedicated his life to political struggle and expected Thabo, his eldest son, to
follow suit. A studi - ous, introverted boy who spent much of his spare time
reading his father’s books at the family home in rural Transkei, he joined the
ANC Youth League at the age of fourteen, launched a pro-ANC student
organisation at the age of nineteen, then joined the Communist Party a year later.
In 1962, at the age of twenty, he was sent abroad by the ANC, along with
twenty-six other students, to further his studies, and he did not return until 1990.
In his years in exile, he earned a degree in economics from the University of
Sussex in England, underwent military training in the Soviet Union, became a
member of the Communist Party’s politburo and represented the ANC in a series
of foreign postings.
During the 1980s, when Western leaders such as Britain’s Margaret Thatcher
regarded the ANC as ‘a typical terrorist organisation’, Mbeki came to be seen in
the West as its acceptable face—a soft-spoken, articulate pragmatist who
favoured a negotiated settlement to end apartheid rather than revolutionary
violence. He was particularly skilful in handling contacts with the stream of
white South Africans—businessmen, academics, churchmen and opposition
politicians—who travelled from South Africa to talk to the ANC, in defiance of
the government, seeking a way through the impasse. Dressed in a tweed jacket
and puffing his ubiquitous pipe, Mbeki spoke more the language of the middle
class than the rhetoric expected of revolutionaries. Once back in South Africa, he
performed much the same task, pacifying businessmen alarmed by talk of
nationalisation, right-wing Afrikaners demanding a separate volkstaat and Zulu
nationalists threatening civil war. ‘He can be diplomatic to the point where many
people regard him as weak’, Mandela once observed.
While Mandela presided over South Africa as a benign patriarch, floating
above the political hurly-burly and taking a broad-brush approach to
government, Mbeki immersed himself in detail. Ambitious to succeed Mandela,
he possessed no natural constituency within the ANC and lacked the common
touch, but relied heavily on his skills as a backroom operator to build political
support, making alliances with all and sundry. He was as adept at aligning
himself with populist factions when the occasion arose as with the pragmatic

wing of the party. Whereas Mandela placed the need for reconciliation above all
else, Mbeki put greater emphasis on the need to transform South African society.
‘You cannot find reconciliation between blacks and whites in a situation in
which poverty and prosperity continue to be defined in racial terms’, he said. ‘If
you want reconciliation between black and white, you need to transform society.
If we have an economy that is geared to benefit the whites and disadvantage the
black majority, and you do not address that, you will not have reconciliation’.
He was given particular responsibility for fashioning economic policy, a
subject about which Mandela admitted to knowing little. To widespread dismay,
Mbeki guarded the process closely, relying on no more than a small inner circle
to assist him. Mandela only saw a draft of the plan shortly before its publication.
The outcome was a policy document called Growth, Employment and
Redistribution that endorsed an orthodox free-market strategy. Published in
1996, it advocated strict fiscal discipline, lower government deficits,
privatisation, trade liberalisation and export-driven growth. It won Mbeki the
approval of foreign investors and the business community but infuriated the
ANC’s traditional allies—the trade unions and the Communist Party. He was
accused of betraying the revolution, of selling out to international capital, of
forsaking ‘the soul of the ANC’. Mandela nevertheless pronounced himself
satisfied and rebuked critics at a Communist Party conference. ‘I will ensure that
the government implements what we believe to be good for the country’, he told
them, wagging his finger.
Mbeki’s record as Mandela’s chief executive, however, was none too
impressive. He acquired a reputation for announcing grand plans—for
privatisation of parastatal corporations, for example—but dithering over their
implementation. He was responsible for mishandling a number of assignments
that Mandela gave to him—including the mess over Winnie Mandela’s
resignation, the Boesak scandal, Buthelezi’s demand for international mediation
and foreign policy initiatives, including a bungled attempt to prevent Nigeria’s
military rulers from executing a prominent dissident, Ken Saro Wiwa. He also
displayed abysmal judgement when handling the TRC report.
His critics pointed to other faults. Some bemoaned his penchant for turning up
late for appointments or missing them altogether, for enjoying the good life and
for hobnobbing with populists. Others warned of more sinister traits. He was
portrayed as an arch-manipulator, preferring to operate in secret behind the
scenes, trusting only a small cabal of loyal advisers and acting ruthlessly in

stifling dissent and in disposing of rivals. The press noted how hostile, even
paranoid, he was about criticism and cited his tendency to react to criticism with
accusations of racial malice.
Mandela, too, had misgivings about Mbeki. His personal choice as his
successor had been Cyril Ramaphosa, the trade union leader who had played a
crucial role in negotiating the white handover of power. But the party’s vote
went to Mbeki.
The succession was effectively sealed at the ANC’s national conference in
Mafikeng in December 1997. Having outmanoeuvred other contenders, Mbeki
was elected ANC president unopposed. But the occasion was not the complete
triumph that Mbeki wanted. For Mandela saw the need to issue words of caution,
his remarks prompting applause:
There is a heavy responsibility for a leader elected unopposed. He may use that
powerful position to settle scores with his detractors, to marginalise or get rid of
them [applause] and surround themselves with yes-men and women [applause].
His first duty is to allay the concerns of his colleagues to enable them to discuss
freely without fear within the internal structures of the movement. Any subject
should be discussed from all angles and people should even be able to criticise
the leader without fear or favour.
Mandela’s farewell speech as ANC president was otherwise notable for its
negative tone. It was mainly the handiwork of Mbeki and seemed intended to set
out a new, more aggressive agenda, but Mandela nevertheless dutifully read it
out. He spoke of a ‘counter-revolutionary network’, run largely by Afrikaners,
that was deliberately trying to erode confidence in South Africa, subvert the
economy and use crime to make the country ungovernable. He berated white
businessmen for the slow pace of ‘transformation’ and black empowerment. He
accused the media of perpetuating ‘the legacy of racism’, ignoring black opinion
and conducting a propaganda campaign to discredit the ANC. He claimed nongovernment organisations had set themselves up as independent watchdogs at
the behest of foreign agents. The litany continued for four hours.
None of this accorded with the rainbow-nation optimism for which Mandela
was renowned. It reflected more of Mbeki’s mind-set and the conspiracies he
believed were ranged against him than Mandela’s view of the world. It
squandered much goodwill and signaled the coming of a more fractious era.

The balance sheet of Mandela’s years in office was mixed. Major strides were
made in the provision of housing, sanitation, piped water and electricity. But
however much Mandela tried to focus attention on the poorer sections of society,
the immediate beneficiary of the new South Africa was the black middle class.
In the civil service and parastatal corporations, blacks rapidly gained positions of
status and responsibility from which they had been barred for so long, helped by
a policy of affirmative action that accorded preferential treatment to ‘previously
disadvantaged’ groups. The business sector followed suit, anxious to be seen to
be redressing the legacy of inequality. Only 10 per cent of managerial posts were
held by blacks, despite years of talk about the need for black advancement. The
opportunities for those with skills and qualifications were vast. Yet the reservoir
of trained and experienced blacks was all too small. Out of a total of 14,000
chartered accountants, for example, only 65 were black.
But even though the way was now open for rapid promotion, the new elite still
clamored for a faster overhaul of the old, white institutions. They pointed to how
the National Party, after its 1948 election victory, had ensured the mass
recruitment of Afrikaners across the board, transforming a whole range of
institutions from broadcasting to the army and the railways into Afrikaner
preserves, and demanded that the ANC take similar action. Some wanted to
establish an African version of the Afrikaner Broederbond to promote black
interests.
As well as affirmative action, the government pursued a programme of ‘black
economic empowerment’ that encouraged white-owned corporations to sell off
stakes to black entrepreneurs. Thabo Mbeki was a fervent advocate of the plan.
‘We must strive to create and strengthen a black capitalist class’, he told a
conference of black businessmen. Blacks had no need to be embarrassed about
the emergence of a successful and prosperous black bourgeoisie, he said. It was
part of the process of the ‘deracialisation’ of the economy and society. The
benefits would spread to the poor.
But, again, the pool of black businessmen was so tiny that in one business deal
after another, a small group of well-connected entrepreneurs made all the
running, enriching themselves hugely in the process. One prominent black
businessman made an estimated profit of 70 million rands during an eight-month
period merely by acquiring equity as an empowerment partner and then selling it

to a non-empowerment party. Within a few years, a new class of multimillionaires had emerged. Leading ANC members were quick to seize the same
opportunities, trading political contacts for shareholdings. ‘I did not struggle
[only] to remain poor’, declared one prominent ANC official. ‘Crony capitalism’
began to take root.
What the Mandela years witnessed, in fact, was a significant widening of the
income gap within the black community. The gap had been growing since the
late 1970s. During the 1980s, while the poorest half of the population slid ever
deeper into poverty, the black middle class fared well, with rising incomes
making its members the most upwardly mobile group in the country. During the
1990s, the black elite—politicians, bureaucrats, entrepreneurs, managers,
businessmen—prospered as never before, many acquiring the lifestyle and status
symbols so prized in South Africa: executive cars, swimming pools, domestic
staff, private school education, golf handicaps and foreign holidays. Perhaps 5
per cent of the black community reached middle-class status. But for the
majority, the same struggle against poverty continued.
The growing spectre of corruption added to the sense of a new ruling class
bent above all on self-enrichment, as Mandela ruefully acknowledged at the end
of his five-year term. ‘We came to government with the zeal of a group of
people who were going to eliminate corruption in government’, he said in 1999.
‘It was such a sad disappointment to note that our own people who are there to
wipe out corruption themselves become corrupt’.
There were other setbacks. Instead of a falling unemployment rate,
employment levels in the mining, agricultural and manufacturing sectors all fell;
overall, unemployment figures hovered between 30 and 40 per cent. A fearsome
crime wave blighted communities across the country. But by far the greatest
calamity was the advancing menace of the Aids pandemic and the government’s
failure to deal with it.

Like other African states, South Africa reacted lethargically to the onset of the
Aids crisis. The first significant batch of HIV-positive cases was reported among
migrant mineworkers from Malawi employed on Rand gold mines in 1986. By
1990, the adult HIV infection rate, measured in an ante-natal survey, stood at 0.7
per cent; by 1992, it had trebled to 2.2 per cent. But when the apartheid
government eventually stirred into action, launching Aids education and

prevention programmes, it met considerable resistance. Anti-apartheid activists
claimed the programmes were a government plot to control population growth
by convincing black people to have less sex and produce fewer babies and
thereby check the advance of African liberation; they lampooned the Aids
acronym by saying it stood for ‘Afrikaner Invention to Deprive Us of Sex’.
Others interpreted the epidemic as the product of malevolent individuals
employing witchcraft.
Mandela’s government purported to give the Aids campaign a high priority,
but with so many other causes demanding attention—housing, education, jobs
and wider health problems—it achieved little. Though designating the campaign
a ‘Presidential Lead Project’, Mandela found the topic uncomfortable and failed
to throw his weight behind it. He passed responsibility for Aids to Thabo Mbeki,
who was given an inter-ministerial committee to chair. A national Aids plan was
devised, but it was soon mired in controversy. A large part of the Aids budget
was spent on an expensive musical show, Sarafina II, that was supposed to take
Aids education to the masses but was derided by Aids activists as being a waste
of money and eventually scrapped in midstream after a corruption scandal.
Mandela’s health minister, Nkosasana Dlamini-Zuma, a medical doctor, was
accused by investigators of being ‘reckless’ and ‘negligent’.
The next controversy exposed the government to further ridicule. In 1996, two
Pretoria researchers claimed to have invented a cheap drug that could cure Aids.
The drawback they faced was that the Medicines Control Council (MCC)
condemned their product—Virodene—as ineffective and dangerous and refused
to issue them a licence to manufacture it. Their cause was nevertheless taken up
by Mbeki and Dlamini-Zuma. In 1997, the researchers were invited to address
the cabinet, where they spoke movingly about the miracle properties of
Virodene, paraded eleven patients who were said to have benefited from the
drug and asked for substantial funds to develop it. They claimed that the MCC
had rejected Virodene because the council was acting in collusion with
international pharmaceutical companies which stood to lose huge profits from
their own products once Virodene went on sale. A rank amateur in medical
matters, Mbeki swallowed their argument and authorised Dlamini-Zuma to
arrange fast-track approval for production, riding roughshod over vociferous
objections from the MCC.
The MCC’s chairman was later fired, and the council was stripped of much of
its authority. But an independent review panel led by the South African Medical

Research Council found that, in fact, Virodene was highly toxic: its main
ingredient, dimethylformamide, was an industrial solvent known to cause severe
liver damage. The public reaction was scathing. The Sunday Times jeered that
the cabinet’s ‘combined technical knowledge of the HIV virus would fit on the
back of a postcard’.
Despite the opprobrium, Mbeki and Dlamini-Zuma plunged headlong into
further controversy. In 1998, a new antiretroviral drug, azidothymidine (AZT),
raised hopes of significant progress against Aids; tests showed that it could cut
vertical transmission from infected mothers to babies by 50 per cent. But
Dlamini-Zuma announced—at a time when the government was preparing to
spend vast sums on unwanted armaments—that AZT would not be made
available on the grounds that it was too expensive. When AZT’s manufacturers
offered to cut the drug’s price by two-thirds, Dlamini-Zuma switched to arguing
that AZT was toxic.
Mandela belatedly realised that he had failed to come to grips with the Aids
crisis. By 1999, official estimates of the number of HIV-POSITIVE cases stood
at 4 million people—10 per cent of the population. The number who had already
died of Aids was put at 500,000. Shortly before stepping down, Mandela
formally apologised to Aids activists for neglecting the issue. In retirement, he
was to make the fight against Aids a personal priority. But by then, South Africa
was in the hands of a president descending ever deeper into the realms of
pseudo-science and conspiracy theories.

In a letter from prison to his friend Amina Cachalia, Mandela once wrote, ‘I
have spent all my life dreaming of a golden age in which all problems will be
solved and our wildest hopes fulfilled’. The golden age of which Mandela
dreamed remained a distant prospect. Nevertheless, the transformation of South
Africa from a country riven by racial division and violence to a fledgling
democracy represented one of the supreme triumphs of the late twentieth
century.
Mandela’s role in that transformation was vital to its success. He understood
from an early stage the extent to which white fear lay at the core of the conflict.
No matter what personal hardships he had to endure, he never lost sight of the
goal of non-racial democracy in South Africa, believing that white fear of it
could eventually be overcome. The generosity of spirit he showed after his

prison ordeal had a profound impact on his white adversaries, earning him
measures of trust and confidence which made a political settlement attainable.
As president, he pursued the cause of national reconciliation with the same
tenacity, using his years in office to foster a climate of tolerance in the hope that
it might take root permanently, but knowing of the difficult times that lay ahead.
South Africa, as he departed, faced many hazards. Its crime rate was among
the highest in the world, unemployment and poverty were widespread and racial
tensions were never far below the surface. But the foundations for a new society
which Mandela helped to lay at least enabled South Africa to face the future with
more hope than once seemed possible.
Many expectations, however, were soon to turn sour.

CHAPTER 33
L’ENVOI
AFTER THE YEARS OF HEARTACHE AND TURMOIL OVER WINNIE,
Mandela in retirement revelled in the pleasures of a happy married life. During
his time as president, his affection for Graca Machel had steadily deepened. At
first reticent about the affair, he spoke openly about it in a television interview in
February 1998. ‘I’m in love with a remarkable lady’, he said. ‘I don’t regret the
reverses and setbacks because late in my life I am blooming like a flower,
because of the love and support she has given me’.
Mandela tried to persuade her into marriage, but initially Graca held back.
After the death of her husband, Samora Machel, Mozambique’s president, in a
plane crash in 1986, she had resolved never to marry again. In Mozambique, she
was still regarded as the First Lady. And she was also heavily committed to her
work on child welfare, both at home and abroad.
From an early age, she had shown exceptional ability and a strong
independent streak. Born in Mozambique’s southern Gaza province in 1945 to a
Methodist family, Graca Simbine had excelled at school and had gained a
scholarship to Lisbon University, where she studied German philology and
joined a clandestine unit of Frelimo, the main Mozambique liberation movement
fighting to overthrow Portuguese rule. After taking her degree, she underwent
military training with Frelimo in Tanzania, becoming a close friend of Frelimo’s
leader Samora Machel, whose wife had died in 1971. At independence in 1975,
Graca was appointed minister of education, and shortly afterwards she married
Machel. Though devoted to him, she remained fiercely independent. At a
woman’s conference in Mozambique in 1984, she publicly rebuked him for
interfering with the proceedings. His sudden death left her devastated, with two
young children and five step-children to look after. ‘I thought my life was
completely over’, she recalled. She mourned him in black for four years.
It was Machel’s death that brought her into contact with Mandela for the first
time. From his prison cell, he wrote her a letter of condolence. Graca wrote back,

thanking him for bringing ‘a ray of light in my hour of darkness’. They met for
the first time in 1990 when Mandela paid a visit to Mozambique. They met again
in 1992, shortly after Mandela had announced his separation from Winnie, when
Graca went to receive an honorary doctorate from the University of the Western
Cape. They developed a warm friendship. ‘We were both very, very lonely’, she
said. ‘We both wanted someone you could talk to; someone who’d understand’.
The following year, after Oliver Tambo died, Mandela took over from him
responsibility for acting as guardian of Graca’s children. Her daughter, Josina,
moved into Mandela’s house while studying at the University of Cape Town. ‘It
wasn’t love at first sight’, said Graca. ‘For me, things don’t happen like that. For
me, falling in love is like a spark connecting two people. With Samora, I was
with him for some time and only later did I feel this spark. It was the same with
Nelson’.
For his part, Mandela was captivated by Graca’s warmth, grace and
intelligence. He telephoned her every day and began spending weekends at her
home in Maputo. But when he formally proposed marriage, she felt that her
obligation to her family and to Mozambique had to come first. ‘I belong to
Mozambique’, she insisted. ‘I will always be the wife of Samora Machel’.
The compromise they accepted for a while was that Graca would spend two
weeks of every month with him in Johannesburg. But this arrangement prompted
criticism from Archbishop Tutu, who complained that they were setting a bad
example to young people and urged Mandela ‘to make an honest woman of her’.
Graca, however, was content enough. ‘I think we are OK like this. . . . We are
two grown-up people who love each other’. She would have preferred to wait
until his term as president had ended. But after further gentle pressure, she
relented.
Mandela wanted a huge party to celebrate the occasion, but Graca asked only
for a quiet family ceremony. Amid a swirl of rumours, they were married
privately at Mandela’s home in Houghton in Johan - nesburg on his eightieth
birthday—18 July 1998. ‘It was my birthday present to him’, said Graca. As they
had both been brought up as Methodists, the service was conducted by a
Methodist bishop, with blessings given by Muslim, Hindu and Jewish elders.
Among the handful of friends present were the Sisulus, Ahmed Kathrada and a
former warder from Robben Island, Christo Brand. The following day, Mandela
and Graca made their first public appearance as husband and wife at a glittering
birthday banquet attended by 2,000 people, including pop stars and foreign

dignitaries. Later in the year, when Graca presented her new husband to
journalists at a press conference in Maputo, she made clear she had no intention
of changing her name. ‘I’m not going to change mine either’, joked Mandela,
alongside her.

When Mandela stepped down as president, he claimed he wanted a quiet life. He
would be content, he said, to spend much of his time with his family in his house
at Qunu in the Transkei countryside. During his prison years, he had often
dreamed of settling down there. ‘I want to live in obscurity’, he told a farewell
press gathering. ‘I would like to retire to my village and be able to walk around
the village and little hills and streams where I grew up’.
Yet he was still too addicted to life on the public stage to leave it behind. ‘If
there’s anything that would kill me it is to wake up in the morning not knowing
what to do’. Graca tried to make him relax, but she soon changed her mind. ‘I
realised I was making a mistake’, she said. ‘He needs to be very busy. He is
quite clear that if he slows down he will feel depressed. He’ll feel he’s not
needed any more’.
Mandela particularly enjoyed taking foreign trips, hobnobbing with world
leaders, show-business stars, sporting heroes and rich businessmen, all keen to
be seen in his company. ‘I often feel he’s reliving his own youth in
Johannesburg in the 1950s, when he was not only a politician, but a township
hero’, remarked Anthony Sampson, his authorised biographer, who knew him
during those years. A global icon, Mandela was able to raise huge sums for his
charities. He also tried his hand at peace-making in Burundi.
On domestic issues, Mandela was careful at first to avoid any comment on
Mbeki’s handling of government business, conscious of how much Mbeki
resented having to operate in the shadow of his own reputation. Mbeki himself
was awkward in dealing with the matter, trying to make light of it with jokes.
‘Madiba’, said Mbeki, when accepting the mantle of ANC president at the
party’s conference in December 1997, ‘members of the press have been asking
me how it feels to step into your shoes. I’ve been saying I would never be seen
dead in such shoes. You wear such ugly shoes!’ He continued: ‘If you don’t see
tears in my eyes, Madiba, it does not mean I am not happy. . . . I will always
seek to ask your help, even if it is for you to carry my briefcase so that I can
walk around with my hands in my pockets!’ On another occasion, he burst out in

exasperation: ‘Yes, indeed. Mandela has much larger feet. I guess I could go
back twenty-seven years, and try going to jail, and then come out and wear
funny shirts’.
When Mbeki spoke at the banquet celebrating Mandela’s eightieth birthday in
1998, he chose, by way of tribute, to quote from Shakespeare’s King Lear, a play
about a senile ruler in retreat from the world. ‘As Lear wished for himself and
his offspring’, he said to Mandela, ‘we too urge you to live, and pray, and sing,
and tell old tales, and laugh at the gilded butterflies which will continue to come
to you to tell you all manner of idle gossip’. In other words: enjoy your dotage
and leave governing to me.
Yet for all the outward show of confidence Mbeki displayed, he was beset by
a deep sense of insecurity that was to have a profound effect on his handling of
power. His biographer, Mark Gevisser, contrasted the assurance with which
Mandela arrived in office, borne on a wave of good wishes from friend and foe
alike, to Mbeki’s constant anxiety about how secure his position was. ‘He
carried that anxiety, that heaviness, with him into power—a hunched, sceptical
counterweight to the inspirational “free at last” optimism of Mandela—and
would never really be able to release it’.
Unlike Mandela, Mbeki disliked the press. During his term as deputy
president, he became increasingly convinced that the press was bent on
portraying Mandela as ‘the one good native’ and raising alarm about what would
happen when he left the stage. The issue came to the fore during a turbulent
period in 1996 when the rand crashed as the result of rumours that Mandela was
ill. An editorial in the Johannesburg Sunday Times drew attention to how much
South Africa’s welfare depended on Mandela’s well-being. Mbeki, said the
newspaper, was just not up to the job of maintaining Mandela’s legacy. ‘He
simply does not inspire confidence. . . . Where Mr Mandela projects warmth of
spirit and generosity, Mr Mbeki appears manipulative and calculating. . . .
Where Mr Mandela inspires affection, even love, Mr Mbeki evokes uncertainty
and fear’.
Infuriated by such disparaging remarks, Mbeki insisted that Mandela issue a
riposte in his own name. Drafted by one of Mbeki’s aides and duly approved by
Mbeki, it appeared under Mandela’s by-line with the headline in the Sunday
Times ‘Don’t praise me to damn the rest’: ‘It is particularly unacceptable that
this strain of hero-worshipping should be coupled with a systematic campaign to

denigrate deputy president Thabo Mbeki—a campaign that is beyond any
civilised norms of discourse, let alone objectivity. . . . The exaltation of the
president and denigration of other ANC leaders constitutes praise which I do not
accept’. Such efforts were to no avail in improving Mbeki’s image.
Mbeki’s standing amongst the white community also deteriorated. During the
1999 election campaign, he complained that white attitudes had hardly changed
over the previous five years. ‘When one walks around this country, one finds
that the legacy of apartheid still sits on our shoulders’, he said. ‘The memory of
apartheid is fading and perhaps there is too much forgiveness. I think we should
be angry about apartheid’. In conversation with Mark Gevisser, Mbeki took
Mandela to task for giving priority to achieving reconciliation rather than to
effecting a transformation of South African society. South Africa, he said, could
not ‘sustain a view of national reconciliation of the kind of which the media
approved’ and with which ‘Madiba cooperated’. Gevisser remarked, ‘I have
seldom seen Mbeki as exercised, or as impassioned, as when he spoke about
this’. ‘You just couldn’t do it!’ Mbeki told him. ‘It was wrong! Just wrong!’
Instead of the multiracial approach that Mandela favoured, Mbeki threw his
weight exclusively behind black advancement. Affirmative action was used
aggressively to give places to blacks in the civil service, local government and
parastatal organisations, such as railways, ports and power generation, regardless
of merit and qualification. Thousands of skilled whites were cleared out of
government service and parastatal posts. A group of ‘racial populists’ within the
ANC demanded ever faster action. The state bureaucracy became, in effect, an
arm of the ANC. Many whites decided to leave South Africa altogether for
opportunities abroad, citing affirmative action, high crime rates and deteriorating
public services as reasons for going. In all, an estimated 750,000 whites
emigrated over a ten-year period, seriously depleting the reservoir of skilled
personnel.
Parliament’s role too went into decline. Whereas Mandela had accorded
parliament due respect, regarding it as one of the main pillars of democracy,
Mbeki sought to emasculate it. For the first five years of democracy, both ANC
members and opposition members had spoken freely. ‘During the Mandela
years’, recalled an ANC MP, Andrew Feinstein, ‘the caucus room had resonated
with sharp debate and discussion, passionate argument and profound polemic’.
In dealing with opposition parties, Mandela was sometimes infuriated by their
criticism. He once referred to opposition parties as ‘Mickey Mouse

organisations’, prompting Democratic Party leader Tony Leon to retort that
Mandela ran a ‘Goofy’ government. But Mandela nevertheless endeavoured to
maintain cordial contact with opposition leaders. On learning that Leon had gone
to hospital for heart surgery, Mandela decided to pay him an unannounced visit,
alerting him to his presence outside the door to his room by saying loudly:
‘Hello Mickey Mouse, this is Goofy. Can I come in?’
By contrast, Mbeki expected ANC members to follow his diktat. ‘The caucus
reflected a more disciplined, choreographed and constrained party’, wrote
Feinstein, ‘a party fearful of its leader, conscious of his power to make or break
careers, conscious of his demand for loyalty, for conformity of thinking’. As
Mbeki began to pursue a more ‘Africanist’ agenda, several prominent white
ANC members found their presence less welcome. ‘It was a change of
temperature’, said Carl Niehaus. ‘People felt alienated, and it pushed them
away’. As for opposition parties, Mbeki treated them with contempt. He rarely
appeared in the assembly to answer questions. ‘A lot of Parliament,’ Leon
observed, ‘has been reduced to a branch office of ANC’s headquarters’. In due
course, parliament became little more than a rubber stamp.
In private, Mandela occasionally felt the need to pick up the phone to chide
Mbeki over a policy issue, but he soon found himself fobbed off by Mbeki’s
aides, who claimed the president was ‘too busy’ to take Mandela’s calls or have
a meeting with him. Mbeki resented criticism of any kind and surrounded
himself with a clique of weak personalities only too willing to agree to all he
said. What Mbeki wanted above all was loyalty; it mattered far more to him than
competence. Government jobs were handed out on that basis. Party committees
and conferences were tightly controlled. Critics of any kind were subjected to
tirades of abuse from loyal party hacks. Anyone deemed to challenge Mbeki was
quickly eviscerated. Mbeki himself was more than ready to spread smears about
rivals in order to discredit them.
With growing paranoia, Mbeki imagined plots against him at every turn. In
one ludicrous episode in 2001, Mbeki caused a public uproar by authorising a
police investigation into allegations made by a serial fraudster that three senior
ANC figures, including Cyril Ramaphosa, were involved in a plot to overthrow
him. Mbeki’s police minister went on television to claim that Mbeki might
actually be in ‘physical danger’. The uproar completely overshadowed an event
in London’s Trafalgar Square that Mandela attended to mark the start of an
international marketing campaign to ‘Celebrate South Africa’, making the

country look more like a banana republic than a progressive democracy. Mbeki
was later obliged to admit that there had been no plot.
Even though Mandela’s misgivings about Mbeki were mounting, he refrained
from making any public intervention until provoked by Mbeki’s increasingly
bizarre conduct over the Aids crisis. Trying to make amends for his own neglect
of the crisis during his term as president, Mandela in retirement threw himself
into the campaign against Aids, prompted in large part by Graca Machel, who
had long understood its full dimensions. But Mandela found Mbeki blocking the
way to meaningful progress.

In his presidential eyrie, spending the midnight hours surfing the internet, Mbeki
became obsessed with the view of a small group of maverick scientists who
questioned whether HIV existed at all or, if it did, whether it was not simply a
harmless ‘passenger’ virus. They challenged the orthodox view of the causes of
Aids, accepted by the vast majority of the world’s medical establishment,
claiming it was part of a conspiracy by large pharmaceutical companies to profit
from the misery of Africa’s poor. Antiretroviral drugs, they argued, were not
only expensive, but they were also toxic, more lethal than the disease they were
supposed to be treating. Aids was not contagious; it was the result of poverty
aggravating old disease patterns.
Early in 2000, Mbeki decided to set up a ‘presidential international panel of
scientists on HIV/AIDS in Africa’ to establish what he called ‘the facts’,
suggesting that the orthodox view of the causes of Aids was no more than a
‘thesis’. To the outrage of the scientific and medical fraternity, he invited a
number of well-known ‘dissidents’ to take part, even though their theories had
long since been discounted. In a letter sent in April 2000 to world leaders,
including UN secretary general Kofi Annan, US president Bill Clinton and
British prime minister Tony Blair, Mbeki explained that he had included the
dissidents because he believed all opinions needed to be considered in the search
for a response to the epidemic. He then went on to make an alarmingly
intemperate defence of the dissidents’ position, portraying them as victims of
intimidation similar to that which had occurred during the apartheid era. ‘Not
long ago in our country people were killed, tortured and imprisoned because the
authorities believed that their views were dangerous’, he wrote. ‘We are now
being asked to do the same thing that the racist apartheid tyranny did, because

there is a scientific view against which dissent is prohibited’.
In Washington, the White House was so astonished at this piece of chicanery
that officials checked to see whether the letter was a hoax. In South Africa, the
president of the Medical Research Council, Professor Malegapuru Makgoba, a
renowned immunologist, complained of the ‘lengthening list of politicallydriven decisions regarding the South African AIDS crisis’ and warned that the
country was ‘rapidly becoming a fertile breeding ground for the types of pseudoscience embraced by politicians’.
Apart from the confusion and paralysis the controversy caused in South
Africa, it took on a worldwide significance. In July 2000, South Africa was due
to host an international Aids conference. Hoping to keep the atmosphere calm,
the conference chairman, Professor Hoosen Coovadia of the University of Natal,
urged Mbeki to steer clear of scientific debates. Mbeki’s response, however, was
to authorise his ministers to make personal attacks on Coovadia and other critics,
questioning their academic credentials and suggesting they were operating as
‘frontline troops of the pharmaceutical industry’. When 5,000 scientists,
including Nobel Prize winners and directors of leading research institutions and
medical societies, signed a declaration, in advance of the conference, stating that
HIV was the direct cause of Aids, Mbeki’s health minister, Manto TshabalalaMsimang, dismissed it as an ‘elitist document’ signed only by health scientists.
‘You can’t have a certain exclusive group of people saying this is what we
believe about HIV and Aids’. Mbeki’s spokesman, Parks Mankahlana, warned
that if the drafters of the declaration gave it to the president or the government, it
would find ‘its comfortable place among the dustbins of the office’.
Opening the conference in Durban, Mbeki made no attempt to pull back into
the mainstream. He reiterated his doubts about the gravity of the epidemic and
dwelt on the findings of a 1995 World Health Organization report which argued
that the world’s biggest killer was extreme poverty—a theme favoured by the
dissidents. In a modest rebuke during his closing address to the conference,
Mandela argued for a different perspective: the dispute over the cause of Aids,
he said, was ‘distracting from the real life-and-death issues we are confronted
with’.
But Mbeki paid no heed. Following the conference, he retreated further into
semantics, conspiracy theories and pseudo-science, continuing to ridicule the
link between HIV and Aids. ‘Aids is Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome’,

he told parliament. ‘I don’t believe it’s a sensible thing to ask: “Does a virus
cause a syndrome?” It can’t. A virus will cause a disease.’ His office issued a
statement accusing Aids activists who wanted the government to provide
antiretroviral drugs in public hospitals of trying to poison black people. ‘Our
people are being used as guinea-pigs and conned into using dangerous and toxic
drugs’, said the statement; it likened this to ‘the biological warfare of the
apartheid era’. He told the ANC’s parliamentary caucus that criticism of his Aids
policies was a plot by the CIA acting in alliance with drug companies to
discredit him as the leader of efforts by the developing world to obtain a better
deal in the international economic system. Interviewed by a Cape Town
television station, he said he was not prepared to set an example by taking a
public HIV test because it would send a message that he supported a particular
scientific viewpoint—the dominant medical ‘paradigm’. In a lecture he gave at
Fort Hare University, he suggested that medical scientists and Aids activists
engaged in public campaigns had racial motives. ‘It does happen that others who
consider themselves to be our leaders take to the streets carrying their placards to
demand that because we are germ carriers and human beings of a lower order
that cannot subject its passions to reason, we must perforce adopt strange
options, to save a depraved and diseased people from perishing from selfinflicted disease’. In other words, the explanations of the causes of the epidemic
as set out by Mbeki’s critics were part of a racial conspiracy against Africans.
The effect of Mbeki’s embrace of dissident arguments was to increase public
resistance to Aids education.
Whatever contorted reasoning Mbeki tried to use, the evidence of catastrophe
continued to mount. The UN Aids agency estimated that 250,000 people in
South Africa died of Aids in 2000. The World Health Organization estimated
that one in five South African adults in 2000 was HIV positive. The South
African paediatric association estimated that 70,000 babies were born with HIV
in 2000. In 2001, Health Department surveys showed that one quarter of all
South African women receiving support from public ante-natal clinics were HIV
positive. A study by the Medical Research Council concluded that in the period
from 1999 to mid-2001, Aids had become the leading cause of death. In 2000,
40 per cent of deaths among those aged fifteen to forty-nine and 25 per cent of
total deaths, including children, were from Aids-related illnesses. The MRC
warned that if the epidemic went unchecked, it would claim between 5 and 7
million South Africans by 2010, 2 million children would be left as orphans, life
expectancy would have plunged from a pre-epidemic high of sixty-five years to

forty-one years and the annual death toll from Aids would have reached 800,000.
But still Mbeki adamantly rejected pleas for the government to provide
antiretroviral drugs through the public health system and frustrated attempts by
private welfare groups to use them in their own projects. In August 2001, an
activist organisation, the Treatment Action Campaign, which had spent four
years trying to persuade Mbeki to change course, started legal proceedings
aimed at forcing the government to provide a new antiretroviral drug called
nevirapine to help reduce mother-to-baby transmission. Mbeki’s response was to
argue that the courts had no right to make policy decisions.
Exasperated by Mbeki’s obduracy, Mandela decided on personal intervention.
In December 2001, he telephoned Edwin Cameron, an appeals court judge and
Aids activist, asking him to call at his house in Houghton. Cameron had been the
first public official in South Africa to disclose he was living with Aids. In his
book Witness to AIDS, Cameron described their meeting:
In his living room he took his seat in a large armchair and gestured to me to sit
on his right, where he could hear best. Apart from two little boys who bustled in
to say goodnight to their grandfather, we were alone. Madiba wanted to talk
about AIDS, and about ways in which he could help ensure a response that
would save lives in our country. Though the former president spoke with tactful
allusiveness, two things seemed very clear to me: he would do nothing to impair
or impugn the authority and standing of his successor; but he would play an
unequivocal part in asserting the vital significance of securing antiretroviral
treatment as part of the remedy for the growing numbers of those dying from
AIDS in South Africa.
As Cameron was leaving, Mandela asked him for a personal statement about
the way in which Aids had affected his life. The following day, Mandela called
in Professor Makgoba, one of Mbeki’s fiercest critics, who had warned that,
unless Mbeki changed course, he would be implicated in ‘the greatest genocide
of our time’.
Mandela’s own public condemnation soon followed. Visiting a treatment
centre on World Aids Day in December, he accused Mbeki of dereliction of duty
for not leading the fight against Aids. In a further attack, Mandela lambasted the
government for resisting the introduction of antiretroviral drugs. ‘We are in a
war’, he told a newspaper. ‘It has killed more people than has been the case in all
previous wars. We must not continue to be debating, to be arguing, when people

are dying’.
Mandela’s coup de grâce came in February 2002 when he awarded the Nelson
Mandela Prize for Health and Human Rights to two researchers from the
University of the Witwatersrand, Professor James McIntyre and Dr Glenda Gray,
for their pioneering work on perinatal HIV transmission strategies. Intending to
create the maximum impact, Mandela scheduled the award ceremony to take
place at the Mount Nelson Hotel in Cape Town the day before Mbeki was due to
give his annual ‘state of the nation’ address to parliament a few hundred yards
away. After drawing attention to the plight of mothers and babies with HIV,
Mandela spoke of his personal experience of the benefits of medical science,
explaining how doctors had succeeded in dealing with his own bout of prostate
cancer. Losing his place in the speech and stumbling for a moment, he looked up
and said, ‘At least I am willing to admit when I have made a mistake’.
Mbeki’s response was characteristically vindictive. At a meeting of the
ANC’s national executive committee in March 2002, with Mandela present,
Mbeki ensured he was humiliated. As Mbeki looked on silently, one member
after another stood up to abuse Mandela for breaking party discipline, vying with
each other to deride him in order to curry favour with Mbeki. According to one
witness, Ngoako Ramatlhodi, they were like ‘a pack of wild dogs tearing their
prey’—‘wild, aggressive and merciless’. Only two members defended
Mandela’s right to speak out. ‘After his vicious mauling’, said Ramatlhodi,
‘Madiba looked twice his age, old and ashen’. The NEC went on to decide not to
provide antiretroviral drugs to pregnant women, rape victims or health workers
because these drugs ‘remained unproven’.
Mandela left the meeting appalled at how Mbeki had stifled the culture of
debate and dissent within the ANC and, even worse, how ANC colleagues had
slavishly followed a policy condemning thousands to an early death simply out
of fear of him. It made Mandela all the more determined to continue his own
campaign.
At the 2002 UN Aids conference in Barcelona, Mandela urged world leaders
to do more to reduce the stigma of HIV/Aids. Then on his return to South Africa,
he decided to pay a visit to Zackie Achmat, the founder of the Treatment Action
Campaign, at his home in Muizenberg. Though weakened by Aids, Achmat had
thrown his energies into contesting in the courts Mbeki’s refusal to provide
government support for antiretroviral treatment and pledged not to take any

antiretroviral drugs himself until they were made freely available to those in
need.
Before setting out for Muizenberg, Mandela called round to Mbeki’s
residence to ask him whether he might like to come along, pointing out how
much South Africa’s reputation would suffer if Achmat died. Describing the
incident to Achmat, Mandela told him, ‘I don’t want to tell you how quickly I
had to leave’.
Towards the end of his visit, Mandela donned a T-shirt emblazoned with the
slogan ‘HIV-POSITIVE’ that Achmat had designed and that had been worn by
thousands of Aids activists. The photograph of Mandela wearing it was widely
published. ‘His smiling famous features atop the white cotton HIV POSITIVE
T-shirt may have marked a turning point in our national struggle about the
meaning of AIDS’, wrote Edwin Cameron. ‘Perhaps it was his intervening moral
voice that made the change in the government’s resistance to antiretroviral drugs
inevitable’.
Even though Mbeki came under intense pressure to back down, ridiculed and
vilified at home and abroad, he remained as obstinate as ever. ‘We will not be
intimidated, terrorised, bludgeoned, manipulated, stampeded, or in any other
way forced to adopt policies and programmes inimical to the health of our
people’, he wrote in an online letter in April 2002. ‘That we are poor and black
does not mean that we cannot think for ourselves and determine what is good for
us. Neither does it mean that we are available to be bought, whatever the prices’.
He accused his critics, such as the Treatment Action Campaign, of conducting
‘an extremely harmful and unacceptable campaign to deny our people all
information and knowledge about the incidence of diseases of poverty in our
country. . . . Despite the propaganda offensive, the reality is that the predominant
feature of illnesses that cause disease and death among the black people in our
country is poverty’.
The courts, however, sided with the Treatment Action Campaign. After a
series of court hearings, in July 2002 the Constitutional Court ordered the
government to provide nevirapine to all HIV-positive pregnant mothers at all
public hospitals free of charge, ‘without delay’.
Even then, Mbeki continued to drag his feet. His health minister, Manto
Tshabalala-Msimang, a crony from exile days, recommended quack remedies
such as eating garlic, beetroot or olive oil, which she claimed had produced

‘astounding results’. Only when further court action was threatened did the
government finally respond with an Aids drugs programme. By then, 1 million
people had died from Aids, the number of people infected by HIV had reached
5.3 million, an estimated 2,000 were infected with HIV every twenty-four hours
and some 600 people were dying from Aids each day.
Yet still Mbeki continued to wield what Edwin Cameron in 2003 called ‘the
dead hand of denialism’, producing further confusion about government policy.
In 2003, when asked by the Washington Post if he had personal experience of
the Aids epidemic, Mbeki responded by saying that ‘personally, I don’t know
anyone who has died of Aids’, implying that Aids victims had in fact died from
other causes. Even when close colleagues and members of his staff were struck
down, he remained in the same state of denial. Offers of foreign assistance were
similarly spurned. When former US president Bill Clinton offered to set up a
team of twenty experts to help South Africa draw up a national treatment plan,
Mbeki initially agreed to the idea, but then failed to extend an invitation once the
team was ready to leave for South Africa.
Despite the universal ridicule that Tshabalala-Msimang had endured as health
minister, Mbeki re-appointed her to the post after the 2004 general election and
allowed her to continue peddling her vegetable remedies and warning of the
dangers of using antiretroviral treatment. At the 2006 UN Aids conference in
Toronto, to the derision of other delegates, she set up a stall stocked with garlic,
lemons and beetroot, promoting them as a suitable treatment. In an angry
outburst, the UN special envoy on Aids, Stephen Lewis, described her and
Mbeki as ‘obtuse, dilatory and negligent’. South Africa, he said, was ‘the only
state in Africa whose government continues to propound theories more worthy
of a lunatic fringe than of a concerned and compassionate state’. He added, ‘The
government has a lot to atone for. I am of the opinion that they can never
achieve redemption’. A study by the Harvard School of Public Health published
in 2008 estimated that by denying antiretroviral drugs to Aids patients and to
pregnant women, Mbeki had caused the premature death of 365,000 people,
including 35,000 babies.

Alongside Mbeki’s infamous handling of the Aids crisis came mounting public
anger over government corruption and his attempts to cover it up. In September
1999, an opposition politician, Patricia de Lille, told parliament that she had

come into possession of a ten-page memorandum signed by ‘concerned ANC
MPs’ claiming high-level corruption in the arms deal. ‘South African companies,
interested groups, senior government officials and members of parliament who
are involved in the Arms Deal are corrupting the democratic process in South
Africa’, said the memorandum. The Auditor-General’s Office took up the case
and issued a preliminary report in August 2000 that identified a litany of
irregularities in the awarding of contracts. The report questioned why the
government had violated its own procurement procedures by deciding to exclude
cost as a criterion, leading to the purchase of the most expensive equipment on
offer. It pointed to several apparent conflicts of interest among key decisionmakers. One was the former minister of defence, Joe Modise, who, within weeks
of leaving office in 1999, had joined a private defence company in which he had
previously acquired a substantial stake and which had successfully bid for subcontract work. Another was Chippy Shaik, the head of procurement at the
Department of Defence, whose brother, Schabir Shaik, was director of another
private company also awarded valuable sub-contract work. Alarmed by evidence
of corruption, the auditor-general, Shauket Fakie, recommended further
investigation.
The preliminary report of the Auditor-General’s Office was taken up by
members of the Standing Committee on Public Accounts (Scopa), a
parliamentary watchdog committee headed by an opposition po - litician, Gavin
Woods. The leader of the ANC members of Scopa was Andrew Feinstein, a
young political activist who threw himself into the fray with idealistic zeal. After
collecting its own evidence of bribery and malpractice, Scopa issued a report in
October 2000 urging the government to mount a major investigation by a joint
team, including an anti-corruption unit with wide-ranging powers, led by Judge
Willem Heath.
Mbeki’s reaction was swift. ‘We soon started to receive reports of the
President’s apoplexy’, wrote Feinstein. ANC members of Scopa were hauled
before the party’s ‘Governance Committee’ and subjected to tirades of abuse.
Pointing aggressively at Feinstein, Mbeki’s chief enforcer, Essop Pahad,
shouted, ‘Who the fuck do you think you are, questioning the integrity of the
government, the Ministers and the President?’ After the meeting, Laloo Chiba,
an ANC veteran who had spent years on Robben Island with Mandela, remarked
to Feinstein, ‘You know, comrade, many years on the Island couldn’t break me,
but I think Thabo’s ANC might.’

In private, several senior ANC figures tried quietly to persuade Feinstein to
give up the chase. One of them explained that he was never going to ‘win this
thing’.
‘Why not?’ asked Feinstein.
‘Because we received money from the same winning companies. How do you
think we funded the 1999 election?’
Still intent on pursuing the scandal, Feinstein and Woods were subsequently
taken by an investigator working for a government agency to a Pretoria
basement where they were shown reams of documents—a paper trail of at least
10 million rands’ worth of improper payments made directly to Modise.
Fearing further exposure, Mbeki instituted a full-scale cover-up. A cabal of
cabinet ministers was wheeled out to attack not only Scopa but also the auditorgeneral; they rejected ‘with contempt’ any insinuation of corruption and argued
that there was no need for an investigation. In a paranoid speech on television,
Mbeki resorted to his habit of blaming the hubbub over corruption on the work
of conspirators. ‘Various entities’, he said, had been hired to mount a sustained
campaign to discredit the government by making ‘unfounded and
unsubstantiated allegations of corruption’. He adamantly refused to allow
Heath’s anti-corruption unit to get involved.
He also moved swiftly to force parliament into line. The speaker of
parliament, Frene Ginwala, who had hitherto supported Scopa’s work and
assured its members of her protection, now deserted them and joined the attack.
Feinstein was removed as the head of Scopa’s ANC members. The ANC’s chief
whip, Tony Yengeni, explained: ‘Some people have the notion that the public
accounts committee members should act in a non-partisan manner. But, in our
system, no ANC member has a free vote’. The ANC proceeded to use its
majority to prevent Scopa from ever acting independently again, prompting
Feinstein to quit parliament in protest.
An official report, written mainly by the Auditor-General’s Office but with
contributions from the National Prosecuting Authority and the Public Protector,
was presented to parliament in November 2001. The report exonerated the
government of any wrongdoing: ‘no evidence was found of any improper or
unlawful conduct by the Government’. But subsequent court action revealed that
a draft of the report had been sent to Mbeki and other members of the
government in advance of publication and that significant alterations had been

made. The alterations included the addition of the key phrase exonerating the
government. Thus, in his determination to cover up the scandal, Mbeki had
contaminated the reputation of three major agencies of the state set up to guard
the public interest.
The extent of corruption became clear in subsequent years as the result of
investigations carried out in Britain, France and Germany that revealed that at
least $300 million had been paid out by foreign defence contractors in bribes and
‘commissions’ to politicians, officials, middlemen and the ANC. Among the
discoveries was that Mbeki himself had held secret discussions in France with a
defence contractor which had subsequently been awarded a contract worth 2
billion rands to supply the navy with four ships. Mbeki claimed, implausibly,
that he did not recall the occasion.
‘The Arms Deal and its cover-up’, wrote Feinstein, ‘were the moment at
which the ANC and the South African government lost their moral compass,
when the country’s political leadership was prepared to undermine the
institutions of our democracy—for which they and many others had fought—to
protect themselves and the party’.

Mbeki’s presidency descended further into ignominy over his handling of the
crisis in neighbouring Zimbabwe, where Robert Mugabe, facing growing
opposition to his corrupt and autocratic regime, launched a sustained campaign
of terror to keep himself in power. Defeated in a referendum in 2000, Mugabe
turned first against white farmers, sending gangs of armed youths to drive them
off their properties, hoping this would help restore his popularity He then set out
to destroy the opposition, sanctioning murder, torture and lawlessness of every
kind. ‘No matter what force you have, this is my territory and that which is mine
I cling [to] unto death’, he said in 2001. Year after year, he concentrated
government resources on maintaining his grip in Zimbabwe—rigging elections,
violating the courts, subverting the judiciary, suppressing the independent press
and licensing the police and security forces to enforce repression at will. The
result was catastrophic. Zimbabwe was reduced to a bankrupt and impoverished
state, with a worthless currency. Commercial agriculture collapsed, leaving the
country dependent on foreign food aid to prevent mass starvation. Education and
health services disintegrated. Unemployment soared to 90 per cent. Several
million people—about a quarter of the population—fled across the border to

South Africa in order to survive.
How to deal with the tyrant living next door became a major preoccupation in
South Africa. South Africa possessed a unique ability to bring pressure to bear
on its landlocked northern neighbour. It provided transport links, electricity
supplies and other services vital for Zimbabwe’s welfare. In the 1970s, the South
African government, for reasons of self-interest, had used these means to force
Ian Smith to concede black majority rule. At an early stage in the crisis, Mandela
spoke out against Mugabe. ‘We have to be ruthless in denouncing such leaders’,
he said in May 2000. Western governments piled in with a torrent of
condemnation and eventually a package of sanctions directed personally at
Mugabe and his cronies.
But Mbeki chose what he termed ‘quiet diplomacy’ to deal with Mugabe,
arguing that discreet persuasion offered a better prospect. His efforts, however,
failed again and again. Mugabe repeatedly promised Mbeki that he would
negotiate a settlement with the opposition but never made any attempt to do so.
Despite being humiliated by one example after another of Mugabe’s perfidy,
Mbeki held fast to the idea that quiet diplomacy would produce results. Not once
did he speak out in defence of human rights in Zimbabwe. Indeed, he began to
parrot Mugabe’s own propaganda. The only reason that such a fuss had been
made about Zimbabwe, he said, was ‘because white people died and white
people were deprived of their property’. The fact that Mugabe’s tyranny had
inflicted violence, hardship and misery on millions of blacks did not seem to
Mbeki sufficient cause to protest. As the lawlessness continued, Mbeki, far from
becoming more critical of Mugabe, acted to shield him against the onslaught of
Western outrage. He endorsed all of Mugabe’s rigged elections and vigorously
opposed sanctions against him. In the West, Mbeki lost all credibility.
Mbeki’s determination to back a brutal African dictator, rather than stand up
for human rights, followed a long tradition by leaders in Africa of turning a blind
eye to the nefarious activities of their peers for the sake of group solidarity. It
won him support in Africanist circles in South Africa that celebrated
Zimbabwe’s example of giving the whites a good kicking and hoped for
something similar in South Africa. But it caused alarm among foreign investors
and nervousness among the white population and aroused further misgivings
about Mbeki’s commitment to democratic values. Moreover, Mbeki’s backing of
Mugabe sullied the reputation of the ANC, which had received so much help in
its own struggle for human rights and now remained indifferent to the struggle

that others in the neighbourhood faced. In a thinly veiled rebuke, Archbishop
Tutu, forever the voice of conscience in South Africa, pronounced himself
‘baffled’ by African leaders who supported dictators like Mugabe. ‘Human
rights are human rights and they are of universal validity or they are nothing’, he
said.

As the ailments of old age took their toll, Mandela retreated from the public
arena. His main public activity became his involvement in the Aids campaign. In
2003, he hosted a star-studded charity concert in Cape Town, called the 46664
concert after his Robben Island prison number, to raise awareness of Aids issues.
Subsequent 46664 concerts were held elsewhere in South Africa and in Spain,
Norway and England. When his own son, Makgatho, died from Aids at the age
of fifty-four in January 2005, Mandela made a public announcement about the
cause of his death: ‘Let us give publicity to HIV/AIDS and not hide it’, he said,
surrounded by family members, ‘because [that is] the only way to make it appear
like a normal illness’.
But otherwise he made few public pronouncements. In the aftermath of his
bruising confrontation over Aids, disenchanted with the turn of events, his
appetite for political engagement dwindled. Nevertheless, he was not averse to
making clear his dislike of Mbeki’s presidential style. At a wedding banquet in
2003, filmed by a television crew, Mandela became increasingly angry at
Mbeki’s late arrival, which was holding up the proceedings. When Mbeki finally
arrived forty-five minutes late, Mandela snapped at him, ‘We are hungry’.
Without bothering to apologise, Mbeki retorted churlishly, ‘I’m sure you are’.
To Mbeki’s evident exasperation, Mandela took up the matter in his address to
the gathering. ‘In the late thirties [1930s]’, he said, ‘there used to be a president
of the ANC who used to say, “I am the black prime minister. I cannot come early
to meetings. I must come late, and all of you must see what a black prime
minister in this country looks like”. I think my president here has taken after that
president’.
In 2004, at the age of eighty-five, his body now frail, his hair turned white, he
decided to withdraw altogether and announced his retirement from public life. ‘I
am confident that nobody . . . will accuse me of selfishness if I ask to spend
time, while I am still in good health, with my family, my friends and also with
myself ’.

His appearances in public became increasingly rare. One of the most
memorable occurred in 2006 when he turned up as a ‘surprise’ guest of honour
at a glittering celebration of F. W. de Klerk’s seventieth birthday held at Cape
Town’s venerable Mount Nelson Hotel. The two men had frequently clashed. In
his autobiography published in 1998, de Klerk made clear his resentment of
Mandela’s ‘bitter and unfounded attacks’ on him. Mandela’s purpose now was to
effect a personal reconciliation.
Before an array of distinguished guests—ANC politicians, former apartheidera ministers and prominent businessmen—Mandela opened his remarks in
Afrikaans, ‘Dis goed om te sien hoe ons saam oud word’—‘It’s good to see us
growing old together’. He spoke lightheartedly of how they had both become
‘retired and almost forgotten’ men, ageing gently. ‘You may gloat that you are
twenty years behind me in this process. But remember I spent thirty years idly
relaxing on islands and in other resorts while you were battling it out with the
maddening crowd. So in reality we are of equal age’. But his main point was
more serious. He wanted, he said, to give de Klerk due credit for the shared
moments in history which ‘in all humility on our parts, might have helped shape
our country, our continent, and, in modest ways, the world’.

To Mandela’s dismay, in his twilight years the ANC was torn apart by
internecine strife. As Mbeki tried to enforce his personal control of the party
with ever greater determination, a vicious feud broke out between his faction of
loyal supporters and a rival faction led by Jacob Zuma, once a close friend.
Mbeki had appointed Zuma as deputy president in 1999 because he seemed to
represent no threat to Mbeki’s own position. A polygamous politician with no
formal schooling and no administrative ability, Zuma was not considered to be
presidential material. The son of a domestic servant and a rural policeman, he
had learned to read and write in English only as an adult while serving a ten-year
prison sentence on Robben Island. Subsequently, in exile, he befriended Mbeki
and rose to become the ANC’s chief of intelligence. On his return to South
Africa, Zuma developed a strong following in his home base in KwaZulu-Natal.
A pragmatic man, he was as much at ease with Zulu traditionalists as with
radical activists and played a significant role in helping to ease tensions with
Buthelezi’s Inkatha party. He also drew support from trade unionists, left-wing
enthusiasts in the ANC and the Communist Party, all infuriated by Mbeki’s freemarket economic policies.

As disillusionment with Mbeki’s leadership gathered momentum—over Aids,
Zimbabwe, economic policy and his dictatorial habits—there was growing talk
in ANC circles about the possibility of replacing Mbeki with Zuma. Alert to the
danger, Mbeki required Zuma to declare publicly that he had no interest in
becoming president and began a campaign to force him out of the deputy
presidency of both the ANC and the state. But whereas Mbeki’s previous rivals
for leadership had preferred to withdraw rather than see their reputations trashed,
Zuma decided to fight back. For a period of five years, South Africa was
dragged through a morass of intrigue and infighting that threatened to undermine
its young democracy.
At the centre of this sordid struggle was the issue of high-level corruption
emanating from the arms deal which had spread through the ANC like a poison.
The name most often mentioned as the main culprit was former defence minister
Joe Modise, but after his death in 2001 Mbeki blocked any investigation into
Modise’s role. With Jacob Zuma, however, it was a different matter. He became
the subject of a series of leaks by government investigators hinting at his
involvement in corruption. In August 2003, the director of public prosecutions,
Bulelani Ngcuka, announced that there was a ‘prima facie’ case against Zuma
but that he had decided not to charge him as it was unclear whether the case was
‘winnable’ in court. Zuma’s supporters claimed that the allegations of corruption
had been levelled against him simply to discredit him and wreck his chances of
bidding for the presidency.
The evidence against Zuma was, in fact, considerable. Since his return from
exile, he had fallen ever deeper into debt and had become heavily dependent for
financial help on a wealthy Durban businessman, Schabir Shaik, who had acted
as a ‘banker’ to the ANC during the apartheid years, laundering money. When
Mandela was still president, hearing of Zuma’s financial difficulties, he had
offered to help him out with a personal loan. But Zuma continued to rely on
Shaik. Over a six-year period, Shaik made hundreds of payments to Zuma
totalling in all about 1.3 million rands. Shaik frequently boasted of his friendship
with Zuma, using it to promote his business activities.
When the government went shopping for arms, Shaik, hoping to win a slice of
the contracts, set up a joint venture with a French arms company, Thomson, and
enlisted Zuma’s help. In 1999, Shaik’s joint venture was awarded a substantial
sub-contract. When investigators began to probe the arms deal, Shaik, according
to state prosecutors, met a Thomson director to solicit a bribe of 500,000 rands a

year to be paid to Zuma for a period of two years in return for his protection
from any investigation into allegations of corruption on the part of Thomson.
The arrangement was confirmed at a meeting among Shaik, Zuma and the
Thomson director in March 2000. In the event, Shaik and Zuma received only
250,000 rands. Compared to other bribes and ‘commissions’ handed out during
the arms deal, the sum was in the minor league.
In 2004, Shaik was put on trial on corruption charges, accused of making
payments to Zuma in return for Zuma’s support of his business activities and of
soliciting a bribe for Zuma of 500,000 rands a year. The prosecution claimed
that there had been ‘a generally corrupt relationship’ between Shaik and Zuma.
In June 2005, Shaik was found guilty and sentenced to fifteen years’
imprisonment.
A fight to the finish now followed. Two weeks after Shaik had been found
guilty, Mbeki fired Zuma as deputy president of South Africa. But when Mbeki
tried to persuade Zuma to resign as deputy president of the ANC, Zuma
adamantly refused. One week later, state prosecutors announced that they
intended to bring criminal charges of corruption against Zuma. When charged,
Zuma retorted that anyone wanting to know about corruption in the arms deal
should ask Mbeki.
The backlash was ferocious. Zuma’s dismissal provoked a wave of popular
protest. Supporters claimed Zuma was the victim of Mbeki’s machinations to
eliminate him from office. Mbeki, they maintained, was using the police,
intelligence services and prosecutors to do his dirty work. At a fractious meeting
of the ANC’s national general council, delegates defied Mbeki by voting to
retain Zuma as deputy president. After a series of police raids on the homes and
offices of Zuma and his associates, trade union leaders denounced what they
called his ‘brutal persecution’, demanded his reinstatement as state deputy
president and called for a halt to court proceedings, claiming that the courts were
too biased to give him a fair hearing. A sustained campaign was mounted to
portray the judiciary as ‘counter-revolutionary’.
Both sides in the feud descended ever deeper into the mire. In the middle of
grappling with charges of corruption, Zuma was hit by accusations of rape. The
case against him had all the hallmarks of a ‘honeytrap’ orchestrated by his
opponents. His accuser was an HIV-POSITIVE family friend. Zuma admitted
having sex with the woman but denied rape. State prosecutors devoted huge

resources to winning a conviction, presenting a list of twenty-eight witnesses.
But it transpired that the complainant was an unstable woman with a long history
of making rape accusations, four of them against priests. Zuma was duly
acquitted.
His reputation, however, was severely damaged by his performance in court.
He claimed that the woman had solicited his attention by wearing a short skirt,
and he went on to explain that in Zulu tradition it would have been an insult if he
had refused to gratify her. He admitted that he had had unprotected sex with
someone he knew to be HIV positive. But, he said, as a former head of the
National Aids Council, he knew that the risk was ‘minimal’. In any case, he had
taken a shower after sex to minimise the risk of contracting the disease. Zuma
was quickly reduced to a figure of ridicule. Cartoonists delighted in depicting
him with a showerhead fixed above his head.
In September 2006, Zuma won a respite from prosecution for corruption when
a judge terminated his trial on technical grounds, but left the way open for
prosecutors to continue their investigations. Rebounding with confidence, Zuma
threw himself into the task of winning the post of ANC president at a party
conference in Polokwane in December 2007, standing in opposition to Mbeki.
Though the constitution prevented Mbeki from standing for a third term as South
Africa’s president after his second term ended in 2009, he intended to perpetuate
his grip on power by winning a third term as ANC president and keeping control
from there.
A raucous party conference gave Zuma a two-thirds majority, ensuring that he
would become the party’s candidate for the presidency in the general election
due in 2009. Many delegates voted for Zuma simply to get rid of Mbeki. But
Zuma’s ordeal was not yet over. Two weeks after his election as ANC president,
prosecutors charged him with sixteen offences, including racketeering,
corruption, money laundering and fraud.
His trial provided a further twist. In a two-hour indictment of Mbeki’s
government in September 2008, a Durban High Court judge, Chris Nicolson,
effectively accepted that Zuma had been the target of a political conspiracy.
Mbeki and his ministers, said the judge, had colluded with national prosecutors
to lay charges against Zuma as part of a ‘titanic political struggle’, in violation of
the constitution. He declared the charges ‘invalid and set aside’, but emphasised
that his decision to throw out the case was not a reflection of Zuma’s guilt or

innocence.
Zuma’s revenge came swiftly. One week later, the ANC forced Mbeki to
resign and replaced him with a caretaker president for the interim before the
2009 general election. But Mbeki was not yet finished. He challenged
Nicolson’s judgement in the courts, arguing that it was improper for the judge to
have made such ‘vexatious, scandalous and prejudicial’ findings about Mbeki’s
role in the affair. In January 2009, the Supreme Court of Appeal ruled that
Nicolson had indeed ‘overstepped’ the limits of his authority by suggesting that
there had been political meddling in Zuma’s prosecution.
Finally, in April 2009, just two weeks before the election, the National
Prosecuting Authority dropped all charges against Zuma, admitting new
evidence of serious flaws in the prosecution. Intercepted phone calls between
senior officials showed that they had conspired over the timing of charges
against Zuma so as to damage his campaign for the presidency of the ANC. The
legal process had thus been ‘tainted’. Nevertheless, said the NPA, withdrawing
the charges against Zuma did not amount to an acquittal; Zuma was still not off
the hook.
In the run-up to the election, the ANC was split asunder. Mbeki loyalists left
to set up a new party, Congress of the People. Its leader, Mosiuoa Lekota, a
former defence minister, argued that the ANC had destroyed the ‘rainbownation’ ideal for which Mandela had strived. Zuma, he said, was not fit to be
president.
In the event, the ANC won with nearly two-thirds of the vote. But it was a
victory that inspired as much a sense of foreboding as of celebration.

Mandela avoided taking sides with either of the factions. But ever loyal to the
ANC, as the election approached, he made a rare appearance at a rally to give his
public backing to Zuma. Yet the ANC had become a sorry spectacle. It was now
dominated by a corrupt elite bent on self-enrichment, on making fortunes by
virtue of political connections. The ANC’s national executive committee, elected
in December 2007, included twenty-eight members with interests in sixty-nine
companies worth billions of rands; several more had spouses with vast
empowerment empires. More than a quarter of its seventy-seven members had
criminal convictions or were under criminal investigation. Among them was

Winnie Madikizela-Mandela, who gained first place, winning more votes than
any other candidate.
ANC leaders treated the public sector, in effect, as a spoils system. They set
up a secret network of front companies, called the Chancellor House Group, to
acquire state contracts in order to channel funds back to the party. By 2007, the
party’s investments had risen to 1.75 billion rands, much of it funded through
such practices. The objective was to ensure that the ANC elite had the means to
entrench themselves in power forever or, as Jacob Zuma put it memorably, ‘until
Jesus comes back’.
The ANC administration was riddled not just with corruption but also with
rank incompetence. Because of a failure by government ministers to plan ahead,
South Africa was hit by an energy crisis in 2008 that caused widespread
economic disruption. The impact was long term. The state power corporation,
Eskom, was obliged to warn foreign companies against investment in new
power-intensive projects until at least 2013. South Africa’s place in the global
economy began to slip badly. Advances that the government made in providing
housing, piped water and electricity to poor communities were soon
overshadowed by failing education, health and other public services. At every
level, there was an acute shortage of skills, much of it aggravated by Mbeki’s
drive to dispense with white expertise. Street protests against deteriorating
public services became increasingly common.
All this was a far cry from the heady optimism of Mandela’s rainbow nation.
The sense of common citizenship and national pride that Mandela had worked so
hard to engender had long since been eroded. Looking back, South Africans
viewed the Mandela era as a golden age of hope and harmony. They missed his
radiant smile, his self-deprecating humour, his benign presence, indeed the touch
of magic he brought to everyday life. Mandela, however, preferred a simple
verdict on his own career: ‘I was not a messiah, but an ordinary man who had
become a leader because of extraordinary circumstances’.

NOTES ON SOURCES
The published work on Mandela is extensive. His autobiography, Long Walk to
Freedom, published in 1994, provides a wealth of material. Several collections
of his articles and speeches have been produced. The first collection, No Easy
Walk to Freedom, which appeared in 1965, contains an introduction written by
Oliver Tambo and many of the articles Mandela wrote for Michael Harmel’s
journal, Liberation, during the 1950s. A second collection, The Struggle Is My
Life, was published in 1978 to mark his sixtieth birthday. A documentary survey
of the struggle against apartheid from 1948 to 1990, Mandela, Tambo and the
African National Congress, edited by Sheridan Johns and R. Hunt Davis Jr. and
published in 1991, covers the same ground with much additional material. All
three collections include extracts from Mandela’s testimony in the treason trial
and his court statements in 1962 and 1964. A fourth collection, Nelson Mandela
Speaks, published in 1993, includes speeches and statements he made between
1990 and 1993. Further documentary material on Mandela is contained in a fivevolume work on African politics compiled by Thomas Karis, Gwendolen Carter
and Gail M. Gerhart, From Protest to Challenge (1972-1997). Records of the
treason trial and the Rivonia trial are held by the William Cullen Library at the
University of the Witwatersrand. In the years after his release from prison in
1990, Mandela gave scores of interviews and press conferences, which are
located in various newspaper archives.
The first of Mandela’s biographers was Mary Benson, a friend of Mandela’s
from the 1950s who interviewed him while he was underground in the early
1960s; her biography originally appeared in 1986 and was updated and
republished in 1994. A biography by Fatima Meer, another friend, was first
published in 1988 and includes a collection of letters and interviews with
members of Mandela’s family. Anthony Sampson, also a friend of Mandela’s
from the 1950s, produced an authorised biography in 1999.
Recent overviews of South Africa’s history include Leonard Thompson’s
masterly account, A History of South Africa (2001); William Beinart’s
Twentieth-Century South Africa (2001); the fifth edition of South Africa, by T.
R. H. Davenport and Christopher Saunders (2000); Frank Welsh’s History of
South Africa (2000); and Robert Ross’s Concise History (2008). Martin
Meredith deals with the making of South Africa in Diamonds, Gold and War

(2007)
The following chapter notes include references to some of the books which I
found to be of particular interest and value. A more complete list can be found in
the Select Bibliography.

Chapter 1
Mandela’s early years are recalled evocatively in his autobiography. The plight
of the Xhosa-speaking peoples of the Eastern Cape region in the nineteenth
century is described in J. B. Peires’s two works, The House of Phalo (1981) and
The Dead Will Arise (1989), an account of the Xhosa cattle-killing of 18561857. Makana’s fate is described by Thomas Pringle (1966 [1834]), Edward
Roux (1964) and J. B. Peires (1981). Maqoma’s life is covered by Timothy
Stapleton (1994). Paul Maylam (1986) provides a useful overview of African
societies. Missionary activity is covered by B. A. Pauw (1975), Andre Odendaal,
(1984), Paul Maylam (1986) and Michael Ashley (1974). Life at Fort Hare is
depicted by Alexander Kerr (1968) and by Z. K. Matthews (1981), who spent
twenty-four years on the staff there. Tambo’s early life is portrayed by Father
Trevor Huddleston (1956). Luli Callinicos’s biography of Tambo was published
in 2004. Matanzima’s account of his student days and his subsequent career is
included in Independence My Way (1976).

Chapter 2
Johannesburg’s early years are brought vividly to life in Charles van Onselen’s
(1982) two-volume work on the Witwatersrand. Nigel Mandy (1984) provides a
useful account of the city’s development. Alan Paton’s famous novel, Cry, the
Beloved Country, is based on his own experiences of life in Johannesburg in the
1940s. Walter and Albertina Sisulu’s lives are recorded affectionately by Elinor
Sisulu (2002). Mandela kept in touch with both Sidelsky and Bregman after his
release from prison in 1990. Radebe joined the Pan-Africanist Congress in the
1950s and went into exile after Sharpeville. According to Roux, he was used by
the police as an agent provocateur and a spy during the 1930s. A profile of
Ismail Meer appears in Anthony Sampson’s The Treason Cage (1958). Meer’s
own account, A Fortunate Man, was published in 2002.
The rise of African nationalism is covered extensively by Andre Odendaal
(1984), Peter Walshe (1970), Tom Lodge (1983), Edward Roux (1964), Mary
Benson (1963) and Thomas Karis, Gwendolen Carter and Gail M. Gerhart
(1972-1977). Sol T. Plaatje’s account of Native Life in South Africa was first
published in 1916. Alfred Stadler describes bus boycotts in Alexandra in his
seminar paper ‘A Long Way to Walk’ (1979) and squatter movements in
Johannesburg in his article ‘Birds in the Cornfield’ (1979). Another account of
the 1943 bus boycott is given by Miriam Basner (1993). Michael Scott gives his
version of the Tobruk episode in his autobiography, A Time to Speak (1958), but
makes no mention there of Mandela’s help. Gail Gerhart (1978) examines the
development of Africanist politics.

Chapter 3
Indian politics during Gandhi’s twenty-year stay in South Africa are covered by
Maureen Swan (1985). Michael Scott’s description of the Durban ‘Resistance
Camp’ comes from his autobiography (1958). Ahmed Kathrada was born in
1929 in Schweizer-Reineke in the western Transvaal, where his parents owned a
retail shop. As a young boy, he was sent to Johannesburg for his education. He
joined the Young Communist League at the age of twelve and the Communist
Party at the age of fourteen, participated in the passive resistance campaign and
distributed pamphlets in the mineworkers’ strike. He shared Flat 13 in Kholvad
House with Meer and Singh. Kathrada’s Memoirs was published in 2004.
Accounts of the Communist Party’s early activities are provided by Edward
Roux (1964), H. J. and R. E. Simons (1969) and Joshua N. Lazerson (1994). A
biography of Moses Kotane by Brian Bunting (1975), a prominent party official
and son of Sidney Bunting, one of the founding members of the party in South
Africa, adds further detail. Dan O’Meara (1975) analyses the impact of the
mineworkers’ strike. Another account of the strike, A Distant Clap of Thunder,
written by Rusty Bernstein, was published by the South African Communist
Party in 1986 to commemorate the strike’s fortieth anniversary. Simons and
Simons record that the public prosecutor involved in the sedition trial was Dr
Percy Yutar, later to gain notoriety in Mandela’s Rivonia trial. Yutar claimed the
strike was part of a plot by communist revolutionaries to overthrow the
government.
The activities of the Congress Youth League are covered by Peter Walshe
(1970), Tom Lodge (1983), Gail M. Gerhart (1978) and Thomas Karis,
Gwendolen Carter and Gail M. Gerhart (1972 -1977). Sisulu recalled that he had
two major disagreements with Mandela. One occurred over the ‘Votes for All’
issue, the other during their imprisonment on Robben Island over a strike issue.

Chapter 4
The rise of Afrikaner nationalism is dealt with by Heribert Adam and Hermann
Giliomee (1979), W. A. de Klerk (1975), Andre du Toit (1983), T. Dunbar
Moodie (1975), Leonard M. Thompson (2001) and F. A. van Jaarsveld (1961).
Thomas Pakenham’s (1979) account of the Anglo-Boer War deserves special
mention. Hermann Giliomee’s history of the Afrikaner people was published in
2003.
Joe Slovo’s (1995) autobiography provides a vivid account of his days as a
young communist activist in Johannesburg, his marriage to Ruth First and his
career as a radical lawyer. Ruth First gives glimpses of her early life in her
account of her imprisonment, One Hundred and Seventeen Days (1965). A
contemporary profile of First appears in Anthony Sampson’s The Treason Cage
(1958). Gillian Slovo writes memorably about her parents in Every Secret Thing
(1997). Fischer described his early life, his political commitment and his
underground work during his trial in 1966. For a full account of Fischer’s life,
see Martin Meredith’s Fischer’s Choice (2002). Mandela’s explanation about the
Defiance Campaign was given during the treason trial. Tom Lodge (1983) gives
a general account of the Defiance Campaign.

Chapter 5
Betty Shein’s recollection is recorded by Heidi Holland (1989). The records of
Mandela’s confrontation with Dormehl were kindly provided by George Bizos.
Evelyn Mandela was interviewed by Fred Bridgland in Cofimvaba in the
Transkei; his account appeared in the London Sunday Telegraph on 25 February
1990 (also used in Chapter 7). Profiles of Lilian Ngoyi are given in Anthony
Sampson’s The Treason Cage (1958), in Helen Joseph’s books (1963, 1966,
1986) and in Maggie Resha’s (1991) autobiography.
The anecdote about Dirker is taken from Joe Slovo’s autobiography,
published in 1995. James Kantor (1967), in his autobiography, said that Dirker
came to be ‘the most hated person on the entire staff ’. Luthuli’s career is charted
in his autobiography, Let My People Go (1982); by Mary Benson (1963); and by
Anthony Sampson (1958).
Life in Sophiatown in the 1940s and 1950s is covered by a host of authors,
including Bloke Modisane (1963), Michael Dingake (1987), Maggie Resha
(1991), Trevor Huddleston (1956), Anthony Sampson (1956), André Proctor
(1979), Tom Lodge (1983) and Edward Feit (1967, 1971). David Coplan (1985)
writes memorably about Sophiatown’s musical milieu. The jazz trumpeter Hugh
Masekela was given his first trumpet by Huddleston, who had received it as a
gift from Louis Armstrong. Mike Nicol (1991) takes a wider look at township
life.
Hendrik Verwoerd was born in 1901 in a small village near Amsterdam to
Dutch parents who immigrated to the Cape when he was two years old; his
family thus bore none of the scars of the Anglo-Boer War which afflicted so
much of the Afrikaner population. Alexander Hepple (1967) and Henry Kenney
(1980) have produced two useful biographies of Verwoerd. Aspects of Bantu
education are covered by Trevor Huddleston (1956), Albert Luthuli (1982), Z.
K. Matthews (1981), Tom Lodge (1983) and Anthony Sampson (1958).

Chapters 6, 8
Janet Robertson (1971) looks at the role of traditional liberals; Joshua N.
Lazerson (1994) concentrates on more radical whites. Helen Joseph was one of

the few prominent members of the Congress of Democrats who was not a
member of the Communist Party. Mandela’s explanation of his attitude towards
communists was given at the Rivonia trial.
Matthews’s proposal formed part of the charge of treason made by state
prosecutors. His references to ‘action’ and ‘going over into the offensive’ were
regarded as having subversive intent.
A useful guide to the treason trial is provided by Thomas Karis (1965). Other
valuable accounts include Lionel Forman and E. S. Sachs’s The South African
Treason Trial (1957), Helen Joseph’s If This Be Treason (1963), Hilda
Bernstein’s The World That Was Ours (1967) and Anthony Sampson’s The
Treason Cage (1958). Sampson’s account also provides a series of contemporary
profiles of the accused, but not one of Mandela. The Treason Trial Defence Fund
eventually developed into the International Defence and Aid Fund, with
headquarters in London, which provided funds to pay for the defence costs of
political activists like Mandela and to help support their families. Funds came
mainly from Britain and Scandinavia.

Chapter 7
The most comprehensive account of Winnie Mandela’s life is provided by
Emma Gilbey in The Lady, first published in 1993. Winnie’s autobiography,
Part of My Soul, first published in 1985, is based largely on a series of
interviews conducted by Anne Benjamin which provide a wealth of detail about
Winnie’s life with Mandela before and after his imprisonment. Nancy Harrison’s
authorised biography, Winnie Mandela: Mother of a Nation, also published in
1985, provides additional material. Robert Matji’s recollection of the Mandela
household is recorded by Heidi Holland (1989).
Matanzima’s career is covered by Patrick Laurence (1976), Newell M. Stultz
(1979), Roger Southall (1982) and Barry Streek and Richard Wicksteed (1981).
Several attempts were made to assassinate Matanzima. Winnie’s father,
Columbus Madikizela, was also the target of assassination. Winnie recalled an
incident at home in Orlando when a Pondo man employed by her father as a bus
driver, who had arrived with other Pondos to talk to Mandela, walked through to
the kitchen, where she was preparing food, and remarked casually how lucky her
father had been to escape. ‘We shall get him yet’, he said. ‘He won’t be so lucky
next time’.
Lewis Nkosi’s essay on the 1950s appears in Home and Exile (1983). The
assault on Luthuli is described by Hannah Stanton in Go Well, Stay Well (1961).

Chapter 8
Benjamin Pogrund (1990) writes sympathetically about Sobukwe, whom he
came to know as a friend. Bishop Ambrose Reeves (1960) gives an independent
account of the Sharpeville shooting. Tom Lodge (1983) provides a wider view of
the crisis. Tambo’s journey into exile was organised with the help of Ronald
Segal.

Chapter 9
Joe Slovo’s essay ‘South Africa: No Middle Road’ (1976) served as a standard
guide for all would-be revolutionaries for many years. He adds further detail of
the move towards violence in his autobiography (1995). His account of his
attempt to blow up the Johannesburg Drill Hall was published in a special
edition of a magazine called Dawn, produced by the ANC in 1986 to mark the
twenty-fifth anniversary of the formation of Umkhonto we Sizwe. Ben Turok
published a critical analysis of the armed struggle in 1974. Howard Barrell
(1990) gives a useful overview of MK from its formation. Mary Benson met
Mandela on several occasions while he was underground, as her autobiography
(1996) records. Details of Mandela’s journey abroad in 1962 emerged during the
Rivonia trial. Mary Benson described his London visit in her autobiography
(1996).

Chapter 10
Millard Shirley retired from the CIA in 1973. According to Gerard Ludi, a police
agent who successfully infiltrated the Communist Party and knew him well,
Shirley ‘had friends in high and low places on both sides of the fence’, including
a well-informed Indian communist based in Durban. In 1986, the National
Reporter, a left-wing monitor of US covert activity, identified Don Rickard as
the American diplomat who had boasted about his role in Mandela’s arrest (10,
no. 2 [August-Winter 1986]). In 1990, Joseph Albright reported on Eckel’s
remarks just as Mandela was making his first visit to the United States.
Several personal accounts describe the perilous existence of the conspirators.
As well as producing The World That Was Ours (1967), Hilda Bernstein wrote a
novel about the early 1960s entitled Death Is Part of the Process (1986). Other
valuable accounts include those by Helen Joseph and AnnMarie Wolpe (1994).
Gerard Ludi (1969) adds further detail. The government minister speaking on the
need for censorship, Jan de Klerk, was F. W. de Klerk’s father.
Poqo’s activities are covered by Tom Lodge (1983). Whereas Umkhonto
operated as an elite group, Poqo took on the form of a mass movement, reaching
a peak of influence in 1963. Swanepoel is portrayed in accounts by Joel Carlson
(1973), James Kantor (1967) and Ruth First (1965), among others. Carlson
wrote, ‘I saw the essence of the man in his eyes: they were cold, oily and
frightening’. Winnie Mandela was later interrogated by Swanepoel.

Chapter 11
The full text of Operation Mayibuye and Sisulu’s radio broadcast are reproduced
in Thomas Karis, Gwendolen Carter and Gail M. Gerhart, vol. 3. AnnMarie
Wolpe (1994) describes a dinner with the Slovos at a restaurant near Zoo Lake
shortly before Joe Slovo’s departure. Slovo discusses Operation Mayibuye in
‘South Africa: No Middle Road’ (1976) and in his autobiography (1995). Govan
Mbeki, in an interview with the author in 1995, still insisted that the plan had
been given full approval. Michael Dingake (1987) describes the circumstances
surrounding the arrests of Hlapane, Mthembu and Brian Somana.

Chapter 12
Several accounts of the Rivonia trial have been produced. They include H. H. W.
de Villiers’s Rivonia (1964) and Lauritz Strydom’s Rivonia Unmasked (1964).
Joel Joffe’s valuable account was written in 1965 but not published until 1995.
Bruno Mtolo gave his version in Umkonto we Sizwe (1966). James Kantor writes
of his experiences in A Healthy Grave (1967). Other memorable accounts are
provided by AnnMarie Wolpe’s The Long Way Home (1994) and Hilda
Bernstein’s The World That Was Ours (1967). Hlapane, who had been recruited
to the Communist Party by Slovo in 1955, was assassinated by an Umkhonto
unit in 1982. The activities of the African Resistance Movement are covered by
Miles Brokensha and Robert Knowles in The Fourth of July Raids (1965). Hugh
Lewin, sentenced to seven years’ imprisonment for his part in the African
Resistance Movement, writes of his experiences in Bandiet (1974). Mary
Benson, in her autobiography (1996), describes her encounters with Bram
Fischer during his underground existence. Lewin records how Fischer, a fellow
inmate in Pretoria, was singled out for persecution by prison warders. An
Afrikaans newspaper commented on Fischer, ‘Die appel het ver van die boom
geval’ (The apple has fallen far from the tree).

Chapters 13, 14
Robben Island’s history is dealt with best by Nigel Penn and Harriet Deacon in
The Island (1992), a series of essays compiled by Deacon. Fran Lisa Buntman
(2003) writes about the life of political prisoners there. Barbara Hutton’s Robben
Island (1994) includes maps, diagrams and photographs. Neville Alexander’s
Robben Island Prison Dossier, 1964-1974 (1994) and his lecture ‘Robben
Island’ (1992) provide much valuable material. Personal accounts by Indres
Naidoo (1982) and Michael Dingake (1987) deserve special mention. Jurgen
Schadeberg’s Voices from Robben Island (1994) is based on a series of
interviews with former prisoners. Ebrahim Ismail Ebrahim was interviewed at
length about Robben Island by Heidi Holland (1989). Moses Dlamini, a PAC
prisoner, spent two years on Robben Island, arriving there in December 1963.
Benjamin Pogrund (1990) writes about Sobukwe’s time on Robben Island. The

visitor to whom Sobukwe complained about forgetting how to speak was Helen
Suzman. Suzman writes about her encounters with Mandela and So - bukwe in
prison in In No Uncertain Terms (1993). James Gregory writes about his
growing friendship with Mandela in Goodbye Bafana (1995).
In his Memoirs (2004), Ahmed Kathrada recalls Mandela’s formidable selfdiscipline, even under the greatest stress. ‘Madiba has a well-deserved reputation
for being level-headed, cool and unflappable. It is virtually impossible to gauge
his inner emotions; by and large he remains inscrutable. He felt deep hurt and
sorrow at the deaths of his mother and his son while he was in prison, and must
have been greatly affected and angered by the harassment that his family
experienced at the hands of the police, but he never allowed his inner turmoil to
overshadow his responsibilities towards his fellow prisoners’. Kathrada adds,
‘Mandela is also slow to anger, but on the rare occasions I have witnessed his
cold wrath, it verged on the uncontrollable and dangerous’.
Winnie Mandela’s account of her life during Mandela’s imprisonment is told
in Part of My Soul (1985). Her book also includes letters from Mandela and
interviews conducted by Anne Benjamin with Zindzi and Zenani. Fatima Meer’s
(1988) biography of Mandela includes many of Mandela’s letters from prison to
family and friends. Emma Gilbey (1993) deals with Winnie’s involvement with
Somana and Mahanyele and her subsequent trial and imprisonment. Nancy
Harrison (1986) provides additional material on Somana, Katzellenbogen and
other suspect characters whom Winnie befriended. Joel Carlson gives a graphic
account of his battles with security police in No Neutral Ground (1973).

Chapter 15
The impact of forced removals is covered by Cosmas Desmond (1971), Laurine
Platzky and Cherryl Walker (1985) and the Surplus People Project (1983). In all,
more than 3 million people are estimated to have been uprooted from their
homes during the apartheid era. The rise of black consciousness is dealt with by
Gail M. Gerhart (1978), Millard Arnold (1978), Steve Biko (1986) and Donald
Woods (1978). The Soweto revolt is covered by John Kane-Berman (1978),
Alan Brooks and Jeremy Brickhill (1980) and Baruch Hirson (1979). Details of
Biko’s brutal interrogation by security police came during hearings of the Truth
and Reconciliation Commission; see Martin Meredith’s Coming to Terms
(1999).
Mac Maharaj gave an extended interview about Robben Island after his
release in 1976, which is reproduced in Mandela, The Struggle Is My Life
(1978), and in Sheridan Johns and R. Hunt Davis Jr. (1991), who also include
accounts by Eddie Daniels (released in 1979), Sisulu, Kathrada and Motsoaledi
(released in 1989). Padraig O’Malley’s skilful biography of Mac Maharaj was
published in 2007.
Anne Benjamin describes her visits to Brandfort to interview Winnie in Part
of My Soul (1985). Emma Gilbey recounts the tensions Winnie aroused there in
The Lady (1993).

Chapters 16, 17, 19
Accounts of the visits by Healey and MacNicoll to Mandela in prison are
reproduced in Sheridan Johns and R. Hunt Davis Jr. (1991). Buthelezi’s early
career is dealt with by Gerhard Mare and Georgina Hamilton (1987) and
subsequently by Ben Temkin (2003). The full texts of Mandela’s reply to
Botha’s offer of freedom and his 1989 memorandum to Botha are reproduced in
Johns and Davis (1991). The accounts of the visits to Mandela by Nicholas
Bethell and Samuel Dash are also reproduced there. The Commonwealth Group
of Eminent Persons published an account of its endeavours in Mission to South
Africa (1986). The series of secret negotiations between Mandela and the
government and Mandela’s secret excursions from Pollsmoor are described in

Allister Sparks’s Tomorrow Is Another Country (1994), in Patti Waldmeir’s
Anatomy of a Miracle (1997) and in James Gregory’s Goodbye Bafana (1995).

Chapters 18, 22
The most detailed account of Mandela United and its aftermath is provided by
Emma Gilbey in The Lady (1993). Much of the evidence comes from the trials at
the Rand Supreme Court of Jerry Richardson in May 1990 (case no. 184189) and
Winnie Mandela in April 1991 (case no. 167/90). Investigations by John Carlin
published in the Independent, London, and by David Beresford published in the
Guardian, London, and the Weekly Mail, Johannesburg, deserve special
mention. Kenny Kgase’s account of Stompie Moeketsi’s fate was published in
the Sunday Telegraph , London, on 22 July 1990.

Chapters 20-26
In a foreword he wrote to Padraig O’Malley’s (2007) biography of Mac
Maharaj, Mandela remarked: ‘I have heard many comrades say that the period
they spent on Robben Island was the best time of their lives. And when I think
about it, I know why. In many respects, it was more like a close-knit family and
a university than a prison’. Ahmed Kathrada made the same point in a letter to
friends written after he had spent twenty-five years in prison and published in his
Memoirs (2004). While knowing full well of the hardships of prison life, he said,
he wanted to give them a fuller picture of what it was like. ‘It is a picture of
great warmth, fellowship, friendship, humour and laughter; of strong
convictions, of a generosity of spirit, of compassion, solidarity and care. It is a
picture of continuous learning, of getting to know and live with your fellowbeings, their strengths as well as their idiosyncrasies; but more important, where
one comes to know oneself, one’s weaknesses, inadequacies and one’s
potentials. Unbelievably, it is a very positive, confident, determined-yes, even a
happy community’.
Willem de Klerk’s biography of his brother, F. W. de Klerk (1991), provides
intriguing insights into his character. F. W. de Klerk’s own account was
published in 1998. Other valuable accounts of the de Klerk era and the tortuous
negotiations between de Klerk and Mandela are given by Allister Sparks in

Tomorrow Is Another Country (1994), by Patti Waldmeir in Anatomy of a
Miracle (1997) and by David Ottaway in Chained Together (1993). Ronnie
Kasrils gives his version of the Bisho episode in ‘Armed and Dangerous’ (1993).
Richard Stengel’s account of working with Mandela on his autobiography was
published in The Spectator, London, on 19 November 1994. Stengal’s memoir of
the time, Mandela’s Way, was published in 2010. Zindzi Mandela gave a frank
interview about her family in the March 1995 issue of Thandi, Johannesburg.

Chapter 27
The 1994 election is examined in detail by R. W. Johnson and Lawrence
Schlemmer (1996). Other accounts include those by Martin Meredith (1994) and
by Andrew Reynolds (1994).

Chapter 28-33
Several accounts of the post-1994 era deserve mention. John Carlin’s Playing
the Enemy (2008) revolves around Mandela’s role in the Rugby World Cup of
1995. Paul Holden (2008) unravels the complexities of the arms deal. Andrew
Feinstein (2007) provides an invaluable glimpse of the inner workings of the
ANC. Antjie Krog (1998) writes with poetic power about the work of the Truth
and Reconciliation Commission. Details of Winnie Mandela’s appearances
before the TRC can be found in Martin Meredith’s Coming to Terms (1999).
Mbeki’s career is examined in detail in Mark Gevisser’s biography (2007). Two
books dealing with Aids in South Africa stand out: Edwin Cameron’s personal
testimony, Witness to AIDS (2005), and Jonny Steinberg’s Sizwe’s Test, a vivid
account of the impact of the epidemic on village life in a small rural community.
Alec Russell (2009) provides a lively journalist’s account of the Mandela-Mbeki
years.

SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY
Abrahams, Peter. Return to Egoli. Faber, London, 1953.
Adam, Heribert, and Hermann Giliomee. Ethnic Power Mobilized: Can South
Africa Change? Yale University Press, New Haven, 1979.
Adam, Heribert, Frederik van Zyl Slabbert and Kogila Moodley. Comrades in
Business: Post-Liberation Politics in South Africa. Tafelberg, Cape Town, 1997.
Alexander, Neville. ‘Robben Island: A Site of Struggle’. In Neville Alexander,
Nigel Penn and Harriet Deacon (eds.), The Politics of Rock and Sand. University
of Cape Town Press, Cape Town, 1992.
———. Robben Island Prison Dossier, 1964-1974. University of Cape Town
Press, Cape Town, 1994.
Alexander, Peter. Alan Paton. Oxford University Press, Cape Town, 1994.
Allen, John. Rabble Rouser for Peace: The Authorized Biography of Desmond
Tutu. The Free Press, London, 2006.
Altbeker, Antony. A Country at War with Itself: South Africa’s Crisis of Crime.
Jonathan Ball, Johannesburg, 2007.
Arnold, Millard (ed.). The Testimony of Steve Biko. Maurice Temple Smith,
London, 1978.
Ashley, Michael. ‘African Education and Society in the Nineteenth-Century
Eastern Cape’. In C. Saunders and R. Derricourt (eds.), Beyond the Cape
Frontier: Studies in the History of Transkei and Ciskei. Longman, London,
1974.
Barber, James. Mandela’s World. Currey, Oxford, 2004.
Barrell, Howard. Conscripts to Their Age: ANC Operational Strategy, 19761986. Ph.D. diss., Oxford University, 1993.
———. MK: The ANC’s Armed Struggle. Penguin, Harmondsworth, 1990.
Basner, Miriam. Am I an African? The Political Memoirs of H. M. Basner.
Witwatersrand University Press, Johannesburg, 1993.

Beinart, William. Twentieth-Century South Africa. Oxford University Press,
Oxford, 2001.
Benson, Mary. The African Patriots: The Story of the African National Congress
of South Africa. Faber, London, 1963. Republished as South Africa: The
Struggle for a Birthright. Penguin, Harmondsworth, 1966.
———. Chief Albert Luthuli of South Africa. Oxford University Press, Oxford,
1963.
———. A Far Cry: The Making of a South African. Ravan Press, Johannesburg,
1996.
———. Nelson Mandela:
Harmondsworth, 1994.

The

Man

and

the

Movement.

Penguin,

Bernstein, Hilda. Death Is Part of the Process. Grafton, London, 1986.
———. The Rift: The Exile Experience of South Africans. Cape, London, 1994.
———. The World That Was Ours. Heinemann, London, 1967.
Bernstein, Rusty. Memory Against Forgetting; Memoirs from a Life in South
African Politics, 1938-1964. Viking, London, 1999.
Bethell, Nicholas. ‘An Interview with Nelson Mandela’. In Mark A. Uhlig (ed.),
Apartheid in Crisis. Penguin, Harmondsworth, 1986.
Bezdrob, Anné Mariè du Preez. Winnie Mandela: A Life. Zebra, Cape Town,
2008.
Biko, Steve. I Write What I Like. Bowerdean Press, London, 1986.
Bonner, Philip, and Lauren Segal. Soweto: A History. Maskew Miller Longman,
Cape Town, 1998.
Boraine, Alex. A Country Unmasked: South Africa’s Truth and Reconciliation
Commission. Oxford University Press, Cape Town, 2000.
Bozzoli, Belinda (ed.). Labour, Townships and Protest. Ravan Press,
Johannesburg, 1979.
Bridgland, Fred. Katiza’s Journey: Beneath the Surface of South Africa’s Shame.
Sidgwick and Jackson, London, 1997.
Brokensha, Miles, and Robert Knowles. The Fourth of July Raids. Simondium,

Cape Town, 1965.
Brooks, Alan, and Jeremy Brickhill. Whirlwind Before the Storm. International
Defence and Aid Fund for Southern Africa, London, 1980.
Bundy, Colin. The Rise and Fall of the South African Peasantry. University of
California Press, Berkeley, 1979.
Bunting, Brian. Moses Kotane: South African Revolutionary. Inkululeko
Publications, London, 1975.
Buntman, Fran Lisa. Robben Island and Prisoner Resistance to Apartheid.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2003.
Butler, Anthony. Cyril Ramaphosa. Jacana, Johannesburg, 2008.
Calland, Richard. Anatomy of South Africa: Who Holds the Power? Zebra Press,
Cape Town, 2006.
Callinicos, Luli. Oliver Tambo: Beyond the Engeli Mountains. David Phillips,
Cape Town, 2004.
Cameron, Edwin. Witness to AIDS. Tafelberg, Cape Town, 2005.
Carlin, John. Playing the Enemy: Nelson Mandela and the Game That Made a
Nation. Atlantic Books, London, 2008.
Carlson, Joel. No Neutral Ground. Davis-Poynter, London, 1973.
Carter, Gwendolen M., Thomas Karis and Newell M. Stultz. South Africa’s
Transkei: The Politics of Domestic Colonialism. Northwestern University Press,
Evanston, 1967.
Clingman, Stephen. Bram Fischer. David Philip, Cape Town, 1998.
Commonwealth Group of Eminent Persons. Mission to South Africa. Penguin,
Harmondsworth, 1986.
Coplan, David. ‘The African Performer and the Johannesburg Entertainment
Industry: The Struggle for African Culture on the Wit - watersrand’. In Belinda
Bozzoli (ed.), Labour, Townships and Protest. Ravan Press, Johannesburg, 1979.
———. In Township Tonight: South Africa’s Black City Music and Theatre.
Ravan Press, Johannesburg, 1985.
Crawford-Browne, Terry. Eye on the Money. Umuzi, Cape Town, 2007.

Crocker, Chester. High Noon in Southern Africa: Making Peace in a Rough
Neighbourhood. Jonathan Ball, Johannesburg, 1992.
Daniels, Eddie. There and Back: Robben Island, 1964-1979. Mayibuye Books,
Cape Town, 2002.
Davenport, T. R. H., and Christopher Saunders. South Africa: A Modern History,
5th ed. Macmillan, London, 2000.
Davis, Stephen M. Apartheid’s Rebels: Inside South Africa’s Hidden War. Yale
University Press, New Haven, 1987.
Deacon, Harriet (ed.). The Island: A History of Robben Island, 1488-1990.
David Philip, Cape Town, 1992.
de Kiewiet, C. W. A History of South Africa: Social and Economic. Oxford
University Press, Oxford, 1941.
de Klerk, F. W. The Last Trek—a New Beginning: The Autobiography.
Macmillan, London, 1998.
de Klerk, W. A. The Puritans in Africa: The Story of Afrikanerdom. Rex
Collings, London, 1975.
de Klerk, Willem. F. W. de Klerk: The Man in His Time. Jonathan Ball,
Johannesburg, 1991.
de Villiers, Dirk, and Johanna de Villiers. PW. Tafelberg, Cape Town, 1984.
de Villiers, H. H. W. Rivonia: Operation Mayibuye. Afrikaanse Pers
Boekhandel, Johannesburg, 1964.
Desmond, Cosmas. The Discarded People: An Account of African Resettlement
in South Africa. Penguin, Harmondsworth, 1971.
Dingake, Michael. My Fight Against Apartheid. Kliptown Books, London, 1987.
d’Oliveira, John. Vorster: The Man. Stanton, Johannesburg, 1977.
Dlamini, Moses. Robben Island: Hell-Hole. Spokesman, Nottingham, 1984.
Driver, C. J. Patrick Duncan: South African and Pan-African. Heinemann,
London, 1980.
du Toit, Andre. ‘No Chosen People: The Myth of the Calvinist Origins of
Afrikaner Nationalism and Racial Ideology’. American Historical Review 88

(October 1983).
Dubow, Saul. The African National Congress. Jonathan Ball, Johannesburg,
2000.
Elphick, Richard, and Hermann Giliomee (eds.). The Shaping of South African
Society, 1652-1820. Longman, London, 1979.
Feinstein, Andrew. After the Party: A Personal and Political Journey Inside the
ANC. Jonathan Ball, Johannesburg, 2007.
Feit, Edward. African Opposition in South Africa: The Failure of Passive
Resistance. Hoover Institution, Palo Alto, 1967.
———. Urban Revolt in South Africa, 1960-1964. Northwestern University
Press, Evanston, 1971.
First, Ruth. One Hundred and Seventeen Days: An Account of Confinement and
Interrogation Under the South African Ninety-Day Detention Law. Penguin,
Harmondsworth, 1965.
Forman, Lionel, and E. S. Sachs. The South African Treason Trial. Calder,
London, 1957.
Frankel, Glenn. Rivonia’s Children. Weidenfeld and Nicolson, London, 1999.
Gerhart, Gail M. Black Power in South Africa: The Evolution of an Ideology.
University of California Press, Berkeley, 1978.
Gevisser, Mark. Portraits of Power: Profiles in a Changing South Africa. David
Philip, Cape Town, 1996.
———. Thabo Mbeki: The Dream Deferred. Jonathan Ball, Johannesburg, 2007.
Gilbey, Emma. The Lady: The Life and Times of Winnie Mandela. Cape,
London, 1993.
Giliomee, Hermann. The Afrikaners: Biography of a People. Tafelberg, Cape
Town, 2003.
Gordin, Jeremy. Zuma: A Biography. Jonathan Ball, Johannesburg, 2008.
Gregory, James. Goodbye Bafana: Nelson Mandela, My Prisoner, My Friend.
Headline, London, 1995.
Gumede, William Mervin. Thabo Mbeki and the Battle for the Soul of the ANC.

Zebra Press, Cape Town, 2005.
Hadland, Adrian, and Jovial Rantao. The Life and Times of Thabo Mbeki. Zebra
Press, Johannesburg, 1999.
Harington, A. L. Sir Harry Smith: Bungling Hero. Tafelberg, Cape Town, 1980.
Harrison, Nancy. Winnie Mandela: Mother of a Nation. Grafton, London, 1985.
Harvey, Robert. The Fall of Apartheid: The Inside Story from Smuts to Mbeki.
Palgrave Macmillan, Basingstoke, 2003.
Hepple, Alexander. Verwoerd. Penguin, Harmondsworth, 1967.
Hirson, Baruch. Revolutions in My Life. Witwatersrand University Press,
Johannesburg, 1995.
———. Year of Fire, Year of Ash: The Soweto Revolt, Roots of a Revolution?
Zed Press, London, 1979.
Holden, Paul. The Arms Deal in Your Pocket. Jonathan Ball, Johannesburg,
2008.
Holland, Heidi. The Struggle: A History of the African National Congress.
Gratton, London,1989.
Huddleston, Father Trevor, C. R. Naught for Your Comfort. Collins, London,
1956.
Hutchinson, Alfred. Road to Ghana. Gollancz, London, 1960.
Hutton, Barbara. Robben Island: Symbol of Resistance. Mayibuye Books,
Bellville, 1994.
Jacobs, Sean, and Richard Calland (eds.). Thabo Mbeki’s World. University of
Natal Press, Scottsville, 2002.
Joffe, Joel. The Rivonia Story. Mayibuye Books, Bellville, 1995.
Johns, Sheridan, and R. Hunt Davis Jr. (eds.). Mandela, Tambo and the African
National Congress: The Struggle Against Apartheid, 1948- 1990—a
Documentary Survey. Oxford University Press, New York, 1991.
Johnson, R. W. South Africa’s Brave New World; The Beloved Country Since
the End of Apartheid. Allen Lane, London, 2009.
Johnson, R. W., and Lawrence Schlemmer. Launching Democracy in South

Africa: The First Open Election, April 1994. Yale University Press, New Haven,
1996.
Johnson, Shaun. Strange Days Indeed. Bantam, Johannesburg, 1993.
Joseph, Helen. If This Be Treason. Deutsch, London, 1963.
———. Side by Side: The Autobiography of Helen Joseph. Zed Books, London,
1986.
———. Tomorrow’s Sun. Hutchinson, London, 1966.
Kane-Berman, John. Soweto: Black Revolt, White Reaction. Ravan Press,
Johannesburg, 1978.
Kantor, James. A Healthy Grave. Hamish Hamilton, London, 1967.
Karis, Thomas. The Treason Trial in South Africa. Hoover Institution
Bibliographical Series 23, Stanford University, Palo Alto, 1965.
Karis, Thomas, Gwendolen Carter, and Gail M. Gerhart (eds.). From Protest to
Challenge: A Documentary History of African Politics in South Africa, 5 vols.
Hoover Institution Press, Palo Alto, 1972-1977; Unisa Press, Pretoria, 1997.
Kasrils, Ronnie. ‘Armed and Dangerous’: My Undercover Struggle Against
Apartheid. Heinemann, Oxford, 1993.
Kathrada, Ahmed. Letters from Robben Island. Mayibuye Books, Cape Town,
1999.
———. Memoirs. Zebra Press, Cape Town, 2004.
Kauffman, Kyle D., and David L. Lindauer (eds.). AIDS and South Africa: The
Social Expression of a Pandemic. Palgrave Macmillan, Basingstoke, 2004.
Keane, Fergal. The Bondage of Fear: A Journey Through the Last White Empire.
Viking, London, 1994.
Kenney, Henry. Architect of Apartheid: H. F. Verwoerd, an Appraisal. Jonathan
Ball, Johannesburg, 1980.
Kerr, Alexander. Fort Hare, 1915-1948: The Evolution of an African College .
C. Hurst, London, 1968.
Koch, Eddie. ‘Without Visible Means of Subsistence: Slumyard Culture in
Johannesburg, 1918-1940’. In Belinda Bozzoli (ed.), Town and Countryside in

the Transvaal. Ravan Press, Johannesburg, 1983.
Krog, Antjie. Country of My Skull. Random House, Johannesburg, 1998.
Kuper, Leo. Passive Resistance in South Africa. Cape, London, 1956.
Kuzwayo, Ellen. Call Me Woman. Women’s Press, London, 1985.
Laurence, Patrick. The Transkei: South Africa’s Politics of Partition. Ravan
Press, Johannesburg, 1976.
Lazerson, Joshua N. Against the Tide: Whites in the Struggle Against Apartheid.
Mayibuye Books, Bellville, 1994.
Lelyveld, Joseph. Move Your Shadow: South Africa, Black and White. Michael
Joseph, London, 1986.
Leon, Tony. On the Contrary. Jonathan Ball, Johannesburg, 2008.
Lerumo, A. [Michael Harmel]. Fifty Fighting Years: The Communist Party of
South Africa, 1921-1971. Inkululeko Publications, London, 1971.
Lewin, Hugh. Bandiet: Seven Years in a South African Prison. Barrie and
Jenkins, London, 1974.
Lipton, Merle. Capitalism and Apartheid: South Africa, 1910-1984. Gower,
Maurice Temple Smith, Aldershot, 1985.
Lodge, Tom. Black Politics in South Africa Since 1945. Longman, London,
1983.
———. Mandela: A Critical Life. Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2006.
———. Politics in South Africa: From Mandela to Mbeki. David Philip, Cape
Town, 2002.
Ludi, Gerard. Operation Q-018. Nasionale Boekhandel, Cape Town, 1969.
Luthuli, Albert. Let My People Go. Fount, London, 1982.
Macmillan, Harold. Pointing the Way, 1959-61. Macmillan, London, 1972.
Maharaj, Mac (ed.). Reflections in Prison. Zebra Press, Cape Town, 2001.
Mandela, Nelson. Long Walk to Freedom. Little, Brown, London, 1994.
———. Nelson Mandela Speaks: Forging a Democratic, Nonracial South
Africa. Pathfinder, New York, 1993.

———. No Easy Walk to Freedom. Heinemann, London, 1965.
______. The Struggle Is My Life, International Defence and Aid Fund for
Southern Africa, London, 1978
Mandela, Winnie. Part of My Soul. Penguin, Harmondsworth, 1985.
Mandy, Nigel. A City Divided: Johannesburg and Soweto. Macmillan, London,
1984.
Mangcu, Xolela. To the Brink: The State of Democracy in South Africa.
University of KwaZulu-Natal Press, Scottsville, 2008.
Mare, Gerhard, and Georgina Hamilton. An Appetite for Power: Buthelezi’s
Inkatha and the Politics of Legal Resistance. Ravan Press, Johannesburg, 1987.
Marks, Shula, and Stanley Trapido (eds.). Industrialization and Social Change in
South Africa: African Class Formation, Culture and Consciousness, 1870-1930.
Longman, London, 1982.
Matanzima, Kaizer D. Independence My Way. Foreign Affairs Association,
Pretoria, 1976.
Matthews, Z. K. Freedom for My People. Rex Collings, London, 1981.
Maylam, Paul. A History of the African People of South Africa. David Philip,
Cape Town, 1986.
Mbeki, Govan. Learning from Robben Island: The Prison Writings of Govan
Mbeki. David Philip, Cape Town, 1991.
———. South Africa: The Peasant’s Revolt. Penguin, Harmondsworth, 1964.
———. The Struggle for Liberation in South Africa. David Philip, Cape Town,
1992.
Meer, Fatima. Higher Than Hope: The Authorized Biography of Nelson
Mandela. Penguin, Harmondsworth, 1988.
Meer, Ismail. A Fortunate Man. Zebra Press, Cape Town, 2002.
Meredith, Martin. Coming to Terms: South Africa’s Search for Truth. Public
Affairs, New York, 1999.
———. Diamonds, Gold and War: The Making of South Africa. Simon and
Schuster, London, 2007.

———. Fischer’s Choice: A Life of Bram Fischer. Jonathan Ball, Johannesburg,
2002.
———. In the Name of Apartheid: South Africa in the Post-war Era. Hamish
Hamilton, London, 1988.
———. South Africa’s New Era: The 1994 Election. Mandarin, London, 1994.
———. The State of Africa: A History of Fifty Years of Independence. Free
Press, London, 2005.
Minnaar, Anthony, Ian Liebenberg and Charl Schutte. The Hidden Hand: Covert
Operations in South Africa. HSRC Publications, Johannesburg, 1994.
Modisane, Bloke. Blame Me on History. Thames and Hudson, London, 1963.
Moodie, T. Dunbar. The Rise of Afrikanerdom: Power, Apartheid and the
Afrikaner Civil Religion. University of California Press, Berkeley, 1975.
Mphahlele, Ezekiel. Down Second Avenue. Faber, London, 1959.
Mtolo, Bruno. Umkonto we Sizwe: The Road to the Left. Drakensberg Press,
Durban, 1966.
Naidoo, Indres. Island in Chains. Penguin, Harmondsworth, 1982.
Ngubane, Jordan. An African Explains Apartheid. Pall Mall Press, London,
1963.
Nicol, Mike. A Good-Looking Corpse: The World of Drum: Jazz and Gangsters,
Hope and Defiance in the Townships of South Africa. Seeker and Warburg,
London, 1991.
Nkosi, Lewis. Home and Exile. Longman, London, 1983.
Odendaal, Andre. Vukani Bantu! The Beginnings of Black Protest Politics in
South Africa to1912. David Philip, Cape Town, 1984.
O’Malley, Padraig. Shades of Difference: Mac Maharaj and the Struggle for
South Africa. Penguin, London, 2007.
O’Meara, Dan. ‘The 1946 African Mineworkers Strike’. Journal of
Commonwealth and Comparative Politics 13, no. 2 (1975).
———. Volkscapitalisme: Class, Capital and Ideology in the Development of
Afrikaner Nationalism, 1934-1948. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,

1983.
Ottaway, David. Chained Together: Mandela, De Klerk and the Struggle to
Remake South Africa. Times Books, New York, 1993.
Pakenham, Thomas. The Boer War. Weidenfeld and Nicolson, London, 1979.
Paton, Alan. Cry, the Beloved Country. Penguin, Harmondsworth, 1988.
Pauw, B. A. Christianity and Xhosa Tradition. Oxford University Press, Cape
Town, 1975.
Peires, J. B. The Dead Will Arise: Nongqawuse and the Great Xhosa CattleKilling Movement of 1856-7. Ravan Press, Johannesburg, 1989.
———. The House of Phalo: A History of the Xhosa People in the Days of Their
Independence. Ravan Press, Johannesburg, 1981.
Plaatje, Sol T. Native Life in South Africa. Ravan Press, Johannesburg, 1982
[1916].
Platzky, Laurine, and Cherryl Walker. The Surplus People: Forced Removals in
South Africa. Ravan Press, Johannesburg, 1985.
Pogrund, Benjamin. Sobukwe and Apartheid. Jonathan Bell, Johannesburg,
1990.
Pottinger, Brian. The Mbeki Legacy. Zebra Press, Cape Town, 2008.
Price, Robert M. The Apartheid State in Crisis. Oxford University Press, New
York, 1991.
Pringle, Thomas. Narrative of a Residence in South Africa. Struik, Cape Town,
1966 [1834].
Proctor, André. ‘Class Struggle, Segregation and the City: A History of
Sophiatown, 1905-1940’. In Belinda Bozzoli (ed.), Labour, Townships and
Protest. Ravan Press, Johannesburg, 1979.
Reader’s Digest Illustrated History of South Africa. Reader’s Digest, Cape
Town, 1994.
Reeves, Ambrose. Shooting at Sharpeville. Gollancz, London, 1960.
———. South Africa: Yesterday and Tomorrow. Gollancz, London, 1962.
Resha, Maggie. My Life in the Struggle. Congress of South African Writers,

Johannesburg, 1991.
Reynolds, Andrew (ed.). Election ’94, South Africa. David Philip, Cape Town,
1994.
__________. Election ’99, South Africa: From Mandela to Mbeki. David Philip,
__________. Election ’99, South Africa: From Mandela to Mbeki. David Philip,
Cape Town, 1999.
Robertson, Janet. Liberalism in South Africa, 1948-1963. Clarendon Press,
Oxford, 1971.
Ross, Robert. A Concise History of South Africa. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, 2008.
Roux, Eddie, and Win Roux. Rebel Pity: The Life of Eddie Roux. Rex Collings,
London, 1970.
Roux, Edward. Time Longer Than Rope, 2nd ed. University of Wisconsin Press,
Madison, 1964.
Russell, Alec. After Mandela: The Battle for the Soul of South Africa.
Hutchinson, London, 2009.
Russell, Diana E. H. Lives of Courage: Women for a New South Africa. Basic
Books, New York, 1989.
Sachs, E. S. Rebel’s Daughters. MacGibbon and Kee, London, 1961.
Sampson, Anthony. Black and Gold: Tycoons, Revolutionaries and Apartheid.
Hodder and Stoughton, London, 1987.
———. Drum: A Venture into the New Africa. Collins, London, 1956.
———. Mandela: The Authorised Biography. HarperCollins, London, 1999.
———. The Treason Cage: The Opposition on Trial in South Africa.
Heinemann, London, 1958.
Schadeberg, Jurgen. Voices from Robben Island. Ravan Press, Johannesburg,
1994.
Scott, Michael. A Time to Speak. Faber, London, 1958.
Seekings, Jeremy. The UDF: A History of the United Democratic Front in South
Africa, 1983-1991. David Philip, Cape Town, 2000.

Segal, Ronald. Into Exile. Cape, London, 1963.
Simons, H. J., and R. A. Simons. Class and Colour in South Africa, 1850-1950.
Penguin, Harmondsworth, 1969.
Sisulu, Elinor. Walter and Albertina Sisulu: In Our Lifetime. David Philip, Cape
Town, 2002.
Slovo, Gillian. Every Secret Thing. Little, Brown, London, 1997.
Slovo, Joe. ‘South Africa: No Middle Road’. In Basil Davidson, Joe Slovo and
Anthony Wilkinson, Southern Africa: The New Politics of Revolution . Penguin,
Harmondsworth, 1976.
———. The Unfinished Autobiography. Ravan Press, Johannesburg, 1995.
Southall, Roger. South Africa’s Transkei: The Political Economy of an
‘Independent’ Bantustan. Heinemann, London, 1982.
Sparks, Allister. Beyond the Miracle: Inside the New South Africa. Jonathan
Ball, Johannesburg, 2003.
____________Tomorrow Is Another Country: The Inside Story of South Africa’s
Negotiated Revolution. Struik, Johannesburg, 1994.
Stadler, Alfred. ‘Birds in the Cornfield: Squatter Movements in Johannesburg,
1944-1947’. In Belinda Bozzoli (ed.), Labour, Townships and Protest. Ravan
Press, Johannesburg, 1979.
———. ‘A Long Way to Walk’. University of the Witwatersrand African
Studies Institute seminar paper, Johannesburg, 1979.
Stanton, Hannah. Go Well, Stay Well. Hodder, London, 1961.
Stapleton, Timothy J. Maqoma: Xhosa Resistance to Colonial Advance.
Jonathan Ball, Johannesburg, 1994.
Steinberg, Jonny. Sizwe’s Test: A Young Man’s Journey Through Africa’s AIDS
Epidemic. Simon and Schuster, New York, 2008.
Stengel, Richard. Mandela’s Way: Fifteen Lessons on Life, Love and Courage.
Random House, New York, 2010.
Streek, Barry, and Richard Wicksteed. Render unto Kaizer: A Transkei Dossier.
Ravan Press, Johannesburg, 1981.

Strydom, Lauritz. Rivonia Unmasked. Voortrekkerpers, Johannesburg, 1964.
Stultz, Newell M. Transkei’s Half Loaf: Race Separation in South Africa. Yale
University Press, New Haven, 1979.
Surplus People Project. Forced Removals in South Africa, 5 vols. Surplus People
Project, Cape Town, 1983.
Suzman, Helen. In No Uncertain Terms: A South African Memoir. Jonathan
Ball, Johannesburg, 1993.
Swan, Maureen. Gandhi: The South African Experience. Ravan Press,
Johannesburg, 1985.
———. ‘Ideology in Organized Indian Politics, 1891-1948’. In Shula Marks and
Stanley Trapido (eds.), The Politics of Race, Class and Nationalism in
Twentieth-Century South Africa. Longman, London, 1987.
Taylor, Rev. J. Christianity and the Natives of South Africa. Lovedale Institution
Press, Lovedale, 1928.
Temkin, Ben. Buthelezi: A Biography. Cass, London, 2003.
Thompson, Leonard M. A History of South Africa. Yale University Press, New
Haven, 2001.
Truth and Reconciliation Commission of South Africa. Report, 5 vols. Juta,
Cape Town, 1998.
Turok, Ben. Nothing but the Truth: Behind the ANC’s Struggle Politics. Zebra
Press, Cape Town, 2003.
———. Strategic Problems in South Africa’s Liberation Struggle. LSM Press,
Richmond, 1974.
Tutu, Desmond. No Future Without Forgiveness. Rider, London, 1999.
van Jaarsveld, F. A. The Afrikaner’s Interpretation of South African History.
Simondium Publishers, Cape Town, 1964.
———. The Awakening of Afrikaner Nationalism, 1868-1881. Human and
Rousseau, Cape Town, 1961.
van Onselen, Charles. Studies in the Social and Economic History of the
Witwatersrand, 1886-1914. Vol. 1, New Babylon; Vol. 2, New Nineveh.
Longman, Harlow, 1982.

Villa-Vicencio, Charles. The Spirit of Freedom: South African Leaders on
Religion and Politics. University of California Press, Berkeley, 1996.
Waldmeir, Patti. Anatomy of a Miracle: The End of Apartheid and the Birth of a
New South Africa. Viking, London, 1997.
Walshe, Peter. The Rise of African Nationalism in South Africa: The African
National Congress, 1912-1952. C. Hurst, London, 1970.
Welsh, Frank. A History of South Africa. HarperCollins, London, 2000.
Willan, Brian. Sol Plaatje: South African Nationalist. Heinemann, London,
1984.
Wilson, Monica, and Leonard Thompson (eds.). The Oxford History of South
Africa, 2 vols. Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1969, 1971.
Wolpe, AnnMarie. The Long Way Home. David Philip, Cape Town, 1994.
Woods, Donald. Biko. Paddington Press, London, 1978.
———. Rainbow Nation Revisited. Deutsch, London, 2000.
Worden, Nigel. The Making of Modern South Africa. Blackwell, Oxford, 1994.

INDEX
‘M’ indicates Nelson Mandela

Achmat, Zackie
Advance (radical journal)
Africa South journal
‘African Claims’ document
African Communist
African Lodestar
African Mineworkers’ Union
African National Congress (ANC)
Africanist criticism of Freedom Charter
Africanist vs Nationalist
ANC headquarters in Lusaka
and armed struggle
arms deal and cover-up
arrest of leaders for treason
attack by de Klerk
and collapse of Eastern European socialist governments
and Communist Party
and Congress of the People
contact by Afrikaner groups
control of state bureaucracy
controversy over underground leadership
cooperation with other organisations
corruption in
criticism of M
Day of the Volunteers
debilitating effect of government repression
decision to go underground
declaration as illegal organization
Defiance Campaign

demands to de Klerk
disagreement about ideology
disorganisation of
dissension caused by new government policy
economic policy
election manifesto (1994)
election of M as president
and Eminent Persons Group
factors leading to negotiations with government
first attempt to organize nationwide political action
founders
Freedom Charter
guerrilla operations
Harare Declaration
harassment by Special Branch
internal scandals
international support for
internecine strife in
killing of insurrectionists in Bisho
‘M’ Plan
and Mandela United Football Club scandal
mass action campaign
May Day strike
military raids on ANC targets
national anthem
negotiations with government
and new constitution
outrage at TRC report
policy of nonviolence
protests against inequitable land distribution
re-establishment of M’s leadership
release of life prisoners
reprimand of M
and Rivonia trial
and school boycott
self-defence units out of control

socialism and state control
and Sophiatown campaign
televised debate between M and de Klerk
threat from extreme right-wing organisations
Transvaal ANC
victory at the polls
and Winnie
Women’s League
young dissidents in See also Rivonia trial; trial for incitement; trial for treason
‘African Nationalism,’ first use of
Africanism/Africanists
Africans, disenfranchisement of
Afrikaans, recognition of as an official language
Afrikaner nationalism, emergence of
Afrikaner Resistance Movement (Afrikaner Weerstandsbeweging; AWB)
Afrikaner Volksfront (AVF)
Afrikaner Volksunie
Aids crisis
Aids epidemic, consequences of
drugs
education and prevention programmes, resistance to
international conference, Barcelona (2002)
international conference, Durban (2000)
and Mbeki
M’s involvement in
M’s T-shirt
presidential international panel of scientists
Safina II, musical show
World Aids Day
Albright, Joseph
Alexander, Neville
Alexandra, Johannesburg
abandonment of removal plans
bus boycott
described
freehold titles in

Inkatha attacks on
May Day strike
M’s lodgings in
Alexandra Health Committee
All African Convention
All-in Conference (Pietermaritzburg )
amakhosi (network of Zulu chiefs)
Americans (Sophiatown gang)
ANC. See African National Congress
Anglican Church
Anglo-Boer War
Angola
Annan, Kofi
anti-Semitism among Afrikaner nationalists
apartheid
anti-apartheid activity abroad
Botha’s intention to modernise
doctrine of
economic consequences of
foreign criticism of
grand
impact of on black homelands
impact of on rural population
implementation of
and increased demands on ANC by Youth League
petty
Programme of Action
protest against by whites
repeal of apartheid laws
arms deal and cover-up
Astor, David
Asvat, Abu-Baker
Asvat, Zhora
Atlantic Charter (1941)
Aucamp, Colonel
Auditor-General’s Office

AVF. See Afrikaner Volksfront
Ayub, Ismail
azidothymidine (AZT)

Badenhorst, Colonel Piet
Baker, Herbert
Bam, Fikile
Bambatha (M’s grandson)
Bantu Authorities Act (1951)
Bantu Education Act (1953)
Bantu Men’s Social Centre, Johannesburg
Bantu Welfare Trust
Bantu World
Bantustans
Baragwanath Hospital, Johannesburg
Barenblatt, Yettah
Barnard, Niel
Basner, H. M. law firm
Basner, Hyman
Beauty (Winnie’s sister)
Bechuanaland (Botswana)
Bekker, Judge Simon
Benoni, Johannesburg
Benson, Mary
Berliners (Sophiatown gang)
Berman, Monty
Bernstein, Hilda
Bernstein, Rusty
arrest at Lilliesleaf
arrest for treason
as author of Freedom Charter
as author of strike bulletins
and the Congress of Democrats
escape to London
as M’s communist friend

on M’s judgement
on M’s meetings with Winnie
and relaunched Communist Party
and Rivonia trial
and treason trial
on Winnie
Berrangé, Vernon
Bethell, Lord Nicholas
Beyleveld, Piet
Bhoda, Ahmed
Biko, Steve
Bisho, Ciskei
Bizana, Pondoland
Bizos, George
defence of Winnie
and letter to Mpofu
and the Rivonia trial
and Zeni’s marriage
Black Act
black consciousness movement
Black Parents Association
‘black spots,’ elimination of
Boers
effects of Anglo-Boer War on
opposition to political rights for Africans
Boesak, Reverend Allen
Boipatong massacre
Bopape, David
Bophuthatswana
Bosch, P. J.
Botha, General Louis
Botha, P. W. (Pieter Willem)
air strikes
denunciation of M as communist
intention to modernise apartheid
meeting with M

memorandum from M
national security system
new constitution
obsession with communism
offer to release M conditionally
and ‘power sharing,’
promise of further reforms
reforms of
refusal to appear before TRC
refusal to talk with ANC
resignation of
state of emergency
stroke
Botha, Pik
Brand, Christo
Brand, Dollar
Brandfort, Orange Free State
Bregman, Nat
Breytenbach, Colonel Jan
Brigish, Harry
Britain
aftereffects of the Anglo-Boer War
demand for economic boycotts and sanctions
domination of South Africa
provocation of Anglo-Boer War by
and Rivonia trial
Broederbond
Brown, Robert
Brutus, Dennis
Bunting, Brian
Bunting, Sonya
Die Burger
Burundi
Bush, George
Buthelezi, Bishop
Buthelezi, Chief Mangosuthu

absence from Codesa
anger at government-ANC accord
attempted negotiation with M and deKlerk
attempts to influence election negotiations
feud with ANC
and government
and Inkatha
meeting with M
as member of ANC’s Youth League
M’s lost opportunity for reconciliation
relationship with M in government
threat to boycott election
working within the apartheid system

Cachalia, Amina
Cachalia, Azhur
Cachalia, Yusuf
Calata, Reverend James
Cameron, Edwin
Cape Colony
Native Land Act (1913)
Native reserves
political rights in
Cape Province
loss of African franchise
Representation of Natives Act (1936)
university for Xhosa students
Cape Town
Coloured community in
forced removals from District Six
as home of Thembi
M’s secret trips
political protest in
Springbok training ground
strike in

Capp (Coordinated Anti-Poverty Programmes)
Carlson, Joel
Carnegie Commission report
Carrington, Lord
Castro, Fidel
Cebekhulu, Katiza
‘Celebrate South Africa’ marketing campaign
Central Intelligence Agency (CIA)
Cetshwayo
Chancellor House Group
Chaskalson, Arthur
Chiba, Laloo
Chikane, Reverend Frank
Child Welfare Society
Chili, Dudu
Chili, Sibusiso
China
guerrilla warfare training in
Sisulu’s visit to
Christian Nationalism
Christian Science Monitor
Churchill, Sir Winston S.
circumcision ritual
Ciskei
City Deep Mines
Civil Cooperation Bureau
civil disobedience in Indian community
‘civilized labour’ policy
The Clarion (radical journal)
Clarkebury
Clayton, Archbishop
Clinton, Bill
Codesa 1,
Codesa 2,
Coetsee, Kobie
Coetzee, Captain Dirk

Collins, Canon John
colonial powers, withdrawal of from Africa
colour bar
Coloured community
attempt to get rid of the Coloured vote
in Cape Town
forced removals in
Franchise Action Committee
Marike de Klerk on
Torch Commando
Coloured People’s Congress
Coloured People’s Organization
Communist International (Comintern)
Communist Party in South Africa
abandonment of nonviolence
and ANC
announcement of existence (1960)
armed struggle, enthusiasm for
arrest of district committee
and Codesa
decision to disband
displeasure with Mbeki
early history of
insurrectionists
lifting of ban
Lilliesleaf Farm
mineworkers’ strike
multiracial environment of
night school
racial imbalance in
radical press of
relaunch of
and Special Branch
Suppression of Communism Act (1950)
trade union organisation
training abroad

Comrade Nomzano (M’s name for Winnie)
Congress Alliance
Congress of Democrats
Congress of South African Trade Unions (Cosatu)
Congress of the People
Congress Youth League
‘Basic Policy,’
and collaboration with other groups
and communists
debate over ideology
demand for aggressive ANC anti-apartheid strategy
formation of
M as president of
manifesto
and squatter issue
as vehicle for M’s political ambition
Conservative Party
Contact (liberal journal)
Convention for a Democratic South Africa (Codesa)
‘Coolie Location,’ Johannesburg
Cooper, Saths
Coordinated Anti-Poverty Programmes (Capp)
Coovadia, Professor Hoosen
Corbett, Judge Michael
Cosatu
Crown Mines
Cry, the Beloved Country (Paton)
Cuba/Cubans
‘cultural clubs,’

Dadoo, Yusuf
and Communist Party
and Defiance Campaign
exile
friendship with M

and mineworkers strike
Dalindyebo, Chief Jongintaba
anger at M
arrangement of marriage for M
death
as devout Wesleyan
estrangement from M
last meeting with M
leadership style
and M’s education
as M’s guardian
plan for M’s future
Dalindyebo, Justice
and arranged marriage
at Crown Mines
as Jongintaba’s son
Dalindyebo, NoEngland (M’s foster mother)
Dalindyebo, Sabata
Daliwonga High School students
Danchurch Aid
Daniels, Eddie
Dash, Samuel
Day of the Covenant
Day of the Volunteers
de Kiewiet, Cornelis
de Klerk, Frederick Willem
acceptance of majority rule
announcement of M’s release
attack on ANC
beliefs about apartheid
as deputy president
disciplinary action within the military
and equal self-determination for blacks
evolution of ideas about constitution
factors leading to negotiations with ANC
and Inkathagate

meeting with M
Nobel Peace Prize
outrage at TRC report
personality
political career
and power sharing
reforms
relationship with M
and Sebokeng violence
and security abuses
view of purpose of Codesa
and white referendum
de Klerk, Jan
de Klerk, Marike
de Klerk, Willem
de Lange, Pieter
de Lille, Patricia
de Villiers, Dawie
de Wet, General Christiaan
de Wet, Judge Quartus
Defiance Campaign (1952)
Delport (warder)
Democratic Party
Department of Defence
Department of Military Intelligence (DMI)
Desmond, Father Cosmas
Dhlamini, Ezekiel ‘King Kong,’
Dhlamini, Prince Musi (Zenani’s husband)
Dinath, Moosa
Dingake, Michael
Dirker, Carl Johannes
Dlamini, Phumzile
Dlamini, Reverend Theophilus
Dlamini-Zuma, Dr Nkosasana
Dormehl, Judge Willem
dos Santos, Eduardo

Drill Hall, Johannesburg
Drum magazine
Dube, John
Duncan, Patrick
Durban
ANC march in
Day of the Volunteers
Indian community in
international Aids conference (2000)
MK sabotage campaign
passive resistance campaign in
violence between Africans and Indians
Dutch Reformed Church

East Germany
Ebrahim, Ismail Ebrahim
Eckel, Paul
Eduardo Mondlane University
Egypt
Elizabeth, Queen (later the Queen Mother)
Elizabeth II, Queen
Eloff, Judge Frikkie
Eminent Persons Group
Erasmus, François
Eskom
Explosives Act

Fakie, Shauket
Falati, Xoliswa
Feinstein, Andrew
Fighting Talk (left-wing journal)
First, Ruth
arrest for treason
and Communist Party

and Congress of Democrats
death
as editor of radical journals
escape to Swaziland
in Maputo, Mozambique
marriage to Slovo
one-way exit permit
on solitary confinement
at University of the Witwatersrand
Fischer, Bram
and armed struggle
background
as communist
and Congress of Democrats
death
decision to go underground
humanitarian ideals of
influence on M
as member of treason trial defence team
and mineworkers strike
as M’s Afrikaner friend
multiracial parties
and Operation Mayibuye
and the Rivonia trial
sentence of life imprisonment
Fischer, Molly
and Congress of Democrats
death
imprisonment
Fischer, Paul
Fordsburg
Fort Hare University (South African Native College)
Fort prison, Johannesburg
Foundation for Peace and Justice
Franchise Action Committee
Franks, Maurice

Fraser, Malcolm
Free Mandela Committee
Freedom Alliance
Freedom Charter
Africanist criticism of
approval of
content of
general economic clause
Matthews’ memorandum
significance of
suggestions, collection of
and the treason trial.
Freedom Front
Frelimo
Fusion government

Gaddafi, Colonel Muammar
Gaitskell, Hugh
Gandhi, Manilal
Gandhi, Mohandas
Garvey, Marcus
Gecelter, Dr Louis
Genadendal, Cape Town (formerly Westbrook)
General Law Amendment Act (1963)
General Law Amendment Act (‘Sabotage Act’) of 1962,
George VI, King
Gevisser, Mark
Ghana
‘Ghetto Act,’
Ginwala, Frene
gold rush in the Transvaal
Goldberg, Annie
Goldberg, Denis
Goldreich, Arthur
Goldstone, Judge Richard

Goldstone Commission
Gqabi, Joe
Gqozo, Brigadier Oupa
Graaf, Sir de Villiers
Gray, Dr Glenda
Grays, Von Weilligh Street, Johannesburg
Great Place, Mqhekezweni
Gregory, Brent (James’ son)
Gregory, James
Grimond, Jo
Group Areas Act (1950)
Growth, Employment and Redistribution (Mbeki)
The Guardian (left-wing weekly newspaper)
Guardian Weekly
Guerrilla Warfare (Guevara)
Guevara, Che
Gumede, Archie
Gumisa, Detective Wilson
Gwala, Harry

Hahlo, Professor H. R.
Hall, Madie
Hani, Chris
assassination of
and treatment of ANC prisoners
Hanson, Harold
Harare Declaration (1989)
Harmel, Michael
on abandonment of nonviolence
background
charge under the Sabotage Act
as communist
and Congress of Democrats
as editor of Liberation (journal)
and Sharpeville crisis

Harmel, Ray
Harms Commission
Harris, John
Harris, Reverend Cecil
Hartzenberg, Ferdi
Harvard School of Public Health
Haysom, Fink
Healdtown, Ciskei
Healey, Denis
Heath, Judge Willem
Helburg, Sergeant
Helman and Michel law firm
Hepple, Bob
arrest at Lilliesleaf
escape to Tanganyika
in M’s support team
pressure to give evidence against the others at Rivonia trial
at trial for incitement
Hertzog, General J. B. M.
Hitler, Adolf
Hlapane, Bartholomew
Hlongwane, Zwelibansi
Hodgson, Jack
arrest
bomb-making
as communist
and Congress of Democrats
under house arrest
and Rivonia trial
Hodgson, Rica
Hoexter, Gustav
Holomisa, Bantu
Hooper, Charles
Houghton, M’s house in
Huddleston, Father Trevor
decision to close St. Peter’s School

and Oliver Tambo
as political activist
and Sophiatown
Hughes, Father
Hussein, Saddam

Ikaneng, Lerotodi
Immorality Act (1949)
impis
Independent Electoral Commission
Indian community
civil disobedience
in Durban
forced removals of
M’s friends in
pass law
segregation of
in Transvaal
violence between Indians and Africans
Indian Congress
and Codesa
commitment to nonviolence
and Congress alliance
and Congress of the People
and day of protest
and Day of the Volunteers
and Defiance Campaign
raid of offices
and Sophiatown campaign
support of May Day strike (1950)
industrial colour bar legislation
Inkatha Freedom Party (Inkatha ye Nkululeko we Sizwe)
attack on Zonkizizwe
attacks in Alexandra
Boipatong incident

Buthelezi’s launch of Inkatha movement
demands for greater regional autonomy
and government funding
as largest black political organisation
march in Thokoza
M’s accusation of using government funds to foment rebellion
recruitment campaign
and Reef township war
threat to boycott election
trade union wing of
training of hit-men by military intelligence
and violence
Inkathagate
Inkululeko (Communist Party newspaper)
Internal Security Act
International Committee of the Red Cross
International Monetary Fund
interrogation
Irish Republican Army (IRA)

Jabavu, Dr Davidson
Jacobs, Colonel
Jacobs, S.
Jameson Raid
Jan Hofmeyr School of Social Work
Joffe, Joel
Johannesburg
African population of
and Anglo-Boer War
as gold rush town
growth of
MK sabotage campaign
in post-war era
squatter camps
and urban segregation

violence in black suburbs
Johannesburg Bar Council
Johannesburg City Council
Johannesburg City Hall
Johannesburg City Press
Johannesburg Star
Johannesburg Sunday Times
Johnson, Shaun
Jonker, Ingrid
Jordan, Pallo
Joseph, Helen
Joubert, Henti

Kahn, Alfred
Kahn, Sam
Kantor, James
Kapitan’s restaurant, Kort Street, Johannesburg
Kasrils, Ronnie
Kathrada, Ahmed ‘Kathy’
argument with M
arrest at Lilliesleaf
friendship with M
under house arrest
and Indian rights protests
and MK
move to Pollsmoor prison
and M’s return to South Africa
objection to talks with Coetsee
release of from prison
and Rivonia trial
at Robben Island
and security issue at Lilliesleaf
Katlehong
Katzellenbogen, Maude
Kemp, General Jan

Ken Saro Wiwa
Kennedy, Judge Alexander
Kentridge, Sydney
Kerr, Dr Alexander
Kerzner, Sol
Keulder, Brigadier
Kgase, Kenny
King Kong (jazz opera)
Kissinger, Henry
Kitson, David
Kleynhans, Piet
Kleynhans brothers
Klindt, Colonel George
Klipspruit
Kliptown
Kodesh, Wolfie
Kohl, Helmut
Komo, Samuel
Kotane, Moses
and ANC
and armed struggle
arrest for treason
background
and communism
death
friendship with M
under house arrest
Lenin School, study at
and Luthuli
and Rivonia trial
and treason trial
underground operations
Kovalsky and Tuch
Krige, Molly
Kruger, James
Kruger, Paul

Kuzwayo, Ellen
KwaZulu
Buthelezi elected chief minister
covert military force
first election (1978)
as one-party state
KwaZulu-Natal
kwela

La Guma, Alex
Lagden Commission report
Lagden, Sir Godfrey
Langa township, rioting at
Langenhoven. J.
Leake, Councillor Edwin Orlando
Leballo, Potlake
Leftwich, Adrian
Leibbrandt, Robey
Lekota, Mosiuoa
Lembede, Anton
Africanism philosophy
and British monarchy
and communists
and Congress Youth League
meets M
motion to expel ANC members with dual allegiances
sudden death of
Lenasia
Lenin, Vladimir Ilyich
Lenin School (Moscow)
Leon, Tony
Lesotho
Levin, Mendel
Lewis, Stephen
Liberal Party

and Congress of the People
encouraging signs from
evidence of communist influence
launch of
M’s resentment of white liberals
Liberation (left-wing journal)
Libya
Lieres, Klaus von
Lilliesleaf Farm, Rivonia
as Communist underground headquarters
description
as home for Goldreich family
M’s family at
M’s routine at
raid on
Lisbon University
Livanos, Costa
London Daily Telegraph
London Times
Lovedale mission
Lowen, George
Ludi, Gerard
Ludorf, Judge Joe
Lusaka, Zambia
Luthuli, Chief Albert
arrest for treason
banning orders
burning of pass
commitment to nonviolence
cooperation with communists
death of
on education boycott
on effects of treason trial
on futility of moderation
on moral strength of ANC
and Native Representative Council

Nobel Peace Prize
as president of ANC
on Rivonia trial
and Sophiatown campaign
speaking tour
talks with white liberals
treason charges, withdrawal of
and treason trial

‘M’ Plan
Machel, Graca (née Simbine)
acquaintance with M
and Aids campaign
marriage to M
membership in Frelimo
military training
as minister of education in Mozambique
Machel, Josina
Machel, Samora
Macmillan, Harold
MacNicoll, David
Madiba clan
Madikizela, Columbus (Winnie’s father)
Madikizela, Gertrude (Winnie’s mother)
Madikizela, Seyina (Winnie’s grandmother)
Madondo, Maxwell
Mafikeng
Magubane, Peter
Mahanyele, Mohale
Maharaj, Mac
Mahlamba’ Ndlopfu, (formerly Libertas), Pretoria
Maisels, Israel
Makana Football Association
Makana (Nxele)
Makeba, Miriam

Makgoba, Professor Malegapuru
Makwetu, Clarence
Malan, Dr Daniel
attempts to reverse interracial integration
ban on interracial marriage and sex
campaign promises (1948)
and communism
election of 1948,
and Herzog
lack of interest in Native policy
as prime minister
and ‘purified’ National Party
Malan, Magnus
Mandela, Bambatha (M’s grandson)
Mandela, Evelyn (née Mase) (M’s first wife)
breakdown of marriage to M
domestic life with M
early life
as Jehovah’s Witness
marriage to M
M’s infidelity
as nurse
takeover of store in Cofimvaba
Mandela, Gadaffi (M’s grandson)
Mandela, Leabie (M’s sister)
Mandela, Mabel (M’s sister)
Mandela, Madiba Thembekile (“Thembi”), born 1945 (M’s son)
birth
death
illness
at Lilliesleaf
and parents’ divorce
relationship with M
Mandela, Makaziwe, born 1948 (M’s daughter)
Mandela, Makaziwe, born 1954 (M’s daughter)
Mandela, Makgatho, born 1950 (M’s son)

birth
death from Aids
illness
at Lilliesleaf
M’s insistence on pursuing studies
visit to Robben Island
Mandela, Nelson Rolihlahla
admiration for Indian rights protesters
ANC, introduction to by Sisulu
arrest as anti-apartheid dissident
arrest during Defiance Campaign
arrest for incitement
arrest for treason
attempts at negotiation with de Klerk and Buthelezi
attitude toward whites
banning orders
birth of
boxing training
breakdown of marriage to Evelyn
burning of pass
as chairman of Umkhonto we Sizwe
charity concerts for Aids
as charity fund-raiser
Chief Jongintaba, estrangement from
childhood in Qunu
the Church, influence of
circumcision ritual
clandestine meetings with Winnie
collaboration, recognition of value of
collaboration with other groups, opposition to
Communist speakers, harassment of
communists, dissipation of hostility toward
communists, friendships with
communists’ influence on M’s attitude toward violence
criticism of in ANC
daily schedule

decision to abandon nonviolence
and Defiance Campaign
disagreement with Sisulu over ‘Votes for All’ issue
disagreement with Tutu
divorce from Evelyn
divorce from Winnie
domestic life with Evelyn
domestic life with Winnie
early interest in governance
education
election as president of ANC
election as president of South Africa (1994)
election campaign
emergence as national leader
employment as articled clerk
end of marriage to Winnie
evading capture, skill at
family history
first court case
flight from arranged marriage
foreign visitors at Pollsmoor
frugal lifestyle
government order to resign from ANC
guerilla war training in Ethiopia
as guest at de Klerk’s seventieth birthday celebration
health
house in Qunu
inauguration as president of South Africa
Indian community, friends in
infidelity to Evelyn
influence of Lambede
influence of Sisulu
introduction to Winnie
involvement in campaign against HIV/AIDS
job as mine policeman
Jongintaba, last meeting with

Judge Dormehl, episode with
law partnership with Tambo
as law student
letter to Verwoerd
at Lilliesleaf
loyalty to Winnie
magnanimity toward political adversaries
Makgatho and Makaziwe, estrangement from
marriage to Evelyn
marriage to Graca Machel
marriage to Winnie
meeting with Botha
meeting with de Klerk
as member of ANC national executive committee
memorandum to Botha
motion to expel ANC members with dual allegiances
move to Pollsmoor prison
M’s three basic principles for a future South Africa
multiracial friendships
as natural campaigner
and necessity for multiracial strategy
Nelson Mandela Prize for Health and Human Rights
Nobel Peace Prize
nonviolence, policy of
on Pan-Africanist Congress policies
political ambitions, beginning of
post-release press conference
as president of Transvaal ANC
as president of Youth League
press criticism of
Pretoria Local prison
on Promotion of Bantu Self-Government Bill (1959)
radio and television address after Hani’s death
re-establishment of leadership in ANC
relationship with de Klerk
relationship with journalists

relationship with Viljoen
relationships with family and friends
release from prison
reply to Botha’s release offer
reprimand from ANC
reprimand of Mbeki at wedding banquet
reputation as bold court performer
response to de Klerk’s attack on ANC
return to South Africa
role in ANC
and Slovo
support of Freedom Charter
as symbol of opposition to government
taste for fine clothes
threatened expulsion from Fort Hare
travels abroad
on tribal colleges
on tribal mediation in matrimonial disputes
undiplomatic statements of
unwillingness to confide in Winnie
at Victor Verster prison farm, Paarl
view of purpose of Codesa
visit to Robben Island during campaign
as ward of Jongintaba
on white liberals
Winnie’s disinterest in marital intimacy
on years in prison
youthful heroes
See also Pollsmoor prison; Rivonia trial; Robben Island; trial for high treason;
trial for incitement
Mandela, Nelson Rolihlahla, personality of
aloof
angry
austere
authoritarian
courteous and attentive to all

impatient with vagueness and ignorance
imperious
independent leadership style
intensely private
love of gardening
nerves of steel
passionate, emotional, sensitive
self-deprecating
self-disciplined
stubborn
Mandela, Winnie Madikizela (M’s second wife)
affair with Mpofu
appointment as deputy minister for arts, culture, science, and technology
attack on negotiation process and ANC
banishment
banning orders
at Brandfort
Canada’s refusal to permit entry
censure by Mass Democratic Movement
clandestine meetings with M
criticism of M’s government
defence team for
disinterest in marital intimacy with M
dismissal from government
divorce from M
domestic life with M
early life
election to ANC national executive committee (2007)
fear of
immunity from retaliation
imprisonment
involvement with dubious characters
kidnapping and assault
luxurious lifestyle
and the Mandela United Football Club
mansion, construction of

meets M
M’s disappointment in
M’s loyalty to
notes of apology for criticism of M’s government
notification of M’s arrest for incitement
penalty for Stompie kidnapping
police harassment of
political ambitions
presence at Rivonia trial
resignation from ANC
role as militant activist
scandals associated with
as social worker
as source of embarrassment to M
and student revolt
TRC hearings
trial for kidnapping and assault
visit with M at Lilliesleaf
visit with M at Victor Verster prison farm
Mandela, Zenani (Zeni), born 1959 (M’s daughter)
birth
education
at Lilliesleaf
marriage
at M’s inauguration
visit to M on Robben Island
visits to M in Pretoria Local
and Winnie’s arrest
Mandela, Zindziswa (Zindzi), born 1960 (M’s daughter)
alleged criminal involvement
birth
in Brandfort
education
letter to UN Special Committee on Apartheid
and the Mandela United Football Club
public reading of M’s reply to Botha

speech at University of Witwatersrand
at TRC hearings
visit with M at Pollsmoor
wedding
and Winnie’s arrest
Mandela and Tambo law firm
Mandela United Football Club
Mangope, Lucas
attempts to influence election negotiations
boycott of election
deposition of
request for help from AVF
Mankahlana, Parks
Mao Tse-tung
Maputo, Mozambique
Maqoma
Marks, J. B.
arrest
as communist
death
and Defiance Campaign
friendship with M
as head of African Mineworkers’ Union
and ‘M’ Plan
Marshall Square police station, Johannesburg
Marshalltown, Johannesburg
Marx, Lieutenant-Colonel Gawie
Masondo, Andrew
Mass Democratic Movement, censure of Winnie by
Matanzima, Kaizer
as articled clerk in Umtata
attempt to persuade M to return to Umtata
courtship of Winnie
friendship with M
help with M’s family matters
and M and Winnie’s divorce proceedings

as supporter of apartheid
Mathiane, Nomavenda
Matji, Robert
Matshikiza, Todd
Matthews, Professor Z. K.
and ANC
arrest for treason
and Congress of the People
death of
at Fort Hare
and Freedom Charter
talks with white liberals
at treason trial
Matyolo, Reverend
May Day strike
Mbekela, Ben
Mbekela, George
Mbekeni, Garlick (M’s cousin)
Mbeki, Govan
as friend of Ruth First
and Operation Mayibuye
release from prison
and Rivonia trial
at Robben Island
Mbeki, Thabo
and affirmative action
‘Africanist’ agenda
and Aids crisis
alienation of whites
attempt to block TRC report
attempted cover-up of arms deal
background
as chair of committee on Aids
cover-up of arms deal
and defence spending
dislike of press

economic policy
election as ANC president
emasculation of parliament
feud with Zuma
and HIV/AIDS crisis
humiliation of M at ANC national executive committee meeting
importance of loyalty to
as member of ANC Youth League
as member of Communist Party
as M’s chief executive
paranoia
personality
on reconciliation
reprimand by M at wedding banquet
resentment of comparison to M
resignation from ANC
Soviet Union, military training in
University of Sussex
and Zimbabwe crisis
McBride, Robert
McIntyre, Professor James
Mda, Peter
Medical Research Council
Medicines Control Council (MCC)
Meer, Fatima
Meer, Ismail
arrest
as communist
as editor of Passive Resister
friendship with M
and Indian rights protests
and Ruth First
at University of the Witwatersrand
Meiring, General George
Mekgwe, Pelo
Meligqili, Chief

Menells
Methodist Church
Methodists
Meyer, Roelf
mfecane
Mfengu
Mhlaba, Raymond
migrant labour
Milner, Alfred, 1st Viscount
mineworkers’ strike (1946)
missionaries
missionary churches, African education system and
Mitchell, Brian
Mitterand, François
MK. See Umkhonto we Sizwe
Mkwayi, Wilton
Mlambo, Johnson
Mlangeni, Andrew
Moahloli, Norah
Modisane, Bloke
Modise, Joe
Moeketsi, Kippie
Mofutsanyana, Edwin
Mokaba, Peter
Mokitimi, Reverend Seth
Mokoena, Aubrey
Mollson, Detective Jeremiah
Mono, Thabiso
Monongoaha, Oriel
Moodley, Strini
Moretsele, Elias
Morgan, John
Morobe, Murphy
Moroka, Dr James
arrest during Defiance Campaign
background

election as president of ANC
and Native Representative Council
and ‘six unjust laws’ repeal ultimatum
support for Programme of Action
Mosaka, Paul
Moseneke, Dikgang
Moshidi, Patrick
Motau, Thabo
Mothopeng, Zephenia
Motlana, Dr Nthatho
Motlana, Nthatho
Motsamayi, David (M’s alias)
Motsoaledi, Elias
Mount Nelson Hotel, Cape Town
Mozambique
Mpanza, James
Mphakanyiswa, Gadla Henry (M’s father)
death
dispute with magistrate
domestic life
and M’s education
as village headman at Mvezo
Mpofu, Dali
Mpondombini, Chief
Mqhayi, Samuel
Mqhekezweni
church attendance
home of Chief Jongintaba Dalindyebo
mission station
primary school
traditional courts
Mthembu, Patrick
Mtolo, Bruno
Mugabe, Robert
Muizenburg
Muller, Philip

Munro, Brigadier General
Murray, Professor Andrew
Mvezo

Naicker, Dr Monty
Naidoo, G. R.
Natal
civil disobedience campaign
civil war
Indian community in
Inkatha hit men deployed in
loss of voting privileges for Africans
massacre by security force
Native reserves
renaming as KwaZulu-Natal
university for Zulu students
violence in
Natal Indian Congress
National Action Council
National Committee of Liberation (African Resistance Movement)
National Intelligence Service
National Party
and apartheid
benefits of its rule
coalition with South Africa Party
and Codesa
conference in Durban (1985)
election losses (1991, 1992)
election victory (1948)
election victory (1953)
election victory (1989)
formation of
national anthem
and new constitution
and ‘purified’ National Party

radio network as propaganda arm
and ‘the Native problem,’
verkrampte wing
verligte wing
Verwoerd’s ‘new vision,’
National Prosecuting Authority
National Union of South African Students
Native Life in South Africa (Plaatje)
Native Representative Council
Native reserves
exodus from
inadequacy of
Natives Land Act (1913)
Naught for Your Comfort (Huddleston)
necklace method of killing
Nehru, Pandit
Nelson Mandela Prize for Health and Human Rights
nevirapine
New Age (radical newspaper)
New York Times
Ngcuka, Bulelani
Ngoyi, Lilian
Ngubane, Jordan
Ngubase, Solomon
Ngubengcuka, King (M’s great-grandfather)
Nguni
Nicholas, Harold
Nicolson, Judge Chris
Niehaus, Carl
Niekerk, J. C. van
Nkedama, Nosekeni Fanny (M’s mother)
attendance at M’s graduation at Fort Hare
attendance at Rivonia trial
as Christian
in Qunu
visit to M on Robben Island

visit with M in Orlando West
Nkosi, Lewis
Nkosi Sikelel’ iAfrika’ (‘God Bless Africa’)
Nokwe, Duma
Nongqawuse
Nxele (Makana)
Nyatsumba, Kaizer
Nyerere, Julius
Nzanga, Rita
Nzo, Alfred

Oakley-Smith, Terry
Obasanjo, General
Observer
O’Donovan, Justice
O’Dowd, Tony
Office for Serious Economic Offenses
offset deals
Omar, Dulla
Operation Exit
Operation Mayibuye
Operation Vula
Oppenheimer, Harry
Oppenheimers, the
Orange Free State
and Anglo-Boer War
British control of
loss of voting privileges for Africans
Native reserves, inadequacy of
presence of extreme right-wing organisations
urban relocation programmes
Orania, Northern Cape province
Orlando, Johannesburg
boxing clubs
establishment of

May Day strike
as prototype for Soweto
refusal of residents to testify against Winnie
site of Sisulu’s home
squatter exodus from
Orlando West, M’s house in

PAC. See Pan-Africanist Congress
Pahad, Amina
Pahad, Essop
Pan-African Freedom Movement for East, Central, and Southern Africa
Pan-Africanist Congress
and ANC
arrests of supporters
ban on
and Codesa
as competition for M
lack of organisation and funding
launch of
Leballo’s announcement of uprising
PAC members on Robben Island (See Robben Island)
pass laws protest
Poqo, military wing
presence at multiparty negotiations
and Sharpeville shootings
Parkington, Michael
pass system
Passive Resister journal
Paton, Alan
Patta, Deborah
The Peasants’ Revolt (Mbeki)
People’s World (radical journal)
Phola Park
Pienaar, François
Piliso

Pirow, Oswald
Pitje, Godfrey
Plaatje, Sol
Pollack, Walter
Pollsmoor prison
foreign visitors at
living conditions
move to
M’s release from
M’s trips outside prison
secret committee talks
talks with Coetsee
visits with family
Population Registration Act (1949)
Population Registration Act (1950)
Poqo, PAC military wing
The Post (Soweto newspaper)
Pratt, Ambrose
press, radical
Pretoria
car-bomb attack
general strike (1992)
and white referendum
Pretoria City Council
Pretoria City Hall
Pretoria Local prison
Pretoria Minute
Pretoria regional services council
Pretoria Supreme Court
Prins, Lieutenant
Programme of Action
Progressive Federal Party
Progressive Youth Council
Prohibition of Mixed Marriages Act (1949)
Promotion of Bantu Self-Government Bill (1959)
Public Protector

Publications and Entertainment Bill (1963)
Publications Control Board

Qaba faith
Qunu, Transkei
M’s boyhood in
M’s house at
population of
primary education in

Radebe, Gaur
activism of
and Alexandra bus boycott
influence on M
and trade union organisation
Ramaphosa, Cyril
on ‘crisis committee,’
as M’s choice as successor
private negotiations with Meyer
rejection of name of KwaZulu-Natal
as secretary-general of ANC
and Winnie
Ramatlhodi, Ngoako
Ramsbottom, Judge
Rand Daily Mail
Rand gold mines
Rand Supreme Court, Johannesburg
Rathebe, Dolly
Reagan, Ronald
Record of Understanding
Reef township war
Reeves, Ambrose, Anglican Bishop of Johannesburg
Registrar of Companies
Relly, Gavin

Renamo rebels
Representation of Natives Act (1936)
Resha, Robert
Rhein, Rudolph
Rhodesia
Richardson, Jerry
Rickard, Don
Rivonia trial
defence team for
Hepple’s predicament and escape
indictment thrown out
international interest in
M’s statement from the dock
pleas in mitigation
sentences
Road to Freedom Tours
Robben Island
Afrikaans, M’s study of
Badenhorst, conditions under
‘carry-ons,’
church services
daily routine
discovery of M’s memoirs
food, grievances about
High Organ
history of
hunger strikes
isolation section
lime quarry, intellectual stimulation in
M as prisoners’ spokesman
M’s first stay
M’s plan for survival
M’s relationships with warders
M’s routine
M’s visitors
newspapers, importance of

PAC members on
prison population, changes in
prisoner communication system
prisoners, treatment of
sports
stories about
study privileges
visits from family
visits from Winnie
Rolling Stones
Roman Catholics
Roosevelt, Franklin D.
Rooy, Professor van
Roux, Eddie
Rugby World Cup tournament (1995)
Rumpff, Judge Franz

Sabotage Act. See General Law Amendment Act (1962)
Salisbury (brig)
Sampson, Anthony
Sarafina II,
Sauer, Paul
Schermbrucker, Ivan
Schwartz, Harry
Scott, Reverend Michael
Sebokeng
segregation
colour bar
Lagden Commission report
Malan on
pass system
political
rules ignored by M
territorial
in universities

urban
See also apartheid
Seipei, Mrs (Stompie’s mother)
Seipei, ‘Stompie’ Moeketse
Seme, Pixley
Semenya, Ismail
Separate Amenities Act
Separate Registration of Voters Bill (1951)
Seventh-Day Adventists
Sexwale, Tokyo
Shaik, Chippy
Shaik, Schabir
Sharif, Omar
Sharpeville massacre
Shaw, Reverend William
Shein, Betty
Shell House massacre
Shirley, Millard
Shope, Gertrude
Sibiya, Khulu
Sidelsky, Lazar
and the African community
employment of M
M’s repayment of debt
warning to M to stay out of politics
Sigcau, Stella
Simon, Paul
Singh, Jaydew
arrest
as a communist
friendship with M
and Indian rights protests
and nonviolence
as secretary of Transvaal Passive Resistance Council
at University of the Witwatersrand
Sisulu, Albertina (née Thethiwe)

and ANC Women’s League
imprisonment
at M and Evelyn’s wedding
marriage to Walter Sisulu
on M’s imperiousness
nomination of M as president
as nurse
Sisulu, Ma
Sisulu, Walter
arrests
decision to abandon nonviolence
and Defiance Campaign
disagreement with M and Tambo over ‘Votes for All’ issue
disappearance underground
early life
influence on M and others
interest in Xhosa history
introduction to ANC
marriage to Albertina Thethiew
membership in Communist Party
on moral strength of ANC
motion to expel ANC members with dual allegiances
move to Pollsmoor prison
on M’s personality
objection to M’s talks with Coetsee
on Pan-Africanist Congress policies
as political advisor to Umkhonto we Sizwe
radio broadcast
release of from prison
and Rivonia trial
at Robben Island
as secretary-general of ANC
and ‘six unjust laws’ repeal ultimatum
talks with Chinese about weapons
tour of communist countries
as treasurer of Congress Youth League

Sisulu Football club
Sita, Nana
Sithole, Sizwe
Slovo, Joe
at ANC-government negotiations
and ANC revolutionary council
and armed struggle
background
banning order
and bombs
as chief-of-staff of Umkhonto we Sizwe
as communist
and Congress of Democrats
and escape notes
and Freedom Charter
marriage to Ruth First
meets M
move to Maputo, Mozambique
and negotiations with government
and Operation Mayibuye
opposition to increased defence spending
personality
praise by M
relationship with M
and Rivonia trial
sunset clause suggestion
and trial for incitement
at Winnie’s trial
Smith, Ian
Smuts, General Jan
in Anglo-Boer War
in cabinet of Union of South Africa
as international statesman
as prime minister
and ‘the Native problem,’
views on territorial separation of races

and World War II,
Smuts family
Sobhuza, King of Swaziland
Sobukwe, Robert
Soga, Alan
Somana, Brian
Sono, Caroline
Sono, Lolo
Sontonga, Enoch
Sooka, Yasmin
Sophiatown, Johannesburg
described
freehold titles in
gangs
history of
May Day strike
M’s speech advocating violence
removal of population to Meadowlands
Sophiatown Scottish
South Africa
accord between government and ANC
affirmative action
Afrikaans as an official language
and Afrikaner homeland (volkstaat)
Aids crisis
arms deal and cover-up
arms procurement programme
assessment of M as president
assets
banning of newspapers
black middle class, success of
Botha’s new constitution
bribery and corruption in arms purchases
change, signs of
conflict between M and Buthelezi
constitution (1910)

corruption in M’s government
court order to provide nevirapine
‘crony capitalism,’ rise of
de Klerk’s objectives for
defence review
depression years (1928-1932)
dominance of Afrikaners
Dominion status
economic growth
economic recession (1984)
economic repercussions from apartheid
election of 1948,
election results (1994)
examples of M’s misplaced loyalty
fear of British domination
foreign investors
foreign policy, friction over
government censorship
government obliteration of radical opposition
government salary issue
grand apartheid
guerrilla warfare, unsuitability for
independence for homelands
interim constitution, approval of
interim government, outline for
international Aids conference (2000)
international condemnation of racial policies
international mediation, failure of
legacy of protest politics
loss of skilled whites
M as symbol of opposition to government
massive disparity in wealth
May Day strike
modern problems in
movement to free M
M’s demand for discipline and austerity

M’s role in transformation of
M’s three basic principles for future
National Party rule, benefits of
national reconciliation, advances in
police interrogators
pro-Nazi sentiment
problems M inherited from de Klerk regime
questions about M’s judgement
refusal of KwaZulu to endorse independence
republic, establishment as
rising unemployment rate
security forces, involvement in violence of
state of emergency
State Security Council, power of
transfer of power
transformation into police state
white backlash
white immigrants, flood of
white population favours change
white referendum on reform process
widening of income gap within black community See also apartheid
South Africa Party
South African Broadcasting Corporation
South African Congress of Trade Unions
South African Council of Churches
South African Institute of Race Relations
South African Native Affairs Commission
South African Native College. See Fort Hare
South African Native National Congress, inaugural conference
South Western Townships (from 1963 Soweto)
Soviet Union
as anti-imperial power
guerrilla training in
struggle with US for influence in African states
support for liberation movements
visit by Fischer

visit by Goldreich
visit by Sisulu
The Sowetan newspaper
Soweto, Johannesburg
description
and Mpanza
M’s speech in
Orlando as prototype for
Soweto revolt(1976)
Spark (radical newspaper)
Special Branch,
harassment of ANC
harassment of M
powers of
and Sophiatown campaign
and treason trial
Spengler, Major (later Colonel) At
Springboks
squatter camps
Stalin, Joseph
Stallard commission
Standing Committee on Public Accounts (Scopa)
The Star
State Security Council
Stegman, Judge Michael
Stellenbosch
Die Stem van Suid Afrika (‘The Voice of South Africa’)
Stengel, Richard
Steyn, Douw
Steyn, Dr Colin
Steyn, General Pierre
Storey, Bishop Peter
Strategic Problems of China’s Revolutionary War (Mao Tse-tung)
Strijdom, Hans
strike, national
Suppression of Communism Act (1950)

Supreme Court of Appeal
Suzman, Helen
Swanepoel, Jan
Swanepoel, Lieutenant (later Major) Theunis
Swapo guerrillas
Swart, Jack
swart gevaar issue

Tambo, Adelaide
Tambo, Oliver
on ANC Revolutionary Council
arrest for treason
background
and communists
and Congress Youth League
death of
and Defiance Campaign
disagreement with Sisulu over ‘Votes for All’ issue
education
election to ANC national executive committee
escape to Bechuanaland (Botswana)
exile base in London
at Fort Hare
friendship with M
and ill-treatment of prisoners
illness of
law partnership with M
on Luthuli’s friendship with Kotane
meets Buthelezi
motion to expel ANC members with dual allegiances
on M’s personality
and Operation Mayibuye
as president of ANC
and Rivonia trial
solicitation of international support

talks with businessmen
as teacher
treason charges, withdrawal of
visits Xuma
Tanganyika
Tefu, Stephen
Terblanche and Brigish
Terre’Blanche, Eugene
Terrorism Act
Thatcher, Margaret
Thema, Selope
Themba, Can
Thembu people
cattle, importance of
daily life
loss of political control
marriage custom
rites of passage to manhood
treatment of children
Thembu royal family
Great House
and M’s divorce from Winnie
M’s link with
Thembuland
annexation by Britain (1885)
exodus of men from
incorporation into Transkeian Territories
Methodist school network
Mfengu in
Thoko (Thembi’s girlfriend)
Thumbumuzi, Prince
Time magazine
Tloome, Daniel
Tobiansky, Herman
Tobruk squatter camp
Torch Commando

Transkei
bribery scandal
exodus of men from
first general election
importance to success of Verwoerd’s strategy
incorporation of Thembuland into
as independent state
Transvaal
and Anglo-Boer War
British control of
bush conference (1989)
death squad amnesty request
as epicenter of violence (1984)
factories for homemade guns
gold rush
Indian community
Indian ‘penetration’ of white areas
Inkatha hit men deployed in
loss of voting privileges for Africans
national convention (1908-1909)
Passive Resistance Councils
political rights for Africans, lack of
presence of extreme right-wing organisations
as richest state in South Africa
university for Sotho, Tsonga, and Venda-speaking students
urban relocation programmes
Transvaal Indian Congress
Transvaal Law Society
Transvaal Municipal Associations
Die Transvaaler (Nationalist newspaper)
Travallyn
Treason Trial Defence Fund
Treatment Action Campaign
Trengrove, Wim
Treurnicht, Andries
trial for treason

closing arguments
defence team
issue of new indictment
M on ANC and communism
M on ANC and violence
M on Freedom Charter
M on socialism
multiracial social interaction during
positive effects of
preparatory examination
testimony by Special Branch detectives
the trial
verdict
trial of M for incitement
M’s address to the court
M’s appearance in Xhosa kaross
M’s request for recusal of van Heerden
M’s sentence
plot to escape
trials. See Rivonia trial; trial for incitement; trial for treason
tribalism, promotion of
Triomf
Truth and Reconciliation Commission (TRC)
ANC evasion of responsibility for warfare with Inkatha
ANC outrage at report
controversy over
and de Klerk
defence of ANC by Mbeki
exposure of ANC use of violence
exposure of security force abuses
gross violations of human rights by Botha regime
powers of
purpose of
report of
and Winnie
Tshabalala, Nomsa

Tshabalala, Siboniso
Tshabalala-Msimang, Manto
Tshotsholoza (Springbok team song)
Tshwete, Steve
tsotsis
Tsukudu, Adelaide
Tuli, Jake
Turok, Ben
arrests
as communist
and Congress of Democrats
and the Freedom Charter
imprisonment
and incendiary device
and sabotage campaign
on torture
underground operations
Turok, Mary
Tutu, Archbishop Desmond
and Boesak scandal
disagreement with M
Nobel Peace Prize celebration rally
and salary issue
on supporting dictators
and Truth and Reconciliation Commission
Tuynhuys, Cape Town
Tyhalarha
Tyumie River

Ulundi, KwaZulu
Umkhonto we Sizwe (MK; Spear of the Nation)
amateurism of
bomb-making
collapse of
difficulties

M’s support committee
Operation Mayibuye
raid at Rivonia
role in Reef war
sabotage campaign
strategy
training of recruits in China
Umsebenzi
Uncle Joe’s café
Union Buildings, Pretoria
Union of Southern African Artists
United Democratic Front
United Free Church of Scotland
United Nations
United Nations Aids Agency
United Nations Aids conference (2002)
United Nations Charter
United Nations General Assembly
United Nations Human Development Report (1994)
United Nations Security Council
United Nations Special Committee on Apartheid
United Party
United States Information Agency
United States of America
condemnation of apartheid
demands for economic boycotts and sanctions against South Africa
M’s address before Congress
and Rivonia trial
struggle with Soviet Union for influence in African states
United Workers’ Union of South Africa (Uwusa)
University Great Hall, Johannesburg
University of Cape Town
University of London
University of Natal
University of South Africa
University of Stellenbosch

University of the Western Cape
University of the Witwatersrand
Unlawful Organizations Act (1960)
Urban Areas Act
Uwusa. See United Worker’s Union of South Africa

van den Bergh, Colonel Hendrik
van der Merwe, Fanie
van der Walt, Tjaart
van der Westhuizen, Brigadier Christoffel
van Heerden, J.
van Rensburg (warder)
van Riebeeck, Jan
van Wyk, Lieutenant
Venda, independence of (1979)
Vereeniging Treaty (1902)
Verryn, Paul
Verwoerd, Betsie
Verwoerd, Hendrik
and African education
appointment of Vorster as minister of justice
assassination of
election as prime minister
government reaction to May Day strike
imperviousness to international criticism
letter from M about strike
as Minister of Native Affairs
plan for territorial separation of races
white supremacy as goal
Victor Verster prison-farm, Paarl
Viljoen, General Constand
Viljoen, Gerrit
Virodene
Vlakplaas police farm
Vlok, Adriaan

volkstaat
Volkstaat Council
Vorster, John.
as minister of justice
security powers
as successor to Verwoerd
‘Votes for All’ campaign

Waluz, Janusw
Washington Post
Wellington, Dr Arthur
Wessel, Frederick
Western Cape
Willemse, General Johan
Williams, Cecil
and Congress of Democrats
under house arrest
Wilson, Woodrow
Witkin, Sidelsky, and Eidelman
Witness to AIDS (Cameron)
Witwatersrand
Wolpe, Harold
women, pass laws extended to
Women’s League
Woods, Gavin
The World
World Aids Day
World Bank
World Health Organization
World Trade Centre, Johannesburg

Xhoma family, M’s lodgings with
Xhosa people
circumcision ritual

feud with Mfengu
identification as ANC supporters
loss of land to whites
loss of political control
military strength
performances in court tradition
resistance against British rule
Sisulu’s interest in Xhosa history
university for Xhosa students
Xuma, Dr Alfred
anti-pass campaign
and communism
and Congress Youth League
defeat by Moroka
rejection of Programme of Action
at Sisulu’s wedding
and Sophiatown

Yengeni, Tony
Young Communist League
Yu Chi Chan Club
Yutar, Dr Percy
appearance
attack on Paton’s character
as deputy attorney-general of Transvaal
dislike of Jewish communists
indictment
lunch with M
and the Rivonia trial

Zimbabwe
Mbeki’s opposition to sanctions against
M’s denunciation of Mugabe
Mugabe’s campaign of terror

Zonkizizwe squatter camp
Zulu people
Buthelezi as political leader
demonstration in Johannesburg
feud with Tongas
identification as Inkatha supporters
military strength
M’s appeal to end war
rise of Zulu kingdom
university in Natal
Zululand, African rebellion (1906)
Zuma, Dr Nkosazana
Zuma, Jacob
accusations of rape
background
corruption charges, setting aside of
election as ANC president
feud with Mbeki
involvement in corruption
Zwane, Charles
Zwane, Kuki
Zwelethini, Goodwill, King of the Zulus

Martin Meredith is a journalist, biographer, and historian who has written
extensively on Africa and its recent history. He is the author of many books,
including Diamonds, Gold, and War: The British, the Boers, and the Making of
South Africa; The Fate of Africa: A History of Fifty Years of Independence;
Mugabe: Power, Plunder, and the Struggle for Zimbabwe; and Coming to
Terms: South Africa’s Search for Truth. He lives near Oxford, England.

PublicAffairs is a publishing house founded in 1997. It is a tribute to the
standards, values, and flair of three persons who have served as mentors to
countless reporters, writers, editors, and book people of all kinds, including me.

I. F. STONE, proprietor of I. F. Stone’s Weekly, combined a commitment to the
First Amendment with entrepreneurial zeal and reporting skill and became one
of the great independent journalists in American history. At the age of eighty,
Izzy published The Trial of Socrates, which was a national bestseller. He wrote
the book after he taught himself ancient Greek.

BENJAMIN C. BRADLEE was for nearly thirty years the charismatic editorial
leader of The Washington Post. It was Ben who gave the Post the range and
courage to pursue such historic issues as Watergate. He supported his reporters
with a tenacity that made them fearless and it is no accident that so many
became authors of influential, bestselling books.

ROBERT L. BERNSTEIN, the chief executive of Random House for more than
a quarter century, guided one of the nation’s premier publishing houses. Bob was
personally responsible for many books of political dissent and argument that
challenged tyranny around the globe. He is also the founder and longtime chair
of Human Rights Watch, one of the most respected human rights organizations
in the world.

For fifty years, the banner of Public Affairs Press was carried by its owner
Morris B. Schnapper, who published Gandhi, Nasser, Toynbee, Truman, and
about 1,500 other authors. In 1983, Schnapper was described by The

Washington Post as “a redoubtable gadfly.” His legacy will endure in the books
to come.

Peter Osnos, Founder and Editor-at-Large

Copyright © 1997, 2010 by Martin Meredith.
First published in 1997 in Great Britain by the Penguin Group.
Published in the United States by PublicAffairs™,
a member of the Perseus Books Group.
All rights reserved.
No part of this book may be reproduced in any manner whatsoever without written permission except in the
case of brief quotations embodied in critical articles and reviews. For information, address PublicAffairs,
250 West 57th Street, Suite 1321, New York, NY 10107.
PublicAffairs books are available at special discounts for bulk purchases in the U.S. by corporations,
institutions, and other organizations. For more information, please contact the Special Markets Department
at the Perseus Books Group, 2300 Chestnut Street, Suite 200, Philadelphia, PA 19103, call (800) 810-4145,
ext. 5000, or e-mail special.markets@perseusbooks.com.
Grateful acknowledgment is made to Little, Brown & Co. for permission to reprint extracts from Long Walk
to Freedom by Nelson Mandela (copyright © 1994 by Nelson Rolihlahla Mandela); and to the Alan Paton
Trust for permission to quote an extract from Cry, the Beloved Country by Alan Paton (copyright © 1948
by Alan Paton). Photos appear with permission from Link; UWC-Robben Island Museum Mayibuye
Archives; Bailey’s African History Archive; GettyImages; and Magnum Photos.
Editorial production by the Book Factory.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Meredith, Martin.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
eISBN : 978-1-58648866-6
1. Mandela, Nelson, 1918-2. South Africa—Politics and government—20th century. 3. African National
Congress—History. 4. Political prisoners—South Africa—Biography. 5. Presidents—South Africa—
Biography. 6. South Africa—Race relations. I. Title.
DT1974 .M474
968.06’5092—dc22
[B] 2010001287

