To set up a household was no new experience for me. But the  establishment in Natal was different from the ones that I had had in  Bombay and London. This time part of the expense was solely for the  sake of prestige. I thought it necessary to have a household in  keeping with my position as an Indian barrister in Natal and as a  representative. So I had a nice little house in a prominent  locality. It was also suitably furnished. Food was simple, but as I  used to invite English friends and Indian co-workers, the  housekeeping bills were always fairly high.  A good servant is essential in every household. But I have never  known how to keep anyone as a servant.  I had a friend as companion and help, and a cook who had become a  member of the family. I also had office clerks boarding and lodging  with me.  I think I had a fair amount of success in this experiment, but it  was not without its modicum of the bitter experiences of life. The companion was very clever and, I thought, faithful to me. But in  this I was deceived. He became jealous of an office clerk who was  staying with me, and wove such a tangled web that I suspected the  clerk. This clerical friend had a temper of his own. Immediately he  saw that he had been the object of my suspicion, he left both the  house and the office. I was pained. I felt that perhaps I had been  unjust to him, and my conscience always stung me.  In the meanwhile, the cook needed a few days' leave, or for some  other cause was away. It was necessary to procure another during his  absence. Of this new man I learnt later that he was a perfect scamp.  But for me he proved a godsend. Within two or three days of his  arrival, he discovered certain irregularities that were going on  under my roof without my knowledge, and he made up his mind to warn  me. I had the reputation of being a credulous but straight man. The  discovery was to him, therefore, all the more shocking. Every day at  one o'clock I used to go home from office for lunch. At about twelve  o'clock one day the cook came panting to the office, and said,  'Please come home at once. There is a surprise for you.' 'Now, what  is this?' I asked. 'You must tell me what it is. How can I leave the  office at this hour to go and see it?'  'You will regret it, if you don't come. That is all I can say.'  I felt an appeal in his persistence. I went home accompanied by a  clerk and the cook who walked ahead of us. He took me straight to  the upper floor, pointed at my companion's room, and said, 'Open  this door and see for yourself.'  I saw it all. I knocked at the door. No reply! I knocked heavily so  as to make the very walls shake. The door was opened. I saw a  prostitute inside. I asked her to leave the house, never to return.  To the companion I said, 'From this moment I cease to have anything  to do with you. I have been thoroughly deceived and have made a fool  of myself. That is how you have requited my trust in you?' Instead of coming to his senses, he threatened to expose me. 'I have nothing to conceal,' said I, 'Expose whatever I may have  done. But you must leave me this moment.'  This made him worse. There was no help for it. So I said to the  clerk standing downstairs: 'Please go and inform the police  superintendent, with my compliments, that a person living with me  has misbehaved himself. I do not want to keep him in my house, but  he refuses to leave. I shall be much obliged if police help can be  sent me.'  This showed him that I was in earnest. His guilt unnerved him. He  apologized to me, entreated me not to inform the police, and agreed  to leave the house immediately, which he did.  The incident came as a timely warning in my life. Only now could I  see clearly how thoroughly I had been beguiled by this evil genius.  In harbouring him I had chosen a bad means for a good end. I had  expected to 'gather figs of thistles'. I had known that the companion  was a bad character, and yet I believed in his faithfulness to me.  In the attempt to reform him I was near ruining myself. I had  disregarded the warning of kind friends. Infatuation had completely  blinded me.  But for the new cook I should never have discovered the truth and  being under the influence of the companion, I should probably have  been unable to lead the life of detachment that I then began. I  should always have been wasting time on him. He had the power to  keep me in the dark and to mislead me.  But God came to the rescue as before. My intentions were pure, and  so I was saved in spite of my mistakes, and this early experience  thoroughly forewarned me for the future.  The cook had been almost a messenger sent from Heaven. He did not  know cooking, and as a cook he could not have remained at my place.  But no one else could have opened my eyes. This was not the first  time, as I subsequently learnt, that the woman had been brought into  my house. She had come often before, but no one had the courage of  this cook. For everyone knew how blindly I trusted the companion.  The cook had, as it were, been sent to me just to do this service,  for he begged leave of me that very moment.  'I cannot stay in your house,' he said. 'You are so easily misled.  This is no place for me.'  I let him go.  I soon discovered that the man who had poisoned my ears against the  clerk was no other than this companion. I tried very hard to make  amends to the clerk for the injustice I had done him. It has,  however, been my eternal regret that I could never satisfy him  fully. Howsoever you may repair it, a rift is a rift 