Hardly ever have I known anybody to cherish such loyalty as I did to the  British Constitution. I can see now that my love of truth was at the  root of this loyalty. It has never been possible for me to simulate  loyalty or, for that matter, any other virtue. The National Anthem  used to be sung at every meeting that I attended in Natal. I then  felt that I must also join in the singing. Not that I was  unaware of the defects in British rule, but I thought it was on  the whole acceptable. In those days I believed that British rule was  on the whole beneficial to the ruled.  The colour prejudice that I saw in South Africa was, I thought, quite contrary to British  traditions, and I believed that it was only temporary and local. I  therefore vied with Englishmen in loyalty to the throne. With  careful perseverance I learnt the tune of the National Anthem and  joined in the singing whenever it was sung. Whenever there was an  occasion for the expression of loyalty without fuss or ostentation,  I readily took part in it.  Never in my life did I exploit this loyalty, never did I seek to  gain a selfish end by its means. It was for me more in the nature of  an obligation, and I rendered it without expecting a reward. Preparations were going on for the celebration of Queen Victoria's  Diamond Jubilee when I reached India. I was invited to join the  committee appointed for the purpose in Rajkot. I accepted the offer,  but had a suspicion that the celebrations would be largely a matter  of show. I discovered much humbug about them and was considerably  pained. I began to ask myself whether I should remain on the  committee or not, but ultimately decided to rest content with doing  my part of the business.  One of the proposals was to plant trees. I saw that many did it  merely for show and for pleasing the officials. I tried to plead  with them that tree-planting was not compulsory, but merely a  suggestion. It should be done seriously or not at all. I have an  impression that they laughed at my ideas. I remember that I was in  earnest when I planted the tree allotted to me and that I carefully  watered and tended it.  I likewise taught the National Anthem to the children of my family.  I recollect having taught it to students of the local Training  College, but I forget whether it was on the occasion of the jubilee  or of King Edward VII's coronation as Emperor of India. Later on the  text began to jar on me. As my conception of Ahimsa  went on maturing, I became more vigilant about my thought and  speech. The lines in the Anthem: 