I was no doubt at fault in having gone to that officer. But his impatience  and overbearing anger were out of all proportion to my mistake. It  did not warrant expulsion. I can scarcely have taken up more than  five minutes of his time. But he simply could not endure my talking.  He could have politely asked me to go, but power had intoxicated him  to an inordinate extent. Later I came to know that patience was not  one of the virtues of this officer. It was usual for him to insult  his visitors. The slightest unpleasantness was sure to put the sahib out. Now most of my work would naturally be in his court. It was beyond me to  conciliate him. I had no desire to curry favour with him. Indeed,  having once threatened to proceed against him, I did not like to  remain silent.  Meanwhile I began to learn something of the petty politics of the country.  Kathiawad, being a conglomeration of small states, naturally had its  rich crop of politicals. Petty intrigues between states, and  intrigues of officers for power were the order of the day. Princes  were always at the mercy of others and ready to lend their ears to  sycophants. Even the sahib's peon had  to be cajoled, and the sahib's shirastedar was more  than his master, as he was his eyes, his ears and his interpreter.  The shirastedar's will was law, and his income was always reputed to be more than the sahib's.  This may have been an exaggeration, but he certainly lived beyond his salary.  This atmosphere appeared to me to be poisonous, and how to remain  unscathed was a perpetual problem for me.  I was thoroughly depressed and my brother clearly saw it. We both felt  that, if I could secure some job, I should be free from this  atmosphere of intrigue. But without intrigue a ministership or  judgeship was out of the question. And the quarrel with the  sahib stood in the way of my practice.  Probandar was then under administration, and I had some work there in the  shape of securing more powers for the prince. Also I had to see the  Administrator in respect of the heavy vighoti (land  rent) exacted from the Mers. This officer, though an Indian, was, I  found, one better than the sahib in  arrogance. He was able, but the ryots appeared to me to be none the  better off for his ability. I succeeded in securing a few more  powers for the Rana, but hardly any relief for the Mers. It struck  me that their cause was not even carefully gone into. So even in this mission I was comparatively disappointed. I thought justice  was not done to my clients, but I had not the means to secure it. At  the most I could have appealed to the Political Agent or to the  Governor who would have dismissed the appeal saying, 'We decline to  interfere.' If there had been any rule or regulation governing such  decisions, it would have been something, but here the sahib's will was  law.  I was exasperated.  In the meantime a Meman firm from Porbandar wrote to my brother making the  following offer: 'We have business in South Africa. Ours is a big  firm, and we have a big case there in the Court, our claim being £  40,000. It has been going on for a long time. We have engaged the  services of the best vakils and barristers. If you sent your brother  there, he would be useful to us and also to himself. He would be  able to instruct our counsel better than ourselves. And he would  have the advantage of seeing a new part of the world, and of making  new acquaintances.'  My brother discussed the proposition with me. I could not clearly make  out whether I had simply to instruct the counsel or to appear in  court. But I was tempted.  My brother introduced me to the late Sheth Abdul Karim Jhaveri a  partner of Dada Abdulla & Co., the firm in question. 'It won't be a  difficult job,' the Sheth assured me. 'We have big Europeans as our  friends, whose acquaintance you will make. You can be useful to us  in our shop. Much of our correspondence is in English and you can  help us with that too. You will, of course, be our guest and hence  will have no expense whatever.'  'How long do you require my services?' I asked. 'And what will be the  payment?'  'Not more than a year. We will pay you a first class return fare and a sum of  £105, all found.'  This was hardly going there as a barrister. It was going as a servant of the  firm. But I wanted somehow to leave India. There was also the  tempting opportunity of seeing a new country, and of having new  experience. Also I could send £105 to my brother and help in the  expenses of the household. I closed with the offer without any  haggling, and got ready to go to South Africa. 