 r.  I
 
 
      
I
  .
MY FRIENDS: — It will readily occur to you that I
cannot, in half an hour, notice all the things that so able a
man as Judge Douglas can say in an hour and a half; and I
hope, therefore, if there be anything that he has said upon
which you would like to hear something from me, but which
I omit to comment upon, you will bear in mind that it would
be expecting an impossibility for me to go over his whole
ground. I can but take up some of the points that he has
dwelt upon, and employ my half-hour specially on them.
The ﬁrst thing I have to say to you is a word in regard to
Judge Douglas’s declaration about the “vulgarity and
blackguardism” in the audience, that no such thing, as he
says, was shown by any Democrat while I was speaking.
Now, I only wish, by way of reply on this subject, to say that
while 
I 
was 
speaking, 
I 
used 
no 
“vulgarity 
or
blackguardism” toward any Democrat.
Now, my friends, I come to all this long portion of the
Judge’s speech, — perhaps half of it, — which he has
devoted to the various resolutions and platforms that have
been adopted in the diﬀerent counties in the diﬀerent
Congressional districts, and in the Illinois legislature,
which he supposes are at variance with the positions I have
assumed before you to-day. It is true that many of these
 resolutions are at variance with the positions I have here
assumed. All I have to ask is that we talk reasonably and
rationally about it. I happen to know, the Judge’s opinion to
the contrary notwithstanding, that I have never tried to
conceal my opinions, nor tried to deceive any one in
reference to them. He may go and examine all the members
who voted for me for United States Senator in 1855, after
the election of 1854. They were pledged to certain things
here at home, and were determined to have pledges from
me; and if he will ﬁnd any of these persons who will tell him
anything inconsistent with what I say now, I will resign, or
rather retire from the race, and give him no more trouble.
The plain truth is this: At the introduction of the Nebraska
policy, we believed there was a new era being introduced in
the history of the Republic, which tended to the spread and
perpetuation of slavery. But in our opposition to that
measure we did not agree with one another in everything.
The people in the north end of the State were for stronger
measures of opposition than we of the central and southern
portions of the State, but we were all opposed to the
Nebraska doctrine. We had that one feeling and that one
sentiment in common. You at the north end met in your
conventions and passed your resolutions. We in the middle
of the State and farther south did not hold such
conventions and pass the same resolutions, although we
had in general a common view and a common sentiment.
So that these meetings which the Judge has alluded to, and
the resolutions he has read from, were local, and did not
spread over the whole State. We at last met together in
 1886, from all parts of the State, and we agreed upon a
common platform. You, who held more extreme notions,
either yielded those notions, or, if not wholly yielding them,
agreed to yield them practically, for the sake of embodying
the opposition to the measures which the opposite party
were pushing forward at that time. We met you then, and if
there was anything yielded, it was for practical purposes.
We agreed then upon a platform for the party throughout
the entire State of Illinois, and now we are all bound, as a
party, to that platform.
And I say here to you, if any one expects of me — in case
of my election — that I will do anything not signiﬁed by our
Republican platform and my answers here to-day, I tell you
very frankly that person will be deceived. I do not ask for
the vote of any one who supposes that I have secret
purposes or pledges that I dare not speak out. Cannot the
Judge be satisﬁed? If he fears, in the unfortunate case of
my election, that my going to Washington will enable me to
advocate sentiments contrary to those which I expressed
when you voted for and elected me, I assure him that his
fears are wholly needless and groundless. Is the Judge
really afraid of any such thing? I’ll tell you what he is afraid
of. He is afraid we’ll all pull together. This is what alarms
him more than anything else. For my part, I do hope that all
of us, entertaining a common sentiment in opposition to
what appears to us a design to nationalize and perpetuate
slavery, will waive minor diﬀerences on questions which
either belong to the dead past or the distant future, and all
pull together in this struggle. What are your sentiments? If
 it be true that on the ground which I occupy — ground
which I occupy as frankly and boldly as Judge Douglas does
his, — my views, though partly coinciding with yours, are
not as perfectly in accordance with your feelings as his are,
I do say to you in all candor, go for him, and not for me. I
hope to deal in all things fairly with Judge Douglas, and
with the people of the State, in this contest. And if I should
never be elected to any oﬀice, I trust I may go down with
no stain of falsehood upon my reputation, notwithstanding
the hard opinions Judge Douglas chooses to entertain of
me.
The Judge has again addressed himself to the Abolition
tendencies of a speech of mine made at Springﬁeld in June
last. I have so often tried to answer what he is always
saying on that melancholy theme that I almost turn with
disgust from the discussion, — from the repetition of an
answer to it. I trust that nearly all of this intelligent
audience have read that speech. If you have, I may venture
to leave it to you to inspect it closely, and see whether it
contains any of those “bugaboos” which frighten Judge
Douglas.
The Judge complains that I did not fully answer his
questions. If I have the sense to comprehend and answer
those questions, I have done so fairly. If it can be pointed
out to me how I can more fully and fairly answer him, I aver
I have not the sense to see how it is to be done. He says I
do not declare I would in any event vote for the admission
of a slave State into the Union. If I have been fairly
reported, he will see that I did give an explicit answer to
 his interrogatories; I did not merely say that I would dislike
to be put to the test, but I said clearly, if I were put to the
test, and a Territory from which slavery had been excluded
should present herself with a State constitution sanctioning
slavery, — a most extraordinary thing, and wholly unlikely
to happen, — I did not see how I could avoid voting for her
admission. But he refuses to understand that I said so, and
he wants this audience to understand that I did not say so.
Yet it will be so reported in the printed speech that he
cannot help seeing it.
He says if I should vote for the admission of a slave State
I would be voting for a dissolution of the Union, because I
hold that the Union cannot permanently exist half slave and
half free. I repeat that I do not believe this government can
endure permanently half slave and half free; yet I do not
admit, nor does it at all follow, that the admission of a
single slave State will permanently ﬁx the character and
establish this as a universal slave nation. The Judge is very
happy indeed at working up these quibbles. Before leaving
the subject of answering questions, I aver as my conﬁdent
belief, when you come to see our speeches in print, that you
will ﬁnd every question which he has asked me more fairly
and boldly and fully answered than he has answered those
which I put to him. Is not that so? The two speeches may be
placed side by side, and I will venture to leave it to
impartial judges whether his questions have not been more
directly and circumstantially answered than mine.
Judge Douglas says he made a charge upon the editor of
the Washington Union, alone, of entertaining a purpose to
 rob the States of their power to exclude slavery from their
limits. I undertake to say, and I make the direct issue, that
he did not make his charge against the editor of the Union
alone. I will undertake to prove by the record here that he
made that charge against more and higher dignitaries than
the editor of the Washington Union. I am quite aware that
he was shirking and dodging around the form in which he
put it, but I can make it manifest that he leveled his “fatal
blow” against more persons than this Washington editor.
Will he dodge it now by alleging that I am trying to defend
Mr. Buchanan against the charge? Not at all. Am I not
making the same charge myself? I am trying to show that
you, Judge Douglas, are a witness on my side. I am not
defending Buchanan, and I will tell Judge Douglas that in
my opinion, when he made that charge, he had an eye
farther north than he has to-day. He was then ﬁghting
against people who called him a Black Republican and an
Abolitionist. It is mixed all through his speech, and it is
tolerably manifest that his eye was a great deal farther
north than it is to-day. The Judge says that though he made
this charge, Toombs got up and declared there was not a
man in the United States, except the editor of the Union,
who was in favor of the doctrines put forth in that article.
And thereupon I understand that the Judge withdrew the
charge. 
Although 
he 
had 
taken 
extracts 
from 
the
newspaper, and then from the Lecompton Constitution, to
show the existence of a conspiracy to bring about a “fatal
blow,” by which the States were to be deprived of the right
of excluding slavery, it all went to pot as soon as Toombs
 got up and told him it was not true. It reminds me of the
story that John Phoenix, the California railroad surveyor,
tells. He says they started out from the Plaza to the Mission
of Dolores. They had two ways of determining distances.
One was by a chain and pins taken over the ground. The
other was by a “go-it-ometer,” — an invention of his own, —
a three-legged instrument, with which he computed a
series of triangles between the points. At night he turned to
the chain-man to ascertain what distance they had come,
and found that by some mistake he had merely dragged the
chain over the ground, without keeping any record. By the
“go-it-ometer,” he found he had made ten miles. Being
skeptical about this, he asked a drayman who was passing
how far it was to the Plaza. The drayman replied it was just
half a mile; and the surveyor put it down in his book, — just
as Judge Douglas says, after he had made his calculations
and computations, he took Toombs’s statement. I have no
doubt that after Judge Douglas had made his charge, he
was as easily satisﬁed about its truth as the surveyor was of
the drayman’s statement of the distance to the Plaza. Yet it
is a fact that the man who put forth all that matter which
Douglas deemed a “fatal blow” at State sovereignty was
elected by the Democrats as public printer.
Now, gentlemen, you may take Judge Douglas’s speech of
March 22, 1858, beginning about the middle of page 21,
and reading to the bottom of page 24, and you will ﬁnd the
evidence on which I say that he did not make his charge
against the editor of the Union alone. I cannot stop to read
it, but I will give it to the reporters. Judge Douglas said:
 “Mr. 
President, 
you 
here 
ﬁnd 
several 
distinct
propositions advanced boldly by the Washington Union
editorially, and apparently authoritatively, and every man
who questions any of them is denounced as an Abolitionist,
a Free-soiler, a fanatic. The propositions are, ﬁrst, that the
primary object of all government at its original institution is
the protection of persons and property; second, that the
Constitution of the United States declares that the citizens
of each State shall be entitled to all the privileges and
immunities of citizens in the several States; and that,
therefore, thirdly, all State laws, whether organic or
otherwise, which prohibit the citizens of one State from
settling in another with their slave property, and especially
declaring it forfeited, are direct violations of the original
intention of the Government and Constitution of the United
States; and, fourth, that the emancipation of the slaves of
the Northern States was a gross outrage on the rights of
property, in as much as it was involuntarily done on the
part of the owner.
“Remember that this article was published in the Union
on the 17th of November, and on the 18th appeared the
ﬁrst article giving the adhesion of the Union to the
Lecompton Constitution. It was in these words:
“‘KANSAS AND HER CONSTITUTION. — The vexed
question is settled. The problem is solved. The dead point
of danger is passed. All serious trouble to Kansas aﬀairs is
over and gone....”
“And a column, nearly, of the same sort. Then, when you
come to look into the Lecompton Constitution, you ﬁnd the
 same doctrine incorporated in it which was put forth
editorially in the Union. What is it?
“‘ARTICLE 7, Section i. The right of property is before
and higher than any constitutional sanction; and the right
of the owner of a slave to such slave and its increase is the
same and as invariable as the right of the owner of any
property whatever.’
“Then in the schedule is a provision that the Constitution
may be amended after 1864 by a two-thirds vote.
“‘But no alteration shall be made to aﬀect the right of
property in the ownership of slaves.’
“It will be seen by these clauses in the Lecompton
Constitution that they are identical in spirit with this
authoritative article in the Washington Union of the day
previous to its indorsement of this Constitution.
“When I saw that article in the Union of the 17th of
November, followed by the gloriﬁcation of the Lecompton
Constitution on the 18th of November, and this clause in
the Constitution asserting the doctrine that a State has no
right to prohibit slavery within its limits, I saw that there
was a fatal blow being struck at the sovereignty of the
States of this Union.”
Here he says, “Mr. President, you here ﬁnd several
distinct propositions advanced boldly, and apparently
authoritatively.” By whose authority, Judge Douglas? Again,
he says in another place, “It will be seen by these clauses in
the Lecompton Constitution that they are identical in spirit
with this authoritative article.” By whose authority, — who
do you mean to say authorized the publication of these
 articles? 
He 
knows 
that 
the 
Washington 
Union 
is
considered the organ of the Administration. I demand of
Judge Douglas by whose authority he meant to say those
articles were published, if not by the authority of the
President of the United States and his Cabinet? I defy him
to show whom he referred to, if not to these high
functionaries in the Federal Government. More than this,
he says the articles in that paper and the provisions of the
Lecompton 
Constitution 
are 
“identical,” 
and, 
being
identical, he argues that the authors are co-operating and
conspiring 
together. 
He 
does 
not 
use 
the 
word
“conspiring,” but what other construction can you put upon
it? He winds up:
“When I saw that article in the Union of the 17th of
November, followed by the gloriﬁcation of the Lecompton
Constitution on the 18th of November, and this clause in
the Constitution asserting the doctrine that a State has no
right to prohibit slavery within its limits, I saw that there
was a fatal blow being struck at the sovereignty of the
States of this Union.”
I ask him if all this fuss was made over the editor of this
newspaper. It would be a terribly “fatal blow” indeed which
a single man could strike, when no President, no Cabinet
oﬀicer, no member of Congress, was giving strength and
eﬀiciency to the movement. Out of respect to Judge
Douglas’s good sense I must believe he did n’t manufacture
his idea of the “fatal” character of that blow out of such a
miserable scapegrace as he represents that editor to be.
But the Judge’s eye is farther south now. Then, it was very
 peculiarly and decidedly north. His hope rested on the idea
of visiting the great “Black Republican” party, and making
it the tail of his new kite. He knows he was then expecting
from day to day to turn Republican, and place himself at
the head of our organization. He has found that these
despised “Black Republicans” estimate him by a standard
which he has taught them none too well. Hence he is
crawling back into his old camp, and you will ﬁnd him
eventually installed in full fellowship among those whom he
was then battling, and with whom he now pretends to be at
such fearful variance.
