  I     
I
  
  A    A  
  A
A
AUGUST 21, 1858
MR. LINCOLN’S REPLY
MY FELLOW-CITIZENS: — When a man hears himself
somewhat misrepresented, it provokes him, at least, I ﬁnd
it so with myself; but when misrepresentation becomes
very gross and palpable, it is more apt to amuse him. The
ﬁrst thing I see ﬁt to notice is the fact that Judge Douglas
alleges, after running through the history of the old
Democratic and the old Whig parties, that Judge Trumbull
and myself made an arrangement in 1854, by which I was
to have the place of General Shields in the United States
Senate, and Judge Trumbull was to have the place of Judge
Douglas. Now, all I have to say upon that subject is that I
think no man not even Judge Douglas can prove it, because
it is not true. I have no doubt he is “conscientious” in
saying it. As to those resolutions that he took such a length
of time to read, as being the platform of the Republican
party in 1854, I say I never had anything to do with them,
and I think Trumbull never had. Judge Douglas cannot
show that either of us ever did have anything to do with
them.
I believe this is true about those resolutions: There was a
call for a convention to form a Republican party at
 Springﬁeld, and I think that my friend Mr. Lovejoy, who is
here upon this stand, had a hand in it. I think this is true,
and I think if he will remember accurately he will be able to
recollect that he tried to get me into it, and I would not go
in. I believe it is also true that I went away from Springﬁeld
when the convention was in session, to attend court in
Tazewell county. It is true they did place my name, though
without authority, upon the committee, and afterward
wrote me to attend the meeting of the committee; but I
refused to do so, and I never had anything to do with that
organization. This is the plain truth about all that matter of
the resolutions.
Now, about this story that Judge Douglas tells of
Trumbull bargaining to sell out the old Democratic party,
and Lincoln agreeing to sell out the old Whig party, I have
the means of knowing about that: Judge Douglas cannot
have; and I know there is no substance to it whatever. Yet I
have no doubt he is “conscientious” about it. I know that
after Mr. Lovejoy got into the Legislature that winter, he
complained of me that I had told all the old Whigs of his
district that the old Whig party was good enough for them,
and some of them voted against him because I told them so.
Now, I have no means of totally disproving such charges as
this which the Judge makes. A man cannot prove a
negative; but he has a right to claim that when a man
makes an aﬀirmative charge, he must oﬀer some proof to
show the truth of what he says. I certainly cannot introduce
testimony to show the negative about things, but I have a
right to claim that if a man says he knows a thing, then he
 must show how he knows it. I always have a right to claim
this, and it is not satisfactory to me that he may be
“conscientious” on the subject.
Now, gentlemen, I hate to waste my time on such things;
but in regard to that general Abolition tilt that Judge
Douglas makes, when he says that I was engaged at that
time in selling out and Abolitionizing the old Whig party, I
hope you will permit me to read a part of a printed speech
that I made then at Peoria, which will show altogether a
diﬀerent view of the position I took in that contest of 1854.
[Voice: “Put on your specs.”]
Mr. LINCOLN: Yes, sir, I am obliged to do so; I am no
longer a young man.
“This is the repeal of the Missouri Compromise. The
foregoing history may not be precisely accurate in every
particular, but I am sure it is suﬀiciently so for all the uses I
shall attempt to make of it, and in it we have before us the
chief materials enabling us to correctly judge whether the
repeal of the Missouri Compromise is right or wrong.
“I think, and shall try to show, that it is wrong — wrong
in its direct eﬀect, letting slavery into Kansas and
Nebraska, and wrong in its prospective principle, allowing
it to spread to every other part of the wide world where
men can be found inclined to take it.
“This declared indiﬀerence, but, as I must think, covert
real zeal for the spread of slavery, I cannot but hate. I hate
it because of the monstrous injustice of slavery itself. I hate
it because it deprives our republican example of its just
inﬂuence in the world, — enables the enemies of free
 institutions, with plausibility, to taunt us as hypocrites;
causes the real friends of freedom to doubt our sincerity,
and especially because it forces so many really good men
amongst ourselves into an open war with the very
fundamental principles of civil liberty, criticizing the
Declaration of Independence, and insisting that there is no
right principle of action but self-interest.
“Before proceeding, let me say I think I have no
prejudice against the Southern people. They are just what
we would be in their situation. If slavery did not now exist
among them, they would not introduce it. If it did now exist
among us, we should not instantly give it up. This I believe
of the masses north and south. Doubtless there are
individuals on both sides who would not hold slaves under
any circumstances; and others who would gladly introduce
slavery anew, if it were out of existence. We know that
some Southern men do free their slaves, go north, and
become tip-top Abolitionists; while some Northern ones go
south and become most cruel slave-masters.
“When Southern people tell us they are no more
responsible for the origin of slavery than we, I acknowledge
the fact. When it is said that the institution exists, and that
it is very diﬀicult to get rid of it, in any satisfactory way, I
can understand and appreciate the saying. I will not blame
them for not doing what I should not know how to do
myself. If all earthly power were given me, I should not
know what to do, as to the existing institution. My ﬁrst
impulse would be to free all the slaves and send them to
Liberia, — to their own native land. But a moment’s
 reﬂection would convince me that whatever of high hope
(as I think there is) there may be in this in the long term,
its sudden execution is impossible. If they were all landed
there in a day, they would all perish in the next ten days;
and there are not surplus shipping and surplus money
enough in the world to carry them there in many times ten
days. What then? Free them all and keep them among us as
underlings? Is it quite certain that this betters their
condition? I think I would not hold one in slavery, at any
rate; yet the point is not clear enough to me to denounce
people upon. What next? Free them, and make them
politically and socially our equals? My own feelings will not
admit of this; and if mine would, we well know that those of
the great mass of white people will not. Whether this
feeling accords with justice and sound judgment, is not the
sole question, if, indeed, it is any part of it. A universal
feeling, whether well or ill founded, cannot be safely
disregarded. We cannot, then, make them equals. It does
seem to me that systems of gradual emancipation might be
adopted; but for their tardiness in this I will not undertake
to judge our brethren of the South.
“When they remind us of their constitutional rights, I
acknowledge them, not grudgingly, but fully and fairly; and
I would give them any legislation for the reclaiming of their
fugitives, which should not, in its stringency, be more likely
to carry a free man into slavery than Our ordinary criminal
laws are to hang an innocent one.
“But all this, to my judgment, furnishes no more excuse
for permitting slavery to go into our own free territory than
 it would for reviving the African slave-trade by law. The law
which forbids the bringing of slaves from Africa, and that
which has so long forbid the taking of them to Nebraska,
can hardly be distinguished on any moral principle; and the
repeal of the former could ﬁnd quite as plausible excuses
as that of the latter.”
I have reason to know that Judge Douglas knows that I
said this. I think he has the answer here to one of the
questions he put to me. I do not mean to allow him to
catechize me unless he pays back for it in kind. I will not
answer questions one after another, unless he reciprocates;
but as he has made this inquiry, and I have answered it
before, he has got it without my getting anything in return.
He has got my answer on the Fugitive Slave law.
Now, gentlemen, I don’t want to read at any greater
length; but this is the true complexion of all I have ever
said in regard to the institution of slavery and the black
race. This is the whole of it; and anything that argues me
into his idea of perfect social and political equality with the
negro is but a specious and fantastic arrangement of
words, by which a man can prove a horse-chestnut to be a
chestnut horse. I will say here, while upon this subject, that
I have no purpose, directly or indirectly, to interfere with
the institution of slavery in the States where it exists. I
believe I have no lawful right to do so, and I have no
inclination to do so. I have no purpose to introduce political
and social equality between the white and the black races.
There is a physical diﬀerence between the two which, in my
judgment, will probably forever forbid their living together
 upon the footing of perfect equality; and inasmuch as it
becomes a necessity that there must be a diﬀerence, I, as
well as Judge Douglas, am in favor of the race to which I
belong having the superior position. I have never said
anything to the contrary, but I hold that, notwithstanding
all this, there is no reason in the world why the negro is not
entitled to all the natural rights enumerated in the
Declaration of Independence, the right to life, liberty, and
the pursuit of happiness. I hold that he is as much entitled
to these as the white man. I agree with Judge Douglas he is
not my equal in many respects, certainly not in color,
perhaps not in moral or intellectual endowment. But in the
right to eat the bread, without the leave of anybody else,
which his own hand earns, he is my equal, and the equal of
Judge Douglas, and the equal of every living man.
Now I pass on to consider one or two more of these little
follies. The Judge is woefully at fault about his early friend
Lincoln being a “grocery-keeper.” I don’t know as it would
be a great sin, if I had been; but he is mistaken. Lincoln
never kept a grocery anywhere in the world. It is true that
Lincoln did work the latter part of one winter in a little
stillhouse, up at the head of a hollow. And so I think my
friend the Judge is equally at fault when he charges me at
the time when I was in Congress of having opposed our
soldiers who were ﬁghting in the Mexican war. The Judge
did not make his charge very distinctly, but I can tell you
what he can prove, by referring to the record. You
remember I was an old Whig, and whenever the
Democratic party tried to get me to vote that the war had
 been righteously begun by the President, I would not do it.
But whenever they asked for any money, or landwarrants,
or anything to pay the soldiers there, during all that time, I
gave the same vote that Judge Douglas did. You can think
as you please as to whether that was consistent. Such is the
truth, and the Judge has the right to make all he can out of
it. But when he, by a general charge, conveys the idea that
I withheld supplies from the soldiers who were ﬁghting in
the Mexican war, or did anything else to hinder the
soldiers, he is, to say the least, grossly and altogether
mistaken, as a consultation of the records will prove to him.
As I have not used up so much of my time as I had
supposed, I will dwell a little longer upon one or two of
these minor topics upon which the Judge has spoken. He
has read from my speech in Springﬁeld, in which I say that
“a house divided against itself cannot stand” Does the
Judge say it can stand? I don’t know whether he does or
not. The Judge does not seem to be attending to me just
now, but I would like to know if it is his opinion that a
house divided against itself can stand. If he does, then
there is a question of veracity, not between him and me, but
between the Judge and an Authority of a somewhat higher
character.
Now, my friends, I ask your attention to this matter for
the purpose of saying something seriously. I know that the
Judge may readily enough agree with me that the maxim
which was put forth by the Savior is true, but he may allege
that I misapply it; and the Judge has a right to urge that, in
my application, I do misapply it, and then I have a right to
 show that I do not misapply it, When he undertakes to say
that because I think this nation, so far as the question of
slavery is concerned, will all become one thing or all the
other, I am in favor of bringing about a dead uniformity in
the various States, in all their institutions, he argues
erroneously. The great variety of the local institutions in the
States, springing from diﬀerences in the soil, diﬀerences in
the face of the country, and in the climate, are bonds of
Union. They do not make “a house divided against itself,”
but they make a house united. If they produce in one
section of the country what is called for, by the wants of
another section, and this other section can supply the
wants of the ﬁrst, they are not matters of discord, but
bonds of union, true bonds of union. But can this question
of slavery be considered as among these varieties in the
institutions of the country? I leave it to you to say whether,
in the history of our government, this institution of slavery
has not always failed to be a bond of union, and, on the
contrary, been an apple of discord and an element of
division in the house. I ask you to consider whether, so long
as the moral constitution of men’s minds shall continue to
be the same, after this generation and assemblage shall
sink into the grave, and another race shall arise, with the
same moral and intellectual development we have, whether,
if that institution is standing in the same irritating position
in which it now is, it will not continue an element of
division? If so, then I have a right to say that, in regard to
this question, the Union is a house divided against itself;
and when the Judge reminds me that I have often said to
 him that the institution of slavery has existed for eighty
years in some States, and yet it does not exist in some
others, I agree to the fact, and I account for it by looking at
the position in which our fathers originally placed it —
restricting it from the new Territories where it had not
gone, and legislating to cut oﬀ its source by the abrogation
of the slave trade, thus putting the seal of legislation
against its spread. The public mind did rest in the belief
that it was in the course of ultimate extinction. But lately, I
think — and in this I charge nothing on the Judge’s motives
— lately, I think that he, and those acting with him, have
placed that institution on a new basis, which looks to the
perpetuity and nationalization of slavery. And while it is
placed upon this new basis, I say, and I have said, that I
believe we shall not have peace upon the question until the
opponents of slavery arrest the further spread of it, and
place it where the public mind shall rest in the belief that it
is in the course of ultimate extinction; or, on the other
hand, that its advocates will push it forward until it shall
become alike lawful in all the States, old as well as new,
North as well as South. Now, I believe if we could arrest
the spread, and place it where Washington and Jeﬀerson
and Madison placed it, it would be in the course of ultimate
extinction, and the public mind would, as for eighty years
past, believe that it was in the course of ultimate extinction.
The crisis would be past, and the institution might be let
alone for a hundred years, if it should live so long, in the
States where it exists; yet it would be going out of
 existence in the way best for both the black and the white
races.
[A voice: “Then do you repudiate popular sovereignty?”]
Well, then, let us talk about popular sovereignty! what is
popular sovereignty? Is it the right of the people to have
slavery or not have it, as they see ﬁt, in the Territories? I
will state — and I have an able man to watch me — my
understanding is that popular sovereignty, as now applied
to the question of slavery, does allow the people of a
Territory to have slavery if they want to, but does not allow
them not to have it if they do not want it. I do not mean that
if this vast concourse of people were in a Territory of the
United States, any one of them would be obliged to have a
slave if he did not want one; but I do say that, as I
understand the Dred Scott decision, if any one man wants
slaves, all the rest have no way of keeping that one man
from holding them.
When I made my speech at Springﬁeld, of which the
Judge complains, and from which he quotes, I really was
not thinking of the things which he ascribes to me at all. I
had no thought in the world that I was doing anything to
bring about a war between the free and slave states. I had
no thought in the world that I was doing anything to bring
about a political and social equality of the black and white
races. It never occurred to me that I was doing anything or
favoring anything to reduce to a dead uniformity all the
local institutions of the various States. But I must say, in all
fairness to him, if he thinks I am doing something which
leads to these bad results, it is none the better that I did
 not mean it. It is just as fatal to the country, if I have any
inﬂuence in producing it, whether I intend it or not. But can
it be true that placing this institution upon the original
basis — the basis upon which our fathers placed it — can
have any tendency to set the Northern and the Southern
States at war with one another, or that it can have any
tendency to make the people of Vermont raise sugar-cane,
because they raise it in Louisiana, or that it can compel the
people of Illinois to cut pine logs on the Grand Prairie,
where they will not grow, because they cut pine logs in
Maine, where they do grow? The Judge says this is a new
principle started in regard to this question. Does the Judge
claim that he is working on the plan of the founders of
government? I think he says in some of his speeches
indeed, I have one here now — that he saw evidence of a
policy to allow slavery to be south of a certain line, while
north of it it should be excluded, and he saw an
indisposition on the part of the country to stand upon that
policy, and therefore he set about studying the subject upon
original principles, and upon original principles he got up
the Nebraska Bill! I am ﬁghting it upon these “original
principles,” ﬁghting it in the Jeﬀersonian, Washingtonian,
and Madisonian fashion.
Now, my friends, I wish you to attend for a little while to
one or two other things in that Springﬁeld speech. My main
object was to show, so far as my humble ability was capable
of showing, to the people of this country what I believed
was the truth, — that there was a tendency, if not a
conspiracy, among those who have engineered this slavery
 question for the last four or ﬁve years, to make slavery
perpetual and universal in this nation. Having made that
speech principally for that object, after arranging the
evidences that I thought tended to prove my proposition, I
concluded with this bit of comment:
“We cannot absolutely know that these exact adaptations
are the result of preconcert; but when we see a lot of
framed timbers, diﬀerent portions of which we know have
been gotten out at diﬀerent times and places, and by
diﬀerent workmen — Stephen, Franklin, Roger, and James,
for instance, — and when we see these timbers joined
together, and see they exactly make the frame of a house or
a mill, all the tenons and mortises exactly ﬁtting, and all
the lengths and proportions of the diﬀerent pieces exactly
adapted to their respective places, and not a piece too
many or too few, — not omitting even the scaﬀolding, — or
if a single piece be lacking, we see the place in the frame
exactly ﬁtted and prepared yet to bring such piece in, — in
such a case we feel it impossible not to believe that
Stephen and Franklin and Roger and James all understood
one another from the beginning, and all worked upon a
common plan or draft drawn before the ﬁrst blow was
struck.”
When my friend Judge Douglas came to Chicago on the
9th of July, this speech having been delivered on the 16th of
June, he made an harangue there, in which he took hold of
this speech of mine, showing that he had carefully read it;
and while he paid no attention to this matter at all, but
complimented me as being a “kind, amiable, and intelligent
 gentleman,” notwithstanding I had said this, he goes on
and eliminates, or draws out, from my speech this tendency
of mine to set the States at war with one another, to make
all the institutions uniform, and set the niggers and white
people to marrying together. Then, as the Judge had
complimented me with these pleasant titles (I must confess
to my weakness), I was a little “taken,” for it came from a
great man. I was not very much accustomed to ﬂattery, and
it came the sweeter to me. I was rather like the Hoosier,
with the gingerbread, when he said he reckoned he loved it
better than any other man, and got less of it. As the Judge
had so ﬂattered me, I could not make up my mind that he
meant to deal unfairly with me; so I went to work to show
him that he misunderstood the whole scope of my speech,
and that I really never intended to set the people at war
with one another. As an illustration, the next time I met
him, which was at Springﬁeld, I used this expression, that I
claimed no right under the Constitution, nor had I any
inclination, to enter into the slave States and interfere with
the institutions of slavery. He says upon that: Lincoln will
not enter into the slave States, but will go to the banks of
the Ohio, on this side, and shoot over! He runs on, step by
step, in the horse-chestnut style of argument, until in the
Springﬁeld speech he says: “Unless he shall be successful
in ﬁring his batteries until he shall have extinguished
slavery in all the States the Union shall be dissolved.” Now,
I don’t think that was exactly the way to treat “a kind,
amiable, intelligent gentleman.” I know if I had asked the
Judge to show when or where it was I had said that, if I
 didn’t succeed in ﬁring into the slave States until slavery
should be extinguished, the Union should be dissolved, he
could not have shown it. I understand what he would do.
He would say: I don’t mean to quote from you, but this was
the result of what you say. But I have the right to ask, and I
do ask now, Did you not put it in such a form that an
ordinary reader or listener would take it as an expression
from me?
In a speech at Springﬁeld, on the night of the 17th, I
thought I might as well attend to my own business a little,
and I recalled his attention as well as I could to this charge
of conspiracy to nationalize slavery. I called his attention to
the fact that he had acknowledged in my hearing twice that
he had carefully read the speech, and, in the language of
the lawyers, as he had twice read the speech, and still had
put in no plea or answer, I took a default on him. I insisted
that I had a right then to renew that charge of conspiracy.
Ten days afterward I met the Judge at Clinton, — that is to
say, I was on the ground, but not in the discussion, — and
heard him make a speech. Then he comes in with his plea
to this charge, for the ﬁrst time; and his plea when put in,
as well as I can recollect it, amounted to this: that he never
had any talk with Judge Taney or the President of the
United States with regard to the Dred Scott decision before
it was made. I (Lincoln) ought to know that the man who
makes a charge without knowing it to be true falsiﬁes as
much as he who knowingly tells a falsehood; and, lastly,
that he would pronounce the whole thing a falsehood; but,
he would make no personal application of the charge of
 falsehood, not because of any regard for the “kind, amiable,
intelligent gentleman,” but because of his own personal
self-respect! I have understood since then (but [turning to
Judge Douglas] will not hold the Judge to it if he is not
willing) that he has broken through the “self-respect,” and
has got to saying the thing out. The Judge nods to me that
it is so. It is fortunate for me that I can keep as good-
humored as I do, when the Judge acknowledges that he has
been trying to make a question of veracity with me. I know
the Judge is a great man, while I am only a small man, but I
feel that I have got him. I demur to that plea. I waive all
objections that it was not ﬁled till after default was taken,
and demur to it upon the merits. What if Judge Douglas
never did talk with Chief Justice Taney and the President
before the Dred Scott decision was made, does it follow
that he could not have had as perfect an understanding
without talking as with it? I am not disposed to stand upon
my legal advantage. I am disposed to take his denial as
being like an answer in chancery, that he neither had any
knowledge, information, or belief in the existence of such a
conspiracy. I am disposed to take his answer as being as
broad as though he had put it in these words. And now, I
ask, even if he had done so, have not I a right to prove it on
him, and to oﬀer the evidence of more than two witnesses,
by whom to prove it; and if the evidence proves the
existence of the conspiracy, does his broader answer
denying all knowledge, information, or belief, disturb the
fact? It can only show that he was used by conspirators,
and was not a leader of them.
 Now, in regard to his reminding me of the moral rule that
persons who tell
what they do not know to be true falsify as much as those
who knowingly
tell falsehoods. I remember the rule, and it must be
borne in mind that
in what I have read to you, I do not say that I know such
a conspiracy
to exist. To that I reply, I believe it. If the Judge says that
I do not
believe it, then he says what he does not know, and falls
within his
own rule, that he who asserts a thing which he does not
know to be true,
falsiﬁes as much as he who knowingly tells a falsehood. I
want to call
your attention to a little discussion on that branch of the
case, and the
evidence which brought my mind to the conclusion which
I expressed as
my belief. If, in arraying that evidence I had stated
anything which was
false or erroneous, it needed but that Judge Douglas
should point it out,
and I would have taken it back, with all the kindness in
the world. I do
not deal in that way. If I have brought forward anything
not a fact, if he
 will point it out, it will not even ruﬄe me to take it back.
But if he
will not point out anything erroneous in the evidence, is
it not rather
for him to show, by a comparison of the evidence, that I
have reasoned
falsely, than to call the “kind, amiable, intelligent
gentleman” a liar?
If I have reasoned to a false conclusion, it is the vocation
of an
able debater to show by argument that I have wandered
to an erroneous
conclusion. I want to ask your attention to a portion of
the Nebraska
Bill, which Judge Douglas has quoted:
“It being the true intent and meaning of this Act, not to
legislate slavery into any Territory or State, nor to
exclude it
therefrom, but to leave the people thereof perfectly free
to form and
regulate their domestic institutions in their own way,
subject only to the
Constitution of the United States.”
Thereupon Judge Douglas and others began to argue in
favor of “popular sovereignty,” the right of the people to
have slaves if they wanted them, and to exclude slavery if
they did not want them. “But,” said, in substance, a Senator
from Ohio (Mr. Chase, I believe), “we more than suspect
 that you do not mean to allow the people to exclude slavery
if they wish to; and if you do mean it, accept an amendment
which I propose, expressly authorizing the people to
exclude slavery.”
I believe I have the amendment here before me, which
was oﬀered, and under which the people of the Territory,
through their representatives, might, if they saw ﬁt,
prohibit the existence of slavery therein. And now I state it
as a fact, to be taken back if there is any mistake about it,
that Judge Douglas and those acting with him voted that
amendment down. I now think that those men who voted it
down had a real reason for doing so. They know what that
reason was. It looks to us, since we have seen the Dred
Scott decision pronounced, holding that “under the
Constitution” the people cannot exclude slavery, I say it
looks to outsiders, poor, simple, “amiable, intelligent
gentlemen,” as though the niche was left as a place to put
that Dred Scott decision in, — a niche which would have
been spoiled by adopting the amendment. And now, I say
again, if this was not the reason, it will avail the Judge
much more to calmly and good-humoredly point out to
these people what that other reason was for voting the
amendment down, than, swelling himself up, to vociferate
that he may be provoked to call somebody a liar.
Again: There is in that same quotation from the Nebraska
Bill this clause: “It being the true intent and meaning of
this bill not to legislate slavery into any Territory or State.”
I have always been puzzled to know what business the
word “State” had in that connection. Judge Douglas knows.
 He put it there. He knows what he put it there for. We
outsiders cannot say what he put it there for. The law they
were passing was not about States, and was not making
provisions for States. What was it placed there for? After
seeing the Dred Scott decision, which holds that the people
cannot exclude slavery from a Territory, if another Dred
Scott decision shall come, holding that they cannot exclude
it from a State, we shall discover that when the word was
originally put there, it was in view of something which was
to come in due time, we shall see that it was the other half
of something. I now say again, if there is any diﬀerent
reason for putting it there, Judge Douglas, in a good-
humored way, without calling anybody a liar, can tell what
the reason was.
When the Judge spoke at Clinton, he came very near
making a charge of falsehood against me. He used, as I
found it printed in a newspaper, which, I remember, was
very nearly like the real speech, the following language:
“I did not answer the charge [of conspiracy] before, for
the reason that I did not suppose there was a man in
America with a heart so corrupt as to believe such a charge
could be true. I have too much respect for Mr. Lincoln to
suppose he is serious in making the charge.”
I confess this is rather a curious view, that out of respect
for me he should consider I was making what I deemed
rather a grave charge in fun. I confess it strikes me rather
strangely. But I let it pass. As the Judge did not for a
moment believe that there was a man in America whose
heart was so “corrupt” as to make such a charge, and as he
 places me among the “men in America” who have hearts
base enough to make such a charge, I hope he will excuse
me if I hunt out another charge very like this; and if it
should turn out that in hunting I should ﬁnd that other, and
it should turn out to be Judge Douglas himself who made it,
I hope he will reconsider this question of the deep
corruption of heart he has thought ﬁt to ascribe to me. In
Judge Douglas’s speech of March 22, 1858, which I hold in
my hand, he says:
“In this connection there is another topic to which I
desire to allude. I seldom refer to the course of
newspapers, or notice the articles which they publish in
regard to myself; but the course of the Washington Union
has been so extraordinary for the last two or three months,
that I think it well enough to make some allusion to it. It
has read me out of the Democratic party every other day, at
least for two or three months, and keeps reading me out,
and, as if it had not succeeded, still continues to read me
out, using such terms as ‘traitor,’ ‘renegade,’ ‘deserter,’ and
other kind and polite epithets of that nature. Sir, I have no
vindication to make of my Democracy against the
Washington Union, or any other newspapers. I am willing to
allow my history and action for the last twenty years to
speak for themselves as to my political principles and my
ﬁdelity to political obligations. The Washington Union has a
personal grievance. When its editor was nominated for
public printer, I declined to vote for him, and stated that at
some time I might give my reasons for doing so. Since I
declined to give that vote, this scurrilous abuse, these
 vindictive and constant attacks have been repeated almost
daily on me. Will any friend from Michigan read the article
to which I allude?”
This is a part of the speech. You must excuse me from
reading the entire article of the Washington Union, as Mr.
Stuart read it for Mr. Douglas. The Judge goes on and sums
up, as I think, correctly:
“Mr. 
President, 
you 
here 
ﬁnd 
several 
distinct
propositions advanced boldly by the Washington Union
editorially, and apparently authoritatively; and any man
who questions any of them is denounced as an Abolitionist,
a Free-soiler, a fanatic. The propositions are, ﬁrst, that the
primary object of all government at its original institution is
the protection of person and property; second, that the
Constitution of the United States declares that the citizens
of each State shall be entitled to all the privileges and
immunities of citizens in the several States; and that,
therefore, thirdly, all State laws, whether organic or
otherwise, which prohibit the citizens of one State from
settling in another with their slave property, and especially
declaring it forfeited, are direct violations of the original
intention of the government and Constitution of the United
States; and, fourth, that the emancipation of the slaves of
the Northern States was a gross outrage of the rights of
property, inasmuch as it was involuntarily done on the part
of the owner.
“Remember that this article was published in the Union
on the 17th of November, and on the 18th appeared the
 ﬁrst article giving the adhesion of the Union, to the
Lecompton Constitution. It was in these words:
“KANSAS AND HER CONSTITUTION. — The vexed
question is settled. The problem is saved. The dead point of
danger is passed. All serious trouble to Kansas aﬀairs is
over and gone...”
And a column nearly of the same sort. Then, when you
come to look into the Lecompton Constitution, you ﬁnd the
same doctrine incorporated in it which was put forth
editorially in the Union. What is it?
“ARTICLE 7, Section I. The right of property is before
and higher than any constitutional sanction; and the right
of the owner of a slave to such slave and its increase is the
same and as inviolable as the right of the owner of any
property whatever.”
Then in the schedule is a provision that the Constitution
may be amended after 1864 by a two-thirds vote:
“But no alteration shall be made to aﬀect the right of
property in the ownership of slaves.”
“It will be seen by these clauses in the Lecompton
Constitution that they are identical in spirit with the
authoritative article in the Washington Union of the day
previous to its indorsement of this Constitution.”
I pass over some portions of the speech, and I hope that
any one who feels interested in this matter will read the
entire section of the speech, and see whether I do the
Judge injustice. He proceeds:
“When I saw that article in the Union of the 17th of
November, followed by the gloriﬁcation of the Lecompton
 Constitution on the 10th of November, and this clause in
the Constitution asserting the doctrine that a State has no
right to prohibit slavery within its limits, I saw that there
was a fatal blow being struck at the sovereignty of the
States of this Union.”
I stop the quotation there, again requesting that it may
all be read. I have read all of the portion I desire to
comment upon. What is this charge that the Judge thinks I
must have a very corrupt heart to make? It was a purpose
on the part of certain high functionaries to make it
impossible for the people of one State to prohibit the
people of any other State from entering it with their
“property,” so called, and making it a slave State. In other
words, it was a charge implying a design to make the
institution of slavery national. And now I ask your attention
to what Judge Douglas has himself done here. I know he
made that part of the speech as a reason why he had
refused to vote for a certain man for public printer; but
when we get at it, the charge itself is the very one I made
against him, that he thinks I am so corrupt for uttering.
Now, whom does he make that charge against? Does he
make it against that newspaper editor merely? No; he says
it is identical in spirit with the Lecompton Constitution, and
so the framers of that Constitution are brought in with the
editor of the newspaper in that “fatal blow being struck.”
He did not call it a “conspiracy.” In his language, it is a
“fatal blow being struck.” And if the words carry the
meaning better when changed from a “conspiracy” into a
“fatal blow being struck,” I will change my expression, and
 call it “fatal blow being struck.” We see the charge made
not merely against the editor of the Union, but all the
framers of the Lecompton Constitution; and not only so, but
the article was an authoritative article. By whose authority?
Is there any question but he means it was by the authority
of the President and his Cabinet, — the Administration?
Is there any sort of question but he means to make that
charge? Then there are the editors of the Union, the
framers of the Lecompton Constitution, the President of the
United States and his Cabinet, and all the supporters of the
Lecompton Constitution, in Congress and out of Congress,
who are all involved in this “fatal blow being struck.” I
commend to Judge Douglas’s consideration the question of
how corrupt a man’s heart must be to make such a charge!
Now, my friends, I have but one branch of the subject, in
the little time I have left, to which to call your attention;
and as I shall come to a close at the end of that branch, it is
probable that I shall not occupy quite all the time allotted
to me. Although on these questions I would like to talk
twice as long as I have, I could not enter upon another head
and discuss it properly without running over my time. I ask
the attention of the people here assembled and elsewhere
to the course that Judge Douglas is pursuing every day as
bearing upon this question of making slavery national. Not
going back to the records, but taking the speeches he
makes, the speeches he made yesterday and day before,
and makes constantly all over the country, I ask your
attention to them. In the ﬁrst place, what is necessary to
make the institution national? Not war. There is no danger
 that the people of Kentucky will shoulder their muskets,
and, with a young nigger stuck on every bayonet, march
into Illinois and force them upon us. There is no danger of
our going over there and making war upon them. Then
what is necessary for the nationalization of slavery? It is
simply the next Dred Scott decision. It is merely for the
Supreme Court to decide that no State under the
Constitution can exclude it, just as they have already
decided that under the Constitution neither Congress nor
the Territorial Legislature can do it. When that is decided
and acquiesced in, the whole thing is done. This being true,
and this being the way, as I think, that slavery is to be made
national, let us consider what Judge Douglas is doing every
day to that end. In the ﬁrst place, let us see what inﬂuence
he is exerting on public sentiment. In this and like
communities, public sentiment is everything. With public
sentiment, nothing can fail; without it, nothing can
succeed. Consequently, he who moulds public sentiment
goes deeper than he who enacts statutes or pronounces
decisions. He makes statutes and decisions possible or
impossible to be executed. This must be borne in mind, as
also the additional fact that Judge Douglas is a man of vast
inﬂuence, so great that it is enough for many men to
profess to believe anything when they once ﬁnd out Judge
Douglas professes to believe it. Consider also the attitude
he occupies at the head of a large party, — a party which he
claims has a majority of all the voters in the country. This
man sticks to a decision which forbids the people of a
Territory from excluding slavery, and he does so, not
 because he says it is right in itself, — he does not give any
opinion on that, — but because it has been decided by the
court; and being decided by the court, he is, and you are,
bound to take it in your political action as law, not that he
judges at all of its merits, but because a decision of the
court is to him a “Thus saith the Lord.” He places it on that
ground alone; and you will bear in mind that thus
committing himself unreservedly to this decision commits
him to the next one just as ﬁrmly as to this. He did not
commit himself on account of the merit or demerit of the
decision, but it is a “Thus saith the Lord.” The next
decision, as much as this, will be a “Thus saith the Lord.”
There is nothing that can divert or turn him away from this
decision. It is nothing that I point out to him that his great
prototype, General Jackson, did not believe in the binding
force of decisions. It is nothing to him that Jeﬀerson did not
so believe. I have said that I have often heard him approve
of Jackson’s course in disregarding the decision of the
Supreme 
Court 
pronouncing 
a 
National 
Bank
constitutional. He says I did not hear him say so. He denies
the accuracy of my recollection. I say he ought to know
better than I, but I will make no question about this thing,
though it still seems to me that I heard him say it twenty
times. I will tell him, though, that he now claims to stand on
the Cincinnati platform, which aﬀirms that Congress
cannot charter a National Bank, in the teeth of that old
standing decision that Congress can charter a bank. And I
remind him of another piece of history on the question of
respect for judicial decisions, and it is a piece of Illinois
 history belonging to a time when the large party to which
Judge Douglas belonged were displeased with a decision of
the Supreme Court of Illinois, because they had decided
that a Governor could not remove a Secretary of State. You
will ﬁnd the whole story in Ford’s History of Illinois, and I
know that Judge Douglas will not deny that he was then in
favor of over-slaughing that decision by the mode of adding
ﬁve new judges, so as to vote down the four old ones. Not
only so, but it ended in the Judge’s sitting down on that
very bench as one of the ﬁve new judges to break down the
four old ones It was in this way precisely that he got his
title of judge. Now, when the Judge tells me that men
appointed conditionally to sit as members of a court will
have to be catechized beforehand upon some subject, I say,
“You know, Judge; you have tried it.” When he says a court
of this kind will lose the conﬁdence of all men, will be
prostituted and disgraced by such a proceeding, I say, “You
know best, Judge; you have been through the mill.” But I
cannot shake Judge Douglas’s teeth loose from the Dred
Scott decision. Like some obstinate animal (I mean no
disrespect) that will hang on when he has once got his
teeth ﬁxed, you may cut oﬀ a leg, or you may tear away an
arm, still he will not relax his hold. And so I may point out
to the Judge, and say that he is bespattered all over, from
the beginning of his political life to the present time, with
attacks upon judicial decisions; I may cut oﬀ limb after limb
of his public record, and strive to wrench him from a single
dictum of the court, — yet I cannot divert him from it. He
hangs, to the last, to the Dred Scott decision. These things
 show there is a purpose strong as death and eternity for
which he adheres to this decision, and for which he will
adhere to all other decisions of the same court.
[A HIBERNIAN: “Give us something besides Dred
Scott.”]
Yes; no doubt you want to hear something that don’t
hurt. Now, having spoken of the Dred Scott decision, one
more word, and I am done. Henry Clay, my beau-ideal of a
statesman, the man for whom I fought all my humble life,
Henry Clay once said of a class of men who would repress
all tendencies to liberty and ultimate emancipation that
they must, if they would do this, go back to the era of our
Independence, and muzzle the cannon which thunders its
annual joyous return; they must blow out the moral lights
around us; they must penetrate the human soul, and
eradicate there the love of liberty; and then, and not till
then, could they perpetuate slavery in this country! To my
thinking, Judge Douglas is, by his example and vast
inﬂuence, doing that very thing in this community, when he
says that the negro has nothing in the Declaration of
Independence. Henry Clay plainly understood the contrary.
Judge Douglas is going back to the era of our Revolution,
and, to the extent of his ability, muzzling the cannon which
thunders its annual joyous return. When he invites any
people, willing to have slavery, to establish it, he is blowing
out the moral lights around us. When he says he “cares not
whether slavery is voted down or up,” — that it is a sacred
right of self-government, — he is, in my judgment,
penetrating the human soul and eradicating the light of
 reason and the love of liberty in this American people. And
now I will only say that when, by all these means and
appliances, Judge Douglas shall succeed in bringing public
sentiment to an exact accordance with his own views; when
these 
vast 
assemblages 
shall 
echo 
back 
all 
these
sentiments; when they shall come to repeat his views and
to avow his principles, and to say all that he says on these
mighty questions, — then it needs only the formality of the
second Dred Scott decision, which he indorses in advance,
to make slavery alike lawful in all the States, old as well as
new, North as well as South.
My friends, that ends the chapter. The Judge can take his
half-hour.
