Manilal was restored to health, but I saw that the Girgaum house was not  habitable. It was damp and ill-lighted. So in consultation with Shri  Revashankar Jagjivan I decided to hire some well-ventilated bungalow  in a suburb of Bombay. I wandered about in Bandra and Santa Cruz.  The slaughter house in Bandra prevented our choice falling there.  Ghatkopar and places near it were too far from the sea. At last we  hit upon a fine bungalow in Santa Cruz, which we hired as being the  best from the point of view of sanitation. I took a first class  season ticket from Santa Cruz to Churchgate, and remember having  frequently felt a certain pride in being the only first class  passenger in my compartment. Often I walked to Bandra in order to  take the fast train from there direct to Churchgate.  I prospered in my profession better than I had expected. My South  African clients often entrusted me with some work, and it was enough  to enable me to pay my way.  I had not yet succeeded in securing any work in the High Court, but  I attended the 'moot' that used to be held in those days, though I  never ventured to take part in it. I recall Jamiatram Nanabhai  taking a prominent part. Like other fresh barristers I made a point  of attending the hearing of cases in the High Court, more, I am  afraid, for enjoying the soporific breeze coming straight from the  sea than for adding to my knowledge. I observed that I was not the  only one to enjoy this pleasure. It seemed to be the fashion and  therefore nothing to be ashamed of.  However I began to make use of the High Court library and make fresh  acquaintances and felt that before long I should secure work in the  High Court.  Thus whilst on the one hand I began to feel somewhat at ease about  my profession, on the other hand Gokhale, whose eyes were always on  me, had been busy making his own plans on my behalf. He peeped in at  my chambers twice or thrice every week, often in company with  friends whom he wanted me to know, and he kept me acquainted with  his mode of work.  But it may be said that God has never allowed any of my own plans to  stand. He has disposed them in His own way.  Just when I seemed to be settling down as I had intended, I received  an unexpected cable from South Africa: 'Chamberlain expected here.  Please return immediately.' I remembered my promise and cabled to  say that I should be ready to start the moment they put me in funds.  They promptly responded, I gave up the chambers and started for  South Africa.  I had an idea that the work there would keep me engaged for at least  a year, so I kept the bungalow and left my wife and children there.  I believed then that enterprising youths who could not find an  opening in the country should emigrate to other lands. I therefore  took with me four or five such youths, one of whom was Maganlal  Gandhi.  The Gandhis were and are a big family. I wanted to find out all  those who wished to leave the trodden path and venture abroad. My  father used to accommodate a number of them in some state service. I  wanted them to be free from this spell. I neither could nor would  secure other service for them; I wanted them to be self-reliant.  But as my ideals advanced, I tried to persuade these youths also to  conform their ideals to mine, and I had the greatest success in  guiding Maganlal Gandhi. But about this later.  The separation from wife and children, the breaking up of a settled  establishment, and the going from the certain to the uncertain - all  this was for a moment painful, but I had inured myself to an  uncertain life. I think it is wrong to expect certainties in this  world, where all else but God that is Truth is an uncertainty. All  that appears and happens about and around us is uncertain, transient.  But there is a Supreme Being hidden therein as a Certainty, and one  would be blessed if one could catch a glimpse of that Certainty and  hitch one's wagon to it. The quest for that Truth is the summum bonum  of life.  I reached Durban not a day too soon. There was work waiting  for me. The date for the deputation to wait on Mr. Chamberlain had  been fixed. I had to draft the memorial to be submitted to him and  accompany the deputation.