So the ships were brought into the dock and the passengers began to go  ashore. But Mr. Escombe had sent word to the captain that, as the  whites were highly enraged against me and my life was in danger, my  family and I should be advised to land at dusk, when the port  superintendent Mr. Tatum would escort us home. The captain  communicated the message to me, and I agreed to act accordingly. But  scarcely half an hour after this, Mr. Laughton came to the captain.  He said: 'I would like to take Mr. Gandhi with me, should he have no  objection. As the legal adviser of the Agent Company I tell you that  you are not bound to carry out the message you have received from  Mr. Escombe.' After this he came to me and said somewhat to this  effect: 'If you are not afraid, I suggest that Mrs. Gandhi and the  children should drive to Mr. Rustomji's house, whilst you and I  follow them on foot. I do not at all like the idea of your entering  the city like a thief in the night. I do not think there is any fear  of anyone hurting you. Everything is quiet now. The whites have all  dispersed. But in any case I am convinced that you ought not to  enter the city stealthily.' I readily agreed. My wife and children  drove safely to Mr. Rustomji's place. With the captain's permission  I went ashore with Mr. Laughton. Mr Rustomji's house was about two  miles from the dock.  As soon as we landed, some youngsters recognized me and shouted  'Gandhi, Gandhi.' About half a dozen men rushed to the spot and  joined in the shouting. Mr. Laughton feared that the crowd might  swell and hailed a rickshaw. I had never liked the idea of being in  a rickshaw. This was to be my first experience. But the youngsters  would not let me get into it. They frightened the rickshaw boy out  of his life, and he took to his heels. As we went ahead, the crowd  continued to swell, until it became impossible to proceed further.  They first caught hold of Mr. Laughton and separated us. Then they  pelted me with stones, brickbats and rotten eggs. Someone snatched  away my turban, whilst others began to batter and kick me. I fainted  and caught hold of the front railings of a house and stood there to  get my breath. But it was impossible. They came upon me boxing and  battering. The wife of the police superintendent, who knew me,  happened to be passing by. The brave lady came up, opened her  parasol though there was no sun then, and stood between the crowd  and me. This checked the fury of the mob, as it was difficult for  them to deliver blows on me without harming Mrs. Alexander. Meanwhile an Indian youth who witnessed the incident had run to the  police station. The police superintendent Mr. Alexander, sent a posse  of men to ring me round and escort me safely to my destination. They  arrived in time. The police station lay on our way. As we reached  there, the superintendent asked me to take refuge in the station,  but I gratefully declined the offer, 'They are sure to quiet down  when they realize their mistake,' I said. 'I have trust in their  sense of fairness.' Escorted by the police, I arrived without  further harm at Mr. Rustomji's place. I had bruises all over, but no  abrasions except in one place. Dr. Dadibarjor, the ship's doctor,  who was on the spot, rendered the best possible help.  There was quiet inside, but outside the whites surrounded the house. Night was  coming on, and the yelling crowd was shouting, 'We must have  Gandhi.' The quick-sighted police superintendent was already there  trying to keep the crowds under control, not by threats, but by humouring them.  But he was not entirely free from anxiety. He sent  me a message to this effect: 'If you would save your friend's house  and property and also your family, you should escape from the house  in disguise, as I suggest.'  Thus on one and the same day I was faced with two contradictory  positions. When danger to life had been no more than imaginary, Mr.  Laughton advised me to launch forth openly. I accepted the advice.  When the danger was quite real, another friend gave me the contrary  advice, and I accepted that too. Who can say whether I did so  because I saw that my life was in jeopardy, or because I did not  want to put my friend's life and property or the lives of my wife  and children in danger? Who can say for certain that I was right  both when I faced the crowd in the first instance bravely, as it was  said, and when I escaped from it in disguise?  It is idle to adjudicate upon the right and wrong of incidents that  have already happened. It is useful to understand them and, if  possible, to learn a lesson from them for the future. It is  difficult to say for certain how a particular man would act in a  particular set of circumstances. We can also see that judging a man  from his outward act is no more than a doubtful inference, inasmuch  as it is not based on sufficient data.  Be that as it may, the preparations for escape made me forget my  injuries. As suggested by the superintendent, I put on an Indian  constable's uniform and wore on my head a Madrasi scarf, wrapped  round a plate to serve as a helmet. Two detectives accompanied me,  one of them disguised as an Indian merchant and with his face  painted to resemble that of an Indian. I forget the disguise of the  other. We reached a neighbouring shop by a by-lane, and making our  way through the gunny bags piled in the godown, escaped by the gate  of the shop and threaded our way through the crowd to a carriage  that had been kept for me at the end of the street. In this we drove  off to the same police station where Mr. Alexander had offered me  refuge a short time before, and I thanked him and the detective  officers.  Whilst I had been thus effecting my escape, Mr. Alexander had kept  the crowd amused by singing the tune: 