The Congress was over, but as I had to meet the Chamber of Commerce and  various people in connection with work in South Africa, I stayed in  Calcutta for a month. Rather than stay this time in a hotel, I  arranged to get the required introduction for a room in the India  Club. Among its members were some prominent Indians, and I looked  forward to getting into touch with them and interesting them in the  work in South Africa. Gokhale frequently went to this Club to play  billiards, and when he knew that I was to stay in Calcutta for some  time, he invited me to stay with him. I thankfully accepted the  invitation, but did not think it proper to go there by myself. He  waited for a day or two and then took me personally. He discovered  my reserve and said: 'Gandhi, you have to stay in the country, and  this sort of reserve will not do. You must get into touch with as  many people as possible. I want you to do Congress work.'  I shall record here an incident in the India Club, before I proceed  to talk of my stay with Gokhale.  Lord Curzon held his darbar about this time. Some Rajas and  Maharajas who had been invited to the darbar were members of the  Club. In the Club I always found them wearing fine Bengali dhotis  and shirts and scarves. On the darbar day they put on trousers  befitting khansamas1 and shining boots. I was pained and inquired of one of them the  reason for the change.  'We alone know our unfortunate condition. We alone know the insults  we have to put up with, in order that we may possess our wealth and  titles,' he replied.  'But what about these khansama  turbans and these shining boots?' I asked.  'Do you see any difference between khansamas  and us?' he replied, and added, 'they are our khansamas,  we are Lord Cruzon's khansamas.  If I were to absent myself from the levée,  I should have to suffer the consequences. If I were to attend it in  my usual dress, it would be an offence. And do you think I am going  to get any opportunity there of talking to Lord Curzon? Not a bit of  it!'  I was moved to pity for this plain-spoken friend.  This reminds me of another darbar.  At the time when Lord Hardinge laid the foundation-stone of the  Hindu University, there was a darbar. There were Rajas and Maharajas  of course, but Pandit Malaviyaji specially invited me also to attend  it, and I did so.  I was distressed to see the Maharajas bedecked like women – silk pyjamas and silk achkans,  pearl necklaces round their necks, bracelets on their wrists, pearl  and diamond tassels on their turbans and, besides all this, swords  with golden hilts hanging from their waist-bands.  I discovered that these were insignia not of their royalty, but of  their slavery. I had thought that they must be wearing these badges  of impotence of their own free will, but I was told that it was  obligatory for these Rajas to wear all their costly jewels at such  functions. I also gathered that some of them had a positive dislike  for wearing these jewels, and that they never wore them except on  occasions like the darbar.  I do not know how far my information was  correct. But whether they wear them on other occasions or not, it is  distressing enough to have to attend viceregal darbars in jewels  that only some women wear.  How heavy is the toll of sins and wrongs that wealth, power and  prestige exact from man!