Whilst on the one hand social service work of the kind I have described in  the foregoing chapters was being carried out, on the other the work  of recording statements of the ryots' grievances was progressing  apace. Thousands of such statements were taken, and they could not  but have their effect. The ever growing number of ryots coming to  make their statements increased the planters' wrath, and they moved  heaven and earth to counteract my inquiry.  One day I received a letter from the Bihar Government to the  following effect: 'Your inquiry has been sufficiently prolonged;  should you not now bring it to an end and leave Bihar?' The letter  was couched in polite language, but its meaning was obvious.  I wrote in reply that the inquiry was bound to be prolonged, and  unless and until it resulted in bringing relief to the people, I had  no intention of leaving Bihar, I pointed out that it was open to  Government to terminate my inquiry by accepting the ryots'  grievances as genuine and redressing them, or by recognizing that  the ryots had made out a prima facie case for an official inquiry  which should be immediately instituted.  Sir Edward Gait, the Lieutenant Governor, asked me to see him,  expressed his willingness to appoint an inquiry and invited me to be  a member of the Committee. I ascertained the names of the other  members, and after consultation with my co-workers agreed to serve  on the Committee, on condition that I should be free to confer with  my co-workers during the progress of the inquiry, that Government  should recognize that, by being a member of the Committee, I did not  cease to be the ryots' advocate, and that in case the result of the  inquiry failed to give me satisfaction, I should be free to guide  and advise the ryots as to what line of action they should take.  Sir Edward Gait accepted the condition as just and proper and  announced the inquiry. The late Sir Frank Sly was appointed Chairman  of the Committee.  The Committee found in favour of the ryots, and recommended that the  planters should refund a portion of the exactions made by them which  the Committee had found to be unlawful, and that the tinkathia  system should be abolished by law.  Sir Edward Gait had a large share in getting the Committee to make a  unanimous report and in getting the agrarian bill passed in  accordance with the Committee's recommendations. Had he not adopted  a firm attitude, and had he not brought all his tact to bear on the  subject, the report would not have been unanimous, and the Agrarian  Act would not have been passed. The planters wielded extraordinary  power. They offered strenuous opposition to the bill in spite of the  report, but Sir Edwin Gait remained firm up to the last and fully  carried out the recommendations of the Committee.  The tinkathia  system which had been in existence for about a century was thus  abolished, and with it the planters' raj came to an end. The ryots,  who had all along remained crushed, now somewhat came to their own,  and the superstition that the stain of indigo could never be washed  out was exploded.  It was my desire to continue the constructive work for some years,  to establish more schools and to penetrate the villages more  effectively. The ground had been prepared, but it did not please  God, as often before, to allow my plans to be fulfilled. Fate  decided otherwise and drove me to take up work elsewhere. 