Whilst I was yet winding up my work on the Committee, I received a letter  from Sjts. Mohanlal Pandya and Shankarlal Parikh telling me of the  failure of crops in the Kheda district, and asking me to guide the  peasants, who were unable to pay the assessment. I had not the  inclination, the ability or the courage to advise without an inquiry  on the spot.  At the same time there came a letter from Shrimati Anasuyabai about  the condition of labour in Ahmedabad. Wages were low, the labourers  had long been agitating for an increment, and I had a desire to  guide them if I could. But I had not the confidence to direct even  this comparatively small affair from that long distance. So I seized  the first opportunity to go to Ahmedabad. I had hoped that I should  be able to finish both these matters quickly and get back to  Champaran to supervise the constructive work that had been  inaugurated there.  But things did not move as swiftly as I had wished, and I was unable  to return to Champaran, with the result that the schools closed down  one by one. My co-workers and I had built many castles in the air,  but they all vanished for the time being.  One of these was cow protection work in Champaran, besides rural  sanitation and education. I had seen, in the course of my travels,  that cow protection and Hindi propaganda had become the exclusive  concern of the Marwadis. A Marwadi friend had sheltered me in his dharmashala  whilst at Bettiah. Other Marwadis of the place had interested me in  their goshala (dairy). My ideas about cow protection had been  definitely formed then, and my conception of the work was the same  as it is today. Cow protection, in my opinion, included  cattle-breeding, improvement of the stock, humane treatment of  bullocks, formation of model dairies, etc. The Marwadi friends had  promised full co-operation in this work, but as I could not fix  myself up in Champaran, the scheme could not be carried out. The goshala in Bettiah is still there, but it has not become a  model dairy, the Champaran bullock is still made to work beyond his  capacity, and the so-called Hindu still cruelly belabours the poor  animal and disgraces his religion.  That this work should have remained unrealized has been, to me, a  continual regret, and whenever I go to Champaran and hear the gentle  reproaches of the Marwadi and Bihari friends, I recall with a heavy  sigh all those plans which I had to drop so abruptly.  The educational work in one way or another is going on in many  places. But the cow protection work had not taken firm root, and has  not, therefore, progressed in the direction intended.  Whilst the Kheda peasants' question was still being discussed, I had already  taken up the question of the mill-hands in Ahmedabad.  I was in a most delicate situation. The mill-hands' case was strong.  Shrimati Anasuyabai had to battle against her own brother, Sjt.  Ambalal Sarabhai, who led the fray on behalf of the mill-owners. My  relations with them were friendly, and that made fighting with them  the more difficult. I held consultations with them, and requested  them to refer the dispute to arbitration, but they refused to  recognize the principle of arbitration. I had therefore to advise the labourers to go on strike. Before I  did so, I came in very close contact with them and their leaders,  and explained to them the conditions of a successful strike: 