From Poona I went to Rajkot and Porbandar, where I had to meet my  brother's widow and other relatives.  During the Satyagraha in South Africa I had altered my style of  dress so as to make it more in keeping with that of the indentured labourers, and in England also I had adhered to the same style for indoor use. For landing in Bombay I had a Kathiawadi suit of clothes  consisting of a shirt, a dhoti, a cloak and a white scarf, all made  of Indian mill cloth. But as I was to travel third from Bombay, I  regarded the scarf and the cloak as too much of an encumbrance, so I  shed them, and invested in an eight-to-ten-annas Kashmiri cap. One  dressed in that fashion was sure to pass muster as a poor man. On account of the plague prevailing at that time, third class  passengers were being medically inspected at Viramgam or Wadhwan –  I forget which. I had slight fever. The inspector on finding that I  had a temperature asked me to report myself to the Medical Officer  at Rajkot and noted down my name.  Someone had perhaps sent the information that I was passing through  Wadhwan, for the tailor Motilal, a noted public worker of the place,  met me at the station. He told me about the Viramgam customs, and  the hardships railway passengers had to suffer on account of it. I  had little inclination to talk because of my fever, and tried to  finish with a brief reply which took the form of a question:  'Are you prepared to go to jail?'  I had taken Motilal to be one of those impetuous youths who do not  think before speaking. But not so Motilal. He replied with firm  deliberation:  'We will certainly go to jail, provided you lead us. As Kathiawadis,  we have the first right on you. Of course we do not mean to detain  you now, but you must promise to halt here on your return. You will  be delighted to see the work and the spirit of our youths, and you  may trust us to respond as soon as you summon us.'  Motilal captivated me. His comrade eulogizing him, said:  'Our friend is but a tailor. But he is such a master of his  profession that he easily earns Rs. 15 a month –  which is just what he  needs – working an hour a day, and gives the rest of his time to  public work. He leads us all, putting our education to shame.' Later I came in close contact with Motilal, and I saw that there was  no exaggeration in the eulogy. He made a point of spending some days  in the then newly started Ashram every month to teach the children  tailoring and to do some of the tailoring of the Ashram himself. He  would talk to me every day of Viramgam, and the hardships of the  passengers, which had become absolutely unbearable for him. He was  cut off in the prime of youth by a sudden illness, and public life  at Wadhwan suffered without him.  On reaching Rajkot, I reported myself to the Medical officer the  next morning. I was not unknown there. The Doctor felt ashamed and  was angry with the inspector. This was unnecessary, for the  inspector had only done his duty. He did not know me, and even if he  had known me, he should not have done otherwise. The Medical Officer  would not let me go to him again insisted on sending an inspector to  me instead.  Inspection of third class passengers for sanitary reasons is  essential on such occasions. If big men choose to travel third,  whatever their position in life, they must voluntarily submit  themselves to all the regulations that the poor are subject to, and  the officials ought to be impartial. My experience is that the  officials, instead of looking upon third class passengers as  fellowmen, regard them as so many sheep. They talk to them  contemptuously, and brook no reply or argument. The third class  passenger has to obey the official as though he were his servant,  and the letter may with impunity belabour and blackmail him, and  book him his ticket only after putting him to the greatest possible  inconvenience, including often missing the train. All this I have  seen with my own eyes. No reform is possible unless some of the  educated and the rich voluntarily accept the status of the poor,  travel third, refuse to enjoy the amenities denied to the poor and,  instead of taking avoidable hardships, discourtesies and injustice  as a matter of course, fight for their removal.  Wherever I went in Kathiawad I heard complaints about the Viramgam  customs hardships. I therefore decided immediately to make use of  Lord Willingdon's offer. I collected and read all the literature  available on the subject, convinced myself that the complaints were  well founded, and opened correspondence with the Bombay Government.  I called on the Private Secretary to Lord Willingdon and waited on  His Excellency also. The latter expressed his sympathy but shifted  the blame on Delhi. 'If it had been in our hands, we should have  removed the cordon long ago. You should approach the Government of  India,' said the Secretary.  I communicated with the Government of India, but got no reply beyond  an acknowledgment. It was only when I had an occasion to meet Lord  Chelmsford later that redress could be had. When I placed the facts  before him, he expressed his astonishment. He had known nothing of  the matter. He gave me a patient hearing, telephoned that very  moment for papers about Viramgam, and promised to remove the cordon  if the authorities had no explanation or defence to offer. Within a  few days of this interview I read in the papers that the Viramgam  customs cordon had been removed.  I regarded this event as the advent of Satyagraha in India. For  during my interview with the Bombay Government the Secretary had  expressed his disapproval of a reference to Satyagraha in a speech  which I had delivered in Bagasra (in Kathiawad).  'Is not this a threat?' he had asked. 'And do you think a powerful  Government will yield to threats?'  'This was no threat,' I had replied. 'It was educating the people.  It is my duty to place before the people all the legitimate remedies  for grievances. A nation that wants to come into its own ought to  know all the ways and means to freedom. Usually they include  violence as the last remedy. Satyagraha, on the other hand, is an  absolutely non-violent weapon. I regard it as my duty to explain  its practice and its limitations. I have no doubt that the British  Government is a powerful Government, but I have no doubt also that  Satyagraha is a sovereign remedy.'  The clever Secretary nodded his head and said: 'We shall see.' 