The trial began. The Government pleader, the Magistrate and other  officials were at a loss to know what to do. The Government pleader was pressing the Magistrate to postpone  the case. But I interfered and requested the Magistrate not to  postpone the case, as I wanted to plead guilty to having disobeyed  the order to leave Champaran and read a brief statement as follows: 'With the permission of the Court I would like to make a brief  statement showing why I have taken the very serious step of  seemingly disobeying the order passed under section 144 of Cr. P.C.  In my humble opinion it is a question of difference of opinion  between the Local Administration and myself. I have entered the  country with motives of rendering humanitarian and national service.  I have done so in response to a pressing invitation to come and help  the ryots, who urge they are not being fairly treated by the indigo  planters. I could not render any help without studying the problem.  I have, therefore, come to study it with the assistance, if  possible, of the Administration and the planters. I have no other  motive, and cannot believe that my coming can in any way disturb  public peace and cause loss of life. I claim to have considerable  experience in such matters. The Administration, however, have  thought differently. I fully appreciate their difficulty, and I  admit too that they can only proceed upon information they received.  As a law-abiding citizen my first instinct would be, as it were, to  obey the order served upon me. But I could not do so without doing  violence to my sense of duty to those for whom I have come. I feel  that I could just now serve them only by remaining in their midst. I  could not, therefore, voluntarily retire. Amid this conflict of  duties I could only throw the responsibility of removing me from  them on the Administration. I am fully conscious of the fact that a  person, holding, in the public life of India, a position such as I  do, has to be most careful in setting an example. It is my firm  belief that in the complex constitution under which we are living,  the only safe and honourable course for a self-respecting man is, in  the circumstances such as face me, to do what I have decided to do,  that is, to submit without protest to the penalty of disobedience.  'I venture to make this statement not in any way in extenuation of  the penalty to be awarded against me, but to show that I have  disregarded the order served upon me, not for want of respect for  lawful authority, but in obedience to the higher law of our being,  the voice of conscience.'  There was now no occasion to postpone the hearing, but as both the  Magistrate and the Government pleader had been taken by surprise,  the Migistrate postponed judgment. Meanwhile I had wired full  details to the Viceroy, to Patna friends, as also to Pandit Madan  Mohan Malaviya and others.  Before I could appear before the Court to receive the sentence, the  Magistrate sent a written message that the Lieutenant Governor had  ordered the case against me to be withdrawn, and the Collector wrote  to me saying that I was at liberty to conduct the proposed inquiry,  and  that I might count on whatever help I needed from the officials.  None of us was prepared for this prompt and happy issue. I called on the Collector, Mr. Heycock. He seemed to be a good man,  anxious to do justice. He told me that I might ask for whatever  papers I desired to see, and that I was at liberty to see him  whenever I liked.  The country thus had its first direct object-lesson in Civil  Disobedience. The affair was freely discussed both locally and in  the press, and my inquiry got unexpected publicity.  It was necessary for my inquiry that the Government should remain  neutral. But the inquiry did not need support from press reporters  or leading articles in the press. Indeed the situation in Champaran  was so delicate and difficult that over-energetic criticism or  highly coloured reports might easily damage the cause which I was seeking  to espouse. So I wrote to the editors of the principal papers  requesting them not to trouble to send any reporters, as I should  send them whatever might be necessary for publication and keep them  informed.  I knew that the Government attitude countenancing my presence had  displeased the Champaran planters, and I know that even the  officials, though they could say nothing openly, could hardly have  liked it. Incorrect or misleading reports, therefore, were likely to  incense them all the more, and their ire, instead of descending on  me, would be sure to descend on the poor fear-stricken ryots and  seriously hinder my search for the truth about the case.  In spite of these precautions the planters engineered against me a  poisonous agitation. All sorts of falsehoods appeared in the press  about my co-workers and myself. But my extreme cautiousness and my  insistence on truth, even to the minutest detail, turned the edge of  their sword.  The planters left no stone unturned in maligning Brajkishorebabu,  but the more they maligned him, the more he rose in the estimation  of the people.  In such a delicate situation as this I did not think it proper to  invite any leaders from other provinces. Pandit Malaviyaji had sent  me an assurance that, whenever I wanted him, I had only to send him  word, but I did not trouble him. I thus prevented the struggle from  assuming a political aspect. But I sent to the leaders and the  principal papers occasional reports, not for publication, but merely  for their information. I had seen that, even where the end might be  political, but where the cause was non-political, one damaged it by  giving it a political aspect and helped it by keeping it within its  non-political limit. The Champaran struggle was a proof of the fact  that disinterested service of the people in any sphere ultimately  helps the country politically. 