CHAPTER X 


SEPTEMBER i ith, 1906 

N early three thousand persons filled the Imperial Theatre 
in Johannesburg. The big hall throbbed with the din of 
voices which spoke the Tamil and Telugu languages of 
southern India, Gujarati and Hindi. The few women wore saris. 
The men wore European and Indian clothes; some had Hindu 
turbans and caps, some Moslem headgear. Among them were rich 
merchants, miners, lawyers, indentured labourers, waiters, rick¬ 
shaw boys, domestic servants, hucksters and poor shopkeepers. 
Many were delegates representing the eighteen thousand Indians 
of the Transvaal, now a British colony; they were meeting to 
decide what to do about pending discriminatory enactments 
against Indians. Abdul Gani, chairman of the Transvaal British- 
Indian Association and the manager of a big business firm, pre¬ 
sided. Sheth Haji Habib delivered the main address. Mohandas 
K. Gandhi sat on the platform. 

Gandhi had convened the meeting. On returning from service 
to the Zulus, and after acquainting Kasturbai with his celibacy 
vow, he had rushed off to Johannesburg in answer to a summons 
from the Indian community. The Transvaal Government Gazette of 
August 22nd, 1906, had printed the draft of an ordinance to be 
submitted to the legislature. If adopted, Gandhi decided, it would 
spell ‘absolute ruin for the Indians of South Africa . . . Better die 
than submit to such a law’. 

‘But how are we to die?’ Gandhi wondered. He had no idea 
what to do. He only knew that the ordinance must be resisted; 
nowhere in the world, he believed, had free men been subjected 
to such humiliating, restrictive legislation. 

The proposed ordinance required all Indian men and women, 
and children over eight, to register with the authorities, submit to 
finger-printing and accept a certificate which they were to carry 
with them at all times. A person who failed to register and leave 
his fingerprints lost his right of residence and could be imprisoned, 
fined, or deported from the Transvaal. An Indian apprehended 

89 


THE END AND THE BEGINNING 

on the street or anywhere without certificate could likewise be 
imprisoned, fined or deported even though he owned valuable 
property or engaged in important commercial transactions. 

The Indians were incensed. This act was directed specifically 
against Indians and was therefore an affront to them and to India. 
If passed it would be the beginning of similar laws in other parts 
of South Africa; in the end, no Indian could remain in South 
Africa. Moreover, the ordinance would permit a police officer to 
accost an Indian woman on the street or enter her home and ask 
for her registration document. In view of the complete or partial 
aloofness in which Indian women lived, this feature of the measure 
was highly offensive both to Moslems and Hindus. ‘If anyone 
came forward to demand a certificate from my wife,’ exclaimed an 
irate Indian at a preliminary committee meeting attended by 
Gandhi, T would shoot him on the spot and take the 
consequences.’ 

That was the mood of the mass meeting in the Imperial Theatre. 

Orchestra, balcony and gallery were crowded long before the 
chairman opened the proceedings. Angry speeches in four 
languages stirred the volatile audience to a high emotional pitch 
and then Sheth Haji Habib read a resolution, which Gandhi had 
helped to prepare, demanding non-compliance with the registra¬ 
tion provisions. Haji Habib called on the assembly to adopt it, 
but not in the usual manner. They must vote, he urged, ‘with 
God as their witness’. 

Gandhi started. A sensitive ear and a keen intuition quickly 
told him that this was an extraordinary event. An action with 
God as witness was a religious vow which could not be broken. 
It was not the ordinary motion passed by a show of hands ai a 
public function and immediately forgotten. 

Gandhi then spoke. He begged them to consider coolly what 
they were doing. ‘Notwithstanding the differences of nomencla¬ 
ture in Hinduism and Islam,’ he declared, ‘we all believe in one 
and the same God. To pledge ourselves or to take an oath in 
the name of God or with Him as a witness is not something to 
be trifled with. If having taken such an oath we violate our pledge 
we are guilty before God and man. Personally, I hold that a man 
who deliberately and knowingly takes a pledge and breaks it 
forfeits his manhood ... A man who lightly pledges his word and 

90 


SEPTEMBER iith, 1906 

then breaks it becomes a man of straw and fits himself for punish¬ 
ment here as well as hereafter.’ 

Having warned them, he tried to stir them. If ever a crisis in 
community affairs warranted a vow, now was the time. Caution 
had its place but also its limits. ‘The government has taken leave 
of all sense of decency. We will be revealing our unworthiness 
and cowardice if we cannot stake our all in the face of the con¬ 
flagration that envelops us. . . 

The purpose of the resolution was not to impress the outside 
world. A vote in favour constituted a personal vow and each one 
of them had to decide whether he possessed the inner strength to 
keep it. In consequence of the vow, they might be jailed; in 
prison they might be beaten and insulted. They might go hungry 
and be exposed to heat and cold. They might lose their jobs, their 
wealth. They might be deported. The struggle might last a long 
time, years. ‘But I can boldly declare and with certainty,’ 
Gandhi exclaimed, ‘that so long as there is even a handful of men 
true to their pledge, there can be only one end to the struggle — 
and that is victory.’ 

The audience applauded. He lowered his voice. Many in the 
hall, moved by the enthusiasm and indignation which dominated 
the meeting, might pledge themselves that evening and repent the 
next morning or the next month. Perhaps only a handful would 
be left to face the final contest with the powerful government. To 
him it would make no difference. ‘There is only one course open 
to me,’ Gandhi asserted, ‘to die but not to submit to the law. Even 
if the unlikely happened and everyone else flinched, leaving me to 
face the music alone, I am confident that I will never violate my 
pledge. Please do not misunderstand me. I am not saying this 
out of vanity. But I wish to put you and especially the leaders on 
the platform, on your guard ... If you have not the will or the 
ability to stand firm even when you are perfectly isolated you 
must not only not take the pledge but you must declare your 
opposition before the resolution is put. . . Although we are going 
to take the pledge in a body, no one may imagine that default on 
the part of one or of many can absolve the rest from their obliga¬ 
tion. Every one must be true to his pledge even unto death, no 
matter what others do.’ 

Gandhi sat down. The chairman added his sobering words. 

9 1 


THE END AND THE BEGINNING 


Then the vote was taken. Everyone present rose, raised his hand 
and swore to God not to obey the proposed anti-Indian ordinance 
if it became law. 

The next day, September 12 th, the Imperial Theatre was 
completely destroyed by fire. Many Indians regarded it as an 
omen that the ordinance would meet a similar fate. To Gandhi 
it was a coincidence. He did not believe in such omens. Fate did 
not beckon to Gandhi with mute signs. The future spoke in him 
through that awesome, Himalayan self-assurance which he dis¬ 
played at the meeting. He knew he could stand alone. 


92 


 

