CHAPTER VI 


TOWARDS GREATNESS 

W hen Gandhi landed at Durban, Natal, in May 1893, his 
mission was simply to win a lawsuit, earn some money and 
perhaps, at long last, start his career: ‘Try my luck in 
South Africa/ he said. As he left the boat to meet his employer, 
a Moslem business man named Dada Abdulla Sheth, Gandhi wore a 
fashionable frock coat, pressed trousers, shining shoes and a 
turban. 

South African society was sharply divided by colour, class, 
religion and profession, and each group jealously defended the 
words and symbols which demarcated it from the others. English¬ 
men called all Indians ‘coolies’ or ‘samis’, and they referred to 
‘coolie teachers’, ‘coolie merchants’, ‘coolie barristers’, etc., for¬ 
getting, deliberately, that if coolie meant anything it meant 
manual labourer. To rise above the coolie level, Parsis from 
India styled themselves Persians, and Moslems from India chose 
to be regarded as ‘Arabs’ which they were not. A turban was 
officially recognized as part of the costume of an ‘Arab’ but not 
of a Hindu. 

Several days after arriving, Gandhi went to court. The 
magistrate ordered him to remove his turban. Gandhi demurred 
and left the court. To obviate further trouble, he decided to 
wear an English hat. No, said Dada Abdulla Sheth, a hat on a 
coloured man is the symbol of a waiter. 

The lawsuit required Gandhi’s presence in Pretoria, the capital 
of Transvaal. First class accommodations were purchased for him 
at Durban where he boarded the train for the overnight journey. 
At Maritzburg, the capital of Natal, a white man entered the 
compartment, eyed the brown intruder, and withdrew to reappear 
in a few moments with two railway officials who told Gandhi 
to transfer to third class. Gandhi protested that he held a first 
class ticket. That didn’t matter; he had to leave. He stayed. So 
they fetched a policeman who took him off with his luggage. 
Gandhi could have returned to the train and found a place in 

55 


THE END AND THE BEGINNING 

the third class car. But he chose to remain in the station waiting 
room. It was cold in the mountains. His overcoat was in his 
luggage which the railway people were holding; afraid to be 
insulted again, he did not ask for it. All night long, he sat and 
shivered, and brooded. 

Should he return to India? This episode reflected a much larger 
situation. Should he address himself to it or merely seek redress 
of his personal grievance, finish the case, and go home to India? 
He had encountered the dread disease of colour prejudice. It 
was his duty to combat it. To flee, leaving his countrymen in 
their predicament, would be cowardice. The frail lawyer began 
to see himself in the role of a David assailing the Goliath of racial 
discrimination. 

Many years later, in India, Dr. John R. Mott, a Christian 
missionary, asked Gandhi, c What have been the most creative 
experiences in your life?’ In reply, Gandhi told the story of the 
night in the Maritzburg station. 

Why, of all people, did it occur to Gandhi to resist the evil? 
The next morning Indians he met recounted similar experiences. 
They made the best of conditions; ‘You cannot strike your head 
against a stone wall.’ But Gandhi intended to test its hardness. 
His father and grandfather had defied authority. His own meagre 
contacts with it in India were unhappy. He had rejected the 
authoritative, time-and-tradition-honoured version of the Bhaga- 
vad Gita for his own. Was it this inherent anti-authoritarianism 
that made him rebel against the government colour line? Was he 
more sensitive, resentful, unfettered and ambitious because his 
life, so far, had been a failure? Did he aspire to be strong morally 
because he was weak physically? Did challenging immoral prac¬ 
tices in an uncrowded arena present greater opportunities for 
service than the pursuit of personal gain in crowded courts? Was 
it destiny, heritage, luck, the Gita , or some other immeasurable 
quantity? 

That bitter night at Maritzburg the germ of social protest was 
born in Gandhi. But he did nothing. He proceeded on his busi¬ 
ness to Pretoria. 

The Charlesto\vn-to-Johannesburg lap was negotiated by stage 
coach. There were three seats on the cqach box, usually occupied 
by the driver and the ‘leader’ of the. trip. On this occasion, the 

56 


TOWARDS G R E A T N E S S 


‘leader’ sat inside and told Gandhi to ride with the driver and a 
Hottentot. There was space for Gandhi inside, but he did not 
want to make a fuss and miss the coach, so he mounted to the 
driver’s perch. Later, however, the deader’ decided he wanted 
to smoke and get some air; he spread a piece of dirty sacking at 
the driver’s feet on the footboard and instructed Gandhi to sit 
on it. Gandhi complained; why could he not go inside? At this, 
the deader’ began to curse and tried to drag him off the coach. 
Gandhi clung to the brass rail though he felt that his wrists would 
break. But he did not relax his hold. The deader’ continued 
alternately to pummel and pull him until the white passengers 
intervened: ‘Don’t beat him,’ they shouted. ‘He is not to blame. 
He is right.’ The deader’, yielding to the customers, relented, and 
Gandhi entered the coach. 

The next day, Gandhi wrote to the coach company and received 
a written assurance that he would not be molested again. 

In Johannesburg, Gandhi went to an hotel, but failed to get a 
room. Indians laughed at his naivety. ‘This country is not for 
men like you,’ a rich Indian merchant said to him. ‘For making 
money we do not mind pocketing insults, and here we are.’ The 
same person advised Gandhi to travel third class to Pretoria 
because conditions in the Transvaal were much worse than in 
Natal. But Gandhi was obdurate. He ordered the railway regu¬ 
lations to be brought to him, read them, and found that the prohi¬ 
bition was not precise. He therefore penned a note to the station 
master stating that he was a barrister and always travelled first (it 
was his ninth day and first journey in South Africa) and would 
soon apply in person for a ticket. 

The station master proved sympathetic. He sold Gandhi the 
ticket on condition that he would not sue the company if the 
guards or the passengers ejected him. The collector came to 
examine the tickets and held up three fingers. Gandhi vehemently 
refused to move to third class. The sole other passenger, an 
Englishman, scolded the guard and invited Gandhi to make 
himself comfortable. 

‘If you want to travel with a coolie, what do I care,’ the guard 
grumbled. 

At the station in Pretoria, Gandhi asked a railway official about 
hotels, but got no helpful information. An American Negro, who 

57 


THE END AND THE BEGINNING 


overheard the conversation, offered to take Gandhi to an inn 
run by an American: Johnston’s Family Hotel. Mr. Johnston 
cheerfully accommodated him but suggested, with apologies, that 
since all the other guests were white, he take dinner in his room. 

Waiting for his food, Gandhi pondered the adventures he had 
had on this strange trip. Not everybody was prejudiced; some 
whites felt uncomfortable about it all. Presently Mr. Johnston 
knocked and said, ‘I was ashamed of having asked you to take 
your dinner here, so I spoke to the other guests about you, and 
asked them if they would mind your having dinner in the dining¬ 
room. They said they had no objection, and they did not mind 
your staying here as long as you liked.’ Gandhi enjoyed the meal 
downstairs. But lodgings in a private home were cheaper than 
Mr. Johnston’s hotel. 

Within a week of his arrival Gandhi summoned all the Indians 
in Pretoria to a meeting. He wanted ‘to present to them a picture 
of their condition’. He was twenty-four. This was his first public 
speech. The audience consisted of Moslem merchants interspersed 
with a few Hindus. He urged four things: Tell the truth even in 
business; Adopt more sanitary habits; Forget caste and religious 
divisions; Learn English. A barber, a clerk and a shopkeeper 
accepted his offer of English lessons. The barber merely wished 
to acquire the vocabulary of his trade. Gandhi dogged them for 
months and would not let them be lazy or lax in their studies. 

Other meetings followed, and soon Gandhi knew every Indian 
in Pretoria. He communicated with the railway authorities and 
elicited the promise that ‘properly dressed’ Indians might travel 
first or second class. Though open to arbitrary interpretation, 
this represented progress. Gandhi was encouraged. The Pretorian 
Indians formed a permanent organization. 

The lawsuit for which Gandhi came to South Africa brought 
him into contact with Roman Catholics, Protestants, Quakers 
and Plymouth Brethren. Some of them tried to convert him to 
Christianity. Gandhi did not discourage their efforts. He pro¬ 
mised that if the inner voice commanded it he would embrace 
the Christian faith. He read the books they gave him and tried 
to answer their searching questions about Indian religions. When 
he did not know the answers he wrote to friends in England and 
to Raychandbai, the jeweller-poet of Bombay. 

58 


TOWARDS GREATNESS 


Once Michael Coates, a Quaker, urged Gandhi to discard the 
beads which, as a member of the Hindu Vaishnava sect, he always 
wore around his neck. 

‘This superstition does not become you,’ Coates exclaimed. 
‘Come, let me break the necklace.’ 

‘No, you will not,’ Gandhi protested. ‘It is a sacred gift from 
my mother.’ 

‘But do you believe in it?’ Coates questioned. 

‘I do not know its mysterious significance,’ Gandhi said, de¬ 
fensively. ‘T do not think I should come to harm if I did not 
wear it. But I cannot, without sufficient reason, give up a necklace 
which she put round my neck out of love and in the conviction 
that it would be conducive to my welfare. When, with the passage 
of time, it wears away, and breaks of its own accord, I shall have 
no reason to get a new one. But this necklace cannot be broken.’ 
Later in life he did not wear beads. 

Gandhi’s Christian friends taught him the essence of Chris¬ 
tianity. They said if he believed in Jesus he would find redemption. 
‘I do not seek redemption from the consequences of sin,’ Gandhi 
replied. ‘I seek to be redeemed from sin itself.’ They said that 
was impossible. Nor could Gandhi understand why, if God had 
one son, He could not have another. Why could he go to Heaven 
and attain salvation only as a Christian? Did Christianity have a 
monopoly of Heaven? Was God a Christian? Did He have 
prejudices against non-Christians? 

Gandhi liked the sweet Christian hymns and many of the 
Christians he met. But he could not regard Christianity as the 
perfect religion or the greatest religion. ‘From the point of view 
of sacrifice, it seemed to me that the Hindus greatly surpassed the 
Christians.’ And Raychandbai assured him that Hinduism was 
unexcelled in subtlety and profundity. On the other hand, 
Gandhi doubted whether the sacred Hindu Vedas were the only 
inspired word of God. ‘Why not also the Bible and the Koran ?’ 
He recoiled from the competitiveness of religions. 

He also disliked the competitiveness of lawyers. His client, 
Dada Abdulla Sheth, and the opposing party, Tyeb Sheth, were 
relatives, and the cost of the litigation, dragging out for more than 
a year, was ruining both. Gandhi suggested a compromise out 
of court. Finally, the plaintiff and defendant agreed on an 

59 


THE END AND THE BEGINNING 


arbitrator who heard the case and decided in favour of Dada 
Abdulla. Now a new problem confronted Gandhi. Tyeb was 
called upon to pay thirty-seven thousand pounds and costs. This 
threatened him with bankruptcy. Gandhi induced Dada Abdulla 
to permit the loser to pay in instalments stretched over a very 
extended period. 

In preparing the case, Gandhi learned the secrets of bookkeep¬ 
ing and some of the fine points of law. Above all, it reinforced his 
opinion that settlements out of court were preferable to trials. He 
followed this practice during his twenty years as a lawyer: T lost 
nothing thereby — not even money, certainly not my soul.’ 

The lawsuit settled, Gandhi returned to Durban and prepared 
to sail for India. He had been in South Africa almost twelve 
months. Before his departure, his associates gave him a farewell 
party. During the festivities someone handed him the day’s Natal 
Mercury , and in it he found a brief item regarding the Natal govern¬ 
ment’s proposed bill to deprive Indians of their right to elect 
members of the legislature. Gandhi stressed the necessity of 
resisting this move. His friends were ready but they were ‘un¬ 
lettered, lame’ men, they said, and powerless without him. He 
consented to stay a month. He remained twenty years fighting 
the battle for Indian rights. He won. 


60 


 

