CHAPTER I 


DEATH BEFORE PRAYERS 

4.30 p.m., Abha brought in the last meal he was ever to 
LJk eat; it consisted of goat’s milk, cooked and raw vegetables, 
jl \ oranges and a concoction of ginger, sour lemons and 
strained butter with juice of aloe. Sitting on the floor of his room 
in the rear of Birla House in New Delhi, Gandhi ate and talked 
with Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel, Deputy Prime Minister of the 
new government of independent India. Maniben, Patel’s 
daughter and secretary, was also present. The conversation was 
important. There had been rumours of differences between 
Patel and Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru. This problem, like 
so many others, had been dropped into the Mahatma’s lap. 

Abha, alone with Gandhi and the Patels, hesitated to interrupt. 
But she knew Gandhi’s attachment to punctuality. Finally, 
therefore, she picked up the Mahatma’s nickel-plated watch and 
showed it to him. T must tear myself away,’ Gandhi remarked, 
and so saying he rose, went to the adjoining bathroom and then 
started towards the prayer ground in the large park to the left of 
the house. Abha, the young wife of Kanu Gandhi, grandson of 
the Mahatma’s cousin, and Manu, the granddaughter of another 
cousin, accompanied him; he leaned his forearms on their 
shoulders. ‘My walking sticks’, he called them. 

During the daily two-minute promenade through the long, 
red-sandstone colonnade that led to the prayer ground, Gandhi 
relaxed and joked. Now, he mentioned the carrot juice Abha had 
given him that morning. 

£ So you are serving me cattle fare,’ he said, and laughed. 

‘Ba used to call it horse fare,’ Abha replied. Ba was Gandhi’s 
deceased wife. 

‘Isn’t it grand of me,’ Gandhi bantered, ‘to relish what no one 
else wants?’ 

‘Bapu (father),’ said Abha, ‘your watch must be feeling very 
neglected. You would not look at it today,’ 

‘Why should I, since you are my timekeepers?’ Gandhi retorted. 

15 


THE END AND THE BEGINNING 

‘But you don’t look at the timekeepers,’ Manu noted. Gandhi 
laughed again. 

By this time he was walking on the grass near the prayer ground. 
A congregation of about five hundred had assembled for the 
regular evening devotions. T am late by ten minutes,’ Gandhi 
mused aloud. T hate being late. I should be here at the stroke 
of five.’ 

He quickly cleared the five low steps up to the level of the prayer 
ground. It was only a few yards now to the wooden platform on 
which he sat during services. Most of the people rose; many 
edged forward; some helped to clear a lane for him; those who 
were nearest bowed low to his feet. Gandhi removed his arms 
from the shoulders of Abha and Manu and touched his palms 
together in the traditional Hindu greeting. 

Just then, a man elbowed his way out of the congregation into 
the lane. He looked as if he wished to prostrate himself in the 
customary obeisance of the devout. But since they were late, 
Manu tried to stop him and caught hold of his hand. He pushed 
her away so that she fell and, planting himself about two feet in 
front of Gandhi, fired three shots from a small automatic pistol. 

As the first bullet struck, Gandhi’s foot, which was in motion, 
descended to the ground, but he remained standing. The second 
bullet struck; blood began to stain Gandhi’s white clothes. His 
face turned ashen pale. His hands, which had been in the touch- 
palm position, descended slowly and one arm remained moment¬ 
arily on Abha’s neck. 

Gandhi murmured, ‘Hey Rama (Oh, God).’ A third shot rang 
out. The limp body settled to the ground. His spectacles dropped 
to the earth. The leather sandals slipped from his feet. 

Abha and Manu lifted Gandhi’s head, and tender hands raised 
him from the ground and carried him into his room in Birla 
House. The eyes were half closed and he seemed to show signs of 
life. Sardar Patel, who had just left the Mahatma, was back at 
Gandhi’s side; he felt the pulse and thought he detected a faint 
beat. Someone searched frantically in a medicine chest for 
adrenalin but found none. 

An alert spectator fetched Dr. D. P. Bhargava. He arrived ten 
minutes after the shooting. ‘Nothing on earth could have saved 
him,’ Dr. Bhargava reports. ‘He had been dead for ten minutes.’ 

16 


DEATH BEFORE PRAYERS 


The first bullet entered Gandhi’s abdomen three and a half 
inches to the right of a line down the middle of the body and two 
and a half inches above the navel and came out through the back. 
The second penetrated the seventh intercostal space one inch to 
the right of the middle line and likewise came out at the back. 
The third shot hit one inch above the right nipple and four inches 
to the right of the middle line and embedded itself in the lung. 

One bullet, Dr. Bhargava says, probably passed through the 
heart and another might have cut a big blood vessel. ‘The 
intestines,’ he adds, ‘were also injured, as next day I found the 
abdomen distended.’ 

The young men and women who had been Gandhi’s constant 
attendants sat near the body and sobbed. Dr. Jivraj Mehta 
arrived and confirmed the death. Presently a murmur went 
through the group: ‘Jawaharlal.’ Nehru had rushed from his 
office. He knelt beside Gandhi, buried his face in the bloody 
clothes and cried. Then came Devadas, Gandhi’s youngest son, 
and Maulana Abul Kalam Azad, Minister of Education, followed 
by many prominent Indians. 

Devadas touched his father’s skin and gently pressed his arm. 
The body was still warm. The head still lay in Abha’s lap. 
Gandhi’s face wore a peaceful smile. He seemed asleep. ‘We 
kept vigil the whole of that night,’ Devadas wrote later. ‘So 
serene was the face and so mellow the halo of divine light that 
surrounded the body that it seemed almost sacrilegious to 
grieve. . . .’ 

Diplomats paid formal visits; some wept. 

Outside, a vast multitude gathered and asked for one last 
view of the Mahatma. The body was accordingly placed in an 
inclined position on the roof of Birla House and a searchlight 
played upon it. Thousands passed in silence, wrung their hands 
and wept. 

Near midnight the body was lowered into the house. All night 
mourners sat in the room and, between sobs, recited from the 
Bhagavad Gita and other holy Hindu scriptures. 

With the dawn arrived ‘the most unbearably poignant moment 
for all of us’, Devadas says. They had to remove the large woollen 
shawl and the cotton shoulder wrap which the Mahatma was 
wearing for warmth when he was shot. These pure white clothes 

17 


THE END AND THE BEGINNING 


showed clots and blotches of blood. As they unfolded the shawl 
the shell of a cartridge dropped out. 

Gandhi now lay before them dressed only in the white loincloth 
as they and the world had always known him. Most of those 
present broke down and cried without control. The sight inspired 
the suggestion that the body be embalmed for at least a few days 
so that friends, co-workers and relatives who lived at a distance 
from New Delhi might see it before it was cremated. But Devadas, 
Pyareial Nayyar, Gandhi’s chief secretary, and others objected. 
It was against Hindu sentiment, and ‘Bapu would never forgive 
us.’ Also, they wished to discourage any move to preserve the 
Mahatma’s earthly remains. It was decided to burn the body the 
next day. 

In the early hours of the morning disciples washed the body 
according to ancient Hindu rites and placed a garland of hand- 
spun cotton strands and a chain of beads around its neck. Roses 
and rose petals were strewn over the blanket that covered all but 
the head, arms and chest. T asked for the chest to be left bare,’ 
Devadas explains. c No soldier ever had a finer chest than Bapu’s.’ 
A pot of incense burned near the body. 

During the morning the body was again placed on the roof for 
public view. 

Ramdas, third son of Gandhi, arrived by air from Nagpur, in 
the Central Provinces of India, at 11 a.m. The funeral had waited 
for him. The body was brought down into the house and then 
carried out to the terrace. A wreath of cotton yarn encircled 
Gandhi’s head; the face looked peaceful yet profoundly sad. The 
saffron-white-green flag of independent India was draped over 
the bier. 

During the night the chassis of a Dodge 15-hundredweight 
army weapon-carrier had been replaced by a new superstructure 
with a raised floor so that all spectators could see the body in the 
open coffin. Two hundred men of the Indian Army, Navy and 
Air Force drew the vehicle by four stout ropes. The motor was 
not used. Non-commissioned officer Naik Ram Chand sat at the 
steering wheel. Nehru, Patel, several other leaders and several 
of Gandhi’s young associates rode on the carrier. 

The cortege, two miles long, left Birla House on Albuquerque 
Road in New Delhi at 11.45 a -m., and, moving forward inch by 

18 


DEATH BEFORE PRAYERS 


inch through dense masses of humanity, reached the Jumna 
River, five and a half miles away, at 4.20 p.m. A million and a 
half marched and a further million watched. Branches of New 
Delhi’s splendid shade trees bent under the weight of persons who 
had climbed upon them to get a better view. The base of the big 
white monument of King George V, which stands in the middle 
of a broad pond, was covered with hundreds of Indians who had 
waded through the water. 

Now and then the voices of Hindus, Moslems, Sikhs, Parsis and 
Anglo-Indians mingled in loud shouts of c Mahatma Gandhi hi jai 
(Long Live Mahatma Gandhi)’. At intervals the multitude 
broke into sacred chants. Three Dakota aircraft flew over the 
procession, dipped in salute and showered countless rose petals. 

Four thousand soldiers, a thousand airmen, a thousand police¬ 
men and a hundred sailors, in varied and vari-coloured uniforms 
and head-dress, marched before and after the bier. Prominent 
among them were mounted lancers bearing aloft red and white 
pennants — the bodyguard of Governor-General Lord Mount- 
batten. Armoured cars, police and soldiers were present to 
maintain order. In charge of the death parade was Major- 
General Roy Bucher, an Englishman chosen by the Indian 
government to be the first commander-in-chief of its army. 

By the holy waters of the Jumna, close to a million people had 
stood and sat from early morning waiting for the cortege to arrive 
at the cremation grounds. The predominant colour was white, 
the white of women’s saris and men’s garments, caps and turbans. 

Several hundred feet from the river, at Rajghat, stood a fresh 
funeral pyre made of stone, brick and earth; it was about two feet 
high and eight feet square. Long thin sandalwood logs sprinkled 
with incense had been stacked on it. Gandhi’s body was laid on 
the pyre with the head to the north and the feet to the south. In 
this position Buddha had met his end. 

At 4.45 p.m., Ramdas set fire to his father’s funeral pyre. The 
logs burst into flame. A groan went up from the vast assemblage. 
Women wailed. With elemental force the crowd surged towards 
the fire and broke through the military cordon. But in a moment 
the people seemed to realize what they were doing and dug in 
their bare toes and prevented an accident. 

The logs crackled and seethed and the flames united in a single 

M.G. 19 


B 


THE END AND THE BEGINNING 

fire. Now there was silence . . . Gandhi’s body was being reduced 
to cinders and ashes. 

The pyre burned for fourteen hours. All the while prayers were 
sung; the entire text of the Gita was read. Twenty-seven hours 
later, when the last embers had grown cold, priests, officials, 
friends and relatives held a special service in the guarded wire 
enclosure around the pyre and collected the ashes and the splinters 
of bone that had defeated the fire. The ashes were tenderly 
scooped into a homespun cotton bag. A bullet was found in the 
ashes. The bones were sprinkled with water from the Jumna 
and deposited in a copper urn. Ramda placed a garland of 
fragrant flowers around the neck of the urn, set it in a wicker 
basket filled with rose petals and, pressing it to his breast, carried 
it back to Birla House. 

Several personal friends of Gandhi asked for and received 
pinches of his ashes. One encased a few grains of ash in a gold 
signet ring. Family and followers decided against gratifying the 
requests for ashes which came from all the six continents. Some 
Gandhi ashes were sent to Burma, Tibet, Ceylon and Malaya. 
But most of the remains were immersed in the rivers of India 
exactly fourteen days after death — as prescribed by Hindu ritual. 

Ashes were given to provincial prime ministers or other digni¬ 
taries. The provincial capitals shared their portions with lesser 
urban centres. Everywhere the public display of the ashes drew 
huge pilgrimages and so did the final ceremonies of immersion in 
the rivers or, as at Bombay, in the sea. 

The chief immersion ceremony took place at Allahabad, in the 
United Provinces, at the confluence of the sacred Ganges, the 
Jumna and the Saraswati. A special train of five third-class 
carriages left New Delhi at 4 a.m. on February 1 ith; Gandhi had 
always travelled third. The compartment in the middle of the 
train containing the urn of ashes and bones was piled almost to 
the ceiling with flowers and guarded by Abha, Manu, Pyarelal 
Nayyar, Dr. Sushila Nayyar, Prabhavati Narayan and others who 
had been Gandhi’s daily companions. The train stopped at 
eleven towns en route ; at each, hundreds of thousands bowed 
reverently, prayed and laid garlands and wreaths on the carriages. 

In Allahabad, on the 12th, the urn was placed under a minia¬ 
ture wooden palanquin and, mounted on a motor truck, it worked 


20 


DEATH BEFORE PRAYERS 


its way through a throng of a million and a half people from the 
city and the surrounding countryside. Women and men in white 
preceded the truck singing hymns. One musician played on an 
ancient instrument. The vehicle looked like a portable rose 
garden; Mrs. Naidu, Governor of the United Provinces, Azad, 
Ramdas and Patel were among those who rode on it. Nehru, 
fists clenched, chin touching his chest, walked. 

Slowly the truck moved to the river bank where the urn was 
transferred to an American military ‘duck’ painted white. Other 
‘ducks 5 and craft accompanied it downstream. Tens of thousands 
waded far into the water to be nearer Gandhi’s ashes. Cannon on 
Allahabad Fort fired a salute as the urn was turned over and its 
contents fell into the river. The ashes spread. The little bones 
flowed quickly towards the sea. 

Gandhi’s assassination caused dismay and pain throughout 
India. It was as though the three bullets that entered his body 
had pierced the flesh of tens of millions. The nation was baffled, 
stunned and hurt by the sudden news that this man of peace, who 
loved his enemies and would not have killed an insect, had been 
shot dead by his own countryman and co-religionist. 

Never in modern history has any man been mourned more 
deeply and more widely. 

The news was conveyed to the country by Prime Minister 
Nehru. He was shaken, shocked and cramped with sorrow. Yet 
he went to the radio station shortly after the bullets struck and, 
speaking extemporaneously, driving back tears and choking with 
emotion, he said: 

‘The light has gone out of our lives and there is darkness every¬ 
where and 1 do not quite know what to tell you and how to say it. 
Our beloved leader, Bapu as we call him, the father of our nation, 
is no more. Perhaps I am wrong to say that. Nevertheless, we 
will not see him again as we have seen him these many years. We 
will not run to him for advice and seek solace from him, and that 
is a terrible blow not to me only but to millions and millions in 
this country. And it is difficult to soften the blow by any advice 
that I or anyone else can give you. 

‘The light has gone out, I said, and yet I was wrong. For the 
light that shone in this country was no ordinary light. The light 


21 


THE END AND THE BEGINNING 


that has illumined this country for these many years will illumine 
this country for many more years, and a thousand years later that 
light will still be seen in this country, and the world will see it and 
it will give solace to innumerable hearts. For that light represented 
the living truth, and the eternal man was with us with his eternal 
truth reminding us of the right path, drawing us from error, 
taking this ancient country to freedom. 

‘All this has happened. There is so much more to do. There was 
so much more for him to do. We could never think that he was 
unnecessary or that he had done his task. But now, particularly, 
when we are faced with so many difficulties, his not being with us 
is a blow most terrible to bear. 

A madman has put an end to his life. . . .’ 

On January 30th, 1948, the Friday he died, Mahatma Gandhi 
was what he had always been: a private citizen without wealth, 
property, official title, official post, academic distinction, scientific 
achievement, or artistic gift. Yet men with governments and 
armies behind them paid homage to the little brown man of 
seventy-eight in a loincloth. The Indian authorities received 
3441 messages of sympathy, all unsolicited, from foreign countries. 
For Gandhi was a moral man, and a civilization not richly en¬ 
dowed with morality felt still further impoverished when the 
assassin’s bullets ended his life. ‘Mahatma Gandhi was the 
spokesman for the conscience of all mankind,’ said General 
George C. Marshall, United States Secretary of State. 

Pope Pius, the Dalai Lama of Tibet, the Archbishop of Canter¬ 
bury, the Chief Rabbi of London, the King of England, President 
Truman, Chiang Kai-shek, the President of France, indeed .the 
political heads of all important countries (except Soviet Russia) 
and most minor ones publicly expressed their grief at Gandhi’s 
passing. 

Leon Blum, the French Socialist, put on paper what millions 
felt. ‘I never saw Gandhi,’ Blum wrote. ‘I do not know his 
language. I never set foot in his country and yet I feel the same 
sorrow as if I had lost someone near and dear. The whole world 
has been plunged into mourning by the death of this extraordinary 
man.’ 

‘Gandhi had demonstrated,’ Professor Albert Einstein asserted, 

22 


DEATH BEFORE PRAYERS 

‘that a powerful human following can be assembled not only 
through the cunning game of the usual political manoeuvres and 
trickeries but through the cogent example of a morally superior 
conduct of life. In our time of utter moral decadence he was the 
only statesman to stand for a higher human relationship in the 
political sphere. 5 

The Security Council of the United Nations paused for its 
members to pay tribute to the dead man. Philip Noel-Baker, the 
British representative, praised Gandhi as ‘the friend of the poorest 
and the loneliest and the lost 5 . Gandhi’s ‘greatest achievements’, 
he predicted, ‘are still to come 5 . Other members of the Security 
Council extolled Gandhi’s spiritual qualities and lauded his 
devotion to peace and non-violence. Mr. Andrei Gromyko, of 
the Soviet Union, called Gandhi ‘one of the outstanding political 
leaders of India 5 whose name ‘will always be linked with the 
struggle of the Indian people for their national liberation which 
has lasted over such a long period 5 . Soviet Ukraine delegate 
Tarasenko also stressed Gandhi’s politics. 

The U.N. lowered its flag to half-mast. 

Humanity lowered its flag. 

The world-wide response to Gandhi’s death was in itself an 
important fact; it revealed a widespread mood and need. ‘There 
is still some hope for the world which reacted as reverently as it 
did to the death of Gandhi, 5 Albert Deutsch declared in the 
New York newspaper PM. ‘The shock and sorrow that followed 
the New Delhi tragedy shows we still respect sainthood even when 
we cannot fully understand it. 5 

Gandhi ‘made humility and simple truth more powerful than 
empires’, U.S. Senator Arthur H. Vandenberg said. Pearl S. 
Buck, novelist, described Gandhi’s assassination as ‘another 
crucifixion 5 . Justice Felix Frankfurter called it ‘a cruel blow 
against the forces of good in the world 5 . 

General Douglas MacArthur, supreme Allied military com¬ 
mander in Japan, said: ‘In the evolution of civilization, if it is to 
survive, all men cannot fail eventually to adopt Gandhi’s belief 
that the process of mass application of force to resolve contentious 
issues is fundamentally not only wrong but contains within itself 
the germs of self-destruction. 5 Lord (Admiral) Mountbatten, last 
British Viceroy in India, expressed the hope that Gandhi’s life 

23 


THE END AND THE BEGINNING 

might ‘inspire our troubled world to save itself by following his 
noble example’. The spectacle of the general and the admiral 
pinning their faith on the little ascetic would certainly seem to 
justify the verdict of Sir Hartley Shawcross, British Attorney 
General, that Gandhi was ‘the most remarkable man of the 
century’. 

To the statesmen and politicians who eulogized him Gandhi 
was at least a reminder of their own inadequacies. 

A California girl of thirteen wrote in a letter: ‘I was really 
terribly sad to hear about Gandhi’s death. I never knew I was 
that interested in him but I found myself quite unhappy about the 
great man’s death.’ 

In New York, a twelve-year-old girl had gone into the kitchen 
for breakfast. The radio was on and it brought the news of the 
shooting of Gandhi. There, in the kitchen, the girl, the maid and 
the gardener held a prayer meeting and prayed and wept. Just 
so, millions in all countries mourned Gandhi’s death as a personal 
loss. They did not quite know why; they did not quite know what 
he stood for. But he was ‘a good man’ and good men are rare. 

‘I know no other man of any time or indeed in recent history’, 
wrote Sir Stafford Cripps, ‘who so forcefully and convincingly 
demonstrated the power of spirit over material things.’ This is 
what the people sensed when they mourned. All around them, 
material things had power over spirit. The sudden flash of his 
death revealed a vast darkness. No one who survived him had 
tried so hard —- and with so much success — to live a life of truth, 
kindness, self-effacement, humility, service and non-violence 
throughout a long, difficult struggle against mighty adversaries. 
He fought passionately and unremittingly against British rule of 
his country and against the evil in his own countrymen. But he 
kept his hands clean in the midst of battle. He fought without 
malice or falsehood or hate. 


24 


 

