CHAPTER VII 


A MOB SCENE 

Natal, in 1896, had 400,000 Negro inhabitants, 50,000 
whites, and 51,000 Indians. The Cape of Good Hope 
Colony had 900,000 Negroes, 400,000 Europeans and 10,000 
Indians; the Transvaal Republic, 650,000 Negroes, 120,000 
whites and about 5000 Indians. Similar proportions obtained in 
other areas. In 1914, the five million Negroes easily outnumbered 
a million and a quarter whites. 

Indians or no Indians, the whites were a permanent minority 
in South Africa. But the Indians were thrifty, able and ambitious, 
and they worked hard. Given normal opportunities, they became 
rivals of the whites in business, agriculture, law and the other 
professions. 

Is that why the Indians were persecuted? 

The Dutch, who first settled South Africa in the sixteenth cen¬ 
tury, brought their slaves from Malaya, Java and other Pacific 
islands; they concentrated in Transvaal and the Orange Free 
State. The British arrived much later. In Natal, they found they 
could grow sugar cane, tea and coffee. But the Negroes were 
reluctant to work for them. Arrangements were accordingly 
made for the shipment of indentured labourers from India. ‘The 
Indian had come to South Africa 5 , wrote Chancellor Jan H. 
Hofmeyer of the Witwaterstrand University in Johannesburg, 
‘because it was deemed to be in the white man’s interest that he 
should. It seemed to be impossible to exploit the Natal coastal 
belt without indentured labour. So the Indians came — and 
brought prosperity to Natal. 5 

The first Indian contract workers landed in Natal on November 
16th, i860. That was the genesis of the Gandhi saga in South 
Africa. 

The indentured Indians were term serfs. They came from India 
voluntarily or, frequently, involuntarily and not knowing where 
they were going; many were untouchables snatched from semi¬ 
starvation. The system tied them for five years to private farms. 

61 


THE END AND THE BEGINNING 


They were given free board and lodging for themselves and their 
families and ten shillings a month in the first year and an addi¬ 
tional shilling a month each year after. At the end of five years 
the contractor paid their passage back to India. He did likewise 
if they remained an additional five years as free labourers. 
In numerous cases, the indentured labourers chose to become 
permanent residents. 

When Gandhi had been in South Africa just over twelve months 
— on August 18th, 1894 — these conditions were altered. At the 
end of the first five-year period, the indentured labourer was 
obliged to return to India or agree to be a serf in South Africa for 
ever. But if he wished to stay as a free working man, he had to 
pay an annual tax of three pounds for himself and for each of his 
dependants. Three pounds was the equivalent of six months 5 pay 
of an indentured labourer. 

This aroused a storm at the centre of which stood Gandhi. 

Indentured Indian immigration drew after it thousands of free 
Indians who came as hawkers, tradesmen, artisans and mem¬ 
bers of the professions, like Gandhi. They numbered perhaps fifty 
thousand in 1900. The pedlars carried their wares on their backs 
hundreds of miles into Zulu villages where no white man would 
try to do business. Gradually, many of them acquired riches and 
property. Indians even owned steamship lines. 

In 1894, 250 free Indians in Natal, being subjects of Her British 
Majesty, Queen Victoria, and having met the wealth qualification, 
enjoyed the right to vote. But that year the Natal legislature passed 
a law explicitly disfranchising Asiatics. 

This was the second serious Indian complaint. 

Throughout Natal, an Indian had to carry a pass to be in the 
streets after 9 p.m. Persons without passes were arrested. The 
Orange Free State, a Boer republic, forbade Indians to own 
property, to trade, or to farm. In the Crown Colony of Zululand, 
Indians were not allowed to own or buy land. The same pro¬ 
scription applied in the Transvaal where, moreover, Indians had 
to pay a three-pound fee for the right to reside; but residence was 
restricted to slums. In the Cape Colony, some municipalities 
prohibited Indians from walking on footpaths. Elsewhere, 
Indians avoided footpaths and pavements because they might be 
kicked off, Gandhi himself was once so kicked. Indians in South 

62 


A MOB SCENE 


Africa were legally barred from buying South African gold. They 
were described in statute books as ‘semi-barbarous Asiatics’. 

In three years in South Africa, Gandhi had become a prosperous 
lawyer and the outstanding Indian political figure. He was 
widely known as the champion of indentured labourers. He 
addressed conferences, drafted memorials to government ministers, 
wrote letters to newspapers, circulated petitions (one was signed 
by ten thousand Indians), and made many friends among whites, 
Indians and Negroes. He learned a few Zulu words and found the 
language ‘very sweet’. He also achieved some knowledge of 
Tamil, a Dravidian tongue spoken by natives of Madras and other 
south-Indian provinces. When work permitted he read books, 
chiefly on religion. He published two pamphlets: An Appeal to 
Every Briton in South Africa and The Indian Franchise , an Appeal. 

‘Appeal’ was the key to Gandhi’s politics. He appealed to the 
common sense and morality of his adversary. ‘It has always been 
a mystery to me’, he says in his autobiography, ‘how men can feel 
themselves honoured by the humiliation of their fellow-beings.’ 
This was the essence of Gandhi’s appeal. 

Gandhi’s struggle in South Africa did not aim to achieve equal 
treatment for the Indians there. He recognized that the whites 
thought they needed protection against a coloured majority 
consisting of Indians and Negroes. He also knew, as he wrote in a 
letter to the Times of India of June 2nd, 1918, that ‘prejudices 
cannot be removed by legislation . . . They will yield only to 
patient toil and education’. 

Nor were the Indians protesting against segregation. ‘They 
feel the ostracism but they silently bear it’, Gandhi wrote. 

This too was a long-range problem. 

Gandhi’s immediate quarrel with the white governments of 
Natal, Transvaal, the Orange Free State and Cape Colony was 
‘for feeding the prejudice by legalizing it’. At least the laws must 
be just; often they are not. ‘I refuse to believe in the infallibility 
of legislators,’ he said. ‘I believe that they are not always guided 
by generous or even just sentiments in their dealings with un¬ 
represented classes.’ They may react to non-existent perils; they 
may serve the interests of white merchants irked by Indian 
competitors. 

Gandhi wished to establish one principle: that Indians were 

63 


THE END AND THE BEGINNING 

citizens of the British Empire and therefore entitled to equality 
under its laws. He did not expect fair administration of the laws; 
the whites would always be favoured. But once the principle of 
legal equality was fixed he would be content to let life work out its 
own complicated pattern, trusting honest citizens to brighten the 
design. If, however, the Indians supinely acknowledged their 
inferiority they would lose dignity and deteriorate. So would the 
whites who imposed the inferiority. 

Gandhi aimed to save the dignity of Indians and whites. 

Thus far in South Africa, Gandhi had displayed unflagging 
energy, an inexhaustible capacity for indignation, an eagerness 
to serve the community, honesty which inspired trust, and a talent 
for easy personal relations with the lowly and the prominent. 
Zeal and a cause dissolved his timidity and loosened his tongue. 
Though there was only slight visible evidence, as yet, of the great 
Gandhi of history, he had proved himself an effective leader and 
an excellent organizer. His Indian co-workers felt acutely, and he 
could not fail to see, that without him the struggle for Indian 
rights would collapse or at least lag. 

Gandhi accordingly took six months’ leave and went to India 
to fetch his family. 

Arrived in the homeland in the middle of 1896, the twenty- 
seven-year-old man with a mission developed a furious activity. 
In Rajkot Gandhi spent a month in the bosom of his family writing 
a pamphlet on Indian grievances in South Africa. Bound in 
green and consequently known as ‘The Green Pamphlet’, it was 
printed in ten thousand copies and sent to newspapers and 
prominent Indians. Many publications reviewed it. To mail the 
rest of the edition Gandhi, always eager to keep down expenses, 
mobilized the children of the neighbourhood who wrote the 
addresses, licked the wrappers and pasted the stamps when there 
was no school. He rewarded them with used stamps and his 
blessing. The children were delighted. Two of them grew up to 
be Gandhi’s close disciples. 

At this juncture, the bubonic plague appeared in Bombay and 
Rajkot was in panic. Gandhi volunteered his services to the State 
and joined the official committee in charge of preventive measures. 
He stressed the need of supervising toilets and accepted that task 
himself. ‘The poor people’, he remarks in his memoirs, ‘had no 

64 


A MOB SCENE 


objection to their latrines being inspected and, what is more, 
they carried out the improvements suggested to them. But when 
we went to the houses of the upper ten, some of them even refused 
us admission. It was our common experience that the latrines 
of the rich were more unclean. 5 Next, Gandhi urged that the 
committee investigate the untouchables’ quarter. Only one 
committee member would go with him. It was Gandhi’s first 
visit to the slums. He had never known how outcasts lived. He 
discovered that they did not have latrines or any enclosed facilities. 
But their houses were clean. 

From Rajkot Gandhi went to Bombay to arrange a public 
meeting on South Africa. He introduced himself to the leading 
citizens and enlisted their support. Meanwhile he nursed his 
sister’s husband, who was ill, and later moved the dying patient 
into his own room. Gandhi always boasted of an ‘aptitude for 
nursing which gradually developed into a passion’. 

The Bombay meeting was a tremendous success because of the 
sponsors and the topic. Gandhi had a written speech but could 
not make himself heard in the big hall. Somebody on the plat¬ 
form read it for him. 

At Poona, inland from Bombay, Gandhi interviewed two of the 
great men of India: Gopal Krishna Gokhale, President of the 
Servants of India Society, and Lokamanya Tilak, a giant intellect 
and towering political leader. Tilak, Gandhi said later, was like 
the ocean and you could not readily launch yourself on it; Gokhale 
was like the Ganges in whose refreshing, holy waters one longed to 
bathe. He fell in love with Gokhale but did not take him as his 
guru. Gandhi described a guru in Young India of October 6th, 
1921, as a rare combination of ‘perfect purity and perfect learn¬ 
ing’. Gokhale, as Gandhi saw him, failed to meet those require¬ 
ments. He did, however, become Gandhi’s political guru, his 
ideal in politics. 

‘They treat us as beasts,’ Gandhi cried out at a mass meeting in 
Madras on October 26th, 1896. ‘The policy is to class us with the 
Kaffir whenever possible,’ he said. South Africa depressed the 
living standards of Indians and locked them up in insanitary 
districts; then the whites condemned the dirty Indian habits. 

‘Submission’ to these ‘insults and indignities’, Gandhi told the 
meeting, ‘means degradation’. He urged resistance. He urged, 

65 


THE END AND THE BEGINNING 


too, that if no amelioration took place emigration from India to 
South Africa be suspended. 

At the Bombay, Poona and Madras meetings, Gandhi quoted 
from the ‘Green Pamphlet 5 and asked the audience to buy it on 
the way out. In Madras, the proud author, noting the brochure’s 
success, brought out a second ten thousand edition which, at first, 
‘sold like hot cakes’; but he had overestimated the market and was 
left with a remainder. 

Gandhi hoped to repeat the performance in Calcutta and 
talked with newspaper editors and eminent citizens. But a cable 
recalled him to Natal, South Africa, to cope with an emergency. 
He therefore rushed back to Bombay where, with his wife, two 
sons and the widowed sister’s only son, he boarded the S.S. Courland , 
a ship belonging to his client, Dada Abdulla Sheth, who gave the 
whole family a free trip. The S.S. JVaderi sailed for Natal at the 
same time. The two ships carried about eight hundred passengers. 

Gandhi’s efforts to arouse Indian public opinion on the South 
African issue had been reported, with exaggeration, in the South 
African press. Now he was arriving with eight hundred free 
Indians. This provoked fierce resentment among the whites: 
Gandhi, they charged, intended to flood Natal and the Transvaal 
with unwanted, unindentured coloured people. Gandhi was of 
course innocent of recruiting or encouraging the travellers. 

At first the ships were kept in quarantine, ostensibly because of 
the plague in Bombay. But after the five-day quarantine period, 
nobody was permitted to come ashore. In Durban, meetings of 
whites demanded that the ships and their passengers, including 
Gandhi, be returned to India. Dada Abdulla received offers of 
reimbursement of losses if he sent the steamers back. The offers 
were accompanied by veiled threats. He stood firm. 

On January 13th, 1897, at the end of twenty-three days’ rocking- 
outside the harbour (following a three-week voyage from Bombay) 
the Courland and Naderi were permitted to dock. But Mr. Harry 
Escombe, Attorney-General of the Natal government, who had 
openly participated in the anti-Gandhi agitation, sent a message 
to Gandhi to land at dusk to avoid trouble. Mr. F. A. Laughton, 
an Englishman and legal counsellor of Dada Abdulla, advised 
against this procedure. Nor did Gandhi wish to enter the city by 
stealth. Mrs. Gandhi, who was pregnant, and the two boys accord- 

66 " 


A MOB SCENE 


ingly disembarked in normal fashion and were driven to the home 
of an Indian named Rustomji, while, by agreement, Gandhi and 
Laughton followed on foot. The clamouring crowds had dis¬ 
persed; but two small boys recognized Gandhi and shouted his 
name. Several whites appeared. Fearing a fight, Laughton 
hailed a Negro-drawn rickshaw. Gandhi had never used one and 
was reluctant to do so now. The rickshaw boy, in any case, from 
fright ran away. As Gandhi and Laughton proceeded, the 
crowd swelled and became violent. They isolated Gandhi from 
Laughton and threw stones, bricks and eggs at him. Then they 
came closer, seized his turban and beat and kicked him. Gandhi 
fainted from pain but caught hold of the iron railings of a house. 
White men continued to smack his face and strike his body. At 
this juncture, Mrs. Alexander, the wife of the Police Superintend¬ 
ent, who knew Gandhi, happened to pass and she intervened and 
placed herself between the maddened mob and the miserable 
Gandhi. 

An Indian boy summoned the police. Gandhi refused asylum 
in the police station but accepted a police escort to Rustomji’s 
house. He was bruised all over and received immediate medical 
attention. 

The city now knew Gandhi’s whereabouts. White gangs 
surrounded Rustomji’s home and demanded that Gandhi be 
delivered to them. ‘We’ll burn him,’ they yelled. Superintendent 
Alexander was on the scene and tried, vainly, to calm or disperse 
the howling mob. To humour them, Alexander led the singing of 

And we’ll hang old Gandhi 
On the sour apple tree, 

but he sensed that the temper of the mob was rising and that 
the house with all its inmates might be set on fire. Night had 
set in. Alexander secretly sent a message to Gandhi to escape in 
disguise. The Superintendent put two detectives at Gandhi’s 
disposal. Gandhi donned an Indian policeman’s uniform and a 
headgear that looked like a helmet while the two white detectives 
painted their skins dark and dressed themselves as Indians. 
The three then left by the rear of the house and, threading their 
way through side streets, reached the police station. 

When Alexander knew that Gandhi was safe, he informed the 

e m.g. 67 


THE END AND THE BEGINNING 

crowd of the fact. This new situation required diplomatic hand¬ 
ling and fortunately the police chief proved equal to it. 

Gandhi remained in the safety of the police station for 
three days. 

News of the assault on Gandhi disturbed London. Joseph 
Chamberlain, British Secretary of State for Colonies, cabled the 
Natal authorities to prosecute the attackers. Gandhi knew several 
of his assailants but refused to prosecute. He said it was not their 
fault; the blame rested on the community leaders and on the 
Natal government. ‘This is a religious question with me, 5 Gandhi 
told Attorney-General Escombe, and he would exercise ‘self- 
restraint 5 . 

‘Gandhi ought to have hated every white face to the end of his 
life, 5 wrote Professor Edward Thompson of Oxford. But Gandhi 
forgave the whites in Durban who assembled to lynch him and 
he forgave those who mauled and beat him. His soul kept no 
record of past sins against his body. Instead of prosecuting the 
guilty he pursued the more creative task of lightening his country¬ 
men’s lot. 

Gandhi had been called back to South Africa to seize a happy 
opportunity. Under pressure exerted from London by the 
Colonial Secretary, Joseph Chamberlain, and from the British 
government in India, the Natal legislature was debating a law 
to annul racial discrimination and replace it by an educational 
test. This had been Gandhi’s goal. The Natal Act, passed in 
1897, met his demand of equal electoral rights for British subjects, 
Indians included; the attempt to disfranchise the few hundred 
Indians was abandoned. Gandhi felt some satisfaction. Tempers 
cooled and tensions relaxed. 


68 


 

