CHAPTER XIII 


TOLSTOY AND GANDHI 

I N central Russia, a Slav aristocrat grappled with the same 
spiritual problems that occupied the Hindu lawyer in South 
Africa. Across continents, Count Leo Tolstoy guided Mohan¬ 
das K. Gandhi and found solace in his struggle. 

In Gandhi’s law office there were several books by Tolstoy on 
religious subjects. But it was only during the leisure of jail that 
the Indian absorbed the great Russian’s teachings. 

War and Peace , probably the world’s greatest novel. Resurrection , 
Anna Karenina , and other works of art brought Tolstoy colossal 
success and universal recognition. But his soul was always in 
torment. The discrepancy between Christ’s message and man’s 
way of life troubled him. Born in 1828 to wealth and an ancient 
title, Tolstoy abandoned high society and, at the age of fifty-seven, 
adopted the simple life: he went barefoot, wore a plain muzhik 
smock and trousers, ploughed, harrowed and planted by the side 
of the peasants, gave up smoking, meat-eating and hunting, and 
began to take long cross-country walks and bicycle rides. In 1891, 
in order to escape from ‘intolerable luxury’, he gave his ample 
properties to his wife and children and devoted himself to vil¬ 
lage education, famine relief and writing about vegetarianism, 
marriage and theology. Though he excoriated church institu¬ 
tions, men and women in search of a faith made his home at 
Yasnaya Polyana their Mecca; Christians, Jews, Moslems and 
Buddhists from the four corners of the earth came to sit at the 
feet of the famous, brilliant nobleman who had drunk his fill of 
material pleasures and now, nearing seventy, sought God. Among 
his guests from abroad were Jane Addams, of Hull House, Chicago; 
William Jennings Bryan, subsequently United States Secretary 
of State; Rabbi Joseph Krauskopf of Philadelphia; George 
Kennan, an American publicist who visited Siberia with the 
permission of the Tsarist authorities and then denounced their 
cruelty to prisoners; Rainer-Maria Rilke, the German poet, and 
Thomas G. Masaryk, later President of Czechoslovakia. 

111 


THE END AND THE BEGINNING 


To these pilgrims, Tolstoy was the strong one who had re¬ 
nounced. His attraction was his attempt to create, in his own way 
of life, a synthesis between creed and conduct. This involved 
manual labour, minimum needs, no holding of property, no 
killing. He called landlordism ‘a great sin’, extolled Henry 
George’s Single Tax, condemned military conscription, defended 
conscientious objectors, helped the pacifist Dukhobors to emigrate 
to Canada, denounced the pogromists of Kishenev, praised 
William Lloyd Garrison’s ‘non-resistance’, taught in a village 
primary school and refused the Nobel Prize because he did not 
accept money. 

The Orthodox Church of Russia excommunicated him. 

To a friend in prison Tolstoy wrote, ‘Unfortunately, I am not 
in prison. . . .’ 

The titles of his tracts reveal his mind: Thou Shalt Kill No One, 
Love One Another , Why Christian People in General and the Russian 
People Especially Fall into Distress , The Teachings of Christ for Children, 
Capital Punishment and Christianity , Religious Tolerance, Self-Perfection, 
and many more like these. 

Tolstoy died on November 20th, 1910, after fleeing from his 
wife in the hope of finding peace in a monastery or a Tolstoyan 
settlement. 

Gandhi came to know Tolstoy through The Kingdom of God 
Is Within You. The name of the volume is the gospel of its 
author. 

‘The history of the church’, Tolstoy bluntly affirmed, ‘is the 
history of cruelties and horror ... Every Church, with its doctrines 
of redemption and salvation, and above all the Orthodox faith 
with its idolatry, excludes the doctrine of Christ.’ Impartially, 
and with icy logic and myriad quotations, Tolstoy proved to his 
own satisfaction that all Christian churches try ‘to conceal the 
true meaning of the doctrine of Christ’. 

Tolstoy was equally critical of governments. From the dimmest 
ages, he declared, ‘Peace unto you’ has been man’s greeting to 
man, yet in Europe Christian nations keep twenty-eight million 
men under arms to settle problems by killing. Approvingly he 
quoted Guy de Maupassant, the French writer: ‘It is stupefying 
that society doe not revolt as a unit against the very sound of the 
word “War”.’ 


112 


TOLSTOY AND GANDHI 


Alexander Herzen, Russia’s great literary critic, had said that 
mounting militarism made every modern government ‘a Genghis 
Khan with telegraphic equipment’. Tolstoy concurred and added, 
‘In the matter of oppression, the Christian nations are worse than 
the pagans.’ 

T believe it is Max Mueller [foremost authority on Asia],’ Tol¬ 
stoy recalled, ‘who describes the astonishment of an Indian con¬ 
verted to Christianity who, having learned the essence of Christian 
doctrine, came to Europe and beheld the life of Christians.’ This 
was Tolstoy’s, as it was Thoreau’s, perpetual theme: the chasm 
between doctrine and doing. 

What to do? Tolstoy’s answer was simple: Live as a Christian 
should. Concretely, ‘A Christian enters into no dispute with his 
neighbour, he neither attacks nor uses violence; on the contrary, 
he suffers himself, without resistance, and by his very attitude 
towards evil not only sets himself free, but helps to free the world 
at large from all outward authority.’ 

The Gita and the Sermon on the Mount had led Gandhi to the 
same conclusion. 

Tolstoy preached peaceful, painful refusal to serve Or obey evil 
governments. He specified: no oath of allegiance, no oath in 
court ‘for an oath is distinctly forbidden by the Gospel’, no police 
duty, no military duty, no payment of taxes. 

‘What are governments to do with these men?’ Tolstoy inquired. 

That became Smuts’s problem. He did not know what to do 
with the Indians. ‘The position of governments in the presence 
of men who profess Christianity’, Tolstoy wrote, ‘is so precarious 
that very little is needed to shake their power to pieces.’ Thoreau 
said the same thing. 

Gandhi began by freeing himself. It was an involved process. 
For man is bound by many chains, and the stoutest are forged in 
the inner smithy, not by Church or State. ‘The Kingdom of God 
is within you.’ You are what you make yourself. You are not free 
because you do not free yourself. 

‘The Kingdom of God’, Tolstoy wrote, ‘is attained by . . . sacri¬ 
ficing outward circumstances for the sake of truth.’ 

Gandhi’s path was strewn with the outward possessions and 
pleasures which he cast off en route to the kingdom of God within 
him. 


rl 3 


THE END AND THE BEGINNING 


Gandhi’s first personal contact with Tolstoy was in the form of 
a long letter, written in English, dated ‘Westminster Palace Hotel, 
4 Victoria Street, S.W., London, October ist, 1909’, and sent 
from there to Tolstoy at Yasnaya Polyana, in central Russia. In 
it, he acquainted the Russian novelist with the civil disobedience 
movement in the Transvaal. 

In Tolstoy’s diary entry for September 24th, 1909 (the Russian 
calendar was then thirteen days behind the Western calendar), 
he wrote, ‘Received a pleasant letter from a Hindu of the Trans¬ 
vaal.’ Four days later, Tolstoy wrote a letter to Vladimir G. 
Chertkov, his intimate friend and, later, the editor of his collected 
works, saying, ‘The letter of the Transvaal Hindu has touched me.’ 

Dating his letter from Yasnaya Polyana, October 7th (20th), 
1909, Tolstoy wrote a reply to Gandhi in Russian. The Russian 
text was translated into English by Tolstoy’s daughter, Tatiana, 
who sent it to Gandhi. Tolstoy wrote, ‘I have just received your 
most interesting letter, which has given me great pleasure. God 
help our dear brothers and co-workers in the Transvaal. The same 
struggle of the soft against the harsh, of meekness and love against 
pride and violence, is making itself felt every year more and more 
among us here ... I greet you fraternally and am happy to have 
contact with you. (signed) Tolstoy.’ 

Gandhi’s second letter to Tolstoy was written in Johannesburg 
on April 4th, 1910, and was accompanied by a copy of Gandhi’s 
little book, Hind Swaraj or Indian Home Rule . In the letter Gandhi 
said, ‘As a humble follower of yours, I send you herewith a booklet 
which I have written. It is my own [English] translation of a 
Gujarati writing ... I am most anxious not to worry you, but if 
your health permits it, and if you could find the time to go through 
the booklet, needless to say I shall value very highly your criticism 
of the writing.’ 

On April 19th, 1910, Tolstoy wrote as follows in his diary: 
‘This morning two Japanese arrived. Wild men in ecstasy over 
European civilization. On the other hand, the book and the 
letter of the Hindu reveal an understanding of all the short¬ 
comings of European civilization and even of its total in¬ 
adequacy.’ 

Next day there was another entry in Tolstoy’s diary: ‘Yesterday 
I read Gandhi on civilization. Very good.’ And again the next 

114 


TOLSTOY AND GANDHI 


day: ‘Read a book about Gandhi. Very important. I must write 
to him/ The book about Gandhi was the Biography of Gandhi by 
J. J. Doke, which Gandhi had sent to Tolstoy. 

A day later, Tolstoy wrote a letter to his friend Chertkov in 
which he referred to Gandhi as ‘a person very close to us, to me’. 

Tolstoy replied to Gandhi on April 25th (May 8th), 1910, from 
Yasnaya Polyana. He wrote: 

Dear Friend: I just received your letter and your book, Indian 
Home Rule . I read your book with great interest because of the 
things and questions you treat in it: passive resistance is a question 
of the greatest importance, not only for India, but for the whole of 
humanity. 

I cannot find your former letters, but came across your bio¬ 
graphy by J. Doss [this is a mistake made by Tolstoy] which too 
interested me much and gave me the possibility to know and 
understand your letter. I am not quite well at present and there¬ 
fore abstain from writing to you all what I have to say about 
your book and all your work, which I appreciate very much, but 
I will do it as soon as I will feel better. Your friend and brother, 
L. Tolstoy. 

This was the English translation, sent to Gandhi, of Tolstoy’s 
perfect Russian. 

Gandhi’s third letter to Tolstoy is dated ‘21-24 Court Chambers, 
corner Rissik and Anderson Streets, Johannesburg, August 15th, 
1910’. In it Gandhi acknowledged Tolstoy’s letter of May 8th, 
with thanks, and added: ‘I shall look forward to your detailed 
criticism of the work which you have been so good as to promise 
in your letter.’ Gandhi also informed Tolstoy of the establishment 
of Tolstoy Farm by Kallenbach and himself. He said that Kallen- 
bach was writing to Tolstoy about the farm. The letters of 
Gandhi and Kallenbach, accompanied by several issues of 
Gandhi’s weekly, Indian Opinion , heightened Tolstoy’s interest 
in Gandhi. In his diary of September 6th (19th), 1910, Tolstoy 
wrote, ‘Pleasant news from Transvaal about the passive resistance 
colony.’ Tolstoy was at this time in a state of serious spiritual 
depression and physically ill. Nevertheless, he replied to Gandhi’s 
letter on the day he received it. Tolstoy dictated the letter on the 
evenings of the 5th and 6th of September (18th and 19th). On the 

h m.g. 115 


THE END AND THE BEGINNING 


7th (20th), Tolstoy corrected the letter and sent it in Russian to 
Chertkov for English translation. 

It was Chertkov who posted Tolstoy’s letter to Gandhi. Chert¬ 
kov included in the letter a letter of his own in which he said: 

My friend, Leo Tolstoy, has requested me to acknowledge the 
receipt of your letter to him of August 15th and to translate into 
English his letter to you of September 7th (new style-20th Sept.) 
written originally in Russian. 

All you communicate about Mr. Kallenbach has greatly 
interested Tolstoy, who has asked me to answer for him Mr. 
Kallenbach’s letter. Tolstoy sends you and your co-workers his 
heartiest greetings and warmest wishes for the success of your 
work, his appreciation of which you will gather from the enclosed 
translation of his letter to you. I must apologize for my mistakes 
in English in the translation, but living in the country in Russia, 
I am unable to profit by the assistance of any Englishman for 
correcting my mistakes. 

With Tolstoy’s permission his letter to you will be published in 
a small periodical printed by some friends of ours in London. A 
copy of the magazine with the letter shall be forwarded to you, 
as also some English publications of Tolstoy’s writings issued by 
4 The Free Age Press’. 

As it seems to me most desirable that more should be known in 
English about your movement, I am writing to a great friend of 
mine and Tolstoy, Mrs. Mayo, of Glasgow, proposing that she 
should enter into communication with you. . . . 

Chertkov sent a separate letter to Mr. Kallenbach. 

Tolstoy’s own letter to Gandhi was the longest in the whole 
correspondence. Dated September 7th (20th), 1910, and trans¬ 
lated into English by Chertkov, it was sent to an intermediary in 
England for posting to Gandhi. The intermediary was ill at the 
time and only posted the letter on November 1st, so that Gandhi 
received the letter in the Transvaal several days after the death 
of Count Leo Tolstoy. 

Tolstoy said: 

The longer I live, and especially now when I vividly feel the 
nearness of death, I want to tell others what I feel so particularly 

116 


TOLSTOY AND GANDHI 


clearly and what to my mind is of great importance — namely, 
that which is called passive resistance, but which in reality is 
nothing else than the teaching of love, uncorrupted by false 
interpretations. 

That love ... is the highest and only law of human life and in 
the depths of his soul every human being (as we see most clearly 
in children) feels and knows this; he knows this until he is en¬ 
tangled by the false teachings of the world. This law was pro¬ 
claimed by all, by the Indian as well as by the Chinese, Hebrew, 
Greek and Roman sages of the world. . . . 

In reality, as soon as force was admitted into love, there was no 
more and there could be no more love as the law of life, and as 
there was no law of love, there was no law at all, except violence — 
i.e. the power of the strongest. Thus Christian mankind has lived 
for nineteen centuries. . . . 

This was a very old man on the brink of death writing to a very 
young man; Gandhi was young, usually twenty-five years younger 
in spirit than his age. Tolstoy was profoundly unhappy. Anyone 
with the insight of War and Peace yet conscious of humanity’s 
refusal, or inability, to use the key to happiness available in Christ’s 
teachings would have to be unhappy. Gandhi, however, believed 
he could reform himself and others. He was doing it. It made 
him happy. 