CHAPTER V 


INDIAN INTERLUDE 

I n London, Gandhi never got beyond Leviticus and Numbers; 
the first books of the Old Testament bored him. Later in life 
he enjoyed the Prophets, Psalms and Ecclesiastes. The New 
Testament was more interesting, and the Sermon on the Mount 
‘went straight to my heart’. He saw similarities between it and the 
Gita. 

‘But I say unto you, that ye resist not evil; but whosoever shall 
smite thee on thy right cheek, turn to him the other also. And if 
any man take away thy coat let him have thy cloak too.’ These 
words of Christ ‘delighted’ Gandhi. Other verses struck a sym¬ 
pathetic chord in the Mahatma-to-be: ‘Blessed are the meek . . . 
Blessed are ye, when men shall revile you and persecute you . . . 
whosoever is angry with his brother without a cause shall be in 
danger of the judgment. . . Agree with thine adversary quickly . . . 
whosoever looketh on a woman to lust after her hath committed 
adultery already in his heart . . . Love your enemies, bless them 
that curse you . . . forgive men their trespasses . . . Lay not up 
for yourselves treasures upon earth ... For where your treasure 
is, there will your heart be also. . . .’ 

It was thanks to a Bible salesman in England that Gandhi read 
the Old and New Testaments. At the suggestion of a friend, he 
read Thomas Carlyle’s essay on the prophet Mohammed. Having 
met Madame H. P. Blavatsky and Mrs. Annie Besant in London, 
he studied their books on theosophy. Gandhi’s religious reading 
was accidental and desultory. Nevertheless, it apparently met a 
need, for he was not a great reader and, apart from law tomes, 
had not read much, not even a history of India. 

Gandhi refused to join Britain’s new theosophist movement, but 
he rejoiced in Mrs. Besant’s renunciation of godlessness. He him¬ 
self had already traversed ‘the Sahara of atheism’ and emerged 
from it thirsty for religion. 

In this state he returned to India in the summer of 1891. He 
was more worldly but no more articulate. He quickly recognized 
d m.g. 51 


THE END AND THE BEGINNING 


his failures yet stubbornly insisted on having his way. He was 
self-critical and self-confident, temperamentally shy and intel¬ 
lectually sure. 

On landing at Bombay, his brother told him that Putlibai, their 
mother, was dead. The news had been kept from Mohandas 
because the family knew his devotion to her. He was shocked, 
but his grief, greater than when his father died, remained under 
control. 

Gandhi’s son Harilal was four; his brothers had several older 
children, boys and girls. The returned barrister led them in 
physical exercises and walks, and played and joked with them. 
He also had time for quarrels with his wife; once, in fact, he sent 
her away from Rajkot to her parents’ home in Porbandar; he 
was still jealous. He performed all the duties of a husband 
except support his wife and child; he had no money. 

Laxmidas Gandhi, a lawyer in Rajkot, had built high hopes 
on his younger brother. But Mohandas was a complete failure 
as a lawyer in Rajkot as well as in Bombay where he could not 
utter a word during a petty case in court. 

Laxmidas, who had financed Gandhi’s studies in England, was 
even more disappointed at his brother’s failure to carry out a 
delicate mission for him. Laxmidas had been the secretary and 
adviser of the heir to the throne of Porbandar. He was thus 
destined, it seemed, to follow in his father’s and grandfather’s 
footsteps and become prime minister of the little state. But he 
lost favour with the British Political Agent. Now Mohandas had 
casually met the agent in London. Laxmidas therefore wanted 
his brother to see the Englishman and adjust matters. Gandhi 
did not think it right to presume on a slight acquaintance and 
ask an interview for such a purpose. But he yielded to his brother’s 
importuning. The agent was cold: Laxmidas could apply through 
the proper channels if he thought he had been wronged. Gandhi 
persisted. The agent showed him the door; Gandhi stayed to 
argue; the agent’s clerk or messenger took hold of Gandhi and 
put him out. 

The shock of the encounter with the British agent, Gandhi 
declares in his autobiography, ‘changed the course of my entire 
life’. He had been doing odd legal jobs for the ruling prince. He 
and his brother hoped he would finally obtain a position as judge 

52 


INDIAN INTERLUDE 


or minister in the government which might lead to further ad¬ 
vancement in the tradition of the family. But his altercation with 
the agent upset these plans. Only a sycophant could succeed and 
get on. The episode intensified his dislike of the atmosphere 
of petty intrigue, palace pomp and snobbery which prevailed in 
Porbandar, Rajkot and the other miniature principalities of the 
Kathiawar peninsula. It was poison to character. Gandhi yearned 
to escape from it. 

At this juncture a business firm of Porbandar Moslems offered 
to send him to South Africa for a year as their lawyer. He seized 
the opportunity to see a new country and get new experiences; 
T wanted somehow to leave India.’ So, after less than two un¬ 
successful years in his native land, its future leader boarded a ship 
for Zanzibar, Mozambique and Natal. He left behind him his 
wife and two children; on October 28th, 1892, a second son 
named Manilal had been born. ‘By way of consolation’, 
Gandhi assured Kasturbai that ‘we are bound to meet again in 
a year’. 

In Bombay, Gandhi had met Raychandbai. ‘No one else, 
Gandhi said, ‘has ever made on me the impression that Raychand¬ 
bai did.’ Raychandbai was a jeweller-poet with a phenomenal 
memory. He was rich, a connoisseur of diamonds and pearls, and 
a good business man. Gandhi was impressed by his religious 
learning, his upright character and his passion for self-realization. 
Raychandbai’s deeds, Gandhi felt, were guided by his desire for 
truth and godliness. Gandhi trusted him completely. In a crisis, 
Gandhi ran to Raychandbai for confession and comfort. From 
South Africa, Gandhi sought and obtained Raychandbai’s advice. 
Nevertheless, Gandhi did not accept Raychandbai as his guru. 
Hindus believe that every man should acknowledge a guru, a 
superior person, near or far, living or dead, as one’s teacher, 
guide, or mentor. But Raychandbai lacked the perfection that 
Gandhi sought in a guru. Gandhi never did find a guru; ‘The 
throne has remained vacant,’ he said. For a Hindu, this is tre¬ 
mendously significant and for Gandhi it is endlessly revealing. 
In the presence of prominent men he felt respect, humility and 
awe, but, wrapped in these sentiments, he sometimes became 
impervious to their thoughts. With all his diffidence he was 
spiritually independent. Ideas came to him occasionally through 

53 


THE END AND THE BEGINNING 

books but chiefly through his own acts. He remade himself by 
tapping his own inner resources. 

Gandhi was a self-remade man and the transformation began 
in South Africa. It is not that he turned failure into success. 
Using the clay that was there he turned himself into another 
person. His was a remarkable case of second birth in one lifetime. 


54 


 

