CHAPTER XII 


LETTER TO A SON 

G andhi’s second sentence ended on December 13th, 1908, 
but, since civil resistance against the immigration ban con¬ 
tinued, he received a third three-month sentence and was 
back in Volksrust prison on February 25th, 1909. Five days later, 
carrying a few possessions on his head and walking in heavy rain, 
he was escorted to a train for Pretoria where he sat out his term 
in the newly built local penitentiary. On arriving, the warden 
said, ‘Are you the son of Gandhi?’ He apparently looked so 
youthful that the official mistook him for his son Harilal who was 
serving a six-month period in Volksrust. Gandhi was forty. 

In jail, Gandhi received a gift of two religious books from 
General Smuts; he also read Stevenson’s Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde, 
Carlyle’s French Revolution , and many Indian religious volumes. 
‘My books saved me,’ he wrote in his reminiscences. 

From prison, Gandhi sent a letter to Manilal who has preserved 
it to this day. It was written by hand, with purple indelible ink 
pencil, on both sides of five long cream-coloured foolscap sheets 
of prison stationery and is in English. Normally, Gandhi would 
have addressed Manilal in Gujarati, but printed instructions in 
the left-hand margin of each page say, in English, Dutch and 
Kaffir, that correspondence must be conducted in English, 
Dutch, German, French, or Kaffir. The letter is dated March 
25th, 1909; Gandhi’s number was 777; the censor initialled it two 
days later. 

Manilal was seventeen and, since nobody else worried, he 
worried about his profession and future. He had had practically 
no formal education. Now he was his father’s agent on the farm 
and in Indian Opinion , and probably a very harassed young man. 

My dear son [Gandhi began], I have a right to write one 
letter per month and receive also one letter per month. It became 
a question with me as to whom I should write to. I thought of 
Mr. Ritch [the editor of Indian Opinion ], Mr. Polak and you. I 

106 


LETTER TO A SON 


chose you because you have been nearest my thoughts in all my 
reading. 

As for myself I must not, I am not allowed to say much. I am 
quite at peace & none need worry about me. 

I hope mother is now quite well. I know several letters from 
you have been received but they have not been given to me. The 
Deputy Governor however was good enough to tell me that she 
was getting on well. Does she wall: about freely? I hope she and 
all of you would continue to take sago & milk in the morning. 
And how is Chanchi? [The nickname of Harilal’s wife, Gulab.] 
Tell her I think of her every day. I hope she has got rid of all 
the sores she had and that she & Rami [Harilal’s little daughter] 
are quite well. 

I hope Ramdas and Devadas are keeping well, learning their 
lessons and not causing any worry. Has Ramdas got rid of his 
cough? 

I hope you all treated Willie well while he was with you. Any 
balance of the food stuff left by Mr. Cordes I should wish you 
have returned to him. 

And now about yourself. How are you? Although I think that 
you are well able to bear all the burden I have placed on your 
shoulders and that you are doing it quite cheerfully, I have often 
felt that you required greater personal guidance than I have been 
able to give you. I know too that you have sometimes felt that 
your education was being neglected. Now I have read a great 
deal in the prison. I have been reading Emerson, Ruskin and 
Mazzini. I have also been reading the Upanishads. All confirm 
the view that education does not mean a knowledge of letters 
but it means character building. It means a knowledge of duty. 
Our own [Gujarati] word literally means training. If this is the 
true view, and it is to my mind the only true view, you are 
receiving the best education-training possible. What can be 
better than that you should have the opportunity of nursing 
mother & cheerfully bearing her ill temper, or than looking after 
Chanchi & anticipating her wants and behaving to her so as 
not to make her feel the absence of Harilal or again than being 
guardian to Ramdas and Devadas? If you succeed in doing this 
well, you have received more than half your education. 

I was much struck by one passage in Nathuramji’s introduction 

107 


THE END AND THE BEGINNING 


to the Upanishads . He says that the Brahmacharya stage — i.e., 
the first stage, is like the last, i.e., the sanyasin [monk] stage. This 
is true. Amusement only continues during the age of innocence, 
i.e., up to twelve years only. As soon as a boy reaches the age of 
discretion, he is taught to realize his responsibilities. Every boy 
from such age onward should practise continence in thought & 
deed, truth likewise and the not-taking of any life. This to him 
must not be an irksome learning and practice but it should be 
natural to him. It should be his enjoyment. I can recall to my 
mind several such boys in Rajkot. Let me tell you that when I 
was younger than you are my keenest enjoyment was to nurse my 
father. Of amusement after I was twelve, I had little or none. If 
you practise the three virtues, if they become part of your life, 
so far as I am concerned you will have completed your education 
— your training. Armed with them, believe me you will earn your 
bread in any part of the world & you will have paved the way to 
acquire a true knowledge of the soul, yourself and God. This does 
not mean that you shd not receive instruction in letters. That 
you shd & you are doing. But it is a thing over which you need 
not fret yourself. You have plenty of time for it and after all you 
are to receive such instruction in order that your training may be 
of use to others. 

Remember please that henceforth our lot is poverty. The more 
I think of it the more I feel that it is more blessed to be poor than 
to be rich. The uses of poverty are far sweeter than those of riches. 

There follow one hundred and five lines of instructions, mes¬ 
sages, and greetings to persons at Phoenix Farm, then, 

And now again yourself. Do give ample work to gardening, 
actual digging, hoeing, etc. We have to live upon it in future. 
And you shd be the expert gardener of the family. Keep your 
tools in their respective places and absolutely clean. In your 
lessons you shd give a great deal of attention to mathematics and 
Sanskrit. The latter is absolutely necessary for you. Both these 
studies are difficult in after life. You will not neglect your music. 
You shd make a selection of all good passages, hymns and verses, 
whether in English, Gujarati or Hindi and write them out in 
your best hand in a book. The collection at the end of a year 

108 


LETTER TO A SON 


will be most valuable. All these things you can do easily if you 
are methodical. Never get agitated and think you have too much 
to do and then worry over what to do first. This you will find out 
in practice if you are patient and take care of your minutes. I 
hope you are keeping an accurate account as it should be kept of 
every penny spent for the household. 

The next paragraph is for a student at the farm. Continuing, 
Gandhi writes: 

Please tell Maganlalbhai that I would advise him to read Emer¬ 
son’s essays. They can be had for nine pence in Durham. There 
is a cheap reprint out. These essays are worth studying. He shd 
read them, mark the important passages and then finally copy 
them out in a notebook. The essays to my mind contain the 
teaching of Indian wisdom in a western guru. It is interesting to 
see our own sometimes thus differently fashioned. He should also 
try to read Tolstoy’s Kingdom of God is Within You. It is a most 
logical book. The English of the translation is very simple. What 
is more Tolstoy practises what he preaches. 

Gandhi told Manilal to make copies of this letter and send one 
to Polak, another to Kallenbach, and a third to a swami who had 
left for India. He was to wait for Polak’s and Kallenbach’s replies 
and incorporate them into his own which, however, ‘should not 
contain any information about the struggle’. The censor did not 
allow that. 

In the last breath Gandhi asked for ‘a copy of algebra. Any 
edition will do’. 

And now I close with love to all and kisses to Ramdas, Devadas 
& Rami. 

from 

Father. 

Solicitude in the writer may be irritation to the recipient. 
Gandhi’s warm and tender concern to mould Manilal into his 
own image probably sounded like a sermon interlarded with 
countless obnoxious chores. Gandhi’s selfless injunctions were 
for his son’s good, but the prospect of chastity, poverty and hard 

109 


THE END AND THE BEGINNING 


work under a strict taskmaster who wanted the tools stacked 
neatly in the storeroom offered few thrills to the young man on 
the threshold of life. 

Married at thirteen, Gandhi never had a boyhood and therefore 
never understood his own boys. The letter to Manilal showed 
this. As a blueprint of the future it had the virtue of truth, but 
the truth was forbidding. The fact that his father had not enjoyed 
life from the age of twelve would have saddened a sensitive son or, 
indeed, frightened him. Such a father is difficult to live with. 
Such a father writes such a letter. The letter said, in effect, ‘Your 
life will remain tied to mine; you cannot go your own way. 5 
Gandhi wanted a helper; Manilal wanted freedom. He thought 
of becoming a lawyer or doctor. His father was training him to 
be a minor saint. 

Eyes fixed on a distant, glorious goal, Gandhi, at this stage, 
sometimes failed to see those who were nearest. He expected them 
to meet the exacting standards he cheerfully imposed on himself. 
But he was not cruel; very likely, it never occurred to him that 
his letter conveyed anything but deep love and paternal care. 


i io 


 

