CHAPTER IX 


THE TRANSFORMATION BEGINS 

T h e Gandhi who worsted the South African government in 
prolonged combat had first conquered himself and trans¬ 
formed his living habits and inner essence. That altered his 
relations with Kasturbai and their children. 

A photograph of Mrs. Gandhi on her first arrival in South 
Africa in 1897 — at twenty-eight — shows her a beautiful woman, 
elegantly dressed in a rich, silk sari. The fine oval face with eyes 
wide apart, well-formed nose, delicately curved lips and perfectly 
shaped chin must have made her very attractive indeed. She was 
not as tall as Gandhi. He was photographed on the same occasion 
in a European suit, stiff white collar and stiff white shirt, a gay, 
striped necktie and a round button in his lapel buttonhole. On 
his head is a thin skull-cap. In a second exposure he is without 
head-dress. His full lips begin to reflect the will-power tempered 
by powerful emotional self-control which they later expressed so 
eloquently. But on the whole he looks the average Indian, Euro¬ 
peanized by constant imitation of the white world. 

Harilal and Manilal, their two sons who came with them to 
South Africa, were dressed in knee-length coats and long, Western 
trousers. They wore shoes and stockings; they had not worn them 
in India. Neither had Kasturbai. All three disliked them and 
complained to the head of the family that their feet felt cramped 
and the stockings stank. But Gandhi used his authority to compel 
obedience. He also inflicted the Western torture of knives and 
forks at meals; finger-eating had been so much more comfortable 
and tasty. 

Gandhi earned five to six thousand pounds a year from his 
legal work — a very big income in those days in South Africa. 
At one time, in Durban, he rented an English villa at the 
beach a few doors from the Attorney-General’s home, and always 
his life resembled that of the professional man who had made 
good. 

Before going to study law in London, Gandhi had yearned to be 

74 


THE TRANSFORMATION BEGINS 

a doctor, and in effect he always was. He offered free medical 
advice to most of his legal clients. One of them, Lutavasinh, was 
asthmatic. Gandhi induced him to fast and give up smoking. 
Later, Gandhi put him on a diet of rice, milk and marmalade for 
a month. ‘At the end of the month,’ Gandhi boasted years later, 
‘he was free from asthma.’ 

An Indian business man’s son became ill suddenly; the doctor 
advised an operation. Gandhi was summoned. To calm the 
father, Gandhi agreed to be present at the operation. The child 
died under the knife; Gandhi never shook off the impression. 

Gandhi was also Kasturbai’s midwife. He had studied a 
popular work on childbirth, which constituted a full course in 
obstetrics and infant care, and, when labour came too swiftly for 
professional help to be fetched, Gandhi himself delivered his 
fourth son, Devadas, May 22rd, 1900. ‘I was not nervous,’ he said. 
For two months after the birth of Devadas and also for a while 
after the birth of Ramdas, his third son, in South Africa in 1897, 
Gandhi employed a nurse; she helped Kasturbai in the household. 
But caring for infants ‘I did myself’, Gandhi writes. 

Gandhi was constantly interfering in household matters; that 
incensed Kasturbai. He considered himself her teacher, which 
annoyed her. He imposed new, rigid rules of behaviour. The 
‘blind, infatuated’ love he gave Kasturbai was a diminishing 
recompense for these tribulations. But ‘A Hindu wife,’ Gandhi 
declared, ‘regards implicit obedience to her husband as the highest 
religion. A Hindu husband regards himself as the lord and master 
of his wife who must ever dance attendance upon him.’ Gandhi, 
in this period, was a very Hindu husband. He thought himself 
‘a cruelly kind’ spouse. At times, Kasturbai would have failed 
to notice the kindness. 

Frequently, Gandhi’s friends and his law clerks and assistants, 
whom he treated like sons, stayed with him. Among these non¬ 
paying boarders was Sheik Mehtab, his athletic, meat-eating 
boyhood friend. Gandhi had brought him along on his second trip 
from India. Mehtab had hardly settled in the Gandhi household 
when he began secretly to introduce prostitutes into his room. 
Gandhi was informed but he refused to believe it until on one 
occasion he caught Mehtab in the act. Mehtab had to leave the 
house. Later Mehtab married and reformed and wrote mediocre 

75 


THE END AND THE BEGINNING 


inspirational verse for the Gandhian passive resisters; his wife 
went to prison as a passive resister. 

There was no running water in the Gandhi home.; each room 
had a chamber pot. Gandhi would not employ an untouchable 
‘sweeper’ who in India does all ‘unclean’ tasks. He and Kasturbai 
carried out the pots. She had no choice; he insisted. But one clerk 
had been an untouchable himself and had become a Christian in 
order to escape the ugly disabilities which Hindus inflict on their 
‘outcasts’. To the orthodox Kasturbai, however, he remained an 
untouchable and she balked at cleaning his pot. In fact she hated 
the whole business and did not see why she, or her husband for 
that matter, should perform such tasks. Gandhi compelled her to 
obey; he considered it part of her ‘education’. But she cried and 
her eyes were red with anger and tears. He protested; not only 
must she do this work but she had to do it cheerfully and when he 
saw her weep, he shouted, ‘I will not have this nonsense in my house.’ 

‘Keep your house to yourself and let me go,’ she screamed. 

Gandhi grabbed her by the hand, dragged her to the gate, 
opened it and was about to push her out. 

‘Have you no shame?’ she exclaimed through copious tears. 
‘Where am I to go? I have no parents or relatives here. For 
Heaven’s sake, behave yourself and shut the gate. Let us not be 
found making scenes like this.’ 

This brought Gandhi to his senses. He possessed a temper and 
temperament, and his subsequent Mahatma-calm was the product 
of training. 

In 1901 Gandhi decided to return to India. On the eve of his 
departure — with his family — the Indian community outdid 
itself in concrete demonstrations of gratitude. He was presented 
with numerous gold and silver objects and diamond ornaments. 
For Kasturbai there was a very valuable gold necklace. 

Gandhi had received gifts when he left for India in 1896. They 
were not like these; they were small, personal tokens of apprecia¬ 
tion which he had accepted easily in that spirit. Since then, 
moreover, his view of personal possessions had been gradually 
changing. He was beginning to see danger in wealth and property. 
He had been pleading with people to conquer their infatuation 
for jewellery. Yet now he himself owned more than anybody 
whom he had tried to convert. 


76 


THE TRANSFORMATION BEGINS 


After the presentation party he went home and spent a sleepless 
night. The gifts might be construed as payment for services which 
he had rendered with no thought of material gain. He wanted to 
give them up. But he saw the advantage of retention. Torn 
between the yearning for financial security and the desire for the 
freedom derived from owning nothing, he paced up and down for 
hours arguing with himself. He was also aware that he faced a 
family crisis if he decided to return the gifts. Kasturbai would 
protest; he would be making her unhappy. But by morning his 
mind was made up: the gifts must go. 

He had won his own battle. Could he convince Kasturbai? 

First, in order to make the renunciation a fact beyond family 
dispute, he drafted a letter which elaborated a plan of using the 
gifts to create a community fund. Then he proceeded to recruit 
Harilal and Manilal, his first and second born. They were readily 
persuaded. They had no interest in jewels and no objection to his 
emerging new philosophy of austerity. Besides, Papa was a 
compelling debater. 

‘Let’s return them,’ they agreed. 

‘Then you will plead with your mother, won’t you?’ Gandhi 
hinted. 

‘Certainly,’ the young boys said with alacrity. ‘Just leave it to 
us. She does not need ornaments. She would want them for us, 
and if we don’t want them why should she not part with them?’ 

But the boys failed to move Kasturbai. Gandhi came to their 
aid. 

‘It’s all very well for you,’ Kasturbai started calmly. ‘You don’t 
care for jewels. You don’t wear them. And it’s easy enough for 
you to influence the boys. They’ll always dance to your tune. 
As for me, I have already obeyed your order not to wear trinkets. 
After all the talking you’ve done about other people not wearing 
jewels it would not do for me to wear them. But what about my 
daughters-in-law?’ she said with bitterness and growing deter¬ 
mination. ‘They will be sure to want them.’ 

‘Well,’ Gandhi put in mildly, ‘the children aren’t married yet. 
We’ve always said they must not marry young. When they are 
grown up they can take care of themselves. And surely we will 
not chose brides for our sons who are fond of jewellery.’ 

‘Young things like pretty things,’ argued Kasturbai. 

77 


THE END AND THE BEGINNING 

Gandhi tried to soothe. ‘Well/ he said, ‘if they do, if after all we 
have to provide them with ornaments, I shall be hem You will 
ask me then.’ 

That infuriated Kasturbai. ‘Ask you! I know you by this time. 
You took my jewellery away from me. Imagine you offering to 
get jewels for your daughters-in-law! You, who are trying to 
make monks of my boys. 

‘No,’ she shouted, ‘the ornaments will not be returned.’ 

The Hindu wife was defiant. ‘Besides,’ she exclaimed, ‘the 
necklace is mine. You have no right to return that.’ This was a 
retreat. She had given up hope of their keeping all the jewels. 
At least, the necklace. 

Eager to mollify her, Gandhi nevertheless was hard. ‘Was the 
necklace given to you for your service or for my service?’ he asked 
rhetorically. 

Kasturbai burst into tears. ‘It’s the same thing,’ she sobbed. 
‘Service rendered by you is as though rendered by me. I have 
toiled and moiled for you day and night. Is that no service? You 
forced all and sundry guests upon me, making me weep bitter 
tears and I slaved for them.’ 

Gandhi knew this was a just reproach. But he did not admit it 
at the moment. He was determined to return the jewels and 
create the community fund. He was ‘definitely of the opinion that 
a public worker should accept no costly gifts’. He was beginning 
to believe that he should own nothing costly, whether given or 
earned. Against this powerful impulse which would soon reach 
full flower and alter his entire mode of life, Kasturbai had no 
argument. Hers was the instinctive, million-year-old female 
desire for adornment and the fear, equally primitive, of material 
want. But a plea for acquisitiveness could not stand against 
Gandhi’s penchant for renunciation, nor could Kasturbai induce 
him to prefer self-enrichment to community service. In the end, 
he simply asserted his male authority and announced that the 
1901 gifts and those of 1896, would be surrendered to trustees. 
So it was, and the fund, augmented from other sources, served 
South African Indians for decades thereafter. 

Shortly after this episode, Gandhi, having returned to India 
and rented a home and chambers in Bombay, received a call at 
his office from an American insurance agent. The agent had a 

78 


THE TRANSFORMATION BEGINS 


‘pleasant countenance’ and ‘a sweet tongue’. He discussed 
Gandhi’s future ‘as though we were old friends’. In America, the 
agent said, ‘a person like you would always carry insurance; life 
is uncertain’. Moreover, ‘It’s a religious duty to be insured.’ 
This impressed Gandhi; he had believed that faith in God made 
an insurance policy superfluous. ‘And what about your family?’ 
the agent continued. Gandhi knew that his surrender of the 
fortune in jewels had intensified Kasturbai’s insecurity. What 
would happen to her and the boys if he died; would it be right 
again to burden his generous brother who had already spent so 
much money on them? So Gandhi took out an insurance policy 
for ten thousand rupees or, roughly, a thousand pounds in values 
of that time. The glib American agent subverted the future 
Mahatma. The future Mahatma had not yet solved his psycho¬ 
logical problems. 

Hardly had the family found itself in Bombay than Manilal, 
aged ten, went down with a severe case of typhoid complicated, 
before long, by pneumonia. At night, the boy had a very high 
temperature. 

A Parsi doctor was called. He said there was no effective medi¬ 
cine. Everything depended on proper diet and good nursing. He 
recommended chicken broth and eggs. 

‘But we are absolute vegetarians,’ Gandhi told the doctor. 

‘Your son’s life is in danger,’ the doctor cautioned. ‘We could 
give him milk diluted with water but that will not provide enough 
nourishment.’ The Parsi physician said many of his Hindu 
patients were vegetarians but in serious illnesses they obeyed his 
instructions. 

Gandhi replied, ‘Even for life itself we may not do certain things. 
Rightly or wrongly it is part of my religious conviction that man 
may not eat eggs and meat. It is in crises such as this that a per¬ 
son’s faith is truly tested.’ To be a vegetarian in normal circum¬ 
stances and take meat when the body is under stress would mock 
vegetarianism. Gandhi accordingly told the doctor he would 
persist. ‘I propose, in addition,’ Gandhi declared, ‘to try some 
hydropathic remedies which I happen to know.’ He had been 
reading pamphlets on water cure by a Dr. Kuhne of Leipzig. 

Gandhi informed Manilal about this conversation. The boy 
was too weak to do more than assent. The father now assumed 

79 


THE END AND THE BEGINNING 


complete charge of the patient. He gave Manilal several three- 
minute hot hip baths a day and starved him on diluted orange 
juice for three days. 

But the temperature remained at 104. Manilal was delirious. 
Gandhi worried. He worried about what people would say, what 
his elder brother Laxmidas, now the head of the family, would 
say. And Kasturbai was anxious and angry. Should he try 
another physician, or perhaps consult an expert in ancient 
Indian aryuvedic medicine? 

On the other hand, he said to himself, The thread of life is in 
God’s hand; and God must be pleased by my adherence to 
vegetarianism and natural cures’. 

The boy’s condition became extremely critical. Gandhi decided 
to give him a wet pack. He dipped a bedsheet in water, wrung it 
out, wrapped it around Manilal’s body, covered him with two 
blankets, and put a wet towel to the head. 

Manilal’s body was hot and dry. Gandhi was frantic. The boy 
was not perspiring. Kasturbai fretted. Gandhi put her in charge, 
telling her strictly not to alter anything; he himself felt he had to 
leave the house to lessen the tension within him. He walked the 
streets and prayed, calling, ‘God, God, God, God, please, God.’ 

Excited, exhausted, he returned home. 

‘It is you Bapu,’ Manilal said to his father. 

‘Yes, darling,’ Gandhi replied. 

T am burning, take me out.’ 

‘Just a few more minutes, son. You are perspiring. You will 
soon be well.’ 

‘No, Bapu, I cannot stand it any longer. I am burning up.’ 

‘Another minute. It will relieve you.’ 

Gandhi opened the sheet and wiped the body dry. Then they 
both fell asleep in the same bed. Next morning the fever was 
down. Gradually, it disappeared. Gandhi kept the boy on 
diluted milk and fruit juices for forty days until he was com¬ 
pletely recovered. 

Was it hydropathy? Or diet? It happens that Gandhi did the 
right thing from the medical point of view. Orange juice and 
milk were at least as good as, perhaps better than, eggs and 
chicken. But Gandhi ascribed Manilal’s delivery to ‘God’s grace’. 

‘God saved my honour,’ he said. 

80 


THE TRANSFORMATION BEGINS 


Gandhi had settled down in Bombay, but in 1902 he was again 
recalled to South Africa. He now realized that he would be there 
for a long time and sent for his wife and three boys; Harilal, 
the eldest, remained in India. Gandhi resumed his lucrative law 
practice in Johannesburg. 

Gandhi insisted that his clients tell him the whole truth; he 
dropped many cases when he discovered that he had been 
deceived. The lawyer’s duty, he held, was not to prove the guilty 
innocent but to help the court to arrive at the truth. 

If a person, wishing to retain him, made a confession of wrong¬ 
doing, Gandhi would say, ‘Why don’t you plead guilt/ and take 
the penalty?’ He thought there was too much litigation for com¬ 
munity health and individual morality. ‘A true lawyer,’ he de¬ 
clared, ‘is one who places truth and service in the first place and 
the emoluments of the profession in the next place only.’ But 
the true lawyer, he found, was a rarity. Lawyers often lied, 
money talked, and witnesses consciously perjured themselves. 

Even as a lawyer his primary impulse was to change men. He 
respected no precedent, tradition, enactment, or habit that ob¬ 
structed a change he aspired to introduce. He changed his own 
habits with the greatest alacrity. 

Gandhi suffered from occasional rheumatic inflammation, head¬ 
aches and constipation. Though a vegetarian he was a heavy 
eater. He concluded that he overate. Having heard of the forma¬ 
tion in England (Manchester) of a No-Breakfast Association, he 
dispensed with the morning meal and the headaches and other 
physical ailments disappeared. Thereafter he took no more 
laxatives or medicines. Instead, if necessary he applied a poultice 
of clean earth moistened with cold water to his abdomen; this 
worked alimentary miracles. Simultaneously, he adopted a diet 
based on sun-baked fruits and nuts. Grapes and almonds, accord¬ 
ing to his researches, were adequate nourishment for the tissues 
and nerves. 

He walked to and from his law office. As long as the family 
was in Johannesburg the children accompanied him — a distance 
of five miles in all. In the office he became an expert typist. 

Once a white barber refused to cut Gandhi’s hair. Without 
blaming the barber (‘There was every chance of his losing his 
custom if he should serve black men. We do not allow our barbers 

81 


THE END AND THE BEGINNING 


to serve our untouchable brethren’) Gandhi bought a pair of 
clippers and thenceforth cut his own hair and that of the boys. 

Gandhi wore stiff white collars, but the laundry was expensive 
and, besides, it returned work so slowly that he had to have 
several dozen collars. He took to washing and starching them 
himself. The first time he did it he used too much starch and the 
iron was not hot enough. In court, the starch began dropping off the 
collar and Gandhi’s colleagues laughed. But ‘in the course of time 
I became an expert washerman’. He saw ‘the beauty of self-help’. 

In 1903 Gandhi joined a group of Christians and Theosophists 
called the Seekers’ Club. They frequently read the Bhagavad Gita 
together. Spurred by this activity Gandhi began studying the 
Gita again. His morning toilet required thirty-five minutes, 
‘fifteen minutes for the toothbrush’, an old Indian custom, and 
twenty minutes for bathing. While cleaning his teeth, he memor¬ 
ized the Gita. Its outstanding lesson to him now was ‘non¬ 
possession’. Straightway he allowed his Bombay American 
insurance policy to lapse. ‘God would take care’ of the family. 

But ‘were not wife and children possessions?’ 

The discussions at the Seekers led him to introspection. He 
concluded that his emotions were undisciplined and that he lacked 
‘equability’. To be equable he would have to treat family, friend 
and foe alike. This was Gita ‘detachment’. 

One evening Gandhi went to an ‘At Home’ of the proprietress 
of his favourite vegetarian restaurant. There he met a young man 
named Henry S. L. Polak, born at Dover in 1882, who had be¬ 
come a vegetarian after reading Count Leo Tolstoy. Polak also 
knew Adolf Just’s Return to Nature , a treatise on nature cures which 
Gandhi cherished. They talked, found much in common and 
became friends. Polak was assistant editor of the Transvaal Critic. 
He had ‘a wonderful faculty’, Gandhi said, ‘of translating into 
practice anything that appealed to his intellect. Some of the 
changes he had made in his life were as prompt as they were 
radical’. This description of what Gandhi liked in Polak is a 
description of Gandhi. 

Some months earlier, in 1903, Gandhi had helped to start a 
weekly magazine called Indian Opinion. The paper was in diffi¬ 
culties, and to cope with them at first hand Gandhi took a trip 
to Durban where the magazine was published. Polak saw him 

82 


THE TRANSFORMATION BEGINS 

off at the station and gave him a book to read for the long 
journey. It was John Ruskin’s Unto This Last. 

Ruskin’s influence during his lifetime was very great, as art 
critic, essayist and writer on ethics, sociology and economics. 
His monumental Fors Clavigera, in eight volumes published between 
1871 and 1874, preached the dignity of manual labour, urged the 
simple life, and stressed the debilitating complexities of the modern 
economic system. 

Ruskin was sometimes contemptuous of the society in which he 
lived. ‘How much’, he demanded in Sesame and Lilies , ‘do you 
think we spend on libraries, public and private, as compared with 
what we spend on our horses? . . . Or, to go lower still, how much 
do you think the contents of the book-shelves of the United 
Kingdom, private and public, would fetch, as compared with the 
contents of its wine-cellars?’ 

The same iconoclastic spirit permeates Unto This Last: Four 
Essays on the First Principles of Political Economy , first published serially 
in the London Cornhill Magazine and in Harper’s, New York, in 
i860 and later in book form. Of this work, forty years later, 
Gandhi said that it was written with ‘blood and tears’. 

‘Riches’, Ruskin declared, ‘are a power like that of electricity, 
acting through inequalities or negations of itself. The force of the 
guinea you have in your pocket depends wholly on the default of 
a guinea in your neighbour’s pocket. If he did not want it, it 
would be of no use to you.’ When he is poor and long out of work 
the guinea is more valuable to you. Therefore, ‘what is really 
desired, under the name of riches, is, essentially, power over men’. 

Consequently, men should seek ‘not greater wealth, but simpler 
pleasure; not higher fortune but deeper felicity; making the first 
of possessions, self-possession; and honouring themselves in the 
harmless pride and calm pursuits of peace’. 

Remembering that ‘what one person has, another cannot have’, 
the rich should abstain from luxuries until all, the poorest too, 
shall have enough, ‘until the time come and the kingdom, when 
Christ’s gift of bread and bequest of peace shall be unto this last 
as unto thee. . . .’ 

To Gandhi it meant: only that economy is good which conduces 
to the good of all. This Gandhi had known. The second lesson, 
which he had ‘dimly realized’, was that ‘a lawyer’s work has the 

f m.g. 83 


M.G. 


THE END AND THE BEGINNING 


same value as the barber’s, inasmuch as all have the same right of 
earning their livelihood for their work’. Gandhi derived this 
interpretation from one sentence in Ruskin’s book: ‘A labourer 
serves his country with his spade, just as a man in the middle rank 
of life serves it with the sword, the pen, or the lancet.’ But Ruskin 
did not say, as Gandhi did, that the work of all ‘has the same value’. 
On the contrary, Ruskin stressed, more than anything else, ‘the 
impossibility of Equality’ between men. He merely contended 
that the underprivileged must find protection in the morality of 
the fortunate. Ruskin hoped to alleviate the hardships of in¬ 
equality by an appeal to the conscience of the devout. 

The third lesson of Unto This Last — ‘that the life of labour, that 
is, the life of the tiller of the soil and the handicraftsman, is the 
life worth living’ — was completely new to Gandhi. But these are 
Gandhi’s words; the teaching, though not alien to Ruskin, is 
scarcely to be found in the four essays. Ruskin merely suggested, 
in a footnote, that the rich would be healthier with ‘lighter dinner 
and more work’ while the poor could do with more dinner and 
lighter work. 

Gandhi, who had never read Ruskin, started reading Unto This 
Last the moment the train left Johannesburg and read all night. 
‘That book’, he said in October 1946, ‘marked the turning point 
in my life.’ He immediately decided ‘to change my life in accord¬ 
ance with the ideals of the book’. He would go to live on a farm 
with his family and associates. 

As Gandhi read his deepest convictions into the Gita , so he wove 
his own notions into Ruskin. Those books appealed to him most 
which were closest to his concept of life and, where they deviated, 
he brought them closer by interpreting them. ‘It was a habit with 
me’, Gandhi once wrote, ‘to forget what I did not like and to 
carry out in practice whatever I liked.’ 

Ruskin, Gandhi observed in 1932, ‘was content to revolutionize 
his mind’ but lacked the strength to change his life. Gandhi 
suffered from no such deficiency. Bent on establishing a Walden 
on the veldt, he acted quickly. He bought a farm near Phoenix, 
a town fourteen miles from Durban. Situated on a hill, it con¬ 
sisted of a hundred acres with a well, some orange, mulberry and 
mango trees and one dilapidated cottage. It cost a thousand 
pounds. Several rich Indians helped with money. One Indian 

84 


THE TRANSFORMATION BEGINS 


friend contributed quantities of corrugated iron for houses. 
Gandhi would have preferred mud huts with thatched roofs, but 
his colleagues vetoed that. 

Without delay, the presses and offices of Indian Opinion were 
transferred to the farm. Albert West, the British editor of the 
magazine, whom Gandhi had met in a vegetarian restaurant, 
gave instant agreement to this startling project. They fixed a 
monthly allowance of three pounds for editor, errand boy and 
compositor. That was in 1904. The magazine is still published 
in the same place by Manilal Gandhi. 

For a while, Gandhi’s law practice required his presence in 
Johannesburg. He could not yet liberate himself for the new life 
at Phoenix. He wrote much of the matter that went into Indian 
Opinion and personally covered most of its deficits, which amounted 
to many pounds a month. He did a great deal of legal work for 
Indians who entrusted him not only with their litigations but also 
with their savings. The Indian indentured labourers knew Gandhi 
as their champion with the authorities and in the courts. He also 
doctored them. Those who became free and accumulated wealth 
often gave him their money to keep; they had no knowledge of 
banking and little faith in the whites. 

A proprietor was seeking funds to expand a vegetarian dining 
room. Gandhi had a large sum belonging to Badri, a former serf. 
‘Badri,’ said Gandhi, ‘may I use your money to help this restau¬ 
rant? It requires a thousand pounds.’ 

‘Brother,’ Badri replied, ‘give away the money if you like. I 
know nothing in these matters. I know only you.’, 

Gandhi lent the proprietor the money. In three months the 
restaurant failed. Gandhi paid back the money out of his own pocket. 

Henry Polak was assisting with the magazine, but Gandhi 
needed him in his law business too, and so Polak, who had 
settled on the Phoenix farm, came to live in Gandhi’s Johannes¬ 
burg home which always resembled an Indian joint family except 
that in the Gandhi household not only blood relatives but friends, 
co-workers, employees and political associates resided under one 
roof. Gandhi paid the expenses. 

Polak wanted to get married; he had postponed it for financial 
reasons. But having made him a member of the joint Gandhi 
family, Gandhi urged him to marry. ‘You are now mine,’ 

85 


THE END AND THE BEGINNING 


Gandhi said. ‘Your concern about yourself and your children is 
my concern. It is I who am marrying you and I do not see any 
objection to your marrying immediately.’ Polak brought his 
bride from England. She was a Christian, Polak a Jew, but their 
real religion, Gandhi said, ‘was the religion of ethics’. Ever shap¬ 
ing others’ lives, Gandhi also persuaded Albert West to marry. 
West went to Scotland and returned with a wife, a mother-in-law 
and a sister. They were embraced in the joint family. At this 
stage of his life, Gandhi was interested in marrying off all his 
bachelor friends. 

The expanding Johannesburg household adopted the practice 
of maximum manual self-service. Instead of buying bread, un¬ 
leavened wholemeal biscuits were baked at home after a recipe of 
the remote but omnipresent Dr. Kuhne of Leipzig, author of The 
New Science of Healing. For health and economy reasons, the flour 
was ground in a handmill with a huge iron wheel. Gandhi, the 
children and the Polaks took turns at this arduous labour. ‘Good 
exercise for the boys,’ said their exacting father. The boys also 
did the chamber-pot chores. 

During 1904 and 1905, Gandhi, Kasturbai and their sons lived 
now in Johannesburg, now at Phoenix Farm. In both places, the 
problem of restraint and self-control preoccupied him. He began 
to fast, like his mother, whenever an occasion presented itself. 
On the other days, he ate two meagre meals of fruits and nuts. 
But after a fast he enjoyed his food more and wanted to eat more. 
Fasts therefore could lead to indulgence! Gandhi’s goal was the 
‘disembodiment’ and ‘desirelessness’ which, in Hindu thought, 
conduces to union with God. Mere abstention does not meet the 
Gita ideal; craving too must be absent. If reduced food consump¬ 
tion stimulated the appetite the restraint was negatived. 

His task, therefore, was to conquer the palate. As a minimum, 
he dispensed with spices and seasoning. Now began his lifelong 
search for a diet which, while sustaining animal man, lifted the 
mind above the animal. 

If he did not curb his passion for food, how could he curb 
stronger passions: anger, vanity and sex? We live, Gandhi 
argued, not in order to provide food, clothing and shelter for the 
body. We provide food, clothing and shelter for the body in order 
to live. Material things are only the means to a spiritual end. 

86 


THE TRANSFORMATION BEGINS 


When they become the end, the sole end, as they usually are, life 
loses content and discontent afflicts mankind. The soul, alas, 
needs a temporary abode, but a clean mud hut will do as well as 
a palace, much better in fact. The body must be kept alive, not 
pampered. To achieve release for the spirit, the body must be 
subjected to the discipline of the mind. 

The denial of ordinary pleasures is masochism, a Westerner 
might say. Yet the Christian ethic is ascetic, and sainthood in all 
religions is related to self-denial. 

The year 1906 marked a crisis in Gandhi’s struggle with his 
passions. He had given up the house in Johannesburg, sent the 
family to Phoenix Farm, and volunteered for medical work in the 
Zulu ‘war’. The suppression of the tribesmen, with its insensate 
cruelty of man to man, depressed him. The long treks to the 
hamlets of the suffering Negroes afforded ample opportunity for 
self-analysis; he must do more to make a better world. Also, he 
had a premonition of further discriminatory measures against 
Indians in South Africa. He must dedicate himself completely to 
public service. 

To Gandhi, selfless service did not mean the sacrifice of part of 
one’s assets; it required the investment of all of one’s being. A 
dedicated person could not belong to wife or children, for if he 
did, then they and not the work would be the first consideration. 
To lead others he had to be immune to all temptations and in 
command of all his desires. 

Gandhi accordingly resolved to give up sexual intercourse. 
Twice before, he had tried to become continent. Kasturbai was 
willing. They began to sleep in separate beds and he never retired 
until he was physically exhausted. Both times he succumbed to 
temptation. 

This time, however, he took a vow. 

On his return from the Zulu uprising, Gandhi went to the 
farm and told Kasturbai of his pledge to forswear sex. She made 
no protest. ‘She was never the temptress,’ Gandhi asserted; he 
determined the character of their intimate relations. 

Gandhi remained celibate from 1906, when he was thirty-seven, 
until his death in 1948. 

The Indian word for continence is ‘Brahmacharya’, and a 
celibate man or woman is called a ‘Brahmachari’. Brahmacharya 

87 


THE END AND THE BEGINNING 

‘fully and properly understood’, Gandhi wrote in 1924, ‘means 
search after Brahma*, or God. ‘Brahmacharya’, he added, 
‘signifies control of all the senses at all times and at all places in 
thought, word and deed.’ It thus includes yet transcends sexual 
restraint; it embraces restraint in diet, emotions and speech. It 
rules out hate, anger, violence and untruth. It creates equability. 
It is desirelessness. 

‘Perfect Brahmacharis’, Gandhi wrote, ‘are perfectly sinless. 
They are therefore near to God. They are like God.’ To that he 
aspired. It was the ultimate in self-transformation. 

It is difficult to plumb Gandhi’s motives; it was difficult even 
for him to know them. Gandhi believed his celibacy was ‘a 
response to the calls of public duty’. On the other hand, ‘My 
main object was to escape having more children.’ 

But why avoid additional children? Phoenix Farm was one big 
joint family into which Gandhi invited many adults and children. 
Their care was a common responsibility and expense. More of his 
own would not have increased the burden. 

Kasturbai was anaemic. She was once near death from internal 
haemorrhage. A gynaecological operation, performed without 
chloroform because she was too emaciated, brought relief but no 
cure. 

Brahmacharya is encountered frequently in Indian lore and life. 
But it is unusual for a married man to take the vow at the early 
age at which Gandhi adopted it. Kasturbai’s health and Hin¬ 
duism are part of the explanation. ‘The sight of women’, he 
admitted in the Harijan magazine of June 15th, 1947, ‘had ceased 
to arouse any sexual urge in me in South Africa.’ That was a third 
factor. Perhaps, too, he harked back to his behaviour while his 
father was dying. 

In retrospect, Gandhi naturally did not attribute the chastity 
vow to his own physiology or to Kasturbai’s, nor to his psychology. 
On the contrary, he identified effect with motive and the effect was 
spiritual. The chaste life apparently reinforced his passion and de¬ 
termination to sacrifice for the common weal. Less carnal, he became 
less self-centred. He seemed suddenly lifted above the material. A 
new inner drive possessed him. Storms continued to rage within, 
but now he could harness them for the generation of more power. 

A new Gandhi faced the South African government. 

88 


 

