CHAPTER XI 


GANDHI GOES TO JAIL 



here was nothing passive about Gandhi. He disliked the 


term ‘Passive Resistance 5 . Following the collective vow at 


X the Imperial Theatre, Gandhi offered a prize for a better 
name for this new kind of mass-yet-individual opposition to 
government unfairness. 

Maganlal Gandhi, a second cousin of Gandhi who lived at 
Phoenix Farm, suggested ‘Sadagraha 5 : ‘firmness in a good cause 5 . 
Gandhi amended it to ‘Satyagraha 5 ; satya is truth, which equals 
love and agraha is firmness or force. ‘Satyagraha 5 , therefore, means 
truth-force or love-force. Truth and love are attributes of the soul. 

This became Gandhi’s target: to be strong not with the strength 
of the brute but with the strength of the spark of God. 

Satyagraha, Gandhi said, is ‘the vindication of truth not by 
infliction of suffering on the opponent but on one’s self 5 . That 
requires self-control. The weapons of the Satyagrahi are within him. 

Satyagraha is peaceful. If words fail to convince the adversary 
perhaps purity, humility and honesty will. The opponent must 
be ‘weaned from error by patience and sympathy 5 , weaned, not 
crushed; converted, not annihilated. 

Satyagraha is the exact opposite of the policy of an-eye-for-an- 
eye-for-an-eye-for-an-eye which ends in making everybody blind. 

You cannot inject new ideas into a man’s head by chopping it 
off; neither will you infuse a new spirit into his heart by piercing 
it with a dagger. 

Acts of violence create bitterness in the survivors and brutality 
in the destroyers; Satyagraha aims to exalt both sides. 

Gandhi hoped that if he practised the Sermon on the Mount, 
Smuts would recall its precepts. Satyagraha assumes a constant 
beneficent interaction between contestants with a view to their 
ultimate reconciliation. Violence, insults and superheated 
propaganda obstruct this achievement. 

Several days after the spiritual baptism in Satyagraha at the 
Imperial Theatre, the Transvaal government released Asiatic 


93 


THE END AND THE BEGINNING 

women from the necessity of registration under the ‘Black Act’. 
This may or may not have been a result of the new Indian 
movement, but Indians felt encouraged by the success of Gandhi’s 
tactics. 

Before confronting the Government with Satyagraha, Gandhi 
thought it desirable to go to London. Transvaal was a Crown 
Colony; the King could, on advice of his ministers, withhold royal 
assent from legislation. Accompanied by a Moslem soda water 
manufacturer named H. O. Ali, Gandhi sailed for England. It 
was his first visit since his shy law-student days. Now he was the 
vocal lobbyist. He interviewed Lord Elgin, the Secretary of 
State for the Colonies and Mr. John Morley, Secretary of State 
for India and, like many champions of causes before and since, 
addressed a meeting of M.P.s in a committee room of the House 
of Commons. It gave Gandhi special pleasure to work with 
Dadabhai Naoroji, ‘The Grand Old Man of India’. Dadabhai, 
as everybody called him, was president of the London Indian 
Society for more than fifty years, a teacher of Gujarati in Univer¬ 
sity College, London, a past president of the Indian National 
Congress party, and on July 6th, 1892, at the age of sixty-one, was 
elected to the British Parliament as the Liberal Member for 
Central Finsbury by a majority of three votes. Before the poll, 
Lord Salisbury, the British Prime Minister, had said, ‘I doubt if 
we have got to that point of view where a British constituency 
would elect a black man.’ The gibe gave Dadabhai his seat and 
fame. As a student in the Inner Temple, Gandhi once sat, 
reverent and silent, at the feet of Dadabhai. Now, autumn 1906, 
Gandhi and Dadabhai were associates in a political enterprise. 

Throughout the six weeks’ sojourn, Englishmen assisted Gandhi 
in winning friends, arranging meetings, licking stamps, pasting 
envelopes, etc. Their generous co-operation led him to remark 
that ‘benevolence is by no means peculiar to the brown skin’. 

When the ship on which they were returning to South Africa 
stopped at the Portuguese island of Madeira, Gandhi and Ali 
received a cable from London announcing that Lord Elgin would 
not sanction the Transvaal anti-Asiatic bill. In the next two weeks 
on board ship, Gandhi and Ali were happy: they had won. 

It transpired, however, that Lord Elgin had employed a 
‘trick’. He had told the Transvaal Commissioner in London that 


94 


GANDHI GOES TO JAIL 

the King would disallow the registration ordinance. But since the 
Transvaal would cease to be a Crown Colony on January ist, 
1907, it could then re-enact the ordinance without royal approval. 
Gandhi condemned this as a ‘crooked policy’. 

In due course, Transvaal set up responsible government and 
adopted the Asiatic Registration Act to go into effect on July 31st, 
1907. Indians stigmatized it as the ‘Black Act’, morally black, 
aimed at black, brown and yellow men. Gandhi, who was light 
brown, often referred to himself as ‘black’. 

Gandhi confidently told the Indian community that ‘even a 
crooked policy would in time turn straight if only we are true to 
ourselves’. The Indians prepared to offer Satyagraha. Uneasy, 
Prime Minister General Botha sent them a message saying he 
‘was helpless’; the white population insisted on the legislation. 
Therefore the Government would be firm. 

So would the Indians. One Moslem, Ahmad Mohammed 
Kachhalia, apparently speaking for many Satyagrahis, said, ‘I 
swear in the name of God that I will be hanged but I will not 
submit to this law.’ 

Some Indians took out permits under the Act, but most did not. 
A number of Indians were accordingly served with official notices 
to register or leave the Transvaal. Failing to do either, they were 
brought before a magistrate on January nth, 1908. Gandhi was 
among them. He had attended the same court as a lawyer. Now 
he stood in the dock. Respectfully he told the judge that as leader 
he merited the heaviest sentence. Judge Jordan unobligingly gave 
him only two months’ simple imprisonment ‘without hard labour’. 

It was Gandhi’s first term in jail. 

Gandhi recorded this jail experience in an article printed at the 
time. The prison authorities were friendly, the meals bad, the 
cells over-crowded. Gandhi went in with four other Satyagrahis. 
From notes kept in prison with his customary meticulousness, he 
knew how many joined them each day and the figures are 
reproduced in the published account. By January 29th, their 
number had risen to 155. 

Gandhi read the Gita in the morning and the Koran , in English 
translation, at noon. He used the Bible to teach English to a 
Chinese Christian fellow prisoner. He also read Ruskin, Socrates, 
Tolstoy, Huxley, Bacon’s essays and Carlyle’s Lives . He was 

95 


THE END AND THE BEGINNING 

happy; he believed that ‘whoever has a taste for reading good 
books is able to bear loneliness in any place with great ease’. 
Indeed, he seemed to regret that his sentence was so short for he 
had commenced to do a Gujarati translation of a book by Carlyle 
and of Ruskin’s Unto This Last , and: ‘I would not have become 
tired even if I had got more than two months. 5 

Reading and translating were interrupted by a visitor from the 
outside; he was Albert Cartwright, editor of the Johannesburg 
Transvaal Leader and a friend of Gandhi; he came as an emissary 
from General Jan Christian Smuts. Cartwright brought a com¬ 
promise solution drafted by Smuts. 

Smuts’s proposal required the Indians to register voluntarily. 
Then the ‘Black Act 5 would be repealed. 

On January 30th, the Johannesburg Chief of Police came to the 
jail and personally conducted Gandhi to Pretoria for a meeting 
with Smuts. The prisoner, in prison uniform, and the general had 
a long talk. Gandhi wanted assurances of the repeal and he 
stipulated that public mention be made of the Indians 5 resistance. 

Smuts said, ‘I could never entertain a dislike for your people. 
You know I too am a barrister. I had some Indian fellow students 
in my time. But I must do my duty. The Europeans want this 
law ... I accept the alterations you have suggested in the draft. 
I have consulted General Botha and I assure you that I will repeal 
the Asiatic Act as soon as most of you have undergone voluntary 
registration. 5 

Smuts rose. 

‘Where am I to go? 5 Gandhi asked. 

‘You are free this very moment. 5 

‘What about the other prisoners? 5 Gandhi asked. 

‘I am phoning the prison officials to release the other prisoners 
tomorrow morning. 5 

It was evening and Gandhi did not have a copper in his pockets. 
Smuts’s secretary gave him the fare to Johannesburg. 

In Johannesburg Gandhi encountered stormy opposition. ‘Why 
was not the Act repealed first, before registration? 5 Indians 
demanded at a public meeting. 

‘That would not be in the nature of a compromise, 5 Gandhi replied. 

‘What if General Smuts breaks faith with us? 5 they argued. 

‘A Satyagrahi, 5 Gandhi said, ‘bids goodbye to fear. He is 

96 


GANDHI GOES TO JAIL 

therefore never afraid of trusting the opponent. Even if the 
opponent plays him false twenty times, the Satyagrahi is ready 
to trust him for the twenty-first time — for an implicit trust in 
human nature is the very essence of his creed.’ 

Optimism about human nature was the starting post of all 
Gandhi’s activities; it sometimes made him sound naive. His 
optimism sprang from a belief that ‘man can change his tempera¬ 
ment, can control it’ although he ‘cannot eradicate it. God has 
given him no such liberty’. Change and control, therefore, 
require constant effort. 

Smuts had made the point that unless Indians in the Transvaal 
registered, there would be no check on Indian immigration, and 
the State might be inundated with unwanted Asiatics. Gandhi 
accepted this and told the public meeting that voluntary registra¬ 
tion would indicate that ‘we do not intend to bring a single Indian 
into the Transvaal surreptitiously or by fraud’. 

Gandhi took into consideration the pressure on the Government 
from race-prejudiced whites. Therefore he was ready to accept 
voluntary registration. But he objected to compulsory registration 
by statute because a government must treat all citizens equally. 
He did not want Indians to bow to force: that reduced the dignity 
and stature of individuals. On the other hand, Gandhi explained 
to the meeting, collaboration freely given — in view of the 
opponent’s known difficulties — was generous and hence en¬ 
nobling. Smuts had withdrawn the compulsion from registration; 
that changed the entire situation. 

A giant Pathan from the wild mountains of north-west India 
near the Khyber Pass stood up and said, ‘We have heard that 
you have betrayed the community and sold it to General Smuts 
for fifteen thousand pounds. We will never give the fingerprints 
nor allow others to do so. I swear with Allah as my witness that 
I will kill the man who takes the lead in applying for registration.’ 

Gandhi’s book on Satyagraha records this charge for posterity. 
He defended himself against it, and declared, despite the threat, 
that he would be the first to give his fingerprints. Then he added, 
‘Death is the appointed end of all life. To die by the hand of a 
brother, rather than by disease or in such other way, cannot be 
for me a matter of sorrow. And if, even in such a case, I am free 
from the thought of anger or hatred against my assailant, I know 

97 


THE END AND THE BEGINNING 

that that will redound to my eternal welfare, and even the assailant 
will later on realize my perfect innocence/ The audience listened 
in silence; it could not have foreseen a nearly fatal assault in the 
immediate future or the death of Gandhi, forty years later, at the 
hands of a brother. 

Gandhi arranged to register on February ioth, the first to do 
so. He went to his law office in the morning as usual. Outside 
he saw a group of big Pathans. Among them was Mir Alam, a 
client of Gandhi’s, six feet tall and of powerful build. Gandhi 
greeted the Pathans, but their response was ominously cold. 

After a little while, Gandhi and several companions left the 
office and commenced walking to the registration bureau. The 
Pathans followed close behind. Just before Gandhi had reached 
his destination, Mir Alam stepped forward and said, ‘Where are 
you going?’ 

‘I propose to take out a certificate of registration,’ Gandhi replied. 

Before he could finish the explanation a heavy blow struck 
Gandhi on the top of his head. ‘I at once fainted with the words 
“Hey, Rama” (Oh, God) on my lips,’ reads his own account. 
Those were his last words on January 30th, 1948, the day he died. 

Other blows fell on Gandhi as he lay on the ground; and the 
Pathans kicked him for good measure. 

He was carried into an office. When he regained consciousness, 
the Reverend Joseph J. Doke, a bearded Baptist idealist, was 
bending over him. ‘How do you feel?’ said Doke. 

‘I am all right,’ Gandhi answered, ‘but I have pains in the teeth 
and ribs. Where is Mir Alam?’ 

‘He has been arrested with the other Pathans,’ Doke said. 

‘They should be released,’ Gandhi murmured. ‘They thought 
they were doing right, and I have no desire to prosecute them.’ 

Gandhi was taken to the Doke home, and the wounds in his 
cheek and lip were stitched. He asked that Mr. Chamney, the 
Registrar for Asiatics, be brought to him so that he could give his 
fingerprints without delay. The process hurt Gandhi physically; 
every movement was painful. Chamney began to weep. ‘I had 
often to write bitterly against him,’ Gandhi declared, ‘but this 
showed me how man’s heart may be softened by events.’ 

Gandhi remained under the tender care of the ‘godly family’ 
for ten days. Several times, Gandhi, feeling the need of comfort, 

98 


GANDHI GOES TO JAIL 

asked Olive, the little Doke daughter, to sing ‘Lead, Kindly 
Light’. It was one of his favourite Christian hymns. 

After recovering, Gandhi indefatigably preached loyalty to his 
registration settlement. Kasturbai and the boys had worried about 
him after Mir Alam’s attack; Gandhi visited them at Phoenix Farm 
and spent most of the time there writing for Indian Opinion in ex¬ 
planation of his compromise with Smuts for voluntary finger¬ 
printing. Many Indians followed Gandhi without really agreeing, 
and he tried to convince them. 

What was Gandhi’s embarrassment, therefore, when Smuts 
refused to fulfil his promise to repeal the ‘Black Act’. Instead, 
Smuts offered the legislature a bill which validated the voluntary 
certificates but kept the compulsory-registration law. 

‘There you are,’ the Indians taunted Gandhi. ‘We have been 
telling you that you are very credulous.’ 

In a charitable and objective mood two decades later, when 
Satyagraha in South Africa was published, Gandhi asserted, ‘It is 
quite possible that in behaving to the Indians as he did in 1908, 
General Smuts was not guilty of a deliberate breach of faith.’ 
But in the heat of the battle, in 1908, Gandhi contributed articles 
to Indian Opinion under the caption, ‘Foul Play’, and called Smuts 
a ‘heartless man’. 

The Indian community’s temper gradually rose to fever pitch. 
A meeting was called at the Hamidia Mosque in Johannesburg 
for four o’clock in the afternoon, August 16th, 1908. A large iron 
cauldron resting on four curved legs was placed conspicuously on 
a raised platform. 

The speeches finished, more than two thousand registration 
certificates collected from the spectators were thrown into the 
cauldron and burned in paraffin as a mighty cheer went up from 
the brown throng. The London Daily Mail correspondent in 
Johannesburg compared it with the Boston Tea Party. 

The issue between the Indians and the Government was now 
joined. 

Under the Smuts-Gandhi compromise, most of the permanent 
residents registered voluntarily. Thereafter, any Indian dis¬ 
covered without a registration certificate would be subject to 
deportation as a new, illegal entrant. The compromise thus stopped- 
immigration, and that was the original purpose of the ‘Black Act’. 

g m.g. 99 


THE END AND THE BEGINNING 


Then why did Smuts now reintroduce compulsory registration? 
'To insult us, 5 the Indians said. e To stress our inequality. To 
force us to admit our inferiority. 5 

This, Gandhi declared, is one of the virtues of Satyagraha: it 
uncovers concealed motives and reveals the truth. It puts the 
best possible interpretation on the opponent’s intentions and 
thereby gives him another chance to discard baser impulses. If 
he fails to do so, his victims see more clearly and feel more 
intensely, while outsiders realize who is wrong. 

The Indians now decided not to register under compulsion and 
to defy the ban on immigration into the Transvaal. 

For the impending contest with the government of the Trans¬ 
vaal, Gandhi commenced to muster his resources. His law office 
at the corner of Rissik and Anderson Streets in Johannesburg 
had now been converted, largely, into a Satyagraha headquarters. 
It consisted of two small and meagrely furnished rooms, an outer 
one for a secretary and an inner one where Gandhi worked 
amidst photographs of his ambulance unit, of Mrs. Annie Besant, 
and some Indian leaders, and a picture of Jesus. Gandhi also 
had an office at Phoenix Farm, and he spent more time there 
than before because he needed the support of the Natal Indians 
who far outnumbered the thirteen thousand of the Transvaal. At 
the farm, he led a chaste, frugal, Spartan existence. Except when 
it rained he slept in the open on a thin cloth. He eschewed all 
material pleasures, and concentrated on the coming battle. ‘A 
Satyagrahi,’ he said, 'has to be, if possible, even more single- 
minded than a rope dancer. 5 

To the Johannesburg office and Phoenix Farm came a steady 
stream of Indians and whites. Gandhi’s circle of friends was large; 
he attracted people and they usually remained loyal to him. 

Olive Schreiner, author of The Story of an African Farm and 
Dreams , was one of Gandhi’s best friends in Cape Colony. 
'Love was written in her eyes,’ he said. Though she came of a 
rich, distinguished and learned family, ‘she was so simple in 
habits that she cleansed utensils in her house herself’, and did her 
own cooking and sweeping. ‘Such physical labour,’ Gandhi held, 
'stimulated her literary ability.’ Colour prejudice was repugnant 
to her. She lent her great influence in South Africa to the cause 
of fairness-to-Indians. So did her brother, Senator W. P. 


ioo 


GANDHI GOES TO JAIL 

Schreiner, the Attorney-General and, at one time, the Prime 
Minister of the Colony. Other prominent persons and high 
officials openly aided Gandhi’s movement. Many Christian 
clergymen supported him. They saw Satyagraha as Christianity 
in action against a system that merely called itself Christian. 
Gandhi worked through moral conversion. He preferred it to 
physical coercion and even to moral coercion. No true devotee of 
Christ could resist this. Christian editors, idealists and ministers 
atoned for the white man’s sins by helping the little brown Hindu. 

Of all Gandhi’s South African collaborators — Indian or white 
— the most intimate, he said, were Henry S. L. Polak, Herman 
Kallenbach, an extremely wealthy Johannesburg architect, and 
Sonya Schlesin, who came from Scotland. 

Kallenbach was a tall, thick-set, squareheaded German Jew 
with a long handlebar moustache and pince-nez. He met Gandhi 
by chance; a mutual interest in Buddhism brought them closer 
together, and thereafter, until Gandhi returned to India, they 
were inseparable. If anybody can be called Gandhi’s second-in- 
command of the Satyagraha movement it was Kallenbach. 
Gandhi characterized him as ‘a man of strong feelings, wide 
sympathies, and child-like simplicity’. 

When Gandhi needed a private secretary and typist Kallenbach 
recommended Miss Schlesin, who was of Russian-Jewish origin. 
Gandhi thought her ‘noble’ and the finest person among his 
European associates. She wore boyish-bobbed hair and a collar 
and necktie. She never married. Though she was young, Indian 
leaders went to her for advice, and the Reverend Doke, when 
he ran Indian Opinion , liked her to comment on his editorials. 
Gandhi put her in charge of Satyagraha’s treasury and books. 

For the financing of the resistance movement, Indians and 
Europeans in South Africa and Indians in India contributed con¬ 
siderable sums. Gandhi believed that an organization whose 
cause is just and impersonal, and which operates in full public 
view, will not lack money. He likewise believed in rigidly 
economical spending and scrupulous, detailed accounting. 

Suggestions poured in on Gandhi to raise the entire question of 
Indian disabilities in South Africa and to mobilize the whole 
Indian community of the continent. But he decided that it was 
against the principles of Satyagraha to expand or even to shift 

IOI 


THE END AND THE BEGINNING 


one’s goal in the midst of battle. The issue was the right of Indians 
to live in and enter the Transvaal, nothing else. 

Gandhi now made a move of arresting and dramatic simplicity. 
A Parsi Indian from Natal named Sorabji Shapurji Adajania, 
who spoke English and had never visited the Transvaal, was 
chosen, at his own request, to test the bar on immigrants. He was 
to notify the Government of his intentions, present himself at the 
Transvaal frontier station of Volksrust, and court arrest. But the 
border authorities let him in and he proceeded unmolested to 
Johannesburg. 

When their astonishment subsided, the Indians interpreted this 
development as a triumph; the Government had refused to fight. 
Even when Sorabji was sentenced to a month’s imprisonment for 
not leaving the Transvaal, their enthusiasm for the Gandhi 
method remained strong. It was accordingly decided that a 
number of English-speaking Indians in Natal, including Harilal, 
Gandhi’s eldest son, who had returned from India, should enter 
the Transvaal. They were arrested at Volksrust and given three 
months in jail. ‘The Transvaal Indians’, Gandhi comments, 
‘were now in high spirits . . . The movement was now in full 
swing.’ The movement fed on prison sentences. 

Gandhi was besieged by people seeking permission to be 
arrested. He gratified the wish of some Natal Indians. Transvaal 
Indians applied for the same privilege; they had only to tell the 
police that they had no registration certificates. 

Gandhi too was arrested and confined in the Volksrust prison. 
His prison card has been preserved by Manilal. It is cream- 
coloured and two and seven-eighths inches wide by three and one- 
eighth. His name is mistakenly given as ‘M. S. Gandhi’ instead 
of M. K. Gandhi. ‘Trade: Solicitor.’ No alias. ‘Sentence and 
date: Twenty-five pounds or two months. October ioth, 1908.’ 
(Like all other Indians, Gandhi preferred prison to fines.) ‘Due 
for discharge: December 13th, 1908.’ On the reverse side, under 
‘Prison Offences’, is a blank. He was a model prisoner. 

Gandhi had seventy-five compatriots with him in jail, and he 
became their cook. ‘Thanks to their love for me’, he wrote in a 
contemporary article, ‘my companions took without a murmur 
the half-cooked porridge I prepared without sugar.’ In addition 
he performed hard labour — digging the earth with a shovel— 


102 


GANDHI GOES TO JAIL 

which blistered his hands. The blisters opened and caused pain. 

Once the warden wanted two men to clean the latrines. Gandhi 
volunteered. 

He had brought this suffering on himself and, by his agitation, 
on others. Would it not be better to pay the fine and stay at home? 

‘Such thoughts’, Gandhi asserted, ‘make one really a coward.’ 
Besides, jail has its good sides: only one warden, whereas in the 
free life there are many; no worry about food; work keeps the 
body healthy; no ‘vicious habits’; ‘the prisoner’s soul is thus free’ 
and he has time to pray to God. ‘The real road to happiness’, 
Gandhi proclaimed, ‘lies in going to jail and undergoing sufferings 
and privations there in the interest of one’s country and religion’. 

This account of life and reflections in jail ends with a quotation 
from Thoreau’s famous essay on ‘Civil Disobedience’ which 
Gandhi had borrowed from the prison library. ‘I saw’ Thoreau 
wrote, ‘that if there was a wall of stone between me and my 
townsmen, there was a still more difficult one to climb or break 
through before they could get to be as free as I was. I did not 
feel for a moment confined, and the walls seemed a great waste of 
stone and mortar. . . . 

‘As they could not reach me’, Thoreau continued, ‘they had 
resolved to punish my body ... I saw that the state was half¬ 
witted, that it was timid as a lone woman with her silver spoons, 
and that it did not know its friends from its foes, and I lost all my 
remaining respect for it and pitied it.’ 

Gandhi cherished this excerpt from Thoreau. He studied the 
entire essay. 

It has often been said that Gandhi took the idea of Satyagraha 
from Thoreau. Gandhi denied this in a letter, dated September 
ioth, 1935, and addressed to Mr. P. Kodanda Rao of the Servants 
of India Society; Gandhi wrote, ‘The statement that I had derived 
my idea of Civil Disobedience from the writings of Thoreau is 
wrong. The resistance to authority in South Africa was well 
advanced before I got the essay of Thoreau on Civil Disobedience. 
But the movement was then known as passive resistance. As it 
was incomplete I had coined the word Satyagraha for the Gujarati 
readers. When I saw the title of Thoreau’s great essay, I began 
to use his phrase to explain our struggle to the English readers. 
But I found that even “Civil Disobedience” failed to convey the 

103 


THE END AND THE BEGINNING 


full meaning of the struggle. I therefore adopted the phrase Civil 
Resistance.’ 

Nevertheless, Thoreau’s ‘Civil Disobedience’ essay did influence 
Gandhi; he called it a ‘masterly treatise’; ‘it left a deep impression 
on me’, he affirmed. There is the imprint of Thoreau on much that 
Gandhi did. Thoreau had read the Bhagavad Gita and some of the 
sacred Hindu Upanishads ; so had Ralph Waldo Emerson who was 
Thoreau’s friend and frequent host. Thoreau, the New England 
rebel, borrowed from distant India and repaid the debt by throw¬ 
ing ideas into the world pool of thought; ripples reached the 
Indian lawyer-politician in South Africa. 

Henry David Thoreau, poet and essayist, was born in 1817 and 
died of tuberculosis at the age of forty-five. He hated Negro 
slavery and the individual’s slavery to the Church, the State, pro¬ 
perty, customs and traditions. With his own hands he built him¬ 
self a hut at Walden Pond outside Concord, Massachusetts, and 
dwelt there alone, doing all the work, growing his food and enjoy¬ 
ing full contact with nature. 

Two years at Walden proved to Thoreau’s own satisfaction that 
he had the courage and inner strength to be free in isolation. He 
accordingly returned to Concord to discover whether he could be 
free inside the community. He decided that the least he could do 
was ‘not lend myself to the wrong which I condemn’. So he refused 
to pay taxes and was imprisoned. A friend paid the tax for him, 
and Thoreau came out after twenty-four hours, but the ex¬ 
perience evoked his most provoking political essay, ‘Civil Dis¬ 
obedience’. 

‘The only obligation which I have a right to assume’ Thoreau 
declared in ‘Civil Disobedience’, ‘is to do at any time what I 
think right.’ To be right, he insisted, is more honourable than 
to be law-abiding. 

Thoreau democracy was the cult of the minority. ‘Why does 
[the Government] not cherish its wise minority?’ he cried. ‘Why 
does it always crucify Christ?’ 

It was 1849. Thoreau was thinking of Negro slavery and the 
invasion of Mexico. The majority which tolerated these measures 
was wrong, and he was right. Could he obey a government that 
committed such sins? He held that dissent without disobedience 
was consent and therefore culpable. 

104 


GANDHI GOES TO JAIL 

Thoreau described civil disobedience in exact terms, as Gandhi 
understood it: T know this well, 5 Thoreau wrote, ‘that if one 
thousand, if one hundred, if ten men whom I could name — if ten 
honest men only — ay, if one honest man, in this state of Massa¬ 
chusetts, ceasing to hold slaves , were actually to withdraw from this 
copartnership, and be locked up in the county jail therefor, it 
would be the abolition of slavery in America. For it matters not 
how small the beginning may seem to be: what is once well done 
is done forever. But we love better to talk about it. . . . 

‘There are thousands who are in opinion opposed to slavery and 
war, who yet in effect do nothing to put an end to them,’ Thoreau 
continued. ‘There, are nine hundred and ninety-nine patrons of 
virtue to every virtuous man. 5 Thoreau despised professions 
without actions. He asked, ‘How does it become a man to behave 
towards this American government today? I answer, that he can¬ 
not without disgrace be associated with it.’ His programme was 
‘peaceful revolution’. ‘All men recognize the right to revolution,’ 
he wrote, ‘that is, the right to refuse allegiance to, and to resist, 
the government when its tyranny and efficiency are great and 
unendurable.’ 

This is why Gandhi was in jail at the very moment he read ‘Civil 
Disobedience’. 

Like Ruskin, Thoreau sought a closer correspondence between 
man’s acts and man’s goal. The artist in both required the 
integration of word and faith with deed. The great poet, the great 
artist has integrity. 

Millions had read Ruskin and Thoreau and agreed with them. 
Many Hindus had read them and agreed with them. But Gandhi 
took words and ideas seriously, and when he accepted an idea in 
principle he felt that not to practise it was dishonest. How can 
you believe in a moral or religious precept and not live it? 

The gulf between word and belief is untruth. The dissonance 
between creed and deed is the root of innumerable wrongs in our 
civilization; it is the weakness of all churches, states, parties and 
persons. It gives institutions and men split personalities. 

In attempting to establish a harmony between words, beliefs 
and acts Gandhi was attacking man’s central problem. He was 
seeking the formula for mental health. 


105 


 

