MICHELLE LAVAUGHN ROBINSON was already practicing law when we met. She
was twenty-five years old and an associate at Sidley & Austin, the Chicago-based
firm where I worked the summer after my first year of law school. She was tall,
beautiful, funny, outgoing, generous, and wickedly smart—and I was smitten
almost from the second I saw her. She’d been assigned by the firm to look out for
me, to make sure I knew where the office photocopier was and that I generally
felt welcome. That also meant we got to go out for lunches together, which
allowed us to sit and talk—at first about our jobs and eventually about everything
else.
Over the course of the next couple of years, during school breaks and when
Michelle came to Harvard as part of the Sidley recruiting team, the two of us
went out to dinner and took long walks along the Charles River, talking about
movies and family and places in the world we wanted to see. When her father
unexpectedly died of complications arising from multiple sclerosis, I flew out to
be with her, and she comforted me when I learned that Gramps had advanced
prostate cancer.
In other words, we became friends as well as lovers, and as my law school
graduation approached, we gingerly circled around the prospect of a life together.
Once, I took her to an organizing workshop I was conducting, a favor for a
friend who ran a community center on the South Side. The participants were
mostly single moms, some on welfare, few with any marketable skills. I asked
them to describe their world as it was and as they would like it to be. It was a
simple exercise I’d done many times, a way for people to bridge the reality of
their communities and their lives with the things they could conceivably change.
Afterward, as we were walking to the car, Michelle laced her arm through mine
and said she’d been touched by my easy rapport with the women.
“You gave them hope.”
“They need more than hope,” I said. I tried to explain to her the conflict that
ICHELLE LAVAUGHN ROBINSON

I was feeling: between working for change within the system and pushing against
it; wanting to lead but wanting to empower people to make change for
themselves; wanting to be in politics but not of it.
Michelle looked at me. “The world as it is, and the world as it should be,”
she said softly.
“Something like that.”
Michelle was an original; I knew nobody quite like her. And although it
hadn’t happened yet, I was starting to think I might ask her to marry me. For
Michelle, marriage was a given—the organic next step in a relationship as serious
as ours. For me, someone who’d grown up with a mother whose marriages didn’t
last, the need to formalize a relationship had always felt less pressing. Not only
that, but in those early years of our courtship, our arguments could be fierce. As
cocksure as I could be, she never gave ground. Her brother, Craig, a basketball
star at Princeton who had worked in investment banking before getting into
coaching, used to joke that the family didn’t think Michelle (“Miche,” they
called her) would ever get married because she was too tough—no guy could
keep up with her. The weird thing was, I liked that about her; how she
constantly challenged me and kept me honest.
And what was Michelle thinking? I imagine her just before we met, very
much the young professional, tailored and crisp, focused on her career and doing
things the way they’re supposed to be done, with no time for nonsense. And then
this strange guy from Hawaii with a scruffy wardrobe and crazy dreams wanders
into her life. That was part of my appeal, she would tell me, how different I was
from the guys she’d grown up with, the men she had dated. Different even from
her own father, whom she adored: a man who had never finished community
college, who had been struck by MS in his early thirties, but who had never
complained and had gone to work every single day and made all of Michelle’s
dance recitals and Craig’s basketball games, and was always present for his family,
truly his pride and joy.
Life with me promised Michelle something else, those things that she saw she
had missed as a child. Adventure. Travel. A breaking of constraints. Just as her
roots in Chicago—her big, extended family, her common sense, her desire to be
a good mom above all else—promised an anchor that I’d been missing for much
of my youth. We didn’t just love each other and make each other laugh and share
the same basic values—there was symmetry there, the way we complemented
each other. We could have each other’s back, guard each other’s blind spots. We

could be a team.
Of course, that was another way of saying we were very different, in
experience and in temperament. For Michelle, the road to the good life was
narrow and full of hazards. Family was all you could count on, big risks weren’t
taken lightly, and outward success—a good job, a nice house—never made you
feel ambivalent because failure and want were all around you, just a layoff or a
shooting away. Michelle never worried about selling out, because growing up on
the South Side meant you were always, at some level, an outsider. In her mind,
the roadblocks to making it were plenty clear; you didn’t have to go looking for
them. The doubts arose from having to prove, no matter how well you did, that
you belonged in the room—prove it not just to those who doubted you but to
yourself.
—
was coming to an end, I told Michelle of my plan. I wouldn’t
clerk. Instead, I’d move back to Chicago, try to keep my hand in community
work while also practicing law at a small firm that specialized in civil rights. If a
good opportunity presented itself, I said, I could even see myself running for
office.
None of this came as a surprise to her. She trusted me, she said, to do what I
believed was right.
“But I need to tell you, Barack,” she said, “I think what you want to do is
really hard. I mean, I wish I had your optimism. Sometimes I do. But people can
be so selfish and just plain ignorant. I think a lot of people don’t want to be
bothered. And I think politics seems like it’s full of people willing to do anything
for power, who just think about themselves. Especially in Chicago. I’m not sure
you’ll ever change that.”
“I can try, can’t I?” I said with a smile. “What’s the point of having a fancy
law degree if you can’t take some risks? If it doesn’t work, it doesn’t work. I’ll be
okay. We’ll be okay.”
She took my face in her hands. “Have you ever noticed that if there’s a hard
way and an easy way, you choose the hard way every time? Why do you think
that is?”
We both laughed. But I could tell Michelle thought she was onto something.
It was an insight that would carry implications for us both.
AS LAW SCHOOL

—
of dating, Michelle and I were married at Trinity United
Church of Christ on October 3, 1992, with more than three hundred of our
friends, colleagues, and family members crammed happily into the pews. The
service was officiated by the church’s pastor, Reverend Jeremiah A. Wright, Jr.,
whom I’d come to know and admire during my organizer days. We were joyful.
Our future together was officially beginning.
I had passed the bar and then delayed my law practice for a year to run
Project VOTE! in advance of the 1992 presidential race—one of the largest
voter-registration drives in Illinois history. After returning from our honeymoon
on the California coast, I taught at the University of Chicago Law School,
finished my book, and officially joined Davis, Miner, Barnhill & Galland, a small
civil rights firm that specialized in employment discrimination cases and did real
estate work for affordable housing groups. Michelle, meanwhile, had decided
she’d had enough of corporate law and made a move to the City of Chicago’s
Department of Planning and Development, working there for a year and a half
before agreeing to direct a nonprofit youth leadership program called Public
Allies.
Both of us enjoyed our jobs and the people we worked with, and as time
went on, we got involved with various civic and philanthropic efforts. We took
in ball games and concerts and shared dinners with a widening circle of friends.
We were able to buy a modest but cozy condo in Hyde Park, right across from
Lake Michigan and Promontory Point, just a few doors down from where Craig
and his young family lived. Michelle’s mother, Marian, still lived in the family’s
South Shore house, less than fifteen minutes away, and we visited often, feasting
on her fried chicken and greens and red velvet cake and barbecue made by
Michelle’s Uncle Pete. Once we were stuffed, we’d sit around the kitchen and
listen to her uncles tell stories of growing up, the laughter louder as the evening
wore on, while cousins and nephews and nieces bounced on the sofa cushions
until they were sent out into the yard.
Driving home in the twilight, Michelle and I sometimes talked about having
kids of our own—what they might be like, or how many, and what about a dog?
—and imagined all the things we’d do together as a family.
A normal life. A productive, happy life. It should have been enough.
AFTER SEVERAL YEARS

—
the summer of 1995, a political opportunity arose suddenly, through
a strange chain of events. The sitting congressman from the Second District of
Illinois, Mel Reynolds, had been indicted on several charges, including allegedly
having sex with a sixteen-year-old campaign volunteer. If he was convicted, a
special election would be promptly held to replace him.
I didn’t live in the district, and I lacked the name recognition and base of
support to launch a congressional race. The state senator from our area, Alice
Palmer, however, was eligible to run for the seat and, not long before the
congressman was convicted in August, she threw her hat into the ring. Palmer, an
African American former educator with deep roots in the community, had a solid
if unremarkable record and was well liked by progressives and some of the oldtime Black activists who had helped Harold get elected; and although I didn’t
know her, we had mutual friends. Based on the work I’d done for Project
VOTE! I was asked to help her nascent campaign, and as the weeks went by,
several people encouraged me to think about filing to run for Alice’s soon-to-bevacant senate seat.
Before talking to Michelle, I made a list of pros and cons. A state senator
wasn’t a glamorous post—most people had no idea who their state legislators
were—and Springfield, the state capital, was notorious for old-style porkbarreling, logrolling, payola, and other political mischief. On the other hand, I
had to start somewhere and pay my dues. Also, the Illinois state legislature was in
session only a few weeks out of the year, which meant I could continue teaching
and working at the law firm.
Best of all, Alice Palmer agreed to endorse me. With Reynolds’s trial still
pending, it was difficult to know how the timing would work. Technically it
would be possible for Alice to run for Congress while keeping the option of
retaining her state seat if she lost the bigger race, but she insisted to me and others
that she was done with the senate, ready to move on. Along with an offer of
support from our local alderman, Toni Preckwinkle, who boasted the best
organization in the area, my chances looked better than good.
I went to Michelle and made my pitch. “Think of it as a test run,” I said.
“Hmph.”
“Dipping our toes in the water.”
“Right.”
BUT THEN IN

“So what do you think?”
She pecked me on the cheek. “I think this is something you want to do, so
you should do it. Just promise me I won’t have to spend time in Springfield.”
I had one last person to check in with before I pulled the trigger. Earlier in
the year, my mother had fallen sick and had been diagnosed with uterine cancer.
The prognosis wasn’t good. At least once a day, the thought of losing her
made my heart constrict. I’d flown to Hawaii right after she’d gotten the news
and had been relieved to find that she looked like herself and was in good spirits.
She confessed she was scared but wanted to be as aggressive as possible with her
treatment.
“I’m not going anywhere,” she said, “until you give me some grandchildren.”
She received the news of my possible state senate run with her usual
enthusiasm, insisting I tell her every detail. She acknowledged it would be a lot of
work, but my mother was never one to see hard work as anything but good.
“Make sure Michelle’s all right with it,” she said. “Not that I’m the marriage
expert. And don’t you dare use me as an excuse not to do it. I’ve got enough to
deal with without feeling like everybody’s putting their lives on hold. It’s morbid,
understand?”
“Got it.”
Seven months after her diagnosis, the situation would turn grim. In
September, Michelle and I flew to New York to join Maya and my mother for a
consultation with a specialist at Memorial Sloan Kettering. Midway through
chemo now, she was physically transformed. Her long dark hair was gone; her
eyes looked hollow. Worse, the specialist’s assessment was that her cancer was at
stage four and that treatment options were limited. Watching my mother suck on
ice cubes because her saliva glands had shut down, I did my best to put on a brave
face. I told her funny stories about my work and recounted the plot of a movie
I’d just seen. We laughed as Maya—nine years younger than me and then
studying at New York University—reminded me what a bossy big brother I’d
been. I held my mother’s hand, making sure she was comfortable before she
settled in to rest. Then I went back to the hotel room and cried.
It was on that trip to New York that I suggested my mother come stay with
us in Chicago; my grandmother was too old to care for her full-time. But my
mother, forever the architect of her own destiny, declined. “I’d rather be
someplace familiar and warm,” she said, looking out the window. I sat there
feeling helpless, thinking about the long path she had traveled in her life, how

unexpected each step along the way must have been, so full of happy accidents.
I’d never once heard her dwell on the disappointments. Instead she seemed to
find small pleasures everywhere.
Until this.
“Life is strange, isn’t it?” she said softly.
It was.
—
advice, I threw myself into my maiden political
campaign. It makes me laugh to think back on what a bare-bones operation it
was—not much more sophisticated than a campaign for student council. There
were no pollsters, no researchers, no TV or radio buys. My announcement, on
September 19, 1995, was at the Ramada Inn in Hyde Park, with pretzels and
chips and a couple hundred supporters—probably a quarter of whom were related
to Michelle. Our campaign literature consisted of an eight-by-four-inch card
with what looked like a passport picture of me, a few lines of biography, and four
or five bullet points that I’d tapped out on my computer. I’d had it printed at
Kinko’s.
I did make a point of hiring two political veterans I’d met working on Project
VOTE! Carol Anne Harwell, my campaign manager, was tall and sassy, in her
early forties and on loan from a West Side ward office. Although she came off as
irrepressibly cheerful, she knew her way around Chicago’s bare-knuckle politics.
Ron Davis, a big grizzly bear of a man, was our field director and petition expert.
He had a gray-flecked Afro, scraggly facial hair, and thick wire-rimmed glasses,
his bulk hidden by the untucked black shirt he seemed to wear every single day.
Ron proved to be indispensable: Illinois had strict ballot access rules, designed
to make life hard on challengers who didn’t have party support. To get on the
ballot, a candidate needed more than seven hundred registered voters who lived
in the district to sign a petition that was circulated and attested to by someone
who also lived in the district. A “good” signature had to be legible, accurately
linked to a local address, and from a registered voter. I still remember the first
time a group of us gathered around our dining room table, Ron huffing and
puffing as he passed out clipboards with the petitions attached, along with voter
files and a sheet of instructions. I suggested that before we talked about petitions,
we should organize some meet-the-candidate forums, maybe draft some position
FOLLOWING MY MOTHER’S

papers. Carol and Ron looked at each other and laughed.
“Boss, let me tell you something,” Carol said. “You can save all that League
of Women Voters shit for after the election. Right now, the only thing that
matters is these petitions. The folks you’re running against, they’re gonna go
through these things with a fine-tooth comb to see if your signatures are legit. If
they’re not, you don’t get to play. And I guarantee you, no matter how careful
we are, about half of the signatures will end up being bad, which is why we got
to get at least twice as many as they say we do.”
“Four times as many,” Ron corrected, handing me a clipboard.
Duly chastened, I drove out to one of the neighborhoods Ron had selected
to gather signatures. It felt just like my early organizing days, going from house to
house, some people not home or unwilling to open the door; women in hair
curlers with kids scampering about, men doing yard work; occasionally young
men in T-shirts and do-rags, breath thick with alcohol as they scanned the block.
There were those who wanted to talk to me about problems at the local school
or the gun violence that was creeping into what had been a stable, working-class
neighborhood. But mostly folks would take the clipboard, sign it, and try as
quickly as possible to get back to what they’d been doing.
If knocking on doors was pretty standard fare for me, the experience was new
to Michelle, who gamely dedicated part of every weekend to helping out. And
while she’d often collect more signatures than I did—with her megawatt smile
and stories of growing up just a few blocks away—there were no smiles two
hours later when we’d get back into the car to drive home.
“All I know,” she said at one point, “is that I must really love you to spend
my Saturday morning doing this.”
Over the course of several months, we managed to collect four times the
number of required signatures. When I wasn’t at the firm or teaching, I visited
block clubs, church socials, and senior citizen homes, making my case to voters. I
wasn’t great. My stump speech was stiff, heavy on policy speak, short on
inspiration and humor. I also found it awkward to talk about myself. As an
organizer, I’d been trained to always stay in the background.
I did get better, though, more relaxed, and slowly the ranks of my supporters
grew. I rounded up endorsements from local officials, pastors, and a handful of
progressive organizations; I even got a few position papers drafted. And I’d like to
say that this is how my first campaign ended—the plucky young candidate and his
accomplished, beautiful, and forbearing wife, starting with a few friends in their

dining room, rallying the people around a new brand of politics.
But that’s not how it happened. In August 1995, our disgraced congressman
was finally convicted and sentenced to prison; a special election was called for late
November. With his seat empty and the timeline officially set, others besides
Alice Palmer jumped into the congressional race, among them Jesse Jackson, Jr.,
who had drawn national attention for the stirring introduction of his father at the
1988 Democratic National Convention. Michelle and I knew and liked Jesse Jr.
His sister Santita had been one of Michelle’s best friends in high school and the
maid of honor at our wedding. He was popular enough that his announcement
immediately changed the dynamics of the race, putting Alice at an enormous
disadvantage.
And because the special congressional election was now going to take place a
few weeks before petitions for Alice’s senate seat had to be filed, my team started
to worry.
“You better check again to make sure Alice isn’t going to mess with you if
she loses to Jesse Jr.,” Ron said.
I shook my head. “She promised me she wasn’t running. Gave me her word.
And she’s said it publicly. In the papers, even.”
“That’s fine, Barack. But can you just check again, please?”
I did, phoning Alice and once again getting her assurance that regardless of
what happened with her congressional run, she still intended to leave state
politics.
But when Jesse Jr. handily won the special election, with Alice coming in a
distant third, something shifted. Stories started surfacing in the local press about a
“Draft Alice Palmer” campaign. A few of her longtime supporters asked for a
meeting, and when I showed up they advised me to get out of the race. The
community couldn’t afford to give up Alice’s seniority, they said. I should be
patient; my turn would come. I stood my ground—I had volunteers and donors
who had already invested a lot in the campaign, after all; I had stuck with Alice
even when Jesse Jr. got in—but the room was unmoved. By the time I spoke to
Alice, it was clear where events were headed. The following week she held a
press conference in Springfield, announcing that she was filing her own lastminute petitions to get on the ballot and retain her seat.
“Told ya,” Carol said, taking a drag from her cigarette and blowing a thin
plume of smoke to the ceiling.
I felt disheartened and betrayed, but I figured all was not lost. We had built

up a good organization over the previous few months, and almost all the elected
officials who’d endorsed me said they’d stick with us. Ron and Carol were less
sanguine.
“Hate to tell you, boss,” Carol said, “but most folks still have no idea who
you are. Shit, they don’t know who she is either, but—no offense, now—‘Alice
Palmer’ is a hell of a lot better ballot name than ‘Barack Obama.’ ”
I saw her point but told them we were going to see things through, even as a
number of prominent Chicagoans were suddenly urging me to drop out of the
race. And then one afternoon Ron and Carol arrived at my house, breathless and
looking like they’d won the lottery.
“Alice’s petitions,” Ron said. “They’re terrible. Worst I’ve ever seen. All
those Negroes who were trying to bully you out of the race, they didn’t bother
actually doing the work. This could get her knocked off the ballot.”
I looked through the informal tallies Ron and our campaign volunteers had
done. It was true; the petitions Alice had submitted appeared to be filled with
invalid signatures: people whose addresses were outside the district, multiple
signatures with different names but the same handwriting. I scratched my head. “I
don’t know, guys…”
“You don’t know what?” Carol said.
“I don’t know if I want to win like this. I mean, yeah, I’m pissed about
what’s happened. But these ballot rules don’t make much sense. I’d rather just
beat her.”
Carol pulled back, her jaw tightening. “This woman gave you her word,
Barack!” she said. “We’ve all been busting our asses out here, based on that
promise. And now, when she tries to screw you, and can’t even do that right,
you’re going to let her get away with it? You don’t think they would knock you
off the ballot in a second if they could?” She shook her head. “Naw, Barack.
You’re a good guy…that’s why we believe in you. But if you let this go, you
might as well go back to being a professor and whatnot, ’cause politics is not for
you. You will get chewed up and won’t be doing anybody a damn bit of good.”
I looked at Ron, who said quietly, “She’s right.”
I leaned back in my chair and lit a cigarette. I felt suspended in time, trying to
decipher what I was feeling in my gut. How much did I want this? I reminded
myself about what I believed I could get done in office, how hard I was willing
to work if I got the chance.

“Okay,” I said finally.
“Okay!” Carol said, her smile returning. Ron gathered up his papers and put
them in his bag.
It would take a couple of months for the process to play out, but with my
decision that day, the race was effectively over. We filed our challenge with the
Chicago Board of Election Commissioners and when it became clear the board
was going to rule in our favor, Alice dropped out. While we were at it, we
knocked several other Democrats with bad petitions off the ballot as well.
Without a Democratic opponent and with only token Republican opposition, I
was on my way to the state senate.
Whatever vision I had for a more noble kind of politics, it would have to
wait.
I suppose there are useful lessons to draw from that first campaign. I learned
to respect the nuts and bolts of politics, the attention to detail required, the daily
grind that might prove the difference between winning and losing. It confirmed,
too, what I already knew about myself: that whatever preferences I had for fair
play, I didn’t like to lose.
But the lesson that stayed with me most had nothing to do with campaign
mechanics or hardball politics. It had to do with the phone call I received from
Maya in Hawaii one day in early November, well before I knew how my race
would turn out.
“She’s taken a bad turn, Bar,” Maya said.
“How bad?”
“I think you need to come now.”
I already knew that my mother’s condition had been deteriorating; I’d spoken
to her just a few days before. Hearing a new level of pain and resignation in her
voice, I had booked a flight to Hawaii for the following week.
“Can she talk?” I asked Maya now.
“I don’t think so. She’s fading in and out.”
I hung up the phone and called the airline to reschedule my flight for first
thing in the morning. I called Carol to cancel some campaign events and run
through what needed to be done in my absence. A few hours later, Maya called
back.
“I’m sorry, honey. Mom’s gone.” She had never regained consciousness, my
sister told me; Maya had sat at her hospital bedside, reading out loud from a book

of folktales as our mother slipped away.
We held a memorial service that week, in the Japanese garden behind the
East-West Center at the University of Hawaii. I remembered playing there as a
child, my mother sitting in the sun and watching me as I tumbled in the grass,
hopped over the rock steps, and caught tadpoles in the stream that ran down one
side. Afterward, Maya and I drove out to the lookout near Koko Head and
scattered her ashes into the sea, the waves crashing against the rocks. And I
thought about my mother and sister alone in that hospital room, and me not
there, so busy with my grand pursuits. I knew I could never get that moment
back. On top of my sorrow, I felt a great shame.
—
at the southern tip of Chicago, the quickest route to
Springfield is via I-55. During rush hour, heading out of downtown and through
the western suburbs, traffic slows to a crawl; but once you get past Joliet things
open up, a straight, smooth spread of asphalt cutting southwest through
Bloomington (home of State Farm insurance and Beer Nuts) and Lincoln (named
after the president, who helped incorporate the town when he was still just a
lawyer) and taking you past miles and miles of corn.
For almost eight years I made this drive, usually alone, usually in about three
and a half hours, trekking back and forth to Springfield for a few weeks in the fall
and through much of the winter and early spring, when the Illinois legislature did
the bulk of its work. I’d drive down Tuesday night after dinner and get back
home Thursday evening or Friday morning. Cell phone service dropped about an
hour outside of Chicago, and the only signals that registered on the dial after that
were talk radio and Christian music stations. To stay awake, I listened to
audiobooks, the longer the better—novels mostly (John le Carré and Toni
Morrison were favorites) but also histories, of the Civil War, the Victorian era,
the fall of the Roman Empire.
When asked, I’d tell skeptical friends how much I was learning in Springfield,
and, for the first few years at least, it was true. Of all fifty states, Illinois best
represented the demographics of the nation, home to a teeming metropolis,
sprawling suburbs, farm country, factory towns, and a downstate region
considered more southern than northern. On any given day, under the high
dome of the capitol, you’d see a cross section of America on full display, a Carl
Sandburg poem come to life. There were inner-city kids jostling one another on
UNLESS

YOU

LIVE

a field trip, well-coiffed bankers working their flip phones, farmers in seed caps
looking to widen the locks that allowed industrial barges to take their crops to
market. You’d see Latina moms looking to fund a new day-care center and
middle-aged biker crews, complete with muttonchops and leather jackets, trying
to stop yet another legislative effort to make them wear helmets.
I kept my head down in those early months. Some of my colleagues were
suspicious of my odd name and Harvard pedigree, but I did my homework and
helped raise money for other senators’ campaigns. I got to know my fellow
legislators and their staffers not just in the senate chamber but also on the
basketball court and at golf outings and during the weekly bipartisan poker games
we organized—with a two-dollar, three-raise limit, the room thick with smoke,
trash talk, and the slow fizz of yet another beer can being opened.
It helped that I already knew the senate minority leader, a hefty Black man in
his sixties named Emil Jones. He’d come up through the ranks of one of the
traditional ward organizations under Daley Sr. and represented the district where
I’d once organized. That’s how we first met: I’d brought a group of parents to his
office, demanding a meeting to get a college prep program funded for area youth.
Rather than stiff-arm us, he invited us in.
“You may not know it,” he said, “but I been waiting for y’all to show up!”
He explained how he’d never had the chance to graduate from college himself;
he wanted to make sure more state money was steered to neglected Black
neighborhoods. “I’m gonna leave it up to you to figure out what we need,” he
told me with a slap on the back as my group left his office. “You leave the
politics to me.”
Sure enough, Emil got the program funded, and our friendship carried over
to the senate. He took an odd pride in me and became almost protective of my
reformist ways. Even when he badly needed a vote on a deal he was cooking up
(getting riverboat gambling licensed in Chicago was a particular obsession), he
would never squeeze me if I told him I couldn’t do it—though he wasn’t above
uttering a few choice curses as he charged off to try someone else.
“Barack’s different,” he once told a staffer. “He’s going places.”
For all my diligence and Emil’s goodwill, neither of us could change one stark
fact: We were in the minority party. Republicans in the Illinois senate had
adopted the same uncompromising approach that Newt Gingrich was using at the
time to neuter Democrats in Congress. The GOP exercised absolute control over
what bills got out of committee and which amendments were in order.

Springfield had a special designation for junior members in the minority like me
—“mushrooms,” because “you’re fed shit and kept in the dark.”
On occasion, I found myself able to shape significant legislation. I helped
make sure Illinois’s version of the national welfare reform bill signed by Bill
Clinton provided sufficient support for those transitioning to work. In the wake
of one of Springfield’s perennial scandals, Emil assigned me to represent the
caucus on a committee to update the ethics laws. Nobody else wanted the job,
figuring it was a lost cause, but thanks to a good rapport with my Republican
counterpart, Kirk Dillard, we passed a law that curbed some of the more
embarrassing practices—making it impossible, for example, to use campaign
dollars for personal items like a home addition or a fur coat. (There were senators
who didn’t talk to us for weeks after that.)
More typical was the time, toward the end of the first session, when I rose
from my seat to oppose a blatant tax giveaway to some favored industry when the
state was cutting services for the poor. I had lined up my facts and prepared with
the thoroughness of a courtroom lawyer; I pointed out why such unjustified tax
breaks violated the conservative market principles Republicans claimed to believe
in. When I sat down, the senate president, Pate Philip—a beefy, white-haired exMarine notorious for insulting women and people of color with remarkably
casual frequency—wandered up to my desk.
“That was a hell of a speech,” he said, chewing on an unlit cigar. “Made
some good points.”
“Thanks.”
“Might have even changed a lot of minds,” he said. “But you didn’t change
any votes.” With that, he signaled to the presiding officer and watched with
satisfaction as the green lights signifying “aye” lit up the board.
That was politics in Springfield: a series of transactions mostly hidden from
view, legislators weighing the competing pressures of various interests with the
dispassion of bazaar merchants, all the while keeping a careful eye on the handful
of ideological hot buttons—guns, abortion, taxes—that might generate heat from
their base.
It wasn’t that people didn’t know the difference between good and bad
policy. It just didn’t matter. What everyone in Springfield understood was that 90
percent of the time the voters back home weren’t paying attention. A
complicated but worthy compromise, bucking party orthodoxy to support an
innovative idea—that could cost you a key endorsement, a big financial backer, a

leadership post, or even an election.
Could you get voters to pay attention? I tried. Back in the district, I accepted
just about any invitation that came my way. I started writing a regular column for
the Hyde Park Herald, a neighborhood weekly with a readership of less than five
thousand. I hosted town halls, setting out refreshments and stacks of legislative
updates, and then usually sat there with my lonesome staffer, looking at my
watch, waiting for a crowd that never came.
I couldn’t blame folks for not showing up. They were busy, they had families,
and surely most of the debates in Springfield seemed remote. Meanwhile, on the
few high-profile issues that my constituents did care about, they probably agreed
with me already, since the lines of my district—like those of almost every district
in Illinois—had been drawn with surgical precision to ensure one-party
dominance. If I wanted more funding for schools in poor neighborhoods, if I
wanted more access to primary healthcare or retraining for laid-off workers, I
didn’t need to convince my constituents. The people I needed to engage and
persuade—they lived somewhere else.
By the end of my second session, I could feel the atmosphere of the capitol
weighing on me—the futility of being in the minority, the cynicism of so many
of my colleagues worn like a badge of honor. No doubt it showed. One day,
while I was standing in the rotunda after a bill I’d introduced went down in
flames, a well-meaning lobbyist came up and put his arm around me.
“You’ve got to stop beating your head against the wall, Barack,” he said.
“The key to surviving this place is understanding that it’s a business. Like selling
cars. Or the dry cleaner down the street. You start believing it’s more than that,
it’ll drive you crazy.”
—
argue that everything I’ve said about Springfield
describes exactly how pluralism is supposed to work; that the horse trading
between interest groups may not be inspiring, but it keeps democracy muddling
along. And maybe that argument would have gone down easier with me at the
time if it weren’t for the life I was missing at home.
The first two years in the legislature were fine—Michelle was busy with her
own work, and although she kept her promise not to come down to the state
capital except for my swearing in, we’d still have leisurely conversations on the
SOME POLITICAL SCIENTISTS

phone on nights I was away. Then one day in the fall of 1997, she called me at
the office, her voice trembling.
“It’s happening.”
“What’s happening?”
“You’re going to be a daddy.”
I was going to be a daddy. How full of joy the months that followed were! I
lived up to every cliché of the expectant father: attending Lamaze classes, trying
to figure out how to assemble a crib, reading the book What to Expect When
You’re Expecting with pen in hand to underline key passages. Around six a.m. on
the Fourth of July, Michelle poked me and said it was time to go to the hospital.
I fumbled around and gathered the bag I’d set by the door, and just seven hours
later was introduced to Malia Ann Obama, eight pounds and fifteen ounces of
perfection.
Among her many talents, our new daughter had good timing; with no
session, no classes, and no big pending cases to work on, I could take the rest of
the summer off. A night owl by nature, I manned the late shift so Michelle could
sleep, resting Malia on my thighs to read to her as she looked up with big
questioning eyes, or dozing as she lay on my chest, a burp and good poop behind
us, so warm and serene. I thought about the generations of men who had missed
such moments, and I thought about my own father, whose absence had done
more to shape me than the brief time I’d spent with him, and I realized that there
was no place on earth I would rather be.
But the strains of young parenthood eventually took their toll. After a blissful
few months, Michelle went back to work, and I went back to juggling three jobs.
We were lucky to find a wonderful nanny who cared for Malia during the day,
but the addition of a full-time employee to our family enterprise squeezed the
budget hard.
Michelle bore the brunt of all this, shuttling between mothering and work,
unconvinced that she was doing either job well. At the end of each night, after
feeding and bath time and story time and cleaning up the apartment and trying to
keep track of whether she’d picked up the dry cleaning and making a note to
herself to schedule an appointment with the pediatrician, she would often fall into
an empty bed, knowing the whole cycle would start all over again in a few short
hours while her husband was off doing “important things.”
We began arguing more, usually late at night when the two of us were
thoroughly drained. “This isn’t what I signed up for, Barack,” Michelle said at

one point. “I feel like I’m doing it all by myself.”
I was hurt by that. If I wasn’t working, I was home—and if I was home and
forgot to clean up the kitchen after dinner, it was because I had to stay up late
grading exams or fine-tuning a brief. But even as I mounted my defense, I knew
I was falling short. Inside Michelle’s anger lay a more difficult truth. I was trying
to deliver a lot of things to a lot of different people. I was taking the hard way,
just as she’d predicted back when our burdens were lighter, our personal
responsibilities not so enmeshed. I thought now about the promise I’d made to
myself after Malia was born; that my kids would know me, that they’d grow up
knowing my love for them, feeling that I had always put them first.
Sitting in the dim light of our living room, Michelle no longer seemed angry,
just sad. “Is it worth it?” she asked.
I don’t recall what I said in response. I know I couldn’t admit to her that I
was no longer sure.
—
in retrospect, to understand why you did something stupid. I don’t
mean the small stuff—ruining your favorite tie because you tried to eat soup in
the car or throwing out your back because you got talked into playing tackle
football on Thanksgiving. I mean dumb choices in the wake of considerable
deliberation: those times when you identify a real problem in your life, analyze it,
and then with utter confidence come up with precisely the wrong answer.
That was me running for Congress. After numerous conversations, I had to
concede that Michelle was right to question whether the difference I was making
in Springfield justified the sacrifice. Rather than lightening my load, though, I
went in the opposite direction, deciding I needed to step on the gas and secure a
more influential office. Around this same time, veteran congressman Bobby
Rush, a former Black Panther, challenged Mayor Daley in the 1999 election and
got trounced, doing poorly even in his own district.
I thought Rush’s campaign had been uninspired, without a rationale other
than the vague promise to continue Harold Washington’s legacy. If this was how
he operated in Congress, I figured I could do better. After talking it over with a
few trusted advisors, I had my staff jerry-rig an in-house poll to see whether a
race against Rush would be viable. Our informal sampling gave us a shot. Using
the results, I was able to persuade several of my closest friends to help finance the
IT’S HARD,

race. And then, despite warnings from more experienced political hands that
Rush was stronger than he looked, and despite Michelle’s incredulity that I
would somehow think she’d feel better with me being in Washington instead of
Springfield, I announced my candidacy for congressman from the First
Congressional District.
Almost from the start, the race was a disaster. A few weeks in, the rumblings
from the Rush camp began: Obama’s an outsider; he’s backed by white folks; he’s a
Harvard elitist. And that name—is he even Black?
Having raised enough money to commission a proper poll, I discovered that
Bobby had 90 percent name recognition in the district and a 70 percent approval
rating, whereas only 11 percent of voters even knew who I was. Shortly
thereafter, Bobby’s adult son was tragically shot and killed, eliciting an outpouring
of sympathy. I effectively suspended my campaign for a month and watched
television coverage of the funeral taking place at my own church, with Reverend
Jeremiah Wright presiding. Already on thin ice at home, I took the family to
Hawaii for an abbreviated Christmas break, only to have the governor call a
special legislative session to vote on a gun control measure I supported. With
eighteen-month-old Malia sick and unable to fly, I missed the vote and was
roundly flayed by the Chicago press.
I lost by thirty points.
When talking to young people about politics, I sometimes offer this story as
an object lesson of what not to do. Usually I throw in a postscript, describing
how, a few months after my loss, a friend of mine, worried that I’d fallen into a
funk, insisted that I join him at the 2000 Democratic National Convention in
L.A. (“You need to get back on the horse,” he said.) But when I landed at LAX
and tried to rent a car, I was turned down because my American Express card was
over its limit. I managed to get myself to the Staples Center, but then learned that
the credential my friend had secured for me didn’t allow entry to the convention
floor, which left me to haplessly circle the perimeter and watch the festivities on
mounted TV screens. Finally, after an awkward episode later that evening in
which my friend couldn’t get me into a party he was attending, I took a cab back
to the hotel, slept on the couch in his suite, and flew back to Chicago just as Al
Gore was accepting the nomination.
It’s a funny story, especially in light of where I ultimately ended up. It speaks,
I tell my audience, to the unpredictable nature of politics, and the necessity for
resilience.

What I don’t mention is my dark mood on that flight back. I was almost
forty, broke, coming off a humiliating defeat and with my marriage strained. I felt
for perhaps the first time in my life that I had taken a wrong turn; that whatever
reservoirs of energy and optimism I thought I had, whatever potential I’d always
banked on, had been used up on a fool’s errand. Worse, I recognized that in
running for Congress I’d been driven not by some selfless dream of changing the
world, but rather by the need to justify the choices I had already made, or to
satisfy my ego, or to quell my envy of those who had achieved what I had not.
In other words, I had become the very thing that, as a younger man, I had
warned myself against. I had become a politician—and not a very good one at
that.