IF AT THE END OF 2010,



anyone had asked me where the next major Middle East
crisis would most likely occur, I could have offered them a rich menu of
possibilities. There was Iraq, of course, where despite progress, it often felt as if a
return to chaos was just a market bombing or militia attack away. The
international sanctions we’d imposed on Iran in response to its nuclear program
had started to cause some pain, and any defiance or desperation from the regime
could lead to a confrontation that spun out of control. Yemen—one of the
world’s true hard-luck cases—had become headquarters to al-Qaeda in the
Arabian Peninsula, which was now the deadliest and most active chapter of the
terrorist network.
And then there were the few hundred miles of winding, contested border that
separated Israel from the Palestinian territories of the West Bank and the Gaza
Strip.
Mine was hardly the first U.S. administration to lose sleep over those
relatively thin pieces of real estate. The conflict between Arabs and Jews had been
an open sore on the region for almost a century, dating back to the 1917 Balfour
Declaration, in which the British, who were then occupying Palestine,
committed to create a “national home for the Jewish people” in a region
overwhelmingly populated by Arabs. Over the next twenty or so years, Zionist
leaders mobilized a surge of Jewish migration to Palestine and organized highly
trained armed forces to defend their settlements. In 1947, in the wake of World
War II and in the shadow of the Holocaust’s unspeakable crimes, the United
Nations approved a partition plan to establish two sovereign states, one Jewish,
the other Arab, with Jerusalem—a city considered holy by Muslims, Christians,
and Jews alike—to be governed by an international body. Zionist leaders
embraced the plan, but Arab Palestinians, as well as surrounding Arab nations that
were also just emerging from colonial rule, strenuously objected. As Britain
withdrew, the two sides quickly fell into war. And with Jewish militias claiming

victory in 1948, the State of Israel was officially born.
For the Jewish people, it was a dream fulfilled, a state of their own in their
historic homeland after centuries of exile, religious persecution, and the more
recent horrors of the Holocaust. But for the roughly seven hundred thousand
Arab Palestinians who found themselves stateless and driven from their lands, the
same events would be a part of what became known as the Nakba, or
“Catastrophe.” For the next three decades, Israel would engage in a succession of
conflicts with its Arab neighbors—most significantly the Six-Day War of 1967, in
which a greatly outnumbered Israeli military routed the combined armies of
Egypt, Jordan, and Syria. In the process, Israel seized control of the West Bank
and East Jerusalem from Jordan, the Gaza Strip and the Sinai Peninsula from
Egypt, and the Golan Heights from Syria. The memory of those losses, and the
humiliation that came with it, became a defining aspect of Arab nationalism, and
support for the Palestinian cause a central tenet of Arab foreign policy.
Meanwhile, Palestinians living within the occupied territories, mostly in
refugee camps, found themselves governed by the Israel Defense Forces (IDF),
with their movements and economic activity severely restricted, prompting calls
for armed resistance and resulting in the rise of the Palestine Liberation
Organization (PLO). Arab politicians routinely denounced Israel, often in
explicitly anti-Semitic terms, and most governments in the region embraced the
PLO’s chairman, Yasser Arafat, as a freedom fighter—even as his organization and
its affiliates engaged in escalating and bloody terrorist attacks against unarmed
civilians.
The United States was no bystander in all this. Jewish Americans had suffered
generations of discrimination in their own country, but they and other Jews
emigrating from the West to Israel still shared language, customs, and appearance
with their white Christian brethren, and in comparison to Arabs, they still
enjoyed far more sympathy from the American public. Harry Truman had been
the first foreign leader to formally recognize Israel as a sovereign state, and the
American Jewish community pressed U.S. officials to assist the fledgling nation.
With the world’s two Cold War superpowers vying for influence in the Middle
East, the United States became Israel’s primary patron—and with that, Israel’s
problems with its neighbors became America’s problems as well.
Practically every U.S. president since then had tried to resolve the Arab-Israeli
conflict, with varying degrees of success. The historic Camp David Accords,
brokered in 1978 by Jimmy Carter, achieved a lasting peace between Israel and

Egypt and returned Sinai to Egyptian control. The agreement, which yielded a
Nobel Peace Prize for the Israeli prime minister, Menachem Begin, and the
Egyptian president, Anwar Sadat, also moved Egypt further out of the Soviet
orbit and made the two countries critical U.S. security partners (as well as the
largest recipients of U.S. economic and military aid in the world, by a wide
margin). But it left the Palestinian issue unresolved. Fifteen years later, with the
Cold War over and U.S. influence at its zenith, Bill Clinton brought Israeli prime
minister Yitzhak Rabin and Arafat together for the signing of the first Oslo
Accord. In it, the PLO finally recognized Israel’s right to exist, while Israel
recognized the PLO as the rightful representative of the Palestinian people and
agreed to the creation of the Palestinian Authority, which would have limited but
meaningful governance over the West Bank and the Gaza Strip.
Along with giving Jordan license to follow Egypt’s example and conclude its
own peace deal with Israel, Oslo provided a framework for the eventual creation
of an autonomous Palestinian state, one that, ideally, would coexist with a secure
Israel that was at peace with its neighbors. But old wounds, and the lure of
violence over compromise among factions on both sides, proved too much to
overcome. Rabin was assassinated by a far-right Israeli extremist in 1995. His
liberal successor, Shimon Peres, served for seven months before losing a snap
election to Benjamin “Bibi” Netanyahu, leader of the right-wing Likud party,
whose platform had once included total annexation of the Palestinian territories.
Unhappy about the Oslo Accords, harder-line organizations like Hamas and the
Palestinian Islamic Jihad set about undermining the credibility of Arafat and his
Fatah party with Palestinians, calling for armed struggle to take back Arab lands
and push Israel into the sea.
After Netanyahu was defeated in the 1999 election, his more liberal successor,
Ehud Barak, made efforts to establish a broader peace in the Middle East,
including outlining a two-state solution that went further than any previous
Israeli proposal. Arafat demanded more concessions, however, and talks collapsed
in recrimination. Meanwhile, one day in September 2000, Likud party leader
Ariel Sharon led a group of Israeli legislators on a deliberately provocative and
highly publicized visit to one of Islam’s holiest sites, Jerusalem’s Temple Mount.
It was a stunt designed to assert Israel’s claim over the wider territory, one that
challenged the leadership of Ehud Barak and enraged Arabs near and far. Four
months later, Sharon became Israel’s next prime minister, governing throughout
what became known as the Second Intifada: four years of violence between the
two sides, marked by tear gas and rubber bullets directed at stone-throwing

protesters; Palestinian suicide bombs detonated outside an Israeli nightclub and in
buses carrying senior citizens and schoolchildren; deadly IDF retaliatory raids and
the indiscriminate arrest of thousands of Palestinians; and Hamas rockets launched
from Gaza into Israeli border towns, answered by U.S.-supplied Israeli Apache
helicopters leveling entire neighborhoods.
Approximately a thousand Israelis and three thousand Palestinians died during
this period—including scores of children—and by the time the violence subsided,
in 2005, the prospects for resolving the underlying conflict had fundamentally
changed. The Bush administration’s focus on Iraq, Afghanistan, and the War on
Terror left it little bandwidth to worry about Middle East peace, and while Bush
remained officially supportive of a two-state solution, he was reluctant to press
Sharon on the issue. Publicly, Saudi Arabia and other Gulf states continued to
offer support to the Palestinian cause, but they were increasingly more concerned
with limiting Iranian influence and rooting out extremist threats to their own
regimes. The Palestinians themselves had splintered after Arafat’s death in 2004:
Gaza came under the control of Hamas and soon found itself under a tightly
enforced Israeli blockade, while the Fatah-run Palestinian Authority, which
continued to govern the West Bank, came to be viewed by even some of its
supporters as feckless and corrupt.
Most important, Israeli attitudes toward peace talks had hardened, in part
because peace no longer seemed so crucial to ensuring the country’s safety and
prosperity. The Israel of the 1960s that remained lodged in the popular
imagination, with its communal kibbutz living and periodic rationing of basic
supplies, had been transformed into a modern economic powerhouse. It was no
longer the plucky David surrounded by hostile Goliaths; thanks to tens of billions
of dollars in U.S. military aid, the Israeli armed forces were now matchless in the
region. Terrorist bombings and attacks within Israel had all but ceased, due in
some measure to the fact that Israel had erected a wall more than four hundred
miles long between itself and the Palestinian population centers in the West Bank,
punctuated with strategically placed checkpoints to control the flow of Palestinian
workers in and out of Israel. Every so often, rocket fire from Gaza still
endangered those living in Israeli border towns, and the presence of Jewish Israeli
settlers in the West Bank sometimes triggered deadly skirmishes. For most
residents of Jerusalem or Tel Aviv, however, the Palestinians lived largely out of
sight, their struggles and resentments troubling but remote.
Given everything that was already on my plate when I became president, it
would have been tempting to just do my best to manage the status quo, quash

any outbreaks of renewed violence between Israeli and Palestinian factions, and
otherwise leave the whole mess alone. But taking into account the broader
foreign policy concerns, I decided I couldn’t go that route. Israel remained a key
U.S. ally, and even with the threats reduced, it still endured terrorist attacks that
jeopardized not only its citizens but also the thousands of Americans who lived or
traveled there. At the same time, just about every country in the world
considered Israel’s continued occupation of the Palestinian territories to be a
violation of international law. As a result, our diplomats found themselves in the
awkward position of having to defend Israel for actions that we ourselves
opposed. U.S. officials also had to explain why it wasn’t hypocritical for us to
press countries like China or Iran on their human rights records while showing
little concern for the rights of Palestinians. Meanwhile, the Israeli occupation
continued to inflame the Arab community and feed anti-American sentiment
across the Muslim world.
In other words, the absence of peace between Israel and the Palestinians made
America less safe. Negotiating a workable solution between the two sides, on the
other hand, stood to strengthen our security posture, weaken our enemies, and
make us more credible in championing human rights around the world—all in
one fell swoop.
In truth, the Israeli-Palestinian conflict also weighed on me personally. Some
of the earliest moral instruction I got from my mother revolved around the
Holocaust, an unconscionable catastrophe that, like slavery, she explained, was
rooted in the inability or unwillingness to recognize the humanity of others. Like
many American kids of my generation, I’d had the story of Exodus etched in my
brain. In sixth grade, I’d idealized the Israel described to me by a Jewish camp
counselor who’d lived on a kibbutz—a place where everyone was equal, he said,
everyone pitched in, and everyone was welcome to share in the joys and struggles
of repairing the world. In high school, I’d devoured the works of Philip Roth,
Saul Bellow, and Norman Mailer, moved by stories of men trying to find their
place in an America that didn’t welcome them. Later, studying the early civil
rights movement in college, I’d been intrigued by the influence of Jewish
philosophers like Martin Buber on Dr. King’s sermons and writings. I’d admired
how, across issues, Jewish voters tended to be more progressive than just about
any other ethnic group, and in Chicago, some of my most stalwart friends and
supporters had come from the city’s Jewish community.
I believed there was an essential bond between the Black and the Jewish
experiences—a common story of exile and suffering that might ultimately be

redeemed by a shared thirst for justice, a deeper compassion for others, a
heightened sense of community. It made me fiercely protective of the right of the
Jewish people to have a state of their own, though, ironically, those same shared
values also made it impossible for me to ignore the conditions under which
Palestinians in the occupied territories were forced to live.
Yes, many of Arafat’s tactics had been abhorrent. Yes, Palestinian leaders had
too often missed opportunities for peace; there’d been no Havel or Gandhi to
mobilize a nonviolent movement with the moral force to sway Israeli public
opinion. And yet none of that negated the fact that millions of Palestinians lacked
self-determination and many of the basic rights that even citizens of nondemocratic countries enjoyed. Generations were growing up in a starved and
shrunken world from which they literally couldn’t escape, their daily lives subject
to the whims of a distant, often hostile authority and the suspicions of every
blank-faced, rifle-carrying soldier demanding to see their papers at each
checkpoint they passed.
By the time I took office, though, most congressional Republicans had
abandoned any pretense of caring about what happened to the Palestinians.
Indeed, a strong majority of white evangelicals—the GOP’s most reliable voting
bloc—believed that the creation and gradual expansion of Israel fulfilled God’s
promise to Abraham and heralded Christ’s eventual return. On the Democratic
side, even stalwart progressives were loath to look less pro-Israel than
Republicans, especially since many of them were Jewish themselves or
represented sizable Jewish constituencies.
Also, members of both parties worried about crossing the American Israel
Public Affairs Committee (AIPAC), a powerful bipartisan lobbying organization
dedicated to ensuring unwavering U.S. support for Israel. AIPAC’s clout could
be brought to bear on virtually every congressional district in the country, and
just about every politician in Washington—including me—counted AIPAC
members among their key supporters and donors. In the past, the organization
had accommodated a spectrum of views on Middle East peace, insisting mainly
that those seeking its endorsement support a continuation of U.S. aid to Israel and
oppose efforts to isolate or condemn Israel via the U.N. and other international
bodies. But as Israeli politics had moved to the right, so had AIPAC’s policy
positions. Its staff and leaders increasingly argued that there should be “no
daylight” between the U.S. and Israeli governments, even when Israel took
actions that were contrary to U.S. policy. Those who criticized Israeli policy too
loudly risked being tagged as “anti-Israel” (and possibly anti-Semitic) and

confronted with a well-funded opponent in the next election.
I’d been on the receiving end of some of this during my presidential
campaign, as Jewish supporters reported having to beat back assertions in their
synagogues and on email chains that I was insufficiently supportive of—or even
hostile toward—Israel. They attributed these whisper campaigns not to any
particular position I’d taken (my backing of a two-state solution and opposition to
Israeli settlements were identical to the positions of the other candidates) but
rather to my expressions of concern for ordinary Palestinians; my friendships with
certain critics of Israeli policy, including an activist and Middle East scholar
named Rashid Khalidi; and the fact that, as Ben bluntly put it, “You’re a Black
man with a Muslim name who lived in the same neighborhood as Louis
Farrakhan and went to Jeremiah Wright’s church.” On Election Day, I’d end up
getting more than 70 percent of the Jewish vote, but as far as many AIPAC board
members were concerned, I remained suspect, a man of divided loyalties:
someone whose support for Israel, as one of Axe’s friends colorfully put it, wasn’t
“felt in his kishkes”—“guts,” in Yiddish.
—
progress on peace,” Rahm had warned me in 2009, “when the
American president and the Israeli prime minister come from different political
backgrounds.” We had been discussing the recent return of Bibi Netanyahu as
Israel’s prime minister, after the Likud party had managed to cobble together a
right-leaning coalition government despite winning one less seat than its main
opponent, the more centrist Kadima party. Rahm, who’d briefly been a civilian
volunteer in the Israeli army and had sat in the front row at Bill Clinton’s Oslo
negotiations, had agreed that we should try to restart Israeli-Palestinian peace
talks, if for no other reason than that it might keep the situation from getting
worse. But he wasn’t optimistic—and the more time I spent with Netanyahu and
his Palestinian counterpart, Mahmoud Abbas, the more I understood why.
Built like a linebacker, with a square jaw, broad features, and a gray combover, Netanyahu was smart, canny, tough, and a gifted communicator in both
Hebrew and English. (He’d been born in Israel but spent most of his formative
years in Philadelphia, and traces of that city’s accent lingered in his polished
baritone.) His family had deep roots in the Zionist movement: His grandfather, a
rabbi, emigrated from Poland to British-governed Palestine in 1920, while his
father—a professor of history best known for his writings on the persecution of
“YOU DON’T GET

Jews during the Spanish Inquisition—became a leader in the movement’s more
militant wing before Israel’s founding. Although raised in a secular household,
Netanyahu inherited his father’s devotion to the defense of Israel: He’d been a
member of a special forces unit in the IDF and had fought in the 1973 Yom
Kippur War, and his older brother had died a hero in the legendary Entebbe raid
of 1976, in which Israeli commandos rescued 102 passengers from Palestinian
terrorists who had hijacked an Air France flight.
Whether Netanyahu also inherited his father’s unabashed hostility toward
Arabs (“The tendency towards conflict is in the essence of the Arab. He is an
enemy by essence. His personality won’t allow him any compromise or
agreement”) was harder to say. What was certain was that he had built his entire
political persona around an image of strength and the message that Jews couldn’t
afford phony pieties—that they lived in a tough neighborhood and so had to be
tough. This philosophy neatly aligned him with the most hawkish members of
AIPAC, as well as Republican officials and wealthy American right-wingers.
Netanyahu could be charming, or at least solicitous, when it served his purposes;
he’d gone out of his way, for example, to meet me in a Chicago airport lounge
shortly after I’d been elected to the U.S. Senate, lavishing praise on me for an
inconsequential pro-Israel bill I’d supported in the Illinois state legislature. But his
vision of himself as the chief defender of the Jewish people against calamity
allowed him to justify almost anything that would keep him in power—and his
familiarity with American politics and media gave him confidence that he could
resist whatever pressure a Democratic administration like mine might try to apply.
My early discussions with Netanyahu—both over the phone and during his
visits to Washington—had gone well enough, despite our very different
worldviews. He was most interested in talking about Iran, which he rightly
viewed as Israel’s largest security threat, and we agreed to coordinate efforts to
prevent Tehran from obtaining a nuclear weapon. But when I raised the
possibility of restarting peace talks with the Palestinians, he was decidedly
noncommittal.
“I want to assure you, Israel wants peace,” Netanyahu said. “But a true peace
has to meet Israel’s security needs.” He made it clear to me that he thought Abbas
was likely unwilling or unable to do so, a point he would also stress in public.
I understood his point. If Netanyahu’s reluctance to enter into peace talks was
born of Israel’s growing strength, then the reluctance of Palestinian president
Abbas was born of political weakness. White-haired and mustached, mild-

mannered and deliberate in his movements, Abbas had helped Arafat found the
Fatah party, which later became the dominant party of the PLO, spending most
of his career managing diplomatic and administrative efforts in the shadow of the
more charismatic chairman. He’d been the preferred choice of both the United
States and Israel to lead the Palestinians after Arafat’s death, in large part due to
his unequivocal recognition of Israel and his long-standing renunciation of
violence. But his innate caution and willingness to cooperate with the Israeli
security apparatus (not to mention reports of corruption inside his administration)
had damaged his reputation with his own people. Having already lost control of
Gaza to Hamas in the 2006 legislative elections, he viewed peace talks with Israel
as a risk not worth taking—at least not without some tangible concessions that
would provide him political cover.
The immediate question was how to coax Netanyahu and Abbas to the
negotiating table. To come up with answers, I relied on a talented group of
diplomats, starting with Hillary, who was well versed on the issues and already
had relationships with many of the region’s major players. To underscore the
high priority I’d placed on the issue, I appointed former Senate majority leader
George Mitchell as my special envoy for Middle East peace. Mitchell was a
throwback—a hard-driving, pragmatic politician with a thick Maine accent who
had demonstrated his peacemaking skills by negotiating the 1998 Good Friday
Agreement, which brought an end to the decades-long conflict between
Catholics and Protestants in Northern Ireland.
We began by calling for a temporary freeze on Israel’s construction of new
settlements in the West Bank, a significant sticking point between the two parties,
so that negotiations might proceed in earnest. Settlement construction, once
limited to small outposts of religious believers, had over time become de facto
government policy, and in 2009, there were about three hundred thousand Israeli
settlers living outside the country’s recognized borders. Developers, meanwhile,
continued to build tidy subdivisions in and around the West Bank and East
Jerusalem, the disputed, predominantly Arab section of the city that Palestinians
hoped to one day make their capital. All this was done with the blessing of
politicians who either shared the religious convictions of the settler movement,
saw the political benefit of catering to settlers, or were simply interested in
alleviating Israel’s housing crunch. For Palestinians, the explosion in settlements
amounted to a slow-motion annexation of their land and stood as a symbol of the
Palestinian Authority’s impotence.
We knew that Netanyahu would probably resist the idea of a freeze. The

settlers had become a meaningful political force, their movement well represented
within Netanyahu’s coalition government. Moreover, he would complain that
the good-faith gesture we’d be asking from the Palestinians in return—that Abbas
and the Palestinian Authority take concrete steps to end incitements to violence
inside the West Bank—was a great deal harder to measure. But given the
asymmetry in power between Israel and the Palestinians—there wasn’t much,
after all, that Abbas could give the Israelis that the Israelis couldn’t already take on
their own—I thought it was reasonable to ask the stronger party to take a bigger
first step in the direction of peace.
As expected, Netanyahu’s initial response to our proposed settlement freeze
was sharply negative, and his allies in Washington were soon publicly accusing us
of weakening the U.S.-Israeli alliance. The White House phones started ringing
off the hook, as members of my national security team fielded calls from
reporters, leaders of American Jewish organizations, prominent supporters, and
members of Congress, all wondering why we were picking on Israel and focusing
on settlements when everyone knew that Palestinian violence was the main
impediment to peace. One afternoon, Ben hurried in late for a meeting, looking
particularly harried after having spent the better part of an hour on the phone
with a highly agitated liberal Democratic congressman.
“I thought he opposes settlements,” I said.
“He does,” Ben said. “He also opposes us doing anything to actually stop
settlements.”
This sort of pressure continued for much of 2009, along with questions about
my kishkes. Periodically, we’d invite the leaders of Jewish organizations or
members of Congress to the White House for meetings with me and my team, so
that we could assure them of our ironclad commitment to Israel’s security and the
U.S.-Israel relationship. It wasn’t a hard argument to make; despite my difference
with Netanyahu on a settlement freeze, I’d delivered on my promise to enhance
U.S.-Israel cooperation across the board, working to counteract the Iranian threat
and to help fund the eventual development of an “Iron Dome” defense system,
which would allow Israel to shoot down Syrian-made rockets coming from Gaza
or from Hezbollah positions inside Lebanon. Nevertheless, the noise orchestrated
by Netanyahu had the intended effect of gobbling up our time, putting us on the
defensive, and reminding me that normal policy differences with an Israeli prime
minister—even one who presided over a fragile coalition government—exacted a
domestic political cost that simply didn’t exist when I dealt with the United

Kingdom, Germany, France, Japan, Canada, or any of our other closest allies.
But shortly after I delivered my Cairo speech, in early June 2009, Netanyahu
cracked open the door to progress by responding with an address of his own in
which he declared, for the first time, his conditional support for a two-state
solution. And after months of wrangling, he and Abbas finally agreed to join me
for a face-to-face discussion while they were both in town for the annual leaders’
gathering at the U.N. General Assembly at the end of September. The two men
were courteous to each other (Netanyahu garrulous and physically at ease, Abbas
largely expressionless, save for the occasional nod) but appeared unmoved when I
urged them to take some risks for peace. Two months later, Netanyahu agreed to
institute a ten-month freeze on the issuance of new settlement permits in the
West Bank. Pointedly he refused to extend the freeze to construction in East
Jerusalem.
Any optimism I felt about Bibi’s concession was short-lived. No sooner had
Netanyahu announced the temporary freeze than Abbas dismissed it as
meaningless, complaining about the exclusion of East Jerusalem and the fact that
construction of already-approved projects was continuing apace. He insisted that
in the absence of a total freeze, he would not join any talks. Other Arab leaders
quickly echoed these sentiments, spurred in part by editorializing from Al Jazeera,
the Qatari-controlled media outlet that had become the dominant news source in
the region, having built its popularity by fanning the flames of anger and
resentment among Arabs with the same algorithmic precision that Fox News
deployed so skillfully with conservative white voters in the States.
The situation only got messier in March 2010, when, just as Joe Biden was
visiting Israel on a goodwill mission, the Israeli Interior Ministry announced
permits for the construction of sixteen hundred new housing units in East
Jerusalem. Although Netanyahu insisted that his office had nothing to do with
the timing of the permits, the move reinforced perceptions among Palestinians
that the freeze was a sham and the United States was in on it. I instructed Hillary
to call Netanyahu and let him know I wasn’t happy, and we reiterated our
suggestion that his government show more restraint on expanding settlements.
His response, delivered at AIPAC’s annual conference in Washington later that
month, was to declare to thunderous applause that “Jerusalem is not a settlement
—it is our capital.”
The following day, Netanyahu and I sat down for a meeting at the White
House. Downplaying the growing tension, I accepted the fiction that the permit

announcement had been just a misunderstanding, and our discussions ran well
over the allotted time. Because I had another commitment and Netanyahu still
had a few items he wanted to cover, I suggested we pause and resume the
conversation in an hour, arranging in the meantime for his delegation to regroup
in the Roosevelt Room. He said he was happy to wait, and after that second
session, we ended the evening on cordial terms, having met for more than two
hours total. The next day, however, Rahm stormed into the office, saying there
were media reports that I’d deliberately snubbed Netanyahu by keeping him
waiting, leading to accusations that I had allowed a case of personal pique to
damage the vital U.S.-Israel relationship.
That was a rare instance when I outcursed Rahm.
Looking back, I sometimes ponder the age-old question of how much
difference the particular characteristics of individual leaders make in the sweep of
history—whether those of us who rise to power are mere conduits for the deep,
relentless currents of the times or whether we’re at least partly the authors of
what’s to come. I wonder whether our insecurities and our hopes, our childhood
traumas or memories of unexpected kindness carry as much force as any
technological shift or socioeconomic trend. I wonder whether a President Hillary
Clinton or President John McCain might have elicited more trust from the two
sides; whether things might have played out differently if someone other than
Netanyahu had occupied the prime minister’s seat or if Abbas had been a younger
man, more intent on making his mark than protecting himself from criticism.
What I do know is that despite the hours Hillary and George Mitchell spent
doing shuttle diplomacy, our plans for peace talks went nowhere until late in
August 2010, just one month before the settlement freeze was set to expire, when
Abbas finally agreed to direct talks, thanks largely to the intervention of Egyptian
president Hosni Mubarak and King Abdullah of Jordan. Abbas conditioned his
participation, however, on Israel’s willingness to keep the settlement freeze in
place—the same freeze he’d spent the previous nine months decrying as useless.
With no time to lose, we arranged to have Netanyahu, Abbas, Mubarak, and
Abdullah join me at meetings and an intimate White House dinner on September
1 to launch the talks. The day was largely ceremonial—the hard work of
hammering out a deal would shift to Hillary, Mitchell, and the negotiating teams.
Still, we dressed up the whole affair with photo ops and press availabilities and as
much fanfare as we could muster, and the atmosphere among the four leaders was
warm and collegial throughout. I still have a photograph of the five of us looking

at President Mubarak’s watch to check that the sun had officially set, since it was
the Muslim month of Ramadan, and we had to confirm that the religiously
prescribed fast had been lifted before seating everyone for dinner.
In the soft light of the Old Family Dining Room, each of us took turns
describing our visions for the future. We talked of predecessors like Begin and
Sadat, Rabin and Jordan’s King Hussein, who’d had the courage and wisdom to
bridge old divides. We spoke of the costs of endless conflict, the fathers who
never came home, the mothers who had buried their children.
To an outsider, it would have seemed a hopeful moment, the start of
something new.
And yet later that night, when the dinner was over and the leaders had gone
back to their hotels and I sat in the Treaty Room going over my briefs for the
next day, I couldn’t help feeling a vague sense of disquiet. The speeches, the small
talk, the easy familiarity—it all felt too comfortable, almost ritualized, a
performance that each of the four leaders had probably participated in dozens of
times before, designed to placate the latest U.S. president who thought things
could change. I imagined them shaking hands afterward, like actors taking off
their costumes and makeup backstage, before returning to the world that they
knew—a world in which Netanyahu could blame the absence of peace on
Abbas’s weakness while doing everything he could to keep him weak, and Abbas
could publicly accuse Israel of war crimes while quietly negotiating business
contracts with the Israelis, and Arab leaders could bemoan the injustices endured
by Palestinians under occupation while their own internal security forces
ruthlessly ferreted out dissenters and malcontents who might threaten their grip
on power. And I thought of all the children, whether in Gaza or in Israeli
settlements or on the street corners of Cairo and Amman, who would continue
to grow up knowing mainly violence, coercion, fear, and the nursing of hatred
because, deep down, none of the leaders I’d met with believed anything else was
possible.
A world without illusions—that’s what they’d call it.
The Israelis and Palestinians would end up meeting only twice in direct peace
talks—once in Washington, the day after our White House dinner, and then
again twelve days later for a two-part conversation, with Mubarak hosting
negotiators in the Egyptian resort town of Sharm el Sheikh before the group
moved to Netanyahu’s Jerusalem residence. Hillary and Mitchell reported that the
discussions were substantive, with the United States dangling incentives to both

sides, including plumped-up aid packages, and even considering a possible early
release of Jonathan Pollard, an American convicted of spying for Israel who’d
become a hero to many right-leaning Israelis.
But it was all to no avail. The Israelis refused to extend the settlement freeze.
The Palestinians withdrew from negotiations. By December 2010, Abbas was
threatening to go to the U.N., seeking recognition of a Palestinian state—and to
the International Criminal Court, seeking Israel’s prosecution for alleged war
crimes in Gaza. Netanyahu was threatening to make life harder for the Palestinian
Authority. George Mitchell tried to put things in perspective, reminding me that
during negotiations to end the Northern Ireland conflict, “We had seven
hundred bad days—and one good one.” Still, it felt as if in the near term, at least,
the window for any peace deal had closed.
In the months to come, I’d think back often to my dinner with Abbas and
Netanyahu, Mubarak and King Abdullah, the pantomime of it, their lack of
resolve. To insist that the old order in the Middle East would indefinitely hold, to
believe that the children of despair wouldn’t revolt, at some point, against those
who maintained it—that, it turned out, was the greatest illusion of all.
—
we had frequently discussed the long-term challenges
facing North Africa and the Middle East. As petrostates failed to diversify their
economies, we asked ourselves what would happen when their oil revenues dried
up. We bemoaned the restrictions placed on women and girls—hindering their
ability to go to school, work, or, in some cases, even drive a car. We noted the
stalled growth and its disproportionate impact on the younger generations in
Arabic-speaking nations: People under the age of thirty made up about 60
percent of the population and were suffering unemployment rates double that of
the rest of the world.
Most of all, we worried about the autocratic, repressive nature of nearly every
Arab government—not just the lack of true democracy but also the fact that those
who held power seemed entirely unaccountable to the people they ruled. Even as
conditions varied from country to country, most of these leaders maintained their
grip through an old formula: restricted political participation and expression,
pervasive intimidation and surveillance at the hands of police or internal security
services, dysfunctional judicial systems and insufficient due process protections,
rigged (or nonexistent) elections, an entrenched military, heavy press censorship,
INSIDE THE WHITE HOUSE,

and rampant corruption. Many of these regimes had been in place for decades,
held together by nationalist appeals, shared religious beliefs, tribal bonds, familial
ties, and webs of patronage. It was possible that the stifling of dissent combined
with plain inertia would be enough to keep them going for a while. But although
our intelligence agencies mainly focused on tracking the actions of terrorist
networks, and our diplomats were not always attuned to what was happening on
“the Arab street,” we could see indications of a growing discontent among
ordinary Arabs—which, given the lack of legitimate outlets to express such
frustration, could spell trouble. Or, as I told Denis after returning from my first
visit to the region as president, “Sometime, somewhere, things are going to
blow.”
What to do with that knowledge? There was the rub. For at least half a
century, U.S. policy in the Middle East had focused narrowly on maintaining
stability, preventing disruptions to our oil supplies, and keeping adversarial
powers (first the Soviets, then the Iranians) from expanding their influence. After
9/11, counterterrorism took center stage. In pursuing each of these goals, we’d
made autocrats our allies. They were predictable, after all, and committed to
keeping a lid on things. They hosted our military bases and cooperated with us
on counterterrorism efforts. And, of course, they did lots of business with U.S.
companies. Much of our national security apparatus in the region depended on
their cooperation and in many instances had become thoroughly entangled with
theirs. Every so often, a report would surface from the Pentagon or Langley,
recommending that U.S. policy pay more attention to human rights and
governance issues when dealing with our Middle East partners. But then the
Saudis would deliver a vital tip that kept an explosive device from being loaded
onto U.S.-bound cargo planes or our naval base in Bahrain would prove critical
in managing a flare-up with Iran in the Strait of Hormuz, and those reports
would be relegated to the bottom of a drawer. Across the U.S. government, the
possibility that some sort of populist uprising might bring down one of our allies
had historically been met with resignation: Sure, it was likely to happen, the same
way a bad hurricane will hit the Gulf Coast or the Big One will hit California;
but since we couldn’t say exactly when or where, and since we didn’t have the
means to stop it anyway, the best thing to do was prepare contingency plans and
get ready to manage the aftershocks.
I liked to think that my administration resisted such fatalism. Building upon
my Cairo speech, I had used interviews and public remarks to urge the
governments of the Middle East to heed the voices of citizens calling for reform.

In meetings with Arab leaders, my team often put human rights issues on the
agenda. The State Department worked diligently behind the scenes to protect
journalists, free political dissidents, and widen the space for civic engagement.
And yet only rarely did the United States scold allies like Egypt or Saudi
Arabia publicly for their human rights violations. Given our concerns over Iraq,
al-Qaeda, and Iran, not to mention Israel’s security needs, the stakes felt too high
to risk rupturing our relationships. Accepting this type of realism, I told myself,
was part of the job. Except that every so often, the story of a women’s rights
activist being arrested in Riyadh would reach my desk, or I’d read about a local
employee of an international human rights organization languishing in a Cairo
jail, and I’d feel haunted. I knew that my administration would never be able to
transform the Middle East into an oasis of democracy, but I believed we could
and should be doing a hell of a lot more to encourage progress toward it.
It was during one of those moods that I set aside time for lunch with
Samantha Power.
I’d met Samantha while I was in the Senate, after I read her Pulitzer Prize–
winning book, “A Problem from Hell”: America and the Age of Genocide—a moving,
tightly reasoned discussion of America’s lackluster response to genocide and the
need for stronger global leadership in preventing mass atrocities. She was teaching
at Harvard at the time, and when I reached out, she jumped at my suggestion that
we share ideas over dinner the next time she was in D.C. She turned out to be
younger than I’d expected, in her mid-thirties, tall and gangly, with red hair,
freckles, and big, thickly lashed, almost sorrowful eyes that crinkled at the corners
when she laughed. She was also intense. She and her Irish mother had
immigrated to the States when she was nine; she’d played basketball in high
school, graduated from Yale, and worked as a freelance journalist covering the
Bosnian war. Her experiences there—bearing witness to slaughter and ethnic
cleansing—had inspired her to get a law degree, hoping it would give her the
tools to cure some part of the world’s madness. That evening, after she’d run me
through an exhaustive list of U.S. foreign policy errors that she insisted needed
correcting, I suggested she might want to get out of the ivory tower and work
with me for a spell.
The conversation that started over dinner that night continued on and off for
the next several years. Samantha joined my Senate staff as a foreign policy fellow,
advising on issues like the genocide then taking place in Darfur. She worked on
my presidential campaign, where she met her future husband, my friend and

eventual regulatory czar Cass Sunstein, and became one of our top foreign policy
surrogates. (I did have to put her in the penalty box, removing her from the
campaign, when, during what she thought was an off-the-record moment with a
reporter, she called Hillary “a monster.”) Following the election, I hired her for a
senior position at the NSC, where she did excellent work, mainly out of the
limelight, including designing a broad global initiative to increase government
transparency and reduce corruption in countries around the world.
Samantha was one of my closest friends in the White House. Much like Ben,
she evoked my own youthful idealism, the part of me still untouched by
cynicism, cold calculation, or caution dressed up as wisdom. And I suspect it was
precisely because she knew that side of me, and understood which heartstrings to
pull, that at times she drove me nuts. I didn’t actually see her much from day to
day, and that was part of the problem; whenever Samantha got time on my
calendar, she felt obliged to remind me of every wrong I hadn’t yet righted. (“So,
what ideals have we betrayed lately?” I’d ask.) She was shattered, for example,
when on Armenian Remembrance Day I failed to explicitly acknowledge the
early-twentieth-century genocide of Armenians at the hands of the Turks (the
need to name genocide unequivocally was a central thesis of her book). I had
good reason for not making a statement at the time—the Turks were deeply
touchy about the issue, and I was in delicate negotiations with President Erdogan
on managing America’s withdrawal from Iraq—but still, she made me feel like a
heel. But as exasperating as Samantha’s insistence could be, every so often I
needed a dose of her passion and integrity, both as a temperature check on my
conscience and because she often had specific, creative suggestions for how to
deal with messy problems that no one in the administration was spending enough
time thinking about.
Our lunch in May 2010 was a case in point. Samantha showed up that day
ready to talk about the Middle East—in particular, the fact that the United States
hadn’t lodged an official protest of the Egyptian government’s recent two-year
extension of a state of “emergency law” that had been in place continuously since
Mubarak’s election in 1981. The extension codified his dictatorial power by
suspending the constitutional rights of Egyptians. “I understand there are strategic
considerations when it comes to Egypt,” Samantha said, “but does anybody stop
to ask whether it’s good strategy?”
I told her that, actually, I had. I wasn’t a big fan of Mubarak, but I’d
concluded that a one-off statement criticizing a law that had been in place for
almost thirty years wouldn’t be all that useful. “The U.S. government’s an ocean

liner,” I said. “Not a speedboat. If we want to change our approach to the
region, then we need a strategy that builds over time. We’d have to get buy-in
from the Pentagon and the intel folks. We’d have to calibrate the strategy to give
allies in the region time to adjust.”
“Is anybody doing that?” Samantha said. “Coming up with that strategy, I
mean?”
I smiled, seeing the wheels turning in her head.
Not long afterward, Samantha and three NSC colleagues—Dennis Ross,
Gayle Smith, and Jeremy Weinstein—presented me with the blueprint for a
Presidential Study Directive stating that U.S. interests in stability across the
Middle East and North Africa were adversely affected by the United States’
uncritical support of authoritarian regimes. In August I used that directive to
instruct the State Department, Pentagon, CIA, and other government agencies to
examine ways the United States could encourage meaningful political and
economic reforms in the region to nudge those nations closer to the principles of
open government, so that they might avoid the destabilizing uprisings, violence,
chaos, and unpredictable outcomes that so often accompanied sudden change.
The NSC team set about conducting biweekly meetings with Middle East experts
from across government to develop specific ideas for reorienting U.S. policy.
Many of the veteran diplomats and experts they talked to were predictably
skeptical of the need for any change to U.S. policy, arguing that as unsavory as
some of our Arab allies might be, the status quo served America’s core interests—
something that wasn’t guaranteed if more populist governments took their place.
Over time, though, the team was able to arrive at a coherent set of principles to
guide a shift in strategy. Under the emerging plan, U.S. officials across agencies
would be expected to deliver a consistent and coordinated message on the need
for reform; they would develop specific recommendations for liberalizing political
and civic life in various countries and offer a range of new incentives to
encourage their adoption. By mid-December, the documents laying out the
strategy were just about ready for my approval, and although I realized that it
wouldn’t change the Middle East overnight, I was heartened by the fact that we
were starting to steer America’s foreign policy machinery in the right direction.
If only our timing had been a bit better.
—

in the North African nation of Tunisia, an impoverished fruit
vendor set himself on fire outside a local government building. It was an act of
protest, born of desperation: one citizen’s furious response to a government he
knew to be corrupt and indifferent to his needs. By all accounts, the man,
twenty-six-year-old Mohamed Bouazizi, was not an activist, nor was he
especially concerned with politics. He belonged to a generation of Tunisians
raised in a stagnant economy and under the thumb of a repressive dictator named
Zine el-Abidine Ben Ali. And after being repeatedly harassed by municipal
inspectors and denied a hearing in front of a judge, he was simply fed up.
According to a bystander, at the moment of his self-immolation, Bouazizi
shouted—to nobody in particular and to everyone at once—“How do you
expect me to make a living?”
The fruit vendor’s anguish set off weeks of nationwide demonstrations against
the Tunisian government, and on January 14, 2011, Ben Ali and his family fled to
Saudi Arabia. Meanwhile, similar protests, made up mostly of young people, were
beginning to happen in Algeria, Yemen, Jordan, and Oman, the first flickers of
what became known as the Arab Spring.
As I prepared to give my State of the Union address on January 25, my team
debated the extent to which I should comment on the events happening almost at
warp speed in the Middle East and North Africa. With public protest having
effectively driven a sitting autocrat from power in Tunisia, people across the
region seemed galvanized and hopeful about the possibilities for wider change.
Still, the complexities were daunting and good outcomes far from guaranteed. In
the end, we added a single, straightforward line to my speech:
“Tonight, let us be clear: The United States of America stands with the
people of Tunisia, and supports the democratic aspirations of all people.”
From the U.S. perspective, the most significant developments were in Egypt,
where a coalition of Egyptian youth organizations, activists, left-wing opposition
parties, and prominent writers and artists had issued a nationwide call for mass
protests against President Mubarak’s regime. On the same day as my State of the
Union, close to fifty thousand Egyptians poured into Tahrir Square, in
downtown Cairo, demanding an end to emergency law, police brutality, and
restrictions on political freedom. Thousands of others participated in similar
protests across the country. The police were attempting to disperse the crowds
using batons, water cannons, rubber bullets, and tear gas, and Mubarak’s
government would not only issue an official ban on protesting but also block
THE SAME MONTH,

Facebook, YouTube, and Twitter in an effort to hamper the demonstrators’
ability to organize or connect with the outside world. For days and nights to
come, Tahrir Square would resemble a permanent encampment, with legions of
Egyptians standing in defiance of their president, calling for “bread, freedom, and
dignity.”
This was precisely the scenario my Presidential Study Directive had sought to
avoid: the U.S. government suddenly caught between a repressive but reliable ally
and a population insistent on change, voicing the democratic aspirations we
claimed to stand for. Alarmingly, Mubarak himself seemed oblivious about the
uprising taking place around him. I’d spoken to him by phone just a week earlier,
and he’d been both helpful and responsive as we’d discussed ways to coax the
Israelis and Palestinians back to the negotiating table, as well as his government’s
call for unity in response to the bombing of a Coptic Christian church in
Alexandria, carried out by Muslim extremists. But when I’d brought up the
possibility that the protests that had begun in Tunisia might spread to his own
country, Mubarak had dismissed it, explaining that “Egypt is not Tunisia.” He’d
assured me that any protest against his government would quickly die down.
Listening to his voice, I’d imagined him sitting in one of the cavernous, ornately
decorated rooms inside the presidential palace where we’d first met—the curtains
drawn, him looking imperious in a high-backed chair as a few aides took notes or
just watched, coiled in readiness to attend to his needs. Insulated as he was, he
would see what he wanted to see, I thought, and hear what he wanted to hear—
and none of it boded well.
Meanwhile, the news footage from Tahrir Square brought back different
memories. The crowds in those first few days appeared to be disproportionately
young and secular—not unlike the students and activists who’d been in the
audience of my Cairo speech. In interviews, they came off as thoughtful and
informed, insisting on their commitment to nonviolence and their desire for
democratic pluralism, rule of law, and a modern, innovative economy that could
deliver jobs and a better standard of living. In their idealism and courage in
challenging an oppressive social order, they appeared no different from the young
people who had once helped tear down the Berlin Wall or stood in front of tanks
in Tiananmen Square. They weren’t so different, either, from the young people
who’d helped elect me president.
“If I were an Egyptian in my twenties,” I told Ben, “I’d probably be out
there with them.”

Of course, I wasn’t an Egyptian in my twenties. I was president of the United
States. And as compelling as these young people were, I had to remind myself
that they—along with the university professors, human rights activists, secular
opposition party members, and trade unionists also on the front lines of the
protests—represented only a fraction of the Egyptian population. If Mubarak
stepped down, creating a sudden power vacuum, they weren’t the ones most
likely to fill it. One of the tragedies of Mubarak’s dictatorial reign was that it had
stunted the development of the institutions and traditions that might help Egypt
effectively manage a transition to democracy: strong political parties, an
independent judiciary and media, impartial election monitors, broad-based civic
associations, an effective civil service, and respect for minority rights. Outside the
military, which was deeply entrenched throughout Egyptian society and
reportedly had a significant stake in large swaths of the economy, the most
powerful and cohesive force in the country was the Muslim Brotherhood, the
Sunni-based Islamist organization whose central objective was to see Egypt—and
the entire Arab world—governed by sharia law. Thanks to its grassroots
organizing and charitable work on behalf of the poor (and despite the fact that
Mubarak had officially banned it), the Brotherhood boasted a substantial
membership. It also embraced political participation rather than violence as a way
of advancing its goals, and in any fair and free election, the candidates it backed
would be odds-on favorites to win. Still, many governments in the region viewed
the Brotherhood as a subversive, dangerous threat, and the organization’s
fundamentalist philosophy made it both unreliable as a custodian for democratic
pluralism and potentially problematic for U.S.-Egyptian relations.
In Tahrir Square, the demonstrations continued to swell, as did violent clashes
between protesters and police. Apparently awakened from his slumber, Mubarak
went on Egyptian television on January 28 to announce that he was replacing his
cabinet, but he offered no signs that he intended to respond to the demands for
broader reform. Convinced that the problem wasn’t going away, I consulted my
national security team to try to come up with an effective response. The group
was divided, almost entirely along generational lines. The older and more senior
members of my team—Joe, Hillary, Gates, and Panetta—counseled caution, all of
them having known and worked with Mubarak for years. They emphasized the
role his government had long played in keeping peace with Israel, fighting
terrorism, and partnering with the United States on a host of other regional
issues. While they acknowledged the need to press the Egyptian leader on reform,
they warned that there was no way of knowing who or what might replace him.

Meanwhile, Samantha, Ben, Denis, Susan Rice, and Joe’s national security
advisor, Tony Blinken, were convinced that Mubarak had fully and irretrievably
lost his legitimacy with the Egyptian people. Rather than keep our wagon
hitched to a corrupt authoritarian order on the verge of collapse (and appear to be
sanctioning the escalating use of force against protesters), they considered it both
strategically prudent and morally right for the U.S. government to align itself
with the forces of change.
I shared both the hopes of my younger advisors and the fears of my older
ones. Our best bet for a positive outcome, I decided, was to see if we could
persuade Mubarak to embrace a series of substantive reforms, including ending
the emergency law, restoring political and press freedoms, and setting a date for
free and fair national elections. Such an “orderly transition,” as Hillary described
it, would give opposition political parties and potential candidates time to build
followings and develop serious plans to govern. It would also allow Mubarak to
retire as an elder statesman, which might help mitigate perceptions in the region
that we were willing to dump longtime allies at the slightest hint of trouble.
It went without saying that trying to convince an aging, embattled despot to
ride off into the sunset, even if it was in his own interests, would be a delicate
operation. After the Situation Room discussion, I phoned Mubarak again, raising
the idea of him putting forward a bolder set of reforms. He instantly grew
combative, characterizing the protesters as members of the Muslim Brotherhood
and insisting once again that the situation would soon return to normal. He did
agree, though, to my request to send an envoy—Frank Wisner, who’d been a
U.S. ambassador to Egypt in the late 1980s—to Cairo for more extensive private
consultations.
Using Wisner to make a direct, face-to-face appeal to the Egyptian president
had been Hillary’s idea, and I thought it made sense: Wisner was literally a scion
of the American foreign policy establishment, his father having been an iconic
leader during the foundational years of the CIA, and he was someone Mubarak
knew well and trusted. At the same time, I understood that Wisner’s history with
Mubarak and his old-school approach to U.S. diplomacy might make him
conservative in evaluating the prospects for change. Before he left, I called him
with clear instructions to “be bold”: I wanted him to push Mubarak to announce
that he would step down after new elections were held—a gesture I hoped would
be dramatic and specific enough to give protesters confidence that change really
was coming.

While we awaited the outcome of Wisner’s mission, the media became more
focused on my administration’s reaction to the crisis—and, more specifically,
whose side we were on. So far, we’d issued little more than generic public
statements in an effort to buy ourselves time. But Washington reporters—many
of whom clearly found the cause of the young protesters compelling—began
pressing Gibbs on why we weren’t unambiguously standing with the forces of
democracy. Foreign leaders in the region, meanwhile, wanted to know why we
weren’t supporting Mubarak more forcefully. Bibi Netanyahu insisted that
maintaining order and stability in Egypt mattered above all else, telling me that
otherwise “you will see Iran in there in two seconds.” King Abdullah of Saudi
Arabia was even more alarmed; the spread of protests in the region was an
existential threat to a family monarchy that had long squelched any form of
internal dissent. He also believed that the Egyptian protesters weren’t in fact
speaking for themselves. He ticked off the “four factions” he believed were
behind the protests: the Muslim Brotherhood, Hezbollah, al-Qaeda, and Hamas.
Neither of these leaders’ analyses stood up to scrutiny. The Sunnis, who made
up the vast majority of Egyptians (and all of the Muslim Brotherhood), were
hardly susceptible to the influence of Shiite Iran and Hezbollah, and there was
absolutely no evidence that al-Qaeda or Hamas was behind the demonstrations in
any way. Still, even younger, more reform-minded leaders in the region,
including King Abdullah of Jordan, feared the possibility of protests engulfing
their countries, and while they used more sophisticated language, they clearly
expected the United States to choose, as Bibi had put it, “stability” over “chaos.”
By January 31, Egyptian army tanks were stationed throughout Cairo, the
government had shut down internet service across the city, and protesters were
planning a nationwide general strike for the next day. Wisner’s readout on his
meeting with Mubarak arrived: The Egyptian president would publicly commit
not to run for another term but had stopped short of suspending emergency law
or agreeing to support a peaceful transfer of power. The report only widened the
split within my national security team: The more senior members saw Mubarak’s
concession as enough justification to stick with him, while the younger staffers
considered the move—much like Mubarak’s sudden decision to appoint his chief
of intelligence, Omar Suleiman, as vice president—as no more than a stalling
tactic that would fail to placate the demonstrators. Tom Donilon and Denis let
me know that staff debates had turned acrimonious and that reporters were
picking up on the discrepancy between Joe’s and Hillary’s cautiously anodyne
statements and the more strident criticism of Mubarak coming from Gibbs and

others in the administration.
Partly to make sure that everyone was singing from the same hymnal while
we determined our next steps, I paid an unscheduled visit to a meeting of the
NSC Principals Committee in the Situation Room late in the afternoon on
February 1. The discussion had barely begun when an aide informed us that
Mubarak was addressing the Egyptian people on a nationwide broadcast. We
turned on the room’s TV monitor so we could watch it in real time. Dressed in a
dark suit and reading from a prepared text, Mubarak appeared to be following
through on his pledge to Wisner, saying that he had never intended to nominate
himself for another term as president and announcing that he would call on the
Egyptian parliament—a parliament he entirely controlled—to discuss speeding up
a timeline for new elections. But the terms of an actual transfer of power were so
vague that any Egyptian watching would likely conclude that whatever promises
Mubarak was now making could and would be reversed the moment the protests
died down. In fact, the Egyptian president devoted the bulk of the speech to
accusing provocateurs and unnamed political forces of hijacking the protests to
undermine the nation’s security and stability. He insisted that he would continue
to fulfill his responsibility, as someone who had “never, ever been seeking
power,” to protect Egypt from agents of chaos and violence. When he finished
the address, someone turned off the monitor, and I leaned back in my chair,
stretching my arms behind my head.
“That,” I said, “is not going to cut it.”
I wanted to take one last shot at convincing Mubarak to initiate a real
transition. Returning to the Oval Office, I placed a call to him, and I put the
phone on speaker mode so that my assembled advisors could hear. I began by
complimenting him on his decision not to run again. I could only imagine how
difficult it might be for Mubarak, someone who’d first assumed power when I
was in college and had outlasted four of my predecessors, to hear what I was
about to say.
“Now that you’ve made this historic decision for a transition of power,” I
said, “I want to discuss with you how it will work. I say this with the utmost
respect…I want to share my honest assessment about what I think will
accomplish your goals.” I then cut to the bottom line: If he stayed in office and
dragged out the transition process, I believed, the protests would continue and
possibly spin out of control. If he wanted to ensure the election of a responsible
government that wasn’t dominated by the Muslim Brotherhood, then now was

the time for him to step down and use his stature behind the scenes to help usher
in a new Egyptian government.
Although Mubarak and I normally spoke to each other in English, he chose
this time to address me in Arabic. I didn’t need the translator to catch the
agitation in his voice. “You don’t understand the culture of the Egyptian
people,” he declared, his voice rising. “President Obama, if I go into the
transition this way, it will be the most dangerous thing for Egypt.”
I acknowledged that I didn’t know Egyptian culture the way he did, and that
he’d been in politics far longer than I had. “But there are moments in history
where just because things have been the same way in the past doesn’t mean they
will be the same way in the future. You’ve served your country well for over
thirty years. I want to make sure you seize this historic moment in a way that
leaves a great legacy for you.”
We went back and forth like this for several more minutes, with Mubarak
insisting on the need for him to remain where he was and repeating that the
protests would soon be over. “I know my people,” he said toward the end of the
call. “They are emotional people. I will talk to you after a while, Mr. President,
and I will tell you that I was right.”
I hung up the phone. For a moment, the room was silent, everyone’s eyes
glued on me. I had given Mubarak my best advice. I had offered him a plan for a
graceful exit. Any leader who replaced him, I knew, might end up being a worse
partner for the United States—and potentially worse for the Egyptian people.
And the truth was, I could have lived with any genuine transition plan he might
have presented, even if it left much of the regime’s existing network intact. I was
enough of a realist to assume that had it not been for the stubborn persistence of
those young people in Tahrir Square, I’d have worked with Mubarak for the rest
of my presidency, despite what he stood for—just as I would continue to work
with the rest of the “corrupt, rotting authoritarian order,” as Ben liked to call it,
that controlled life in the Middle East and North Africa.
Except those kids were in Tahrir Square. Because of their brash insistence on
a better life, others had joined them—mothers and laborers and shoemakers and
taxi drivers. Those hundreds of thousands of people had, for a brief moment at
least, lost their fear, and they wouldn’t stop demonstrating unless Mubarak
restored that fear the only way he knew how: through beatings and gunfire,
detentions and torture. Earlier in my presidency, I hadn’t managed to influence
the Iranian regime’s vicious crackdown on Green Movement protesters. I might

not be able to stop a China or Russia from crushing its own dissidents. But the
Mubarak regime had received billions of U.S. taxpayer dollars; we supplied them
with weapons, shared information, and helped train their military officers; and for
me to allow the recipient of that aid, someone we called an ally, to perpetrate
wanton violence on peaceful demonstrators, with all the world watching—that
was a line I was unwilling to cross. It would do too much damage, I thought, to
the idea of America. It would do too much damage to me.
“Let’s prepare a statement,” I said to my team. “We’re calling on Mubarak to
step down now.”
—
of many in the Arab world (and more than a few
American reporters), the United States is not a grand puppet master whimsically
pulling the strings of the countries with which it does business. Even
governments that rely on our military and economic assistance think first and
foremost of their own survival, and the Mubarak regime was no exception. After
I publicly announced my conviction that it was time for Egypt to start a quick
transition to a new government, Mubarak remained defiant, testing how far he
could go in intimidating the protesters. The next day, while the Egyptian army
stood idly by, gangs of pro-Mubarak supporters descended on Tahrir Square—
some on camels and horses, brandishing whips and clubs, others hurling
firebombs and rocks from surrounding rooftops—and began assaulting the
demonstrators. Three protesters were killed and six hundred were injured; over
the course of several days, authorities detained more than fifty journalists and
human rights activists. The violence continued into the next day, along with
large-scale counterdemonstrations organized by the government. Pro-Mubarak
forces even began roughing up foreign reporters, accusing them of actively
inciting the opposition.
My biggest challenge during those tense several days was keeping everybody
in my administration on the same page. The message coming out of the White
House was clear. When Gibbs was asked what I meant when I said that the
transition in Egypt had to begin “now,” he said simply, “Now means yesterday.”
We were also successful in getting our European allies to issue a joint statement
that mirrored my own. Around the same time, though, Hillary was interviewed
at a security conference in Munich and seemed to go out of her way to warn of
the dangers in any rapid transition in Egypt. At the same conference, Frank
CONTRARY TO THE BELIEFS

Wisner—who no longer had an official role in the administration and claimed to
be speaking only as a private citizen—voiced the opinion that Mubarak should
stay in power during any transition period. Hearing this, I told Katie to track
down my secretary of state. When I got her on the phone, I didn’t mask my
displeasure.
“I understand full well the potential problems with any move away from
Mubarak,” I said, “but I’ve made a decision, and I can’t have a bunch of mixed
messages out there right now.” Before Hillary could respond, I added, “And tell
Wisner I don’t give a damn about what capacity he’s speaking in—he needs to be
quiet.”
Despite the occasional frustrations I experienced in dealing with a national
security establishment that remained uncomfortable with the prospect of an Egypt
without Mubarak, that same establishment—particularly the Pentagon and the
intelligence community—probably had more impact on the final outcome in
Egypt than any high-minded statements coming from the White House. Once or
twice a day, we had Gates, Mullen, Panetta, Brennan, and others quietly reach
out to high-ranking officers in the Egyptian military and intelligence services,
making clear that a military-sanctioned crackdown on the protesters would have
severe consequences on any future U.S.-Egyptian relationship. The implication of
this military-to-military outreach was plain: U.S.-Egyptian cooperation, and the
aid that came with it, wasn’t dependent on Mubarak’s staying in power, so
Egypt’s generals and intelligence chiefs might want to carefully consider which
actions best preserved their institutional interests.
Our messaging appeared successful, for by the evening of February 3,
Egyptian army troops had positioned themselves to keep the pro-Mubarak forces
separate from the protesters. The arrests of Egyptian journalists and human rights
activists began to slow. Encouraged by the change in the army’s posture, more
demonstrators flowed peacefully into the square. Mubarak would hang on for
another week, vowing not to bow to “foreign pressure.” But on February 11, just
two and a half weeks after the first major protest in Tahrir Square, a wearylooking Vice President Suleiman appeared on Egyptian television to announce
that Mubarak had left office and a caretaker government led by the Supreme
Council of the Armed Forces would initiate the process for new elections.
In the White House, we watched CNN broadcast footage of the crowd in
Tahrir Square erupting in celebration. Many staffers were jubilant. Samantha sent
me a message saying how proud she was to be a part of the administration.

Walking down the colonnade on our way to my press statement to reporters, Ben
couldn’t wipe the smile off his face. “It’s pretty amazing,” he said, “being a part
of history like that.” Katie printed out a wire photo and left it on my desk; it
showed a group of young protesters in the Egyptian square hoisting a sign that
read, YES WE CAN.
I was relieved—and cautiously hopeful. Still, I did find myself occasionally
thinking about Mubarak, who just a few months earlier had been my guest in the
Old Family Dining Room. Rather than flee the country, the elderly leader had
apparently taken up residence in his private compound in Sharm el Sheikh. I
pictured him there, sitting in lavish surroundings, a dim light casting shadows
across his face, alone with his thoughts.
I knew that for all the celebration and optimism in the air, the transition in
Egypt was only the beginning of a struggle for the soul of the Arab world—a
struggle whose outcome remained far from certain. I remembered the
conversation I’d had with Mohammed bin Zayed, the crown prince of Abu
Dhabi and the de facto ruler of the United Arab Emirates, immediately after I
called for Mubarak to step down. Young, sophisticated, close to the Saudis, and
perhaps the savviest leader in the Gulf, MBZ, as we called him, hadn’t minced
words in describing how the news was being received in the region.
MBZ told me that U.S. statements on Egypt were being watched closely in
the Gulf, with increasing alarm. What would happen if protesters in Bahrain
called for King Hamad to step down? Would the United States put out that same
kind of statement that we had on Egypt?
I had told him I hoped to work with him and others to avoid having to
choose between the Muslim Brotherhood and potentially violent clashes between
governments and their people.
“The public message does not affect Mubarak, you see, but it affects the
region,” MBZ told me. He suggested that if Egypt collapsed and the Muslim
Brotherhood took over, there would be eight other Arab leaders who would fall,
which is why he was critical of my statement. “It shows,” he said, “that the
United States is not a partner we can rely on in the long term.”
His voice was calm and cold. It was less a plea for help, I realized, than a
warning. Whatever happened to Mubarak, the old order had no intention of
conceding power without a fight.
—

demonstrations in other countries only grew
in scope and intensity following Mubarak’s resignation, as more and more people
came to believe that change was possible. A handful of regimes successfully
managed to make at least symbolic reform in response to protesters’ demands
while avoiding significant bloodshed or upheaval: Algeria lifted its nineteen-yearold emergency law, the king of Morocco engineered constitutional reforms that
modestly increased the power of the country’s elected parliament, and Jordan’s
monarch would soon do the same. But for many Arab rulers, the main lesson out
of Egypt was the need to systematically, ruthlessly crush the protests—no matter
how much violence that might require and no matter how much international
criticism such crackdowns might generate.
Two of the countries that saw the worst violence were Syria and Bahrain,
where sectarian divisions ran high and privileged minorities governed large and
resentful majorities. In Syria, the March 2011 arrest and torture of fifteen
schoolboys who had sprayed anti-government graffiti on city walls set off major
protests against the Alawite Shiite–dominated regime of President Bashar al-Assad
in many of the country’s predominantly Sunni communities. After tear gas, water
cannons, beatings, and mass arrests failed to quell the demonstrations, Assad’s
security forces went on to launch full-scale military operations across several
cities, complete with live fire, tanks, and house-to-house searches. Meanwhile,
just as MBZ had predicted, in the small island nation of Bahrain, huge, mostly
Shiite demonstrations against the government of King Hamad bin Isa bin Salman
al-Khalifa were taking place in the capital city of Manama, and the Bahraini
government responded with force, killing scores of protesters and injuring
hundreds more. As outrage over police brutality fueled even bigger
demonstrations, the beleaguered Hamad went further, taking the unprecedented
step of inviting armed divisions of the Saudi and Emirati armies to help suppress
his own citizens.
My team and I spent hours wrestling with how the United States could
influence events inside Syria and Bahrain. Our options were painfully limited.
Syria was a longtime adversary of the United States, historically allied with Russia
and Iran, as well as a supporter of Hezbollah. Without the economic, military, or
diplomatic leverage we’d had in Egypt, the official condemnations of the Assad
regime we made (and our later imposition of a U.S. embargo) had no real effect,
and Assad could count on Russia to veto any efforts we might make to impose
international sanctions through the U.N. Security Council. With Bahrain, we
had the opposite problem: The country was a longtime U.S. ally and hosted the
IF ANYTHING, ANTI-GOVERNMENT

U.S. Navy’s Fifth Fleet. That relationship allowed us to privately pressure Hamad
and his ministers to partially answer the protesters’ demands and to rein in the
police violence. Still, Bahrain’s ruling establishment viewed the protesters as
Iranian-influenced enemies who had to be contained. In concert with the Saudis
and the Emiratis, the Bahraini regime was going to force us to make a choice, and
all were aware that when push came to shove, we couldn’t afford to risk our
strategic position in the Middle East by severing relations with three Gulf
countries.
In 2011, no one questioned our limited influence in Syria—that would come
later. But despite multiple statements from my administration condemning the
violence in Bahrain and efforts to broker a dialogue between the government and
more moderate Shiite opposition leaders, our failure to break with Hamad—
especially in the wake of our posture toward Mubarak—was roundly criticized. I
had no elegant way to explain the apparent inconsistency, other than to
acknowledge that the world was messy; that in the conduct of foreign policy, I
had to constantly balance competing interests, interests shaped by the choices of
previous administrations and the contingencies of the moment; and that just
because I couldn’t in every instance elevate our human rights agenda over other
considerations didn’t mean that I shouldn’t try to do what I could, when I could,
to advance what I considered to be America’s highest values. But what if a
government starts massacring not hundreds of its citizens but thousands and the
United States has the power to stop it? Then what?
—
Muammar Gaddafi had ruled Libya with a viciousness
that, even by the standards of his fellow dictators, spilled into madness. Prone to
flamboyant gestures, incoherent rants, and odd behavior (in advance of the 2009
UNGA meetings in New York, he’d tried to get approval to erect a massive
Bedouin tent in the middle of Central Park for himself and his entourage), he had
nevertheless been ruthlessly efficient in stamping out dissent in his country, using
a combination of secret police, security forces, and state-sponsored militias to jail,
torture, and murder anyone who dared to oppose him. Throughout the 1980s,
his government had also been one of the leading state sponsors of terrorism
around the world, facilitating such horrific attacks as the 1988 bombing of Pan
Am Flight 103, which killed citizens of twenty-one countries, including 189
Americans. Gaddafi had more recently tried to wrap himself in the cloak of
FOR FORTY-TWO YEARS,

respectability by ending his support for international terrorism and dismantling his
nascent nuclear program (which led Western countries, including the United
States, to resume diplomatic relations). But inside Libya itself, nothing had
changed.
Less than a week after Mubarak left power in Egypt, Gaddafi’s security forces
fired into a large group of civilians who’d gathered to protest the arrest of a
human rights lawyer. Within days, the protests had spread, and more than a
hundred had been killed. A week later, much of the country was in open
rebellion, with anti-Gaddafi forces taking control of Benghazi, Libya’s secondlargest city. Libyan diplomats and former loyalists, including the country’s
ambassador to the U.N., began to defect, appealing to the international
community to come to the aid of the Libyan people. Accusing the protesters of
being fronts for al-Qaeda, Gaddafi unleashed a campaign of terror, declaring,
“Everything will burn.” By the beginning of March, the death count had risen to
a thousand.
Appalled by the escalating carnage, we quickly did everything we could short
of using military force to stop Gaddafi. I called for him to relinquish power,
arguing that he had lost the legitimacy to govern. We imposed economic
sanctions, froze billions of dollars in assets that belonged to him and his family,
and, at the U.N. Security Council, passed an arms embargo and referred the case
of Libya to the International Criminal Court, where Gaddafi and others could be
tried for committing crimes against humanity. But the Libyan leader was
undeterred. Analysts forecasted that once Gaddafi’s forces reached Benghazi, tens
of thousands of lives could be lost.
It was around this time that a chorus grew, first among human rights
organizations and a handful of columnists, and then members of Congress and
much of the media, demanding that the United States take military action to stop
Gaddafi. In many ways, I considered this a sign of moral progress. For most of
America’s history, the thought of using our combat forces to stop a government
from killing its own people would have been a nonstarter—because such statesponsored violence happened all the time; because U.S. policy makers didn’t
consider the death of innocent Cambodians, Argentinians, or Ugandans relevant
to our interests; and because many of the perpetrators were our allies in the fight
against communism. (This included the reportedly CIA-backed military coup that
toppled a Communist government in Indonesia in 1965, two years before my
mother and I arrived there, with a bloody aftermath that resulted in between five
hundred thousand and a million deaths.) In the 1990s, though, more timely

international reporting of such crimes, combined with America’s ascendance as
the world’s lone superpower after the Cold War, had led to a reexamination of
U.S. inaction and prompted the successful American-led NATO intervention in
the Bosnian conflict. Indeed, the obligation of the United States to prioritize the
prevention of atrocities in its foreign policy was what Samantha’s book had been
all about—one of the reasons I’d brought her into the White House.
And yet, as much as I shared the impulse to save innocent people from
tyrants, I was profoundly wary of ordering any kind of military action against
Libya, for the same reason that I’d declined Samantha’s suggestion that my Nobel
Prize address include an explicit argument for a global “responsibility to protect”
civilians against their own governments. Where would the obligation to
intervene end? And what were the parameters? How many people would need to
have been killed, and how many more would have to be at risk, to trigger a U.S.
military response? Why Libya and not the Congo, for example, where a series of
civil conflicts had resulted in millions of civilian deaths? Would we intervene only
when there was no chance of U.S. casualties? Bill Clinton had thought the risks
were low back in 1993, when he sent special operations forces into Somalia to
capture members of a warlord’s organization in support of U.S. peacekeeping
efforts there. In the incident known as “Black Hawk Down,” eighteen service
members were killed and seventy-three more wounded.
The truth is that war is never tidy and always results in unintended
consequences, even when launched against seemingly powerless countries on
behalf of a righteous cause. When it came to Libya, advocates for U.S.
intervention had tried to obfuscate that reality by latching on to the idea of
imposing a no-fly zone to ground Gaddafi’s military planes and prevent bombing,
which they presented as an antiseptic, risk-free way of saving the Libyan people.
(Typical question from a White House reporter at the time: “How many more
people have to die before we take this one step?”) What they were missing was
the fact that establishing a no-fly zone in Libyan airspace would require us to first
fire missiles into Tripoli to destroy Libya’s air defenses—a clear act of war against
a country that posed no threat to us. Not only that, but it wasn’t even clear that a
no-fly zone would have any effect, since Gaddafi was using ground forces and not
air bombardment to attack opposition strongholds.
America was also still knee-deep in the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan. I had
just ordered U.S. forces in the Pacific to help the Japanese handle the worst
nuclear accident since Chernobyl, brought on by a tsunami that had leveled the
city of Fukushima; we were seriously concerned about the potential of

radioactive fallout reaching the West Coast. Add in the fact that I was still dealing
with a U.S. economy that was barely above water and a Republican Congress
that had pledged to undo everything my administration had accomplished in our
first two years, and it’s fair to say that I found the idea of waging a new war in a
distant country with no strategic importance to the United States to be less than
prudent. I wasn’t the only one. Bill Daley, who’d become my chief of staff in
January, seemed bewildered that anyone was even entertaining the notion.
“Maybe I’m missing something, Mr. President,” he said during one of our
evening wrap-ups, “but I don’t think we got clobbered in the midterms because
voters don’t think you’re doing enough in the Middle East. Ask ten people on
the street and nine of them don’t even know where the heck Libya is.”
And yet, as reports of hospitals filling up with gruesome injuries and young
people being unceremoniously executed on the streets continued to trickle out of
Libya, support around the world for intervention gathered steam. To the surprise
of many, the Arab League voted in support of an international intervention
against Gaddafi—a sign not only of how extreme the levels of violence in Libya
had become but also of the extent to which the Libyan strongman’s erratic
behavior and meddling in the affairs of other countries had isolated him from his
fellow Arab leaders. (The vote may also have been a handy way for countries in
the region to deflect attention from their own human rights abuses, given that
nations like Syria and Bahrain remained members in good standing.) Meanwhile,
Nicolas Sarkozy, who’d been criticized mercilessly in France for supporting the
Ben Ali regime in Tunisia till the bitter end, suddenly decided to make saving the
Libyan people his personal cause. Together with David Cameron, he announced
his intention to immediately introduce a resolution in the U.N. Security Council
on behalf of France and the United Kingdom, authorizing an international
coalition to initiate a no-fly zone over Libya—a resolution on which we’d have
to take a position.
On March 15, I convened a meeting of my national security team to discuss
the pending Security Council resolution. We began with a briefing on Gaddafi’s
progress: Libyan troops with heavy armaments were poised to overtake a town on
the outskirts of Benghazi, which could allow them to cut off water, food, and
power to the city’s six hundred thousand residents. With his forces massed,
Gaddafi was pledging to go “house by house, home by home, alley by alley,
person by person, until the country is cleansed of dirt and scum.” I asked Mike
Mullen what difference a no-fly zone would make. Essentially none, he told me,
confirming that since Gaddafi was using ground forces almost exclusively, the

only way to stop an assault on Benghazi was to target those forces directly with
air strikes.
“In other words,” I said, “we are being asked to participate in a no-fly zone
that will make everyone look like they’re doing something but that won’t
actually save Benghazi.”
I then asked for people’s recommendations. Gates and Mullen were strongly
opposed to any U.S. military action, emphasizing the stress that missions in Iraq
and Afghanistan were already placing on our troops. They were also convinced—
correctly, I thought—that despite the rhetoric from Sarkozy and Cameron, the
U.S. military would end up having to carry most of the load for any operation in
Libya. Joe considered it foolish to get involved in yet another war abroad, while
Bill remained astonished that we were even having the debate.
As I worked my way around the room, though, the voices for intervention
weighed in. Hillary had been conferenced in from Paris, where she was attending
a G8 meeting, and said she’d been impressed by the Libyan opposition leader
she’d met there. Despite—or perhaps because of—her realpolitik on Egypt, she
now favored us joining an international mission. Speaking from our U.N. offices
in New York, Susan Rice said the situation reminded her of the international
community’s failure to intervene in the 1994 genocide in Rwanda. She’d been a
member of Bill Clinton’s National Security Council at the time and remained
haunted by the lack of action. If a relatively modest action could save lives, she
argued, we should take it—though she suggested that rather than sign on to the
proposal for a no-fly zone, we should present our own resolution seeking a
broader mandate to take whatever actions were necessary to protect Libyan
civilians from Gaddafi’s forces.
A few of the younger staffers expressed concern that a military action against
Libya might have the unintended consequence of convincing countries like Iran
that they needed nuclear weapons as a hedge against a future U.S. attack. But as
had been true with Egypt, Ben and Tony Blinken felt we had a responsibility to
support those forces protesting for democratic change in the Middle East—
particularly if the Arab states and our closest allies were prepared to act with us.
And while Samantha remained uncharacteristically clinical when describing the
potential death toll in Benghazi should we decide not to act, I knew that she was
in daily, direct contact with Libyans pleading for help. I almost didn’t need to ask
what her position was.
I checked my watch, knowing I was soon due to host an annual dinner with

the U.S. military’s combatant commanders and their spouses in the Blue Room
of the residence. “All right,” I said. “I’m not ready to make a decision yet. But
based on what I’m hearing, here’s the one thing we’re not going to do—we’re
not going to participate in some half-assed no-fly zone that won’t achieve our
objective.”
I told the team we’d reconvene in a couple of hours, by which time I
expected to hear real options for what an effective intervention would look like,
including an analysis of the costs, human resources, and risks involved. “Either we
do this right,” I said, “or we stop pretending that we’re serious about saving
Benghazi just to make ourselves feel better.”
By the time I arrived in the Blue Room, Michelle and our guests had already
assembled. We took photos with each commander and spouse, making small talk
about our kids and trading jokes about our golf games. During dinner I sat next
to a young Marine and his wife; he had stepped on an IED while working as a
bomb technician in Afghanistan and lost both his legs. He was still getting
accustomed to his prosthetics, he told me, but he looked to be in good spirits and
was handsome in his uniform. I could see on his wife’s face the mixture of pride,
determination, and suppressed anguish that had become so familiar to me during
my visits with military families over the previous two years.
All the while, my brain was churning with calculations, thinking about the
decision I’d have to make as soon as Buddy and Von and the other butlers cleared
away the dessert plates. The arguments Mullen and Gates had made against
military action in Libya were compelling. I’d already sent thousands of young
men like the Marine sitting next to me into battle, and there was no guarantee,
whatever those on the sidelines might think, that a new war wouldn’t lead others
to suffer such injuries, or worse. I was irritated that Sarkozy and Cameron had
jammed me on the issue, in part to solve their domestic political problems, and I
felt scornful of the Arab League’s hypocrisy. I knew that Bill was right: that
outside of Washington, there wasn’t a lot of support for what America was being
asked to do, and that the minute anything about a U.S. military operation in
Libya went south, my political problems would only worsen.
I also knew that unless we took the lead, the European plan would likely go
nowhere. Gaddafi’s troops would lay siege to Benghazi. At best, a protracted
conflict would ensue, perhaps even a full-blown civil war. At worst, tens of
thousands or more would be starved, tortured, or shot in the head. And at the
moment, at least, I was perhaps the one person in the world who could keep that

from happening.
The dinner ended. I told Michelle I’d be home in an hour and made my way
back to the Situation Room, where the team had been reviewing options and sat
awaiting further instructions.
“I think I’ve got a plan that might work,” I said.