Running for presedency

I’d promised Americans a different kind of
foreign policy than the sort we’d been practicing since 9/11. Iraq and Afghanistan
offered stark lessons in how quickly a president’s options narrowed once a war
had begun. I was determined to shift a certain mindset that had gripped not just
the Bush administration but much of Washington—one that saw threats around
every corner, took a perverse pride in acting unilaterally, and considered military
action as an almost routine means of addressing foreign policy challenges. In our
interactions with other nations, we had become obdurate and shortsighted,
resistant to the hard, slow work of building coalitions and consensus. We’d closed
ourselves off from other points of view. I believed that America’s security
depended on strengthening our alliances and international institutions. I saw
military action as a tool of last, not first, resort.
We had to manage the wars we were in. But I also wanted to put this broader
faith in diplomacy to the test.
It began with a change in tone. From the start of my administration, we made
sure that every foreign policy statement coming out of the White House
emphasized the importance of international cooperation and America’s intention
to engage other nations, big and small, on the basis of mutual interest and respect.
We looked for small but symbolic ways to shift policy—like boosting the
international affairs budget at the State Department or bringing the United States
out of arrears on its U.N. dues after several years in which the Bush
administration and the Republican-controlled Congress had withheld certain
payments.
Consistent with the adage that 80 percent of success is a matter of showing
up, we also made a point of visiting parts of the world that had been neglected by
the Bush administration, with its all-consuming focus on terrorism and the
Middle East. Hillary, in particular, was a whirlwind that first year, hopping from
continent to continent as doggedly as she’d once campaigned for the presidency.
UNNING FOR THE PRESIDENCY,

Seeing the excitement her visits generated in foreign capitals, I felt vindicated in
my decision to appoint her as America’s top diplomat. It wasn’t just that she was
treated as a peer by world leaders. Wherever she went, the public saw her
presence in their country as a sign that they really mattered to us.
“If we want other countries to support our priorities,” I told my NSC team,
“we can’t just bully them into it. We’ve got to show them we’re taking their
perspectives into account—or at least can find them on a map.”
To be known. To be heard. To have one’s unique identity recognized and
seen as worthy. It was a universal human desire, I thought, as true for nations and
peoples as it was for individuals. If I understood that basic truth more than some
of my predecessors, perhaps it was because I’d spent a big chunk of my childhood
abroad and had family in places long considered “backward” and
“underdeveloped.” Or maybe it was because as an African American, I’d
experienced what it was like not to be fully seen inside my own country.
Whatever the reason, I made a point of showing an interest in the history,
culture, and people of the places we visited. Ben joked that my overseas speeches
could be reduced to a simple algorithm: “[Greeting in foreign language—often
badly pronounced.] It’s wonderful to be in this beautiful country that’s made
lasting contributions to world civilization. [List of stuff.] There’s a long history of
friendship between our two nations. [Inspiring anecdote.] And it’s in part due to
the contributions of the millions of proud [hyphenated Americans] whose
ancestors immigrated to our shores that the United States is the nation it is
today.” It might have been corny, but the smiles and nods of foreign audiences
showed the extent to which simple acts of acknowledgment mattered.
For the same reason, we tried to include some high-profile sightseeing on all
my foreign trips, something to get me out of hotels and beyond the palace gates.
My interest in touring Istanbul’s Blue Mosque or visiting a local eatery in Ho Chi
Minh City, I knew, would make a far more lasting impression on the average
Turkish or Vietnamese citizen than any bilateral meeting or press conference
talking point. Just as important, these stops gave me a chance to interact at least a
little with ordinary people rather than just government officials and wealthy elites,
who in many countries were viewed as out of touch.
But our most effective public diplomacy tool came straight out of my
campaign playbook: During my international trips, I made a point of hosting
town hall meetings with young people. The first time we tried it, with a crowd
of more than three thousand European students during the NATO summit in

Strasbourg, we weren’t sure what to expect. Would I get heckled? Would I bore
them with long, convoluted answers? But after an unscripted hour in which
members of the audience enthusiastically questioned me on everything from
climate change to fighting terrorism and offered their own good-humored
observations (including the fact that “Barack” means “peach” in Hungarian), we
decided to make it a regular feature of my foreign travel.
The town halls usually were broadcast live on the country’s national stations,
and whether they emanated from Buenos Aires, Mumbai, or Johannesburg, they
attracted a large viewership. For folks in many parts of the world, the sight of a
head of state making him- or herself accessible for direct questioning from citizens
was a novelty—and a more meaningful argument for democracy than any lecture
I might give. In consultation with our local embassies, we often invited young
activists from the host country’s marginalized groups—religious or ethnic
minorities, refugees, LGBTQ students—to participate. By handing them a
microphone and letting them tell their own stories, I could expose a nation of
viewers to the justness of their claims.
The young people I met in those town halls were a steady source of personal
inspiration. They made me laugh and sometimes made me tear up. In their
idealism, they reminded me of the youthful organizers and volunteers who had
propelled me into the presidency, and of the bonds we share across racial, ethnic,
and national boundaries when we learn to set aside our fear. No matter how
frustrated or discouraged I might have felt going in, I always came out of those
town halls feeling recharged, as if I’d been dipped in a cool forest spring. So long
as young men and women like that exist in every corner of this earth, I told
myself, there is reason enough to hope.
—
public attitudes toward the United States had steadily
improved since I’d taken office, demonstrating that our early diplomatic work
was paying off. This heightened popularity made it easier for our allies to sustain
or even boost their troop contributions in Afghanistan, knowing that their
citizens trusted our leadership. It gave me and Tim Geithner more leverage when
coordinating the international response to the financial crisis. After North Korea
started testing ballistic missiles, Susan Rice was able to get the Security Council to
pass robust international sanctions, in part because of her skill and tenacity but
also, she told me, because “a lot of countries want to be seen as being aligned
AROUND THE WORLD,

with you.”
Still, there were limits to what a diplomatic charm offensive could
accomplish. At the end of the day, each nation’s foreign policy remained driven
by its own economic interests, geography, ethnic and religious schisms, territorial
disputes, founding myths, lasting traumas, ancient animosities—and, most of all,
the imperatives of those who had and sought to maintain power. It was the rare
foreign leader who was susceptible to moral suasion alone. Those who sat atop
repressive governments could for the most part safely ignore public opinion. To
make progress on the thorniest foreign policy issues, I needed a second kind of
diplomacy, one of concrete rewards and punishments designed to alter the
calculations of hard, ruthless leaders. And, throughout my first year, interactions
with the leaders of three countries in particular—Iran, Russia, and China—gave
me an early indication of how difficult that would be.
Of the three, Iran posed the least serious challenge to America’s long-term
interests but won the prize for “Most Actively Hostile.” Heir to the great Persian
empires of antiquity, once an epicenter of science and art during Islam’s medieval
golden age, Iran had for many years barely registered in the minds of U.S. policy
makers. With Turkey and Iraq on its western border and Afghanistan and
Pakistan to the east, it was generally viewed as just another poor Middle Eastern
country, its territory shrunk by civil conflict and ascendant European powers. In
1951, though, Iran’s secular, left-leaning parliament moved to nationalize the
country’s oil fields, seizing control of profits that had once gone to the British
government, which owned a majority stake in Iran’s biggest oil production and
export company. Unhappy to be boxed out, the Brits imposed a naval blockade
to prevent Iran from shipping oil to would-be buyers. They also convinced the
Eisenhower administration that the new Iranian government was tilting toward
the Soviets, leading Eisenhower to green-light Operation Ajax, a CIA-MI6engineered coup that deposed Iran’s democratically elected prime minister and
consolidated power in the hands of the country’s young monarch, Shah
Mohammad Reza Pahlavi.
Operation Ajax set a pattern for U.S. miscalculation in dealing with
developing countries that lasted throughout the Cold War: mistaking nationalist
aspirations for Communist plots; equating commercial interests with national
security; subverting democratically elected governments and aligning ourselves
with autocrats when we determined it was to our benefit. Still, for the first
twenty-seven years, U.S. policy makers must have figured their gambit in Iran
had worked out just fine. The shah became a stalwart ally who extended contracts

to U.S. oil companies and bought plenty of expensive U.S. weaponry. He
maintained friendly relations with Israel, gave women the right to vote, used the
country’s growing wealth to modernize the economy and the education system,
and mingled easily with Western businesspeople and European royalty.
Less obvious to outsiders was a simmering discontent with the shah’s
extravagant spending, ruthless repression (his secret police were notorious for
torturing and killing dissidents), and promotion of Western social mores that, in
the eyes of conservative clerics and their many followers, violated the core tenets
of Islam. Nor did CIA analysts pay much attention to the growing influence of an
exiled messianic Shiite cleric, Ayatollah Khomeini, whose writings and speeches
denounced the shah as a Western puppet and called on the faithful to replace the
existing order with an Islamic state governed by sharia law. So U.S. officials were
caught by surprise when a series of demonstrations inside Iran at the start of 1978
blossomed into a full-blown populist revolution. In successive waves, followers of
Khomeini’s were joined in the streets by disaffected workers, unemployed youths,
and pro-democracy forces seeking a return to constitutional rule. By the
beginning of 1979, with the number of demonstrators swelling into the millions,
the shah quietly fled the country and was briefly admitted into the United States
for medical treatment. America’s nightly newscasts were filled with images of the
ayatollah—white-bearded, with the smoldering eyes of a prophet—stepping off a
plane in triumphant return from exile before a sea of adoring supporters.
Most Americans knew little about this history as the revolution unfolded—or
why people in a faraway country were suddenly burning Uncle Sam in effigy and
chanting “Death to America.” I sure didn’t. I was seventeen at the time, still in
high school and just on the cusp of political awareness. I only vaguely understood
the details of all that happened next: how Khomeini installed himself as supreme
leader and sidelined former secular and reformist allies; how he formed the
paramilitary Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps (IRGC) to crush anybody who
challenged the new regime; and how he used the drama that unfolded when
radicalized students stormed the U.S. embassy and took American hostages to
help solidify the revolution and humiliate the world’s most powerful nation.
But it’s hard to overstate just how much, thirty years later, the fallout from
these events still shaped the geopolitical landscape of my presidency. Iran’s
revolution inspired a slew of other radical Islamic movements intent on
duplicating its success. Khomeini’s call to overthrow Sunni Arab monarchies
turned Iran and the House of Saud into bitter enemies and sharpened sectarian
conflict across the Middle East. Iraq’s attempted 1980 invasion of Iran and the

bloody eight-year war that followed—a war in which the Gulf states provided
Saddam Hussein with financing while the Soviets supplied Khomeini’s military
with arms, including chemical weapons—accelerated Iran’s sponsorship of
terrorism as a way to offset its enemies’ military advantages. (The United States,
under Reagan, cynically tried to have it both ways, publicly backing Iraq while
secretly selling arms to Iran.) Khomeini’s vow to wipe Israel off the map—
manifest in the IRGC’s support for armed proxies like the Lebanon-based Shiite
militia Hezbollah and the military wing of the Palestinian resistance group Hamas
—made the Iranian regime Israel’s single greatest security threat and contributed
to the general hardening of Israeli attitudes toward possible peace with its
neighbors. More broadly, Khomeini’s rendering of the world as a Manichaean
clash between the forces of Allah and those of “the Great Satan” (America)
seeped like a toxin into the minds not just of future jihadists but of those in the
West already inclined to view Muslims as objects of suspicion and fear.
Khomeini died in 1989. His successor, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, a cleric
who’d barely traveled outside his own country and never would again, apparently
matched Khomeini in his hatred of America. Despite his title as supreme leader,
Khamenei’s authority wasn’t absolute—he had to confer with a powerful council
of clerics, while day-to-day responsibility for the running of the government fell
to a popularly elected president. There’d been a period toward the end of the
Clinton administration and the start of the Bush administration when more
moderate forces inside Iran had gained a little traction, offering the prospect of a
thaw in U.S.-Iranian relations. After 9/11, Iran’s then president, Mohammad
Khatami, had even reached out to the Bush administration with offers to help
with America’s response in neighboring Afghanistan. But U.S. officials had
ignored the gesture, and once President Bush named Iran, along with Iraq and
North Korea, as part of an “axis of evil” in his 2002 State of the Union speech,
whatever diplomatic window existed effectively slammed shut.
—
I took office, conservative hard-liners were firmly back in charge in
Tehran, led by a new president, Mahmoud Ahmadinejad, whose manic antiWestern outbursts, Holocaust denial, and persecution of gays and others he
considered a threat made him a perfect distillation of the regime’s most hateful
aspects. Iranian weapons were still being sent to militants intent on killing
American soldiers in Iraq and Afghanistan. The U.S. invasion of Iraq had greatly
BY THE TIME

strengthened Iran’s strategic position in the region by replacing its sworn enemy,
Saddam Hussein, with a Shiite-led government subject to Iranian influence.
Hezbollah, Iran’s proxy, had emerged as the most powerful faction in Lebanon,
with Iranian-supplied missiles that could now reach Tel Aviv. The Saudis and
Israelis spoke in alarming tones of an expanding “Shiite Crescent” of Iranian
influence and made no secret of their interest in the possibility of a U.S.-initiated
regime change.
Under any circumstances, then, Iran would have been a grade A headache for
my administration. But it was the country’s accelerating nuclear program that
threatened to turn a bad situation into a full-blown crisis.
The regime had inherited nuclear facilities built during the time of the shah,
and under the U.N.’s Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty—to which Iran had
been a signatory since its ratification in 1970—it had the right to use nuclear
energy for peaceful means. Unfortunately the same centrifuge technology used to
spin and enrich the low-enriched uranium (LEU) that fueled nuclear power
plants could be modified to produce weapons-grade, highly enriched uranium
(HEU). As one of our experts put it, “With enough HEU, a smart high school
physics student with access to the internet can produce a bomb.” Between 2003
and 2009, Iran boosted its total number of uranium-enriching centrifuges from a
hundred to as many as five thousand, far more than any peaceful program could
justify. The U.S. intelligence community was reasonably confident that Iran
didn’t have a nuclear weapon yet. But it was also convinced that the regime had
narrowed its “breakout capacity”—the window of time needed to produce
enough uranium to build a viable nuclear weapon—to a potentially dangerous
point.
An Iranian nuclear arsenal wouldn’t need to threaten the U.S. homeland; just
the possibility of a nuclear strike or nuclear terrorism in the Middle East would
severely limit a future U.S. president’s options to check Iranian aggression toward
its neighbors. The Saudis would likely react by pursuing their own rival “Sunni
bomb,” triggering a nuclear arms race in the world’s most volatile region.
Meanwhile, Israel—reportedly holding a trove of undeclared nuclear weapons
itself—viewed a nuclear-armed Iran as an existential threat and was allegedly
drawing up plans for a preemptive strike against Iran’s facilities. Any action,
reaction, or miscalculation by any of these parties could plunge the Middle East—
and the United States—into yet another conflict at a time when we still had
180,000 highly exposed troops along Iran’s borders, and when any big spike in oil
prices could send the world economy deeper into a tailspin. At times during my

administration we gamed out the scenarios for what a conflict with Iran would
look like; I left those conversations weighed down by the knowledge that if war
became necessary, nearly everything else I was trying to achieve would likely be
upended.
For all these reasons, my team and I had spent much of the transition
discussing how to prevent Iran from getting a nuclear weapon—ideally through
diplomacy rather than by starting another war. We settled on a two-step strategy.
Because there had been almost no high-level contact between the United States
and Iran since 1980, step one involved direct outreach. As I’d said in my
inaugural address, we were ready to extend a hand to those willing to unclench
their fists. Within weeks of taking office, I’d sent a secret letter to Ayatollah
Khamenei through a channel we had with Iranian diplomats at the United
Nations, suggesting that we open a dialogue between our two countries on a
range of issues, including Iran’s nuclear program. Khamenei’s answer was blunt:
Iran had no interest in direct talks. He did, however, take the opportunity to
suggest ways the United States could stop being an imperialist bully.
“Guess he’s not unclenching his fist anytime soon,” Rahm said after reading a
copy of Khamenei’s letter, which had been translated from Farsi.
“Only enough to give me the middle finger,” I said.
The truth was, none of us in the White House had expected a positive
response. I’d sent the letter anyway because I wanted to establish that the
impediment to diplomacy was not America’s intransigence—it was Iran’s. I
reinforced a message of openness to the broader Iranian public through a
traditional Persian New Year’s (Nowruz) greeting that we put online in March.
As it was, any prospects of an early breakthrough were extinguished in June
2009, when Iranian opposition candidate Mir-Hossein Mousavi credibly accused
government officials of vote rigging to help reelect Ahmadinejad to a second term
as president. Millions of protesters inside Iran took to the streets to challenge the
election results, launching a self-described “Green Movement” that posed one of
the most significant internal challenges to the Islamic state since the 1979
Revolution.
The ensuing crackdown was merciless and swift. Mousavi and other
opposition leaders were placed under house arrest. Peaceful marchers were
beaten, and a significant number were killed. One night, from the comfort of my
residence, I scanned the reports of the protests online and saw video of a young
woman shot in the streets, a web of blood spreading across her face as she began

to die, her eyes gazing upward in reproach.
It was a haunting reminder of the price so many people around the world
paid for wanting some say in how they were governed, and my first impulse was
to express strong support for the demonstrators. But when I gathered my national
security team, our Iran experts advised against such a move. According to them,
any statement from me would likely backfire. Already, regime hard-liners were
pushing the fiction that foreign agents were behind the demonstrations, and
activists inside Iran feared that any supportive statements from the U.S.
government would be seized upon to discredit their movement. I felt obliged to
heed these warnings, and signed off on a series of bland, bureaucratic statements
—“We continue to monitor the entire situation closely”; “The universal rights to
assembly and free speech must be respected”—urging a peaceful resolution that
reflected the will of the Iranian people.
As the violence escalated, so did my condemnation. Still, such a passive
approach didn’t sit well with me—and not just because I had to listen to
Republicans howl that I was coddling a murderous regime. I was learning yet
another difficult lesson about the presidency: that my heart was now chained to
strategic considerations and tactical analysis, my convictions subject to
counterintuitive arguments; that in the most powerful office on earth, I had less
freedom to say what I meant and act on what I felt than I’d had as a senator—or
as an ordinary citizen disgusted by the sight of a young woman gunned down by
her own government.
Having been rebuffed in our attempts to open a dialogue with Iran, and with
the country spiraling into chaos and further repression, we shifted to step two of
our nonproliferation strategy: mobilizing the international community to apply
tough, multilateral economic sanctions that might force Iran to the negotiating
table. The U.N. Security Council had already passed multiple resolutions calling
on Iran to halt its enrichment activities. It had also authorized limited sanctions
against Iran and formed a group called the P5+1—representing the five
permanent Security Council members (the United States, the United Kingdom,
France, Russia, and China) plus Germany—to meet with Iranian officials in the
hope of pushing the regime back into Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty
compliance.
The problem was that the existing sanctions were too weak to have much of
an impact. Even U.S. allies like Germany continued to do a healthy amount of
business with Iran, and just about everyone bought its oil. The Bush

administration had unilaterally imposed additional U.S. sanctions, but those were
largely symbolic, since U.S. companies had been blocked from doing business
with Iran since 1995. With oil prices high and its economy growing, Iran had
been more than happy to string along the P5+1 with regular negotiating sessions
that produced nothing other than a commitment to more talking.
To get Iran’s attention, we’d have to persuade other countries to tighten the
vise. And that meant getting buy-in from a pair of powerful, historic adversaries
that didn’t like sanctions as a matter of principle, had friendly diplomatic and
commercial relations with Iran—and mistrusted U.S. intentions almost as much as
Tehran did.
—
in the 1960s and ’70s, I was old enough to recall the Cold
War as the defining reality of international affairs, the force that chopped Europe
in two, fueled a nuclear arms race, and generated proxy wars around the globe. It
shaped my childhood imagination: In schoolbooks, newspapers, spy novels, and
movies, the Soviet Union was the fearsome adversary in a contest between
freedom and tyranny.
I was also part of a post-Vietnam generation that had learned to question its
own government and saw how—from the rise of McCarthyism to support for
South Africa’s apartheid regime—Cold War thinking had often led America to
betray its ideals. This awareness didn’t stop me from believing we should contain
the spread of Marxist totalitarianism. But it made me wary of the notion that
good resided only on our side and bad on theirs, or that a people who’d
produced Tolstoy and Tchaikovsky were inherently different from us. Instead,
the evils of the Soviet system struck me as a variation on a broader human
tragedy: The way abstract theories and rigid orthodoxy can curdle into repression.
How readily we justify moral compromise and relinquish our freedoms. How
power can corrupt and fear can compound and language can be debased. None of
that was unique to Soviets or Communists, I thought; it was true for all of us.
The brave struggle of dissidents behind the Iron Curtain felt of a piece with,
rather than distinct from, the larger struggle for human dignity taking place
elsewhere in the world—including America.
When, in the mid-1980s, Mikhail Gorbachev took over as the general
secretary of the Communist Party and ushered in the cautious liberalization
known as perestroika and glasnost, I studied what happened closely, wondering if
HAVING COME OF AGE

it signaled the dawning of a new age. And when, just a few years later, the Berlin
Wall fell and democratic activists inside Russia lifted Boris Yeltsin to power,
sweeping aside the old Communist order and dissolving the Soviet Union, I
considered it not just a victory for the West but a testimony to the power of a
mobilized citizenry and a warning for despots everywhere. If the tumult that
engulfed Russia in the 1990s—economic collapse, unfettered corruption, rightwing populism, shadowy oligarchs—gave me pause, nevertheless I held out hope
that a more just, prosperous, and free Russia would emerge from the inevitably
difficult transition to free markets and representative government.
I’d mostly been cured of that optimism by the time I became president. It was
true that Yeltsin’s successor, Vladimir Putin, who had come to power in 1999,
claimed no interest in a return to Marxism-Leninism (“a mistake,” he once called
it). And he had successfully stabilized the nation’s economy, in large part thanks
to a huge increase in revenues brought about by rising oil prices. Elections were
now held in accordance with the Russian constitution, capitalists were
everywhere, ordinary Russians could travel abroad, and pro-democracy activists
like the chess master Garry Kasparov could get away with criticizing the
government without an immediate trip to the Gulag.
And yet, with each year that Putin remained in power, the new Russia
looked more like the old. It became clear that a market economy and periodic
elections could go hand in hand with a “soft authoritarianism” that steadily
concentrated power in Putin’s hands and shrank the space for meaningful dissent.
Oligarchs who cooperated with Putin became some of the world’s wealthiest
men. Those who broke from Putin found themselves subject to various criminal
prosecutions and stripped of their assets—and Kasparov ultimately did spend a
few days in jail for leading an anti-Putin march. Putin’s cronies were handed
control of the country’s major media outlets, and the rest were pressured into
ensuring him coverage every bit as friendly as the state-owned media had once
provided Communist rulers. Independent journalists and civic leaders found
themselves monitored by the FSB (the modern incarnation of the KGB)—or, in
some cases, turned up dead.
What’s more, Putin’s power didn’t rest on simple coercion. He was genuinely
popular (his approval ratings at home rarely dipped below 60 percent). It was a
popularity rooted in old-fashioned nationalism—the promise to restore Mother
Russia to its former glory, to relieve the sense of disruption and humiliation so
many Russians had felt over the previous two decades.

Putin could sell that vision because he’d experienced those disruptions
himself. Born into a family without connections or privilege, he’d methodically
climbed the Soviet ladder—reservist training with the Red Army, law studies at
Leningrad State University, a career in the KGB. After years of loyal and effective
service to the state, he’d secured a position of modest stature and respectability,
only to see the system he’d devoted his life to capsize overnight when the Berlin
Wall fell in 1989. (He was at that time stationed with the KGB in Dresden, East
Germany, and he reportedly spent the next few days scrambling to destroy files
and standing guard against possible looters.) He’d made a quick pivot to the
emerging post-Soviet reality, allying himself to democratic reformer Anatoly
Sobchak, a mentor from law school who became mayor of St. Petersburg.
Moving into national politics, Putin rose through the ranks of the Yeltsin
administration with breathtaking speed, using his power in a variety of posts—
including director of the FSB—to pick up allies, dole out favors, gather secrets,
and outmaneuver rivals. Yeltsin appointed Putin prime minister in August 1999
and then four months later—hobbled by corruption scandals, bad health, a
legendary drinking problem, and a record of catastrophic economic
mismanagement—surprised everyone by vacating his office. That made Putin,
then forty-seven, the acting president of Russia and provided him with the head
start he needed to get elected to a full presidential term three months later. (One
of Putin’s first acts was to grant Yeltsin a blanket pardon for any wrongdoing.)
In the hands of the shrewd and the ruthless, chaos had proven a gift. But
whether out of instinct or calculation, Putin also understood the Russian public’s
longing for order. While few people had an interest in returning to the days of
collective farming and empty store shelves, they were tired and scared and
resented those—both at home and abroad—who appeared to have taken
advantage of Yeltsin’s weakness. They preferred a strong hand, which Putin was
only too happy to provide.
He reasserted Russian control over the predominantly Muslim province of
Chechnya, making no apologies for matching the brutal terrorist tactics of
separatist rebels there with unrelenting military violence. He revived Soviet-style
surveillance powers in the name of keeping the people safe. When democratic
activists challenged Putin’s autocratic tendencies, he dismissed them as tools of the
West. He resurrected pre-Communist and even Communist symbols and
embraced the long-suppressed Russian Orthodox Church. Fond of showy public
works projects, he pursued wildly expensive spectacles, including a bid to host the
Winter Olympics in the summer resort town of Sochi. With the fastidiousness of

a teenager on Instagram, he curated a constant stream of photo ops, projecting an
almost satirical image of masculine vigor (Putin riding a horse with his shirt off,
Putin playing hockey), all the while practicing a casual chauvinism and
homophobia, and insisting that Russian values were being infected by foreign
elements. Everything Putin did fed the narrative that under his firm, paternal
guidance, Russia had regained its mojo.
There was just one problem for Putin: Russia wasn’t a superpower anymore.
Despite having a nuclear arsenal second only to our own, Russia lacked the vast
network of alliances and bases that allowed the United States to project its
military power across the globe. Russia’s economy remained smaller than those of
Italy, Canada, and Brazil, dependent almost entirely on oil, gas, mineral, and arms
exports. Moscow’s high-end shopping districts testified to the country’s
transformation from a creaky state-run economy to one with a growing number
of billionaires, but the pinched lives of ordinary Russians spoke to how little of
this new wealth trickled down. According to various international indicators, the
levels of Russian corruption and inequality rivaled those in parts of the
developing world, and its male life expectancy in 2009 was lower than that of
Bangladesh. Few, if any, young Africans, Asians, or Latin Americans looked to
Russia for inspiration in the fight to reform their societies, or felt their
imaginations stirred by Russian movies or music, or dreamed of studying there,
much less immigrating. Shorn of its ideological underpinnings, the once-shiny
promise of workers uniting to throw off their chains, Putin’s Russia came off as
insular and suspicious of outsiders—to be feared, perhaps, but not emulated.
It was this gap between the truth of modern-day Russia and Putin’s insistence
on its superpower status, I thought, that helped account for the country’s
increasingly combative foreign relations. Much of the ire was directed at us: In
public remarks, Putin became sharply critical of American policy. When U.S.backed initiatives came before the U.N. Security Council, he made sure Russia
blocked them or watered them down—particularly anything touching on human
rights. More consequential were Putin’s escalating efforts to prevent former
Soviet bloc countries, now independent, from breaking free of Russia’s orbit.
Our diplomats routinely received complaints from Russia’s neighbors about
instances of intimidation, economic pressure, misinformation campaigns, covert
electioneering, contributions to pro-Russian political candidates, or outright
bribery. In the case of Ukraine, there’d been the mysterious poisoning of Viktor
Yushchenko, a reformist activist turned president whom Moscow opposed. And
then, of course, there had been the invasion of Georgia during the summer of

2008.
It was hard to know how far down this dangerous path Russia planned to go.
Putin was no longer Russia’s president: Despite dominating the polls, he’d chosen
to abide by Russia’s constitutional prohibition against three consecutive terms,
swapping places with Dmitry Medvedev, his former deputy, who upon being
elected president in 2008 had promptly installed Putin as his prime minister. The
consensus among analysts was that Medvedev was merely keeping the presidential
seat warm until 2012, when Putin would be eligible to run again. Still, Putin’s
decision not just to step down but to promote a younger man with a reputation
for relatively liberal, pro-Western views suggested he at least cared about
appearances. It even offered the possibility that Putin would eventually leave
elective office and settle into the role of power broker and elder statesman,
allowing a new generation of leadership to put Russia back on the path toward a
modern, lawful democracy.
All that was possible—but not likely. Since the time of the czars, historians
had noted Russia’s tendency to adopt with much fanfare the latest European ideas
—whether representative government or modern bureaucracy, free markets or
state socialism—only to subordinate or abandon such imported notions in favor
of older, harsher ways of maintaining the social order. In the battle for Russia’s
identity, fear and fatalism usually beat out hope and change. It was an
understandable response to a thousand-year history of Mongol invasions,
byzantine intrigues, great famines, pervasive serfdom, unbridled tyranny, countless
insurrections, bloody revolutions, crippling wars, years-long sieges, and millions
upon millions slaughtered—all on a frigid landscape that forgave nothing.
—
I flew to Moscow for my first official visit to Russia as president,
accepting the invitation Medvedev had extended at the G20 meeting in April.
My thought was that we could continue with our proposed “reset”—focusing on
areas of common interest while acknowledging and managing our significant
differences. School was out for the summer, which meant that Michelle, Malia,
and Sasha could join me. And under the pretext of needing help with the girls
(and with the promise of a tour of the Vatican and an audience with the pope
when we continued on to Italy for a G8 summit), Michelle convinced my
mother-in-law and our close friend Mama Kaye to come along as well.
Our daughters had always been great travelers, cheerfully enduring our annual
IN

JULY,

nine-hour round-trip commercial flights between Chicago and Hawaii, never
whining or throwing tantrums or kicking the seats in front of them, instead
engrossing themselves in the games, puzzles, and books that Michelle doled out
with military precision at regular intervals. Flying on Air Force One was a
definite upgrade for them, with a choice of in-flight movies, actual beds to sleep
in, and a flight crew plying them with all kinds of snacks. But still, traveling
overseas with the president of the United States presented a new set of challenges.
They got woken up just a few hours after falling asleep to put on new dresses and
fancy shoes and have their hair combed tight so that they’d be presentable once
we landed. They had to smile for photographers as we walked down the stairs,
then introduce themselves to a row of gray-haired dignitaries who stood waiting
on the tarmac—careful to maintain eye contact and not mumble, as their mother
had taught them, and trying not to look bored as their dad engaged in
meaningless chitchat before everyone climbed into the awaiting Beast. Rolling
down a Moscow freeway, I asked Malia how she was holding up. She looked
catatonic, her big brown eyes staring blankly at a spot over my shoulder.
“I think,” she said, “this is the most tired I’ve ever been in my entire life.”
A midmorning nap seemed to cure the girls’ jet lag, and there are moments of
us together in Moscow that I recall as if they happened yesterday. Sasha striding
beside me through the grand, red-carpeted halls of the Kremlin, followed by a set
of towering uniformed Russian officers, her hands in the pockets of a tan trench
coat as if she were a pint-sized secret agent. Or Malia trying to suppress a grimace
after she gamely agreed to taste caviar in a rooftop restaurant overlooking Red
Square. (True to form, Sasha refused the heap of slimy black stuff on my spoon,
even at the risk of not getting a crack at the ice cream station later.)
But traveling as the First Family wasn’t the same as traveling during the
campaign, when we’d ride an RV from town to town and Miche and the girls
would stay at my side through parades and county fairs. I now had my itinerary
and they had theirs—along with their own support staff, briefings, and official
photographer. At the end of our first night in Moscow, when we reunited at the
Ritz-Carlton, the four of us lay on the bed and Malia asked why I hadn’t gone
with them to see the Russian dancers and dollmakers. Michelle leaned over and
whispered conspiratorially, “Your father’s not allowed to have fun. He has to sit
in boring meetings all day.”
“Poor Daddy,” Sasha said, patting me on the head.
The setting for my official meeting with Medvedev was suitably impressive:

one of the palaces within the Kremlin complex, its high, gilded ceilings and
elaborate appointments restored to their former czarist glory. Our discussion was
cordial and professional. At a joint press conference, we artfully finessed the
continuing friction around Georgia and missile defense, and we had plenty of
“deliverables” to announce, including an agreed-upon framework for the
negotiation of the new strategic arms treaty, which would reduce each side’s
allowable nuclear warheads and delivery systems by up to one-third. Gibbs was
more excited by Russia’s agreement to lift restrictions on certain U.S. livestock
exports, a change worth more than $1 billion to American farmers and ranchers.
“Something folks back home actually care about,” he said with a grin.
That evening, Michelle and I were invited to Medvedev’s dacha, a few miles
outside the city center, for a private dinner. From reading Russian novels, I’d
imagined a larger but still-rustic version of the traditional country home. Instead,
we found ourselves on an enormous estate cloistered in a bank of tall trees.
Medvedev and his wife, Svetlana—a cheerful, matronly blonde with whom
Michelle and the girls had spent much of the day—greeted us at the front door,
and after a brief tour, we walked out through a garden to dine in a large, woodbeamed gazebo.
Our conversation barely touched on politics. Medvedev was fascinated by the
internet and quizzed me about Silicon Valley, expressing his desire to boost
Russia’s tech sector. He took a keen interest in my workout routine, describing
how he swam for thirty minutes each day. We shared stories about our
experiences teaching law, and he confessed his affection for hard rock bands like
Deep Purple. Svetlana expressed concerns about how their thirteen-year-old son,
Ilya, would manage adolescence with the added attention of being the president’s
son—a challenge Michelle and I understood all too well. Medvedev speculated
that the boy would eventually prefer attending university abroad.
We bid the Medvedevs farewell shortly after dessert, taking care that the
members of our team were fully loaded into the travel van before our motorcade
snaked out of the compound. Gibbs and Marvin had been entertained by
members of Medvedev’s team elsewhere on the property, plied with vodka shots
and schnapps, putting them in a jovial mood that wouldn’t survive the next
morning’s wake-up call. As Michelle fell asleep beside me in the darkness of the
car, I was struck by just how ordinary the night had been—how, with the
exception of the translators who’d sat discreetly behind us while we ate, we could
have been attending a dinner party in any well-to-do American suburb.

Medvedev and I had more than a few things in common: Both of us had studied
and taught law, gone on to marry and start families a few years later, dabbled in
politics, and been helped along by older, cagier politicians. It made me wonder
how much the differences between us could be explained by our respective
characters and dispositions, and how much was merely the result of our different
circumstances. Unlike him, I had the good fortune of having been born in a
nation where political success hadn’t required me to ignore billion-dollar
kickbacks or the blackmailing of political opponents.
—
for the first time the following morning when I traveled
to his dacha, located in a suburb outside Moscow. Our Russia experts, Mike
McFaul and Bill Burns, as well as Jim Jones, joined me for the ride. Having had
some past interactions with Putin, Burns suggested that I keep my initial
presentation short. “Putin’s sensitive to any perceived slights,” Burns said, “and in
his mind, he’s the more senior leader. You might want to open the meeting by
asking him his opinion about the state of U.S.-Russian relations and let him get a
few things off his chest.”
After turning through an imposing gate and continuing down a long
driveway, we pulled up in front of a mansion, where Putin welcomed us for the
obligatory photo op. Physically, he was unremarkable: short and compact—a
wrestler’s build—with thin, sandy hair, a prominent nose, and pale, watchful
eyes. As we exchanged pleasantries with our respective delegations, I noticed a
casualness to his movements, a practiced disinterest in his voice that indicated
someone accustomed to being surrounded by subordinates and supplicants.
Someone who’d grown used to power.
Accompanied by Sergey Lavrov, Russia’s urbane foreign minister and former
U.N. representative, Putin led us to a broad outdoor patio, where an elaborate
spread had been arranged for our benefit, with eggs and caviar, breads and teas,
served by male waiters in traditional peasant dress and high leather boots. I
thanked Putin for his hospitality, noted the progress our countries had made with
the previous day’s agreements, and asked for his assessment of the U.S.-Russia
relationship during his time in office.
Burns hadn’t been kidding when he said the man had a few things to get off
his chest. I’d barely finished the question before Putin launched into an animated
and seemingly endless monologue chronicling every perceived injustice, betrayal,
I MET VLADIMIR PUTIN

and slight that he and the Russian people had suffered at the hands of the
Americans. He’d liked President Bush personally, he said, and had reached out
after 9/11, pledging solidarity and offering to share intelligence in the fight
against a common enemy. He’d helped the United States secure airbases in
Kyrgyzstan and Uzbekistan for the Afghan campaign. He’d even offered Russia’s
help in handling Saddam Hussein.
And where had it gotten him? Rather than heed his warnings, he said, Bush
had gone ahead and invaded Iraq, destabilizing the entire Middle East. The U.S.
decision seven years earlier to pull out of the Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty and its
plans to house missile defense systems on Russia’s borders continued to be a
source of strategic instability. The admission of former Warsaw Pact countries
into NATO during both the Clinton and Bush administrations had steadily
encroached on Russia’s “sphere of influence,” while U.S. support for the “color
revolutions” in Georgia, Ukraine, and Kyrgyzstan—under the specious guise of
“democracy promotion”—had turned Russia’s once-friendly neighbors into
governments hostile to Moscow. As far as Putin was concerned, the Americans
had been arrogant, dismissive, unwilling to treat Russia as an equal partner, and
constantly trying to dictate terms to the rest of the world—all of which, he said,
made it hard to be optimistic about future relations.
About thirty minutes into what was supposed to have been an hour-long
meeting, my staffers started sneaking glances at their watches. But I decided not
to interrupt. It seemed clear that Putin had rehearsed the whole thing, but his
sense of grievance was real. I also knew that my continued progress with
Medvedev depended on the forbearance of Putin. After about forty-five minutes,
Putin finally ran out of material, and rather than trying to stick to our schedule, I
began answering him point by point. I reminded him that I’d personally opposed
the invasion of Iraq, but I also rejected Russia’s actions in Georgia, believing that
each nation had the right to determine its own alliances and economic
relationships without interference. I disputed the idea that a limited defense
system designed to guard against an Iranian missile launch would have any impact
on Russia’s mighty nuclear arsenal, but mentioned my plan to conduct a review
before taking further steps on missile defense in Europe. As for our proposed
“reset,” the goal wasn’t to eliminate all differences between our two countries, I
explained; it was to get past Cold War habits and establish a realistic, mature
relationship that could manage those differences and build on shared interests.
At times, the conversation got contentious, especially on Iran. Putin dismissed
my concerns about Iran’s nuclear program and bristled at my suggestion that he

suspend a pending sale of the powerful Russian-designed S-300 surface-to-air
missile system to the regime. The system was purely defensive, he said, adding
that reneging on a contract worth $800 million would risk both the bottom line
and the reputation of Russian arms manufacturers. But for the most part he
listened attentively, and by the end of what had turned into a two-hour
marathon, he expressed openness, if not enthusiasm, for the reset effort.
“Of course, on all these issues, you will have to work with Dmitry,” Putin
told me as he walked me to my waiting motorcade. “These are now his
decisions.” Our eyes met as we shook hands, both of us knowing that the
statement he’d just made was dubious, but for now, at least, it was the closest
thing I was going to get to an endorsement.
The meeting with Putin wreaked havoc on the rest of the day’s schedule. We
raced back to Moscow, where I was slated to deliver the commencement address
to bright-eyed young Russians studying international business and finance.
Beforehand, in a holding room off the stage, I had a brief pull-aside with former
Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev. Seventy-eight years old and still robust, with
the signature red birthmark splashed across his head, he struck me as a strangely
tragic figure. Here was a man who’d once been one of the most powerful people
on earth, whose instincts for reform and efforts at denuclearization—no matter
how tentative—had led to an epic global transformation and earned him the
Nobel Peace Prize. He now found himself largely disdained within his own
country, both by those who felt he’d surrendered to the West and by those who
considered him a Communist throwback whose time was long past. Gorbachev
told me he was enthusiastic about a reset and my proposals for a nuclear-free
world, but after fifteen minutes I had to cut the conversation short to deliver my
speech. Although he said he understood, I could tell he was disappointed—a
reminder for both of us of the fleeting, fickle nature of public life.
Then it was off to an abbreviated Kremlin lunch with Medvedev and a
ballroom of important personages, followed by a roundtable discussion with U.S.
and Russian business leaders, where boilerplate appeals for greater economic
cooperation were exchanged. By the time I arrived at the summit of U.S. and
Russian civil society leaders that McFaul had organized, I could feel jet lag
kicking in. I was content to take a seat, catch my breath, and listen to the remarks
of those speaking before me.
It was my kind of crowd: democracy activists, heads of nonprofits, and
community organizers working at a grassroots level on issues like housing, public

health, and political access. They mostly toiled in obscurity, jostled for money to
keep their operations afloat, and rarely had a chance to travel outside their home
cities, much less do so at the invitation of a U.S. president. One of the Americans
was even someone I’d worked with during my organizing days back in Chicago.
Maybe it was the juxtaposition of my past and my present that kept me
thinking about my conversation with Putin. When Axe asked for my impressions
of the Russian leader, I’d said that I found him strangely familiar, “like a ward
boss, except with nukes and a U.N. Security Council veto.” This prompted a
laugh, but I hadn’t meant it as a joke. Putin did, in fact, remind me of the sorts of
men who had once run the Chicago machine or Tammany Hall—tough, street
smart, unsentimental characters who knew what they knew, who never moved
outside their narrow experiences, and who viewed patronage, bribery,
shakedowns, fraud, and occasional violence as legitimate tools of the trade. For
them, as for Putin, life was a zero-sum game; you might do business with those
outside your tribe, but in the end, you couldn’t trust them. You looked out for
yourself first and then for your own. In such a world, a lack of scruples, a
contempt for any high-minded aspirations beyond accumulating power, were not
flaws. They were an advantage.
In America, it had taken generations of protest, progressive lawmaking,
muckraking journalism, and dogged advocacy to check, if not fully eliminate,
such raw exercises of power. That reform tradition was in large part what had
inspired me to enter politics. And yet, in order to reduce the risk of nuclear
catastrophe or another Middle East war, I’d just spent the morning courting an
autocrat who no doubt kept dossiers on every Russian activist in the room and
could have any one of them harassed, jailed, or worse whenever he pleased. If
Putin did go after one of these activists, how far would I go in taking him to task
—especially knowing that it probably wouldn’t change his behavior? Would I
risk the completion of START negotiations? Russian cooperation on Iran? And
how did one measure such trade-offs anyway? I could tell myself that
compromises existed everywhere, that in order to get things done back home, I’d
cut deals with politicians whose attitudes weren’t so different from Putin’s and
whose ethical standards didn’t always bear scrutiny. But this felt different. The
stakes were higher—on both sides of the ledger.
Standing up finally to speak, I praised the people in the room for their
courage and dedication and urged them to focus not just on democracy and civil
rights but also on concrete strategies to provide jobs, education, healthcare, and
decent housing. Addressing the Russians in the audience, I said that America

couldn’t and shouldn’t fight their battles for them, that Russia’s future was for
them to determine; but I added that I would be rooting for them, firm in my
conviction that all people aspire to the principles of human rights, the rule of law,
and self-governance.
The room burst into applause. McFaul beamed. I felt glad about being able to
lift, however briefly, the spirits of good people doing hard and sometimes
dangerous work. I believed that, even in Russia, it would pay off in the long run.
Still, I couldn’t shake the fear that Putin’s way of doing business had more force
and momentum than I cared to admit, that in the world as it was, many of these
hopeful activists might soon be marginalized or crushed by their own government
—and there’d be very little I could do to protect them.