
CHAPTER 12

Dear President Obama,
Today I was informed that effective June 30, 2009, I will join the rapidly
growing number of unemployed in this country…
As I tucked my children into bed tonight, fighting the panic that is threatening
to consume me, I realized that as a parent, I will not have the opportunity that my
parents had. I cannot look at my children and tell them honestly that if you work
hard enough and sacrifice enough, then anything is possible. I have learned today
that you can make all the right choices, do all the right things, and it still might not
be enough, because your government has failed you.
Although my government has been talking quite a bit about protecting and
helping middle America, what I have seen has been to the contrary. I see a
government that has been catering to lobbyists and special interest groups. I see
billions of dollars that are being spent on bailouts for financial institutions…
Thank you for allowing me to voice just a few of my thoughts on this
emotional night.

I

Sincerely,
Nicole Brandon
Virginia

two or three letters like this every night. I’d slip them
back into the folder they had come in, adding it to the high pile of papers on the
desk. On that particular night, the face of the Treaty Room’s grandfather clock
read one in the morning. I rubbed my eyes, decided I needed a better reading
lamp, and glanced up at the massive oil painting hanging over the heavy leather
couch. It depicted a stern, portly President McKinley standing like a bushyeyebrowed headmaster while a group of mustached men signed the treaty ending
T SEEMED LIKE I READ

the Spanish-American War in 1898, all of them gathered around the very table
where I now sat. It was a fine piece for a museum, but less than ideal for what
was now my home office; I made a note to myself to have it replaced with
something more contemporary.
Other than the five minutes I’d spent walking across the hall to tuck in the
girls and kiss Michelle good night, I’d been planted in my chair since dinnertime,
the same way I was just about every night of the week. For me, these were often
the quietest and most productive hours of the day, a time when I could catch up
on work and prepare myself for whatever was coming next, poring over the
stacks of material my staff secretary sent up to the residence for my review. The
latest economic data. Decision memos. Informational memos. Intelligence
briefings. Legislative proposals. Drafts of speeches. Press conference talking points.
I felt the seriousness of my job most acutely when reading letters from
constituents. I received a nightly batch of ten—some written in longhand, others
printed-out emails—arranged neatly in a purple folder. They were often the last
thing I looked at before going to bed.
It had been my idea, the letters, one that came to me on my second day in
office. I figured that taking in a steady dose of constituent mail would be an
efficient way for me to reach outside the presidential bubble and hear directly
from those I served. The letters were like an IV drip from the real world, an
everyday reminder of the covenant I now had with the American people, the
trust I carried, and the human impact of each decision I made. I insisted on seeing
a representative cross section. (“I don’t just want a bunch of happy-talk stuff from
supporters,” I told Pete Rouse, who was now a senior advisor and the West
Wing’s resident Yoda.) Other than that, we left it up to our Correspondence
Office to choose which of the ten thousand or so letters and emails that flowed
into the White House daily went into the folder.
For the first week, what I read was mostly feel-good stuff: notes of
congratulations, people telling me how inspired they’d been on Inauguration
Day, kids with suggestions for legislation (“You should pass a law to cut down on
the amount of homework”).
But as weeks went by, the letters became more somber. A man who had
worked at the same job for twenty years described the shame he felt when he had
to tell his wife and kids he’d been laid off. A woman wrote after the bank
foreclosed on her home; she was worried that if she didn’t get immediate help,
she’d end up on the streets. A student had dropped out of college; his financial

aid had run out, and he was moving back into his parents’ house. Some letters
offered detailed policy recommendations. Others were written in anger (“Why
hasn’t your Justice Department thrown any of these Wall Street crooks in jail?”)
or with quiet resignation (“I doubt you’ll ever read this, but I thought you should
know we are hurting out here”).
Most often they were urgent appeals for help, and I would write back on a
note card embossed with the presidential seal, explaining the steps we were taking
to get the economy moving again, offering whatever encouragement I could. I
would then mark the original letter with instructions for my staff. “See if
Treasury can check with the bank about a refinancing option,” I’d write. Or
“Does the VA have a loan program for vets in this situation?” Or simply, “Can
we help?”
This would usually be enough to focus the attention of the relevant agency.
The letter writer would be contacted. Days or weeks later, I’d receive a followup memo explaining the actions taken on their behalf. Sometimes people would
get the relief they had sought—their home temporarily saved, a spot in an
apprenticeship program.
Still, it was hard to take any satisfaction from individual cases. I knew that
each letter represented the desperation of millions across the country, people
counting on me to save their jobs or their homes, to restore whatever sense of
security they had once felt. No matter how hard my team and I worked, no
matter how many initiatives we put into place or how many speeches I gave,
there was no getting around the damning, indisputable facts.
Three months into my presidency, more people were suffering than when I
began, and no one—including me—could be sure relief was in sight.
—
the day after I signed the Recovery Act, I flew to Mesa,
Arizona, to announce our plan to deal with the collapsing housing market. Other
than job loss, no aspect of the economic crisis had a more direct impact on
ordinary people. With more than three million homes having gone into some
stage of foreclosure in 2008, another eight million were now at risk. Over the
final three months of the year, home prices fell almost 20 percent, meaning that
even families who could manage their payments suddenly found themselves
“underwater”—their house worth less than they owed, their primary investment
ON FEBRUARY 18,

and nest egg now a millstone of debt around their necks.
The problem was at its worst in states like Nevada and Arizona, two of the
epicenters of the subprime-driven housing bubble. There, you could drive
through entire subdivisions that looked like ghost towns, with block after block
of cookie-cutter houses, many of them newly built but lifeless, properties
developed but never sold, or sold and promptly foreclosed upon. Either way,
they were empty, some with their windows boarded up. The few homes still
occupied stood out like small oases, their postage-stamp lawns green and tended,
cars parked in the driveways, lonely outposts against a backdrop of ravaged
stillness. I remember talking with a homeowner in one of these developments
during a campaign visit to Nevada. He was a sturdy, fortyish man in a white Tshirt who had turned off his lawn mower to shake my hand while a towheaded
little boy zipped around behind him on a red tricycle. He was luckier than many
of his neighbors, he told me: He’d had enough seniority at the factory where he
worked to avoid the first wave of layoffs, and his wife’s nursing job seemed
relatively secure. Still, the house they’d paid $400,000 to purchase at the height of
the bubble was now worth half that amount. They had quietly debated whether
their best move was to default on their mortgage and walk away. Toward the end
of our conversation, the man looked back at his son.
“I remember my dad talking about the American Dream when I was a kid,”
he said. “How the most important thing was to work hard. Buy a house. Raise a
family. Do things right. What happened to that? When did that become just a
load of…?” He trailed off, looking pained before wiping the sweat from his face
and restarting his mower.
The question was what my administration could do to help a man like that.
He hadn’t lost his home, but he’d lost faith in the shared enterprise of our
country, its larger ideal.
Affordable-housing advocates and some progressives in Congress were
pushing a large-scale government program to not only reduce monthly mortgage
payments for people at risk of losing their homes but actually forgive a portion of
their outstanding balance. At first blush the idea had obvious appeal: a “bailout
for Main Street, not Wall Street,” as proponents suggested. But the sheer scale of
lost home equity across the country made such a principal-reduction program
cost-prohibitive; our team calculated that even something the size of a second
TARP—a political impossibility—would have a limited effect when spread out
across the $20 trillion U.S. real estate market.

We settled on launching two more modest programs, both of which I
detailed that day in Mesa: the Home Affordable Modification Program (HAMP),
designed to reduce the monthly mortgage payments of eligible homeowners to
no more than 31 percent of their income, and the Home Affordable Refinance
Program (HARP), which would help borrowers refinance their mortgage at
lower rates even if their homes were underwater. By design, not everyone would
be assisted under these programs. They wouldn’t help those who, through
subprime loans, had bought way more home than their income could support.
Nor would they be open to those who had bought real estate as a debt-financed
investment, thinking they could flip the property for a profit. Instead, the goal
was to target several million families teetering on the edge: those who lived in
their homes and had made what had seemed at the time like a responsible
purchase, but now needed relief to get them through.
Implementing even these limited programs posed all kinds of logistical
hurdles. For example, while it was in the interest of mortgage lenders to keep
families in their homes (in an already depressed market, foreclosed homes sold at
fire-sale prices, resulting in big losses for the lender), mortgages were no longer
held by a discrete set of banks that we could pressure into participating. Instead,
they’d been securitized, sold in bits and pieces to various investors around the
world. The homeowner never dealt directly with these anonymous lenders,
instead sending mortgage payments to a servicing company that operated as little
more than a glorified bill collector. Without the legal authority to force these
servicing companies to do anything, the best we could do was offer incentives for
them to offer homeowners a break. We also had to convince the servicing
companies to process millions of applications to determine who was or wasn’t
eligible for a mortgage modification or refinancing, something they were illequipped to do.
And just who, exactly, was deserving of government assistance? This question
would insinuate itself into just about every policy debate we had throughout the
economic crisis. After all, as bad as things were in 2009, the vast majority of
American homeowners were still figuring out a way, by hook or by crook, to stay
current on their mortgages. To do so, many had cut back on eating out, canceled
their cable TV, or spent down savings intended for their retirement or for their
children’s college expenses.
Was it fair to devote the hard-earned tax dollars of those Americans to
reducing the mortgage payments of a neighbor who’d fallen behind? What if the
neighbor had bought a bigger house than they could really afford? What if they

had opted for a cheaper but riskier type of mortgage? Did it matter if the
neighbor had been duped by a mortgage broker into thinking they were doing
the right thing? What if the neighbor had taken their kids to Disneyland the year
before rather than putting that money into a rainy-day fund—did that make them
less worthy of help? Or what if they had fallen behind on their payments not
because they’d put in a new swimming pool or taken a vacation but because
they’d lost their job, or because a family member had gotten sick and their
employer didn’t offer health insurance, or because they just happened to live in
the wrong state—how did that change the moral calculus?
For policy makers trying to halt a crisis, none of these questions mattered—at
least not in the short term. If your next-door neighbor’s house is on fire, you
don’t want the fire department dispatcher asking whether it was caused by
lightning or by someone smoking in bed before agreeing to send a fire truck; you
just want the fire put out before it reaches your house. Mass foreclosures were the
equivalent of a five-alarm fire that was destroying everyone’s home values and
taking the economy down with it. And from our perspective, at least, we were
the fire department.
Still, questions of fairness were very much on the minds of the public. I
wasn’t surprised when experts reacted critically to our housing package,
suggesting that the $75 billion price tag was too small to address the scale of the
problem, or when housing advocates blasted us in the press for not including a
means to reduce the overall principal. What my team and I didn’t anticipate was
the critique that ended up getting the most attention that day in Mesa, maybe
because it came from such an unlikely source. The day after the rally, Gibbs
mentioned that a CNBC business commentator named Rick Santelli had
launched a lengthy on-air rant about our housing plan. Gibbs, whose radar on
these things was rarely off, seemed concerned.
“It’s getting a lot of play,” he said. “And the press pool’s asking me about it.
You might want to check it out.”
That night I watched the video clip on my laptop. I was familiar with Santelli;
he seemed no different from most of the talking heads populating the cable
business shows, delivering a mix of market gossip and yesterday’s news with the
glib conviction of a late-night infomercial host. In this instance, he’d been
broadcasting live from the floor of the Chicago Mercantile Exchange, charged up
with theatrical outrage and surrounded by traders who were smugly cheering
from their desks as he regurgitated a bunch of standard Republican talking points,

including the (incorrect) claim that we’d be paying off the mortgages of
irresponsible spendthrifts and deadbeats—“losers,” Santelli called them—who had
gotten in over their heads. “The government is promoting bad behavior!” he
shouted. “How many of you people want to pay for your neighbor’s mortgage
that has an extra bathroom and can’t pay their bills?”
Santelli went on to declare that “our Founding Fathers, people like Benjamin
Franklin and Jefferson, what we’re doing in this country now is making them roll
over in their graves.” Somewhere in mid-monologue, he suggested “a Chicago
tea party in July” to put a stop to big-government giveaways.
It was hard for me not to dismiss the whole thing for what it was: a mildly
entertaining shtick intended not to inform but to fill airtime, sell ads, and make
the viewers of Squawk Box feel like they were real insiders—not one of the
“losers.” Who, after all, was going to take such half-baked populism seriously?
How many Americans considered the traders at the Chicago Merc representative
of the country—traders who still had jobs precisely because the government had
stepped in to keep the financial system afloat?
In other words, it was bullshit. Santelli knew it. The CNBC anchors
bantering with him knew it. And yet it was clear that the traders, at least, fully
embraced what Santelli was peddling. They didn’t appear chastened by the fact
that the game they played had been rigged up and down the line, if not by them
then by their employers, the real high rollers in wood-paneled boardrooms. They
didn’t seem concerned by the fact that for every “loser” who had bought more
house than he could afford, there were twenty folks who had lived within their
means but were now suffering the fallout from Wall Street’s bad bets.
No, these traders were genuinely aggrieved, convinced that they were about
to get screwed at the hands of the government. They thought they were the
victims. One had even leaned into Santelli’s mic and declared our housing
program a “moral hazard”—deploying an economic term that had entered the
popular lexicon, used to explain how policies that shielded banks from their
mounting losses might end up encouraging even more financial recklessness in
the future. Only now the same term was being wielded to argue against help for
families who, through no fault of their own, were about to lose their homes.
I clicked the video feed off, feeling irritated. It was a familiar trick, I thought
to myself, the kind of rhetorical sleight of hand that had become a staple of
conservative pundits everywhere, whatever the issue: taking language once used
by the disadvantaged to highlight a societal ill and turning it on its ear. The

problem is no longer discrimination against people of color, the argument goes;
it’s “reverse racism,” with minorities “playing the race card” to get an unfair
advantage. The problem isn’t sexual harassment in the workplace; it’s humorless
“feminazis” beating men over the head with their political correctness. The
problem is not bankers using the market as their personal casino, or corporations
suppressing wages by busting unions and offshoring jobs. It’s the lazy and shiftless,
along with their liberal Washington allies, intent on mooching off the economy’s
real “makers and the doers.”
Such arguments had nothing to do with facts. They were impervious to
analysis. They went deeper, into the realm of myth, redefining what was fair,
reassigning victimhood, conferring on people like those traders in Chicago that
most precious of gifts: the conviction of innocence, as well as the righteous
indignation that comes with it.
—
think back to that Santelli clip, which foreshadowed so many of
the political battles I’d face during my presidency. For there was at least one
sideways truth in what he’d said: Our demands on the government had changed
over the past two centuries, since the time the Founders had chartered it. Beyond
the fundamentals of repelling enemies and conquering territory, enforcing
property rights and policing issues that property-holding white men deemed
necessary to maintain order, our early democracy had largely left each of us to our
own devices. Then a bloody war was fought to decide whether property rights
extended to treating Blacks as chattel. Movements were launched by workers,
farmers, and women who had experienced firsthand how one man’s liberty too
often involved their own subjugation. A depression came, and people learned that
being left to your own devices could mean penury and shame.
Which is how the United States and other advanced democracies came to
create the modern social contract. As our society grew more complex, more and
more of the government’s function took the form of social insurance, with each
of us chipping in through our tax dollars to protect ourselves collectively—for
disaster relief if our house was destroyed in a hurricane; unemployment insurance
if we lost a job; Social Security and Medicare to lessen the indignities of old age;
reliable electricity and phone service for those who lived in rural areas where
utility companies wouldn’t otherwise make a profit; public schools and
universities to make education more egalitarian.
I WOULD OFTEN

It worked, more or less. In the span of a generation and for a majority of
Americans, life got better, safer, more prosperous, and more just. A broad middle
class flourished. The rich remained rich, if maybe not quite as rich as they would
have liked, and the poor were fewer in number, and not as poor as they’d
otherwise have been. And if we sometimes debated whether taxes were too high
or certain regulations were discouraging innovation, whether the “nanny state”
was sapping individual initiative or this or that program was wasteful, we
generally understood the advantages of a society that at least tried to offer a fair
shake to everyone and built a floor beneath which nobody could sink.
Maintaining this social compact, though, required trust. It required that we
see ourselves as bound together, if not as a family then at least as a community,
each member worthy of concern and able to make claims on the whole. It
required us to believe that whatever actions the government might take to help
those in need were available to you and people like you; that nobody was gaming
the system and that the misfortunes or stumbles or circumstances that caused
others to suffer were ones to which you at some point in your life might fall prey.
Over the years, that trust proved difficult to sustain. In particular, the fault
line of race strained it mightily. Accepting that African Americans and other
minority groups might need extra help from the government—that their specific
hardships could be traced to a brutal history of discrimination rather than
immutable characteristics or individual choices—required a level of empathy, of
fellow feeling, that many white voters found difficult to muster. Historically,
programs designed to help racial minorities, from “forty acres and a mule” to
affirmative action, were met with open hostility. Even universal programs that
enjoyed broad support—like public education or public sector employment—had
a funny way of becoming controversial once Black and brown people were
included as beneficiaries.
And harder economic times strained civic trust. As the U.S. growth rate
started to slow in the 1970s—as incomes then stagnated and good jobs declined
for those without a college degree, as parents started worrying about their kids
doing at least as well as they had done—the scope of people’s concerns narrowed.
We became more sensitive to the possibility that someone else was getting
something we weren’t and more receptive to the notion that the government
couldn’t be trusted to be fair.
Promoting that story—a story that fed not trust but resentment—had come to
define the modern Republican Party. With varying degrees of subtlety and

varying degrees of success, GOP candidates adopted it as their central theme,
whether they were running for president or trying to get elected to the local
school board. It became the template for Fox News and conservative radio, the
foundational text for every think tank and PAC the Koch Brothers financed: The
government was taking money, jobs, college slots, and status away from
hardworking, deserving people like us and handing it all to people like them—
those who didn’t share our values, who didn’t work as hard as we did, the kind of
people whose problems were of their own making.
The intensity of these convictions put Democrats on the defensive, making
leaders less bold about proposing new initiatives, limiting the boundaries of
political debate. A deep and suffocating cynicism took hold. Indeed, it became
axiomatic among political consultants of both parties that restoring trust in the
government or in any of our major institutions was a lost cause, and that the
battle between Democrats and Republicans each election cycle now came down
to whether America’s squeezed middle class was more likely to identify the
wealthy and powerful or the poor and minorities as the reason they weren’t doing
better.
I didn’t want to believe that this was all our politics had to offer. I hadn’t run
simply to fan anger and allocate blame. I had run to rebuild the American
people’s trust—not just in the government but in one another. If we trusted one
another, democracy worked. If we trusted one another, the social compact held,
and we could solve big problems like wage stagnation and declining retirement
security. But how could we even begin?
The economic crisis had tipped recent elections in the Democrats’ favor. But
far from restoring any sense of common purpose or faith in the government’s
capacity to do good, the crisis had also made people more angry, more fearful,
more convinced that the fix was in. What Santelli understood, what McConnell
and Boehner understood, was how easily that anger could be channeled, how
useful fear could be in advancing their cause.
The forces they represented might have lost the recent battle at the polls—but
the larger war, that clash of worldviews, values, and narratives, was the one they
would still try to win.
—
IF ALL THIS

seems obvious to me now, it wasn’t at the time. My team and I were

too busy. Passing the Recovery Act and rolling out our housing plan may have
been necessary elements in ending the crisis. They weren’t close to being
sufficient. In particular, the global financial system was still broken—and the man
I was relying on to fix it was not off to a promising start.
Tim Geithner’s problems had begun weeks earlier, during the process to get
him confirmed as Treasury secretary. Historically, Senate confirmation of cabinet
appointments was a relatively routine affair, with senators from both parties
operating on the presumption that presidents were entitled to choose their own
teams—even if they considered the men and women the president selected to be
scoundrels and fools. But in recent years, the Senate’s constitutional mandate to
“advise and consent” had become one more weapon in the endless cycle of
partisan trench warfare. Senate staffers of the opposing party now scoured the
records of nominees, looking for any youthful indiscretion or damaging quote
that could then be raised in a hearing or used to make news. The nominees’
personal lives became the subject of endless and intrusive public questioning. The
point of the exercise was not necessarily to torpedo the appointment—eventually
most nominees got confirmed—but to distract and politically embarrass the
administration. The hazing quality of the proceedings had another consequence:
With increasing frequency, highly qualified candidates for top federal jobs would
cite the confirmation ordeal—what it might do to their reputations, how it might
affect their families—as a reason to decline a high-profile post.
Tim’s particular problem had to do with taxes: During the three years he’d
spent working for the International Monetary Fund, it turned out, neither he nor
his accountants had noticed that the organization did not withhold its U.S.
employees’ payroll taxes. It was an innocent and apparently common mistake,
and when an audit surfaced the problem in 2006, a full two years before he was
even considered for the Treasury job, Tim amended his returns and paid what the
audit said he owed. Yet given the political climate—and the fact that as Treasury
secretary, Tim would be overseeing the IRS—the reaction to his error was
unforgiving. Republicans suggested that he had purposely committed tax fraud.
Late-night comics made jokes at his expense. Tim grew despondent, telling Axe
and Rahm that perhaps I should nominate someone else, which led me to call
him late one night to buck him up and insist that he was “my guy.”
Although he was confirmed a few days later, Tim was aware that it was by the
smallest margin of any Treasury nominee in U.S. history, and that his credibility
both at home and internationally had been damaged. I wasn’t as worried about all
that; nobody remembered confirmation votes, and I was certain his credibility

would quickly rebound. But the confirmation drama reminded me that Tim was
still a civilian, a lifelong technocrat who had always operated behind the scenes. It
would take him some time—just as it had taken me—to get accustomed to the
glare of the spotlight.
The day after Tim’s confirmation, he and Larry came to the Oval Office to
brief me on the grim state of the financial system. Credit remained frozen. The
markets were precarious. Five massive institutions—“five big bombs,” Tim called
them—were in particular peril: Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, which had become
virtually the only sources of housing finance and were burning through the $200
billion in taxpayer funds Treasury had injected into them the previous year; the
insurance giant AIG, which had massive exposure as a result of insuring
mortgage-based derivatives and had required $150 billion in TARP over the
previous four months just to stay afloat; and two banks, Citigroup and Bank of
America, which together constituted about 14 percent of America’s bank deposits
and had seen their stock drop 82 percent over the previous four months.
A renewed run on any one of these five financial institutions could tip it into
insolvency, which in turn could trigger a global financial earthquake even bigger
than the one we’d just weathered. And despite the hundreds of billions the
government had already devoted to their rescue, there was no way that the
remaining $300 billion in TARP funds could cover the current pace of losses. A
Federal Reserve analysis predicted that, unless the entire system stabilized soon,
the banks might need an additional $300 to $700 billion in government cash
infusion—and those numbers didn’t include AIG, which would later announce a
$62 billion quarterly loss.
Rather than pouring more taxpayer dollars into a leaky bucket, we had to
find a way to patch its holes. First and foremost, we needed to restore some
semblance of market confidence so that investors who’d fled to safety, pulling
trillions of dollars in private capital out of the financial sector, would return from
the sidelines and reinvest. When it came to Fannie and Freddie, Tim explained,
we had the authority to put more money into them without congressional
approval, in part because they’d already been placed in government
conservatorship. Right away, we agreed to a new $200 billion capital
commitment. This wasn’t a comfortable choice, but the alternative was to let the
entire U.S. mortgage market effectively vanish.
As for the rest of the financial system, the choices were dicier. A few days
later, in another Oval Office meeting, Tim and Larry outlined three basic

options. The first, most prominently advocated by FDIC chair and Bush holdover
Sheila Bair, involved a reprise of Hank Paulson’s original idea for TARP, which
was to have the government set up a single “bad bank” that would buy up all the
privately held toxic assets, thereby cleansing the banking sector. This would allow
investors to feel some form of trust and banks to start lending again.
Not surprisingly, the markets liked this approach, since it effectively dumped
future losses in the lap of taxpayers. The problem with the “bad bank” idea,
though, as both Tim and Larry pointed out, was that no one knew how to fairly
price all the toxic assets currently on the banks’ books. If the government paid
too much, it would amount to yet another massive taxpayer bailout with few
strings attached. If, on the other hand, the government paid too little—and with
an estimated $1 trillion in toxic assets still out there, fire-sale prices would be all
the government could afford—the banks would have to swallow massive losses
right away and would almost certainly go belly-up anyway. In fact, it was
precisely because of these pricing complications that Hank Paulson had
abandoned the idea back at the start of the crisis.
We had a second possibility, one that on the surface seemed cleaner: to
temporarily nationalize those systemically significant financial institutions that—
based on the current market price of their assets and liabilities—were insolvent
and then force them to go through a restructuring similar to a bankruptcy
proceeding, including making shareholders and bondholders take “haircuts” on
their holdings and potentially replacing both management and boards. This
option fulfilled my desire to “tear the Band-Aid off” and fix the system once and
for all, rather than letting the banks limp along in what was sometimes referred to
as a “zombie” state—technically still in existence but without enough capital or
credibility to function. It also had the benefit of satisfying what Tim liked to refer
to as “Old Testament justice”—the public’s understandable desire to see those
who’d done wrong punished and shamed.
As usual, though, what looked like the simplest solution wasn’t so simple.
Once the government nationalized one bank, stakeholders at every other bank
would almost certainly dump their holdings as fast as they could, fearing that their
institution would be next. Such runs would likely trigger the need to nationalize
the next-weakest bank, and the one after that, and the one after that, in what
would become a cascading government takeover of America’s financial sector.
Not only would that cost a whole lot of money; it also would require the
U.S. government to manage these institutions for as long as it took to eventually

sell them off. And while we were busy contending with a million inevitable
lawsuits (filed not just by Wall Street types but also by pension funds and small
investors angry over the forced “haircut”), the question would be who would we
put in charge of these banks—especially given that almost everyone with the
requisite experience was likely to be tainted by some involvement with subprime
lending? Who would set their salaries and bonuses? How would the public feel if
these nationalized banks just kept bleeding money? And to whom could the
government ultimately sell these banks, other than to other banks that might have
been similarly complicit in creating the mess in the first place?
In part because there were no good answers to these questions, Tim had
cooked up a third option. His theory was this: Although nobody doubted that
banks were in bad shape and had a whole bunch of bad assets on their books, the
market panic had so deeply depressed all asset prices that their condition might
look worse than it really was. After all, the overwhelming majority of mortgages
wouldn’t end up in default. Not every mortgage-backed security was worthless,
and not every bank was awash in bad bets. And yet as long as the market had
trouble discerning genuine insolvency from temporary illiquidity, most investors
would simply avoid anything related to the financial sector.
Tim’s proposed solution would come to be known as a “stress test.” The
Federal Reserve would set a benchmark for how much capital each of the
nineteen systemically significant banks needed to survive a worst-case scenario.
The Fed would then dispatch regulators to pore over each bank’s books,
rigorously assessing whether or not it had enough of a financial cushion to make
it through a depression; if not, the bank would be given six months to raise that
amount of capital from private sources. If it still fell short, the government would
then step in to provide enough capital to meet the benchmark, with
nationalization coming into play only if the government’s infusion exceeded 50
percent. Either way, the markets would finally have a clear picture of each bank’s
condition. Shareholders would see their shares in a bank diluted, but only in
proportion to the amount of capital needed for the bank to get well. And
taxpayers would be on the hook only as a last resort.
Tim presented this third option more as a framework than a detailed plan, and
Larry voiced some skepticism, believing that the banks were irredeemable, that
the markets would never believe in the rigors of a government-managed audit,
and that the exercise would do little more than delay the inevitable. Tim
acknowledged those risks. He added that any stress test would require about three
months to complete, during which time the public pressure for us to take more

decisive action would only build; in the meantime any number of events could
send the markets into an even sharper tailspin.
Larry and Tim stopped talking and waited for my reaction. I sat back in my
chair.
“Anything else on the menu?” I asked.
“Not right now, Mr. President.”
“Not very appetizing.”
“No, Mr. President.”
I nodded, pondered the probabilities, and after a few more questions decided
that Tim’s stress-test approach was our best way forward. Not because it was
great—not even because it was good—but because the other approaches were
worse. Larry compared it to having a doctor administer a less invasive treatment
before opting for radical surgery. If the stress test worked, we could fix the system
faster and with less taxpayer money. If it didn’t, we’d probably be no worse off
and would at least have a better sense of what more radical surgery would entail.
Assuming, of course, that the patient didn’t die in the meantime.
—
weeks later, on February 10, Tim addressed the public for the first
time as Treasury secretary, speaking in a grand hall inside the Treasury Building
called the Cash Room, which for more than a century following the Civil War
had operated as a bank, dispensing currency directly from government vaults. The
idea was that Tim would unveil the framework for the stress test and outline
other measures we were taking to stabilize the floundering banks, sending a signal
that despite the uncertainty of the times, we were calm and had a credible plan.
Confidence, of course, is hard to convey if you don’t fully feel it. Still bruised
by the confirmation hearings, having spent his first few weeks on the job working
with only a skeleton staff, and still sorting out the details of how the stress test
would work, Tim stepped before a bank of TV cameras and financial journalists
that day and promptly tanked.
By every estimation, including his own, the speech was a disaster. He looked
nervous, was awkwardly using a teleprompter for the first time, and spoke in only
vague terms about the overall plan. The White House communications team had
been pressing him to emphasize our intent to get tough on the banks, even as our
economic team emphasized the need to reassure the financial markets that there
A COUPLE OF

was no need for panic. Meanwhile, the alphabet soup of independent agencies
responsible for regulating the financial system had not coalesced around Tim’s
proposal, and several agency heads, like Sheila Bair, kept pushing their own pet
ideas. The result was a classic speech by committee, full of hedged bets and mixed
messages, reflecting all the contradictory pressures. And in the rush to get it
finished, Tim—who was running on fumes at this point—had devoted almost no
time to practicing his delivery.
As he was speaking, the stock market dropped by more than 3 percent. By
day’s end, it was down almost 5 percent, with financial stocks falling a full 11
percent. Tim’s speech was all over the news, being parsed every which way. As
Larry had predicted, many analysts viewed the stress test as nothing more than an
elaborate whitewash, a new string of bailouts. Commentators across the political
spectrum were now openly wondering whether Tim’s tenure, my presidency,
and the global financial system were headed for the dumpster.
As much as Tim blamed himself during the next morning’s postmortem, I
recognized it as a systems failure—and a failure on my part to put those who
worked under me in a position to succeed. A day earlier, speaking at a press
conference of my own, I’d unthinkingly and unfairly put a good deal of advance
hype on Tim’s speech, telling reporters that he’d be announcing “clear and
specific plans” and was set to have “his moment in the sun.”
The lessons all around were painful but useful. In the months that followed,
I’d drive our team to run a tighter process, with better communications between
relevant parts of the administration; to anticipate problems and resolve disputes
before we took any plans public, allowing our ideas appropriate time and space to
germinate regardless of external pressure; to pay careful attention to how big
projects were staffed; and to sweat the details not just of substance but of
stagecraft as well.
And one more thing: I told myself not to ever open my big mouth again to
set up expectations that, given the circumstances, could not possibly be met.
Still, the damage was done. The world’s first impression of my hardworking,
all-star economic team was that of a gang that couldn’t shoot straight.
Republicans crowed. Rahm fielded calls from nervous Democrats. About the
only positive thing I could draw from the fiasco was Tim’s reaction to it. His
spirit could have been crushed, but it wasn’t. Instead, he had the resigned air of
someone who would take his punishment for the poor speech performance but at
the same time was confident that on the bigger stuff, he was right.

I liked that in him. He was still my guy. The best we could do now was
hunker down, execute, and hope that our damn plan actually worked.
—
“MADAM SPEAKER… the

President of the United States!”
For reasons that still aren’t entirely clear to me, a newly elected president’s
first speech before a joint session of Congress isn’t technically considered a State
of the Union address. But for all intents and purposes, that’s exactly what it is—
the first of that annual ritual in which a president has the chance to speak directly
to tens of millions of fellow Americans.
My own first address was scheduled for February 24, which meant that even
as we were scrambling to get our economic rescue plan in place, I had to steal
whatever scraps of time I could to review the drafts Favs worked up. It wasn’t an
easy assignment for either of us. Other speeches could traffic in broad themes or
focus narrowly on a single issue. In the SOTU, as West Wing staffers called it,
the president was expected to outline both domestic and foreign policy priorities
for the coming year. And no matter how much you dressed up your plans and
proposals with anecdotes or catchy phrases, detailed explanations of Medicare
expansion or tax credit refundability rarely stirred the heartstrings.
Having been a senator, I was well versed in the politics of standing ovations at
the SOTU: the ritualized spectacle in which members of the president’s party
leapt to their feet and cheered to the rafters at practically every third line, while
the opposition party refused to applaud even the most heartwarming story for fear
that the cameras might catch them consorting with the enemy. (The sole
exception to this rule was any mention of troops overseas.) Not only did this
absurd bit of theater highlight the country’s divisions at a time when we needed
unity; the constant interruptions added at least fifteen minutes to an already long
speech. I had considered beginning my address by asking all those in attendance
to hold their applause, but unsurprisingly, Gibbs and the comms team had nixed
the idea, insisting that a silent chamber would not play well on TV.
But if the process ahead of the SOTU left us feeling harried and uninspired—
if at various points I told Favs that after an election night speech, an inauguration
speech, and nearly two years of nonstop talking I had absolutely nothing new to
say and would be doing the country a favor by emulating Thomas Jefferson and
just dropping off my remarks to Congress for the people to read at their leisure—

it all vanished the instant I arrived at the threshold of the ornate House chamber
and heard the sergeant at arms announce my entrance onto the floor.
“Madam Speaker…” Perhaps more than any others, those words and the
scene that followed made me conscious of the grandeur of the office I now
occupied. There was the thundering applause as I stepped into the chamber; the
slow walk down the center aisle through outstretched hands; the members of my
cabinet arrayed along the first and second rows; the Joint Chiefs in their crisp
uniforms and the Supreme Court justices in their black robes, like members of an
ancient guild; the greetings from Speaker Pelosi and Vice President Biden,
positioned on either side of me; and my wife beaming down from the upper
gallery in her sleeveless dress (that was when the cult of Michelle’s arms truly
took off), waving and blowing a kiss as the Speaker lowered her gavel and the
proceedings commenced.
Although I spoke about my plans to end the war in Iraq, fortify U.S. efforts in
Afghanistan, and prosecute the fight against terrorist organizations, the bulk of my
address was devoted to the economic crisis. I went over the Recovery Act, our
housing plan, the rationale behind the stress test. But there was also a bigger point
I wanted to make: that we needed to keep reaching for more. I didn’t just want
to solve the emergencies of the day; I felt we needed to make a bid for lasting
change. Once we’d restored growth to the economy, we couldn’t be satisfied
with simply returning to business as usual. I made clear that night that I intended
to move forward with structural reforms—in education, energy, and climate
policy, in healthcare and financial regulation—that would lay the foundation for
long-term and broad-based prosperity in America.
The days had long passed since I got nervous on a big stage, and considering
how much ground we had to cover, the speech went about as well as I could
have hoped. According to Axe and Gibbs, the reviews were fine, the talking
heads deeming me suitably “presidential.” But apparently they’d been surprised
by the boldness of my agenda, my willingness to forge ahead with reforms
beyond those that addressed the central business of saving the economy.
It was as if nobody had been listening to the campaign promises I’d made—or
as if they assumed that I hadn’t actually meant what I’d said. The response to my
speech gave me an early preview of what would become a running criticism
during my first two years in office: that I was trying to do too much, that to
aspire to anything more than a return to the pre-crisis status quo, to treat change
as more than a slogan, was naïve and irresponsible at best, and at worst a threat to

America.
—
the economic crisis was, my fledgling administration
didn’t have the luxury of putting everything else on hold, for the machinery of
the federal government stretched across the globe, churning every minute of
every day, indifferent to overstuffed in-boxes and human sleep cycles. Many of its
functions (generating Social Security checks, keeping weather satellites aloft,
processing agricultural loans, issuing passports) required no specific instructions
from the White House, operating much like a human body breathes or sweats,
outside the brain’s conscious control. But this still left countless agencies and
buildings full of people in need of our daily attention: looking for policy guidance
or help with staffing, seeking advice because some internal breakdown or external
event had thrown the system for a loop. After our first weekly Oval Office
meeting, I asked Bob Gates, who’d served under seven previous presidents, for
any advice he might have in managing the executive branch. He gave me one of
his wry, crinkly smiles.
“There’s only one thing you can count on, Mr. President,” he said. “On any
given moment in any given day, somebody somewhere is screwing up.”
We went to work trying to minimize screw-ups.
In addition to my regular meetings with the Treasury, state, and defense
secretaries and the daily briefings I got from my national security and economic
teams, I made a point of sitting down with each member of my cabinet to go
over strategic plans for their departments, pushing them to identify roadblocks
and set priorities. I visited their respective agencies, often using the occasion to
announce a new policy or government practice, and spoke to large gatherings of
career government staffers, thanking them for their service and reminding them
of the importance of their missions.
There was an endless flow of meetings with various constituency groups—the
Business Roundtable, the AFL-CIO, the U.S. Conference of Mayors, veterans’
services organizations—to address their concerns and solicit their support. There
were big set pieces that absorbed enormous amounts of time (like the
presentation of our first federal budget proposal) and innovative public events
designed to increase government transparency (like our first-ever live-streamed
town hall). Each week I delivered a video address. I sat down for interviews with
AS ALL-CONSUMING AS

various print reporters and TV anchors, both national and local. I gave remarks at
the National Prayer Breakfast and threw a Super Bowl party for members of
Congress. By the first week of March, I’d also held two summits with foreign
leaders—one in D.C. with British prime minister Gordon Brown, the other in
Ottawa with Canadian prime minister Stephen Harper—each involving its own
policy objectives and diplomatic protocols.
For every event, meeting, and policy rollout, a hundred people or more
might be frantically working behind the scenes. Every document issued was factchecked, every person who showed up for a meeting was vetted, every event was
planned to the minute, and every policy announcement was carefully scrubbed to
make sure it was achievable, affordable, and didn’t carry the risk of unforeseen
consequences.
This kind of focused industriousness extended to the East Wing, where the
First Lady had a small suite of offices and a busy schedule of her own. From the
moment we’d arrived at the White House, Michelle had thrown herself into her
new job while also making a home for our family. Thanks to her, Malia and
Sasha seemed to be taking the transition to our strange new life completely in
stride. They tossed balls in the long hallway that ran the length of the residence
and made cookies with the White House chefs. Their weekends were filled with
playdates and birthday parties with new friends, rec basketball, soccer leagues,
tennis lessons for Malia, dance classes and tae kwon do for Sasha. (Much like her
mother, Sasha was not to be messed with.) Out in public, Michelle sparkled with
charm, her fashion choices attracting favorable notice. Tasked with hosting the
annual Governors Ball, Michelle had shaken up tradition by arranging to have
Earth, Wind & Fire provide the entertainment, their horn-blasting R&B funk
generating moves on the dance floor that I’d never thought I’d see out of a
bipartisan gathering of middle-aged public officials.
Look beautiful. Care for your family. Be gracious. Support your man. For most of
American history, the First Lady’s job had been defined by these tenets, and
Michelle was hitting all the marks. What she hid from the outside world, though,
was the way her new role initially chafed, how fraught with uncertainty it felt.
Not all her frustrations were new. For as long as we’d been together, I’d
watched my wife struggle the way many women did, trying to reconcile her
identity as an independent, ambitious professional with a desire to mother our
girls with the same level of care and attentiveness that Marian had given her. I
had always tried to encourage Michelle in her career, never presuming that

household duties were her province alone; and we’d been lucky that our joint
income and a strong network of close-by relatives and friends had given us
advantages that many families didn’t have. Still, this wasn’t enough to insulate
Michelle from the wildly unrealistic and often contradictory social pressures that
women with children absorbed from the media, their peers, their employers, and,
of course, the men in their lives.
My career in politics, with its prolonged absences, had made it even tougher.
More than once Michelle had decided not to pursue an opportunity that excited
her but would have demanded too much time away from the girls. Even in her
last job at the University of Chicago Medical Center, with a supportive boss and
the ability to make her own schedule, she’d never fully shaken the sense that she
was shortchanging the girls, her work, or both. In Chicago, she had at least been
able to avoid being in the public eye and manage the everyday push and pull on
her own terms. Now all that had changed. With my election, she’d been forced
to give up a job with real impact for a role that—in its original design, at least—
was far too small for her gifts. Meanwhile, mothering our kids involved a whole
new set of complications—like having to call a parent to explain why Secret
Service agents needed to survey their house before Sasha came for a playdate or
working with staffers to press a tabloid not to print a picture of Malia hanging out
with her friends at the mall.
On top of these things, Michelle suddenly found herself drafted as a symbol in
America’s ongoing gender wars. Each choice she made, each word she uttered,
was feverishly interpreted and judged. When she lightheartedly referred to herself
as a “mom in chief,” some commentators expressed disappointment that she
wasn’t using her platform to break down stereotypes about a woman’s proper
place. At the same time, efforts to stretch the boundaries of what a First Lady
should or should not do carried their own peril: Michelle still smarted from the
viciousness of some of the attacks leveled at her during the campaign, and one
had only to look at Hillary Clinton’s experience to know how quickly people
could turn on a First Lady who engaged in anything resembling policy making.
Which is why, in those early months, Michelle took her time deciding how
she’d use her new office, figuring out how and where she might exert an
influence while carefully and strategically setting the tone for her work as First
Lady. She consulted with Hillary and with Laura Bush. She recruited a strong
team, filling her staff with seasoned professionals whose judgment she trusted.
Eventually she decided to take on two causes that were personally meaningful:
the alarming jump in America’s childhood obesity rates and the embarrassing lack

of support for America’s military families.
It wasn’t lost on me that both issues tapped into frustrations and anxieties that
Michelle herself sometimes felt. The obesity epidemic had come to her attention
a few years earlier when our pediatrician, noticing that Malia’s body mass index
had increased somewhat, identified too many highly processed “kid-friendly”
foods as the culprit. The news had confirmed Michelle’s worries that our harried,
overscheduled lives might be adversely impacting the girls. Similarly, her interest
in military families had been sparked by emotional roundtable discussions she’d
had during the campaign with the spouses of deployed service members. As
they’d described feeling a mixture of loneliness and pride, as they’d admitted to
occasional resentment at being treated as an afterthought in the larger cause of
defending the nation, as they expressed reluctance to ask for help for fear of
seeming selfish, Michelle had heard echoes of her own circumstances.
Precisely because of these personal connections, I was sure her impact on
both issues would be substantial. Michelle was someone who started from the
heart and not the head, from experience rather than abstractions. I also knew this:
My wife didn’t like to fail. Whatever ambivalence she felt about her new role,
she was nonetheless determined to carry it out well.
As a family, we were adapting week by week, each of us finding means to
adjust to, cope with, and enjoy our circumstances. Michelle turned to her
unflappable mother for counsel anytime she felt anxious, the two of them
huddling together on the couch in the solarium on the third floor of the White
House. Malia threw herself into her fifth-grade homework and was lobbying us
to deliver on our personal campaign promise to get a family dog. Sasha, just
seven, still fell asleep at night clutching the frayed chenille blankie she’d had since
she was a baby, her body growing so fast you could almost see the difference each
day.
Our new housing arrangement brought one especially happy surprise: Now
that I lived above the store, so to speak, I was home basically all the time. On
most days, the work came to me, not the other way around. Unless I was
traveling, I made a point of being at the dinner table by six-thirty each night,
even if it meant that later I needed to go back downstairs to the Oval Office.
What a joy that was, listening to Malia and Sasha talk about their days,
narrating a world of friend drama, quirky teachers, jerky boys, silly jokes,
dawning insights, and endless questions. After the meal was over and they
bounded off to do homework and get ready for bed, Michelle and I would sit and

catch up for a time, less often about politics and more about news of old friends,
movies we wanted to see, and most of all the wondrous process of watching our
daughters grow up. Then we’d read the girls bedtime stories, hug them tightly,
and tuck them in—Malia and Sasha in their cotton pajamas smelling of warmth
and life. In that hour and a half or so each evening, I found myself replenished—
my mind cleansed and my heart cured of whatever damage a day spent pondering
the world and its intractable problems may have done.
If the girls and my mother-in-law were our anchors in the White House,
there were others who helped me and Michelle manage the stress of those early
months. Sam Kass, the young man we’d hired to cook for us part-time back in
Chicago as the campaign got busy and our worries about the kids’ eating habits
peaked, had come with us to Washington, joining the White House not just as a
chef but also as Michelle’s point person on the childhood obesity issue. The son
of a math teacher at the girls’ old school and a former college baseball player, Sam
had an easygoing charm and compact good looks that were enhanced by a shiny,
clean-shaven head. He was also a genuine food policy expert, conversant in
everything from the effects of monoculture farming on climate change to the
links between eating habits and chronic disease. Sam’s work with Michelle would
prove invaluable; it was brainstorming with him, for example, that gave Michelle
the idea to plant a vegetable garden in the South Lawn. But what we got in the
bargain was a fun-loving uncle to the girls, a favorite younger brother to Michelle
and me, and—along with Reggie Love—someone I could shoot hoops or play a
game of pool with anytime I needed to blow off a little steam.
We found similar support from our longtime athletic trainer, Cornell
McClellan, a former social worker and martial arts expert who owned his own
gym in Chicago. Despite his imposing frame, Cornell was kind and goodhumored when he wasn’t torturing us with squats, deadlifts, burpees, and lunge
walks, and he’d decided that it was his duty to start splitting his time between
D.C. and Chicago to make sure the First Family stayed in shape.
Each morning, Monday through Thursday, Michelle and I began our days
with both Cornell and Sam, the four of us gathering in the small gym on the
third floor of the residence, its wall-mounted television reliably set to ESPN’s
SportsCenter. There was no disputing that Michelle was Cornell’s star pupil,
powering through her workouts with unerring focus, while Sam and I were
decidedly slower and given to taking longer breaks between sets, distracting
Cornell with heated debates—Jordan versus Kobe, Tom Hanks versus Denzel
Washington—anytime the regimen got too intense for our liking. For both

Michelle and me, that daily hour in the gym became one more zone of normalcy,
shared with friends who still called us by our first names and loved us like family,
who reminded us of the world we’d once known—and the version of ourselves
that we hoped always to inhabit.
—
final stress reliever that I didn’t like to talk about, one that had
been a chronic source of tension throughout my marriage: I was still smoking five
(or six, or seven) cigarettes a day.
It was the lone vice that had carried over from the rebel days of my youth. At
Michelle’s insistence, I had quit several times over the years, and I never smoked
in the house or in front of the kids. Once elected to the U.S. Senate, I had
stopped smoking in public. But a stubborn piece of me resisted the tyranny of
reason, and the strains of campaign life—the interminable car rides through
cornfields, the solitude of motel rooms—had conspired to keep me reaching for
the pack I kept handy in a suitcase or drawer. After the election, I’d told myself it
was as good a time as any to stop—by definition, I was in public just about
anytime I was outside the White House residence. But then things got so busy
that I found myself delaying my day of reckoning, wandering out to the pool
house behind the Oval Office after lunch or up to the third-floor terrace after
Michelle and the girls had gone to sleep, taking a deep drag and watching the
smoke curl toward the stars, telling myself I’d stop for good as soon as things
settled down.
Except things didn’t settle down. So much so that by March my daily
cigarette intake had crept up to eight (or nine, or ten).
That month, another estimated 663,000 Americans would lose their jobs,
with the unemployment rate shooting up to 8.5 percent. Foreclosures showed no
signs of abating, and credit remained frozen. The stock market hit what would be
its lowest point of the recession, down 57 percent from its peak, with shares of
Citigroup and Bank of America approaching penny-stock status. AIG,
meanwhile, was like a bottomless maw, its only apparent function being to
gobble up as much TARP money as possible.
All this would have been more than enough to keep my blood pressure rising.
What made it worse was the clueless attitude of the Wall Street executives whose
collective asses we were pulling out of the fire. Just before I took office, for
THERE WAS A

example, the leaders of most of the major banks had gone ahead and authorized
more than a billion dollars in year-end bonuses for themselves and their
lieutenants, despite having already received TARP funds to prop up their stock
prices. Not long after, Citigroup execs somehow decided it was a good idea to
order a new corporate jet. (Because this happened on our watch, someone on
Tim’s team was able to call the company’s CEO and browbeat him into canceling
the order.)
Meanwhile, bank executives bristled—sometimes privately, but often in the
press—at any suggestion that they had in any way screwed up, or should be
subject to any constraints when it came to running their business. This last bit of
chutzpah was most pronounced in the two savviest operators on Wall Street,
Lloyd Blankfein of Goldman Sachs and Jamie Dimon of JPMorgan Chase, both
of whom insisted that their institutions had avoided the poor management
decisions that plagued other banks and neither needed nor wanted government
assistance. These claims were true only if you ignored the fact that the solvency of
both outfits depended entirely on the ability of the Treasury and the Fed to keep
the rest of the financial system afloat, as well as the fact that Goldman in particular
had been one of the biggest peddlers of subprime-based derivatives—and had
dumped them onto less sophisticated customers right before the bottom fell out.
Their obliviousness drove me nuts. It wasn’t just that Wall Street’s attitude
toward the crisis confirmed every stereotype of the über-wealthy being
completely out of touch with the lives of ordinary people. Each tone-deaf
statement or self-serving action also made our job of saving the economy that
much harder.
Already, some Democratic constituencies were asking why we weren’t being
tougher on the banks—why the government wasn’t simply taking them over and
selling off their assets, for example, or why none of the individuals who had
caused such havoc had gone to jail. Republicans in Congress, unburdened by any
sense of responsibility for the mess they’d help create, were more than happy to
join in on the grilling. In testimony before various congressional committees,
Tim (who was now routinely labeled as a “former Goldman Sachs banker”
despite having never worked for Goldman and having spent nearly his entire
career in public service) would explain the need to wait for the stress-test results.
My attorney general, Eric Holder, would later point out that as egregious as the
behavior of the banks may have been leading up to the crisis, there were few
indications that their executives had committed prosecutable offenses under
existing statutes—and we were not in the business of charging people with crimes

just to garner good headlines.
But to a nervous and angry public, such answers—no matter how rational—
weren’t very satisfying. Concerned that we were losing the political high ground,
Axe and Gibbs urged us to sharpen our condemnations of Wall Street. Tim, on
the other hand, warned that such populist gestures would be counterproductive,
scaring off the investors we needed to recapitalize the banks. Trying to straddle
the line between the public’s desire for Old Testament justice and the financial
markets’ need for reassurance, we ended up satisfying no one.
“It’s like we’ve got a hostage situation,” Gibbs said to me one morning. “We
know the banks have explosives strapped to their chests, but to the public it just
looks like we’re letting them get away with a robbery.”
With tensions growing inside the White House and me wanting to make sure
everyone remained on the same page, in mid-March I called together my
economic team for a marathon Sunday session in the Roosevelt Room. For
several hours that day, we pressed Tim and his deputies for their thoughts on the
ongoing stress test—whether it would work, and whether Tim had a Plan B if it
didn’t. Larry and Christy argued that in light of mounting losses at Citigroup and
Bank of America, it was time for us to consider preemptive nationalization—the
kind of strategy that Sweden had ultimately pursued when it went through its
own financial crisis in the 1990s. This was in contrast, they said, to the
“forbearance” strategy that had left Japan in a lost decade of economic stagnation.
In response, Tim pointed out that Sweden—with a much smaller financial sector,
and at a time when the rest of the world was stable—had nationalized only two of
its major banks as a last resort, while providing effective guarantees for its
remaining four. An equivalent strategy on our part, he said, might cause the
already fragile global financial system to unravel, and would cost a minimum of
$200 to $400 billion. (“The chances of getting an additional dime of TARP
money from this Congress are somewhere between zero and zero!” Rahm
shouted, practically jumping out of his chair.) Some on the team suggested that
we at least take a more aggressive posture toward Citigroup and Bank of America
—forcing out their CEOs and current boards, for example, before granting more
TARP money. But Tim said such steps would be wholly symbolic—and, further,
would make us responsible for finding immediate replacements capable of
navigating unfamiliar institutions in the midst of the crisis.
It was an exhausting exercise, and as the session ran into the evening hours, I
told the team that I was going up to the residence to have dinner and get a

haircut and would expect them to have arrived at a consensus by the time I got
back. In truth, I’d already gotten what I wanted out of the meeting: confirmation
in my own mind that, despite the legitimate issues Larry, Christy, and others had
raised about the stress test, it continued to be our best shot under the
circumstances. (Or as Tim liked to put it, “Plan beats no plan.”)
Just as important, I felt assured that we’d run a good process: that our team
had looked at the problem from every conceivable angle; that no potential
solution had been discarded out of hand; and that everyone involved—from the
highest-ranking cabinet member to the most junior staffer in the room—had
been given the chance to weigh in. (For these same reasons, I would later invite
two groups of outside economists—one left-leaning, the other conservative—
who’d publicly questioned our handling of the crisis to meet me in the Oval, just
to see if they had any ideas that we hadn’t already considered. They didn’t.)
My emphasis on process was born of necessity. What I was quickly
discovering about the presidency was that no problem that landed on my desk,
foreign or domestic, had a clean, 100 percent solution. If it had, someone else
down the chain of command would have solved it already. Instead, I was
constantly dealing with probabilities: a 70 percent chance, say, that a decision to
do nothing would end in disaster; a 55 percent chance that this approach versus
that one might solve the problem (with a 0 percent chance that it would work out
exactly as intended); a 30 percent chance that whatever we chose wouldn’t work
at all, along with a 15 percent chance that it would make the problem worse.
In such circumstances, chasing after the perfect solution led to paralysis. On
the other hand, going with your gut too often meant letting preconceived
notions or the path of least political resistance guide a decision—with cherrypicked facts used to justify it. But with a sound process—one in which I was able
to empty out my ego and really listen, following the facts and logic as best I could
and considering them alongside my goals and my principles—I realized I could
make tough decisions and still sleep easy at night, knowing at a minimum that no
one in my position, given the same information, could have made the decision
any better. A good process also meant I could allow each member of the team to
feel ownership over the decision—which meant better execution and less
relitigation of White House decisions through leaks to The New York Times or
The Washington Post.
Returning from my haircut and dinner that night, I sensed that things had
played out the way I had hoped. Larry and Christy agreed that it made sense for

us to wait and see how the stress test went before taking more drastic action. Tim
accepted some useful suggestions about how to better prepare for possibly bad
results. Axe and Gibbs offered ideas about improving our communications
strategy. All in all, I was feeling pretty good about the day’s work.
Until, that is, someone brought up the issue of the AIG bonuses.
It seemed that AIG—which had thus far taken more than $170 billion in
TARP funds and still needed more—was paying its employees $165 million in
contractually obligated bonuses. Worse yet, a big chunk of the bonuses would go
to the division directly responsible for leaving the insurance giant wildly
overexposed in the subprime derivative business. AIG’s CEO, Edward Liddy
(who himself was blameless, having only recently agreed to take the helm at the
company as a public service and was paying himself just a dollar a year),
recognized that the bonuses were unseemly. But according to Tim, Liddy had
been advised by his lawyers that any attempt to withhold the payments would
likely result in successful lawsuits by the AIG employees and damage payments
potentially coming in at three times the original amount. To cap it off, we didn’t
appear to have any governmental authority to stop the bonus payments—in part
because the Bush administration had lobbied Congress against the inclusion of
“claw-back” provisions in the original TARP legislation, fearing that it would
discourage financial institutions from participating.
I looked around the room. “This is a joke, right? You guys are just messing
with me.”
Nobody laughed. Axe started arguing that we had to try to stop the
payments, even if our efforts were unsuccessful. Tim and Larry began arguing
back, acknowledging the whole thing was terrible but saying that if the
government forced a violation of contracts between private parties, we’d do
irreparable damage to our market-based system. Gibbs chimed in to suggest that
morality and common sense trumped contract law. After a few minutes, I cut
everyone off. I instructed Tim to keep looking at ways we might keep AIG from
dispensing the bonuses (knowing full well he’d probably come up empty). Then I
told Axe to prepare a statement condemning the bonuses that I could deliver the
next day (knowing full well that nothing I said would help lessen the damage).
Then I told myself that it was still the weekend and I needed a martini. That
was another lesson the presidency was teaching me: Sometimes it didn’t matter
how good your process was. Sometimes you were just screwed, and the best you
could do was have a stiff drink—and light up a cigarette.

—
the AIG bonuses brought the pent-up anger of several months to
an uncontrolled boil. Newspaper editorials were scathing. The House quickly
passed a bill to tax Wall Street bonuses at 90 percent for people making over
$250,000, only to watch it die in the Senate. In the White House briefing room,
it seemed like Gibbs fielded questions on no other topic. Code Pink, a quirky
antiwar group whose members (mostly women) dressed in pink T-shirts, pink
hats, and the occasional pink boa, ramped up protests outside various government
buildings and surfaced at hearings where Tim was appearing, hoisting signs with
slogans like GIVE US OUR $$$$$ BACK, clearly unimpressed by any argument about
the sanctity of contracts.
The following week, I decided to convene a White House meeting with the
CEOs of the top banks and financial institutions, hoping to avoid any further
surprises. Fifteen of them showed up, all men, all looking dapper and polished,
and they all listened with placid expressions as I explained that the public had run
out of patience, and that given the pain the financial crisis was causing across the
country—not to mention the extraordinary measures the government had taken
to support their institutions—the least they could do was show some restraint,
maybe even sacrifice.
When it was the executives’ turn to respond, each one offered some version
of the following: (a) the problems with the financial system really weren’t of their
making; (b) they had made significant sacrifices, including slashing their
workforces and reducing their own compensation packages; and (c) they hoped
that I would stop fanning the flames of populist anger, which they said was
hurting their stock prices and damaging industry morale. As proof of this last
point, several mentioned a recent interview in which I’d said that my
administration was shoring up the financial system only to prevent a depression,
not to help a bunch of “fat cat bankers.” When they spoke, it sounded like their
feelings were hurt.
“What the American people are looking for in this time of crisis,” one banker
said, “is for you to remind them that we’re all in this together.”
I was stunned. “You think it’s my rhetoric that’s made the public angry?”
Taking a deep breath, I searched the faces of the men around the table and
realized they were being sincere. Much like the traders in the Santelli video, these
Wall Street executives genuinely felt picked on. It wasn’t just a ploy. I tried then
to put myself in their shoes, reminding myself that these were people who had no
THE NEWS OF

doubt worked hard to get where they were, who had played the game no
differently than their peers and were long accustomed to adulation and deference
for having come out on top. They gave large sums to various charities. They
loved their families. They couldn’t understand why (as one would later tell me)
their children were now asking them whether they were “fat cats,” or why no
one was impressed that they had reduced their annual compensation from $50 or
$60 million to $2 million, or why the president of the United States wasn’t
treating them as true partners and accepting, just to take one example, Jamie
Dimon’s offer to send over some of JPMorgan’s top people to help the
administration design our proposed regulatory reforms.
I tried to understand their perspective, but I couldn’t. Instead, I found myself
thinking about my grandmother, how in my mind her Kansas prairie character
represented what a banker was supposed to be: Honest. Prudent. Exacting. Riskaverse. Someone who refused to cut corners, hated waste and extravagance, lived
by the code of delayed gratification, and was perfectly content to be a little bit
boring in how she did business. I wondered what Toot would make of the
bankers who now sat with me in this room, the same kind of men who’d so often
been promoted ahead of her—who in a month made more than she’d made in
her entire career, at least in part because they were okay with placing billiondollar bets with other people’s money on what they knew, or should have
known, was a pile of bad loans.
Finally I let out something between a laugh and a snort. “Let me explain
something, gentlemen,” I said, careful not to raise my voice. “People don’t need
my prompting to be angry. They’ve got that covered all on their own. The fact
is, we’re the only ones standing between you and the pitchforks.”
—
my words that day had much impact—other than reinforcing the
view on Wall Street that I was anti-business. Ironically, the same meeting would
later be cited by critics on the left as an example of how, in my general
fecklessness and alleged chumminess with Wall Street, I had failed to hold the
banks accountable during the crisis. Both takes were wrong, but this much was
true: By committing to the stress test and the roughly two-month wait for its
preliminary results, I’d placed on hold whatever leverage I had over the banks.
What was also true was that I felt constrained from making any rash moves while
I still had so many fronts of the economic crisis to deal with—including the need
I CAN’T SAY

to keep the U.S. auto industry from driving over a cliff.
Just as the Wall Street implosion was a culmination of long-standing structural
problems in the global financial system, what ailed the Big Three automakers—
bad management, bad cars, foreign competition, underfunded pensions, soaring
healthcare costs, an overreliance on the sale of high-margin, gas-guzzling SUVs—
had been decades in the making. The financial crisis and the deepening recession
had only hastened the reckoning. By the autumn of 2008, auto sales had plunged
30 percent to their lowest level in more than a decade, and GM and Chrysler
were running out of cash. While Ford was in slightly better shape (mainly due to
a fortuitous restructuring of its debt just before the crisis hit), analysts questioned
whether it could survive the collapse of the other two, given the reliance of all
three automakers on a common pool of parts suppliers across North America. Just
before Christmas, Hank Paulson had used a creative reading of the TARP
authorization to provide GM and Chrysler with more than $17 billion in bridge
loans. But without the political capital to force a more permanent solution, the
Bush administration had managed only to kick the can down the road until I
took office. Now that the cash was about to run out, it was up to me to decide
whether to put billions more into the automakers in order to keep them afloat.
Even during the transition, it had been clear to everyone on my team that
GM and Chrysler would have to go through some sort of court-structured
bankruptcy. Without it, there was simply no way that they could cover the cash
they were burning through each month, no matter how optimistic their sales
projections. Moreover, bankruptcy alone wouldn’t be enough. To justify further
government support, the automakers would also have to undergo a painstaking,
top-to-bottom business reorganization and find a way to make cars that people
wanted to buy. (“I don’t understand why Detroit can’t make a damn Corolla,” I
muttered more than once to my staff.)
Both tasks were easier said than done. For one thing, GM’s and Chrysler’s top
management made the Wall Street crowd look positively visionary. In an early
discussion with our transition economic team, GM CEO Rick Wagoner’s
presentation was so slapdash and filled with happy talk—including projections for
a 2 percent increase in sales every year, despite having seen declining sales for
much of the decade preceding the crisis—that it rendered even Larry temporarily
speechless. As for bankruptcy, the process for both GM and Chrysler would likely
be similar to open-heart surgery: complicated, bloody, fraught with risk. Just
about every stakeholder (management, workers, suppliers, shareholders,
pensioners, distributors, creditors, and the communities in which the

manufacturing plants were located) stood to lose something in the short term,
which would be cause for prolonged, bare-knuckle negotiations when it became
unclear whether the two companies would even survive another month.
We did have a few things going for us. Unlike the situation with the banks,
forcing GM and Chrysler to reorganize wasn’t likely to trigger widespread panic,
which gave us more room to demand concessions in exchange for continued
government support. It also helped that I had a strong personal relationship with
the United Auto Workers, whose leaders recognized that major changes needed
to be made in order for its members to hold on to their jobs.
Most important, our White House Auto Task Force—led by Steve Rattner
and Ron Bloom and staffed by a brilliant thirty-one-year-old policy specialist
named Brian Deese—was turning out to be terrific, combining analytical rigor
with an appreciation for the human dimensions of the million-plus jobs at stake in
getting this right. They had begun negotiations with the carmakers well before I
was even sworn in, giving GM and Chrysler sixty days to come up with formal
reorganization plans to demonstrate their viability. To make sure the companies
didn’t collapse during this period, they’d designed a series of incremental but
critical interventions—such as quietly guaranteeing both companies’ receivables
with suppliers so that they didn’t run out of parts.
In mid-March, the Auto Task Force came to the Oval Office to give me their
assessment. Neither of the plans that GM and Chrysler had submitted, they said,
passed muster; both companies were still living in a fantasy world of unrealistic
sales projections and vague strategies for getting costs under control. The team
felt that with an aggressive structured bankruptcy, though, GM could get back on
track, and recommended that we give the company sixty days to revise its
reorganization plan—provided it agreed to replace both Rick Wagoner and the
existing board of directors.
When it came to Chrysler, though, our team was split. The smallest of the
Big Three, Chrysler was also in the worst financial shape and—outside of its Jeep
brand—had what looked to be an unsalvageable product line. Given our limited
resources and the perilous state of auto sales more generally, some on the team
argued that we’d have a better chance of saving GM if we let Chrysler go. Others
insisted that we shouldn’t underestimate the potential economic shock of
allowing an iconic American company to collapse. Either way, the task force let
me know, the situation at Chrysler was deteriorating fast enough that I needed to
make my decision right away.

At this point, my assistant Katie poked her head into the Oval Office, telling
me I needed to get to the Situation Room for a meeting with my national
security team. Figuring I should probably take more than a half hour to decide
the fate of the American auto industry, I asked Rahm to reconvene the task force
along with my three senior advisors—Valerie, Pete, and Axe—in the Roosevelt
Room later that afternoon so I could hear from both sides (more process!). At
that meeting, I listened to Gene Sperling make a pitch for saving Chrysler and
Christy Romer and Austan Goolsbee explain why continued support of the
company likely amounted to throwing good money after bad. Rahm and Axe,
ever sensitive to the politics of the situation, pointed out that the country
opposed—by a stunning two-to-one margin—any further auto bailouts. Even in
Michigan, support barely reached a majority.
Rattner noted that Fiat had recently expressed an interest in buying a
significant stake in Chrysler and that its CEO, Sergio Marchionne, had taken over
that faltering company in 2004 and, impressively, made it profitable within a year
and a half. The discussions with Fiat, however, were still tentative, and nobody
could guarantee that any intervention would be enough to get Chrysler back on
track. A 51–49 decision, Rattner called it—with a strong likelihood that the odds
of success would seem bleaker once the company went into bankruptcy and we
had a better look under the hood.
I was thumbing through the charts, scrutinizing numbers, occasionally
glancing up at the portraits of Teddy and FDR hanging on the wall, when it
came time for Gibbs to speak. He had previously worked on U.S. senator Debbie
Stabenow’s campaign, in Michigan, and he now pointed to a map in the slide
deck that showed every Chrysler plant across the Midwest.
“Mr. President,” he said, “I’m not an economist, and I don’t know how to
run a car company. But I do know we’ve spent the last three months trying to
prevent a second Great Depression. And the thing is, in a lot of these towns that
depression has already arrived. We cut Chrysler off now and we might as well be
signing a death warrant for every spot you see on the map. Each one has
thousands of workers counting on us. The kind of people you met on the
campaign trail…losing their healthcare, their pensions, too old to start over. I
don’t know how you walk away from them. I don’t think that’s why you ran for
president.”
I stared at the points on the map, more than twenty in all, spread across
Michigan, Indiana, and Ohio, my mind wandering back to my earliest days as an

organizer in Chicago, when I’d meet with laid-off steelworkers in cold union
halls or church basements to discuss their community concerns. I could
remember their bodies heavy under winter coats, their hands chapped and
callused, their faces—white, Black, brown—betraying the quiet desperation of
men who’d lost their purpose. I hadn’t been able to help them much then; their
plants had already closed by the time I’d arrived, and people like me had no
leverage over the distant executives who’d made those decisions. I’d entered
politics with the notion that I might someday be able to offer something more
meaningful to those workers and their families.
And now here I was. I turned to Rattner and Bloom and told them to get
Chrysler on the phone. If, with our help, the company could negotiate a deal
with Fiat, I said, and deliver a realistic, hardheaded business plan to emerge from
a structured bankruptcy within a reasonable time frame, we owed those workers
and their communities that chance.
It was getting close to dinnertime and I still had several calls to make in the
Oval. I was about to adjourn the meeting when I noticed Brian Deese tentatively
raising his hand. The youngest member of the task force, he’d barely spoken
during the discussion, but unbeknownst to me, he’d actually been the one to
prepare the map and brief Gibbs on the human costs involved in letting Chrysler
go under. (Years later, he’d tell me that he felt the arguments would carry more
weight coming from a senior staff member.) Having seen his side prevail and
feeling swept up in the moment, though, Deese started pointing out all the
potential upsides of the decision I’d just made—including that a Chrysler-Fiat
tandem could end up being the first U.S.-based operation to produce cars capable
of getting forty miles to the gallon. Except in his nervousness, he said “the first
U.S.-produced cars that can go forty miles an hour.”
The room was quiet for a moment, then broke into laughter. Realizing his
mistake, Deese’s face, cherubic beneath his mustache and beard, turned bright
red. I smiled and rose from my chair.
“You know, it just so happens my first car was a ’76 Fiat,” I said, gathering
up the papers in front of me. “Bought it used, my freshman year of college. Red,
five-speed stick. As I remember, it went over forty miles an hour…when it
wasn’t in the shop. Worst car I ever owned.” I walked around the table, patted
Deese on the arm, and turned back as I was heading out the door. “The people at
Chrysler thank you,” I said, “for not making that particular argument until after I
made my decision.”

—
that a president gets too much credit when the economy is
doing well, and too much blame when it slumps. In normal times, that’s true. All
kinds of factors—from a decision by the Fed (over which a president by law has
no authority) to raise or lower interest rates, to the vicissitudes of the business
cycle, to bad weather delaying construction projects or a sudden spike in
commodity prices brought on by some conflict on the other side of the world—
are likely to have a bigger impact on the day-to-day economy than anything the
president does. Even major White House initiatives, like a big tax cut or a
regulatory overhaul, don’t tend to produce any sort of measurable influence on
GDP growth or unemployment rates for months or even years.
As a result, most presidents labor without knowing the economic impact of
their actions. Voters can’t gauge it either. There’s an inherent unfairness to this, I
suppose: Depending on accidents of timing, a president can be punished or
rewarded at the polls for things entirely beyond his or her control. At the same
time, this also offers an administration a certain margin for error, allowing leaders
to set policy while feeling secure in the knowledge that not everything depends
on them getting things right.
In 2009, however, the situation was different. In the first hundred days of my
administration, no margin for error existed. Every move we made counted. Every
American was paying attention. Had we restarted the financial system? Had we
ended the recession? Put people back to work? Kept people in their homes? Our
scorecard was posted daily for everyone to see, with each new fragment of
economic data, each news report or anecdote becoming an opportunity for
judgment. My team and I carried that knowledge with us the minute we woke
up, and it stayed with us until we went to bed.
Sometimes I think it was only the sheer busyness of those months that kept us
from succumbing to the overall stress. After the GM and Chrysler decisions, the
main pillars of our strategy were basically in place, which meant we could turn
our focus to implementation. The Auto Task Force negotiated a change in GM
management, brokered Fiat’s stake in Chrysler, and helped put together a
plausible plan for the structured bankruptcies and reorganization of both car
companies. The housing team, meanwhile, hammered together the framework
for the HAMP and HARP programs. The Recovery Act’s tax cuts and grants to
states began to flow, with Joe Biden, together with his able chief of staff Ron
Klain, in charge of overseeing the billions of dollars in infrastructure projects with
IT’S OFTEN SAID

an eye toward minimizing waste or fraud. And Tim and his still-skeletal staff at
Treasury, along with the Fed, continued to put out fires across the financial
system.
The pace was relentless. When I met with my economic team for our regular
morning briefing, the faces of those arrayed in a horseshoe of chairs and couches
around the Oval told a tale of exhaustion. Later, I would hear secondhand
accounts of how folks had sometimes yelled at one another during staff meetings,
the result of legitimate policy disputes, bureaucratic turf battles, anonymous leaks
to the press, the absence of weekends, or too many late-night meals of pizza or
chili from the Navy Mess on the ground floor of the West Wing. None of this
tension spilled into real rancor or kept the work from getting done. Whether due
to professionalism, or respect for the presidency, or awareness of what failure
might mean for the country, or a solidarity forged from being a collective target
for the escalating attacks from all quarters, everyone more or less held it together
as we waited for some sign, any sign, that our plans for ending the crisis were in
fact going to work.
And finally, in late April, it came. Tim dropped by the Oval one day to tell
me that the Federal Reserve, which had remained tight-lipped throughout its
review of the banks, had at long last given Treasury a preliminary look at the
stress-test results.
“So?” I said, trying to read Tim’s expression. “How does it look?”
“Well, the numbers are still subject to some revisions…”
I threw up my hands in mock exasperation.
“Better than expected, Mr. President,” Tim said.
“Meaning?”
“Meaning we may have turned the corner.”
Of the nineteen systemically significant institutions subjected to the stress test,
the Fed had given nine a clean bill of health, determining that they wouldn’t
need to raise more capital. Five other banks required more capital to meet the
Fed’s benchmark but nonetheless appeared sturdy enough to raise it from private
sources. This left five institutions (including Bank of America, Citigroup, and
GMAC, the financing arm of General Motors) that were likely to need additional
government support. According to the Fed, the collective shortfall looked to be
no more than $75 billion—an amount that our remaining TARP funds could
comfortably cover if required.

“Never a doubt,” I said, deadpan, when Tim was finished briefing me.
It was the first smile I’d seen on his face in weeks.
If Tim felt vindicated by the results of the stress test, he didn’t let it show. (He
did admit several years later that hearing Larry Summers utter the words “You
were right” was pretty satisfying.) As it was, we kept the early information within
our tight circle; the last thing we needed was premature celebration. But when
the Fed released its final report two weeks later, its conclusions hadn’t changed,
and despite some continued skepticism from political commentators, the audience
that mattered—the financial markets—found the audit rigorous and credible,
inspiring a new rush of confidence. Investors began pumping cash back into
financial institutions almost as fast as they’d pulled it out. Corporations found they
could borrow again to finance their day-to-day operations. Just as fear had
compounded the very real losses the banks had suffered from the subprime
lending binge, the stress test—along with massive assurances from the U.S.
government—had jolted markets back into rational territory. By June, the ten
troubled financial institutions had raised over $66 billion in private capital, leaving
only a $9 billion shortfall. The Fed’s emergency liquidity fund was able to cut its
investment in the financial system by more than two-thirds. And the country’s
nine largest banks had paid back the U.S. Treasury, returning the $67 billion in
TARP funds they’d received—with interest.
Almost nine months after the fall of Lehman Brothers, the panic appeared to
be over.
—
has passed since those perilous days at the start of my
presidency, and although the details are hazy for most Americans, my
administration’s handling of the financial crisis still generates fierce debate.
Viewed narrowly, it’s hard to argue with the results of our actions. Not only did
the U.S. banking sector stabilize far sooner than any of its European counterparts;
the financial system and the overall economy returned to growth faster than those
of just about any other nation in history after such a significant shock. If I had
predicted on the day of my swearing in that within a year the U.S. financial
system would have stabilized, almost all TARP funds would be fully repaid
(having actually made rather than cost taxpayers money), and the economy would
have begun what would become the longest stretch of continuous growth and
job creation in U.S. history, the majority of pundits and experts would have
MORE THAN A D E CA D E

questioned my mental fitness—or assumed I was smoking something stronger
than tobacco.
For many thoughtful critics, though, the fact that I had engineered a return to
pre-crisis normalcy is precisely the problem—a missed opportunity, if not a flatout betrayal. According to this view, the financial crisis offered me a once-in-ageneration chance to reset the standards for normalcy, remaking not just the
financial system but the American economy overall. If only I had broken up the
big banks and sent some white-collar culprits to jail; if only I had put an end to
outsized pay packages and Wall Street’s heads-I-win, tails-you-lose culture, then
maybe today we’d have a more equitable system that served the interests of
working families rather than a handful of billionaires.
I understand such frustrations. In many ways, I share them. To this day, I
survey reports of America’s escalating inequality, its reduced upward mobility and
still-stagnant wages, with all the consequent anger and distortions such trends stir
in our democracy, and I wonder whether I should have been bolder in those
early months, willing to exact more economic pain in the short term in pursuit of
a permanently altered and more just economic order.
The thought nags at me. And yet even if it were possible for me to go back in
time and get a do-over, I can’t say that I would make different choices. In the
abstract, all the various alternatives and missed opportunities that the critics offer
up sound plausible, simple plot points in a morality tale. But when you dig into
the details, each of the options they propose—whether nationalization of the
banks, or stretching the definitions of criminal statutes to prosecute banking
executives, or simply letting a portion of the banking system collapse so as to
avoid moral hazard—would have required a violence to the social order, a
wrenching of political and economic norms, that almost certainly would have
made things worse. Not worse for the wealthy and powerful, who always have a
way of landing on their feet. Worse for the very folks I’d be purporting to save.
Best-case scenario, the economy would have taken longer to recover, with more
unemployment, more foreclosures, more business closures. Worst-case scenario,
we might have tipped into a full-scale depression.
Someone with a more revolutionary soul might respond that all this would
have been worth it, that you have to break eggs to make an omelet. But as
willing as I had always been to disrupt my own life in pursuit of an idea, I wasn’t
willing to take those same risks with the well-being of millions of people. In that
sense, my first hundred days in office revealed a basic strand of my political

character. I was a reformer, conservative in temperament if not in vision.
Whether I was demonstrating wisdom or weakness would be for others to judge.
And anyway, such ruminations came later. In the summer of 2009, the race
had only just started. Once the economy was stabilized, I knew I’d have more
time to push through the structural changes—in taxes, education, energy,
healthcare, labor law, and immigration—that I had campaigned on, changes that
would make the system fundamentally more fair and expand opportunity for
ordinary Americans. Already, Tim and his team were preparing options for a
comprehensive Wall Street reform package that I would later present to
Congress.
In the meantime, I tried to remind myself that we had steered the nation
away from disaster, that our work was already providing some form of relief.
Expanded unemployment insurance payments were keeping families across the
country afloat. Tax cuts for small businesses were allowing a few more workers to
stay on the payroll. Teachers were in classrooms, and cops were on the beat. An
auto factory that had threatened to close was still open, while a mortgage
refinancing was keeping someone out there from losing a home.
The absence of catastrophe, the preservation of normalcy, wouldn’t attract
attention. Most of the people impacted wouldn’t even know how our policies
had touched their lives. But every so often, while reading in the Treaty Room
late at night, I’d come across a letter in my purple folder that began with
something like this:
Dear President Obama,
I’m sure you’ll never read this, but I thought you might want to know that a
program you started has been a real lifesaver…
I’d set down the letter after reading it and pull out a note card to write the
person a brief response. I imagined them getting the official envelope from the
White House and opening it up with a look of puzzlement, then a smile. They’d
show it to their family, maybe even take it to work. Eventually the letter would
fall into a drawer somewhere, forgotten under the accumulation of the new joys
and pains that make up a life. That was okay. I couldn’t expect people to
understand how much their voices actually meant to me—how they had
sustained my spirit and beat back whispering doubts on those late, solitary nights.
