oUR FIRST SPRING IN THE WHITE HOUSE

arrived early. By mid-March, the air had
softened and the days grown longer. As the weather warmed, the South Lawn
became almost like a private park to explore. There were acres of lush grass
ringed by massive, shady oaks and elms and a tiny pond tucked behind the
hedges, with the handprints of presidential children and grandchildren pressed
into the paved pathway that led to it. There were nooks and crannies for games
of tag and hide-and-go-seek, and there was even a bit of wildlife—not just
squirrels and rabbits but a red-tailed hawk that a group of visiting fourth graders
had named Lincoln and a slender, long-legged fox that could sometimes be
spotted at a distance in the late afternoon and occasionally got bold enough to
wander down the colonnade.
Cooped up as we’d been through the winter, we took full advantage of the
new backyard. We had a swing set installed for Sasha and Malia, near the
swimming pool and directly in front of the Oval Office. Looking up from a late
afternoon meeting on this or that crisis, I might glimpse the girls playing outside,
their faces set in bliss as they soared high on the swings. We also set up a couple
of portable basketball hoops on either end of the tennis courts, so that I could
sneak out with Reggie for a quick game of H-O-R-S-E and the staff could play
interoffice games of five-on-five.
And with the help of Sam Kass, as well as the White House horticulturalist
and a crew of enthusiastic fifth graders from a local elementary school, Michelle
planted her garden. What we expected to be a meaningful but modest project to
encourage healthy eating ended up becoming a genuine phenomenon, inspiring
school and community gardens across the country, attracting worldwide
attention, and generating so much produce by the end of that first summer—
collards, carrots, peppers, fennel, onions, lettuce, broccoli, strawberries,
blueberries, you name it—that the White House kitchen started donating crates
of spare vegetables to the local food banks. As an unexpected bonus, a member of
UR FIRST SPRING IN THE WHITE HOUSE

the groundskeeping crew turned out to be an amateur beekeeper, and we gave
him the okay to set up a small hive. Not only did it end up producing more than
a hundred pounds of honey a year, but an enterprising microbrewer in the Navy
Mess suggested that we could use the honey in a beer recipe, which led to the
purchase of a home brew kit and made me the first presidential brewmaster.
(George Washington, I was told, made his own whiskey.)
But of all the pleasures that first year in the White House would deliver, none
quite compared to the mid-April arrival of Bo, a huggable, four-legged black
bundle of fur, with a snowy-white chest and front paws. Malia and Sasha, who’d
been lobbying for a puppy since before the campaign, squealed with delight upon
seeing him for the first time, letting him lick their ears and faces as the three of
them rolled around on the floor of the residence. It wasn’t just the girls who fell
in love either. Michelle spent so much time with Bo—teaching him tricks,
cradling him in her lap, sneaking him bacon—that Marian confessed to feeling
like a bad parent for never having given in to Michelle’s girlhood wish for a
family dog.
As for me, I got what someone once described as the only reliable friend a
politician can have in Washington. Bo also gave me an added excuse to put off
my evening paperwork and join my family on meandering after-dinner walks
around the South Lawn. It was during those moments—with the light fading into
streaks of purple and gold, Michelle smiling and squeezing my hand as the dog
bounded in and out of the bushes with the girls giving chase, Malia eventually
catching up to us to interrogate me about things like birds’ nests or cloud
formations while Sasha wrapped herself around one of my legs to see how far I
could carry her along—that I felt normal and whole and as lucky as any man has a
right to expect.
Bo had come to us as a gift from Ted and Vicki Kennedy, part of a litter that
was related to Teddy’s own beloved pair of Portuguese water dogs. It was an
incredibly thoughtful gesture—not only because the breed was hypoallergenic (a
necessity due to Malia’s allergies) but also because the Kennedys had made sure
that Bo was housebroken before he came to us. When I called to thank them,
though, it was only Vicki I could speak with. It had been almost a year since
Teddy was diagnosed with a malignant brain tumor, and although he was still
receiving treatment in Boston, it was clear to everyone—Teddy included—that
the prognosis was not good.
I’d seen him in March, when he’d made a surprise appearance at a White

House conference we held to get the ball rolling on universal-healthcare
legislation. Vicki had worried about the trip, and I’d understood why. Teddy’s
walk was unsteady that day; his suit barely fit after all the weight he’d lost, and
despite his cheerful demeanor, his pinched, cloudy eyes showed the strain it took
just to hold himself upright. And yet he’d insisted on coming anyway, because
thirty-five years earlier the cause of getting everyone decent, affordable healthcare
had become personal for him. His son Teddy Jr. had been diagnosed with a bone
cancer that led to a leg amputation at the age of twelve. While at the hospital,
Teddy had gotten to know other parents whose children were just as ill but who
had no idea how they’d pay the mounting medical bills. Then and there, he had
vowed to do something to change that.
Through seven presidents, Teddy had fought the good fight. During the
Clinton administration, he helped secure passage of the Children’s Health
Insurance Program. Over the objections of some in his own party, he worked
with President Bush to get drug coverage for seniors. But for all his power and
legislative skill, the dream of establishing universal healthcare—a system that
delivered quality medical care to all people, regardless of their ability to pay—
continued to elude him.
Which is why Ted Kennedy had forced himself out of bed to come to our
conference, knowing that while he could no longer lead the fight, his brief but
symbolic presence might have an effect. Sure enough, when he walked into the
East Room, the hundred and fifty people who were present erupted into cheers
and lengthy applause. After opening the conference, I called upon him to speak
first, and some of his former staffers could be seen tearing up at the sight of their
old boss rising to speak. His remarks were short; his baritone didn’t boom quite as
loudly as it used to when he’d roared on the Senate floor. He looked forward, he
said, to being “a foot soldier” in the upcoming effort. By the time we’d moved
on to the third or fourth speaker, Vicki had quietly escorted him out the door.
I saw him only once more in person, a couple of weeks later, at a signing
ceremony for a bill expanding national service programs, which Republicans and
Democrats alike had named in his honor. But I would think of Teddy sometimes
when Bo wandered into the Treaty Room, his head down, his tail wagging,
before he curled up at my feet. And I’d recall what Teddy had told me that day,
just before we walked into the East Room together.
“This is the time, Mr. President,” he had said. “Don’t let it slip away.”

—
some form of universal healthcare in the United States dates back
to 1912, when Theodore Roosevelt, who had previously served nearly eight
years as a Republican president, decided to run again—this time on a progressive
ticket and with a platform that called for the establishment of a centralized
national health service. At the time, few people had or felt the need for private
health insurance. Most Americans paid their doctors visit by visit, but the field of
medicine was quickly growing more sophisticated, and as more diagnostic tests
and surgeries became available, the attendant costs began to rise, tying health
more explicitly to wealth. Both the United Kingdom and Germany had addressed
similar issues by instituting national health insurance systems, and other European
nations would eventually follow suit. While Roosevelt ultimately lost the 1912
election, his party’s progressive ideals planted a seed that accessible and affordable
medical care might be viewed as a right more than a privilege. It wasn’t long,
however, before doctors and southern politicians vocally opposed any type of
government involvement in healthcare, branding it as a form of bolshevism.
After FDR imposed a nationwide wage freeze meant to stem inflation during
World War II, many companies began offering private health insurance and
pension benefits as a way to compete for the limited number of workers not
deployed overseas. Once the war ended, this employer-based system continued,
in no small part because labor unions liked the arrangement, since it enabled them
to use the more generous benefit packages negotiated under collective bargaining
agreements as a selling point to recruit new members. The downside was that it
left those unions unmotivated to push for government-sponsored health programs
that might help everybody else. Harry Truman proposed a national healthcare
system twice, once in 1945 and again as part of his Fair Deal package in 1949, but
his appeal for public support was no match for the well-financed PR efforts of the
American Medical Association and other industry lobbyists. Opponents didn’t just
kill Truman’s effort. They convinced a large swath of the public that “socialized
medicine” would lead to rationing, the loss of your family doctor, and the
freedoms Americans hold so dear.
Rather than challenging private insurance head-on, progressives shifted their
energy to help those populations the marketplace had left behind. These efforts
bore fruit during LBJ’s Great Society campaign, when a universal single-payer
program partially funded by payroll tax revenue was introduced for seniors
(Medicare) and a not-so-comprehensive program based on a combination of
THE QUEST FOR

federal and state funding was set up for the poor (Medicaid). During the 1970s
and early 1980s, this patchwork system functioned well enough, with roughly 80
percent of Americans covered through either their jobs or one of these two
programs. Meanwhile, defenders of the status quo could point to the many
innovations brought to market by the for-profit medical industry, from MRIs to
lifesaving drugs.
Useful as they were, though, these innovations also further drove up
healthcare costs. And with insurers footing the nation’s medical bills, patients had
little incentive to question whether drug companies were overcharging or if
doctors and hospitals were ordering redundant tests and unnecessary treatments in
order to pad their bottom lines. Meanwhile, nearly a fifth of the country lived
just an illness or accident away from potential financial ruin. Forgoing regular
checkups and preventive care because they couldn’t afford it, the uninsured often
waited until they were very sick before seeking care at hospital emergency rooms,
where more advanced illnesses meant more expensive treatment. Hospitals made
up for this uncompensated care by increasing prices for insured customers, which
in turn further jacked up premiums.
All this explained why the United States spent a lot more money per person
on healthcare than any other advanced economy (112 percent more than Canada,
109 percent more than France, 117 percent more than Japan) and for similar or
worse results. The difference amounted to hundreds of billions of dollars per year
—money that could have been used instead to provide quality childcare for
American families, or to reduce college tuition, or to eliminate a good chunk of
the federal deficit. Spiraling healthcare costs also burdened American businesses:
Japanese and German automakers didn’t have to worry about the extra $1,500 in
worker and retiree healthcare costs that Detroit had to build into the price of
every car rolling off the assembly line.
In fact, it was in response to foreign competition that U.S. companies began
off-loading rising insurance costs onto their employees in the late 1980s and ’90s,
replacing traditional plans that had few, if any, out-of-pocket costs with cheaper
versions that included higher deductibles, co-pays, lifetime limits, and other
unpleasant surprises hidden in the fine print. Unions often found themselves able
to preserve their traditional benefit plans only by agreeing to forgo increases in
wages. Small businesses found it tough to provide their workers with health
benefits at all. Meanwhile, insurance companies that operated in the individual
market perfected the art of rejecting customers who, according to their actuarial
data, were most likely to make use of the healthcare system, especially anyone

with a “preexisting condition”—which they often defined to include anything
from a previous bout of cancer to asthma and chronic allergies.
It’s no wonder, then, that by the time I took office there were very few
people ready to defend the existing system. More than 43 million Americans
were now uninsured, premiums for family coverage had risen 97 percent since
2000, and costs were only continuing to climb. And yet the prospect of trying to
get a big healthcare-reform bill through Congress at the height of a historic
recession made my team nervous. Even Axe—who’d experienced the challenges
of getting specialized care for a daughter with severe epilepsy and had left
journalism to become a political consultant in part to pay for her treatment—had
his doubts.
“The data’s pretty clear,” Axe said when we discussed the topic early on.
“People may hate the way things work in general, but most of them have
insurance. They don’t really think about the flaws in the system until somebody
in their own family gets sick. They like their doctor. They don’t trust
Washington to fix anything. And even if they think you’re sincere, they worry
that any changes you make will cost them money and help somebody else. Plus,
when you ask them what changes they’d like to see to the healthcare system, they
basically want every possible treatment, regardless of cost or effectiveness, from
whatever provider they choose, whenever they want it—for free. Which, of
course, we can’t deliver. And that’s before the insurance companies, the drug
companies, the docs start running ads—”
“What Axe is trying to say, Mr. President,” Rahm interrupted, his face
screwed up in a frown, “is that this can blow up in our faces.”
Rahm went on to remind us that he’d had a front-row seat at the last push for
universal healthcare, when Hillary Clinton’s legislative proposal crashed and
burned, creating a backlash that contributed to Democrats losing control of the
House in the 1994 midterms. “Republicans will say healthcare is a big new liberal
spending binge, and that it’s a distraction from solving the economic crisis.”
“Unless I’m missing something,” I said, “we’re doing everything we can do
on the economy.”
“I know that, Mr. President. But the American people don’t know that.”
“So what are we saying here?” I asked. “That despite having the biggest
Democratic majorities in decades, despite the promises we made during the
campaign, we shouldn’t try to get healthcare done?”
Rahm looked to Axe for help.

“We all think we should try,” Axe said. “You just need to know that if we
lose, your presidency will be badly weakened. And nobody understands that
better than McConnell and Boehner.”
I stood up, signaling that the meeting was over.
“We better not lose, then,” I said.
—
back to those early conversations, it’s hard to deny my
overconfidence. I was convinced that the logic of healthcare reform was so
obvious that even in the face of well-organized opposition I could rally the
American people’s support. Other big initiatives—like immigration reform and
climate change legislation—would probably be even harder to get through
Congress; I figured that scoring a victory on the item that most affected people’s
day-to-day lives was our best shot at building momentum for the rest of my
legislative agenda. As for the political hazards Axe and Rahm worried about, the
recession virtually ensured that my poll numbers were going to take a hit anyway.
Being timid wouldn’t change that reality. Even if it did, passing up a chance to
help millions of people just because it might hurt my reelection prospects…well,
that was exactly the kind of myopic, self-preserving behavior I’d vowed to reject.
My interest in healthcare went beyond policy or politics; it was personal, just
as it was for Teddy. Each time I met a parent struggling to come up with the
money to get treatment for a sick child, I thought back to the night Michelle and
I had to take a three-month-old Sasha to the emergency room for what turned
out to be viral meningitis—the terror and helplessness we felt as the nurses
whisked her away for a spinal tap, and the realization that we might never have
caught the infection in time had the girls not had a regular pediatrician we felt
comfortable calling in the middle of the night. When, on the campaign trail, I
met farmworkers or supermarket cashiers suffering from a bum knee or bad back
because they couldn’t afford a doctor’s visit, I thought about one of my best
friends, Bobby Titcomb, a commercial fisherman in Hawaii who resorted to
professional medical help only for life-threatening injuries (like the time a diving
accident resulted in a spear puncturing his lung) because the monthly cost of
insurance would have wiped out what he earned from an entire week’s catch.
Most of all, I thought about my mom. In mid-June, I headed to Green Bay,
Wisconsin, for the first of a series of healthcare town hall meetings we would
WHEN

I

THINK

hold around the country, hoping to solicit citizen input and educate people on
the possibilities for reform. Introducing me that day was Laura Klitzka, who was
thirty-five years old and had been diagnosed with aggressive breast cancer that
had spread to her bones. Even though she was on her husband’s insurance plan,
repeated rounds of surgery, radiation, and chemo had bumped her up against the
policy’s lifetime limits, leaving them with $12,000 in unpaid medical bills. Over
her husband Peter’s objections, she was now pondering whether more treatment
was worth it. Sitting in their living room before we headed for the event, she
smiled wanly as we watched Peter doing his best to keep track of the two young
kids playing on the floor.
“I want as much time with them as I can get,” Laura said to me, “but I don’t
want to leave them with a mountain of debt. It feels selfish.” Her eyes started
misting, and I held her hand, remembering my mom wasting away in those final
months: the times she’d put off checkups that might have caught her disease
because she was in between consulting contracts and didn’t have coverage; the
stress she carried to her hospital bed when her insurer refused to pay her disability
claim, arguing that she had failed to disclose a preexisting condition despite the
fact that she hadn’t even been diagnosed when her policy started. The unspoken
regrets.
Passing a healthcare bill wouldn’t bring my mom back. It wouldn’t douse the
guilt I still felt for not having been at her side when she took her last breath. It
would probably come too late to help Laura Klitzka and her family.
But it would save somebody’s mom out there, somewhere down the line. And
that was worth fighting for.
—
whether we could get it done. As tough as it had been to
pass the Recovery Act, the concept behind the stimulus legislation was pretty
simple: enable the government to pump out money as fast as it could in order to
keep the economy afloat and people employed. The law didn’t take cash out of
anyone’s pockets, or force a change in how businesses operated, or discontinue
old programs in order to pay for new ones. In the immediate term, there were no
losers in the deal.
By contrast, any major healthcare bill meant rejiggering one-sixth of the
American economy. Legislation of this scope was guaranteed to involve hundreds
THE QUESTION WAS

of pages of endlessly fussed-over amendments and regulations, some of them new,
some of them rewrites to previous law, all of them with their own high stakes. A
single provision tucked inside the bill could translate to billions of dollars in gains
or losses for some sector of the healthcare industry. A shift in one number, a zero
here or a decimal point there, could mean a million more families getting
coverage—or not. Across the country, insurance companies like Aetna and
UnitedHealthcare were major employers, and local hospitals served as the
economic anchor for many small towns and counties. People had good reasons—
life-and-death reasons—to worry about how any change would affect them.
There was also the question of how to pay for the law. To cover more
people, I had argued, America didn’t need to spend more money on healthcare;
we just needed to use that money more wisely. In theory, that was true. But one
person’s waste and inefficiency was another person’s profit or convenience;
spending on coverage would show up on the federal books much sooner than the
savings from reform; and unlike the insurance companies or Big Pharma, whose
shareholders expected them to be on guard against any change that might cost
them a dime, most of the potential beneficiaries of reform—the waitress, the
family farmer, the independent contractor, the cancer survivor—didn’t have
gaggles of well-paid and experienced lobbyists roaming the halls of Congress on
their behalf.
In other words, both the politics and the substance of healthcare were mindnumbingly complicated. I was going to have to explain to the American people,
including those with quality health insurance, why and how reform could work.
For this reason, I thought we’d use as open and transparent a process as possible
when it came to developing the necessary legislation. “Everyone will have a seat
at the table,” I’d told voters during the campaign. “Not negotiating behind closed
doors, but bringing all parties together, and broadcasting those negotiations on CSPAN, so that the American people can see what the choices are.” When I later
brought this idea up with Rahm, he looked like he wished I weren’t the
president, just so he could more vividly explain the stupidity of my plan. If we
were going to get a bill passed, he told me, the process would involve dozens of
deals and compromises along the way—and it wasn’t going to be conducted like
a civics seminar.
“Making sausage isn’t pretty, Mr. President,” he said. “And you’re asking for
a really big piece of sausage.”

—
and I did agree on was that we had months of work ahead of
us, parsing the cost and outcome of each piece of possible legislation,
coordinating every effort across different federal agencies and both houses of
Congress, and all the while looking for leverage with major players in the
healthcare world, from medical providers and hospital administrators to insurers
and pharmaceutical companies. To do all this, we needed a top-notch healthcare
team to keep us on track.
Luckily we were able to recruit a remarkable trio of women to help run the
show. Kathleen Sebelius, the two-term Democratic governor from Republicanleaning Kansas, came on as secretary of health and human services (HHS). A
former state insurance commissioner, she knew both the politics and the
economics of healthcare and was a gifted enough politician—smart, funny,
outgoing, tough, and media savvy—to serve as the public face of health reform,
someone we could put on TV or send to town halls around the country to
explain what we were doing. Jeanne Lambrew, a professor at the University of
Texas and an expert on Medicare and Medicaid, became the director of the HHS
Office of Health Reform, basically our chief policy advisor. Tall, earnest, and
often oblivious to political constraints, she had every fact and nuance of every
healthcare proposal at her fingertips—and could be counted on to keep the room
honest if we veered too far in the direction of political expediency.
But it was Nancy-Ann DeParle whom I would come to rely on most as our
campaign took shape. A Tennessee lawyer who’d run that state’s health programs
before serving as the Medicare administrator in the Clinton administration,
Nancy-Ann carried herself with the crisp professionalism of someone accustomed
to seeing hard work translate into success. How much of that drive could be
traced to her experiences growing up Chinese American in a tiny Tennessee
town, I couldn’t say. Nancy-Ann didn’t talk much about herself—at least not
with me. I do know that when she was seventeen, her mom died of lung cancer,
which might have had something to do with her willingness to give up a
lucrative position at a private equity firm to work in a job that required even
more time away from a loving husband and two young sons.
It seems I wasn’t the only one for whom getting healthcare passed was
personal.
Along with Rahm, Phil Schiliro, and deputy chief of staff Jim Messina, who
had served as Plouffe’s right hand in the campaign and was one of our shrewdest
ONE THING RAHM

political operators, our healthcare team began to map out what a legislative
strategy might look like. Based on our experiences with the Recovery Act, we
had no doubt that Mitch McConnell would do everything he could to torpedo
our efforts, and that the chances of getting Republican votes in the Senate for
something as big and as controversial as a healthcare bill were slim. We could take
heart from the fact that instead of the fifty-eight senators who were caucusing
with the Democrats when we passed the stimulus bill, we were likely to have
sixty by the time any healthcare bill actually came to a vote. Al Franken had
finally taken his seat after a contentious election recount in Minnesota, and Arlen
Specter had decided to switch parties after being effectively driven out of the
GOP—just like Charlie Crist—for supporting the Recovery Act.
Still, our filibuster-proof head count was tenuous, for it included a terminally
ill Ted Kennedy and the frail and ailing Robert Byrd of West Virginia, not to
mention conservative Dems like Nebraska’s Ben Nelson (a former insurance
company executive) who could go sideways on us at any minute. Beyond
wanting some margin for error, I also knew that passing something as
monumental as healthcare reform on a purely party-line vote would make the
law politically more vulnerable down the road. Consequently we thought it made
sense to shape our legislative proposal in such a way that it at least had a chance of
winning over a handful of Republicans.
Fortunately we had a model to work with, one that, ironically, had grown
out of a partnership between Ted Kennedy and former Massachusetts governor
Mitt Romney, one of John McCain’s opponents in the Republican primary for
president. Confronting budget shortfalls and the prospect of losing Medicaid
funding a few years earlier, Romney had become fixated on finding a way to get
more Massachusetts residents properly insured, which would then reduce state
spending on emergency care for the uninsured and, ideally, lead to a healthier
population in general.
He and his staff came up with a multipronged approach in which every
person would be required to purchase health insurance (an “individual
mandate”), the same way every car owner was required to carry auto insurance.
Middle-income people who couldn’t access insurance through their job, didn’t
qualify for Medicare or Medicaid, and were unable to afford insurance on their
own would get a government subsidy to buy coverage. Subsidies would be
determined on a sliding scale according to each person’s income, and a central
online marketplace—an “exchange”—would be set up so that consumers could
shop for the best insurance deal. Insurers, meanwhile, would no longer be able to

deny people coverage based on preexisting conditions.
These two ideas—the individual mandate and protecting people with
preexisting conditions—went hand in hand. With a huge new pool of
government-subsidized customers, insurers no longer had an excuse for trying to
cherry-pick only the young and healthy for coverage to protect their profits.
Meanwhile, the mandate ensured that people couldn’t game the system by
waiting until they got sick to purchase insurance. Touting the plan to reporters,
Romney called the individual mandate “the ultimate conservative idea” because
it promoted personal responsibility.
Not surprisingly, Massachusetts’s Democratic-controlled state legislature had
initially been suspicious of the Romney plan, and not just because a Republican
had proposed it; among many progressives, the need to replace private insurance
and for-profit healthcare with a single-payer system like Canada’s was an article of
faith. Had we been starting from scratch, I would have agreed with them; the
evidence from other countries showed that a single, national system—basically
Medicare for All—was a cost-effective way to deliver quality healthcare. But
neither Massachusetts nor the United States was starting from scratch. Teddy,
who despite his reputation as a wide-eyed liberal was ever practical, understood
that trying to dismantle the existing system and replace it with an entirely new
one would be not only a political nonstarter but hugely disruptive economically.
Instead, he’d embraced the Romney proposal with enthusiasm and helped the
governor line up the Democratic votes in the state legislature required to get it
passed into law.
“Romneycare,” as it eventually became known, was now two years old and
had been a clear success, driving the uninsured rate in Massachusetts down to just
under 4 percent, the lowest in the country. Teddy had used it as the basis for
draft legislation he’d started preparing many months ahead of the election in his
role as chair of the Senate Health and Education Committee. And though Plouffe
and Axe had persuaded me to hold off on endorsing the Massachusetts approach
during the campaign—the idea of requiring people to buy insurance was
extremely unpopular with voters, and I’d instead focused my plan on lowering
costs—I was now convinced, as were most healthcare advocates, that Romney’s
model offered us the best chance of achieving our goal of universal coverage.
People still differed on the details of what a national version of the
Massachusetts plan might look like, and as my team and I mapped out our
strategy, a number of advocates urged us to settle these issues early by putting out

a specific White House proposal for Congress to follow. We decided against that.
One of the lessons from the Clintons’ failed effort was the need to involve key
Democrats in the process, so they’d feel a sense of ownership of the bill.
Insufficient coordination, we knew, could result in legislative death by a thousand
cuts.
On the House side, this meant working with old-school liberals like Henry
Waxman, the wily, pugnacious congressman from California. In the Senate, the
landscape was different: With Teddy convalescing, the main player was Max
Baucus, a conservative Democrat from Montana who chaired the powerful
Finance Committee. When it came to the tax issues that occupied most of the
committee’s time, Baucus often aligned himself with business lobbies, which I
found worrying, and in three decades as a senator he had yet to spearhead the
passage of any major legislation. Still, he appeared to be genuinely invested in the
issue, having organized a congressional healthcare summit the previous June and
having spent months working with Ted Kennedy and his staff on early drafts of a
reform bill. Baucus also had a close friendship with Iowa senator Chuck Grassley,
the Finance Committee’s ranking Republican, and was optimistic that he could
win Grassley’s support for a bill.
Rahm and Phil Schiliro were skeptical that Grassley was gettable—after all,
we’d been down that rabbit hole during the Recovery Act debate. But we
decided it was best to let Baucus’s process play itself out. He’d already outlined
some of his ideas in the press and would soon pull together a healthcare-reform
working group that included Grassley and two other Republicans. During an
Oval Office meeting, though, I made a point of warning him not to let Grassley
string him along.
“Trust me, Mr. President,” Baucus said. “Chuck and I have already discussed
it. We’re going to have this thing done by July.”
—
its share of surprises. A key piece of equipment breaks down. A
traffic accident forces a change in delivery routes. A client calls to say you’ve won
the contract—but they need the order filled three months earlier than planned. If
it’s the kind of thing that’s happened before, the place where you work may have
systems and procedures to handle the situation. But even the best organizations
can’t anticipate everything, in which case you learn to improvise to meet your
objectives—or at least to cut your losses.
EVERY JOB HAS

The presidency was no different. Except that the surprises came daily, often in
waves. And over the course of the spring and summer of that first year, as we
wrestled with the financial crisis, two wars, and the push for healthcare reform,
several unexpected items got added to our already overloaded plate.
The first carried the possibility of a genuine catastrophe. In April, reports
surfaced of a worrying flu outbreak in Mexico. The flu virus usually hits
vulnerable populations like the elderly, infants, and asthma sufferers hardest, but
this strain appeared to strike young, healthy people—and was killing them at a
higher-than-usual rate. Within weeks, people in the United States were falling ill
with the virus: one in Ohio, two in Kansas, eight in a single high school in New
York City. By the end of the month, both our own Centers for Disease Control
(CDC) and the World Health Organization (WHO) had confirmed that we were
dealing with a variation of the H1N1 virus. In June, the WHO officially declared
the first global pandemic in forty years.
I had more than a passing knowledge of H1N1 after working on U.S.
pandemic preparedness when I was in the Senate. What I knew scared the hell
out of me. In 1918, a strain of H1N1 that came to be known as “the Spanish flu”
had infected an estimated half a billion people and killed somewhere between 50
and 100 million—roughly 4 percent of the world’s population. In Philadelphia
alone, more than 12,000 died in the span of a few weeks. The effects of the
pandemic went beyond the stunning death tolls and shutdown of economic
activity; later research would reveal that those who were in utero during the
pandemic grew up to have lower incomes, poorer educational outcomes, and
higher rates of physical disability.
It was too early to tell how deadly this new virus would be. But I wasn’t
interested in taking any chances. On the same day that Kathleen Sebelius was
confirmed as HHS secretary, we sent a plane to pick her up from Kansas, flew her
to the Capitol to be sworn in at a makeshift ceremony, and immediately asked
her to spearhead a two-hour conference call with WHO officials and health
ministers from Mexico and Canada. A few days later, we pulled together an
interagency team to evaluate how ready the United States was for a worst-case
scenario.
The answer was, we weren’t at all ready. Annual flu shots didn’t provide
protection against H1N1, it turned out, and because vaccines generally weren’t a
moneymaker for drug companies, the few U.S. vaccine makers that existed had a
limited capacity to ramp up production of a new one. Then we faced questions of

how to distribute antiviral medicines, what guidelines hospitals used in treating
cases of the flu, and even how we’d handle the possibility of closing schools and
imposing quarantines if things got significantly worse. Several veterans of the
Ford administration’s 1976 swine flu response team warned us of the difficulties
involved in getting out in front of an outbreak without overreacting or triggering
a panic: Apparently President Ford, wanting to act decisively in the middle of a
reelection campaign, had fast-tracked mandatory vaccinations before the severity
of the pandemic had been determined, with the result that more Americans
developed a neurological disorder connected to the vaccine than died from the
flu.
“You need to be involved, Mr. President,” one of Ford’s staffers advised,
“but you need to let the experts run the process.”
I put my arm around Sebelius’s shoulders. “You see this?” I said, nodding her
way. “This…is the face of the virus. Congratulations, Kathleen.”
“Happy to serve, Mr. President,” she said brightly. “Happy to serve.”
My instructions to Kathleen and the public health team were simple:
Decisions would be made based on the best available science, and we were going
to explain each step of our response to the public—including detailing what we
did and didn’t know. Over the course of the next six months, we did exactly
that. A summertime dip in H1N1 cases gave the team time to work with
drugmakers and incentivize new processes for quicker vaccine production. They
pre-positioned medical supplies across regions and gave hospitals increased
flexibility to manage a surge in flu cases. They evaluated—and ultimately rejected
—the idea of closing schools for the rest of the year, but worked with school
districts, businesses, and state and local officials to make sure that everyone had
the resources they needed to respond in the event of an outbreak.
Although the United States did not escape unscathed—more than 12,000
Americans lost their lives—we were fortunate that this particular strain of H1N1
turned out to be less deadly than the experts had feared, and news that the
pandemic had abated by mid-2010 didn’t generate headlines. Still, I took great
pride in how well our team had performed. Without fanfare or fuss, not only had
they helped keep the virus contained, but they’d strengthened our readiness for
any future public health emergency—which would make all the difference several
years later, when the Ebola outbreak in West Africa would trigger a full-blown
panic.
This, I was coming to realize, was the nature of the presidency: Sometimes

your most important work involved the stuff nobody noticed.
—
of events was an opportunity rather than a crisis. At the end
of April, Supreme Court justice David Souter called to tell me he was retiring
from the bench, giving me my first chance to fill a seat on the highest court in
the land.
Getting somebody confirmed to the Supreme Court has never been a slam
dunk, in part because the Court’s role in American government has always been
controversial. After all, the idea of giving nine unelected, tenured-for-life lawyers
in black robes the power to strike down laws passed by a majority of the people’s
representatives doesn’t sound very democratic. But since Marbury v. Madison, the
1803 Supreme Court case that gave the Court final say on the meaning of the
U.S. Constitution and established the principle of judicial review over the actions
of the Congress and the president, that’s how our system of checks and balances
has worked. In theory, Supreme Court justices don’t “make law” when
exercising these powers; instead, they’re supposed to merely “interpret” the
Constitution, helping to bridge how its provisions were understood by the
framers and how they apply to the world we live in today.
For the bulk of constitutional cases coming before the Court, the theory
holds up pretty well. Justices have for the most part felt bound by the text of the
Constitution and precedents set by earlier courts, even when doing so results in
an outcome they don’t personally agree with. Throughout American history,
though, the most important cases have involved deciphering the meaning of
phrases like “due process,” “privileges and immunities,” “equal protection,” or
“establishment of religion”—terms so vague that it’s doubtful any two Founding
Fathers agreed on exactly what they meant. This ambiguity gives individual
justices all kinds of room to “interpret” in ways that reflect their moral
judgments, political preferences, biases, and fears. That’s why in the 1930s a
mostly conservative Court could rule that FDR’s New Deal policies violated the
Constitution, while forty years later a mostly liberal Court could rule that the
Constitution grants Congress almost unlimited power to regulate the economy.
It’s how one set of justices, in Plessy v. Ferguson, could read the Equal Protection
Clause to permit “separate but equal,” and another set of justices, in Brown v.
Board of Education, could rely on the exact same language to unanimously arrive at
the opposite conclusion.
THE SECOND TURN

It turned out that Supreme Court justices made law all the time.
Over the years, the press and the public started paying more attention to
Court decisions and, by extension, to the process of confirming justices. In 1955,
southern Democrats—in a fit of pique over the Brown decision—institutionalized
the practice of having Supreme Court nominees appear before the Senate
Judiciary Committee to be grilled on their legal views. The 1973 Roe v. Wade
decision focused further attention on Court appointments, with every
nomination from that point on triggering a pitched battle between pro-choice
and anti-abortion forces. The high-profile rejection of Robert Bork’s nomination
in the late 1980s and the Clarence Thomas–Anita Hill hearings in the early 1990s
—in which the nominee was accused of sexual harassment—proved to be
irresistible TV drama. All of which meant that when it came time for me to
replace Justice Souter, identifying a well-qualified candidate was the easy part.
The hard part would be getting that person confirmed while avoiding a political
circus that could sidetrack our other business.
We already had a team of lawyers in place to manage the process of filling
scores of lower court vacancies, and they immediately began compiling an
exhaustive list of possible Supreme Court candidates. In less than a week, we’d
narrowed it down to a few finalists, who would be asked to submit to an FBI
background check and come to the White House for an interview. The short list
included former Harvard Law School dean and current solicitor general Elena
Kagan and Seventh Circuit appellate judge Diane Wood, both first-rate legal
scholars whom I knew from my time teaching constitutional law at the
University of Chicago. But as I read through the fat briefing books my team had
prepared on each candidate, it was someone I’d never met, Second Circuit
appellate judge Sonia Sotomayor, who most piqued my interest. A Puerto Rican
from the Bronx, she’d been raised mostly by her mom, a telephone operator who
eventually earned her nurse’s license, after her father—a tradesman with a thirdgrade education—died when Sonia was just nine years old. Despite speaking
mostly Spanish at home, Sonia had excelled in parochial school and won a
scholarship to Princeton. There, her experiences echoed what Michelle would
encounter at the university a decade later: an initial sense of uncertainty and
displacement that came with being just one of a handful of women of color on
campus; the need to sometimes put in extra work to compensate for the gaps in
knowledge that more privileged kids took for granted; the comfort of finding
community among other Black students and supportive professors; and the
realization over time that she was as smart as any of her peers.

Sotomayor graduated from Yale Law School and went on to do standout
work as a prosecutor in the Manhattan district attorney’s office, which helped
catapult her to the federal bench. Over the course of nearly seventeen years as a
judge, she’d developed a reputation for thoroughness, fairness, and restraint,
ultimately leading the American Bar Association to give her its highest rating.
Still, when word leaked that Sotomayor was among the finalists I was
considering, some in the legal priesthood suggested that her credentials were
inferior to those of Kagan or Wood, and a number of left-leaning interest groups
questioned whether she had the intellectual heft to go toe-to-toe with
conservative ideologues like Justice Antonin Scalia.
Maybe because of my own background in legal and academic circles—where
I’d met my share of highly credentialed, high-IQ morons and had witnessed
firsthand the tendency to move the goalposts when it came to promoting women
and people of color—I was quick to dismiss such concerns. Not only were Judge
Sotomayor’s academic credentials outstanding, but I understood the kind of
intelligence, grit, and adaptability required of someone of her background to get
to where she was. A breadth of experience, familiarity with the vagaries of life,
the combination of brains and heart—that, I thought, was where wisdom came
from. When asked during the campaign what qualities I’d look for in a Supreme
Court nominee, I had talked not only about legal qualifications but also about
empathy. Conservative commentators had scoffed at my answer, citing it as
evidence that I planned to load up the Court with woolly-headed, socialengineering liberals who cared nothing about the “objective” application of the
law. But as far as I was concerned, they had it upside down: It was precisely the
ability of a judge to understand the context of his or her decisions, to know what
life was like for a pregnant teen as well as for a Catholic priest, a self-made tycoon
as well as an assembly-line worker, the minority as well as the majority, that was
the wellspring of objectivity.
There were other considerations that made Sotomayor a compelling choice.
She’d be the first Latina—and only the third woman—to serve on the Supreme
Court. And she’d already been confirmed twice by the Senate, once
unanimously, making it harder for Republicans to argue that she was an
unacceptable choice.
Given my high regard for Kagan and Wood, I was still undecided when Judge
Sotomayor came to the Oval Office for a get-to-know-you session. She had a
broad, kind face and a ready smile. Her manner was formal and she chose her
words carefully, though her years at Ivy League schools and on the federal bench

hadn’t sanded away the Bronx accent. I’d been warned by my team not to ask
candidates their positions on specific legal controversies like abortion
(Republicans on the committee were sure to ask about any conversation between
me and a nominee to see if I had applied a “litmus test” in making my choice).
Instead, the judge and I talked about her family, her work as a prosecutor, and
her broad judicial philosophy. By the end of the interview, I was convinced that
Sotomayor had what I was looking for, although I didn’t say so on the spot. I did
mention that there was one aspect of her résumé that I found troubling.
“What’s that, Mr. President?” she asked.
“You’re a Yankees fan,” I said. “But since you grew up in the Bronx and
were brainwashed early in life, I’m inclined to overlook it.”
A few days later, I announced my selection of Sonia Sotomayor as a Supreme
Court nominee. The news was positively received, and in the run-up to her
appearance before the Senate Judiciary Committee, I was happy to see that
Republicans had trouble identifying anything in the judge’s written opinions or
conduct on the bench that might derail her confirmation. Instead, they fastened
on two race-related issues to justify their opposition. The first involved a 2008
case in New Haven, Connecticut, in which Sotomayor joined the majority in
ruling against a group of primarily white firefighters who’d filed a “reverse
discrimination” claim. The second issue concerned a 2001 speech Sotomayor had
delivered at the University of California, Berkeley, in which she’d argued that
female and minority judges added a much-needed perspective to the federal
courts, triggering charges from conservatives that she was incapable of impartiality
on the bench.
Despite the temporary dustup, the confirmation hearings proved
anticlimactic. Justice Sotomayor was confirmed by a Senate vote of 68–31, with
nine Republicans joining all the Democrats except for Teddy Kennedy, who was
undergoing treatment for his cancer—about as much support as any nominee was
likely to get, given the polarized environment we were operating in.
Michelle and I hosted a reception for Justice Sotomayor and her family at the
White House in August, after she was sworn in. The new justice’s mother was
there, and I was moved to think what must be going through the mind of this
elderly woman who’d grown up on a distant island, who’d barely spoken English
when she had signed up for the Women’s Army Corps during World War II, and
who, despite the odds stacked against her, had insisted that somehow her kids
would count for something. It made me think of my own mother, and Toot and

Gramps, and I felt a flash of sorrow that none of them had ever had a day like
this, that they were gone before they’d seen what their dreams for me had come
to.
Tamping down my emotions as the justice spoke to the audience, I looked
over at a pair of handsome young Korean American boys—Sotomayor’s adopted
nephews—squirming in their Sunday best. They would take for granted that their
aunt was on the U.S. Supreme Court, shaping the life of a nation—as would kids
across the country.
Which was fine. That’s what progress looks like.
—
toward healthcare reform consumed much of the summer. As
the legislation lumbered through Congress, we looked for any opportunity to
help keep the process on track. Since the White House summit in March,
members of my healthcare and legislative teams had participated in countless
meetings on the subject up on Capitol Hill, trudging into the Oval at the end of
the day like weary field commanders back from the front, offering me reports on
the ebb and flow of battle. The good news was that the key Democratic chairs—
especially Baucus and Waxman—were working hard to craft bills they could pass
out of their respective committees before the traditional August recess. The bad
news was that the more everyone dug into the details of reform, the more
differences in substance and strategy emerged—not just between Democrats and
Republicans but between House and Senate Democrats, between us and
congressional Democrats, and even between members of my own team.
Most of the arguments revolved around the issue of how to generate a mix of
savings and new revenue to pay for expanding coverage to millions of uninsured
Americans. Because of his own inclinations and his interest in producing a
bipartisan bill, Baucus hoped to avoid anything that could be characterized as a
tax increase. Instead, he and his staff had calculated the windfall profits that a new
flood of insured customers would bring to hospitals, drug companies, and insurers
and had used those figures as a basis for negotiating billions of dollars in up-front
contributions through fees or Medicare payment reductions from each industry.
To sweeten the deal, Baucus was also prepared to make certain policy
concessions. For example, he promised the pharmaceutical lobbyists that his bill
wouldn’t include provisions allowing the reimportation of drugs from Canada—a
popular Democratic proposal that highlighted the way Canadian and European
THE SLOW MARCH

government-run healthcare systems used their massive bargaining power to
negotiate much cheaper prices than Big Pharma charged inside the United States.
Politically and emotionally, I would’ve found it a lot more satisfying to just
go after the drug and insurance companies and see if we could beat them into
submission. They were wildly unpopular with voters—and for good reason. But
as a practical matter, it was hard to argue with Baucus’s more conciliatory
approach. We had no way to get to sixty votes in the Senate for a major
healthcare bill without at least the tacit agreement of the big industry players.
Drug reimportation was a great political issue, but at the end of the day, we
didn’t have the votes for it, partly because plenty of Democrats had major
pharmaceutical companies headquartered or operating in their states.
With these realities in mind, I signed off on having Rahm, Nancy-Ann, and
Jim Messina (who had once been on Baucus’s staff) sit in on Baucus’s negotiations
with healthcare industry representatives. By the end of June, they’d hashed out a
deal, securing hundreds of billions of dollars in givebacks and broader drug
discounts for seniors using Medicare. Just as important, they’d gotten a
commitment from the hospitals, insurers, and drug companies to support—or at
least not oppose—the emerging bill.
It was a big hurdle to clear, a case of politics as the art of the possible. But for
some of the more liberal Democrats in the House, where no one had to worry
about a filibuster, and among progressive advocacy groups that were still hoping
to lay the groundwork for a single-payer healthcare system, our compromises
smacked of capitulation, a deal with the devil. It didn’t help that, as Rahm had
predicted, none of the negotiations with the industry had been broadcast on CSPAN. The press started reporting on details of what they called “backroom
deals.” More than a few constituents wrote in to ask whether I’d gone over to the
dark side. And Chairman Waxman made a point of saying he didn’t consider his
work bound by whatever concessions Baucus or the White House had made to
industry lobbyists.
Quick as they were to mount their high horse, House Dems were also more
than willing to protect the status quo when it threatened their prerogatives or
benefited politically influential constituencies. For example, more or less every
healthcare economist agreed that it wasn’t enough just to pry money out of
insurance and drug company profits and use it to cover more people—in order
for reform to work, we also had to do something about the skyrocketing costs
charged by doctors and hospitals. Otherwise, any new money put into the system

would yield less and less care for fewer and fewer people over time. One of the
best ways to “bend the cost curve” was to establish an independent board,
shielded from politics and special-interest lobbying, that would set reimbursement
rates for Medicare based on the comparative effectiveness of particular treatments.
House Democrats hated the idea. It would mean giving away their power to
determine what Medicare did and didn’t cover (along with the potential
campaign fundraising opportunities that came with that power). They also
worried that they’d get blamed by cranky seniors who found themselves unable
to get the latest drug or diagnostic test advertised on TV, even if an expert could
prove that it was actually a waste of money.
They were similarly skeptical of the other big proposal to control costs: a cap
on the tax deductibility of so-called Cadillac insurance plans—high-cost,
employer-provided policies that paid for all sorts of premium services but didn’t
improve health outcomes. Other than corporate managers and well-paid
professionals, the main group covered by such plans were union members, and
the unions were adamantly opposed to what would come to be known as “the
Cadillac tax.” It didn’t matter to labor leaders that their members might be
willing to trade a deluxe hospital suite or a second, unnecessary MRI for a chance
at higher take-home pay. They didn’t trust that any savings from reform would
accrue to their members, and they were absolutely certain they’d catch flak for
any changes to their existing healthcare plans. Unfortunately, so long as the
unions were opposed to the Cadillac tax, most House Democrats were going to
be too.
The squabbles quickly found their way into the press, making the whole
process appear messy and convoluted. By late July, polls showed that more
Americans disapproved than approved of the way I was handling healthcare
reform, prompting me to complain to Axe about our communications strategy.
“We’re on the right side of this stuff,” I insisted. “We just have to explain it
better to voters.”
Axe was irritated that his shop was seemingly getting blamed for the very
problem he’d warned me about from the start. “You can explain it till you’re
blue in the face,” he told me. “But people who already have healthcare are
skeptical that reform will benefit them, and a whole bunch of facts and figures
won’t change that.”
Unconvinced, I decided I needed to be more public in selling our agenda.
Which is how I found myself in a prime-time press conference devoted to

healthcare, facing an East Room full of White House reporters, many of whom
were already writing the obituary on my number one legislative initiative.
—
I enjoyed the unscripted nature of live press conferences. And
unlike the first healthcare forum during the campaign, in which I’d laid an egg as
Hillary and John Edwards shined, I now knew my subject cold. In fact, I
probably knew it too well. During the press conference, I succumbed to an old
pattern, giving exhaustive explanations of each facet of the issue under debate. It
was as if, having failed to get the various negotiations involving the bill on CSPAN, I was going to make up for it by offering the public a one-hour, highly
detailed crash course on U.S. healthcare policy.
The press corps didn’t much appreciate the thoroughness. One news story
made a point of noting that at times I adopted a “professorial” tone. Perhaps that
was why, when the time came for the last question, Lynn Sweet, a veteran
Chicago Sun-Times reporter I’d known for years, decided to ask me something
entirely off the topic.
“Recently,” Lynn said, “Professor Henry Louis Gates, Jr., was arrested at his
home in Cambridge. What does that incident say to you, and what does it say
about race relations in America?”
Where to start? Henry Louis Gates, Jr., was a professor of English and AfroAmerican studies at Harvard and one of the country’s most prominent Black
scholars. He was also a casual friend, someone I’d occasionally run into at social
gatherings. Earlier that week, Gates had returned to his home in Cambridge after
a trip to China and found his front door jammed shut. A neighbor—having
witnessed Gates trying to force the door open—called the police to report a
possible break-in. When the responding officer, Sergeant James Crowley, arrived,
he asked Gates for identification. Gates refused at first and—according to
Crowley—called him racist. Eventually Gates produced his identification but
allegedly continued to berate the departing officer from his porch. When a
warning failed to quiet Gates down, Crowley and two other officers that he’d
called for backup handcuffed him, took him to the police station, and booked
him for disorderly conduct. (The charges were quickly dropped.)
Predictably the incident had become a national story. For a big swath of
white America, Gates’s arrest was entirely deserved, a simple case of someone not
IN GENERAL,

showing the proper respect for a routine law enforcement procedure. For Blacks,
it was just one more example of the humiliations and inequities, large and small,
suffered at the hands of the police specifically and white authority in general.
My own guess as to what had happened was more particular, more human,
than the simple black-and-white morality tale being portrayed. Having lived in
Cambridge, I knew that its police department didn’t have a reputation for
harboring a whole bunch of Bull Connor types. Meanwhile, Skip—as Gates was
known to his friends—was brilliant and loud, one part W.E.B. Du Bois, one part
Mars Blackmon, and cocky enough that I could easily picture him cussing out a
cop to the point where even a relatively restrained officer might feel his
testosterone kick in.
Still, while no one had been hurt, I found the episode depressing—a vivid
reminder that not even the highest level of Black achievement and the most
accommodating of white settings could escape the cloud of our racial history.
Hearing about what had happened to Gates, I had found myself almost
involuntarily conducting a quick inventory of my own experiences. The multiple
occasions when I’d been asked for my student ID while walking to the library on
Columbia’s campus, something that never seemed to happen to my white
classmates. The unmerited traffic stops while visiting certain “nice” Chicago
neighborhoods. Being followed around by department store security guards while
doing my Christmas shopping. The sound of car locks clicking as I walked across
a street, dressed in a suit and tie, in the middle of the day.
Moments like these were routine among Black friends, acquaintances, guys in
the barbershop. If you were poor, or working-class, or lived in a rough
neighborhood, or didn’t properly signify being a respectable Negro, the stories
were usually worse. For just about every Black man in the country, and every
woman who loved a Black man, and every parent of a Black boy, it was not a
matter of paranoia or “playing the race card” or disrespecting law enforcement to
conclude that whatever else had happened that day in Cambridge, this much was
almost certainly true: A wealthy, famous, five-foot-six, 140-pound, fifty-eightyear-old white Harvard professor who walked with a cane because of a childhood
leg injury would not have been handcuffed and taken down to the station merely
for being rude to a cop who’d forced him to produce some form of identification
while standing on his own damn property.
Of course, I didn’t say all that. Maybe I should have. Instead, I made what I
thought were some pretty unremarkable observations, beginning with the

acknowledgment that the police had responded appropriately to the 911 call and
also that Gates was a friend, which meant I might be biased. “I don’t know, not
having been there and not seeing all the facts, what role race played in that,” I
said. “But I think it’s fair to say, number one, any of us would be pretty angry;
number two, that the Cambridge police acted stupidly in arresting somebody
when there was already proof that they were in their own home; and number
three, what I think we know separate and apart from this incident is that there is a
long history in this country of African Americans and Latinos being stopped by
law enforcement disproportionately.”
That was it. I left the evening press conference assuming that my four minutes
on the Gates affair would be a brief sidebar to the hour I’d spent on healthcare.
Boy, was I wrong. The next morning, my suggestion that the police had
acted “stupidly” led every news broadcast. Police union representatives suggested
that I had vilified Officer Crowley and law enforcement in general and were
demanding an apology. Anonymous sources claimed that strings had been pulled
to get Gates’s charges dropped without a court appearance. Conservative media
outlets barely hid their glee, portraying my comments as a case of an elitist
(professorial, uppity) Black president siding with his well-connected (mouthy,
race-card-wielding) Harvard friend over a white, working-class cop who was just
doing his job. In the daily White House press briefing, Gibbs fielded questions on
little else. Afterward, he asked whether I’d consider issuing a clarification.
“What am I clarifying?” I asked. “I thought I was pretty clear the first time.”
“The way it’s being consumed, people think you called the police stupid.”
“I didn’t say they were stupid. I said they acted stupidly. There’s a
difference.”
“I get it. But…”
“We’re not doing a clarification,” I said. “It’ll blow over.”
The next day, though, it hadn’t blown over. Instead, the story had completely
swamped everything else, including our healthcare message. Fielding nervous calls
from Democrats on the Hill, Rahm looked like he was ready to jump off a
bridge. You would have thought that in the press conference I had donned a
dashiki and cussed out the police myself.
Eventually I agreed to a damage-control plan. I began by calling Sergeant
Crowley to let him know I was sorry for having used the word “stupidly.” He
was gracious and good-humored, and at some point I suggested that he and Gates
come visit the White House. The three of us could have a beer, I said, and show

the country that good people could get past misunderstandings. Both Crowley
and Gates, whom I called immediately afterward, were enthusiastic about the
idea. In a press briefing later that day, I told reporters that I continued to believe
that the police had overreacted in arresting Gates, just as the professor had
overreacted to their arrival at his home. I acknowledged that I could have
calibrated my original comments more carefully. Much later I’d learn through
David Simas, our in-house polling guru and Axe’s deputy, that the Gates affair
caused a huge drop in my support among white voters, bigger than would come
from any single event during the eight years of my presidency. It was support that
I’d never completely get back.
Six days later, Joe Biden and I sat down with Sergeant Crowley and Skip
Gates at the White House for what came to be known as the “Beer Summit.” It
was a low-key, friendly, and slightly stilted affair. As I’d expected based on our
phone conversation, Crowley came across as a thoughtful, decent man, while
Skip was on his best behavior. For an hour or so, the four of us talked about our
upbringings, our work, and ways to improve trust and communication between
police officers and the African American community. When our time was up,
both Crowley and Gates expressed appreciation for the tours my staff had given
their families, though I joked that next time they could probably find easier ways
to score an invitation.
After they were gone, I sat alone in the Oval Office, reflecting on it all.
Michelle, friends like Valerie and Marty, Black senior officials like Attorney
General Eric Holder, ambassador to the U.N. Susan Rice, and U.S. trade
representative Ron Kirk—we were all accustomed to running the obstacle course
necessary to be effective inside of predominantly white institutions. We’d grown
skilled at suppressing our reactions to minor slights, ever ready to give white
colleagues the benefit of the doubt, remaining mindful that all but the most
careful discussions of race risked triggering in them a mild panic. Still, the
reaction to my comments on Gates surprised us all. It was my first indicator of
how the issue of Black folks and the police was more polarizing than just about
any other subject in American life. It seemed to tap into some of the deepest
undercurrents of our nation’s psyche, touching on the rawest of nerves, perhaps
because it reminded all of us, Black and white alike, that the basis of our nation’s
social order had never been simply about consent; that it was also about centuries
of state-sponsored violence by whites against Black and brown people, and that
who controlled legally sanctioned violence, how it was wielded and against
whom, still mattered in the recesses of our tribal minds much more than we cared

to admit.
My thoughts were interrupted by Valerie, who poked her head in to check
on me. She said that the coverage of the “Beer Summit” had been generally
positive, although she admitted to having received a bunch of calls from Black
supporters who weren’t happy. “They don’t understand why we’d bend over
backward to make Crowley feel welcome,” she said.
“What’d you tell them?” I asked.
“I said the whole thing has become a distraction, and you’re focused on
governing and getting healthcare passed.”
I nodded. “And our Black folks on staff…how are they doing?”
Valerie shrugged. “The younger ones are a little discouraged. But they get it.
With all you’ve got on your plate, they just don’t like seeing you being put in
this position.”
“Which position?” I said. “Being Black, or being president?”
We both got a good laugh out of that.