RARELY does  a week goes

by when I don’t run into somebody—a friend, a
supporter, an acquaintance, or a total stranger—who insists that from the first
time they met me or heard me speak on TV, they knew I’d be president. They
tell me this with affection, conviction, and a certain amount of pride in their
political acumen, talent spotting, or soothsaying. Sometimes they will cloak it in
religious terms. God had a plan for you, they’ll tell me. I’ll smile and say that I
wish they had told me this back when I was thinking about running; it would
have saved me a lot of stress and self-doubt.
The truth is, I’ve never been a big believer in destiny. I worry that it
encourages resignation in the down-and-out and complacency among the
powerful. I suspect that God’s plan, whatever it is, works on a scale too large to
admit our mortal tribulations; that in a single lifetime, accidents and happenstance
determine more than we care to admit; and that the best we can do is to try to
align ourselves with what we feel is right and construct some meaning out of our
confusion, and with grace and nerve play at each moment the hand that we’re
dealt.
I know that by the spring of 2006, the idea of me running for president in the
next election, while still unlikely, no longer felt outside the realm of possibility.
Each day, our Senate office was inundated with media requests. We were getting
twice as much mail as other senators. Every state party and candidate for the
November midterm elections wanted me to headline their events. And our rote
denials that I was planning to run seemed only to fuel speculation.
One afternoon, Pete Rouse walked into my office and closed the door
behind him.
“I want to ask you something,” he said.
I looked up from the constituent letters I’d been signing. “Shoot.”
“Have your plans changed for 2008?”
ARELY DOES A WEEK GO

“I don’t know. Should they?”
Pete shrugged. “I think the original plan to stay out of the limelight and focus
on Illinois made sense. But your profile’s not going down. If there’s even a
remote chance you’re considering it, I’d like to write a memo outlining what we
need to do to keep your options open. You all right with that?”
I leaned back in my chair and stared at the ceiling, knowing the implications
of my answer. “Makes sense,” I finally said.
“Okay?” Pete asked.
“Okay.” I nodded, returning to my paperwork.
“The Memo Master” is how some on the staff referred to Pete. In his hands,
the lowly memorandum approached an art form, each one efficient and oddly
inspiring. A few days later, he distributed a revised road map for the remainder of
the year for my senior team to consider. It called for an expanded travel schedule
to support more Democratic candidates in the midterms, meetings with
influential party officials and donors, and a retooled stump speech.
For months to come, I followed this plan, putting myself and my ideas before
new audiences, lending my support to Democrats in swing states and swing
districts, and traveling to parts of the country I’d never been to before. From the
West Virginia Jefferson-Jackson Dinner to the Nebraska Morrison Exon Dinner,
we hit them all, packing the house and rallying the troops. Anytime someone
asked if I was going to run for president, though, I continued to demur. “Right
now, I’m just focused on getting Ben Nelson back to the Senate, where we need
him,” I’d say.
Was I fooling them? Was I fooling myself? It’s hard to say. I was testing, I
suppose, probing, trying to square what I was seeing and feeling as I traveled
around the country with the absurdity of my launching a national campaign. I
knew that a viable presidential candidacy wasn’t something you just fell into.
Done right, it was a deeply strategic endeavor, built slowly and quietly over time,
requiring not only confidence and conviction but also piles of money and enough
commitment and goodwill from others to carry you through all fifty states and
two straight years of primaries and caucuses.
Already, a number of my fellow Democratic senators—Joe Biden, Chris
Dodd, Evan Bayh, and, of course, Hillary Clinton—had laid the groundwork for
a possible run. Some had run before; all had been preparing for years and had a
seasoned cadre of staff, donors, and local officials lined up to help. Unlike me,
most could point to a record of meaningful legislative accomplishments. And I

liked them. They had treated me well, broadly shared my views on the issues, and
were more than capable of running an effective campaign and, beyond that, an
effective White House. If I was becoming convinced that I could excite voters in
ways that they couldn’t—if I suspected that only a wider coalition than they
could build, a different language than they used, could shake up Washington and
give hope to those in need—I also understood that my favored status was partly
an illusion, the result of friendly media coverage and an over-stoked appetite for
anything new. The infatuation could reverse itself in an instant, I knew, the rising
star transformed into the callow youth, presumptuous enough to think he could
run the country less than halfway through his first term.
Better to hold off, I told myself. Pay dues, collect chits, wait my turn.
On a bright spring afternoon, Harry Reid asked me to stop by his office. I
trudged up the wide marble stairs from the Senate chamber to the second floor,
the unsmiling, dark-eyed portraits of long-dead men staring down upon me with
each step. Harry greeted me in the reception area and led me into his office, a
big, high-ceilinged room with the same intricate moldings, tile work, and
spectacular views that other senior senators enjoyed, but short on memorabilia or
photos of handshakes with the famous that adorned other offices.
“Let me get to the point,” Harry said, as if he were known for small talk.
“We’ve got a lot of people in our caucus planning to run for president. I can
hardly count them all. And they’re good people, Barack, so I can’t be out there
publicly, taking sides…”
“Listen, Harry, just so you know, I’m not—”
“But,” he said, cutting me off, “I think you need to consider running this
cycle. I know you’ve said you wouldn’t do it. And sure, a lot of people will say
you need more experience. But let me tell you something. Ten more years in the
Senate won’t make you a better president. You get people motivated, especially
young people, minorities, even middle-of-the-road white people. That’s
different, you see. People are looking for something different. Sure, it will be
hard, but I think you can win. Schumer thinks so too.”
He stood up and headed toward the door, making it clear the meeting was
over. “Well, that’s all I wanted to tell you. So think about it, okay?”
I left his office stunned. As good a relationship as I’d developed with Harry, I
knew him to be the most practical of politicians. Walking down the stairs, I
wondered if there was some angle to what he had said, some sophisticated game
he was playing that I was too dim to recognize. But when I later talked to Chuck

Schumer, and then to Dick Durbin, they delivered the same message: The
country was desperate for a new voice. I would never be in a better position to
run than I was now, and with my connection with young voters, minorities, and
independents, I might broaden the map in a way that could help other Democrats
down the ballot.
I didn’t share these conversations beyond my senior staff and closest friends,
feeling as if I had stepped into a minefield and shouldn’t make any sudden moves.
As I mulled it all over with Pete, he suggested I have one more conversation
before I considered taking a more serious look at what a race would entail.
“You need to talk to Kennedy,” he said. “He knows all the players. He’s run
himself. He’ll give you some perspective. And at the very least, he’ll tell you if he
plans to support anyone else.”
Heir to the most famous name in American politics, Ted Kennedy was by
then the closest thing Washington had to a living legend. During more than four
decades in the Senate, he’d been at the forefront of every major progressive cause,
from civil rights to the minimum wage to healthcare. With his great bulk, huge
head, and mane of white hair, he filled every room he walked into, and was the
rare senator who commanded attention whenever he gingerly rose from his seat
in the chamber, searching his suit pocket for his glasses or his notes, that iconic
Boston baritone launching each speech with “Thank you, Madam President.”
The argument would unspool—the face reddening, the voice rising—building to
a crescendo like a revivalist sermon, no matter how mundane the issue at hand.
And then the speech would end, the curtain would come down, and he would
become the old, avuncular Teddy again, wandering down the aisle to check on
the roll call or sit next to a colleague, his hand on their shoulder or forearm,
whispering in their ear or breaking into a hearty laugh—the kind that made you
not care that he was probably softening you up for some future vote he might
need.
Teddy’s office on the third floor of the Russell Senate Office Building was a
reflection of the man—charming and full of history, its walls cluttered with
photographs of Camelot and models of sailboats and paintings of Cape Cod. One
painting in particular caught my attention, of dark, jagged rocks curving against a
choppy, white-capped sea.
“Took me a long time to get that one right,” Teddy said, coming up beside
me. “Three or four tries.”
“It was worth the effort,” I said.

We sat down in his inner sanctum, with the shades drawn and a soft light, and
he began telling stories—about sailing, his children, and various fights he’d lived
through on the Senate floor. Ribald stories, funny stories. Occasionally he drifted
along some unrelated current before tacking back to his original course,
sometimes uttering just a fragment of a thought, all the while both of us knowing
that this was a performance—that we were just circling the real purpose of my
visit.
“So…” he finally said, “I hear there’s talk of you running for president.”
I told him it was unlikely, but that I nevertheless wanted his counsel.
“Yes, well, who was it who said there are one hundred senators who look in
the mirror and see a president?” Teddy chuckled to himself. “They ask, ‘Do I
have what it takes?’ Jack, Bobby, me too, long ago. It didn’t go as planned, but
things work out in their own way, I suppose…”
He trailed off, lost in his thoughts. Watching him, I wondered how he took
the measure of his own life, and his brothers’ lives, the terrible price each one of
them had paid in pursuit of a dream. Then, just as suddenly, he was back, his
deep blue eyes fixed on mine, all business.
“I won’t be wading in early,” Teddy said. “Too many friends. But I can tell
you this, Barack. The power to inspire is rare. Moments like this are rare. You
think you may not be ready, that you’ll do it at a more convenient time. But you
don’t choose the time. The time chooses you. Either you seize what may turn
out to be the only chance you have, or you decide you’re willing to live with the
knowledge that the chance has passed you by.”
—
oblivious to what was happening. At first she simply
ignored the fuss. She stopped watching political news shows and waved off all the
overeager questions from friends and co-workers about whether I planned to run.
When one evening at home I mentioned the conversation I’d had with Harry,
she just shrugged, and I did not press the issue.
As the summer wore on, though, the chatter began to seep through the cracks
and crevices of our home life. Our evenings and weekends appeared normal so
long as Malia and Sasha were swirling about, but I felt the tension whenever
Michelle and I were alone. Finally, one night after the girls were asleep, I came
into the den where she was watching TV and muted the sound.
MICHELLE WAS HARDLY

“You know I didn’t plan any of this,” I said, sitting down next to her on the
couch.
Michelle stared at the silent screen. “I know,” she said.
“I realize we’ve barely had time to catch our breath. And until a few months
ago, the idea of me running seemed crazy.”
“Yep.”
“But given everything that’s happened, I feel like we have to give the idea a
serious look. I’ve asked the team to put together a presentation. What a campaign
schedule would look like. Whether we could win. How it might affect the
family. I mean, if we were ever going to do this—”
Michelle cut me off, her voice choked with emotion.
“Did you say we?” she said. “You mean you, Barack. Not we. This is your
thing. I’ve supported you the whole time, because I believe in you, even though
I hate politics. I hate the way it exposes our family. You know that. And now,
finally, we have some stability…even if it’s still not normal, not the way I’d
choose for us to live…and now you tell me you’re going to run for president?”
I reached for her hand. “I didn’t say I am running, honey. I just said we can’t
dismiss the possibility. But I can only consider it if you’re on board.” I paused,
seeing that none of her anger was dissipating. “If you don’t think we should, then
we won’t. Simple as that. You get the final say.”
Michelle lifted her eyebrows as if to suggest she didn’t believe me. “If that’s
really true, then the answer is no,” she said. “I don’t want you to run for
president, at least not now.” She gave me a hard look and got up from the couch.
“God, Barack…When is it going to be enough?”
Before I could answer, she’d gone into the bedroom and closed the door.
How could I blame her for feeling this way? By even suggesting the
possibility of a run, by involving my staff before I’d asked for her blessing, I had
put her in an impossible spot. For years now, I’d asked Michelle for fortitude and
forbearance when it came to my political endeavors, and she’d given it—
reluctantly but with love. And then each time I’d come back again, asking for
more.
Why would I put her through this? Was it just vanity? Or perhaps something
darker—a raw hunger, a blind ambition wrapped in the gauzy language of
service? Or was I still trying to prove myself worthy to a father who had
abandoned me, live up to my mother’s starry-eyed expectations of her only son,

and resolve whatever self-doubt remained from being born a child of mixed race?
“It’s like you have a hole to fill,” Michelle had told me early in our marriage,
after a stretch in which she’d watched me work myself to near exhaustion.
“That’s why you can’t slow down.”
In truth, I thought I’d resolved those issues long ago, finding affirmation in
my work, security and love in my family. But I wondered now if I could ever
really escape whatever it was in me that needed healing, whatever kept me
reaching for more.
Maybe it was impossible to disentangle one’s motives. I recalled a sermon by
Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr., called “The Drum Major Instinct.” In it, he talks
about how, deep down, we all want to be first, celebrated for our greatness; we
all want “to lead the parade.” He goes on to point out that such selfish impulses
can be reconciled by aligning that quest for greatness with more selfless aims. You
can strive to be first in service, first in love. For me, it seemed a satisfying way to
square the circle when it came to one’s baser and higher instincts. Except now I
was also confronting the obvious fact that the sacrifices were never mine alone.
Family got dragged along for the ride, put in the line of fire. Dr. King’s cause,
and his gifts, might have justified such sacrifice. But could mine?
I didn’t know. Whatever the nature of my faith, I couldn’t take refuge in the
notion of God calling me to run for president. I couldn’t pretend to be simply
responding to some invisible pull of the universe. I couldn’t claim I was
indispensable to the cause of freedom and justice, or deny responsibility for the
burden I’d be placing on my family.
Circumstances may have opened the door to a presidential race, but nothing
during these months had prevented me from closing it. I could easily close the
door still. And the fact that I hadn’t, that instead I had allowed the door to open
wider, was all Michelle needed to know. If one of the qualifications of running
for the most powerful office in the world was megalomania, it appeared I was
passing the test.
—
my mood as I left in August for a seventeen-day tour
through Africa. In South Africa, I took the boat ride out to Robben Island and
stood in the tiny cell where Nelson Mandela had passed most of his twenty-seven
years in prison, keeping his faith that change would come. I met with members of
SUCH THOUGHTS COLORED

the South African Supreme Court, spoke with doctors at an HIV/AIDS clinic,
and spent time with Bishop Desmond Tutu, whose joyful spirit I had gotten to
know during his visits to Washington.
“So is it true, Barack,” he said with an impish smile, “that you are going to be
our first African president of the United States? Ah, that would make us all verrry
proud!”
From South Africa, I flew to Nairobi, where Michelle and the girls—
accompanied by our friend Anita Blanchard and her children—joined me.
Abetted by wall-to-wall coverage in the local press, the Kenyan response to our
presence was over the top. A visit to Kibera, one of Africa’s largest shantytowns,
drew thousands who packed themselves along the winding paths of red dirt,
chanting my name. My half sister Auma had thoughtfully organized a family trip
to Nyanza Province, so we could introduce Sasha and Malia to our father’s
ancestral home in the western region of the country. Traveling there, we were
surprised to see people lined up and waving alongside miles of highway. And
when Michelle and I stopped at a mobile health clinic to publicly take an HIV
test as a means of demonstrating its safety, a crowd of thousands showed up,
swamping our vehicle and giving the diplomatic security team a real scare. Only
when we went on safari, parked among the lions and wildebeests, did we escape
the commotion.
“I swear, Barack, these folks think you’re already president!” Anita joked one
evening. “Just reserve me a seat on Air Force One, okay?”
Neither Michelle nor I laughed.
While the family headed back to Chicago, I continued on, traveling to the
Kenya-Somalia border to get briefed on U.S.-Kenyan cooperation against the
terrorist group al-Shabaab; taking a helicopter from Djibouti into Ethiopia, where
U.S. military personnel were assisting flood relief efforts; and finally flying into
Chad to visit refugees from Darfur. At each stop, I saw men and women engaged
in heroic work, in impossible circumstances. At each stop, I was told how much
more America could be doing to help relieve the suffering.
And at each stop, I was asked if I was running for president.
Just days after my return to the States, I flew to Iowa to give the keynote
speech at Senator Tom Harkin’s Annual Steak Fry, a ritual that took on added
importance in the run-up to presidential elections, given that Iowa was always the
first state to vote in the primary process. I’d accepted the invitation months earlier
—Tom had asked me to speak precisely to avoid having to choose between all

the presidential aspirants who coveted the slot—but now my appearance only
fueled speculation. As we were leaving the fairgrounds following my speech, I
was pulled aside by Steve Hildebrand, a former political director for the
Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee and an old Iowa hand who’d been
enlisted by Pete to show me around.
“That’s the hottest reception I’ve ever seen here,” Steve said. “You can win
Iowa, Barack. I can feel it. And if you win Iowa, you can win the nomination.”
It felt sometimes as if I’d been caught in a tide, carried along by the current of
other people’s expectations before I’d clearly defined my own. The temperature
rose even higher when, a month later, just a few weeks before the midterm
elections, my second book was released. I’d labored on it all year, in the evenings
in my D.C. apartment and on weekends after Michelle and the girls had gone to
sleep; even in Djibouti, where I’d scrambled for several hours trying to fax
corrected page proofs to my editor. I had never intended the book to serve as a
campaign manifesto; I just wanted to present my ideas about the current state of
American politics in an interesting way and sell enough copies to justify my
sizable advance.
But that wasn’t how it was received, by the political press or the public.
Promoting it meant I was on television and radio practically nonstop, and
combined with my very visible barnstorming on behalf of congressional
candidates, I looked more and more like a candidate myself.
On a drive down from Philly to D.C., where I was scheduled to appear the
next morning on Meet the Press, Gibbs and Axe, along with Axe’s business
partner, David Plouffe, asked me what I planned to say when the show’s host,
Tim Russert, inevitably grilled me about my plans.
“He’s going to run back the old tape,” Axe explained. “The one where you
say unequivocally you will not run for president in 2008.”
I listened for a few minutes as the three of them began hashing out various
ways to sidestep the question before I interrupted.
“Why don’t I just tell the truth? Can’t I just say that I had no intention of
running two years ago, but circumstances have changed and so has my thinking,
and I plan to give it serious thought after the midterms are over?”
They liked the idea, admitting that it said something about the strangeness of
politics that such a straightforward answer would be considered novel. Gibbs also
advised that I give Michelle a heads-up, predicting that a direct suggestion that I
might run would cause the media frenzy to immediately intensify.

Which is exactly what happened. My admission on Meet the Press made
headlines and the evening news. On the internet, a “Draft Obama” petition took
off, gathering thousands of signatures. National columnists, including several
conservative ones, penned op-eds urging me to run, and Time magazine
published a cover story titled “Why Barack Obama Could Be the Next
President.”
Apparently, though, not everyone was sold on my prospects. Gibbs reported
that when he stopped at a kiosk on Michigan Avenue to get a copy of Time, the
Indian American vendor looked down at my picture and offered a two-word
response: “Fuuuuck that.”
We had a good laugh over this. And as the speculation about my candidacy
grew, Gibbs and I would repeat the phrase like an incantation, one that helped
maintain our grasp on reality and ward off the growing sense that events were
moving beyond our control. The crowd at my final stop before the midterm
elections, an evening rally in Iowa City in support of the Democratic candidate
for governor, was especially raucous. Standing on the stage and looking out at the
thousands of people gathered there, their breath rising like mist through the klieg
lights, their faces turned up in expectation, their cheers drowning out my haggard
voice, I felt as if I were watching a scene in a movie, the figure onstage not my
own.
When I got home late that night, the house was dark and Michelle was
already asleep. After taking a shower and going through a stack of mail, I slipped
under the covers and began drifting off. In that liminal space between wakefulness
and sleep, I imagined myself stepping toward a portal of some sort, a bright and
cold and airless place, uninhabited and severed from the world. And behind me,
out of the darkness, I heard a voice, sharp and clear, as if someone were right
next to me, uttering the same word again and again.
No. No. No.
I jolted out of bed, my heart racing, and went downstairs to pour myself a
drink. I sat alone in the dark, sipping vodka, my nerves jangled, my brain in
sudden overdrive. My deepest fear, it turned out, was no longer of irrelevance, or
being stuck in the Senate, or even losing a presidential race.
The fear came from the realization that I could win.
—

of antipathy toward the Bush administration and the war in Iraq,
Democrats swept just about every important contest in November, winning
control of both the House and the Senate. As hard as we’d worked to help
achieve these results, my team and I had no time to celebrate. Instead, starting the
day after the election, we began charting a possible path to the White House.
Our pollster, Paul Harstad, went through the numbers and found me already
among the first tier of candidates. We discussed the primary and caucus calendar,
understanding that for an upstart campaign like mine, everything would depend
on winning the early states, especially Iowa. We ran through what a realistic
budget might look like, and how we’d go about raising the hundreds of millions
of dollars it would take just to win the Democratic nomination. Pete and Alyssa
presented plans for juggling my Senate duties with campaign travel. Axelrod
wrote a memo outlining the themes of a potential campaign, and how—given
voters’ utter contempt for Washington—my message of change could compensate
for my obvious lack of experience.
Despite how little time they’d had, everyone had carried out their assignments
with thoroughness and care. I was especially impressed by David Plouffe. In his
late thirties, slight and intense, with sharp features and a crisp yet informal
manner, he had dropped out of college to work on a series of Democratic
campaigns and also ran the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee
before joining Axelrod’s consulting firm. I sat listening one day as he mapped out
how we might power a grassroots state-by-state organizing effort using both our
volunteer base and the internet, and later I told Pete that if we did this, Plouffe
seemed like the clear choice for campaign manager.
“He’s excellent,” Pete said. “It might take some convincing, though. He’s got
a young family.”
This was one of the more striking things about our discussions that month:
The entire team displayed an ambivalence that matched my own. It wasn’t just
that my candidacy remained a long shot; both Plouffe and Axelrod were blunt in
saying that for me to beat Hillary Clinton, a “national brand,” we would have to
pitch close to a perfect game. No, what gave them more pause was the fact that,
unlike me, they had seen presidential campaigns up close. They knew all too well
the grueling nature of the enterprise. They understood the toll it would take not
just on me and my family but on them and their families as well.
We’d be on the road constantly. The press would be merciless in its scrutiny
—“a nonstop colonoscopy” I believe Gibbs called it. I’d see very little of
RIDING A WAVE

Michelle or the kids for a year at least—two years if we were lucky enough to
win the primary.
“I’ll be honest, Barack,” Axe told me after one meeting. “The process can be
exhilarating, but it’s mostly misery. It’s like a stress test, an EKG on the soul. And
for all your talent, I don’t know how you’ll respond. Neither do you. The whole
thing is so crazy, so undignified and brutal, that you have to be a little
pathological to do what it takes to win. And I just don’t know if you’ve got that
hunger in you. I don’t think you’ll be unhappy if you never become president.”
“That’s true,” I said.
“I know it is,” Axe said. “And as a person, that’s a strength. But for a
candidate, it’s a weakness. You may be a little too normal, too well-adjusted, to
run for president. And though the political consultant in me thinks it would be a
thrill to see you do this, the part of me that’s your friend kind of hopes you
don’t.”
Michelle, meanwhile, was also sorting out her feelings. She listened quietly
during meetings, occasionally asking questions about the campaign calendar, what
would be expected of her, and what it might mean for the girls. Gradually her
resistance to the idea of me running had subsided. Perhaps it helped to hear the
unvarnished truth of what a campaign entailed, her worst fears rendered concrete
and specific and therefore more manageable. Maybe it was the conversations
she’d had with Valerie and Marty, two of our most loyal friends, people whose
judgment she implicitly trusted. Or the nudge she got from her brother, Craig—
someone who had pursued his own unlikely dreams, first to play professional
basketball and later to become a coach, even though it meant giving up a
lucrative career in banking.
“She’s just scared,” he had told me over a beer one afternoon. He’d gone on
to describe how Michelle and her mother used to watch his high school
basketball games, but if the score got even a little close, they’d leave and go wait
in the tunnel, the two of them too tense to stay in their seats. “They didn’t want
to see me lose,” Craig said. “They didn’t want to see me hurt or disappointed. I
had to explain that it’s part of competition.” He was in favor of me taking my
shot at the presidency and said he planned to talk it over with his sister. “I want
her to see the bigger picture,” he said. “The chance to compete at this level isn’t
something you can pass up.”
One day in December, just ahead of our holiday trip to Hawaii, our team
held what was to be the final meeting before I decided whether to move forward

or not. Michelle patiently endured an hour-long discussion on staffing and the
logistics of a potential announcement before cutting in with an essential question.
“You’ve said there are a lot of other Democrats who are capable of winning
an election and being president. You’ve told me the only reason for you to run is
if you could provide something that the others can’t. Otherwise it’s not worth it.
Right?”
I nodded.
“So my question is why you, Barack? Why do you need to be president?”
We looked at each other across the table. For a moment, it was as if we were
alone in the room. My mind flipped back to the moment seventeen years earlier
when we first met, me arriving late to her office, a little damp from the rain,
Michelle rising up from her desk, so lovely and self-possessed in a lawyerly blouse
and skirt, and the easy banter that followed. I had seen in those round, dark eyes
of hers a vulnerability that I knew she rarely let show. I knew even then that she
was special, that I would need to know her, that this was a woman I could love.
How lucky I had been, I thought.
“Barack?”
I shook myself out of the reverie. “Right,” I said. “Why me?” I mentioned
several of the reasons we’d talked about before. That I might be able to spark a
new kind of politics, or get a new generation to participate, or bridge the
divisions in the country better than other candidates could.
“But who knows?” I said, looking around the table. “There’s no guarantee
we can pull it off. Here’s one thing I know for sure, though. I know that the day
I raise my right hand and take the oath to be president of the United States, the
world will start looking at America differently. I know that kids all around this
country—Black kids, Hispanic kids, kids who don’t fit in—they’ll see themselves
differently, too, their horizons lifted, their possibilities expanded. And that
alone…that would be worth it.”
The room was quiet. Marty smiled. Valerie was tearing up. I could see
different members of the team conjuring it in their minds, the swearing in of the
first African American president of the United States.
Michelle stared at me for what felt like an eternity. “Well, honey,” she said
finally, “that was a pretty good answer.”
Everyone laughed, and the meeting moved on to other business. In years to
come, those who’d been in the room would sometimes make reference to that

meeting, understanding that my answer to Michelle’s question had been an
impromptu articulation of a shared faith, the thing that had launched us all on
what would be a long, rough, and improbable journey. They would remember it
when they saw a little boy touch my hair in the Oval Office, or when a teacher
reported that the kids in her inner-city class had started studying harder after I was
elected.
And it’s true: In answering Michelle’s question, I was anticipating the ways in
which I hoped that even a credible campaign might shake loose some vestiges of
America’s racial past. But privately I knew that getting there also meant
something more personal.
If we won, I thought, it would mean that my U.S. Senate campaign hadn’t
just been dumb luck.
If we won, it would mean that what had led me into politics wasn’t just a
pipe dream, that the America I believed in was possible, that the democracy I
believed in was within reach.
If we won, it would mean that I wasn’t alone in believing that the world
didn’t have to be a cold, unforgiving place, where the strong preyed on the weak
and we inevitably fell back into clans and tribes, lashing out against the unknown
and huddling against the darkness.
If these beliefs were made manifest, then my own life made sense, and I could
then pass on that promise, that version of the world, to my children.
I had made a bet a long time ago, and this was the point of reckoning. I was
about to step over some invisible line, one that would inexorably change my life,
in ways I couldn’t yet imagine and in ways I might not like. But to stop now, to
turn back now, to lose my nerve now—that was unacceptable.
I had to see how this whole thing played out.