WITH SOUTH CAROLINA BEHIND US,

things once again seemed to start breaking our
way. In a New York Times op-ed on January 27, Caroline Kennedy announced
her support for me, generously suggesting that our campaign had made her
understand, for the first time, the inspiration young Americans had once drawn
from her father. Her uncle, Ted Kennedy, followed suit the next day, joining me
for an appearance before several thousand students at American University.
Teddy was absolutely electric, summoning all the old Camelot magic, batting
down the argument of inexperience once used against his brother and now
directed toward me. Axe would call it a symbolic passing of the torch, and I
could see what it meant to him. It was as if, in our campaign, Teddy recognized a
familiar chord, and was reaching back to a time before his brothers’ assassinations,
Vietnam, white backlash, riots, Watergate, plant closings, Altamont, and AIDS,
back to when liberalism brimmed with optimism and a can-do spirit—the same
spirit that had shaped my mother’s sensibilities as a young woman, and that she
had funneled into me.
The Kennedy endorsement added poetry to our campaign and helped set us
up for Super Tuesday, on February 5, when more than half the nation’s delegates
would be determined in a single day. We’d always known that Super Tuesday
would present an enormous challenge; even with our wins in Iowa and South
Carolina, Hillary remained far better known, and the face-to-face retail
campaigning we’d done in the early states was simply not possible in bigger, more
densely populated places like California and New York.
What we did have, though, was a grassroots infantry that expanded by the
day. With the help of our veteran delegate expert, Jeff Berman, and our tenacious
field director, Jon Carson, Plouffe developed a strategy that we would execute
with the same single-minded focus that we’d applied to Iowa. Rather than trying
to win the big primary states and spend heavily on TV ads there just to mitigate
our losses, we instead focused my time and our field efforts on the caucus states—
ITH SOUTH CAROLINA BEHIND US,

many of them small, rural, and overwhelmingly white—where the enthusiasm of
our supporters could produce relatively large turnouts and lopsided victories,
which would translate to big delegate hauls.
Idaho was a case in point. It hadn’t made sense for us to send paid staff to
such a tiny, solidly Republican state, but a determined band of volunteers called
Idahoans for Obama had organized themselves. They’d spent the past year using
social media tools like MySpace and Meetup to build a community, getting to
know my positions on issues, creating personal fundraising pages, planning events,
and strategically canvassing the state. When, a few days before Super Tuesday,
Plouffe told me that I was scheduled to campaign in Boise instead of putting in an
extra day in California—where we were rapidly making up ground—I confess
that I had my doubts. But a Boise State arena filled with fourteen thousand
cheering Idahoans quickly cured me of any skepticism. We ended up winning
Idaho by such a large margin that we gained more delegates there than Hillary
got from winning New Jersey, a state with more than five times the population.
This became the pattern. Thirteen of the twenty-two Super Tuesday contests
went our way; and while Hillary won New York and California by a few
percentage points each, overall we netted thirteen more delegates than she did. It
was a remarkable achievement, a testament to the skill and resourcefulness of
Plouffe, our field staff, and most of all our volunteers. And given the questions
that both pundits and the Clinton campaign continued to raise about my
potential appeal in a general election, I took extra satisfaction in having run the
table across the so-called red part of the country.
What struck me as well was the growing role that technology played in our
victories. The extraordinary youth of my team allowed us to embrace and refine
the digital networks that Howard Dean’s campaign had set in motion four years
earlier. Our status as upstarts forced us to trust, again and again, the energy and
creativity of our internet-savvy volunteers. Millions of small donors were helping
to fuel our operation, emailed links helped to spread our campaign messaging in
ways that Big Media couldn’t, and new communities were forming among
people who’d previously been isolated from one another. Coming out of Super
Tuesday, I was inspired, imagining that I was glimpsing the future, a resurgence
of bottom-up participation that could make our democracy work again.
What I couldn’t fully appreciate yet was just how malleable this technology
would prove to be; how quickly it would be absorbed by commercial interests
and wielded by entrenched powers; how readily it could be used not to unify

people but to distract or divide them; and how one day many of the same tools
that had put me in the White House would be deployed in opposition to
everything I stood for.
Such insights would come later. After Super Tuesday, we went on an
absolute tear, winning eleven straight primaries and caucuses over the course of
two weeks, by an average margin of 36 percent. It was a heady stretch, almost
surreal, although the staff and I did our best not to get too far ahead of ourselves
—“Remember New Hampshire!” was a common refrain—understanding that
the battle would remain pitched, aware that there were still plenty of people out
there who wanted to see us fail.
—
the sociologist W.E.B. Du Bois describes the
“double consciousness” of Black Americans at the dawn of the twentieth century.
Despite having been born and raised on American soil, shaped by this nation’s
institutions and infused with its creed, despite the fact that their toiling hands and
beating hearts contributed so much to the country’s economy and culture—
despite all this, Du Bois writes, Black Americans remain the perpetual “Other,”
always on the outside looking in, ever feeling their “two-ness,” defined not by
what they are but by what they can never be.
As a young man, I had learned a lot from Du Bois’s writing. But whether
because of my unique parentage and upbringing or because of the times in which
I had come of age, this notion of “double consciousness” was not something I felt
personally. I had wrestled with the meaning of my mixed-race status and the fact
of racial discrimination. Yet at no point had I ever questioned—or had others
question—my fundamental “American-ness.”
Of course, I had never run for president before.
Even before I formally announced, Gibbs and our communications team had
beaten back various rumors that bubbled up on conservative talk radio or fly-bynight websites before migrating to the Drudge Report and Fox News. There were
reports that I had been schooled in an Indonesian madrassa, which gained enough
traction that a CNN correspondent actually traveled to my old elementary school
in Jakarta, where he found a bunch of kids wearing Western-style uniforms and
listening to New Kids on the Block on their iPods. There were claims that I
wasn’t an American citizen (helpfully illustrated by a picture of me wearing an
I N THE SOULS OF BLACK FOLK,

African outfit at my Kenyan half brother’s wedding). As the campaign progressed,
more lurid falsehoods were circulated. These had nothing to do with my
nationality but everything to do with a “foreignness” of a more familiar,
homegrown, dark-hued variety: that I had dealt drugs, that I had worked as a gay
prostitute, that I had Marxist ties and had fathered multiple children out of
wedlock.
It was hard to take any of this stuff seriously, and initially at least, not many
people did—in 2008, the internet was still too slow, too spotty, and too removed
from mainstream news operations to directly penetrate the minds of voters. But
there were indirect, more genteel ways to question my affinities.
Following the terror attacks of 9/11, for example, I had taken to wearing an
American flag lapel pin, feeling that it was one small way to express national
solidarity in the face of enormous tragedy. Then, as the debate about Bush’s war
on terrorism and the Iraq invasion wore on—as I watched John Kerry get swiftboated and heard those who opposed the Iraq War have their patriotism
questioned by the likes of Karl Rove, as I saw my colleagues wearing flag pins in
the Senate blithely vote for budget cuts to funding for veterans’ programs—I
quietly set my own pin aside. It was less an act of protest and more a reminder to
myself that the substance of patriotism mattered far more than the symbol.
Nobody seemed to notice, especially since most of my fellow senators—including
former navy POW John McCain—regularly sported flag-pin-less lapels.
So when back in October a local reporter in Iowa had asked me why I wasn’t
wearing a flag pin, I told the truth, saying that I didn’t think the presence or
absence of a token you could buy in a dime store measured one’s love of country.
Soon enough, conservative talking heads were hammering on the purported
meaning of my bare lapel. Obama hates the flag, Obama disrespects our troops.
Months later, they were still making an issue of it, which began to piss me off.
Just why was it, I wanted to ask, that only my pin habits, and not those of any
previous presidential candidates, had suddenly attracted so much attention? Not
surprisingly, Gibbs discouraged me from any public venting.
“Why give them the satisfaction?” he counseled. “You’re winning.”
Fair enough. I was less easily persuaded, though, when I saw the same sort of
innuendo directed toward my wife.
Since Iowa, Michelle had continued to light up the campaign trail. With the
girls in school, we limited her appearances to tight races and her travel mostly to
weekends, but wherever she went, she was funny and engaging, insightful and

blunt. She talked about raising kids and trying to balance the demands of work
and family. She described the values she’d been raised with—her father never
missing a day of work despite his MS, her mother’s deep attention to her
education, the family never having had much money but always having plenty of
love. It was Norman Rockwell, Leave It to Beaver stuff. My in-laws fully
embodied the tastes and aspirations we tend to claim as uniquely American, and I
didn’t know anyone more mainstream than Michelle, whose favorite meal was a
burger and fries, who liked to watch reruns of The Andy Griffith Show, and who
relished any chance to pass a Saturday afternoon shopping at the mall.
And yet, at least according to some commentators, Michelle was…different,
not First Lady material. She seemed “angry,” they said. One Fox News segment
described her as “Obama’s Baby Mama.” It wasn’t just conservative media either.
New York Times columnist Maureen Dowd wrote a column suggesting that when
Michelle painted a teasing portrait of me in her speeches as a hapless dad who let
bread go stale in the kitchen and left dirty laundry lying around (reliably getting
an appreciative laugh from her audience), she wasn’t humanizing me but rather
“emasculating” me, hurting my chances at being elected.
This sort of commentary was infrequent, and some on our staff considered it
on par with the usual nastiness of campaigns. But that’s not how Michelle
experienced it. She understood that alongside the straitjacket that political wives
were supposed to stay in (the adoring and compliant helpmeet, charming but not
too opinionated; the same straitjacket that Hillary had once rejected, a choice she
continued to pay dearly for), there was an extra set of stereotypes applied to Black
women, familiar tropes that Black girls steadily absorbed like toxins from the day
they first saw a blond Barbie doll or poured Aunt Jemima syrup on their
pancakes. That they didn’t meet the prescribed standards of femininity, that their
butts were too big and their hair too nappy, that they were too loud or hottempered or cutting toward their men—that they were not just “emasculating”
but masculine.
Michelle had managed this psychic burden all her life, largely by being
meticulous about her appearance, maintaining control of herself and her
environment, and preparing assiduously for everything, even as she refused to be
cowed into becoming someone she wasn’t. That she had emerged whole, with so
much grace and dignity, just as so many Black women had succeeded in the face
of so many negative messages, was amazing.
Of course, it was the nature of presidential campaigns that control would

occasionally slip. For Michelle, it happened right before the Wisconsin primary,
when, during the course of a speech in which she described being awed by how
many people were energized by our campaign, she said, “For the first time in my
adult lifetime, I’m really proud of my country…because I think people are
hungry for change.”
It was a textbook gaffe—a few ad-libbed words that could then be diced,
clipped, and weaponized by the conservative media—a garbled version of what
she’d said many times before in her speeches about being proud of the direction
our country was headed in, the promising surge in political participation. My
team and I largely deserved the blame; we’d put Michelle on the road without
the speechwriting, prep sessions, and briefers that I had at all times, the
infrastructure that kept me organized and on point. It was like sending a civilian
into live fire without a flak jacket.
No matter. Reporters pounced, speculating as to how much Michelle’s
comments might hurt the campaign, and how much it revealed about the
Obamas’ true feelings. I understood this to be part of a larger and uglier agenda
out there, a slowly accruing, deliberately negative portrait of us built from
stereotypes, stoked by fear, and meant to feed a general nervousness about the
idea of a Black person making the country’s most important decisions with his
Black family in the White House. But I was less concerned about what all this
meant for the campaign than I was pained by seeing how much it hurt Michelle;
how it caused my strong, intelligent, and beautiful wife to doubt herself.
Following the misstep in Wisconsin, she reminded me that she’d never had a
desire to be in the spotlight and said that if her presence on the campaign trail
hurt more than it helped, she would just as soon stay home. I assured her that the
campaign would provide her better support, insisting that she was a far more
compelling figure to voters than I would ever be. But nothing I said seemed to
make her feel better.
—
emotional ups and downs, our campaign continued to
grow. By the time we entered Super Tuesday, the scale of our organization had
mushroomed, a modest start-up transformed into a more secure and betterfunded operation. The hotel rooms we stayed in were a bit roomier, our travel
smoother. After starting out flying commercial, we’d later gone through our share
of misadventures on cut-rate charter flights. One pilot landed us in the wrong
THROUGHOUT ALL THESE

city not once but twice. Another tried to jump-start the plane’s battery with an
extension cord plugged into a standard socket in the airport lounge. (I was
grateful when the experiment failed, though it meant we then waited two hours
for a battery to be trucked in from a neighboring town on a flatbed.) With a
bigger budget, we were now able to lease our own plane, complete with a flight
attendant, meals, and seats that actually reclined.
But new growth brought with it rules, protocols, process, and hierarchy. Our
staff had grown to more than a thousand people nationwide, and while those on
our senior team did their best to maintain the campaign’s scrappy, informal
culture, gone were the days when I could claim to know the majority of the
people who worked for me. In the absence of such familiarity, fewer and fewer of
the people I met in the course of a day addressed me as “Barack.” I was “sir”
now, or “Senator.” When I entered the room, staff would often get up out of
their seats to move elsewhere, assuming that I didn’t want to be disturbed. If I
insisted they stick around, they would smile shyly and speak only in a low
murmur.
It made me feel old, and increasingly lonely.
In an odd way, so did the crowds at our rallies. They had swelled to fifteen,
twenty, or even thirty thousand strong at a stop, people wearing the red, white,
and blue Obama campaign logo on shirts and hats and overalls, waiting for hours
to get into whatever arena we’d found. Our team developed something of a
pregame ritual. Reggie, Marvin, Gibbs, and I would jump out of the car at a
service entrance or loading dock, then follow our advance team through corridors
and back ways. Usually I’d meet with local organizers; take pictures with a
hundred or so key volunteers and supporters, full of hugs, kisses, and small
requests; and sign books, magazines, baseballs, birth announcements, military
commissions, and just about anything else. Then there’d be an interview with a
reporter or two; a quick lunch in a holding room that had been prestocked with
bottled iced tea, trail mix, protein bars, and any other item that I had ever
mentioned wanting, no matter how incidentally, in quantities adequate for a
survivalist’s bomb shelter; followed by a bathroom break, with either Marvin or
Reggie handing me a gel to put on my forehead and nose so my skin wouldn’t
shine on television, though one of our videographers insisted it was a carcinogen.
I’d hear the buzz of the crowd growing louder as I walked under the stands or
bleachers to the staging area. There’d be a cue to the sound engineer for the
announcement (“the Voice of God,” I learned it was called), I’d listen quietly

backstage as a local person introduced me, and then would come the words “the
next president of the United States,” a deafening roar, the sound of U2’s “City of
Blinding Lights,” and, after a quick fist bump or a “Go get ’em, boss,” a walk
through the curtain and onto the stage.
I did this two or three times a day, traveling from city to city, state to state.
And though the novelty wore off quickly, the sheer energy of those rallies never
stopped filling me with wonder. “Like a rock concert” is how reporters described
it, and in terms of noise at least, that was accurate. But that wasn’t how it felt
while I was onstage. I wasn’t offering the crowd a solo performance so much as
trying to be a reflector, reminding Americans—through the stories they’d told me
—of all that they truly cherished, and the formidable power that, joined together,
they possessed.
Once my speech was over and I walked off the stage to shake hands along the
rope line, I often found people screaming, pushing, and grabbing. Some would
cry or touch my face, and despite my best efforts to discourage it, young parents
would pass howling babies across rows of strangers for me to hold. The
excitement was fun and at times deeply touching, but it was also a little
unnerving. At some basic level people were no longer seeing me, I realized, with
all my quirks and shortcomings. Instead, they had taken possession of my likeness
and made it a vessel for a million different dreams. I knew a time would come
when I would disappoint them, falling short of the image that my campaign and I
had helped to construct.
I realized, too, that if supporters could mold bits and pieces of me into an
outsized symbol of hope, then the vague fears of detractors could just as readily
congeal into hate. And it was in response to this disturbing truth that I’d seen my
life change the most.
I had been assigned Secret Service protection in May 2007, just a few months
after my campaign began—given the code name “Renegade” and a round-theclock security detail. This wasn’t the norm. Unless you were a sitting vice
president (or, in the case of Hillary, a former First Lady), candidates typically
weren’t assigned coverage until they’d all but secured the nomination. The reason
my case was handled differently, the reason Harry Reid and Bennie Thompson,
chair of the House Homeland Security Committee, had publicly insisted the
Service move early, was straightforward: The number of threats directed my way
exceeded anything the Secret Service had ever seen before.
The head of my personal detail, Jeff Gilbert, was an impressive guy. African

American, bespectacled, with an open, friendly manner, he could have passed for
an executive at a Fortune 100 company. In our first meeting, he emphasized his
desire to make the transition as seamless as possible, understanding that as a
candidate, I had to freely interact with the public.
Jeff proved true to his word: At no point did the Service ever prevent us from
pulling off an event, and the agents did what they could to downplay their
presence (using bales of hay rather than metal bike racks, for example, to create a
barrier in front of an outdoor stage). The shift leaders, most in their forties, were
professional and courteous, with dry senses of humor. Often, we’d sit in the back
of the plane or on a bus ride and rib one another about our respective sports
teams or talk about our kids. Jeff’s son was a star offensive lineman at Florida, and
we all began monitoring his prospects in the NFL draft. Meanwhile, Reggie and
Marvin hit it off with the younger agents, going to the same watering holes after
campaign business was done.
Still, to suddenly have armed men and women hovering around me wherever
I went, posted outside every room I occupied, was a shock to my system. My
view of the outside world started to shift, obscured by the veil of security. I no
longer walked through the front entrance of a building when a back stairwell was
available. If I worked out in a hotel gym, agents first covered the windows with
cloth to prevent a potential shooter from getting a sight line. Bulletproof barriers
were placed inside any room I slept in, including our bedroom at home in
Chicago. And I no longer had the option of driving myself anywhere, not even
around the block.
As we moved closer to the nomination, my world shrank even further. More
agents were added. My movements became more restricted. Spontaneity vanished
entirely from my life. It was no longer possible, or at least not easy, for me to
walk through a grocery store or have a casual chat with a stranger on the
sidewalk.
“It’s like a circus cage,” I complained to Marvin one day, “and I’m the
dancing bear.”
There were times when I went stir-crazy, so fed up with the highly scheduled
regimen of town halls, interviews, photo ops, and fundraising that I would up and
take off, suddenly desperate to search for a good taco or to follow the sounds of
some nearby outdoor concert, sending the agents scrambling to catch up,
whispering “Renegade on the move” into their wrist mics.
“The bear is loose!” Reggie and Marvin would shout a little gleefully during

such episodes.
But by the winter of 2008, these impromptu outings occurred less and less
often. I knew that unpredictability made my detail’s job harder and increased the
risk to the agents. And anyway, the tacos didn’t taste as good as I’d imagined
when I was surrounded by a circle of anxious agents, not to mention the crowds
and reporters that quickly assembled the moment I was recognized. When I had
downtime, I found myself spending it more often in my room—reading, playing
cards, quietly watching a ball game on TV.
To the relief of his keepers, the bear became accustomed to captivity.
—
of February, we had built what looked like an insurmountable lead
over Hillary in pledged delegates. It was around this time that Plouffe, always
cautious in his assessments, called from Chicago to tell me what at some level I
already knew.
“I think it’s safe to say that if we play our cards right these next few weeks,
you will be the Democratic nominee for president of the United States.”
After we hung up, I sat alone, trying to take the measure of my emotions.
There was pride, I suppose, the jolt of satisfaction a mountain climber must feel
looking back at the jagged ground that’s been covered below. Mostly, though, I
felt a certain stillness, without elation or relief, sobered by the thought that the
responsibilities of governance were no longer a distant possibility. Axe, Plouffe,
and I found ourselves wrangling more frequently about our campaign platform,
with me insisting that all our proposals withstand scrutiny—less because of the
need to defend them during the election season (experience had cured me of the
notion that anyone else paid close attention to my plans for tax reform or
environmental regulation) than because I might have to actually implement them.
Such projections into the future might have occupied even more of my time
had it not been for the fact that, despite the math showing I was going to be the
nominee, Hillary simply would not give up.
Anyone else would have. She was running out of money. Her campaign was
in turmoil, with staff recriminations spilling out into the press. The only
remaining chance Hillary had to win the nomination depended on convincing
superdelegates—the several hundred Democratic elected officials and party
insiders who were given a vote at the convention and could cast it any way they
BY THE END

wanted—to choose her when the party convened in August. It was a slender reed
to hang on: While Hillary had started with a big early lead in superdelegates (who
tended to announce which way they would vote long before the convention),
more and more had committed to us as the primary season dragged on.
And yet she soldiered on, embracing her underdog status. Her voice took on
a greater urgency, especially when discussing working-class concerns, offering her
willingness to campaign to the bitter end as proof that she’d fight just as hard for
American families. With upcoming primaries in Texas and Ohio (states populated
by older white and Hispanic voters who tended to lean her way), to be followed
seven weeks later by Pennsylvania (a state where she also enjoyed a healthy lead),
Hillary assured anyone who’d listen that she planned to take our contest all the
way to the convention floor.
“She’s like a fucking vampire,” Plouffe groused. “You can’t kill her off.”
Her tenacity was admirable, but my sympathies extended only so far. Senator
John McCain would soon wrap up the Republican nomination, and another two
or three months of bitter Democratic primary contests would give him a big head
start on laying the groundwork for November’s general election. It also meant
that after almost eighteen months of nonstop campaigning, nobody on my team
would get a meaningful break, which was unfortunate because all of us were
running on fumes.
That probably explains how we came to make the one big tactical error of
our campaign.
Rather than set realistic expectations and effectively concede Ohio so that we
could focus on Texas, we decided to go for the knockout punch and try to win
both. We spent massively in each state. For a week, I shuttled back and forth,
from Dallas to Cleveland to Houston to Toledo, my voice raw, my eyes
bloodshot—hardly looking like a herald of hope.
Our efforts had a modest effect on the polls, but they lent credence to the
Clinton campaign’s claim that a victory for her in Texas and Ohio could
fundamentally reset the race. Meanwhile, the political press, seeing these
primaries as perhaps my final test before securing the nomination and eager to
sustain a drama that had proven to be a cable news ratings bonanza, gave more
prominent coverage to Hillary’s attacks on me, including an ad she ran
contending that I wasn’t ready to handle the “three a.m. phone call” involving a
crisis. When all was said and done, we lost Ohio (decisively) and Texas (just
barely).

On the flight from San Antonio back to Chicago after the primary, my team’s
mood was grim. Michelle barely said a word. When Plouffe attempted to lighten
things by announcing that we’d won Vermont, it barely elicited a shrug. When
someone else offered up the theory that we had all died and entered purgatory,
where we were destined to debate Hillary for all eternity, no one laughed. It felt
too close to the truth.
Hillary’s victories didn’t change the delegate count in a meaningful way, but
they put enough wind in her campaign’s sails to guarantee at least two more
months of bitter primaries. The results also gave her camp fresh ammunition for
an argument that seemed to be gaining traction with reporters—that I couldn’t
connect with white working-class voters, that Latinos were lukewarm at best
about me, and that in an election of this importance, these weaknesses could
make me a very risky Democratic nominee.
Just one week later, I found myself wondering if they were right.
—
more than a year since I’d given much thought to my pastor,
Reverend Jeremiah Wright. But on March 13, we woke up to discover that ABC
News had compiled a series of short clips culled from several years of his sermons,
skillfully packaged to fit a two-minute segment on Good Morning America. There
was Reverend Wright calling America “USA of KKK.” There was Reverend
Wright saying, “Not God bless America. God damn America.” There was
Reverend Wright, in living color, explaining how the tragedy of 9/11 might in
part be explained by our record of military interventions and wanton violence
overseas, a matter of “America’s chickens…coming home to roost.” The video
offered no context or history; in fact, it could not have portrayed Black radicalism
more vividly, or provided a more surgical tool to offend Middle America. It was
like a Roger Ailes fever dream.
Within hours of its initial broadcast, the video was running everywhere.
Inside my campaign, it felt as if a torpedo had blown through our hull. I issued a
statement, forcefully denouncing the sentiments expressed in the video, while also
emphasizing all the good work that Reverend Wright and Trinity did in
Chicago. The next day, I appeared at an already scheduled meeting with the
editorial boards of two newspapers and then did a round of network TV
interviews, each time offering a condemnation of the views expressed in the
video clips. But no sound bite could offset the harm. The image of Reverend
IT HAD BEEN

Wright kept rolling across TV screens, the cable chatter continued nonstop, and
even Plouffe admitted we might not survive this.
Later, Axe and Plouffe would fault themselves for not having had our
researchers obtain the videos a year earlier, after the Rolling Stone article hit,
which would have given us more time to do damage control. But I knew the
blame lay squarely on my shoulders. I may not have been in church for any of the
sermons in question or heard Reverend Wright use such explosive language. But
I knew all too well the occasional spasms of anger within the Black community—
my community—that Reverend Wright was channeling. I did know how
differently Black and white folks still viewed issues of race in America, regardless
of how much else they had in common. For me to believe that I could bridge
those worlds had been pure hubris, the same hubris that had led me to assume
that I could dip in and out of a complex institution like Trinity, headed by a
complex man like Reverend Wright, and select, as if off a menu, only those
things that I liked. Maybe I could do that as a private citizen, but not as a public
figure running for president.
Anyway, it was too late now. And while there are moments in politics, as in
life, when avoidance, if not retreat, is the better part of valor, there are other
times when the only option is to steel yourself and go for broke.
“I need to make a speech,” I told Plouffe. “On race. The only way to deal
with this is to go big and put Reverend Wright in some kind of context. And I
need to do it in the next few days.”
The team was skeptical. We’d booked the next three days solid with events,
without any real time to spend on what could end up being the most
consequential speech of the campaign. But we had no choice. On a Saturday
night, after a day of stumping in Indiana, I went home to Chicago and spent an
hour on the phone with Favs, dictating the argument I’d formed in my mind. I
wanted to describe how Reverend Wright and Trinity were representative of
America’s racial legacy, how institutions and individuals who embodied the
values of faith and work, family and community, education and upward mobility,
might still harbor bitterness toward—and feel betrayed by—a country they loved.
But I had to do more than that. I had to explain the other side, why white
Americans might resist, or even resent, claims of injustice from Blacks—unhappy
with any presumption that all whites were racist, or that their own fears and dayto-day struggles were less valid.
Unless we could recognize one another’s reality, I’d argue, we would never

solve the problems America faced. And to hint at what such a recognition might
mean, I would include a story that I had told in my first book but had never
spoken about in a political speech—the pain and confusion I had experienced as a
teenager, when Toot expressed her fear of a panhandler at a bus stop—not only
because he had been aggressive but because he was Black. It hadn’t made me love
her any less, for my grandmother was a part of me, just as, in a more indirect
way, Reverend Wright was a part of me.
Just as they were both a part of the American family.
As I wrapped up the call with Favs, I remembered the one time Toot and
Reverend Wright had met. It had been at my wedding, where Reverend Wright
hugged my mother and grandmother and told them what a wonderful job they’d
done raising me, how proud they should be. Toot had smiled in a way I rarely
saw her smile, whispering to my mother how the pastor seemed quite charming
—although she got a bit uncomfortable later, when during the ceremony
Reverend Wright described the conjugal obligations of the newlyweds in terms
far more vivid than anything Toot had ever heard in the Methodist church of her
childhood.
Favs wrote the first draft, and for the next two nights, I stayed up late, editing
and rewriting, finishing finally at three a.m. on the day I was to deliver it. In the
holding room at Philadelphia’s National Constitution Center, Marty, Valerie, and
Eric Whitaker, as well as Axe, Plouffe, and Gibbs, joined me and Michelle to
wish me luck.
“How you feel?” Marty asked.
“Good,” I said, and it was true. “I figure if it works, we get through this. If it
doesn’t, we probably lose. But either way, I’ll be saying what I believe.”
It worked. The networks carried the speech live, and within twenty-four
hours, more than one million people had watched it on the internet—a record at
the time. Reviews from pundits and editorial writers around the country were
strong, and the effect on those in the hall—including Marty, who was
photographed with a fat tear running down his cheek—indicated I had touched a
chord.
But the most important review came that evening, when I placed a call to my
grandmother in Hawaii.
“That was a very nice speech, Bar,” she told me. “I know it wasn’t easy.”
“Thanks, Toot.”

“You know I’m proud of you, don’t you?”
“I know,” I said. And it was only after I hung up that I allowed myself to cry.
—
the bleeding, but the Reverend Wright situation had
taken a toll, particularly in Pennsylvania, where Democratic voters skewed older
and more conservative. What kept us from an outright free fall was the hard work
of our volunteers, an influx of money from small donors that helped us run ads
for four weeks, and the willingness of some key state officials to vouch for me
with their white working-class base. Chief among them was Bob Casey, the
affable Irish Catholic son of the state’s former governor and one of my colleagues
in the U.S. Senate. There wasn’t much upside for him—Hillary had broad
support and was likely to win the state—and he hadn’t announced his
endorsement when the Reverend Wright video hit the news. And yet, when I
called Bob before my speech and offered to free him from his commitment to
endorse me in light of the changed circumstances, he insisted on going forward.
“The Wright stuff’s not great,” he said in a bit of world-class understatement.
“But I still feel like you’re the right guy.”
Bob then backed up his endorsement with decency and courage, campaigning
by my side for more than a week, up and down Pennsylvania. Slowly, our poll
numbers began ticking back up. Although we knew a victory was not in the
cards, we figured a three- or four-point loss remained within reach.
And then, on cue, I made my biggest mistake of the campaign.
We’d flown to San Francisco for a big-dollar fundraiser, the kind of event that
I generally dreaded, taking place in a fancy house and involving a long photo line,
shiitake mushroom hors d’oeuvres, and wealthy donors, most of them terrific and
generous one-on-one but collectively fitting every stereotype of the lattedrinking, Prius-driving West Coast liberal. We were running late into the
evening when, during the obligatory question-and-answer session, someone
asked me to explain why I thought so many working-class voters in Pennsylvania
continued to vote against their interests and elect Republicans.
I’d been asked a form of this question a thousand times. Normally I had no
problem describing the mix of economic anxiety, frustration with a seemingly
unresponsive federal government, and legitimate differences on social issues like
abortion that pushed voters into the Republican column. But whether because I
THE SPEECH STANCHED

was mentally and physically worn-out, or because I was just impatient, that’s not
how my answer came across.
“You go into some of these small towns in Pennsylvania,” I said, “and, like a
lot of small towns in the Midwest, the jobs have been gone now for twenty-five
years and nothing’s replaced them. And they fell through the Clinton
administration and the Bush administration, and each successive administration
has said that somehow these communities are going to regenerate and they have
not.”
So far so good. Except I then added, “So it’s not surprising then that they get
bitter, they cling to guns or religion or antipathy toward people who aren’t like
them, or anti-immigrant sentiment, or anti-trade sentiment as a way to explain
their frustrations.”
I can provide the exact quote here, because in the audience that night was a
freelance writer who was recording me. To her mind, my answer risked
reinforcing negative stereotypes some Californians already had about workingclass white voters and was therefore worth blogging about on Huffington Post. (It’s
a decision I respect, by the way, though I wish she had talked to me about it
before writing the story. This is what separates even the most liberal writers from
their conservative counterparts—the willingness to flay politicians on their own
side.)
Even today, I want to take that sentence back and make a few simple edits.
“So it’s not surprising then that they get frustrated,” I would say in my revised
version, “and they look to the traditions and way of life that have been constants
in their lives, whether it’s their faith, or hunting, or blue-collar work, or more
traditional notions of family and community. And when Republicans tell them
we Democrats despise these things—or when we give these folks reason to
believe that we do—then the best policies in the world don’t matter to them.”
That’s what I believed. It’s why I’d gotten votes from rural white voters in
downstate Illinois and Iowa—because they sensed, even when we didn’t agree on
an issue like abortion or immigration, that I fundamentally respected and cared
about them. In many ways they were more familiar to me than the people I
spoke to that night in San Francisco.
And so I still brood about this string of poorly chosen words. Not because it
subjected us to a whole new round of bludgeoning at the hands of the press and
the Clinton campaign—although that was no fun—but because the words ended
up having such a long afterlife. The phrases “bitter” and “cling to guns or

religion” were easily remembered, like a hook in a pop song, and would be cited
deep into my presidency as evidence that I failed to understand or reach out to
working-class white people, even when the positions I took and policies I
championed consistently indicated the contrary.
Maybe I’m overstating the consequences of that night. Maybe things were
bound to play out as they did, and what nags at me is the simple fact that I
screwed up and don’t like being misunderstood. And maybe I’m bothered by the
care and delicacy with which one must state the obvious: that it’s possible to
understand and sympathize with the frustrations of white voters without denying
the ease with which, throughout American history, politicians have redirected
white frustration about their economic or social circumstances toward Black and
brown people.
One thing’s for certain. The fallout from my gaffe that night provided my San
Francisco questioner a better answer than any verbal response I might have given.
—
the remainder of the Pennsylvania campaign. There was
the final debate in Philadelphia, a brutal affair consisting almost entirely of
questions about flag pins, Wright, and “bitter.” Campaigning across the state, an
invigorated Hillary touted her newfound appreciation for gun rights—Annie
Oakley, I called her. We lost by nine points.
As had been true of the Ohio and Texas primaries, the results had little
impact on our delegate lead. But there was no denying we’d taken a serious hit.
Political insiders speculated that if the results of the next two big contests
(Indiana, where Hillary had a solid lead, and North Carolina, where we were
heavily favored) showed any further erosion in our support, superdelegates might
start running scared, giving Hillary a realistic chance of wresting away the
nomination.
Such talk grew appreciably louder several days later, when Jeremiah Wright
decided to make a round of public appearances.
I had spoken to him only once after the video came out, to let him know
how strongly I objected to what he’d said, but also to say that I wanted to shield
him and the church from any further fallout. I don’t remember the details, just
that the call was painful and brief, his questions full of hurt. Had any of these socalled reporters bothered to listen to the full sermons? he asked me. How could
WE LIMPED THROUGH

they selectively edit a lifetime of work down to two minutes? Listening to this
proud man defend himself, I could only imagine his bewilderment. He’d been a
sought-after speaker at America’s leading universities and seminaries, a pillar of his
community, a luminary within not just Black churches but many white ones as
well. And then, in what felt like an instant, he’d become a national object of fear
and derision.
I felt genuine remorse, knowing this was all because of his association with
me. He was collateral damage in a struggle he’d played no part in choosing. And
yet I had no meaningful way to salve his wounds, and when I made the practical
—if transparently self-interested—suggestion that he lie low for a time and let
things blow over, I knew he felt it as just one more affront.
When it was announced that Reverend Wright would be giving an interview
on Bill Moyers’s show and then a keynote address at a Detroit NAACP dinner
and then an appearance before the National Press Club in Washington, all just
ahead of the Indiana and North Carolina primaries in early May, I fully expected
the worst. As it turned out, the first two appearances were notable mainly for
their restraint, with the reverend coming across as more theologian and preacher
than provocateur.
Then, at the National Press Club, the dam broke. Strafed by questions from
the political press and flustered by their unwillingness to consider his answers,
Reverend Wright unleashed a rant for the ages, gesticulating as if he were at a
tent revival, eyes glistening with righteous fury. He pronounced America racist at
its core. He suggested that the U.S. government was behind the AIDS epidemic.
He praised Nation of Islam leader Louis Farrakhan. The attacks on him were all
racially motivated, and my denunciation of his earlier statements he dismissed as
just “what politicians do” in order to get elected.
Or, as Marty would later put it, “he went full ghetto on their ass.”
I missed the live broadcast, but watching the replay, I knew what I had to do.
The following afternoon, I found myself sitting on a bench in a high school
locker room in Winston-Salem, North Carolina, with Gibbs, staring at walls
painted industrial green, the stale smell of football uniforms wafting about,
waiting to deliver the press statement in which I would permanently sever my
relationship with someone who had played a small but significant part in making
me the man that I was; someone whose words had once served as a tagline for the
speech that put me on the national stage; someone who, for all his now
inexcusable blind spots, had never shown me anything but kindness and support.

“You okay?” Gibbs asked me.
“Yep.”
“I know this can’t be easy.”
I nodded, touched by Gibbs’s concern. It wasn’t the norm for the two of us
to acknowledge the pressure we were under; Gibbs was a warrior first, a prankster
second, and on the road we usually opted for easy banter and profanity-laced
humor. But perhaps because he’d grown up in Alabama, he understood better
than most the complications of race, religion, and family, and how good and bad,
love and hate, might be hopelessly tangled in the same heart.
“You know, I’m not sure Hillary’s wrong,” I told him.
“About what?”
“About me being damaged goods. I think about it sometimes, how this isn’t
supposed to be about my own ambition. It’s supposed to be about making the
country better,” I said. “If the American people can’t get past this Wright thing,
and I stagger my way into the nomination, only to lose the general, what good
have I done?”
Gibbs put a hand on my shoulder. “You’re not going to lose,” he said.
“People are looking for something real, and they’ve seen it in you. Let’s just get
this shit behind us once and for all, so we can get back to reminding them why
you should be president.”
My brief statement, in which I unequivocally denounced and separated myself
from Reverend Wright, served its purpose. If it didn’t fully allay voter concerns,
it at least convinced reporters I had nothing further to say on the matter. Back on
the campaign trail, we refocused our attention on healthcare, jobs, the war in
Iraq, unsure of exactly how things would all play out.
Then we got some help from an unexpected quarter.
Throughout the spring of 2008, gas prices had been skyrocketing, mostly the
result of various supply disruptions. Nothing got voters in a bad mood like high
gas prices, and eager to get out ahead of the issue, John McCain had proposed a
temporary suspension of the federal gas tax. Hillary immediately endorsed the
idea, and the team asked me what I wanted to do.
I told them I was against it. While it had some superficial appeal, I knew it
would drain an already depleted federal highway fund, leading to fewer
infrastructure projects and jobs. Based on my experience as an Illinois state
senator, where I’d once voted for a similar proposal, I was sure that consumers

wouldn’t see much benefit. In fact, gas station owners were just as likely to keep
prices high and boost their own profits as they were to pass the three-cents-agallon savings on to motorists.
Somewhat to my surprise, Plouffe and Axe agreed. In fact, Axe suggested that
we highlight my opposition as more proof that I was willing to be straight with
voters. The next day, I stood outside a gas station and made my argument before
a gaggle of reporters, contrasting what I considered a serious, long-term energy
policy with the typical Washington solution that both McCain and Hillary were
proposing. It was a bit of political posturing, I said, designed to give the
impression of action without actually solving the problem. Then, when both
Hillary and McCain tried to paint me as out of touch and unconcerned with
what a few hundred dollars might mean to America’s working families, we
doubled down, shooting a TV ad on the issue and running it nonstop throughout
Indiana and North Carolina.
It was one of our prouder moments, taking a tough position without the
benefit of polls and in the face of pundits who thought we were crazy. We began
seeing signs in the polling data that voters were buying our argument, though
none of us at this point—not even Plouffe—fully trusted data anymore. Like a
patient awaiting the results of a biopsy, the campaign lived with the possibility of
a bad outcome.
The night before the primaries, we held an evening rally in Indianapolis
featuring a performance by Stevie Wonder. After my stump speech, Valerie,
Marty, Eric, and I parked ourselves in a small room, enjoying the music, some
beer, and a cold chicken dinner.
We were in a reflective mood, reminiscing about the joys of Iowa, the
heartbreak of New Hampshire, volunteers we’d met and new friends we’d made.
Eventually someone brought up Reverend Wright’s appearance at the National
Press Club, and Marty and Eric began taking turns acting out some of the more
excruciating lines. Whether it was a sign of exhaustion, or anxious anticipation of
the next day’s voting, or maybe just us recognizing the absurdity of our
circumstances—four longtime friends, African Americans from the South Side of
Chicago, eating chicken and listening to Stevie Wonder while waiting to see if
one of us would become the Democratic nominee for president of the United
States—we all started to laugh and couldn’t stop, the kind of deep, tear-inducing,
falling-out-of-your-chair laughter that’s a kissing cousin to despair.
Then Axe walked in, wearing his most forlorn look.

“What’s the matter?” I said, still laughing and trying to catch my breath.
Axe shook his head. “I just got our overnight numbers…had us down twelve
in Indiana. I just don’t think we’re going to make it.”
For a moment, everyone grew quiet. Then I said, “Axe, I love you, but
you’re a downer. Either grab a drink and sit down with us or get the fuck out of
here.”
Axe shrugged and left the room, taking his worries with him. I looked around
at my friends and raised my beer in a toast.
“To the audacity of hope,” I said. Clinking our bottles, we started to laugh as
hard as before.
—
in a Raleigh hotel room, Gibbs read me the
election results. We’d won North Carolina by fourteen points. More surprisingly,
we had pulled out an effective tie in Indiana, losing by just a few thousand votes.
There would be six more contests before the official end of the Democratic
primary season, and a few weeks would pass before Hillary’s belated but gracious
concession speech and endorsement, but the results that night told us that the race
was basically over.
I would be the Democratic nominee for president of the United States.
In my speech that night, I began the pivot to the general election, knowing
there wasn’t a minute to waste, telling our audience that I was confident that
Democrats would unite to prevent John McCain from continuing the legacy of
George W. Bush. I spent some time talking to Axe about potential running mates
and then phoned Toot to tell her the news. (“It really is something, Bar,” she
said.) Well past midnight, I called Plouffe back at our Chicago headquarters, and
the two of us went over what we needed to do to get ready for the convention,
less than three months away.
Lying in bed later, unable to sleep, I took a silent inventory. I thought about
Michelle, who had put up with my absences, held down the home front, and
overridden her reticence about politics to become effective and fearless on the
stump. I thought about my daughters, as lively and cuddly and engaging as ever,
even when I didn’t see them for a week. I thought about the skill and focus of
Axe and Plouffe and the rest of my senior team, how they never gave any
indication of doing what they did for money or power, and how in the face of
TWENTY-FOUR HOURS LATER,

unrelenting pressure they’d proven loyal not just to me and to one another but to
the idea of making America better. I thought about friends like Valerie, Marty,
and Eric, who’d shared my joys and eased my burdens along every step, asking
nothing in return. And I thought about the young organizers and volunteers
who’d braved bad weather, skeptical voters, and their candidate’s missteps
without wavering.
I had asked something hard of the American people—to place their faith in a
young and untested newcomer; not just a Black man, but someone whose very
name evoked a life story that seemed unfamiliar. Repeatedly I’d given them cause
not to support me. There’d been uneven debate performances, unconventional
positions, clumsy gaffes, and a pastor who’d cursed the United States of America.
And I’d faced an opponent who’d proven both her readiness and her mettle.
Despite all that, they’d given me a chance. Through the noise and chatter of
the political circus, they’d heard my call for something different. Even if I hadn’t
always been at my best, they’d divined what was best in me: the voice insisting
that for all our differences, we remained bound as one people, and that, together,
men and women of goodwill could find a way to a better future.
I promised myself I would not let them down.
