NO MATTER WHAT YOU MIGHT tell yourself

tell yourself, no matter how much you’ve read or
how many briefings you’ve received or how many veterans of previous
administrations you’ve recruited, nothing entirely prepares you for those first
weeks in the White House. Everything is new, unfamiliar, fraught with import.
The vast majority of your senior appointees, including cabinet secretaries, are
weeks or sometimes months away from being confirmed. Across the White
House complex, staffers can be seen securing the requisite IDs, asking where to
park, learning how to operate the phones, figuring out where the bathrooms are,
and schlepping boxes into the cramped warren of offices in the West Wing or the
more capacious rooms in the nearby Eisenhower Executive Office Building
(EEOB), all while trying not to look completely overwhelmed. It’s like movingin day on a college campus, except a large percentage of the people involved are
middle-aged, in suits, and, along with you, charged with running the most
powerful nation on earth.
I didn’t have to worry about moving myself in, but my days were a
whirlwind. Having witnessed how stumbles out of the gate had hobbled Bill
Clinton throughout his first two years in office, Rahm was intent on taking
advantage of our postelection honeymoon period to get some things done.
“Trust me,” he said. “The presidency is like a new car. It starts depreciating
the minute you drive it off the lot.”
To build early momentum, he had instructed our transition team to identify
campaign promises I could fulfill with the stroke of a pen. I signed an executive
order banning torture and launched what was supposed to be a year-long process
to close the U.S. military detention center in Guantánamo Bay, Cuba. We
instituted some of the toughest ethics rules in White House history, including
tightening restrictions on lobbyists. A couple of weeks later, we finalized an
agreement with congressional leaders to cover four million more kids under the
Children’s Health Insurance Program, and shortly after that, we lifted President
O MATTER WHAT YOU MIGHT

Bush’s moratorium on federally funded embryonic stem-cell research.
I signed my first bill into law on my ninth day in office: the Lilly Ledbetter
Fair Pay Act. The legislation was named after an unassuming Alabaman who,
deep into a long career at the Goodyear Tire & Rubber Company, had
discovered that she’d routinely been paid less than her male counterparts. As
discrimination cases go, it should have been a slam dunk, but in 2007, defying all
common sense, the Supreme Court had disallowed the lawsuit. According to
Justice Samuel Alito, Title VII of the Civil Rights Act required Ledbetter to have
filed her claim within 180 days of when the discrimination first occurred—in
other words, six months after she received her first paycheck, and many years
before she actually discovered the pay disparity. For over a year, Republicans in
the Senate had blocked corrective action (with President Bush promising to veto
it if it passed). Now, thanks to quick legislative work by our emboldened
Democratic majorities, the bill sat on a small ceremonial desk in the East Room.
Lilly and I had become friends during the campaign. I knew her family, knew
her struggles. She stood next to me that day as I put my signature on the bill,
using a different pen for each letter of my name. (The pens would serve as
keepsakes for Lilly and the bill’s sponsors—a nice tradition, though it made my
signature look like it had been written by a ten-year-old.) I thought not just
about Lilly but also about my mother, and Toot, and all the other working
women across the country who had ever been passed over for promotions or
been paid less than they were worth. The legislation I was signing wouldn’t
reverse centuries of discrimination. But it was something, a step forward.
This is why I ran, I told myself. This is what the office can do.
We would roll out other comparable initiatives in those first few months,
some attracting modest press attention, others noticed only by those directly
affected. In normal times, this would have been enough, a series of small wins as
our bigger legislative proposals—on healthcare, immigration reform, and climate
change—began to work their way through Congress.
But these were not normal times. For the public and the press, for me and my
team, only one issue truly mattered: What were we going to do to halt the
economy’s collapse?
—
AS DIRE AS

the situation had seemed before the election, it wasn’t until a mid-

December meeting in Chicago with my new economic team, just over a month
before I was sworn in, that I had begun to appreciate the scope of what we were
dealing with. Christy Romer, whose cheery demeanor and sensible style brought
to mind a 1950s TV-sitcom mom, opened her presentation with a line she’d
heard Axelrod use in an earlier meeting.
“Mr. President-Elect,” she said, “this is your holy-shit moment.”
The chuckles quickly subsided as Christy took us through a series of charts.
With over half of America’s twenty-five largest financial institutions having either
failed, merged, or restructured to avoid bankruptcy during the previous year,
what had begun as a crisis on Wall Street had now thoroughly infected the
broader economy. The stock market had lost 40 percent of its value. There were
foreclosure filings on 2.3 million homes. Household wealth had dropped 16
percent, which, as Tim would later point out, was more than five times the
percentage loss that occurred in the aftermath of the 1929 market crash. All this
on top of an economy that was already suffering from persistently high levels of
poverty, a decline in the share of working-age men who were actually working, a
fall in productivity growth, and lagging median wages.
And we had yet to reach the bottom. As people had felt poorer, they’d
stopped spending, just as mounting losses had caused banks to stop lending,
imperiling more businesses and more jobs. A number of major retailers already
had gone belly-up. GM and Chrysler were headed in the same direction. News
stations now carried daily reports of mass layoffs at blue-chip companies like
Boeing and Pfizer. According to Christy, all arrows pointed in the direction of
the deepest recession since the 1930s, with job losses—estimated at 533,000 in
November alone—likely to get worse.
“How much worse?” I asked.
“We’re not sure,” Larry chimed in, “but probably in the millions.” He
explained that unemployment was typically a “lagging indicator,” meaning the
full scale of job losses during recessions didn’t show up right away, and usually
continued well after an economy started growing again. Moreover, economies
typically recovered much more slowly from recessions triggered by financial crises
than from those caused by fluctuations in the business cycle. In the absence of
quick and aggressive intervention by the federal government, Larry calculated, the
chances of a second Great Depression were “about one in three.”
“Jesus,” Joe Biden muttered. I looked out the window of the downtown
conference room. A heavy snow swirled soundlessly through a gray sky. Images

of tent cities and people lined up at soup kitchens materialized in my head.
“All right, then,” I said, turning back to the team. “Since it’s too late to ask
for a recount, what can we do to lower those odds?”
We spent the next three hours mapping out a strategy. Job one was reversing
the cycle of contracting demand. In an ordinary recession, monetary policy
would be an option: By lowering interest rates, the Federal Reserve could help
make the purchase of everything from homes to cars to appliances significantly
cheaper. But while Chairman Ben Bernanke was committed to trying out a range
of unorthodox strategies to douse the financial panic, Tim explained, the Fed had
used up most of its bullets over the course of the previous year: With interest
rates already close to zero, neither businesses nor consumers, already badly
overleveraged, showed any inclination to take on more debt.
Our conversation therefore focused on fiscal stimulus, or, in layperson’s
terms, having the government spend more money. Though I hadn’t majored in
economics, I was familiar enough with John Maynard Keynes, one of the giants
of modern economics and a theoretician of the causes of the Great Depression.
Keynes’s basic insight had been simple: From the perspective of the individual
family or firm, it was prudent to tighten one’s belt during a severe recession. The
problem was that thrift could be stifling; when everyone tightened their belts at
the same time, economic conditions couldn’t improve.
Keynes’s answer to the dilemma was just as simple: A government needed to
step in as the “spender of last resort.” The idea was to pump money into the
economy until the gears started to turn again, until families grew confident
enough to trade in old cars for new ones and innovative companies saw enough
demand to start making new products again. Once the economy was kick-started,
the government could then turn off the spigot and recoup its money through the
resulting boost in tax revenue. In large part, this was the principle behind FDR’s
New Deal, which took shape after he took office in 1933, at the height of the
Great Depression. Whether it was young men in the Civilian Conservation
Corps put to work building trails in America’s national parks, or farmers receiving
government payments for surplus milk, or theater troupes performing as part of
the Works Progress Administration, the New Deal’s programs helped
unemployed Americans get desperately needed paychecks and companies sustain
themselves with government orders for steel or lumber, all of which helped
bolster private enterprise and stabilize the faltering economy.
As ambitious as it was at the time, New Deal spending actually proved too

modest to fully counteract the Great Depression, especially after FDR succumbed
to 1936 election-year pressures and pulled back too early on what was then seen
by many elite opinion makers as government profligacy. It would take the
ultimate stimulus of World War II, when the entire nation mobilized to build an
Arsenal of Democracy, to finally break the Depression once and for all. But the
New Deal had kept things from getting worse, and Keynesian theory had come
to be widely accepted among economists, including politically conservative ones
(although Republican-leaning economists typically preferred stimulus in the form
of tax cuts rather than government programs).
So we needed a stimulus package. To deliver the necessary impact, how big
did it need to be? Before the election, we’d proposed what was then considered
an ambitious program of $175 billion. Immediately after the election, examining
the worsening data, we had raised the number to $500 billion. The team now
recommended something even bigger. Christy mentioned a trillion dollars,
causing Rahm to sputter like a cartoon character spitting out a bad meal.
“There’s no fucking way,” Rahm said. Given the public’s anger over the
hundreds of billions of dollars already spent on the bank bailout, he said, any
number that began “with a t” would be a nonstarter with lots of Democrats, not
to mention Republicans. I turned to Joe, who nodded in assent.
“What can we get passed?” I asked.
“Seven, maybe eight hundred billion, tops,” Rahm said. “And that’s a
stretch.”
There was also the question of how stimulus dollars would be used.
According to Keynes, it didn’t matter much what the government spent the
money on, so long as it generated economic activity. But since the levels of
spending we were talking about would likely preclude funding for other priorities
well into the future, I pushed the team to think about high-profile, high-yield
projects—modern versions of the Interstate Highway System or the Tennessee
Valley Authority that would not only give the economy an immediate boost but
could transform America’s longer-term economic landscape. What about a
national smart grid that would make the delivery of electricity more secure and
efficient? Or a new, highly integrated air traffic control system that would
enhance safety and reduce fuel costs and carbon emissions?
Folks around the table were not encouraging. “We’ve already started asking
federal agencies to identify high-impact projects,” Larry said, “but I have to be
honest, Mr. President-Elect. Those kinds of projects are extremely complicated.

They take time to develop…and unfortunately time is not on our side.” The
most important thing was to get the money into people’s pockets as quickly as
possible, and that aim was best served by providing food stamps and extended
unemployment insurance, as well as middle-class tax cuts and aid to states to help
them avoid having to lay off teachers, firefighters, and police officers. Studies had
shown that spending on infrastructure provided the biggest bang for the buck—
but, Larry suggested, even there we should focus on more prosaic undertakings
like road repair and patching up aging sewer systems, projects that local
governments could use to put people to work right away.
“It’s going to be hard to get the public excited about food stamps and
repaving roads,” Axe said. “Not real sexy.”
“Neither’s a depression,” Tim tartly replied.
Tim was the one person among us who’d already spent a stomach-churning
year on the front lines of the crisis. I could hardly blame him for refusing to be
swept up in any starry-eyed plans. His biggest concern was that mass
unemployment and bankruptcies were further weakening the financial system,
creating what he described as “an adverse feedback loop.” As Larry took the lead
on the stimulus package, Tim and his team would in the meantime try to come
up with a plan to unlock the credit markets and stabilize the financial system once
and for all. Tim admitted that he wasn’t yet sure exactly what would work—or
whether the remaining $350 billion in TARP money would be enough to cover
it.
And that wasn’t the end of our to-do list. A talented team—including Shaun
Donovan, the former head of New York City’s Department of Housing
Preservation and Development and my nominee for housing and urban
development secretary, as well as Austan Goolsbee, my longtime economic
advisor and a University of Chicago professor, whom I would appoint to the
Council of Economic Advisers—had already begun work on plans to shore up
the housing market and reduce the flood of foreclosures. We recruited prominent
finance whiz Steve Rattner and Ron Bloom, a former investment banker who
represented unions in corporate restructurings, to generate strategies to save the
auto industry. And my soon-to-be budget director, Peter Orszag, was given the
unenviable task of coming up with a plan to pay for the stimulus in the short
term while putting the federal budget on a more sustainable path for the long
term—this at a time when high levels of emergency spending and lower tax
revenues had already driven the federal deficit to more than $1 trillion for the first

time in history.
In exchange for Peter’s troubles, we wrapped up the meeting by bringing in a
cake to celebrate his fortieth birthday. As people gathered around the table to
watch him blow out the candles, Goolsbee—whose tweedy name always seemed
incongruous with his Jimmy Olsen looks, ebullient humor, and Waco, Texas,
twang—appeared beside me.
“That’s definitely the worst briefing any incoming president has gotten since
FDR in 1932!” he said. He sounded like a boy impressed by the sight of a
particularly grisly wound.
“Goolsbee,” I said, “that’s not even my worst briefing this week.”
—
half-joking; outside of economic briefings, I was spending much of
my transition time in windowless rooms, getting the classified details on Iraq,
Afghanistan, and multiple terrorist threats. Still, I remember leaving the meeting
on the economy more energized than despondent. Some of my confidence was a
matter of postelection adrenaline, I suppose—the untested, maybe delusional
belief that I was up for the task at hand. I also felt good about the team I’d
assembled; if anyone could come up with the answers we needed, I figured this
group could.
Mostly, though, my attitude was a necessary acknowledgment of how life’s
fortunes balance out. Given all that had gone my way during the campaign, I
could hardly complain now about the bad cards we’d been dealt. As I’d remind
my team more than once over the course of the next few years, the American
people probably wouldn’t have taken a chance on electing me if things hadn’t
been spinning out of control. Our job now was to get the policy right and do
what was best for the country, regardless of how tough the politics might be.
That’s what I told them, anyway. Privately, I knew that the politics weren’t
just going to be tough.
They were going to be brutal.
In the days leading up to the inauguration, I had read several books on FDR’s
first term and the implementation of the New Deal. The contrast was instructive,
though not in a good way for us. By the time Roosevelt was elected in 1932, the
Great Depression had been wreaking havoc for more than three years. A quarter
of the country was unemployed, millions were destitute, and the shantytowns
I WAS ONLY

that dotted the American landscape were commonly referred to as
“Hoovervilles”—a fair reflection of what people thought of Republican president
Herbert Hoover, the man FDR was about to replace.
So widespread was the hardship, so discredited were Republican policies, that
when a new bout of bank runs occurred during what was then a four-month
transition between presidencies, FDR made a point of rebuffing Hoover’s efforts
to enlist his help. He wanted to make sure that in the public’s mind, his
presidency marked a clean break, untarnished by past blunders. And when, in a
stroke of luck, the economy showed signs of life just a month after he took office
(before his policies had been even put into effect), FDR was happy not to share
the credit with the previous administration.
We, on the other hand, were not going to have the benefit of such clarity.
After all, I had already made the decision to help President Bush with his
necessary though wildly unpopular response to the banking crisis, placing my
hand on the proverbial bloody knife. To further stabilize the financial system, I
knew, I’d likely have to do more of the same. (I was already having to twist the
arms of some Senate Democrats just to get them to vote for the release of the
second, $350 billion tranche of TARP funds.) As voters watched the situation get
worse, which Larry and Christy said was all but assured, my popularity—along
with that of the Democrats who now controlled Congress—was sure to
plummet.
And despite the turmoil of the previous months, despite the horrific headlines
of early 2009, nobody—not the public, not Congress, not the press, and (as I’d
soon discover) not even the experts—really understood just how much worse
things were about to get. Government data at the time was showing a severe
recession, but not a cataclysmic one. Blue-chip analysts predicted that the
unemployment rate would top out at 8 or 9 percent, not even imagining the 10
percent mark it would eventually reach. When, several weeks after the election,
387 mostly liberal economists had sent a letter to Congress, calling for a robust
Keynesian stimulus, they’d put the price tag at $300 to $400 billion—about half
of what we were about to propose, and a good indicator of where even the most
alarmist experts had the economy pegged. As Axelrod described it, we were
about to ask the American public to spend close to a trillion dollars on sandbags
for a once-in-a-generation hurricane that only we knew was coming. And once
the money was spent, no matter how effective the sandbags proved to be, a
whole lot of folks would be flooded out anyway.

“When things are bad,” Axe said, walking next to me as we left the
December meeting, “no one cares that ‘things could have been worse.’ ”
“You’re right,” I agreed.
“We’ve got to level-set people’s expectations,” he said. “But if we scare them
or the markets too much, that will just add to the panic and do more economic
damage.”
“Right again,” I said.
Axe shook his head dolefully. “It’s going to be one hell of a midterm
election,” he said.
This time I said nothing, admiring his occasional, almost endearing ability to
state the obvious. As it was, I didn’t have the luxury of thinking that far ahead. I
had to focus on a second, more immediate political problem.
We had to get the stimulus bill through Congress right away—and Congress
didn’t work very well.
—
pervasive nostalgia in Washington, both before I was elected and
during my presidency, for a bygone era of bipartisan cooperation on Capitol Hill.
And the truth is that throughout much of the post–World War II era, the lines
separating America’s political parties really had been more fluid.
By the 1950s, most Republicans had accommodated themselves to New
Deal–era health and safety regulations, and the Northeast and the Midwest
produced scores of Republicans who were on the liberal end of the spectrum
when it came to issues like conservation and civil rights. Southerners, meanwhile,
constituted one of the Democratic Party’s most powerful blocs, combining a
deep-rooted cultural conservatism with an adamant refusal to recognize the rights
of African Americans, who made up a big share of their constituency. With
America’s global economic dominance unchallenged, its foreign policy defined by
the unifying threat of communism, and its social policy marked by a bipartisan
confidence that women and people of color knew their place, both Democrats
and Republicans felt free to cross party lines when required to get a bill passed.
They observed customary courtesies when it came time to offer amendments or
bring nominations to a vote and kept partisan attacks and hardball tactics within
tolerable bounds.
The story of how this postwar consensus broke down—starting with LBJ’s
THERE WAS A

signing of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and his prediction that it would lead to
the South’s wholesale abandonment of the Democratic Party—has been told
many times before. The realignment Johnson foresaw ended up taking longer
than he had expected. But steadily, year by year—through Vietnam, riots,
feminism, and Nixon’s southern strategy; through busing, Roe v. Wade, urban
crime, and white flight; through affirmative action, the Moral Majority, union
busting, and Robert Bork; through assault weapons bans and the rise of Newt
Gingrich, gay rights and the Clinton impeachment—America’s voters and their
representatives became more and more polarized.
Political gerrymandering fortified these trends, as both parties, with the help
of voter profiles and computer technology, drew congressional districts with the
explicit aim of entrenching incumbency and minimizing the number of
competitive districts in any given election. Meanwhile, the splintering of the
media and the emergence of conservative outlets meant voters were no longer
reliant on Walter Cronkite to tell them what was true; instead, they could hew to
sources that reinforced, rather than challenged, their political preferences.
By the time I took office, this “big sort” between red and blue was close to
complete. There were still holdouts in the Senate—a dozen or so moderate-toliberal Republicans and conservative Democrats who were open to collaboration
—but most of them were hanging on to their seats for dear life. In the House,
wave elections in 2006 and 2008 had swept a dozen or so conservative Democrats
from traditionally GOP districts into office. But on the whole, House Democrats
skewed liberal, especially on social issues, with white southern Democrats an
endangered species. The shift among House Republicans was even more severe.
Purged of just about all of the remaining moderates, their caucus leaned further
right than any in modern history, with old-school conservatives jockeying for
influence with the newly emboldened breed of Gingrich disciples, Rush
Limbaugh bomb throwers, Sarah Palin wannabes, and Ayn Rand acolytes—all of
whom brooked no compromise; were skeptical of any government action not
involving defense, border security, law enforcement, or the banning of abortion;
and appeared sincerely convinced that liberals were bent on destroying America.
On paper, at least, none of this would necessarily stop us from getting a
stimulus bill passed. After all, Democrats enjoyed a seventy-seven-seat majority in
the House and a seventeen-seat majority in the Senate. But even in the best of
circumstances, trying to get the largest emergency spending bill in history
through Congress in record time would be a little like getting a python to
swallow a cow. I also had to contend with a bit of institutionalized procedural

mischief—the Senate filibuster—which in the end would prove to be the most
chronic political headache of my presidency.
The filibuster isn’t mentioned anywhere in the Constitution. Instead, it came
into being by happenstance: In 1805, Vice President Aaron Burr urged the Senate
to eliminate the “motion to proceed”—a standard parliamentary provision that
allows a simple majority of any legislature to end debate on a piece of business
and call for a vote. (Burr, who seems never to have developed the habit of
thinking things through, reportedly considered the rule a waste of time.)
It didn’t take long for senators to figure out that without a formal way to end
debate, any one of them could bring Senate business to a halt—and thereby
extract all sorts of concessions from frustrated colleagues—simply by talking
endlessly and refusing to surrender the floor. In 1917, the Senate curbed the
practice by adopting “cloture,” allowing a vote of two-thirds of senators present
to end a filibuster. For the next fifty years the filibuster was used only sparingly—
most notably by southern Democrats attempting to block anti-lynching and fairemployment bills or other legislation that threatened to shake up Jim Crow.
Gradually, though, the filibuster became more routinized and easier to maintain,
making it a more potent weapon, a means for the minority party to get its way.
The mere threat of a filibuster was often enough to derail a piece of legislation.
By the 1990s, as battle lines between Republicans and Democrats hardened,
whichever party was in the minority could—and would—block any bill not to
their liking, so long as they remained unified and had at least the 41 votes needed
to keep a filibuster from being overridden.
Without any constitutional basis, public debate, or even the knowledge of
most Americans, passing legislation through Congress had come to effectively
require 60 votes in the Senate, or what was often referred to as a “supermajority.”
By the time I was elected president, the filibuster had become so thoroughly
integrated into Senate practice—viewed as an essential and time-honored
tradition—that nobody much bothered to discuss the possibility of reforming or
doing away with it altogether.
And that is why—having just won an election by an overwhelming electoral
margin and with the support of the largest congressional majority in many years—
I still couldn’t rename a post office, much less pass our stimulus package, without
winning a few Republican votes.
How hard could that be?

—
initiative can take months to prepare. There are scores of
meetings involving multiple agencies and perhaps hundreds of staffers. There are
extensive consultations with interested stakeholders. The White House
communications team is charged with choreographing a tightly managed
campaign to sell the idea to the public, and the machinery of the entire executive
branch is marshaled to pull in key committee chairs and ranking members. All of
this takes place long before actual legislation is drafted and introduced.
We had no time for any of that. Instead, before I even took office, my stillunofficial and largely unpaid economic team worked nonstop through the
holidays to flesh out the key elements of what would become the American
Recovery and Reinvestment Act (apparently “stimulus package” wouldn’t go
over well with the public).
We proposed that nearly $800 billion be divided into three buckets of
roughly equal size. In bucket one, emergency payments like supplementary
unemployment insurance and direct aid to states to slow further mass layoffs of
teachers, police officers, and other public workers. In bucket two, tax cuts
targeted at the middle class, as well as various business tax breaks that gave
companies a big incentive to invest in new plants or equipment now instead of
later. Both the emergency payments and the tax cuts had the advantage of being
easy to administer; we could quickly get money out the door and into the
pockets of consumers and businesses. Tax cuts also had the added benefit of
potentially attracting Republican support.
The third bucket, on the other hand, contained initiatives that were harder to
design and would take longer to implement but might have a bigger long-term
impact: not just traditional infrastructure spending like road construction and
sewer repair but also high-speed rail, solar and wind power installation,
broadband lines for underserved rural areas, and incentives for states to reform
their education systems—all intended not only to put people to work but to
make America more competitive.
Considering how many unmet needs there were in communities all across the
country, I was surprised by how much work it took for our team to find worthy
projects of sufficient scale for the Recovery Act to fund. Some promising ideas
we rejected because they would take too long to stand up or required a huge new
bureaucracy to manage. Others missed the cut because they wouldn’t boost
demand sufficiently. Mindful of accusations that I planned to use the economic
A MAJOR WHITE HOUSE

crisis as an excuse for an orgy of wasteful liberal boondoggles (and because I in
fact wanted to prevent Congress from engaging in wasteful boondoggles, liberal
or otherwise), we put in place a series of good-government safeguards: a
competitive application process for state and local governments seeking funding;
strict audit and reporting requirements; and, in a move we knew would draw
howls from Capitol Hill, a firm policy of no “earmarks”—to use the innocuous
name for a time-honored practice in which members of Congress insert various
pet projects (many dubious) into must-pass legislation.
We had to run a tight ship and maintain high standards, I told my crew. With
any luck, the Recovery Act wouldn’t just help avert a depression. It could also
serve to restore the public’s faith in honest, responsible government.
By New Year’s Day, most of our initial work was finished. Armed with our
proposal and knowing we couldn’t afford to work on a conventional timetable,
Joe Biden and I traveled to the Capitol on January 5—two weeks before my
inauguration—to meet with Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid, Senate
Republican leader Mitch McConnell, Speaker of the House Nancy Pelosi, House
Republican leader John Boehner, and the other key leaders of the newly installed
111th Congress whose support we’d need to get a bill passed.
Of the four key leaders, I knew Harry best, but I’d had my share of
interactions with McConnell during my few years in the Senate. Short, owlish,
with a smooth Kentucky accent, McConnell seemed an unlikely Republican
leader. He showed no aptitude for schmoozing, backslapping, or rousing oratory.
As far as anyone could tell, he had no close friends even in his own caucus; nor
did he appear to have any strong convictions beyond an almost religious
opposition to any version of campaign finance reform. Joe told me of one run-in
he’d had on the Senate floor after the Republican leader blocked a bill Joe was
sponsoring; when Joe tried to explain the bill’s merits, McConnell raised his hand
like a traffic cop and said, “You must be under the mistaken impression that I
care.” But what McConnell lacked in charisma or interest in policy he more than
made up for in discipline, shrewdness, and shamelessness—all of which he
employed in the single-minded and dispassionate pursuit of power.
Harry couldn’t stand him.
Boehner was a different animal, an affable, gravel-voiced son of a bartender
from outside Cincinnati. With his chain-smoking and perpetual tan, his love of
golf and a good merlot, he felt familiar to me, cut from the same cloth as many of
the Republicans I’d gotten to know as a state legislator in Springfield—regular

guys who didn’t stray from the party line or the lobbyists who kept them in
power but who also didn’t consider politics a blood sport and might even work
with you if it didn’t cost them too much politically. Unfortunately these same
human qualities gave Boehner a tenuous grip on his caucus; and having
experienced the humiliation of being stripped of a leadership post as a result of
insufficient fealty to Newt Gingrich in the late 1990s, he rarely deviated from
whatever talking points his staff had prepared for him, at least not in public.
Unlike the relationship between Harry and McConnell, however, there was no
real enmity between Speaker Nancy Pelosi and Boehner, just mutual frustration
—on Nancy’s part because of Boehner’s unreliability as a negotiating partner and
his frequent inability to deliver votes; on Boehner’s part because Nancy generally
outmaneuvered him.
Boehner wasn’t the first to be outflanked by the Speaker. On the surface,
Nancy, in her designer suits, matching shoes, and perfectly coiffed hair, looked
every bit the wealthy San Francisco liberal she was. Though she could talk a mile
a minute, she wasn’t particularly good on TV at the time, with a tendency to
deliver Democratic nostrums with a practiced earnestness that called to mind an
after-dinner speech at a charity gala.
But politicians (usually men) underestimated Nancy at their own peril, for her
ascent to power had been no fluke. She’d grown up in the East, the Italian
American daughter of Baltimore’s mayor, tutored from an early age in the ways
of ethnic ward bosses and longshoremen, unafraid to play hardball politics in the
name of getting things done. After moving to the West Coast with her husband,
Paul, and staying home to raise their five kids while he built a successful business,
Nancy eventually put her early political education to good use, rising steadily
through the ranks of the California Democratic Party and Congress to become
the first female Speaker in American history. She didn’t care that Republicans
made her their favorite foil; nor was she fazed by the occasional grousing of her
Democratic colleagues. The fact was, nobody was tougher or a more skilled
legislative strategist, and she kept her caucus in line with a combination of
attentiveness, fundraising prowess, and a willingness to cut off at the knees anyone
who failed to deliver on commitments they’d made.
Harry, Mitch, Nancy, and John. The Four Tops, we sometimes called them.
For most of the next eight years, the dynamics among these individuals would
play a key role in shaping my presidency. I became accustomed to the ritualistic
quality of our joint meetings, the way they’d file into the room one at a time,
each offering a handshake and a muted acknowledgment (“Mr. President…Mr.

Vice President…”); how, once we were all seated, Joe and I and sometimes
Nancy would attempt some lighthearted banter, considering ourselves lucky if we
got a tepid smile from the other three, while my staff brought in the press pool
for the obligatory photo op; how, once the press had been ushered out and we
got down to business, the four of them would take care not to show their cards
or make firm commitments, their comments often sprinkled with thinly veiled
recrimination directed at their counterparts, all of them unified only in their
common desire to be somewhere else.
Perhaps because it was our first meeting since the election, perhaps because
we were joined by their respective whips and deputies, and perhaps because of
the gravity of what lay before us, the Four Tops were all on their best behavior
when we gathered that day in early January in the opulent LBJ Room, just off the
Senate chamber, along with other congressional leaders. They listened with
studied attentiveness as I made the case for the Recovery Act. I mentioned that
my team had already reached out to their staffs for input on actual legislation and
that we welcomed any suggestions to make the stimulus package more effective. I
noted that I also hoped to visit with each of their caucuses immediately after the
inauguration to answer further questions. But given the rapidly worsening
situation, I said, speed was of the essence: We needed a bill on my desk not in
one hundred days but in thirty. I closed by telling those gathered that history
would judge all of us by what we did in this moment and that I hoped we could
muster the kind of bipartisan cooperation that would restore the confidence of an
anxious and vulnerable public.
Considering what I was asking congressional leaders to do—to compress what
might normally be a year-long legislative process into one month—the reaction
around the room was relatively subdued. My longtime friend Dick Durbin, the
Senate whip, asked about increasing the portion of stimulus dollars dedicated to
infrastructure. Jim Clyburn, the House majority whip, offered a pointed history
lesson on all the ways the New Deal had bypassed Black communities, asking
how we were going to prevent the same thing from happening in places like his
home state of South Carolina. Virginian Eric Cantor, the second-ranking
Republican in the House and one of the conservative Young Turks known to be
gunning for Boehner’s job, praised some of the tax cut proposals we had included
in the package but asked whether a bigger, permanent tax cut wouldn’t work
better than spending on what he considered failed liberal programs like food
stamps.
It was, however, the comments from Harry, Mitch, Nancy, and John,

delivered with teeth-clenching civility and requiring a bit of deciphering, that
gave me and Joe our best sense of the real state of play.
“Well, Mr. President-Elect,” said Nancy, “I think the American people are
pretty clear that you inherited a terrible mess. Just terrible. And of course our
caucus is prepared to do the responsible thing to clean up this mess that you
inherited. But I just hope our friends on the other side of the aisle remember how
it was the Democrats, including you, Mr. President-Elect, who stepped up to the
plate…Despite what we all know was bad politics…it was Democrats who were
willing to help President Bush with TARP. I hope our Republican friends take
the same responsible approach in what, as you said, is a very critical moment.”
Translation: Don’t think for a minute that we won’t be reminding the
American people every single chance we get that Republicans caused the
financial crisis.
“Our caucus won’t like it,” Harry said, “but we don’t have much choice, so
we’ll just have to get it done, okay?”
Translation: Don’t expect Mitch McConnell to lift a finger to help.
“Well, we’re happy to listen, but with all due respect, I don’t think the
American people are looking for more big spending and bailouts,” Boehner said.
“They’re tightening their belts, and they expect us to do the same.”
Translation: My caucus will crucify me if I say anything that sounds
cooperative.
“I can’t tell you there’s much of an appetite for what you’re proposing, Mr.
President-Elect,” McConnell said, “but you’re welcome to come to our weekly
luncheon to make your case.”
Translation: You must be under the mistaken impression that I care.
On our way down the stairs after the meeting was over, I turned to Joe.
“Well, that could have been worse,” I said.
“Yeah,” Joe said. “No fistfights broke out.”
I laughed. “See there? That’s progress!”
—
everything was in the first few weeks after I took office, I
barely had time to dwell on the pervasive, routine weirdness of my new
circumstances. But make no mistake, it was weird. There was the way everyone
GIVEN HOW HECTIC

now stood up anytime I walked into a room. “Sit down,” I’d growl, telling my
team that those kinds of formalities weren’t my style. They’d smile and nod—and
then do the exact same thing the next time we met.
There was the way my first name all but disappeared, used by nobody but
Michelle, our families, and a few close friends, like Marty. Otherwise, it was
“Yes, Mr. President” and “No, Mr. President,” although over time my staff at
least adopted the more colloquial “POTUS” (president of the United States)
when talking to or about me inside the White House.
There was the way my daily schedule had suddenly become a behind-thescenes tug-of-war between various staffers, agencies, and constituencies, each one
wanting their causes highlighted or their issues addressed, outcomes spit out
through a hidden machinery that I never fully understood. Meanwhile, I
discovered that whenever the Secret Service agents whispered into their wrist
microphones, they were broadcasting my movements over a staff-monitored
radio channel: “Renegade heading to residence” or “Renegade to Situation
Room” or “Renegade to Secondary Hold,” which was their discreet way of
saying I was going to the bathroom.
And there was the ever-present traveling press pool: a herd of reporters and
photographers who needed to be alerted anytime I left the White House complex
and would follow me in a government-provided van. The arrangement made
sense when we traveled on official business, but I soon discovered that it applied
in all circumstances, whether Michelle and I were going out to a restaurant or I
was heading to a gym to play basketball or planning to watch one of the girls’
soccer games at a nearby field. As Gibbs, who was now my press secretary,
explained, the rationale was that a president’s movements were inherently
newsworthy and that the press needed to be on the scene in case something
consequential happened. And yet I can’t recall the press van ever capturing any
image more compelling than me getting out of a car wearing sweatpants. It did
have the effect of eliminating whatever scraps of privacy I might still have had
when venturing beyond the White House gates. Feeling mildly cranky about it, I
asked Gibbs that first week whether we could leave the press behind when I went
on personal outings.
“Bad idea,” Gibbs said.
“Why? The reporters crammed in that van must know it’s a waste of time.”
“Yeah, but their bosses don’t,” Gibbs said. “And remember, you promised to
run the most open administration in history. You do this, the press will have a

fit.”
“I’m not talking about public business,” I objected. “I’m talking about taking
my wife on a date. Or getting some fresh air.” I’d read enough about previous
presidents to know that Teddy Roosevelt once spent two weeks camping in
Yellowstone, traveling by horse. I knew that during the Great Depression, FDR
had passed weeks at a time sailing up the East Coast to an island near Nova
Scotia. I reminded Gibbs that Harry Truman had gone for long morning walks
through the streets of Washington during his presidency.
“Times have changed, Mr. President,” Gibbs said patiently. “Look, it’s your
decision. But I’m telling you, getting rid of the press pool will create a shitstorm
that we don’t need right now. It’ll also make it harder for me to get cooperation
from them when it comes to the girls…”
I started to answer, then shut my mouth. Michelle and I had already told
Gibbs that our highest priority was making sure the press left our daughters alone
when they were out and about. Gibbs knew I wasn’t going to do anything to
jeopardize that. Having successfully repulsed my rebellion, he was wise enough
not to gloat; instead he just patted me on the back and headed to his office,
leaving me to mutter under my breath. (To their credit, members of the press
would place Malia and Sasha off-limits for the duration of my presidency, an act
of basic decency that I deeply appreciated.)
My team did throw me one bone when it came to freedom: I was able to
keep my BlackBerry—or, rather, I was given a new, specially modified device,
approved only after several weeks of negotiations with various cybersecurity
personnel. With it, I could send and receive emails, though only from a vetted list
of twenty or so contacts, and the internal microphone and headphone jack had
been removed, so that the phone function didn’t work. Michelle joked that my
BlackBerry was like one of those play phones you give toddlers, where they get
to press buttons and it makes noises and things light up but nothing actually
happens.
Given these limitations, most of my contact with the outside world depended
on three young aides who sat in the Outer Oval: Reggie, who had agreed to stay
on as my body man; Brian Mosteller, a fastidious Ohioan who organized all my
daily events within the complex; and Katie Johnson, Plouffe’s no-nonsense
assistant from the campaign who now performed the same function for me.
Together they served as my unofficial gatekeepers and personal life-support
system, patching through my phone calls, scheduling my haircuts, providing

briefing materials, keeping me on time, alerting me to upcoming staff birthdays
and purchasing cards for me to sign, telling me when I’d spilled soup on my tie,
enduring my rants and bad jokes, and generally keeping me functioning
throughout the course of twelve- to sixteen-hour days.
The lone denizen of the Outer Oval past his mid-thirties was Pete Souza, our
White House photographer. Middle-aged, compactly built, and with a swarthy
complexion that reflected his Portuguese roots, Pete was on his second tour at the
White House, having served as an official photographer for the Reagan
administration. After various teaching stints and freelance assignments, Pete had
landed at the Chicago Tribune, where he’d covered the early stages of the Afghan
War as well as my start in the U.S. Senate.
I had liked him right away: In addition to having a photojournalist’s gift for
capturing complex stories in a single image, Pete was smart, unpretentious, a bit
curmudgeonly, but never cynical. After we won, he agreed to join the team on
the condition that I allow him unfettered access. It was a measure of my
confidence in him that I gave the okay, and for the next eight years Pete became
a constant presence, skirting the edges of every meeting, witnessing every victory
and defeat, occasionally lowering himself onto a creaky knee to get the angle he
wanted, never making a sound other than the constant whirr of the camera’s
shutter.
He also became a good friend.
In this new, curiously sealed habitat of mine, the fondness and trust I felt
toward those I worked with and the kindness and support they showed me and
my family were a saving grace. This was true for Ray Rogers and Quincy
Jackson, the two young navy valets assigned to the Oval Office, who served
refreshments to visitors and whipped up a solid lunch for me every day in the tiny
kitchenette wedged next to the dining space. Or the White House
Communications Agency staffers, among them two brothers named Nate and
Luke Emory, who set up lecterns, prompters, and video shoots at a moment’s
notice. Or Barbara Swann, who brought the mail each day and appeared
incapable of anything other than a smile and sweet word for everyone.
And it was true of the residence staff. My family’s new living quarters seemed
less a home than an extended series of suites in a boutique hotel, complete with a
gym, pool, tennis court, movie theater, salon, bowling alley, and medical office.
The staff was organized under the direction of chief usher Steve Rochon, a
former Coast Guard rear admiral who was hired by the Bushes in 2007,

becoming the first African American to hold the post. A cleaning crew came
through each day, keeping the place spotless; a rotating team of chefs prepared
meals for our family or, as sometimes happened, for a few hundred guests; butlers
were on hand to serve those meals or anything else you might want; switchboard
operators sat ready to put through calls at all hours and to make sure we woke up
in the morning; ushers waited in the small elevator every morning to take me
down to work and were there to greet me again upon my evening return;
building engineers were on-site to fix what was broken; and in-house florists kept
every room filled with magnificent, ever-varying, freshly cut flowers.
(It’s worth pointing out here—only because people were often surprised to
hear it—that a First Family pays out of pocket for any new furniture, just as it
does for everything else it consumes, from groceries to toilet paper to extra staff
for a president’s private dinner party. The White House budget does set aside
funds for a new president to redo the Oval Office, but despite some worn
upholstery on the chairs and sofas, I decided that a historic recession wasn’t the
best time to be going through fabric swatches.)
And for the president, at least, there was a trio of navy valets, first among
them a soft-spoken bear of a man named Sam Sutton. On our first full day in the
White House, I walked through the hallway closet that connected our bedroom
to my bathroom only to find every shirt, suit, and pair of pants I owned perfectly
pressed and hung in orderly rows, my shoes shined to a high gloss, every pair of
socks or shorts folded and sorted as if in a department store display. When in the
evening I returned from the Oval Office and hung my (only lightly mussed!) suit
in the closet (a significant improvement over my normal practice of draping it on
the nearest doorknob, one of Michelle’s pet peeves), Sam came up beside me and
gently but firmly explained that it would be better if from now on I just left the
care of my clothes up to him—a switch that not only improved my general
appearance but no doubt helped my marriage.
None of this was a hardship, of course. Still, it was a little disconcerting.
During the campaign, Michelle and I had become accustomed to always having
people around, but they hadn’t occupied our house, and we definitely weren’t
used to having butlers and maids. In this new, rarefied air, we worried that the
girls would get too coddled and slide into bad habits, and we instituted a rule
(enforced with only average success) that they had to clean their rooms and make
their beds before school each morning. My mother-in-law, loath to have anyone
waiting on her, asked the staff for a lesson on using the washers and dryers so she
could do her own laundry. Feeling a little embarrassed myself, I tried to keep the

Treaty Room, which served as my personal office in the residence, free of the
stacks of books, papers, and assorted junk that had characterized all my previous
“Holes.”
Gradually, thanks to the steady generosity and professionalism of the residence
staff, we found ourselves settling in. We became especially close to our regular
crew of chefs and butlers, with whom we had daily contact. As with my valets, all
of them were Black, Latino, or Asian American, and all but one were men
(Cristeta Comerford, a Filipina American, had been recently appointed as the
White House’s executive chef, the first woman to hold the job). And while they
were uniformly glad to have well-paying, secure jobs with good benefits, it was
hard to miss in their racial makeup the vestiges of an earlier time, when social
rank had clear demarcations and those who occupied the office of president felt
most comfortable in their privacy when served by those they assumed were not
their equals—and, therefore, could not judge them.
The most senior butlers were a pair of big, round-bellied Black men with sly
senses of humor and the wisdom that comes from having a front-row seat to
history. Buddy Carter had been around since the tail end of the Nixon
presidency, first caring for visiting dignitaries at Blair House and then moving to a
job in the residence. Von Everett had been around since Reagan. They spoke of
previous First Families with appropriate discretion and genuine affection. But
without saying much, they didn’t hide how they felt about having us in their
care. You could see it in how readily Von accepted Sasha’s hugs or the pleasure
Buddy took in sneaking Malia an extra scoop of ice cream after dinner, in the
easy rapport they had talking to Marian and the pride in their eyes when Michelle
wore a particularly pretty dress. They were barely distinguishable from Marian’s
brothers or Michelle’s uncles, and in that familiarity they became more, not less,
solicitous, objecting if we carried our own plates into the kitchen, alert to even a
hint of what they considered substandard service from anyone on the residence
staff. It would take us months of coaxing before the butlers were willing to swap
their tuxedos for khakis and polo shirts when serving us meals.
“We just want to make sure you’re treated like every other president,” Von
explained.
“That’s right,” Buddy said. “See, you and the First Lady don’t really know
what this means to us, Mr. President. Having you here…” He shook his head.
“You just don’t know.”

—
Speaker Pelosi and Democratic House Appropriations
Committee chair Dave Obey, as well as heroic efforts from our still-skeletal staff,
we were able to get the Recovery Act legislation drafted, introduced in the
House, passed out of committee, and scheduled for a full vote of the House—all
by the end of my first week in office.
We considered it a minor miracle.
It helped that congressional Democrats were enthusiastic about the core
elements of the package—although that didn’t stop them from griping about all
sorts of particulars. Liberals complained that the business tax cuts were giveaways
to the rich. More centrist Dems expressed anxiety about how the big price tag
would play with their more conservative constituents. Members across the
spectrum complained about how direct aid to states would only help Republican
governors balance their budgets and appear fiscally responsible, even as those same
governors accused the folks in Congress of spending like drunken sailors.
This kind of low-grade grumbling was par for the course with any major
legislative initiative, regardless of who was in the White House. It was especially
common among Democrats, who for a variety of reasons (a more diverse
makeup, a greater aversion to authority) seemed to take an almost perverse pride
in their lack of message discipline. When some of these complaints spilled into
the press, with reporters hyping a handful of stray comments as a possible sign of
dissension in the ranks, Rahm or I made sure to lob a call at the worst
transgressors so we could explain—in plain and sometimes unprintable terms—
just why it was that headlines like KEY DEMOCRATS BLAST OBAMA STIMULUS PLAN
or DEMOCRATS MAKE CLEAR THEY WILL GUARD TURF were not exactly helpful to
the cause.
Our message was received. On the margins, we made some concessions in the
drafted legislation, boosting funding for congressional priorities, trimming dollars
from some of our own. But when the dust had settled, the legislation contained
close to 90 percent of what our economic team had originally proposed, and
we’d succeeded in keeping the bill free of earmarks and egregious wastes of
money that might discredit it in the eyes of the public.
Just one thing was missing: Republican support.
From the start, none of us had been particularly optimistic about getting a big
chunk of Republican votes, especially in the aftermath of billions already spent on
WITH SUPPORT FROM

financial rescue. Most House Republicans had voted against TARP despite
significant pressure from a president of their own party. Those who had voted for
it continued to face withering criticism from the Right, and there was a growing
belief within Republican circles that one of the reasons they had done so badly in
successive elections was that they’d allowed President Bush to lead them astray
from conservative, small-government principles.
Nevertheless, coming out of our early-January meeting with congressional
leaders, I had told my team to ramp up our Republican outreach. Not just for
show, I said; make a serious effort.
The decision exasperated some Democrats, especially in the House. Having
been in the minority for over a decade, House Democrats had been entirely shut
out of the legislative process. Now that they were in control, they were in no
mood to see me offer concessions to their former tormentors. They thought I was
wasting my time, being naïve. “These Republicans aren’t interested in
cooperating with you, Mr. President,” one member told me bluntly. “They’re
looking to break you.”
I figured they might be right. But for a variety of reasons, I felt it was
important to at least test the proposition. Getting the two Republican votes we
needed for a filibuster-proof majority in the Senate would be a lot easier, I knew,
if we first secured a decent Republican vote count in the House—safety in
numbers being a maxim by which almost every politician in Washington lived.
Republican votes would also provide useful political cover for Democrats
representing conservative-leaning parts of the country, who were already looking
ahead to tough reelection races. And truthfully, just the act of negotiating with
Republicans served as a handy excuse to deflect some of the less orthodox ideas
that occasionally surfaced from our side of the aisle (“I’m sorry, Congressman, but
legalizing marijuana isn’t the kind of stimulus we’re talking about here…”).
But for me, reaching out to Republican members wasn’t just tactical. Since
my convention speech in Boston and through the closing days of my campaign, I
had argued that people across the country weren’t as divided as our politics
suggested, and that to do big things we needed to move past partisan bickering.
And what better way to make an honest effort to reach across the aisle than from
a position of strength, at a time when I didn’t necessarily need support from
House Republicans to get my agenda passed? I thought that maybe, with an open
mind and a bit of humility, I might catch GOP leaders by surprise and ease their
suspicions, helping to build working relationships that could carry over to other

issues. And if, as was more likely, the gambit didn’t work and Republicans
rejected my overtures, then at least voters would know who was to blame for
Washington’s dysfunction.
To lead our Legislative Affairs office, we had recruited a savvy former senior
House Democratic staffer named Phil Schiliro. He was tall and balding, with a
high-pitched laugh that masked a quiet intensity, and from Congress’s first day in
session Phil set out in search of negotiating partners, calling in me or Rahm or
Joe Biden to help court individual members where necessary. When some
Republicans expressed interest in more infrastructure, we told them to give us a
list of their priorities. When others said they couldn’t vote for a bill that included
contraception funding dressed up as stimulus, we urged Democrats to strike the
provision. When Eric Cantor suggested a reasonable modification to one of our
tax provisions, despite the fact there was no chance he’d be voting for the bill, I
told my staff to make the change, wanting to send a signal that we were serious
about giving Republicans a seat at the table.
Yet with each passing day, the prospect of Republican cooperation appeared
more and more like a distant mirage. Those who’d initially expressed interest in
working with us stopped returning our phone calls. GOP members of the House
Appropriations Committee boycotted hearings on the Recovery Act, claiming
that they weren’t being seriously consulted. Republican attacks on the bill in the
press became less restrained. Joe reported that Mitch McConnell had been
cracking the whip, preventing members of his caucus from even talking to the
White House about the stimulus package, and Democratic House members said
they’d heard the same thing from their GOP counterparts.
“We can’t play” was how one Republican apparently put it.
Bleak as things looked, I thought I still might have a chance to sway a few
members during my visits to the House and Senate Republican caucuses, both of
which were scheduled on January 27, the eve of the House vote. I took extra
time to prepare my presentation, making sure I had all the facts and figures at my
fingertips. The morning before the meetings, Rahm and Phil joined me in the
Oval Office to review the arguments we thought Republicans might find most
persuasive. We were about to load my motorcade for the drive to Capitol Hill
when Gibbs and Axe walked into the Oval Office and showed me an AP wire
story that had just come in, right after Boehner’s meeting with his caucus. HOUSE
REPUBLICANS URGED TO OPPOSE STIMULUS BILL.

“When did this happen?” I asked, scanning the article.

“About five minutes ago,” Gibbs said.
“Did Boehner call to give us a heads-up?” I asked.
“No,” Rahm said.
“Am I correct to assume, then, that this shit’s not on the level?” I said, as the
group of us started heading outside toward the Beast.
“That would be correct, Mr. President,” Rahm said.
The caucus meetings themselves weren’t overtly hostile. Boehner, Cantor,
and House Republican Conference chair Mike Pence were already at the lectern
when I arrived (deftly avoiding a private conversation about the stunt they’d just
pulled), and after Boehner’s brief introduction and some polite applause, I stepped
up to speak. It was my first time at a House Republicans gathering, and it was
hard not to be struck by the room’s uniformity: row after row of mostly middleaged white men, with a dozen or so women and maybe two or three Hispanics
and Asians. Most sat stone-faced as I briefly made the case for stimulus—citing
the latest data on the economy’s meltdown, the need for quick action, the fact
that our package contained tax cuts Republicans had long promoted, and our
commitment to long-term deficit reduction once the crisis had passed. The
audience did perk up when I opened the floor for a series of questions (or, more
accurately, talking points pretending to be questions), all of which I cheerfully
responded to as if my answers mattered.
“Mr. President, why doesn’t this bill do anything about all those Democraticsponsored laws that forced banks to give mortgages to unqualified borrowers and
were the real cause of the financial crisis?” (Applause.)
“Mr. President, I’ve got a book here for you that shows the New Deal didn’t
end the Depression but actually made things worse. Do you agree that the
Democrats’ so-called stimulus is just repeating those mistakes and will leave a sea
of red ink for future generations to clean up?” (Applause.)
“Mr. President, will you get Nancy Pelosi to put her partisan bill aside and
start over with the truly open process that the American people are demanding?”
(Cheers, applause, a few hoots.)
On the Senate side, the setting felt less stilted. Joe and I were invited to sit
around a table with the forty or so senators in attendance, many of them our
former colleagues. But the substance of the meeting was not much different, with
every Republican who bothered to speak singing from the same hymnal,
describing the stimulus package as a pork-filled, budget-busting, “special-interest
bailout” that Democrats needed to scrap if they wanted any hope of cooperation.

On the ride back to the White House, Rahm was apoplectic, Phil
despondent. I told them it was fine, that I’d actually enjoyed the give-and-take.
“How many Republicans do you think might still be in play?” I asked.
Rahm shrugged. “If we’re lucky, maybe a dozen.”
That proved optimistic. The next day, the Recovery Act passed the House
244 to 188 with precisely zero Republican votes. It was the opening salvo in a
battle plan that McConnell, Boehner, Cantor, and the rest would deploy with
impressive discipline for the next eight years: a refusal to work with me or
members of my administration, regardless of the circumstances, the issue, or the
consequences for the country.
—
that for a political party that had just suffered two cycles of
resounding defeat, the GOP strategy of pugnacious, all-out obstruction would
carry big risks. And during a time of genuine crisis, it sure wasn’t responsible.
But if, like McConnell and Boehner, your primary concern was clawing your
way back to power, recent history suggested that such a strategy made sense. For
all their talk about wanting politicians to get along, American voters rarely reward
the opposition for cooperating with the governing party. In the 1980s, Democrats
retained their grip on the House (though not the Senate) long after Ronald
Reagan’s election and the country’s shift to the right, in part because of the
willingness of “responsible” Republican leaders to help make Congress work; the
House flipped only after a Gingrich-led GOP turned Congress into an all-out
brawl. Similarly, Democrats made no inroads against a Republican-controlled
Congress by helping pass President Bush’s tax cuts or his prescription drug plan;
they won back the House and Senate when they began challenging the president
and Republican leaders on everything from Social Security privatization to the
handling of the Iraq War.
Such lessons weren’t lost on McConnell and Boehner. They understood that
any help they offered my administration in mounting an effective, sustained
government response to the crisis would only be to my political benefit—and
would tacitly acknowledge the bankruptcy of their own anti-government, antiregulation rhetoric. If, on the other hand, they fought a rearguard action, if they
generated controversy and threw sand in the gears, they at least had a chance to
energize their base and slow me and the Democrats down at a time when the
YOU MIGHT THINK

country was sure to be impatient.
In executing their strategy, Republican leaders had a couple of things going
for them—starting with the nature of modern news coverage. From my time in
the Senate and on the campaign trail, I’d gotten to know most of the national
political reporters, and on the whole, I found them to be smart, hardworking,
ethical, and committed to getting their facts straight. At the same time,
conservatives weren’t wrong to think that in their personal attitudes the majority
of news reporters probably fell at the more liberal end of the political spectrum.
This would seem to make these reporters unlikely accomplices in
McConnell’s and Boehner’s plans. But whether out of fear of appearing biased, or
because conflict sells, or because their editors demanded it, or because it was the
easiest way to meet the deadlines of a twenty-four-hour, internet-driven news
cycle, their collective approach to reporting on Washington followed a
depressingly predictable script:
Report what one side says (quick sound bite included).
Report what the other side says (opposing sound bite, the more insulting the
better).
Leave it to an opinion poll to sort out who’s right.
Over time, my staff and I became so resigned to this style of “he said / he
said” coverage that we could joke about it. (“In dueling press conferences today,
the debate over the shape of planet Earth heated up, with President Obama—
who claims the Earth is round—coming under withering attack from
Republicans who insist that the White House has covered up documents proving
the Earth is flat.”) In those first few weeks, though, with our White House
communications team barely in place, we could still be surprised. Not just by the
GOP’s willingness to peddle half-truths or outright lies about the contents of the
Recovery Act (the claim that we were planning to spend millions on a Mob
Museum in Las Vegas, for example, or that Nancy Pelosi had included $30
million to save an endangered mouse), but by the willingness of the press to
broadcast or publish these whoppers as straight news.
With enough badgering from us, an outlet might eventually run a story that
fact-checked Republican claims. Rarely, though, did the truth catch up to the
initial headlines. Most Americans—already trained to believe that the government
wasted money—didn’t have the time or inclination to keep up with the details of
the legislative process or who was or wasn’t being reasonable in negotiations. All
they heard was what the Washington press corps told them—that Democrats and

Republicans were fighting again, politicians were splurging, and the new guy in
the White House was doing nothing to change it.
Of course, efforts to discredit the Recovery Act still depended on the ability
of GOP leaders to keep their members in line. At a minimum, they needed to
make sure the stimulus package didn’t get enough support from stray Republicans
to be deemed “bipartisan,” since (as McConnell would later explain) “when you
hang the bipartisan tag on something, the perception is that differences have been
worked out.” Their task was made easier now that the majority of GOP members
hailed from districts or states that were solidly Republican. Their base of voters,
fed a steady diet of Fox News, talk radio, and Sarah Palin speeches, was in no
mood for compromise; in fact, the biggest threat to these representatives’
reelection prospects came from primary challengers who might accuse them of
being closet liberals. Rush Limbaugh had already castigated Republicans like
McCain for saying that with the election over, they now hoped for my success.
“I hope Obama fails!” the talk radio show host had thundered. Back in early
2009, most Republican elected officials didn’t consider it wise to be quite that
blunt in public (it was a different story in private, as we would later learn). But
even those politicians who didn’t share Limbaugh’s sentiments knew that with
that single statement, he was effectively channeling—and shaping—the views of a
sizable chunk of their voters.
Big conservative donors weighed in as well. Panicked by the cratering
economy and the impact it was already having on their members’ bottom lines,
traditional business organizations like the Chamber of Commerce eventually
came out in favor of the Recovery Act. But their influence over the Republican
Party had by then been supplanted by billionaire ideologues like David and
Charles Koch, who had spent decades and hundreds of millions of dollars
systematically building a network of think tanks, advocacy organizations, media
operations, and political operatives, all with the express goal of rolling back every
last vestige of the modern welfare state. For them, all taxes were confiscatory,
paving the road to socialism; all regulations were a betrayal of free-market
principles and the American way of life. They saw my victory as a mortal threat
—which is why, shortly after my inauguration, they pulled together a conclave of
some of America’s wealthiest conservatives in a smartly manicured resort in
Indian Wells, California, to map out a strategy to fight back. They didn’t want
compromise and consensus. They wanted war. And they let it be known that
Republican politicians without the stomach to resist my policies at every turn
would not only find donations drying up but also might find themselves the

target of a well-financed primary challenge.
As for those Republicans who were still tempted to cooperate with me
despite lobbying from constituents, donors, and conservative media outlets, good
old-fashioned peer pressure usually did the trick. During the transition, I had met
with Judd Gregg, a capable, decent GOP senator from New Hampshire, and
offered to make him commerce secretary—part of my effort to deliver on my
promise of bipartisan governance. He’d readily accepted, and in early February,
we announced his nomination. With Republican opposition to the Recovery Act
growing more boisterous by the day, though, as McConnell and the rest of
leadership worked him over in caucus meetings and on the Senate floor and
former First Lady Barbara Bush reportedly stepped in to dissuade him from
joining my administration, Judd Gregg lost his nerve. A week after we’d
announced his nomination, he called to withdraw.
Not every Republican picked up on the rapidly shifting mood within their
own party. On the day the Senate was to vote on the Recovery Act, I found
myself in Fort Myers, Florida, at a town hall–style meeting meant to drum up
public support for the bill and allow me to answer questions about the economy.
Joining me was Florida governor Charlie Crist, a moderate Republican with a
friendly, polished demeanor and the kind of good looks—tanned, silver-haired,
sparkling white teeth—that seemed straight out of central casting. Crist was
hugely popular at the time, having cultivated an image of someone who could
work across party lines, avoiding divisive social issues and instead focusing on
promoting business and tourism. He also knew that his state was in big trouble:
As one of the hot spots of subprime lending and the housing bubble, Florida had
an economy and state budget in free fall and in desperate need of federal help.
It was out of both temperament and necessity, then, that Crist agreed to
introduce me at the town hall and publicly endorse the stimulus bill. Despite the
fact that home values in Fort Myers had dropped about 67 percent (with a full 12
percent of houses in foreclosure), the crowd was raucous and energized that day,
mostly Democratic and still swept up in what Sarah Palin would later call the
“hopey, changey stuff.” After Crist offered up a reasonable, somewhat cautious
explanation of why he supported the Recovery Act, pointing out its benefits for
Florida and the need for elected officials to put people before party politics, I gave
the governor what was my standard “bro hug”—a handshake, an arm around the
back for a pat, an appreciative look in the eye, a thank-you in the ear.
Poor Charlie. How could I know that my two-second gesture would prove

to be a political kiss of death for him? Within days of the rally, footage of “the
hug”—accompanied by calls for Crist’s head—began appearing in right-wing
media outlets. In a matter of months, Crist went from a Republican star to a
pariah. He was called a poster child for appeasement, the kind of weak-kneed,
opportunistic RINO who needed to be made an example of. It would take time
for the whole thing to play out: In the 2010 U.S. Senate race, Crist was forced to
run as an independent and got clobbered by conservative upstart Marco Rubio;
Crist eventually mounted a political comeback only by switching parties and
winning one of Florida’s congressional seats as a Democrat. Nevertheless, the
immediate lesson was not lost on congressional Republicans.
Cooperate with the Obama administration at your own peril.
And if you have to shake his hand, make sure you don’t look happy about it.
—
hard for me not to fixate on the political dynamics that
unfolded in those first weeks of my presidency—how quickly Republican
resistance hardened, independent of anything we said or did, and how thoroughly
that resistance colored the way the press and ultimately the public viewed the
substance of our actions. After all, those dynamics set the course for so much of
what happened in the months and years that followed, a cleaving of America’s
political sensibilities that we are still dealing with a decade later.
But in February 2009, I was obsessed with the economy, not politics. So it’s
worth pointing out a relevant piece of information that I omitted from the
Charlie Crist story: A few minutes before I walked out onstage to give him that
hug, I got a call from Rahm letting me know that the Recovery Act had just
cleared the Senate, assuring the legislation’s eventual passage through Congress.
How we got it done can’t be considered a model for the new brand of
politics I’d promised on the campaign trail. It was old-school. Once the House
vote made clear that a broadly bipartisan bill wasn’t in the cards, our focus
narrowed to securing 61 Senate votes—61 because no Republican senator could
afford to be tagged as the sole vote that put Obama’s bill over the top. In the
radioactive atmosphere McConnell had orchestrated, the only Republicans even
willing to consider supporting us were three self-identified moderates from states
in which I’d won handily: Susan Collins and Olympia Snowe of Maine and Arlen
Specter of Pennsylvania. Those three, along with Senator Ben Nelson of
LOOKING BACK, IT’S

Nebraska—the unofficial spokesman for the half dozen Democrats from
conservative states whose priority on every controversial issue was to position
themselves somewhere, anywhere, to the right of Harry Reid and Nancy Pelosi,
thereby winning the prized label of “centrist” from Washington pundits—became
the gatekeepers through which the Recovery Act had to pass. And none of these
four senators were shy about charging a hefty toll.
Specter, who had already battled two bouts of cancer, insisted that $10 billion
of the Recovery Act go to the National Institutes of Health. Collins demanded
the bill be stripped of dollars for school construction and that it include an “AMT
patch”—a tax provision that prevented upper-middle-class Americans from
paying a higher tax bill. Nelson wanted extra Medicaid money for rural states.
Even as their priorities added billions, the group insisted that the overall bill had
to come in under $800 billion, because any figure higher than that just seemed
“too much.”
As far as we could tell, there was no economic logic to any of this, just
political positioning and a classic squeeze play by politicians who knew they had
leverage. But this truth went largely unnoticed; as far as the Washington press
corps was concerned, the mere fact that the four senators were working in
“bipartisan” fashion signified Solomonic wisdom and reason. Meanwhile, liberal
Dems, particularly in the House, were furious with me for letting a “Gang of
Four” effectively determine the final contents of the bill. Some went so far as to
suggest that I barnstorm against Snowe, Collins, Specter, and Nelson in their
home states until they relinquished their “ransom” demands. I told them this
wasn’t going to happen, having calculated (with concurrence from Joe, Rahm,
Phil, Harry, and Nancy) that strong-arming tactics would likely backfire—and
also shut the door on getting the quartet’s cooperation on any other bill I might
try to pass in the future.
Anyway, the clock was ticking; or, as Axe later described it, the house was
burning and those four senators had the only fire hose. After a week of
negotiations (and plenty of cajoling, pestering, and hand-holding of the senators
by me, Rahm, and especially Joe), an agreement was reached. The Gang of Four
mostly got what they wanted. In return, we got their votes, while retaining
almost 90 percent of the stimulus measures we’d originally proposed. Other than
the votes of Collins, Snowe, and Specter, the modified, 1,073-page bill passed
both the House and the Senate strictly along party lines. And less than a month
after I took office, the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act was ready for
me to sign into law.

—
took place before a small crowd at the Denver
Museum of Nature and Science. We had asked the CEO of an employee-owned
solar energy company to introduce me; and as I listened to him describe what the
Recovery Act would mean to his business—the layoffs averted, the new workers
he’d hire, the green economy he hoped to promote—I did my best to savor the
moment.
By any conventional yardstick, I was about to sign historic legislation: a
recovery effort comparable in size to FDR’s New Deal. The stimulus package
wouldn’t just boost aggregate demand. It would help millions weather the
economic storm, extending unemployment insurance for the jobless, food
assistance for the hungry, and medical care for those whose lives had been
upended; supply the broadest onetime tax cut for middle-class and working-poor
families since Reagan; and provide the nation’s infrastructure and transportation
systems the biggest infusion of new spending since the Eisenhower
administration.
That’s not all. Without losing our focus on short-term stimulus and job
creation, the Recovery Act would also put a massive down payment on campaign
commitments I’d made to modernize the economy. It promised to transform the
energy sector, with an unprecedented investment in clean energy development
and efficiency programs. It would finance one of the largest and most ambitious
education reform agendas in a generation. It would spur on the transition to
electronic medical records, which had the potential to revolutionize America’s
healthcare system; and it would extend broadband access to classrooms and rural
areas that had been previously shut out of the information superhighway.
Any one of these items, if passed as a stand-alone bill, would qualify as a
major achievement for a presidential administration. Taken together, they might
represent the successful work of an entire first term.
Still, after I toured the solar panels on the museum’s rooftop, stepped up to
the podium, and thanked the vice president and my team for making it all happen
under extreme pressure; after I expressed my appreciation for those in Congress
who’d helped get the bill over the finish line; after I used my multiple pens to
sign the Recovery Act into law, shook everybody’s hand, and gave a few
interviews—after all that, as I finally found myself alone in the back of the Beast,
THE

SIGNING

CEREMONY

the main emotion I felt was not triumph but deep relief.
Or, more accurately, relief with a heavy dose of foreboding.
If it was true that we had gotten a couple of years’ worth of work done in a
month, we had also spent down a couple of years’ worth of political capital just as
fast. It was hard to deny, for example, that McConnell and Boehner had
clobbered us on the messaging front. Their relentless attacks continued to shape
coverage of the Recovery Act, with the press trumpeting every spurious
accusation of waste and malfeasance. Some pundits embraced the GOP-driven
narratives that I had failed to reach out enough to Republicans in shaping the bill,
thereby breaking my promise to govern in a bipartisan fashion. Others suggested
that our agreement with Collins, Nelson, Snowe, and Specter represented cynical
Washington horse-trading rather than “change we can believe in.”
Public support for the Recovery Act had grown over the weeks it had taken
to pass the bill. But soon enough, the noise would have an impact, reversing that
trend. Meanwhile, a decent portion of my own Democratic base—still flush with
election-night hubris and agitated by Republican unwillingness to roll over and
play dead—seemed less content with everything we’d managed to get into the
Recovery Act than mad about the much smaller number of things we’d had to
give up. Liberal commentators insisted that if I had shown more spine in resisting
the Gang of Four’s demands, the stimulus would have been bigger. (This despite
the fact that it was twice as big as what many of these commentators had been
calling for just a few weeks earlier.) Women’s groups were unhappy about the
contraception provisions that had been removed. Transportation groups
complained that the increase in mass transit dollars wasn’t all they had sought.
Environmentalists seemed to be spending more time objecting to the small
fraction of funding that went to clean coal projects than celebrating the Recovery
Act’s massive investment in renewable energy.
Between Republican attacks and Democratic complaints, I was reminded of
the Yeats poem “The Second Coming”: My supporters lacked all conviction,
while my opponents were full of passionate intensity.
None of this would have worried me if passing the Recovery Act was all we
needed to do to get the economy to start working again. I was confident that we
could effectively implement the legislation and prove our critics wrong. I knew
that Democratic voters would stick with me for the long haul, and my own poll
numbers with the general public remained high.
The problem was that we still had at least three or four more big moves to

make in order to end the crisis, each one just as urgent, each one just as
controversial, each one just as hard to pull off. It was as if, having ascended the
face of a big mountain, I now found myself looking out over a series of
successively more perilous peaks—while realizing that I had twisted an ankle, bad
weather was coming, and I’d used up half my supplies.
I didn’t share these feelings with anyone on my team; they were frazzled
enough as it was. Suck it up, I told myself. Tighten your laces. Cut your rations.
Keep moving.