
O

in Iowa made news across the country.
The media used words like “stunning” and “seismic” to describe it, noting that
the results were especially devastating for Hillary, who finished third. Both Chris
Dodd and Joe Biden promptly dropped out of the race. Elected officials who’d
stayed cautiously on the sidelines were now calling, ready to endorse. Pundits
declared me the new Democratic front-runner, suggesting that the high level of
voter engagement in Iowa signaled a broader appetite for change in America.
Having spent the previous year as David, I was suddenly cast as Goliath—and
as happy as I was about our victory, the new role felt awkward. For a year, my
team and I had avoided getting too high or too low, ignoring both the initial
hype surrounding my candidacy and the subsequent reports of its imminent
demise. With only five days between Iowa and the New Hampshire primary, it
took everything we had to tamp down expectations. Axe considered the gushing
stories and TV images of me before adoring crowds (“Obama the icon,” he
complained) especially unhelpful in a state like New Hampshire, where the
electorate—many of them independents who liked to decide at the last minute
between voting in the Democratic or Republican primary—had a reputation for
being contrarian.
Still, it was hard not to feel like we were in the driver’s seat. Our organizers
in New Hampshire were just as tenacious and our volunteers just as spirited as
those in Iowa; our rallies drew enthusiastic crowds, with lines to get in that
would wind through parking lots and stretch around the block. Then, in the span
of forty-eight hours, the contest took a couple of unexpected turns.
The first happened during the lone debate before the primary when, midway
through, the moderator asked Hillary how she felt when people said she was not
“likable.”
Now, this was the type of question that drove me nuts on several levels. It
was trivial. It was unanswerable—what’s a person supposed to say to something
UR EIGHT-POINT MARGIN OF VICTORY

like that? And it was indicative of a double standard that Hillary specifically and
women politicians in general had to put up with, in which they were expected to
be “nice” in ways that were never deemed relevant to their male counterparts.
Despite the fact that Hillary was handling the question just fine (“Well, that
hurts my feelings,” she said, laughing, “but I’ll try to go on”), I decided to
interject.
“You’re likable enough, Hillary,” I said, deadpan.
I assumed the audience understood my intentions—to make an overture to
my opponent while indicating scorn for the question. But whether because of
bad delivery, clumsy phrasing, or spin by the Clinton communications team, a
story line emerged—that I had been patronizing toward Hillary, dismissive, even,
yet another boorish male putting down his female rival.
In other words, the opposite of what I had meant.
Nobody on our team got too exercised about my remark, understanding that
any attempt to clarify it would only fuel the fire. But no sooner had the story
begun to die down than the media exploded yet again, this time over how
Hillary was being perceived following a meeting she’d had with a group of
undecided voters in New Hampshire, most of them women. Fielding an
empathetic question about how she was managing the stresses of the race, Hillary
had momentarily choked up, describing how personally and passionately invested
she was—how she didn’t want to see the country move backward and how she’d
devoted her life to public service “against some pretty difficult odds.”
It was a rare and genuine show of emotion on Hillary’s part, one that ran
counter to her steely, controlled image, enough so that it made headlines and sent
the cable news pundits into orbit. Some interpreted the moment as compelling
and authentic, a new point of human connection between Hillary and the public.
Others deemed it either a manufactured bit of emotion or a sign of weakness that
threatened to damage her candidacy. Running beneath it all, of course, was the
fact that Hillary quite possibly could become the nation’s first female president
and—just as mine did with race—her candidacy surfaced all sorts of stereotypes
about gender and how we expected our leaders to look and behave.
The frenzy around whether Hillary was trending up or down continued right
into primary day in New Hampshire. My team took comfort in the fact that we
had a big cushion: Polls showed us with a ten-point lead. So when the midday
rally we’d scheduled at a local college drew a sparse crowd, my speech
interrupted by a fainting student and what seemed like an interminable response

time by the medics, I didn’t take it as a bad omen.
It wasn’t until that evening, after the polls had closed, that I knew we had a
problem. As Michelle and I were in our hotel room getting ready for what we
expected to be a victory celebration, I heard a knock and opened the door to find
Plouffe, Axe, and Gibbs standing sheepishly in the hall, looking like teenagers
who had just crashed their dad’s car into a tree.
“We’re going to lose,” Plouffe said.
They began offering various theories on what had gone wrong. It was
possible that independents who supported us over Hillary had decided to vote en
masse in the Republican primary to help John McCain, figuring that we had our
race well in hand. Undecided women may have swung sharply in Hillary’s
direction during the campaign’s final days. Or maybe it was the fact that when
the Clinton team attacked us on TV and in campaign mailings, we hadn’t done
enough to highlight their negative tactics, allowing the punches to land.
The theories all sounded plausible. But for the moment, the whys didn’t
matter.
“Looks like winning this thing’s going to take a while,” I said with a rueful
smile. “Right now, let’s figure out how to cauterize the wound.”
No hangdog looks, I told them; our body language had to communicate to
everyone—the press, donors, and most of all our supporters—that setbacks were
par for the course. I reached out to our distraught New Hampshire team to tell
them how proud I was of their efforts. Then there was the matter of what to say
to the seventeen hundred or so people who had gathered in a Nashua school gym
in anticipation of victory. Fortunately I had already worked with Favs earlier in
the week to tone down any triumphalist tones in the speech, asking him instead
to emphasize the hard work that lay ahead. I now got him on the phone to
instruct that—other than a tip of the hat to Hillary—we barely change the text.
The speech I gave to our supporters that evening would end up being one of
the most important of our campaign, not just as a rallying cry for the
disheartened, but as a useful reminder of what we believed. “We know the battle
ahead will be long,” I said, “but always remember that no matter what obstacles
stand in our way, nothing can stand in the way of the power of millions of voices
calling for change.” I said that we lived in a country whose history was all but
built on hope, by people—pioneers, abolitionists, suffragists, immigrants, civil
rights workers—who’d been undeterred by seemingly impossible odds.
“When we’ve been told we’re not ready,” I said, “or that we shouldn’t try, or

that we can’t, generations of Americans have responded with a simple creed that
sums up the spirit of a people: Yes we can.” The crowd began to chant the phrase
like a drumbeat, and for perhaps the first time since Axe had suggested it as a
slogan for my Senate campaign, I fully believed the power of those three words.
—
following our loss in New Hampshire was predictably
tough, the overall message being that order had been restored and Hillary was
back on top. But a funny thing happened inside our campaign. Devastated as they
were by the loss, our staff grew more unified and also more determined. Instead
of a drop-off in volunteers, our offices reported a surge of walk-ins across the
country. Our online contributions—particularly from new small-dollar donors—
spiked. John Kerry, who’d previously been noncommittal, came out with an
enthusiastic endorsement for me. This was followed by announcements of
support from Governor Janet Napolitano of Arizona, Senator Claire McCaskill of
Missouri, and Governor Kathleen Sebelius of Kansas, all hailing from states that
leaned Republican and helping to send a message that despite the setback, we
were strong and moving forward, our hopes intact.
All this was gratifying, and it confirmed my instinct that losing New
Hampshire wasn’t the disaster commentators thought it might be. If Iowa had
shown me to be a real contender, and not simply a novelty act, the rush to anoint
me had been artificial and premature. In that sense, the good people of New
Hampshire had done me a favor by slowing down the process. Running for
president is supposed to be hard, I told a group of supporters the next day,
because being president is hard. Delivering change is hard. We were going to
have to earn this thing, and that meant getting back to work.
And that’s what we did. Nevada’s caucus came on January 19, just a week and
a half after New Hampshire, and we weren’t surprised when we lost the raw vote
to Hillary; polls there had shown us to be well behind her throughout the year.
But in presidential primaries, what matters is not so much the number of
individual votes you get but rather how many pledged convention delegates you
win, with delegates apportioned based on a series of arcane rules unique to each
state. Thanks to our organization’s strength in rural Nevada, where we’d
campaigned hard (Elko, a town that looked like a western movie set, complete
with tumbleweeds and a saloon, was one of my all-time favorite stops), our more
even distribution of votes across the state resulted in us winning thirteen delegates
THE NEWS COVERAGE

to Hillary’s twelve. Improbably enough, we were able to emerge from Nevada
claiming a draw and entered the next phase of the campaign—the South Carolina
primary and the behemoth, twenty-two-state Super Tuesday—with at least a
fighting chance.
My senior team would later say it was my optimism that carried them
through the loss in New Hampshire. I don’t know if that’s actually the case, since
my staff and supporters operated with admirable resilience and consistency
throughout the campaign, independent of anything I did. At most, I had simply
returned the favor, given all that others had done to drag me across the Iowa
finish line. What is probably true is that New Hampshire showed my team and
supporters a quality I had learned about myself, something that proved useful not
just during the course of the campaign but for the eight years that followed: I
often felt steadiest when things were going to hell. Iowa may have convinced me
and my team that I could end up being president. But it was the New Hampshire
loss that made us confident I’d be up to the job.
I’ve often been asked about this personality trait—my ability to maintain
composure in the middle of crisis. Sometimes I’ll say that it’s just a matter of
temperament, or a consequence of being raised in Hawaii, since it’s hard to get
stressed when it’s eighty degrees and sunny and you’re five minutes from the
beach. If I’m talking to a group of young people, I’ll describe how over time I’ve
trained myself to take the long view, about how important it is to stay focused on
your goals rather than getting hung up on the daily ups and downs.
There’s truth in all of this. But there’s another factor at play. In tough spots, I
tend to channel my grandmother.
She was eighty-five years old then, the last survivor of the trio who raised me.
Her health was declining; cancer had spread through a body already ravaged by
osteoporosis and a lifetime of bad habits. But her mind was still sharp, and
because she was no longer able to fly and I’d missed our annual Christmas trip to
Hawaii due to the demands of the campaign, I had taken to calling her every few
weeks just to check in.
I placed such a call after New Hampshire. As usual, the conversation didn’t
last long; Toot considered long-distance calls an extravagance. She shared news
from the Islands, and I told her about her great-granddaughters and their latest
mischief. My sister Maya, who lived in Hawaii, reported that Toot watched every
twist and turn of the campaign on cable TV, but she never brought it up with
me. In the wake of my loss, she had just one piece of advice.

“You need to eat something, Bar. You look too skinny.”
This was characteristic of Madelyn Payne Dunham, born in Peru, Kansas, in
1922. She was a child of the Depression, the daughter of a schoolteacher and a
bookkeeper at a small oil refinery, themselves the children of farmers and
homesteaders. These were sensible people who worked hard, went to church,
paid their bills, and remained suspicious of bombast, public displays of emotion,
or foolishness of any sort.
In her youth, my grandmother had pushed against these small-town
constraints, most notably by marrying my grandfather Stanley Armour Dunham,
who was prone to all the questionable qualities mentioned above. Together
they’d had their fair share of adventures, during the war and after, but by the time
I was born, all that remained of Toot’s rebellious streak was her smoking,
drinking, and taste for lurid thrillers. At the Bank of Hawaii, Toot had managed
to rise from an entry-level clerical position to become one of its first female vice
presidents, and by all accounts she’d been excellent at her job. For twenty-five
years, there would be no fuss, no mistakes, and no complaints, even when she
saw younger men that she’d trained promoted ahead of her.
After Toot retired, I sometimes ran into people back in Hawaii who told
stories of how she’d helped them—a man insisting he’d have lost his company
without her intervention, or a woman recalling how Toot waived an arcane bank
policy requiring an estranged husband’s signature to secure a loan for the real
estate agency she was starting. If you asked Toot about any of these things,
though, she’d maintain that she’d started working at the bank not because of any
particular passion for finance or wish to help others, but because our family
needed the money, and that’s what had been available to her.
“Sometimes,” she told me, “you just do what needs to be done.”
It wasn’t until I was a teenager that I understood just how far my
grandmother’s life had strayed from the path she’d once imagined; how much of
herself she had sacrificed, first for her husband, then for her daughter, then for her
grandchildren. It struck me as quietly tragic, how cramped her world seemed.
And yet even then it wasn’t lost on me that it was because of Toot’s
willingness to carry the load in front of her—waking before sunup every day to
stuff herself into a business suit and heels and take the bus to her downtown
office, working all day on escrow documents before coming home too tired to do
much else—that she and Gramps were able to retire comfortably, travel, and
maintain their independence. The stability she provided allowed my mother to

pursue a career she enjoyed, despite its sporadic pay and overseas postings, and
was why Maya and I had been able to go to a private school and fancy colleges.
Toot showed me how to balance a checkbook and resist buying stuff I didn’t
need. She was the reason why, even in my most revolutionary moments as a
young man, I could admire a well-run business and read the financial pages, and
why I felt compelled to disregard overly broad claims about the need to tear
things up and remake society from whole cloth. She taught me the value of
working hard and doing your best even when the work was unpleasant, and
about fulfilling your responsibilities even when doing so was inconvenient. She
taught me to marry passion with reason, to not get overly excited when life was
going well, and to not get too down when it went badly.
All this was instilled in me by an elderly, plainspoken white lady from Kansas.
It was her perspective that often came to mind when I was campaigning, and her
worldview that I sensed in many of the voters I encountered, whether in rural
Iowa or in a Black neighborhood in Chicago, that same quiet pride in sacrifices
made for children and grandchildren, the same lack of pretension, the same
modesty of expectations.
And because Toot possessed both the remarkable strengths and stubborn
limitations of her upbringing—because she loved me fiercely and would literally
do anything to help me, and yet never fully shed the cautious conservatism that
had made her quietly agonize the first time my mother brought my father, a
Black man, home for dinner—she also taught me the tangled, multifaceted truth
of race relations in our country.
—
a Black America and a white America and a Latino America and
an Asian America. There’s the United States of America.”
It was probably the line most remembered from my 2004 convention speech.
I’d intended it more as a statement of aspiration than a description of reality, but
it was an aspiration I believed in and a reality I strove for. The idea that our
common humanity mattered more than our differences was stitched into my
DNA. It also described what I felt was a practical view of politics: In a
democracy, you needed a majority to make big change, and in America that
meant building coalitions across racial and ethnic lines.
Certainly that had been true for me in Iowa, where African Americans
“THERE IS NOT

constituted less than 3 percent of the population. Day to day, our campaign didn’t
consider this an obstacle, just a fact of life. Our organizers encountered pockets of
racial animosity, at times voiced openly even by potential supporters (“Yeah, I’m
thinking about voting for the nigger” was heard more than once). Every so often,
though, the hostility went beyond a rude remark or a slammed door. One of our
most beloved supporters had woken up the day before Christmas to find her yard
strewn with torn-up OBAMA signs, her house vandalized and spray-painted with
racial epithets. Obtuseness, rather than meanness, was more common, with our
volunteers fielding the kinds of remarks that are familiar to any Black person
who’s spent time in a largely white setting, a variation on the theme of “I don’t
think of him as being Black, really….I mean, he’s so intelligent.”
For the most part, though, I found white voters across Iowa to be much like
those I had courted just a few years earlier in downstate Illinois—friendly,
thoughtful, and open to my candidacy, concerned less about my skin color or
even my Muslim-sounding name than they were about my youth and lack of
experience, my plans to create jobs or end the war in Iraq.
As far as my political advisors were concerned, our job was to keep it that
way. It wasn’t that we ducked racial issues. Our website made my position clear
on hot-button topics like immigration reform and civil rights. If asked in a town
hall, I wouldn’t hesitate to explain the realities of racial profiling or job
discrimination to a rural, all-white audience. Inside the campaign, Plouffe and
Axe listened to the concerns of Black and Latino team members, whether
someone wanted to tweak a television ad (“Can we include at least one Black
face other than Barack’s?” Valerie gently asked at one point) or was reminding us
to work harder to recruit more senior staff of color. (On this score, at least, the
world of experienced, high-level political operatives wasn’t so different from that
of other professions, in that young people of color consistently had less access to
mentors and networks—and couldn’t afford to accept the unpaid internships that
might put them on the fast track to run national campaigns. This was one thing I
was determined to help change.) But Plouffe, Axe, and Gibbs made no apologies
for de-emphasizing any topic that might be labeled a racial grievance, or split the
electorate along racial lines, or do anything that would box me in as “the Black
candidate.” To them, the immediate formula for racial progress was simple—we
needed to win. And this meant gaining support not just from liberal white college
kids but also from voters for whom the image of me in the White House
involved a big psychological leap.
“Trust me,” Gibbs would wisecrack, “whatever else they know about you,

people have noticed that you don’t look like the first forty-two presidents.”
Meanwhile, I’d felt no shortage of love from African Americans since my
election to the U.S. Senate. Local NAACP chapters got in touch, wanting to give
me awards. My photo regularly showed up in the pages of Ebony and Jet. Every
Black woman of a certain age told me I reminded her of her son. And the love
for Michelle was at a whole other level. With her professional credentials, sisterfriend demeanor, and no-nonsense devotion to motherhood, she seemed to distill
what so many Black families worked toward and hoped for their children.
Despite all this, Black attitudes toward my candidacy were complicated—
driven in no small part by fear. Nothing in Black people’s experience told them
that it might be possible for one of their own to win a major party nomination,
much less the presidency of the United States. In the minds of many, what
Michelle and I had accomplished was already something of a miracle. To aspire
beyond that seemed foolish, a flight too close to the sun.
“I’m telling you, man,” Marty Nesbitt said to me shortly after I announced
my candidacy, “my mother worries about you the same way she used to worry
about me.” A successful entrepreneur, a former high school football star with the
good looks of a young Jackie Robinson, married to a brilliant doctor and with
five wonderful kids, Marty seemed the embodiment of the American Dream.
He’d been raised by a single mom who worked as a nurse in Columbus, Ohio; it
was only as a result of a special program designed to get more young people of
color into prep schools and on to college that Marty had climbed the ladder out
of his neighborhood, a place where most Black men could hope for little more
than a lifetime on the assembly line. But when after college he decided to leave a
stable job at General Motors for a riskier venture into real estate investments, his
mother had fretted, afraid he might lose everything by reaching too far.
“She thought I was crazy to give up that kind of security,” Marty told me.
“So imagine how my mom and her friends are feeling about you right now. Not
just running for president, but actually believing you can be president!”
This mindset wasn’t restricted to the working class. Valerie’s mother—whose
family had epitomized the Black professional elite of the forties and fifties—was
the wife of a doctor and one of the guiding lights in the early childhood
education movement. But she expressed the same skepticism toward my
campaign at the start.
“She wants to protect you,” Valerie said.
“From what?” I asked.

“From disappointment,” she said, leaving unspoken her mother’s more
specific fear that I might get myself killed.
We heard it again and again, especially during the first months of the
campaign—a protective pessimism, a sense in the Black community that Hillary
was a safer choice. With national figures like Jesse Jackson, Jr. (and a more
grudging Jesse Sr.), behind us, we were able to get a good number of early
endorsements from African American leaders, especially from younger ones. But
many more chose to wait and see how I fared, and other Black politicians,
businesspeople, and pastors—whether out of genuine loyalty toward the Clintons
or an eagerness to back the prohibitive favorite—came out for Hillary before I’d
even had a chance to make my case.
“The country’s not ready yet,” one congressman told me, “and the Clintons
have a long memory.”
Meanwhile, there were activists and intellectuals who supported me but
viewed my campaign in purely symbolic terms, akin to earlier races mounted by
Shirley Chisholm, Jesse Jackson, and Al Sharpton, a useful if transitory platform
from which to raise a prophetic voice against racial injustice. Unconvinced that
victory was possible, they expected me to take the most uncompromising
positions on everything from affirmative action to reparations and were
continually on alert for any hints that I might be spending too much time and
energy courting middle-of-the-road, less progressive white folks.
“Don’t be one of those so-called leaders who take the Black vote for
granted,” a supporter told me. I was sensitive to the criticism, for it wasn’t
entirely wrong. A lot of Democratic politicians did take Black voters for granted
—at least since 1968, when Richard Nixon had determined that a politics of
white racial resentment was the surest path to Republican victory, and thereby
left Black voters with nowhere else to go. It was not only white Democrats who
made this calculation. There wasn’t a Black elected official who relied on white
votes to stay in office who wasn’t aware of what Axe, Plouffe, and Gibbs were at
least implicitly warning against—that too much focus on civil rights, police
misconduct, or other issues considered specific to Black people risked triggering
suspicion, if not a backlash, from the broader electorate. You might decide to
speak up anyway, as a matter of conscience, but you understood there’d be a
price—that Blacks could practice the standard special-interest politics of farmers,
gun enthusiasts, or other ethnic groups only at their own peril.
Of course, that was part of the reason I was running, wasn’t it—to help us

break free of such constraints? To reimagine what was possible? I wanted to be
neither a supplicant, always on the periphery of power and seeking favor from
liberal benefactors, nor a permanent protester, full of righteous anger as we waited
for white America to expiate its guilt. Both paths were well trodden; both, at
some fundamental level, were born of despair.
No, the point was to win. I wanted to prove to Blacks, to whites—to
Americans of all colors—that we could transcend the old logic, that we could
rally a working majority around a progressive agenda, that we could place issues
like inequality or lack of educational opportunity at the very center of the
national debate and then actually deliver the goods.
I knew that in order to accomplish that, I needed to use language that spoke
to all Americans and propose policies that touched everyone—a topflight
education for every child, quality healthcare for every American. I needed to
embrace white people as allies rather than impediments to change, and to couch
the African American struggle in terms of a broader struggle for a fair, just, and
generous society.
I understood the risks. I heard the muted criticisms that came my way from
not just rivals but friends. How an emphasis on universal programs often meant
benefits were less directly targeted to those most in need. How appealing to
common interests discounted the continuing effects of discrimination and allowed
whites to avoid taking the full measure of the legacy of slavery, Jim Crow, and
their own racial attitudes. How this left Black people with a psychic burden,
expected as they were to constantly swallow legitimate anger and frustration in
the name of some far-off ideal.
It was a lot to ask of Black folks, requiring a mixture of optimism and
strategic patience. As I tried to lead voters and my own campaign through this
uncharted territory, I was constantly reminded that this wasn’t an abstract
exercise. I was bound to specific communities of flesh and blood, filled with men
and women who had their own imperatives and their own personal histories—
including a pastor who seemed to embody all the contradictory impulses I was
attempting to corral.
—
Reverend Jeremiah A. Wright, Jr., during my organizing days. His
church, Trinity United Church of Christ, was one of the largest in Chicago. The
I FIRST MET

son of a Baptist minister and a school administrator from Philadelphia, he had
grown up steeped in Black church tradition while also attending the most
prestigious—and largely white—schools in the city. Rather than go straight into
the ministry, he left college to join the Marines and then the U.S. Navy, training
as a cardiopulmonary technician and serving as part of the medical team caring for
Lyndon Johnson after his 1966 surgery. In 1967, he enrolled at Howard
University and, like many Blacks during those turbulent years, soaked up the
forceful rhetoric of Black Power, an interest in all things African, and leftist
critiques of the American social order. By the time he graduated from seminary,
he’d also absorbed the Black liberation theology of James Cone—a view of
Christianity that asserted the centrality of the Black experience, not because of
any inherent racial superiority but because, Cone claimed, God sees the world
through the eyes of those most oppressed.
That Reverend Wright came to pastor in an overwhelmingly white
denomination gives some indication of his practical side; not only did the United
Church of Christ value serious scholarship—something he emphasized every
Sunday—but it had the money and infrastructure to help him build his
congregation. What was once a staid church with fewer than one hundred
members grew to six thousand during his tenure, a rollicking, bustling place
containing the multitudes that make up Black Chicago: bankers and former gang
members, kente robes and Brooks Brothers suits, a choir that could rock classic
gospel and the “Hallelujah Chorus” in a single service. His sermons were full of
pop references, slang, humor, and genuine religious insight that not only
prompted cheers and shouts from his members but burnished his reputation as
one of the best preachers in the country.
There were times when I found Reverend Wright’s sermons a little over the
top. In the middle of a scholarly explication of the Book of Matthew or Luke, he
might insert a scathing critique of America’s drug war, American militarism,
capitalist greed, or the intractability of American racism, rants that were usually
grounded in fact but bereft of context. Often, they sounded dated, as if he were
channeling a college teach-in from 1968 rather than leading a prosperous
congregation that included police commanders, celebrities, wealthy
businesspeople, and the Chicago school superintendent. And every so often, what
he said was just wrong, edging close to the conspiracy theories one heard on latenight public-access stations or in the barbershop down the street. It was as if this
erudite, middle-aged, light-skinned Black man were straining for street cred,
trying to “keep it real.” Or maybe he just recognized—both within his

congregation and within himself—the periodic need to let loose, to release pentup anger from a lifetime of struggle in the face of chronic racism, reason and logic
be damned.
All this I knew. And yet for me, especially when I was a young man still
sorting out my beliefs and my place inside Chicago’s Black community, the good
in Reverend Wright more than outweighed his flaws, just as my admiration for
the congregation and its ministries outweighed my broader skepticism toward
organized religion. Michelle and I eventually joined Trinity as members, though
we proved to be spotty churchgoers. Like me, Michelle hadn’t been raised in a
particularly religious household, and what started as once-a-month attendance
became less frequent over time. When we did go, though, it was meaningful, and
as my political career took off, I made a point of inviting Reverend Wright to do
an invocation or a benediction at key events.
This had been the plan for the day I announced my candidacy. Reverend
Wright was to lead the assembled crowd in a prayer before I appeared onstage.
On my way down to Springfield a day ahead of the event, though, I had received
an urgent call from Axe, asking if I’d seen a Rolling Stone article that had just been
published about my candidacy. Evidently the reporter had sat in on a recent
service at Trinity, absorbing a fiery sermon from Reverend Wright and quoting it
in his story.
“He’s quoted saying…hold on, let me read this: ‘We believe in white
supremacy and black inferiority and believe it more than we believe in God.’ ”
“Seriously?”
“I think it’s fair to say that if he gives the invocation tomorrow, he’ll be the
lead story…at least on Fox News.”
The article itself offered a generally fair view of Jeremiah Wright and Trinity’s
ministry, and I wasn’t surprised that my pastor would point out the gap between
America’s professed Christian ideals and its brutal racial history. Still, the language
he’d used was more incendiary than anything I’d heard before, and although a
part of me was frustrated with the constant need to soften for white folks’ benefit
the blunt truths about race in this country, as a matter of practical politics I knew
Axe was right.
That afternoon, I called Reverend Wright and asked if he’d be willing to skip
the public invocation and instead offer Michelle and me a private prayer before
my speech. I could tell he was hurt, but ultimately—and to my team’s great relief
—he went along with the new plan.

For me the episode churned up all the doubts I still had about running for the
highest office in the land. It was one thing to have integrated my own life—to
learn over time how to move seamlessly between Black and white circles, to
serve as translator and bridge among family, friends, acquaintances, and
colleagues, making connections across an ever-expanding orbit, until I felt I could
finally know the world of my grandparents and the world of a Reverend Wright
as a single, unified whole. But to explain those connections to millions of
strangers? To imagine that a presidential campaign, with all its noise and
distortions and simplifications, could somehow cut through hurt and fear and
suspicion that had been four hundred years in the making? The reality of
American race relations was too complicated to reduce to a sound bite. Hell, I
myself was too complicated, the contours of my life too messy and unfamiliar to
the average American, for me to honestly expect I could pull this thing off.
—
Rolling Stone article had come out earlier, foreshadowing problems
to come, I would have decided not to run. It’s hard to say. I do know that—in a
bit of irony, or perhaps providence—it was another pastor and close friend of
Reverend Wright’s, Dr. Otis Moss, Jr., who helped me push through my doubts.
Otis Moss was a veteran of the civil rights movement, a close friend and
associate of Dr. King’s, the pastor of one of the largest churches in Cleveland,
Ohio, and a former advisor to President Jimmy Carter. I didn’t know him well,
but after the article was published he called me one evening to offer support. He
had gotten wind of the difficulties with Jeremiah, he said, and heard those voices
within the Black community arguing that I wasn’t ready, or I was too radical, or
too mainstream, or not quite Black enough. He expected the path would only
get harder but urged me not to get discouraged.
“Every generation is limited by what it knows,” Dr. Moss told me. “Those of
us who were part of the movement, giants like Martin, lieutenants and foot
soldiers like me…we are the Moses generation. We marched, we sat in, we went
to jail, sometimes in defiance of our elders, but we were in fact building on what
they had done. We got us out of Egypt, you could say. But we could only travel
so far.
“You, Barack, are part of the Joshua generation. You and others like you are
responsible for the next leg of the journey. Folks like me can offer the wisdom of
our experience. Perhaps you can learn from some of our mistakes. But ultimately
MAYBE IF THE

it will be up to you, with God’s help, to build on what we’ve done, and lead our
people and this country out of the wilderness.”
It’s hard to overstate how these words fortified me, coming as they did almost
a year before our Iowa victory; what it meant to have someone so intimately
linked to the source of my earliest inspiration say that what I was trying to do was
worth it, that it wasn’t just an exercise in vanity or ambition but rather a part of
an unbroken chain of progress. More practically, it was thanks to the willingness
of Dr. Moss and other former colleagues of Dr. King’s—like Reverend C. T.
Vivian of Atlanta and Reverend Joseph Lowery of the Southern Christian
Leadership Conference—to lay their proverbial hands on me, vouching for me as
an extension of their historic work, that more Black leaders didn’t swing early
into Hillary’s camp.
Nowhere was this more evident than in March 2007, when I attended the
march across the Edmund Pettus Bridge in Selma, Alabama, that Congressman
John Lewis hosted each year. I’d long wanted to make the pilgrimage to the site
of Bloody Sunday, which in 1965 became a crucible of the battle for civil rights,
when Americans fully realized what was at stake. But my visit promised to be
complicated. The Clintons would be there, I was told; and before participants
gathered to cross the bridge, Hillary and I were scheduled to speak simultaneously
at dueling church services.
Not only that, but our host, John Lewis, had indicated that he was inclined to
endorse Hillary. John had become a good friend—he’d taken great pride in my
election to the Senate, rightly seeing it as part of his legacy—and I knew he was
tortured by the decision. As I listened to him explain his reasoning over the
phone, how long he had known the Clintons, how Bill’s administration had
supported many of his legislative priorities, I chose not to press him too hard. I
could imagine the pressure this kind and gentle man was under, and I also
recognized that, at a time when I was asking white voters to judge me on the
merits, a raw appeal to racial solidarity would feel like hypocrisy.
The Selma commemoration could have turned into an uncomfortable
political spectacle, but when I arrived, I immediately felt at ease. Perhaps it was
being in a place that had played such a large role in my imagination and the
trajectory of my life. Perhaps it was the response of ordinary people who’d
gathered to mark the occasion, shaking my hand or giving me a hug, some
sporting Hillary buttons but saying they were glad I was there. But mostly it was
the fact that a group of respected elders had my back. When I entered the historic

Brown Chapel AME Church for the service, I learned that Reverend Lowery
had asked to say a few words before I was introduced. He was well into his
eighties by then but had lost none of his wit and charisma.
“Let me tell you,” he began, “some crazy things are happening out there.
People say certain things ain’t happening, but who can tell? Who can tell?”
“Preach now, Reverend,” someone shouted from the audience.
“You know, recently I went to the doctor and he said my cholesterol was a
little high. But then he explained to me that there’s two kinds of cholesterol.
There’s the bad cholesterol, and then there’s the good cholesterol. Having good
cholesterol—that’s all right. And that got me thinking how there’s a lot of things
like that. I mean, when we started the movement, a lot of folks thought we were
crazy. Ain’t that right, C.T.?” Reverend Lowery nodded in the direction of
Reverend Vivian, who was sitting onstage. “That there’s another crazy Negro…
and he’ll tell you that everybody in the movement was a little crazy…”
The crowd laughed heartily.
“But like cholesterol,” he continued, “there’s good crazy and bad crazy, see?
Harriet Tubman with the Underground Railroad, she was as crazy as she could
be! And Paul, when he preached to Agrippa, Agrippa said, ‘Paul, you crazy’…but
it was a good crazy.”
The crowd began to clap and cheer as Reverend Lowery brought it home.
“And I say to you today that we need more folks in this country who are a
good crazy….You can’t tell what will happen when you get folks with some
good crazy…going to the polls to vote!”
The churchgoers rose to their feet, and the pastors sitting next to me onstage
chortled and clapped me on the back; and by the time I got up to speak, taking
the words Dr. Moss had offered me as a point of departure—about the legacy of
the Moses generation and how it had made my life possible, about the
responsibility of the Joshua generation to take the next steps required for justice
in this nation and around the world, not just for Black people but for all those
who had been dispossessed—the church was in full revival mode.
Outside, after the service was done, I saw another colleague of Dr. King’s,
Reverend Fred Shuttlesworth, a legendary and fearless freedom fighter who had
survived the Klan bombing his house and a white mob beating him with clubs,
chains, and brass knuckles, and stabbing his wife as they attempted to enroll their
two daughters in a previously all-white Birmingham school. He had recently
been treated for a brain tumor, leaving him frail, but he motioned me over to his

wheelchair to talk, and as the marchers gathered, I offered to push him across the
bridge.
“I’d like that just fine,” Reverend Shuttlesworth said.
And so we went, the morning sky a glorious blue, crossing the bridge over a
muddy brown river, voices rising sporadically in song and prayer. With each step,
I imagined how these now elderly men and women must have felt forty-some
years earlier, their young hearts beating furiously as they faced down a phalanx of
armed men on horseback. I was reminded of just how slight my burdens were in
comparison. The fact that they were still engaged in the fight and, despite
setbacks and sorrow, hadn’t succumbed to bitterness showed me that I had no
cause to be tired. I felt renewed in my conviction that I was where I was
supposed to be and doing what needed to be done, that Reverend Lowery might
be right in saying there was some kind of “good crazy” in the air.
—
as the campaign shifted to South Carolina during the second
and third weeks of January, I knew that our faith would again be tested. We
badly needed a win. On paper, the state looked good for us: African Americans
made up a large percentage of Democratic primary voters, and we had a great
mix of veteran politicians and young activists, both white and Black, in our
corner. But polls showed our support among white voters lagging, and we didn’t
know whether African American voters would turn out in the numbers we
needed. Our hope was to move toward Super Tuesday with a win that didn’t
break down strictly along racial lines. But if the Iowa effort had displayed the
possibilities of a more idealistic kind of politics, the campaign in South Carolina
ended up being decidedly different. It became a brawl, an exercise in old-style
politics, set against a landscape heavy with memories of a bitter, bloody racial
history.
Some of this was the result of the tight race, rising anxieties, and what seemed
to be a sense within the Clinton camp that a negative campaign worked to their
advantage. Their attacks, on the air and through surrogates, had taken on a
sharper tone. With voters from around the country increasingly paying attention,
all of us were aware of the stakes. Our one debate that week turned into an
absolute slugfest between me and Hillary, with John Edwards (whose campaign
was on its last legs and who would soon drop out) rendered a spectator as Hillary
and I went after each other like gladiators in the ring.
TEN MONTHS LATER,

Afterward, Hillary left the state to campaign elsewhere, but the intensity
hardly let up, the campaigning on their side now left to a feisty, energized, and
omnipresent William Jefferson Clinton.
I sympathized with the position Bill was in: Not only was his wife under
constant scrutiny and attack, but my promise to change Washington and
transcend partisan gridlock must have felt like a challenge to his own legacy. No
doubt I’d reinforced that perception when, in a Nevada interview, I said that
while I admired Bill Clinton, I didn’t think he’d transformed politics the way
Ronald Reagan had in the 1980s, when he’d managed to reframe the American
people’s relationship to government on behalf of conservative principles. After all
the obstructionism and sheer venom that Clinton had had to contend with
throughout his presidency, I could hardly fault him for wanting to knock a cocky
young newcomer down a peg or two.
Clinton clearly relished being back in the arena. A larger-than-life figure, he
traveled across the state offering astute observations and emanating folksy charm.
His attacks on me were for the most part well within bounds, the same points I’d
have made if I’d been in his shoes—that I lacked experience and that if I did
manage to win the presidency, Republicans in Congress would have me for
lunch.
Beyond that, though, lay the politics of race, something that Clinton had
navigated deftly in the past but proved trickier against a credible Black candidate.
When he’d suggested ahead of the New Hampshire primary that some of my
positions on the Iraq War were a “fairy tale,” there were Black folks who heard it
as a suggestion that the notion of me as president was a fairy tale, which led
Congressman Jim Clyburn, the majority whip—South Carolina’s most powerful
Black official and someone who until then had maintained a careful neutrality—
to publicly rebuke him. When Clinton told white audiences that Hillary “gets
you” in ways that her opponents did not, Gibbs—himself a son of the South—
heard echoes of Republican strategist Lee Atwater and dog-whistle politics and
had no qualms about deploying some of our supporters to say so.
Looking back, I don’t know that any of this was fair; Bill Clinton certainly
didn’t think so. But it was hard in South Carolina to distinguish what was true
from what was felt. All across the state, I was met with great warmth and
hospitality from Blacks and whites alike. In cities like Charleston, I experienced
the much-touted New South—cosmopolitan, diverse, and bustling with
commerce. Moreover, as someone who had made Chicago his home, I hardly

needed reminding that racial division wasn’t unique to the South.
Still, as I traveled through South Carolina making my case for the presidency,
racial attitudes seemed less coded, blunter—sometimes not hidden at all. How
was I to interpret the well-dressed white woman in a diner I visited, grimly
unwilling to shake my hand? How was I to understand the motives of those
hoisting signs outside one of our campaign events, sporting the Confederate flag
and NRA slogans, yelling about states’ rights and telling me to go home?
It wasn’t just shouted words or Confederate statues that evoked the legacy of
slavery and segregation. At the suggestion of Congressman Clyburn, I visited J. V.
Martin Junior High School, a largely Black public school in the rural town of
Dillon in the northeastern section of the state. Part of the building had been
constructed in 1896, just thirty years after the Civil War, and if repairs had been
made over the decades, you couldn’t tell. Crumbling walls. Busted plumbing.
Cracked windows. Dank, unlit halls. A coal furnace in the basement still used to
heat the building. Leaving the school, I alternated between feeling downcast and
freshly motivated: What message had generations of boys and girls received as
they arrived at this school each day except for the certainty that, to those in
power, they did not matter; that whatever was meant by the American Dream, it
wasn’t meant for them?
Moments like this helped me see the wearying effects of long-term
disenfranchisement, the jaded filter through which many Black South Carolinians
absorbed our campaign. I began to understand the true nature of my adversary. I
wasn’t running against Hillary Clinton or John Edwards or even the Republicans.
I was running against the implacable weight of the past; the inertia, fatalism, and
fear it produced.
Black ministers and power brokers who were accustomed to getting payments
to turn out voters complained about our emphasis on recruiting grassroots
volunteers instead. For them, politics was less about principles and more a simple
business proposition, the way things had always been done. While campaigning,
Michelle—whose great-great-grandfather had been born into slavery on a South
Carolina rice plantation—would hear well-meaning Black women suggesting that
losing an election might be better than losing a husband, the implication being
that if I was elected, I was sure to be shot.
Hope and change were a luxury, folks seemed to be telling us, exotic imports
that would wilt in the heat.

—
the eve of the primary, NBC released a poll that showed my
support among white South Carolinians had fallen to a paltry 10 percent. The
news set the pundits spinning. It was to be expected, they intoned; even high
African American turnout couldn’t make up for deep-seated white resistance to
any Black candidate, much less one named Barack Hussein Obama.
Axelrod, always in catastrophe mode, relayed this to me while scrolling
through his BlackBerry. He added, unhelpfully, that if we lost South Carolina,
our campaign would likely be over. Even more unhelpfully, he went on to say
that even if we eked out a win, the paucity of white support would lead both the
press and the Clintons to discount the victory and reasonably question my
viability in a general election.
Our entire team was on pins and needles on primary day, aware of all that
was on the line. But when evening finally arrived and the returns started rolling
in, the results exceeded our most optimistic projections. We beat Hillary by a
two-to-one margin, with nearly 80 percent of a massive Black turnout and 24
percent of the white vote. We even won by ten points among white voters under
forty. Given the gauntlet we’d run and the hits we’d taken since Iowa, we were
jubilant.
As I walked onstage in an auditorium in Columbia to give our victory speech,
I could feel the pulse of stomping feet and clapping hands. Several thousand
people had packed themselves into the venue, though under the glare of
television lights, I could see only the first few rows—college students mostly,
white and Black in equal measure, some with their arms interlocked or draped
over one another’s shoulders, their faces beaming with joy and purpose.
“Race doesn’t matter!” people were chanting. “Race doesn’t matter! Race
doesn’t matter!”
I spotted some of our young organizers and volunteers mixed in with the
crowd. Once again, they’d come through, despite the naysayers. They deserved a
victory lap, I thought to myself, a moment of pure elation. Which is why, even as
I quieted the crowd and dove into my speech, I didn’t have the heart to correct
those well-meaning chanters—to remind them that in the year 2008, with the
Confederate flag and all it stood for still hanging in front of a state capitol just a
few blocks away, race still mattered plenty, as much as they might want to believe
otherwise.
ON JANUARY 25,