IT’S IN THE NATURE OF

politics, and certainly the presidency, to go through rough
patches—times when, because of a boneheaded mistake, an unforeseen
circumstance, a sound but unpopular decision, or a failure to communicate, the
headlines turn sour and the public finds you wanting. Usually this lasts for a
couple of weeks, maybe a month, before the press loses interest in smacking you
around, either because you fixed the problem, or you expressed contrition, or
you chalked up a win, or something deemed more important pushes you off the
front page.
If the rough patch lasts long enough, though, you may find yourself in a
dreaded situation in which problems compound, then congeal into a broader
narrative about you and your presidency. The negative stories don’t let up, which
leads to a drop in your popularity. Your political adversaries, smelling blood in
the water, go after you harder, and allies aren’t as quick to defend you. The press
starts digging for additional problems inside your administration, to confirm the
impression that you’re in political trouble. Until—like the daredevils and fools of
old at Niagara Falls—you find yourself trapped in the proverbial barrel, tumbling
through the crashing waters, bruised and disoriented, no longer sure which way is
up, powerless to arrest your descent, waiting to hit bottom and hoping, without
evidence, that you’ll survive the impact.
For most of my second year in office, we were in the barrel.
We’d seen it coming, of course, especially after the Tea Party summer and the
ruckus surrounding the Affordable Care Act. My approval ratings, which had
held fairly steady during my first six months in office, ticked down throughout
the fall. Press coverage became more critical, on matters both significant (like my
decision to send more troops into Afghanistan) and strange (like the case of the
Salahis, a pair of Washington social climbers who found a way to crash a state
dinner and have their photo taken with me).
Nor had our troubles let up over the holidays. On Christmas Day, a young
T’S IN THE NATURE OF

Nigerian named Umar Farouk Abdulmutallab had boarded a Northwest Airlines
flight from Amsterdam to Detroit and tried to detonate explosive materials sewn
into his underwear. Tragedy had been averted only because the contraption
hadn’t worked; seeing smoke and flames coming from under the would-be
terrorist’s blanket, a passenger restrained him and flight attendants extinguished
the flames, allowing the plane to land safely. Having just arrived in Hawaii with
Michelle and the girls for a much-needed ten-day break, I spent most of the next
several days on the phone with my national security team and the FBI, trying to
determine who exactly Abdulmutallab was, whom he’d been working with, and
why both airport security and our terrorist watch list hadn’t kept him from
boarding a U.S.-bound plane.
What I failed to do in those first seventy-two hours, though, was follow my
initial instincts, which were to get on television, explain to the American people
what had happened, and assure them that it was safe to travel. My team had made
a sensible argument for waiting: It was important, they said, for the president to
have all the facts before making a statement to the public. And yet my job
involved more than just managing the government or getting the facts right. The
public also looked to the president to explain a difficult and often scary world.
Rather than coming off as prudent, my absence from the airwaves made me seem
unengaged, and soon we were taking incoming fire from across the political
spectrum, with less charitable commentators suggesting that I cared more about
my tropical vacation than I did about threats against the homeland. It didn’t help
that my usually unflappable secretary of homeland security, Janet Napolitano,
briefly stumbled in one of her TV interviews, responding to a question about
where security had broken down by saying that “the system worked.”
Our mishandling of the so-called Underwear Bomber played into Republican
accusations that Democrats were soft on terrorism, weakening my hand on issues
like closing the detention center at Guantánamo Bay. And like the other gaffes
and unforced errors that occurred during my first year, this one no doubt
contributed to my slide in the polls. But according to Axe, who spent his days
poring over political data, cross-tabbed by political party, age, race, gender,
geography, and Lord knows what else, my sinking political fortunes heading into
2010 could be traced to one overriding factor.
The economy still stank.
On paper, our emergency measures—along with the Federal Reserve’s
interventions—appeared to be working. The financial system was up and

running, and banks were on the way to solvency. Housing prices, while still way
down from their peak, had at least temporarily stabilized, and U.S. auto sales had
started to climb. Thanks to the Recovery Act, consumer and business spending
had rebounded slightly, and states and cities had slowed (though not stopped)
their layoffs of teachers, cops, and other public workers. Across the country,
major building projects were under way, picking up some of the slack that had
resulted from the collapse of housing construction. Joe Biden and his chief of
staff, my former debate coach Ron Klain, had done an excellent job of overseeing
the flow of stimulus dollars, with Joe often devoting chunks of his day to picking
up the phone and barking at state or local officials whose projects were behind
schedule or who weren’t providing us with adequate documentation. An audit
found that as a result of their efforts, just 0.2 percent of Recovery Act dollars had
been improperly spent—a statistic that even the best-run private sector companies
might envy, given the amounts of money and the number of projects involved.
Still, to the millions of Americans dealing with the aftermath of the crisis,
things felt worse, not better. They were still at risk of losing their homes to
foreclosure. Their savings were depleted, if not entirely wiped out. Most
troubling of all, they still couldn’t find work.
Larry Summers had warned that unemployment was a “lagging indicator”:
Companies typically didn’t start laying off employees until several months into a
recession and didn’t resume hiring until well after a recession ended. Sure
enough, while the pace of job loss gradually slowed over the course of 2009, the
number of unemployed people continued to grow. The unemployment rate
didn’t peak until October, hitting 10 percent—the highest since the early 1980s.
The news was so consistently bad that I found myself developing a knot in my
stomach on the first Thursday of every month, when the Labor Department sent
the White House an advance copy of its monthly jobs report. Katie claimed that
she could usually gauge the contents of the report by my economic team’s body
language: If they averted their gaze, she told me, or spoke in hushed tones, or just
dropped off a manila envelope for her to give me, rather than waiting around to
hand it to me in person, she knew we were in for another rough month.
If Americans were understandably frustrated with the recovery’s glacial pace,
the bank bailout sent them over the edge. Man, did folks hate TARP! They
didn’t care that the emergency program had worked better than expected, or that
more than half of the money given to the banks had already been repaid with
interest, or that the broader economy couldn’t have started healing until the
capital markets were working again. Across the political spectrum, voters

considered the bank bailouts a scam that had allowed the barons of finance to
emerge from the crisis relatively unscathed.
Tim Geithner liked to point out that this wasn’t strictly true. He would list all
the ways Wall Street had paid for its sins: investment banks gone belly-up, bank
CEOs ousted, shares diluted, billions of dollars in losses. Likewise, Attorney
General Holder’s lawyers at the Justice Department would soon start racking up
record settlements from financial institutions that were shown to have violated
the law. Still, there was no getting around the fact that many of the people most
culpable for the nation’s economic woes remained fabulously wealthy and had
avoided prosecution mainly because the laws as written deemed epic recklessness
and dishonesty in the boardroom or on the trading floor less blameworthy than
the actions of a teenage shoplifter. Whatever the economic merits of TARP or
the legal rationale behind the Justice Department’s decisions not to press criminal
charges, the whole thing reeked of unfairness.
“Where’s my bailout?” continued to be a popular refrain. My barber asked me
why no bank executives had gone to jail; so did my mother-in-law. Housing
advocates asked why banks had received hundreds of billions in TARP funds
while only a fraction of that amount was going toward directly helping
homeowners at risk of foreclosure pay down their mortgages. Our answer—that
given the sheer size of the U.S. housing market, even a program as big as TARP
would have only a nominal effect on the rate of foreclosures, and any additional
money we got out of Congress was more effectively used to boost employment—
sounded heartless and unpersuasive, especially when the programs we had set up
to help homeowners refinance or modify their mortgages fell woefully short of
expectations.
Eager to get out ahead of the public outrage, or at least the line of fire,
Congress set up multiple oversight committees, with Democrats and Republicans
taking turns denouncing the banks, questioning regulators’ decisions, and casting
as much blame as possible on the other party. In 2008 the Senate had appointed a
special inspector general to monitor TARP, a former prosecutor named Neil
Barofsky who knew little about finance but had a gift for generating sensational
headlines and attacked our decision-making with zeal. The further the possibility
of a financial meltdown receded from view, the more everyone questioned
whether TARP had even been necessary in the first place. And because we were
now in charge, it was often Tim and other members of my administration
occupying the hot seat, defending the seemingly indefensible.

Republicans weren’t shy about taking advantage, suggesting that TARP had
always been a Democratic idea. On a daily basis, they launched broadsides at the
Recovery Act and the rest of our economic policies, insisting that “stimulus” was
just another name for out-of-control, liberal pork-barrel spending and more
bailouts for special interests. They blamed the Recovery Act for the exploding
federal deficit we’d inherited from the Bush administration, and—to the extent
that they even bothered to offer alternative policies—argued that the best way to
fix the economy was for the government to slash its budget and get its fiscal
house in order, the same way hard-pressed families across the country were
“tightening their belts.”
Add it all up, and by early 2010, polls showed that significantly more
Americans disapproved of my economic stewardship than approved—a flashing
red light that helped explain not only the loss of Ted Kennedy’s seat in
Massachusetts but also Democratic losses in off-year gubernatorial races in New
Jersey and Virginia, states I’d won handily just twelve months earlier. According
to Axe, voters in focus groups couldn’t distinguish between TARP, which I’d
inherited, and the stimulus; they just knew that the well-connected were getting
theirs while they were getting screwed. They also thought that Republican calls
for budget cuts in response to the crisis—“austerity,” as economists liked to call it
—made more intuitive sense than our Keynesian push for increased government
spending. Congressional Democrats from swing districts, already nervous about
their reelection prospects, began distancing themselves from the Recovery Act
and shunning the word “stimulus” altogether. Those further to the left, freshly
angered by the lack of a public option in the healthcare bill, renewed their
complaints that the stimulus hadn’t been big enough and that Tim and Larry
were too cozy with Wall Street. Even Nancy Pelosi and Harry Reid started
questioning our White House communications strategy—especially our penchant
for denouncing “excessive partisanship” and “special interests” in Washington
rather than going harder at the Republicans.
“Mr. President,” Nancy said to me on one call, “I tell my members that what
you’ve managed to do in such a short time is historic. I’m just so very proud,
really. But right now, the public doesn’t know what you’ve accomplished. They
don’t know how awful the Republicans are behaving, just trying to block you on
everything. And voters aren’t going to know if you aren’t willing to tell them.”
Axe, who oversaw our communications shop, was exasperated when I
mentioned my conversation with the Speaker. “Maybe Nancy can tell us how to
spin ten percent unemployment,” he harrumphed. He reminded me that I’d run

on the promise to change Washington, not to engage in the usual partisan food
fight. “We can bash Republicans all we want,” he said, “but at the end of the
day, we’re going to keep taking on water so long as the best we can tell voters is
‘Sure, things are terrible—but it could’ve been worse.’ ”
He had a point; given the state of the economy, there were limits to what any
messaging strategy could accomplish. We had known from the start that the
politics of the recession were going to be rough. But Nancy was also right to be
critical. I was the one, after all, who’d taken such great pride in not letting shortterm politics intrude on our response to the economic crisis, as if the rules of
political gravity didn’t apply to me. When Tim had expressed concern that overly
harsh rhetoric directed at Wall Street might dissuade private investors from
recapitalizing the banks and therefore prolong the financial crisis, I’d agreed to
tone it down, despite objections from Axe and Gibbs. Now a sizable part of the
country thought I cared more about the banks than I cared about them. When
Larry had suggested that we pay out the Recovery Act’s middle-class tax cuts in
biweekly increments rather than in one lump sum because research showed that
people were more likely to spend the money that way, giving the economy a
quicker boost, I’d said great, let’s do it—even though Rahm had warned that it
meant no one would notice the slight bump in each paycheck. Now surveys
showed that the majority of Americans believed that I’d raised rather than lowered
their taxes—all to pay for bank bailouts, the stimulus package, and healthcare.
FDR would never have made such mistakes, I thought. He had understood
that digging America out of the Depression was less a matter of getting every
New Deal policy exactly right than of projecting confidence in the overall
endeavor, impressing upon the public that the government had a handle on the
situation. Just as he’d known that in a crisis people needed a story that made sense
of their hardships and spoke to their emotions—a morality tale with clear good
guys and bad guys and a plot they could easily follow.
In other words, FDR understood that to be effective, governance couldn’t be
so antiseptic that it set aside the basic stuff of politics: You had to sell your
program, reward supporters, punch back against opponents, and amplify the facts
that helped your cause while fudging the details that didn’t. I found myself
wondering whether we’d somehow turned a virtue into a vice; whether, trapped
in my own high-mindedness, I’d failed to tell the American people a story they
could believe in; and whether, having ceded the political narrative to my critics, I
was going to be able to wrest it back.

—
a year of unrelentingly bad economic numbers, we finally
received a glimmer of hope: The March 2010 jobs report showed the economy
gaining 162,000 new jobs—the first month of solid growth since 2007. When
Larry and Christy Romer came into the Oval to deliver the news, I gave them
both fist bumps and declared them “Employees of the Month.”
“Do we each get a plaque for that, Mr. President?” Christy asked.
“We can’t afford plaques,” I said. “But you get to lord it over the rest of the
team.”
The April and May reports were positive as well, offering the tantalizing
possibility that the recovery might finally be picking up steam. None of us inside
the White House thought a jobless rate over 9 percent called for a victory lap.
We agreed, though, that it made both economic and political sense to start more
emphatically projecting a sense of forward momentum in my speeches. We even
began planning for a nationwide tour in the early summer, where I’d highlight
communities on the rebound and companies that were hiring again. “Recovery
Summer,” we would call it.
Except Greece imploded.
Although the financial crisis had originated on Wall Street, its impact across
Europe had been just as severe. Months after we’d gotten the U.S. economy
growing again, the European Union remained mired in recession, with its banks
fragile, its major industries yet to recover from the huge drop in global trade, and
unemployment in some countries running as high as 20 percent. The Europeans
didn’t have to contend with the sudden collapse of their housing industry the way
we did, and their more generous safety nets helped cushion the recession’s impact
on vulnerable populations. On the other hand, the combination of greater
demands on public services, reduced tax revenues, and ongoing bank bailouts had
placed severe pressure on government budgets. And unlike the United States—
which could cheaply finance rising deficits even in a crisis, as risk-averse investors
rushed to buy our Treasury bills—countries like Ireland, Portugal, Greece, Italy,
and Spain found it increasingly difficult to borrow. Their efforts to placate
financial markets by cutting government spending only lowered already weak
aggregate demand and deepened their recessions. This, in turn, produced even
bigger budget shortfalls, necessitated additional borrowing at ever higher interest
rates, and rattled financial markets even more.
AFTER MORE THAN

We couldn’t afford to be passive observers to all this. Problems in Europe
acted as a significant drag on the U.S. recovery: The European Union was our
largest trading partner, after all, and U.S. and European financial markets were
practically joined at the hip. Through much of 2009, Tim and I had urged
European leaders to take more decisive action to mend their economies. We
advised them to clear up the issues with their banks once and for all (the “stress
test” E.U. regulators had applied to their financial institutions was so slipshod that
a pair of Irish banks needed government rescues just a few months after regulators
had certified them as sound). We pushed any E.U. countries with stronger
balance sheets to initiate stimulus policies comparable to our own, in order to
jump-start business investment and increase consumer demand across the
continent.
We got exactly nowhere. Although liberal by American standards, Europe’s
biggest economies were almost all led by center-right governments, elected on
the promise of balanced budgets and free-market reforms rather than more
government spending. Germany, in particular—the European Union’s one true
economic powerhouse and its most influential member—continued to see fiscal
rectitude as the answer to all economic woes. The more I’d gotten to know
Angela Merkel, the more I’d come to like her; I found her steady, honest,
intellectually rigorous, and instinctually kind. But she was also conservative by
temperament, not to mention a savvy politician who knew her constituency, and
whenever I suggested to her that Germany needed to set an example by spending
more on infrastructure or tax cuts, she politely but firmly pushed back. “Ya,
Barack, I think maybe that’s not the best approach for us,” she would say, her
face pulling into a slight frown, as if I’d suggested something a little tawdry.
Sarkozy didn’t serve as much of a counterweight. Privately, he voiced
sympathy for the idea of economic stimulus, given France’s high unemployment
rate (“Don’t worry, Barack…I’m working on Angela, you’ll see”). But he had
trouble pivoting away from the fiscally conservative positions that he himself had
taken in the past, and as far as I could tell, he wasn’t organized enough to come
up with a clear plan for his own country, much less for all of Europe.
And while the United Kingdom’s prime minister, Gordon Brown, agreed
with us on the need for European governments to boost short-term spending, his
Labour Party would lose its majority in Parliament in May 2010, and Brown
would find himself replaced by Conservative leader David Cameron. In his early
forties, with a youthful appearance and a studied informality (at every
international summit, the first thing he’d do was take off his jacket and loosen his

tie), the Eton-educated Cameron possessed an impressive command of the issues,
a facility with language, and the easy confidence of someone who’d never been
pressed too hard by life. I liked him personally, even when we butted heads, and
for the next six years he’d prove to be a willing partner on a host of international
issues, from climate change (he believed in the science) to human rights (he
supported marriage equality) to aid for developing countries (throughout his
tenure, he’d managed to allocate 1.5 percent of the U.K.’s budget to foreign aid,
a significantly higher percentage than I’d ever convince the U.S. Congress to
approve). On economic policy, though, Cameron hewed closely to free-market
orthodoxy, having promised voters that his platform of deficit reduction and cuts
to government services—along with regulatory reform and expanded trade—
would usher in a new era of British competitiveness.
Instead, predictably, the British economy would fall deeper into a recession.
The stubborn embrace of austerity by key European leaders, despite all of the
contrary evidence, was more than a little frustrating. But given everything else on
my plate, the situation in Europe hadn’t been keeping me up at night. That all
began to change in February 2010, though, when a Greek sovereign debt crisis
threatened to unravel the European Union—and sent me and my economic team
scrambling to avert yet another round of global financial panic.
Greece’s economic problems weren’t new. For decades, the country had been
plagued by low productivity, a bloated and inefficient public sector, massive tax
avoidance, and unsustainable pension obligations. Despite that, throughout the
2000s, international capital markets had been happy to finance Greece’s steadily
escalating deficits, much the same way that they’d been happy to finance a heap
of subprime mortgages across the United States. In the wake of the Wall Street
crisis, the mood grew less generous. When a new Greek government announced
that its latest budget deficit far exceeded previous estimates, European bank stocks
plunged and international lenders balked at lending Greece more money. The
country suddenly teetered on the brink of default.
Normally the prospect of a small country not paying its bills on time would
have a limited effect outside its borders. Greece’s GDP was roughly the size of
Maryland’s, and other countries faced with similar problems were typically able to
hammer out an agreement with creditors and the IMF, allowing them to
restructure their debt, maintain their international creditworthiness, and
eventually get back on their feet.
But in 2010, economic conditions weren’t normal. Greece’s attachment to an

already shaky Europe made its sovereign debt problems the equivalent of a lit
stick of dynamite being tossed into a munitions factory. Because it was a member
of the European Union’s common market, where companies and people worked,
traveled, and traded under a unified set of regulations and without regard to
national borders, Greece’s economic troubles easily migrated. Banks in other E.U.
countries were some of Greece’s biggest lenders. Greece was also one of sixteen
countries that had adopted the euro, meaning it had no currency of its own to
devalue or independent monetary remedies that it could pursue. Without an
immediate, large-scale rescue package from its fellow eurozone members, Greece
might have no alternative but to pull out of the currency compact, an
unprecedented move with uncertain economic ramifications. Already, market
fears about Greece had caused big spikes in the rates banks were charging Ireland,
Portugal, Italy, and Spain to cover their sovereign debt. Tim worried that an
actual Greek default and/or exit from the eurozone might lead skittish capital
markets to effectively cut off credit to those bigger countries altogether,
administering a shock to the financial system as bad or even worse than the one
we’d just been through.
“Is it just me,” I asked after Tim had finished laying out various hair-raising
scenarios, “or are we having trouble catching a break?”
And so, out of nowhere, stabilizing Greece suddenly became one of our top
economic and foreign policy priorities. In face-to-face meetings and over the
phone that spring, Tim and I put on a full-court press to get the European
Central Bank and the IMF to produce a rescue package robust enough to calm
the markets and allow Greece to cover its debt payments, while helping the new
government set up a realistic plan to reduce the country’s structural deficits and
restore growth. To guard against possible contagion effects on the rest of Europe,
we also recommended that the Europeans construct a credible “firewall”—
basically, a joint loan fund with enough heft to give capital markets confidence
that in an emergency the eurozone stood behind its members’ debts.
Once again, our European counterparts had other ideas. As far as the
Germans, the Dutch, and many of the other eurozone members were concerned,
the Greeks had brought their troubles on themselves with their shoddy
governance and spendthrift ways. Although Merkel assured me that “we won’t
do a Lehman” by letting Greece default, both she and her austerity-minded
finance minister, Wolfgang Schäuble, appeared determined to condition any
assistance on an adequate penance, despite our warnings that squeezing an already
battered Greek economy too hard would be counterproductive. The desire to

apply some of that Old Testament justice and discourage moral hazard was
reflected in Europe’s initial offer: a loan of up to €25 billion, barely enough to
cover a couple of months of Greek debt, contingent on the new government
enacting deep cuts in worker pensions, steep tax increases, and freezes on public
sector wages. Not wanting to commit political suicide, the Greek government
said thanks but no thanks, especially after the country’s voters responded to news
reports of the European proposal with widespread riots and strikes.
Europe’s early design for an emergency firewall wasn’t much better. The
initial figure proposed by eurozone authorities to capitalize the loan fund—€50
billion—was woefully inadequate. On a call with his fellow finance ministers,
Tim had to explain that to be effective, the fund would have to be at least ten
times that size. Eurozone officials also insisted that to access the fund, a member
country’s bondholders would have to undergo a mandatory “haircut”—in other
words, accept a certain percentage of losses on what they were owed. This
sentiment was perfectly understandable; after all, the interest lenders charged on a
loan was supposed to factor in the risk that the borrower might default. But as a
practical matter, any haircut requirement would make private capital far less
willing to lend debt-ridden countries like Ireland and Italy any more money, thus
defeating the firewall’s entire purpose.
For me, the whole thing felt like a dubbed TV rerun of the debates we’d had
back home in the aftermath of the Wall Street crisis. And while I was crystal clear
about what European leaders like Merkel and Sarkozy needed to do, I had
sympathy for the political bind they were in. After all, I’d had a hell of a time
trying to convince American voters that it made sense to spend billions of
taxpayer dollars bailing out banks and helping strangers avoid foreclosure or job
loss inside our own country. Merkel and Sarkozy, on the other hand, were being
asked to persuade their voters that it made sense to bail out a bunch of foreigners.
I realized then that the Greek debt crisis was as much a geopolitical problem
as it was a problem of global finance, one that exposed the unresolved
contradictions at the heart of Europe’s decades-long march toward greater
integration. In those heady days after the fall of the Berlin Wall, in the years of
methodical restructuring that followed, that project’s grand architecture—the
common market, the euro, the European Parliament, and a Brussels-based
bureaucracy empowered to set policy on a wide range of regulatory issues—
expressed an optimism in the possibilities of a truly unified continent, purged of
the toxic nationalism that had spurred centuries of bloody conflict. To a
remarkable degree, the experiment had worked: In exchange for giving up some

elements of their sovereignty, the European Union’s member states had enjoyed a
measure of peace and widespread prosperity perhaps unmatched by any collection
of people in human history.
But national identities—the distinctions of language, culture, history, and
levels of economic development—were stubborn things. And as the economic
crisis worsened, all those differences the good times had papered over started
coming to the fore. How prepared were citizens in Europe’s wealthier, more
efficient nations to take on a neighboring country’s obligations or to see their tax
dollars redistributed to those outside their borders? Would citizens of countries in
economic distress accept sacrifices imposed on them by distant officials with
whom they felt no affinity and over whom they had little or no power? As the
debate about Greece heated up, public discussions inside some of the original
E.U. countries, like Germany, France, and the Netherlands, would sometimes
veer beyond disapproval of the Greek government’s policies and venture into a
broader indictment of the Greek people—how they were more casual about
work or how they tolerated corruption and considered basic responsibilities like
paying one’s taxes to be merely optional. Or, as I’d overhear one E.U. official of
undetermined origin tell another while I was washing my hands in a G8 summit
lavatory:
“They don’t think like us.”
Leaders like Merkel and Sarkozy were too invested in European unity to
traffic in such stereotypes, but their politics dictated that they proceed cautiously
in agreeing to any rescue plan. I noticed that they rarely mentioned that German
and French banks were some of Greece’s biggest lenders, or that much of the
Greeks’ accumulated debt had been racked up buying German and French
exports—facts that might have made clear to voters why saving the Greeks from
default amounted to saving their own banks and industries. Maybe they worried
that such an admission would turn voter attention away from the failures of
successive Greek governments and toward the failures of those German and
French officials charged with supervising bank lending practices. Or maybe they
feared that if their voters fully understood the underlying implications of
European integration—the extent to which their economic fates, for good and
for ill, had become bound up with those of people who were “not like us”—they
might not find it entirely to their liking.
In any event, by early May, the financial markets got scary enough that
European leaders faced reality. They agreed to a joint E.U.-IMF loan package

that would allow Greece to make its payments for the next three years. The
package still included austerity measures that everyone involved knew would be
too onerous for the Greek government to implement, but at least it gave other
E.U. governments the political cover they needed to approve the deal. Later in
the year, the eurozone countries also tentatively agreed to a firewall on the scale
that Tim had suggested, and without a mandatory “haircut” requirement.
European financial markets would remain a roller-coaster ride throughout 2010,
and the situation in not just Greece but also Ireland, Portugal, Spain, and Italy
remained perilous. Without the leverage to force a permanent fix for Europe’s
underlying problems, Tim and I had to content ourselves with having
temporarily helped to defuse another bomb.
As for the crisis’s effect on the U.S. economy, whatever momentum the
recovery had gathered at the beginning of the year came to a screeching halt. The
news out of Greece sent the U.S. stock market sharply downward. Business
confidence, as measured by monthly surveys, dropped as well, with the new
uncertainties causing managers to put off planned investments. The jobs report
for June returned to negative territory—and would stay that way into the fall.
“Recovery Summer” turned out to be a bust.
—
the White House changed that second year. It wasn’t that anyone
started taking the place for granted; each day, after all, brought new reminders of
how privileged we were to be playing a part in writing history. And there sure
wasn’t any drop in effort. To an outsider, staff meetings might have looked more
relaxed as people got to know one another and grew familiar with their roles and
responsibilities. But beneath the easy banter, everyone understood the stakes
involved, the need for us to execute even routine tasks to the most exacting of
standards. I never had to tell anyone in the White House to work hard or go the
extra mile. Their own fear of dropping the ball—of disappointing me, colleagues,
constituencies that were counting on us—drove people far more than any
exhortation I might deliver.
Everybody was sleep-deprived, perpetually. Rarely did senior staffers put in
less than a twelve-hour day, and almost all of them came in for at least part of
each weekend. They didn’t have a one-minute commute like I did or a bevy of
chefs, valets, butlers, and assistants to shop, cook, pick up dry cleaning, or take
the kids to school. Single staffers stayed single longer than they might have liked.
THE MOOD IN

Those staffers lucky enough to have partners often relied on an overburdened and
lonely spouse, creating the kinds of chronic domestic tensions that Michelle and I
were more than familiar with. People missed their children’s soccer games and
dance recitals. People got home too late to tuck toddlers into bed. Those like
Rahm, Axe, and others, who’d decided against putting their families through the
disruption of moving to Washington, barely saw their spouses and kids at all.
If anyone complained about this, they did so privately. Folks knew what they
signed up for when joining an administration. “Work-life balance” wasn’t part of
the deal—and given the perilous state of the economy and the world, the volume
of incoming work wouldn’t slow down anytime soon. Just as athletes in a locker
room don’t talk about nagging injuries, the members of our White House team
learned to suck it up.
Still, the cumulative effects of exhaustion—along with an increasingly angry
public, an unsympathetic press, disenchanted allies, and an opposition party with
both the means and the intent to turn everything we did into an interminable
slog—had a way of fraying nerves and shortening tempers. I began hearing more
consternation over Rahm’s occasional outbursts during early-morning staff
meetings, accusations that Larry cut people out of certain economic policy
discussions, whispers that people felt shortchanged when Valerie took advantage
of her personal relationship with me and Michelle to do end runs around White
House processes. Tensions flared between younger foreign policy staffers like
Denis and Ben, who were accustomed to running ideas by me informally before
putting them through a formal process, and my national security advisor, Jim
Jones, who’d come out of a military culture in which chains of command were
inviolate and subordinates were expected to stay in their lanes.
Members of my cabinet had their own frustrations. While Hillary, Tim,
Robert Gates, and Eric Holder got most of my attention by virtue of their posts,
other cabinet members were performing yeomen’s work without a lot of handholding. Secretary of Agriculture Tom Vilsack, the hard-charging former
governor of Iowa, would leverage Recovery Act dollars to spark a host of new
economic development strategies for struggling rural communities. Labor
secretary Hilda Solis and her team were working to make it easier for low-wage
workers to get overtime pay. My old friend Arne Duncan, the former Chicago
school superintendent, now secretary of education, was leading the effort to raise
standards in low-performing schools across the country, even when it drew the
wrath of the teachers’ unions (who were understandably wary of anything that
might involve more standardized tests) and conservative activists (who thought

that the effort to institute a common core curriculum was a plot by liberals to
indoctrinate their children).
Despite such achievements, the daily grind of running a federal agency didn’t
always match the more glamorous role (advisor and confidant to the president,
frequent visitor to the White House) that some in the cabinet had imagined for
themselves. There was a time when presidents like Lincoln relied almost
exclusively on their cabinets to formulate policy; a bare-bones White House staff
handled little more than the president’s personal needs and correspondence. But
as the federal government had expanded in the modern era, successive presidents
looked to centralize more and more decision-making under one roof, swelling
the number and influence of White House personnel. Meanwhile, cabinet
members became more specialized, consumed with the task of managing massive,
far-flung principalities rather than bending the president’s ear.
The shift in power showed up in my calendar. Whereas folks like Rahm or
Jim Jones saw me almost every day, only Hillary, Tim, and Gates had standing
meetings in the Oval. Other secretaries had to fight to get on my schedule, unless
an issue involving their agency became a top White House priority. Full cabinet
meetings, which we tried to hold once a quarter, gave people a chance to share
information, but they were too big and unwieldy to allow for much actual
business; just getting everybody seated in the Cabinet Room was something of an
ordeal, with folks having to take turns sidling awkwardly between the heavy
leather chairs. In a town where proximity and access to the president were taken
as a measure of clout (the reason why senior staffers coveted the West Wing’s
cramped, ill-lit, and notoriously rodent-infested offices rather than the spacious
suites in the EEOB across the street), it didn’t take long for some cabinet
members to start feeling underutilized and underappreciated, relegated to the
periphery of the action and subject to the whims of often younger, less
experienced White House staffers.
None of these issues were unique to my presidency, and it’s a credit to both
my cabinet and my staff that they maintained their focus even as the work
environment got tougher. With few exceptions, we avoided the open hostilities
and constant leaks that had characterized some previous administrations. Without
exception, we avoided scandal. I’d made clear at the start of my administration
that I’d have zero tolerance for ethical lapses, and people who had a problem
with that didn’t join us in the first place. Even so, I appointed a former Harvard
Law School classmate of mine, Norm Eisen, as special counsel to the president for
ethics and government reform, just to help keep everybody—including me—on

track. Cheerful and punctilious, with sharp features and the wide, unblinking eyes
of a zealot, Norm was perfect for the job—the kind of guy who relished the
well-earned nickname “Dr. No.” When asked once what sorts of out-of-town
conferences were okay for administration officials to attend, his response was
short and to the point:
“If it sounds fun, you can’t go.”
Keeping up morale, on the other hand, wasn’t something I could delegate. I
tried to be generous in my praise, measured in my criticism. In meetings, I made
a point of eliciting everyone’s views, including those of more junior staffers.
Small stuff mattered—making sure it was me who brought out the cake for
somebody’s birthday, for example, or taking the time to call someone’s parents
for an anniversary. Sometimes, when I had a few unscheduled minutes, I’d just
wander through the West Wing’s narrow halls, poking my head into offices to
ask people about their families, what they were working on, and whether there
was anything they thought we could be doing better.
Ironically, one aspect of management that took me longer to learn than it
should have was the need to pay closer attention to the experiences of women
and people of color on the staff. I’d long believed that the more perspectives
around a table, the better an organization performed, and I took pride in the fact
that we’d recruited the most diverse cabinet in history. Our White House
operation was similarly loaded with talented, experienced African Americans,
Latinos, Asian Americans, and women, a group that included domestic policy
advisor Melody Barnes, deputy chief of staff Mona Sutphen, political director
Patrick Gaspard, director of intergovernmental affairs Cecilia Muñoz, White
House cabinet secretary Chris Lu, staff secretary Lisa Brown, and the head of the
Council on Environmental Quality, Nancy Sutley. All of them were exemplary
at their jobs and played key roles in shaping policy. Many became not just valued
advisors but good friends.
My non-white and non-male cabinet members didn’t have to worry, though,
about fitting into their workplace; within their buildings, they were at the top of
the food chain and everyone else adjusted to them. Women and people of color
in the White House, on the other hand, had to wrestle—at various times and to
varying degrees—with the same nagging questions, frustrations, and doubts that
faced their counterparts in other professional settings, from corporate suites to
university departments. Did Larry dismiss my proposal in front of the president because
he thought it wasn’t fully fleshed out, or was it because I wasn’t assertive enough? Or was

it because he doesn’t take women as seriously as men? Did Rahm consult with Axe and
not me on that issue because he happened to need a political perspective, or because the two
of them have a long-standing relationship? Or is it that he’s not as comfortable with Black
people?
Should I say something? Am I being overly sensitive?
As the first African American president, I felt a particular obligation to model
an inclusive workplace. Still, I tended to discount the role that race and gender—
as opposed to the friction that typically arises when you get a group of stressedout, type A high achievers confined in close quarters—actually played in office
dynamics. Maybe it was because everyone was on their best behavior in front of
me; when I did hear about problems popping up among staffers, it was usually
through Pete or Valerie, in whom, by virtue of age and temperament, others
seemed most comfortable confiding. I knew that the brash styles of Rahm, Axe,
Gibbs, and Larry—not to mention their politically conditioned nervousness about
taking a strong stand on wedge issues like immigration, abortion, and relations
between police and minority communities—were sometimes received differently
by the women and people of color on the team. On the other hand, those guys
were combative with everybody, including one another. Knowing them as well as
I did, I felt that as much as any of us growing up in America can be free of bias,
they passed the test. So long as I didn’t hear about anything egregious, I figured
that it was enough for me to set a good example for the team by treating people
with courtesy and respect. Day-to-day cases of bruised egos, turf battles, or
perceived slights, they could handle among themselves.
But late in our first year, Valerie asked to see me and reported deepening
dissatisfaction among the senior women in the White House—and it was only
then that I started to examine some of my own blind spots. I learned that at least
one woman on the team had been driven to tears after being upbraided in a
meeting. Tired of having their views repeatedly dismissed, several other senior
women had effectively stopped talking in meetings altogether. “I don’t think the
men even realize how they’re coming across,” Valerie said, “and as far as the
women are concerned, that’s part of the problem.”
I was troubled enough that I suggested that a dozen women on the staff join
me for dinner so that they’d have a chance to air things out. We held it in the
Old Family Dining Room, on the first floor of the residence, and perhaps
because of the fancy setting, with the high ceilings, black-tied butlers, and fine
White House china, it took a little time before the women opened up. Feelings

around the table weren’t uniform, and no one said they’d been on the receiving
end of overtly sexist remarks. But as I listened to these accomplished women talk
for well over two hours, it became clear the degree to which patterns of behavior
that were second nature for many of the senior men on the team—shouting or
cursing during a policy debate; dominating a conversation by constantly
interrupting other people (especially women) in mid-sentence; restating a point
that somebody else (often a female staffer) had made half an hour earlier as if it
were your own—had left them feeling diminished, ignored, and increasingly
reluctant to voice their opinions. And while many of the women expressed
appreciation for the degree to which I actively solicited their views during
meetings, and said they didn’t doubt my respect for their work, their stories
forced me to look in the mirror and ask myself how much my own inclination
toward machismo—my tolerance for a certain towel-snapping atmosphere in
meetings, the enjoyment I took in a good verbal jousting—may have contributed
to their discomfort.
I can’t say that we resolved all of the concerns raised that night (“It’s hard to
unravel patriarchy in a single dinner,” I said to Valerie afterward), any more than
I could guarantee that my periodic check-ins with the Black, Latino, Asian, and
Native American members of the team ensured that they always felt included. I
do know that when I spoke to Rahm and the other senior men about how their
female colleagues were feeling, they were surprised and chastened and vowed to
do better. The women, meanwhile, seemed to take to heart my suggestion that
they assert themselves more in discussions (“If somebody tries to talk over you,
tell them you’re not finished!”)—not only for their own mental health but
because they were knowledgeable and insightful and I needed to hear what they
had to say if I was going to do my job well. A few months later, as we walked
together from the West Wing to the EEOB, Valerie told me that she’d noticed
some improvement in how the staffers were interacting.
“And how are you holding up?” she asked me.
I stopped at the top of the EEOB’s stairs to search my jacket pockets for some
notes I needed for the meeting we were about to attend. “I’m good,” I said.
“You sure?” Her eyes narrowed as she searched my face like a doctor
examining a patient for symptoms. I found what I was looking for and started
walking again.
“Yeah, I’m sure,” I said. “Why? Do I seem different to you?”
Valerie shook her head. “No,” she said. “You seem exactly the same. That’s

what I don’t understand.”
—
first time Valerie had commented on how little the presidency had
changed me. I understood that she meant it as a compliment—her way of
expressing relief that I hadn’t gotten too full of myself, lost my sense of humor, or
turned into a bitter, angry jerk. But as war and the economic crisis dragged on
and our political problems began to mount, she started worrying that maybe I was
acting a little too calm, that I was just bottling up all the stress.
She wasn’t the only one. Friends started sending notes of encouragement,
somber and heartfelt, as if they’d just learned that I had a serious illness. Marty
Nesbitt and Eric Whitaker discussed flying in to hang out and watch a ball game
—a “boys’ night,” they said, just to take my mind off things. Mama Kaye,
arriving for a visit, expressed genuine surprise at how well I looked in person.
“What’d you expect?” I teased, reaching down to give her a big hug. “You
thought I was going to have a rash on my face? That my hair’d be falling out?”
“Oh, stop it,” she said, playfully hitting me on the arm. She leaned back and
looked at me the same way Valerie had, searching for signs. “I guess I just
thought you’d look more tired. Are you getting enough to eat?”
Puzzled by all this solicitude, I happened to mention it to Gibbs one day. He
chuckled. “Let me tell you, boss,” he said, “if you watched cable news, you’d be
worried about you too.” I knew what Gibbs was driving at: Once you became
president, people’s perceptions of you—even the perceptions of those who knew
you best—were inevitably shaped by the media. What I hadn’t fully appreciated,
though, at least not until I scanned a few news broadcasts, was how the images
producers used in stories about my administration had shifted of late. Back when
we were riding high, toward the end of the campaign and the start of my
presidency, most news footage showed me active and smiling, shaking hands or
speaking in front of dramatic backdrops, my gestures and facial expressions
exuding energy and command. Now that most of the stories were negative, a
different version of me appeared: older-looking, walking alone along the
colonnade or across the South Lawn to Marine One, my shoulders slumped, my
eyes downcast, my face weary and creased with the burdens of the office.
Being in the barrel put the sadder version of me on permanent display.
In fact, life as I was experiencing it didn’t feel nearly so dire. Like my staff, I
IT WASN’T THE

could have used more sleep. Each day had its share of aggravations, worries, and
disappointments. I’d stew over mistakes I’d made and question strategies that
hadn’t panned out. There were meetings I dreaded, ceremonies I found foolish,
conversations I would have rather avoided. While I continued to refrain from
yelling at people, I cursed and complained plenty, and felt unfairly maligned at
least once a day.
But as I’d discovered about myself during the campaign, obstacles and
struggles rarely shook me to the core. Instead, depression was more likely to
creep up on me when I felt useless, without purpose—when I was wasting my
time or squandering opportunities. Even during my worst days as president, I
never felt that way. The job didn’t allow for boredom or existential paralysis, and
when I sat down with my team to figure out the answer to a knotty problem, I
usually came away energized rather than drained. Every trip I took—touring a
manufacturing plant to see how something got made or visiting a lab where
scientists explained a recent breakthrough—fed my imagination. Comforting a
rural family displaced by a storm or meeting with inner-city teachers who were
striving to reach kids others had written off, and allowing myself to feel, if just for
a moment, what they were going through, made my heart bigger.
The fuss of being president, the pomp, the press, the physical constraints—all
that I could have done without. The actual work, though?
The work, I loved. Even when it didn’t love me back.
Outside of the job, I had tried to make peace with living in the bubble. I
maintained my rituals: the morning workout, the dinner with my family, an
evening walk on the South Lawn. In the early months of my presidency, that
routine included reading a chapter from Life of Pi to Sasha each night before
tucking her and Malia into bed. When it came time to choose our next book,
though, Sasha decided that she, like her sister, had gotten too old to be read to. I
hid my dismay and took to playing a nightly game of pool with Sam Kass instead.
We’d meet on the third floor of the residence after dinner, once Michelle and
I had talked through our days and Sam had had a chance to clean up the kitchen.
I’d put on some Marvin Gaye or OutKast or Nina Simone from my iPod, and
the loser from the previous night’s game would rack, and for the next half hour
or so we’d play eight-ball. Sam would dish up White House gossip or ask for
advice about his love life. I’d relay something funny one of the girls had said or
go off on a brief political rant. Mostly, though, we just trash-talked and tried
improbable shots, the crack of the break or the soft click of a ball rolling into a

corner pocket clearing my mind before I headed to the Treaty Room to do my
evening work.
Initially, the pool game had also given me an excuse to duck out and have a
cigarette on the third-floor landing. Those detours stopped when I quit smoking,
right after I signed the Affordable Care Act into law. I’d chosen that day because
I liked the symbolism, but I’d made the decision a few weeks earlier, when Malia,
smelling a cigarette on my breath, frowned and asked if I’d been smoking. Faced
with the prospect of lying to my daughter or setting a bad example, I called the
White House doctor and asked him to send me a box of nicotine gum. It did the
trick, for I haven’t had a cigarette since. But I did end up replacing one addiction
with another: Through the remainder of my time in office, I would chomp on
gum ceaselessly, the empty packets constantly spilling out of my pockets and
leaving a trail of shiny square bread crumbs for others to find on the floor, under
my desk, or wedged between sofa cushions.
Basketball offered another reliable refuge. When my schedule allowed,
Reggie Love would organize a game on the weekend, rounding up some of his
buddies and reserving time for us on an indoor court at the Fort McNair army
base, the FBI headquarters, or the Department of the Interior. The runs were
intense—with a couple of exceptions, most of the regular participants were
former Division I college players in their late twenties or early thirties—and while
I hated to admit it, I was usually one of the weaker players on the floor. Still, as
long as I didn’t try to do too much, I found I could hold my own, setting picks,
feeding whoever on our team was hot and hitting a jumper when I was open,
running the break and losing myself in the flow and camaraderie of competition.
Those pickup games represented continuity for me, a tether to my old self,
and when my team beat Reggie’s, I’d make sure he heard about it all week. But
the enjoyment I got from playing basketball was nothing compared to the thrill—
and stress—of rooting for Sasha’s fourth-grade rec league team.
They called themselves the Vipers (props to whoever thought of the name),
and each Saturday morning during the season, Michelle and I would travel to a
small public park field house in Maryland and sit in the bleachers with the other
families, cheering wildly whenever one of the girls came remotely close to
making a basket, shouting reminders to Sasha to box out or get back on defense,
and doing our best not to be “those parents,” the kind who yell at the refs. Maisy
Biden, Joe’s granddaughter and one of Sasha’s best friends, was the star of the
team, but for most of the girls it was their first experience with organized

basketball. Apparently the same was true for their coaches, a friendly young
couple who taught at Sidwell and who, by their own admission, didn’t consider
basketball their primary sport. After observing an adorable but chaotic first couple
of games, Reggie and I took it upon ourselves to draw up some plays and
volunteered to conduct a few informal Sunday afternoon practice sessions with
the team. We worked on the basics (dribbling, passing, making sure your
shoelaces were tied before you ran onto the court), and although Reggie could
get a little too intense when we ran drills (“Paige, don’t let Isabel punk you like
that!”), the girls seemed to have as much fun as we did. When the Vipers won
the league championship in an 18–16 nail-biter, Reggie and I celebrated like it
was the NCAA finals.
Every parent savors such moments, I suppose, when the world slows down,
your strivings get pushed to the back of your mind, and all that matters is that
you are present, fully, to witness the miracle of your child growing up. Given all
the time I’d missed with the girls over years of campaigning and legislative
sessions, I cherished the normal “dad stuff” that much more. But, of course,
nothing about our lives was completely normal any longer, as I was reminded the
following year when, in true Washington fashion, a few of the parents from a
rival Sidwell team started complaining to the Vipers coaches, and presumably the
school, that Reggie and I weren’t offering training sessions to their kids too. We
explained that there was nothing special about our practices—that it was just an
excuse for me to spend extra time with Sasha—and offered to help other parents
organize practices of their own. But when it became clear that the complaints had
nothing to do with basketball (“They must think being coached by you is
something they can put on a Harvard application,” Reggie scoffed) and that the
Vipers coaches were feeling squeezed, I decided it would be simpler for all
concerned if I went back to just being a fan.
Despite a few exasperating incidents like that, there was no denying that our
status as the First Family conferred plenty of benefits. Museums around town let
us visit after hours, allowing us to avoid the crowds (Marvin and I still laugh over
the time he decided to strategically plant himself in front of a large and very
detailed portrait of a naked man at the Corcoran Gallery for fear that the girls
might see it). Because the Motion Picture Association of America sent us DVDs
of new releases, the White House movie theater got plenty of use, although
Michelle’s tastes and mine often diverged: She preferred rom-coms, while
according to her, my favorite movies usually involved “terrible things happening
to people, and then they die.”

The incredible White House staff also made it easy for us to entertain guests.
No longer did we have to worry, as most working parents with young kids do,
about mustering the energy after a long week at the office to shop, cook, or
straighten up a house that looks like it’s been hit by a tornado. Along with
weekend get-togethers with our regular circle of friends, we began hosting small
dinner parties in the residence every few months, inviting artists, writers, scholars,
business leaders, and others whose paths we’d crossed and wanted to know better.
Usually the dinners would last until well past midnight, full of wine-fueled
conversations that inspired us (Toni Morrison, at once regal and mischievous,
describing her friendship with James Baldwin); instructed us (the co-chair of my
Council of Advisors on Science and Technology, Dr. Eric Lander, describing the
latest breakthroughs in genetic medicine); enchanted us (Meryl Streep leaning
over to softly recite in Mandarin the lyrics to a song about clouds that she’d
learned for a part years ago); and generally made me feel better about humanity’s
prospects.
But maybe the best White House perk involved music. One of Michelle’s
goals as First Lady was to make the White House more welcoming—a “People’s
House” in which all visitors would feel represented, rather than a remote,
exclusive fortress of power. Working with the White House Social Office, she
organized more tours for local school groups and started a mentorship program
that paired disadvantaged kids with White House staffers. She opened up the
South Lawn for trick-or-treating on Halloween, and held movie nights for
military families.
As part of that effort, her office arranged for us to host a regular American
music series in tandem with public television, in which some of the country’s
leading artists—household names like Stevie Wonder, Jennifer Lopez, and Justin
Timberlake but also up-and-comers like Leon Bridges and living legends like B.
B. King—spent part of a day conducting music workshops with area youths
before performing in front of a couple hundred guests on an East Room stage, or
sometimes on the South Lawn. Along with the Gershwin Prize concert, which
the White House traditionally put on each year to honor a leading composer or
performer, the series gave my family front-row seats three or four times a year at
a live, star-studded musical extravaganza.
Every genre was represented: Motown and Broadway show tunes; classic
blues and a Fiesta Latina; gospel and hip-hop; country, jazz, and classical. The
musicians typically rehearsed the day before they were scheduled to appear, and if
I happened to be upstairs in the residence as they were running through their set,

I could hear the sounds of drums and bass and electric guitar reverberating
through the Treaty Room floor. Sometimes I’d sneak down the back stairs of the
residence and slip into the East Room, standing in the rear so as not to attract
attention, and just watch the artists at work: a duet figuring out their harmonies, a
headliner tweaking an arrangement with the house band. I’d marvel at everyone’s
mastery of their instruments, the generosity they showed toward one another as
they blended mind, body, and spirit, and I’d feel a pang of envy at the pure,
unambiguous joy of their endeavors, such a contrast to the political path I had
chosen.
As for the actual concerts, they were absolutely electric. I can still picture Bob
Dylan, with just a bassist, a piano player, and his guitar, tenderly reworking “The
Times They Are a-Changin’.” When finished, he stepped off the stage, shook my
hand, gave a little grin and bow in front of me and Michelle, and vanished
without a word. I remember a young playwright of Puerto Rican descent named
Lin-Manuel Miranda, who told us in the photo line before an evening of poetry,
music, and the spoken word that he planned to debut the first song of what he
hoped would be a hip-hop musical on the life of America’s first Treasury
secretary, Alexander Hamilton. We were politely encouraging but secretly
skeptical, until he got up onstage and started dropping beats and the audience
went absolutely nuts.
And there was the time Paul McCartney serenaded my wife with “Michelle.”
She laughed, a little embarrassed, as the rest of the audience applauded, and I
wondered what Michelle’s parents would have said back in 1965, the year the
song came out, if someone had knocked on the door of their South Side home
and told them that someday the Beatle who wrote it would be singing it to their
daughter from a White House stage.
Michelle loved those concerts as much as I did. But I suspect she would have
preferred to have attended them as a guest rather than a host. On the surface, she
had every reason to feel good about her own adjustment to our new life: Our
daughters seemed happy; she’d quickly made a new circle of friends, many of
them the mothers of Malia’s and Sasha’s classmates; and she had a little more
flexibility than I did to leave the White House complex unnoticed. Her initiative
to reduce childhood obesity—called Let’s Move!—had been well received and
was already showing meaningful results, and in collaboration with Jill Biden she
would soon launch a new initiative, called Joining Forces, that would provide
support to military families. Whenever she appeared in public, whether it was
visiting a public school classroom or trading good-natured barbs with late-night

television hosts, people seemed irresistibly drawn to her genuineness and warmth,
her smile and quick wit. In fact, it was fair to say that, unlike me, she had not
missed a step or hit a false note from the moment we’d arrived in Washington.
And yet, despite Michelle’s success and popularity, I continued to sense an
undercurrent of tension in her, subtle but constant, like the faint thrum of a
hidden machine. It was as if, confined as we were within the walls of the White
House, all of her previous sources of frustration became more concentrated, more
vivid, whether it was my round-the-clock absorption with work, or the way
politics exposed our family to constant scrutiny and attacks, or the tendency of
even friends and family members to treat her role as secondary in importance.
More than anything, the White House reminded her daily that fundamental
aspects of her life were no longer entirely within her control. Who we spent time
with, where we went on vacation, where we’d be living after the 2012 election,
even the safety of her family—all of it was at some level subject to how well I
performed at my job, or what the West Wing staff did or didn’t do, or the whims
of voters, or the press corps, or Mitch McConnell, or the jobs numbers, or some
completely unanticipated event occurring on the other side of the planet.
Nothing was fixed anymore. Not even close. And so, consciously or not, a part
of her stayed on alert, no matter what small triumphs and joys a day or week or
month might bring, waiting and watching for the next turn of the wheel, bracing
herself for calamity.
Michelle rarely shared such feelings directly with me. She knew the load I
was carrying and saw no point in adding to it; for the foreseeable future, at least,
there wasn’t much I could do to change our circumstances. And maybe she
stopped talking because she knew I’d try to reason away her fears, or try to
placate her in some inconsequential way, or imply that all she needed was a
change in attitude.
If I was fine, she should be too.
There remained stretches when it really did feel fine, evenings when the two
of us snuggled under a blanket to watch a show on TV, Sunday afternoons when
we got down on the carpet with the girls and Bo and the entire second floor of
the residence filled up with laughter. More often, though, Michelle retired to her
study once dinner was done, while I headed down the long hall to the Treaty
Room. By the time I was finished with work, she’d already be asleep. I’d undress,
brush my teeth, and slip under the covers, careful not to wake her. And although
I rarely had trouble falling asleep during my time in the White House—I’d be so

tired that within five minutes of my head hitting the pillow I’d usually be out
cold—there were nights when, lying next to Michelle in the dark, I’d think
about those days when everything between us felt lighter, when her smile was
more constant and our love less encumbered, and my heart would suddenly
tighten at the thought that those days might not return.
It makes me wonder now, with the benefit of hindsight, whether Michelle’s
was the more honest response to all the changes we were going through; whether
in my seeming calm as crises piled up, my insistence that everything would work
out in the end, I was really just protecting myself—and contributing to her
loneliness.
I know that it was around this time that I started having a recurring dream. In
it, I find myself on the streets of some unnamed city, a neighborhood with trees,
storefronts, light traffic. The day is pleasant and warm, with a soft breeze, and
people are out shopping or walking their dogs or coming home from work. In
one version I’m riding a bike, but most often I’m on foot, and I’m strolling along,
without any thoughts in particular, when suddenly I realize that no one
recognizes me. My security detail is gone. There’s nowhere I have to be. My
choices have no consequence. I wander into a corner store and buy a bottle of
water or iced tea, making small talk with the person behind the counter. I settle
down on a nearby bench, pop open the cap on my drink, take a sip, and just
watch the world passing by.
I feel like I’ve won the lottery.
—
had the answer for regaining political momentum. The Wall
Street crisis had exposed a breakdown in the system for regulating financial
markets, and during the transition, I’d asked our economic team to develop
legislative reforms that would make a future crisis less likely. As far as Rahm was
concerned, the sooner we got such a “Wall Street reform” bill drafted and up for
a vote, the better.
“It puts us back on the side of the angels,” he said. “And if the Republicans
try to block it, we’ll shove it up their ass.”
There was every reason to expect that Mitch McConnell would fight us on
new financial regulations. After all, he’d made a career of opposing any and all
forms of government regulation (environmental laws, labor laws, workplace safety
RAHM THOUGHT HE

laws, campaign finance laws, consumer protection laws) that might constrain
corporate America’s ability to do whatever it damn well pleased. But McConnell
also understood the political hazards of the moment—voters still associated the
Republican Party with big business and yacht-owning billionaires—and he didn’t
plan on letting his party’s standard anti-regulation position get in the way of his
quest for the Senate majority. And so, while he made no secret of his intention to
filibuster my agenda at every turn, a task made easier after Scott Brown’s victory
in the Massachusetts Senate race deprived Democrats of their sixtieth vote, he let
Tim know in a meeting in his office on Capitol Hill that he’d make an exception
for Wall Street reform. “He’s going to vote against whatever we propose,” Tim
told us after returning from the meeting, “and so will most of his caucus. But he
said we should be able to find five or so Republicans who’ll work with us and he
won’t do anything to stop them.”
“Anything else?” I asked.
“Only that obstruction is working for them,” Tim said. “He seemed pretty
pleased with himself.”
McConnell’s concession to the public mood was significant, but it didn’t
mean we’d have an easy time getting Wall Street reform through Congress.
Banking industry executives continued to show no remorse for the economic
havoc they’d caused. Nor did bankers show gratitude for all we’d done to yank
them out of the fire (accusations that I was “anti-business” had become a regular
feature in the financial press). On the contrary, they viewed our efforts to tighten
regulations on their operations as unacceptably burdensome, if not downright
offensive. They also retained one of the most powerful lobbying operations in
Washington, with influential constituencies in every state and the deep pockets to
spread campaign donations across both parties.
Beyond all-out opposition from the banks, we had to confront the sheer
complexity of trying to regulate the modern financial system. Gone were the days
when most of America’s money ran in a simple, circular loop, with banks taking
in customers’ deposits and using that money to make plain vanilla loans to
families and businesses. Trillions of dollars now moved across multiple borders in
the blink of an eye. The holdings of nontraditional financial operations like hedge
funds and private equity firms rivaled those of many banks, while computerdriven trading and exotic products like derivatives had the power to make or
break markets. Within the United States, oversight of this diffuse system was split
among an assortment of federal agencies (the Fed, Treasury, FDIC, SEC, CFTC,

OCC), most of which operated independently and fiercely protected their turf.
Effective reform meant corralling these different players under a common
regulatory framework; it also meant syncing up U.S. efforts with those made by
regulators in other countries so that firms couldn’t simply run their transactions
through overseas accounts to avoid more stringent rules.
Finally we had to contend with sharp differences within the Democratic Party
about both the shape and scope of reform. For those who leaned closer to the
political center (and that included Tim and Larry as well as the majority of
Democrats in Congress), the recent crisis had revealed serious but fixable flaws in
an otherwise solid financial system. Wall Street’s status as the world’s preeminent
financial center depended on growth and innovation, the argument went, and
cycles of boom and bust—with corresponding swings between irrational
exuberance and irrational panic—were built-in features not only of modern
capitalism but of the human psyche. Since it was neither possible nor even
desirable to eliminate all risk to investors and firms, the goals of reform were
defined narrowly: Put guardrails around the system to reduce the most excessive
forms of risk-taking, ensure transparency in the operations of major institutions,
and “make the system safe for failure,” as Larry put it, so that those individuals or
financial institutions that made bad bets didn’t drag everyone else down with
them.
To many on the left, this sort of targeted approach to reform fell woefully
short of what was needed and would merely put off a long-overdue reckoning
with a system that failed to serve the interests of ordinary Americans. They
blamed some of the economy’s most troubling trends on a bloated, morally
suspect financial sector—whether it was the corporate world’s preference for cost
cutting and layoffs over long-term investments as a way of boosting short-term
earnings, or the use of debt-financed acquisitions by certain private equity firms
to strip down existing businesses and resell their spare parts for undeserved profit,
or the steady rise in income inequality and the shrinking share of taxes paid by
the über-rich. To reduce these distorting effects and stop the speculative frenzies
that so often triggered financial crises, they urged, we should consider a more
radical overhaul of Wall Street. The reforms they favored included capping the
size of U.S. banks and reinstating Glass-Steagall, a Depression-era law that had
prohibited FDIC-insured banks from engaging in investment banking, which had
been mostly repealed during the Clinton administration.
In a lot of ways, these intraparty divisions on financial regulation reminded
me of the healthcare debate, when advocates of a single-payer system had

dismissed any accommodations to the existing private insurance system as selling
out. And just as had been true in the healthcare debate, I had some sympathy for
the Left’s indictment of the status quo. Rather than efficiently allocate capital to
productive uses, Wall Street really did increasingly function like a trillion-dollar
casino, its outsized profits and compensation packages overly dependent on evergreater leverage and speculation. Its obsession with quarterly earnings had warped
corporate decision-making and encouraged short-term thinking. Untethered to
place, indifferent to the impact of globalization on particular workers and
communities, the financial markets had helped accelerate the offshoring of jobs
and the concentration of wealth in a handful of cities and economic sectors,
leaving huge swaths of the country drained of money, talent, and hope.
Big, bold policies could make a dent in these problems, most of which had to
do with rewriting the tax code, strengthening labor laws, and changing the rules
of corporate governance. All three items were high on my to-do list.
But when it came to regulating the nation’s financial markets to make the
system more stable, the Left’s prescription missed its mark. The evidence didn’t
show that limiting the size of U.S. banks would have prevented the recent crisis
or the need for federal intervention once the system began to unravel.
JPMorgan’s assets dwarfed those of Bear Stearns and Lehman Brothers, but it was
those smaller firms’ highly leveraged bets on securitized subprime mortgages that
had set off a panic. The last major U.S. financial crisis, back in the 1980s, hadn’t
involved big banks at all; instead, the system had been rocked by a deluge of
high-risk loans by thousands of small, poorly capitalized regional savings and loan
associations (S&Ls) in cities and small towns across the country. Given the scope
of their operations, we thought it made sense for regulators to give mega-banks
like Citi or Bank of America extra scrutiny—but cutting their assets in half
wouldn’t change that. And since the banking sectors of most European and Asian
countries were actually more concentrated than they were here, limiting the size
of U.S. banks would put them at a big disadvantage in the international
marketplace, all without eliminating the overall risk to the system.
For similar reasons, the growth of the non-bank financial sector made GlassSteagall’s distinction between investment banks and FDIC-insured commercial
banks largely obsolete. The largest bettors on subprime mortgage securities—
AIG, Lehman, Bear, Merrill, as well as Fannie and Freddie—weren’t commercial
banks backed by federal guarantees. Investors hadn’t cared about the absence of
guarantees and poured so much money into them anyway that the entire financial
system was threatened when they started to fail. Conversely, traditional FDIC-

insured banks like Washington Mutual and IndyMac got into trouble not by
behaving like investment banks and underwriting high-flying securities but by
making tons of subprime loans to unqualified buyers in order to drive up their
earnings. Given how easily capital now flowed between various financial entities
in search of higher returns, stabilizing the system required that we focus on the
risky practices we were trying to curb rather than the type of institution involved.
And then there were the politics. We didn’t have anything close to the votes
in the Senate for either reviving Glass-Steagall or passing legislation to shrink U.S.
banks, any more than we’d had the votes for a single-payer healthcare system.
Even in the House, Dems were anxious about any perception of overreaching,
especially if it caused the financial markets to pull in their horns again and made
the economy worse. “My constituents hate Wall Street right now, Mr.
President,” one suburban Democrat told me, “but they didn’t sign up for a
complete teardown.” FDR may have once had a mandate from voters to try
anything, including a restructuring of American capitalism, after three wrenching
years of the Depression, but partly because we’d stopped the situation from ever
getting that bad, our mandate for change was a whole lot narrower. Our best
chance for broadening that mandate, I figured, was to notch a few wins while we
could.
—
after months of fine-tuning, our draft legislation for financial
reform was ready to take to Congress. And while it didn’t contain all the
provisions the Left had been looking for, it remained a massively ambitious effort
to revamp twentieth-century regulations for the twenty-first-century economy.
At the core of the package was a proposal to increase the percentage of capital
that all financial institutions of “systemic” importance—whether banks or nonbanks—were required to hold. More capital meant less borrowing to finance
risky bets. Greater liquidity meant these institutions could better weather sudden
runs during a market downturn. Forcing Wall Street’s main players to maintain a
bigger capital cushion against losses would fortify the system as a whole; and to
make sure these institutions hit their marks, they’d have to regularly undergo the
same kind of stress test we’d applied at the height of the crisis.
Next we needed a formal mechanism to allow any single firm, no matter how
big, to fail in an orderly way, so that it wouldn’t contaminate the entire system.
The FDIC already had the power to put any federally insured bank through what
IN JUNE 2009,

amounted to a structured bankruptcy proceeding, with rules governing how assets
were liquidated and how claimants divvied up whatever remained. Our draft
legislation gave the Fed a comparable “resolution authority” over all systemically
important institutions, whether they were banks or not.
To improve consistency of enforcement, we proposed streamlining the
functions and responsibilities of various federal agencies. To facilitate quicker
responses in the event of a major market disruption, we formalized authority for
many of the emergency actions—“foam on the runway,” our economic team
called it—that the Fed and Treasury had deployed during the recent crisis. And to
catch potential problems before they got out of hand, our draft legislation
tightened up rules governing the specialized markets that constituted much of the
financial system’s plumbing. We paid particular attention to the buying and
selling of derivatives, those often impenetrable forms of securities that had helped
intensify losses across the system once the subprime mortgage market collapsed.
Derivatives had legitimate uses—all sorts of companies used them to hedge their
risk against big swings in currency or commodity prices. But they also offered
irresponsible traders some of the biggest opportunities for the kinds of high-stakes
gambling that put the entire system at risk. Our reforms would push most of
these transactions into a public exchange, allowing for clearer rules and greater
supervision.
The bulk of these proposals were highly technical, involving aspects of the
financial system that were hidden from public view. But there was a final element
of our draft legislation that had less to do with high finance and more to do with
people’s everyday lives. The crisis on Wall Street couldn’t have happened
without the explosion of subprime mortgage lending. And although plenty of
those loans went to sophisticated borrowers—those who understood the risks
involved with adjustable rate mortgages and balloon payments as they flipped
Florida condos or purchased Arizona vacation homes—a larger percentage had
been marketed and sold to working-class families, many of them Black and
Hispanic, people who believed they were finally gaining access to the American
Dream only to see their homes and their savings snatched away in foreclosure
proceedings.
The failure to protect consumers from unfair or misleading lending practices
wasn’t restricted to mortgages. Perpetually short on cash no matter how hard they
worked, millions of Americans regularly found themselves subject to exorbitant
interest rates, hidden fees, and just plain bad deals at the hands of credit card
issuers, payday lenders (many of them quietly owned or financed by blue-chip

banks), used-car dealers, cut-rate insurers, retailers selling furniture on installment
plans, and purveyors of reverse mortgages. Often they found themselves in a
downward spiral of compounding debt, missed payments, shot credit, and
repossessions that left them in a deeper hole than where they’d started. Across the
country, sketchy financial-industry practices contributed to rising inequality,
reduced upward mobility, and the kinds of hidden debt bubbles that made the
economy more vulnerable to major disruptions.
Having already signed legislation reforming the credit card industry, I agreed
with my team that the aftermath of the crisis offered us a unique chance to make
more progress on the consumer protection front. As it happened, Harvard law
professor and bankruptcy expert Elizabeth Warren had come up with an idea that
might deliver the kind of impact we were looking for: a new consumer finance
protection agency meant to bolster the patchwork of spottily enforced state and
federal regulations already in place and to shield consumers from questionable
financial products the same way the Consumer Product Safety Commission kept
shoddy or dangerous consumer goods off the shelves.
I was a longtime admirer of Warren’s work, dating back to the 2003
publication of her book The Two-Income Trap, in which Warren and her
coauthor, Amelia Tyagi, provided an incisive and passionate description of the
growing pressures facing working families with children. Unlike most academics,
Warren showed a gift for translating financial analysis into stories that ordinary
folks could understand. In the intervening years, she had emerged as one of the
financial industry’s most effective critics, prompting Harry Reid to appoint her as
chair of the congressional panel overseeing TARP.
Tim and Larry were apparently less enamored with Warren than I was, each
of them having been called to make repeated appearances before her committee.
Although they appreciated her intelligence and embraced her idea of a consumer
finance protection agency, they saw her as something of a grandstander.
“She’s really good at taking potshots at us,” Tim said in one of our meetings,
“even when she knows there aren’t any serious alternatives to what we’re already
doing.”
I looked up in mock surprise. “Well, that’s shocking,” I said. “A member of
an oversight committee playing to the crowd? Rahm, you ever heard of such a
thing?”
“No, Mr. President,” Rahm said. “It’s an outrage.”
Even Tim had to crack a smile.

—
getting Wall Street reform through Congress was no less
laborious than our adventures with the Affordable Care Act, but it didn’t receive
nearly as much attention. Partly this had to do with the subject matter. Even
members and lobbyists intent on killing the legislation kept a relatively low
profile, not wanting to be seen as defenders of Wall Street so soon after the crisis,
and many of the bill’s finer points were too arcane to generate interest in the
popular press.
One issue that did capture headlines involved a proposal by former Federal
Reserve chairman Paul Volcker to prohibit FDIC-insured banks from trading on
their own accounts or operating their own hedge funds and private equity shops.
According to Volcker, this sort of provision offered a simple way to restore some
of the prudential boundaries that Glass-Steagall had placed around commercial
banks. Before we knew it, our willingness to include the “Volcker Rule” in our
legislation became a litmus test among many on the left for how serious we were
about Wall Street reform. Volcker, a gruff, cigar-smoking, six-foot-seven
economist by training, was an unlikely hero for progressives. In 1980, as Fed
chairman, he’d hiked U.S. interest rates to an unprecedented 20 percent in order
to break the back of America’s then-raging inflation, resulting in a brutal
recession and 10 percent unemployment. The Fed’s painful medicine had angered
unions and many Democrats at the time; on the other hand, it had not only
tamed inflation but helped lay the groundwork for stable economic growth in the
1980s and ’90s, making Volcker a revered figure in both New York and
Washington.
In recent years, Volcker had grown bluntly critical of Wall Street’s worst
excesses, gaining some liberal admirers. He’d endorsed my campaign early, and
I’d come to value his counsel enough that I appointed him to chair an advisory
group on the economic crisis. With his no-nonsense demeanor, and his belief in
free-market efficiency as well as in public institutions and the common good, he
was something of a throwback (my grandmother would have liked him), and
after hearing him out in a private meeting in the Oval, I was persuaded that his
proposal to curb proprietary trading made sense. When I discussed the idea with
Tim and Larry, though, they were skeptical, arguing that it would be difficult to
administer and might impinge on legitimate services that banks provided their
customers. To me, their position sounded flimsy—one of the few times during
our work together when I felt they harbored more sympathy for the financial
THE PROCESS OF

industry’s perspective than the facts warranted—and for weeks I continued to
press them on the matter. At the start of 2010, as Tim grew concerned that
momentum for Wall Street reform was beginning to lag, he finally recommended
we make a version of the Volcker Rule part of our legislative package.
“If it helps us get the bill passed,” Tim said, “we can find a way to make it
work.”
For Tim, it was a rare concession to political optics. Axe and Gibbs, who’d
been filling my in-box with polls showing that 60 percent of voters thought my
administration was too friendly toward the banks, were thrilled with the news;
they suggested that we announce the proposal at the White House with Volcker
on hand. I asked if the general public would understand such an obscure rule
change.
“They don’t need to understand it,” Gibbs said. “If the banks hate it, they’ll
figure it must be a good thing.”
With the basic parameters of our legislation set, it fell to House Financial
Services Committee chairman Barney Frank and Senate Banking Committee
chairman Chris Dodd, both twenty-nine-year veterans of Congress, to help get it
passed. They were an unlikely pair. Barney had made his name as a liberal
firebrand and the first member of Congress to come out as gay. His thick glasses,
disheveled suits, and strong Jersey accent lent him a workingman’s vibe, and he
was as tough, smart, and knowledgeable as anyone in Congress, with a withering,
rapid-fire wit that made him a favorite of reporters and a headache for political
opponents. (Barney once spoke to one of my classes while I was a student at
Harvard Law, during which he dressed me down for asking what he apparently
considered a dumb question. I didn’t think it was that dumb. Thankfully, he
didn’t remember our first encounter.)
Chris Dodd, on the other hand, came off as the consummate Washington
insider. Immaculately dressed, his silver hair as shiny and crisp as a TV news
anchor’s, always ready to roll out a bit of Capitol Hill gossip or an Irish tall tale,
he’d grown up in politics—the son of a former U.S. senator, one of Ted
Kennedy’s best friends, pals with any number of industry lobbyists despite his
liberal voting record. We’d developed a warm relationship while I was in the
Senate, based in part on Chris’s good-natured acknowledgment of the absurdity
of the place (“You didn’t think this was actually on the level, did you?” he’d say
with a wink after some colleague made an impassioned plea on behalf of a bill
while actively trying to undermine said bill behind the scenes). But he took pride

in his effectiveness as a legislator, and had been one of the driving forces behind
such impactful laws as the Family and Medical Leave Act.
Together, they made a formidable team, each perfectly suited for the politics
of their chamber. In the House, a dominant Democratic majority meant that
passing a financial-reform bill was never in question. Instead, our main task was
keeping our own members on track. Not only did Barney have a firm command
of the legislative details; he had the credibility inside the Democratic caucus to
temper impractical demands from fellow progressives, as well as the clout to ward
off efforts by more transactional Democrats to water down the legislation on
behalf of special interests. In the Senate, where we needed every vote we could
find, Chris’s patient bedside manner and willingness to reach out to even the
most recalcitrant Republicans helped soothe the nerves of conservative
Democrats; he also gave us a useful conduit to industry lobbyists who opposed
the bill but didn’t find Chris scary.
Despite these advantages, moving what came to be known as “Dodd-Frank”
involved the same kind of sausage-making that had been required to pass the
healthcare bill, with a flurry of compromises that often left me privately steaming.
Over our strong objections, the car dealers won an exemption from our new
consumer protection agency’s oversight: With prominent dealerships in every
congressional district, many of them considered pillars of the community for their
sponsorship of Little League teams or donations to the local hospital, even the
most regulation-happy Democrat ran scared of potential blowback. Our effort to
streamline the number of regulatory agencies overseeing the financial system died
an inglorious death; with each agency subject to the jurisdiction of a different
congressional committee (the Commodity Futures Trading Commission, for
example, reported to the House and Senate Agriculture Committees),
Democratic committee chairs fiercely resisted the idea of giving up their leverage
over some part of the financial industry. As Barney explained to Tim, we could
conceivably consolidate the SEC and the CFTC: “Just not in the United States.”
In the Senate, where the need to get to the sixty-vote threshold in order to
overcome a filibuster gave every senator leverage, we were left to contend with
all sorts of individual requests. Republican Scott Brown, fresh off a victorious
campaign in which he’d railed against Harry Reid’s various “backroom deals” to
get the healthcare bill passed, indicated a willingness to vote for Wall Street
reform—but not without a deal of his own, asking if we could exempt a pair of
favored Massachusetts banks from the new regulations. He saw no irony in this. A
group of left-leaning Democrats introduced with much fanfare an amendment

that they claimed would make the Volcker Rule’s restrictions on proprietary
trading even tougher. Except that when you read the fine print, their amendment
carved out loopholes for a smorgasbord of interests—the insurance industry, real
estate investments, trusts, and on and on—that did big business in these senators’
individual states.
“Another day in the world’s greatest deliberative body,” Chris said.
At times, I felt like the fisherman in Hemingway’s The Old Man and the Sea,
sharks gnawing at my catch as I tried to tow it to shore. But as the weeks passed,
the core of our reforms survived the amendment process remarkably intact. A
number of provisions introduced by congressional members—including improved
disclosure of executive compensation in public companies, increased transparency
in credit-rating agencies, and new claw-back mechanisms to prevent Wall Street
executives from walking away with millions in bonuses as a result of questionable
practices—actually made the bill better. Thanks to strong cooperation between
our two lead sponsors, the conference to reconcile differences between the House
and Senate versions of the bill saw none of the intraparty squabbling that had
played out during the negotiations over healthcare. And in mid-July 2010, after a
vote of 237–192 in the House and 60–39 in the Senate (with three Republicans
voting “aye” in each chamber), we held a White House ceremony where I signed
into law the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act.
It was a significant triumph: the most sweeping change to the rules governing
America’s financial sector since the New Deal. The law had its warts and
unwanted compromises, and it certainly wouldn’t put an end to every instance of
foolishness, greed, shortsightedness, or dishonesty on Wall Street. But by
establishing the equivalent of “better building codes, smoke detectors, and
sprinkler systems,” as Tim liked to describe it, Dodd-Frank would check a
number of reckless practices, give regulators the tools to put out financial fires
before they got out of hand, and make crises on the scale we’d just seen far less
likely. And in the new Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB), American
families now had a powerful advocate in their corner. Through its work, they
could expect a fairer, more transparent credit market, and real savings as they
tried to buy a house, finance a car, deal with a family emergency, send their kids
to college, or plan for retirement.
But if my team and I could take pride in the substance of what we’d
achieved, we also had to acknowledge what had become obvious even before the
bill was signed: Dodd-Frank’s historic reforms weren’t going to give us much of a

political lift. Despite valiant efforts by Favs and the rest of my speechwriters, it
was hard to make “derivative clearinghouses” and “proprietary trading bans”
sound transformational. Most of the law’s improvements to the system would
remain invisible to the public—more a matter of bad outcomes prevented than
tangible benefits gained. The idea of a consumer agency for financial products
was popular with voters, but the CFPB would take time to set up, and people
were looking for help right away. With conservatives denouncing the legislation
as a guarantee of future bailouts and another step toward socialism, and with
progressives unhappy that we hadn’t done more to remake the banks, it was easy
for voters to conclude that the sound and fury around Dodd-Frank signified
nothing more than the usual Washington scrum—especially since, by the time it
passed, all anybody wanted to talk about was a gaping, gushing hole at the
bottom of the ocean.