ENTERING THE SUMMER OF 2008

our campaign’s first order of business was
unifying the Democratic Party. The prolonged and bruising primary had left hard
feelings between Hillary’s staff and mine, and some of her more ardent boosters
threatened to withhold their support unless I put her on the ticket.
But despite speculation in the press of a possibly irreparable breach, our first
post-primary meeting, held in early June at the Washington home of our
colleague Senator Dianne Feinstein, proved to be courteous and businesslike, if
not without tension. At the outset, Hillary felt obliged to get a few things off her
chest, mainly having to do with what she considered unfair attacks by my
campaign. As the winner, I felt obliged to keep my own complaints to myself.
But it didn’t take long to clear the air. The bottom line, she said, was that she
wanted to be a team player—for the good of the Democratic Party, and for the
good of the country.
It may have helped that she sensed my sincere admiration. Although I would
ultimately decide that having her as a running mate posed too many
complications (including the awkwardness of a former president roaming the
West Wing without a clear portfolio), I was already considering a different role
for her in an Obama administration. How Hillary felt about me, I couldn’t say.
But if she harbored any doubts about my readiness for the job ahead, she kept
them to herself. From our first public appearance together a few weeks later, in a
small New Hampshire town called Unity (corny, but effective), until the very
end of the campaign, both she and Bill did everything we asked of them with
energy and a smile.
With Hillary on board, the team and I got busy designing our broader
electoral strategy. Like the primaries and caucuses, a presidential general election
resembles a big math puzzle. Which combination of states do you need to win to
get the requisite 270 electoral votes? For at least twenty years, nominees of both
parties had come up with the same answer, assuming that the majority of states
NTERING THE SUMMER OF 2008,

were inalterably Republican or Democratic, and therefore concentrating all their
time and money on a handful of big battleground states like Ohio, Florida,
Pennsylvania, and Michigan.
Plouffe had a different idea. One happy by-product of our interminable
primary was that we’d campaigned in every nook and corner of the country. We
had battle-tested volunteers in a number of states Democrats had historically
ignored. Why not use that advantage to compete in traditionally Republicanleaning territory? Based on the data, Plouffe was convinced we could win western
states like Colorado and Nevada. With a big boost in turnout among minority
and younger voters, he believed we even had a chance in North Carolina, a state
that hadn’t gone Democratic in a presidential election since Jimmy Carter in
1976, and Virginia, which hadn’t gone Democratic since Lyndon Johnson in
1964. Broadening the electoral map would give us multiple paths to victory,
Plouffe argued, and would also help down-ballot Democratic candidates. At a
minimum, it would force John McCain and the Republican Party to spend
resources shoring up their vulnerable flanks.
Among the various Republicans who had competed for the presidential
nomination, I had always considered John McCain to be most worthy of the
prize. I had admired him from afar before I got to Washington—not only for his
service as a navy pilot and the unimaginable courage he’d shown during five and
a half harrowing years as a POW, but because of the contrarian sensibility and
willingness to buck Republican Party orthodoxy on issues like immigration and
climate change that he’d shown in his 2000 presidential campaign. While we
were never close in the Senate, I often found him insightful and self-deprecating,
quick to puncture pretension and hypocrisy on both sides of the aisle.
McCain did enjoy being something of a press corps darling (“my
constituency,” he once called them), never passing up a chance to be on the
Sunday morning news shows, and among his colleagues he had a well-earned
reputation for volatility—quick to explode over small disagreements, his pallid
face reddening, his reedy voice rising at the first sign of a perceived slight. But he
wasn’t an ideologue. He respected not only the customs of the Senate but also the
institutions of our government and our democracy. I never saw him display the
race-tinged nativism that regularly infected other Republican politicians, and on
more than one occasion, I’d seen him display real political courage.
Once, as the two of us stood in the well of the Senate waiting for a vote,
John had confided to me that he couldn’t stand a lot of the “crazies” in his own

party. I knew this was part of his shtick—privately playing to Democrats’
sensibilities while voting with his caucus about 90 percent of the time. But the
disdain he expressed for the far-right wing of his party wasn’t an act. And in an
increasingly polarized climate, the political equivalent of a holy war, McCain’s
modest heresies, his unwillingness to profess the true faith, carried a real cost. The
“crazies” in his party mistrusted him, they considered him a RINO—Republican
in Name Only—and he was regularly attacked by the Rush Limbaugh crowd.
Unfortunately for McCain, it was precisely these voices of the hard Right that
were exciting the core GOP voters most likely to vote in presidential primaries,
rather than the business-friendly, strong-on-defense, socially moderate
Republicans McCain appealed to and was most comfortable with. And as the
Republican primary wore on, and McCain sought to win over some of the very
people he professed to despise—as he abandoned any pretense of fiscal rectitude
in favor of even bigger tax cuts than the Bush tax cuts he’d once voted against,
and hedged his position on climate change to accommodate fossil fuel interests—I
sensed a change taking place in him. He seemed pained, uncertain—the once
jaunty, irreverent warrior transformed into a cranky Washington insider, lassoed
to an incumbent president with an approval rating around 30 percent and a
hugely unpopular war.
I wasn’t sure I could beat the 2000 version of John McCain. But I was
increasingly confident that I could beat the McCain of 2008.
—
say I thought the race would be easy. In a contest against an
American hero, the election wouldn’t be decided on issues alone. Indeed, we
suspected that the central question was likely to be whether a majority of voters
could get comfortable with the idea of a young, inexperienced African American
senator—one who hadn’t previously served in the military or even an executive
office—filling the role of commander in chief.
I knew that if I was to earn Americans’ trust on this front, I needed to speak
from the most informed position possible, especially about the nation’s role in
Iraq and Afghanistan. Which is why, just a few weeks after I’d wrapped up the
nomination, we decided I would embark on nine days of foreign travel. The
proposed schedule was brutal: In addition to a brief stop in Kuwait and three days
on the ground in Afghanistan and Iraq, I would meet with the leaders of Israel,
Jordan, the United Kingdom, and France, and deliver a major foreign policy
THAT’S NOT TO

address in Berlin. If we pulled the trip off, we’d not only dispel concerns voters
might have about my ability to operate effectively on the world stage but also
highlight—at a time when voters were deeply troubled by the strained alliances of
the Bush years—just what a new era of American leadership might look like.
Of course, with the political press sure to flyspeck my every move, there was
a good chance something might go wrong. Even a single blunder might reinforce
the notion that I wasn’t ready for prime time and tank our campaign. My team
figured it was worth the risk.
“Walking a tightrope without a net,” Plouffe said. “That’s when we’re at our
best.”
I pointed out that it was me and not “we” perilously up in the air.
Nevertheless, I left Washington in good spirits, eager to travel overseas after a
year and a half with my nose to the campaign grindstone.
Joining me on the Afghanistan and Iraq legs of the trip were two of my
favorite colleagues, both of whom were seasoned in foreign policy: Chuck Hagel,
the ranking member of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, and Jack Reed,
who sat on the Armed Services Committee. In personality, the two men couldn’t
have been more different. Jack, a liberal Democrat from Rhode Island, was
slightly built, studious, and understated. A proud West Point graduate, he had
been one of the few senators to vote against authorizing the Iraq War. Chuck, a
conservative Republican from Nebraska, was broad-shouldered, expansive, and
full of good humor. A Vietnam veteran with two Purple Hearts, he had voted for
the Iraq War. What the two shared was an abiding reverence for the U.S. military
and a belief in the prudent use of American power. After almost six years, their
views on Iraq had converged, and they were now two of the war’s most incisive
and credible critics. Their bipartisan presence on the trip helped deflect any
criticism that it was a campaign stunt; and Chuck’s willingness not only to travel
with me but also to publicly praise aspects of my foreign policy, just four months
before the election, was a bold and generous gesture.
On a Saturday in mid-July, we landed at Bagram Air Base, a six-square-mile
installation north of Kabul, set against the jagged peaks of the Hindu Kush, that
served as the largest U.S. military base in Afghanistan. The news wasn’t good:
The collapse of Iraq into sectarian violence, and the Bush administration’s
decision to reinforce our presence with a sustained troop surge, had siphoned
military and intelligence capabilities out of Afghanistan (by 2008, we had five
times as many troops in Iraq as we had there). The shift in focus had allowed the

Taliban—the Sunni Islamic insurgents we’d been fighting since 2001—to go on
the offensive, and that summer the monthly U.S. casualties in Afghanistan would
exceed those in Iraq.
As usual, our military was doing all it could to make a tough situation work.
The newly assigned commander of coalition forces, General Dave McKiernan,
arranged for his team to brief us on the steps they were taking to push back
against Taliban strongholds. The following day, dining in the mess hall at the
U.S. coalition headquarters in Kabul, we listened as a group of soldiers spoke of
their mission with enthusiasm and pride. Hearing these earnest young men and
women, most of them just a few years out of high school, talk about building
roads, training Afghan soldiers, and setting up schools, only to see their work
periodically interrupted or undone because they were understaffed or underresourced, was both humbling and frustrating, and I vowed that, given the
chance, I would get them more help.
That night we slept at the heavily fortified U.S. embassy, and in the morning
we drove to the imposing nineteenth-century palace where President Hamid
Karzai lived. In the 1970s, Kabul had been not so different from the capitals of
other developing countries, ragged around the edges but peaceful and growing,
full of elegant hotels, rock music, and college students intent on modernizing
their country. Karzai and his ministers were products of that era, but many had
fled to Europe or the United States either during the Soviet invasion that began
in 1979 or when the Taliban took over in the mid-1990s. After its assault on
Kabul, the United States had brought Karzai and his advisors back and installed
them in power—functional expatriates we hoped would serve as the Afghan face
of a new, nonmilitant order. With their impeccable English and stylish dress, they
fit the part, and as our delegation dined on a banquet of traditional Afghan fare,
they did their best to persuade us that a modern, tolerant, and self-sufficient
Afghanistan was within reach so long as American troops and cash continued to
flow.
I might have believed Karzai’s words were it not for reports of rampant
corruption and mismanagement within his government. Much of the Afghan
countryside was beyond the control of Kabul, and Karzai rarely ventured out,
reliant not just on U.S. forces but on a patchwork of alliances with local warlords
to maintain what power he possessed. I thought about his seeming isolation later
that day as a pair of Black Hawk helicopters flew us over mountainous terrain on
our way to a U.S. forward operating base (FOB) near Helmand on Afghanistan’s
southern plateau. The small villages of mud and wood that we saw from the air

blended seamlessly into the dun-colored rock formations, with barely a paved
road or an electrical line in sight. I tried to imagine what the people below
thought of the Americans in their midst, or their own president in his sumptuous
palace, or even the idea of a nation-state called Afghanistan. Not much, I
suspected. They were just trying to survive, buffeted by forces as constant and
unpredictable as the winds. And I wondered what it might take—beyond the
courage and skill of our troops, despite the best-laid plans of analysts in
Washington—to reconcile American ideas of what Afghanistan should be with a
landscape that for hundreds of years had proven impervious to change.
Such thoughts stayed with me as we left Afghanistan and headed to Iraq,
spending a night in Kuwait along the way. Trends had improved since my last
visit to Iraq; a surge in U.S. troops, the internationally certified election of Shiite
prime minister Nuri Kamal al-Maliki, and a brokered agreement with Sunni tribal
leaders in the western province of Anbar had reversed some of the sectarian
carnage unleashed by the original U.S. invasion and subsequent bungling by men
like Donald Rumsfeld and Paul Bremer. John McCain interpreted the recent
successes to mean we were winning the fight and would continue to so long as
we stayed the course and—in what had become a common nostrum among
Republicans—“listened to our commanders on the ground.”
I drew a different conclusion. After five years of heavy U.S. involvement,
with Saddam Hussein gone, no evidence of WMDs, and a democratically elected
government installed, I believed phased withdrawal was in order: one that would
build in the time needed to stand up Iraqi security forces and root out the last
vestiges of al-Qaeda in Iraq; guarantee ongoing military, intelligence, and
financial support; and begin bringing our troops home so that we could hand Iraq
back to its people.
As in Afghanistan, we had a chance to mingle with troops and visit an FOB in
Anbar, before meeting with Prime Minister Maliki. He was a dour figure,
vaguely Nixonian with his long face, heavy five-o’clock shadow, and indirect
gaze. He had cause to be stressed, for his new job was both difficult and
dangerous. He was trying to balance the demands of the domestic Shiite power
blocs that had elected him and the Sunni population that had dominated the
country under Saddam; he also had to manage countervailing pressures from his
U.S. benefactors and Iranian neighbors. Indeed, Maliki’s ties to Iran, where he
had lived in exile for many years, as well as his uneasy alliances with certain Shiite
militias, made him anathema to Saudi Arabia and other U.S. allies in the Persian
Gulf region, underscoring just how much the U.S. invasion had strengthened

Iran’s strategic position there.
Whether anyone in the Bush White House had discussed such a predictable
consequence before ordering U.S. troops into Iraq was uncertain. But the
administration sure wasn’t happy about it now. My conversations with several
high-ranking generals and diplomats made clear that the White House’s interest
in maintaining a sizable troop presence in Iraq was about more than a simple
desire to ensure stability and reduce violence. It was also about preventing Iran
from taking further advantage of the mess we’d made.
Given that the issue was dominating the foreign policy debate both in
Congress and in the campaign, I asked Maliki through the interpreter whether he
thought Iraq was ready for a withdrawal of U.S. troops. We were all surprised by
his unequivocal response: Though he expressed deep appreciation for the efforts
of U.S. and British forces and hoped that America would continue to help pay for
the training and maintenance of Iraqi forces, he agreed with me that we set a time
frame for a U.S. withdrawal.
It was unclear what was behind Maliki’s decision to push an accelerated
timetable for U.S. withdrawal. Simple nationalism? Pro-Iranian sympathies? A
move to consolidate his power? But as far as the political debate in the United
States was concerned, Maliki’s position had big implications. It was one thing for
the White House or John McCain to dismiss my calls for a timetable for
withdrawal as weak and irresponsible, a version of “cut and run.” It was quite
another to dismiss the same idea coming from Iraq’s newly elected leader.
Of course, at the time, Maliki still didn’t really call the shots in his country.
The commander of coalition forces in Iraq, General David Petraeus, did—and it
was my conversation with him that foreshadowed some of the central foreign
policy debates I’d have for much of my presidency.
Trim and fit, with a PhD in international relations and economics from
Princeton and an orderly, analytical mind, Petraeus was considered the brains
behind our improved position in Iraq and the individual to whom the White
House had essentially contracted out its strategy. We took a helicopter together
from the Baghdad airport to the heavily fortified Green Zone, talking all the way,
and although the substance of our conversation wouldn’t appear in any press
write-ups, as far as my campaign team was concerned that was just fine. It was the
photographs they cared about—images of me seated next to a four-star general
aboard a Black Hawk helicopter, wearing a headset and aviator glasses.
Apparently it proved a youthful, vigorous contrast to an unfortunate depiction of

my Republican opponent that happened to surface on the very same day:
McCain riding shotgun on a golf cart with former president George H. W. Bush,
the two of them resembling a couple of pastel-sweatered grandpas on their way to
a country club picnic.
Meanwhile, sitting together in his spacious office at coalition headquarters,
Petraeus and I discussed everything from the need for more Arabic-language
specialists in the military to the vital role development projects would play in
delegitimizing militias and terrorist organizations and bolstering the new
government. Bush deserved credit, I thought, for having selected this particular
general to right what had been a sinking ship. If we had unlimited time and
resources—if America’s long-term national security interests absolutely depended
on creating a functioning and democratic state allied to the United States in Iraq
—then Petraeus’s approach had as good a chance as any of achieving the goal.
But we did not have unlimited time or resources. When you boiled it down,
that’s what the argument over withdrawal was all about. How much did we
continue to give, and when would it be enough? As far as I was concerned, we
were approaching that line; our national security required a stable Iraq, but not a
showcase for American nation-building. Petraeus, on the other hand, believed
that without a more sustained U.S. investment, whatever gains we’d made were
still easily reversed.
I asked how long it would take for them to feel permanent. Two years? Five?
Ten?
He couldn’t say. But announcing a fixed timetable for withdrawal, he
believed, would only give the enemy the chance to wait us out.
But wouldn’t that always be true?
He conceded the point.
And what about surveys indicating that a strong majority of Iraqis, both Shiite
and Sunni, had wearied of the occupation and wanted us out sooner rather than
later?
That was a problem we would have to manage, he said.
The conversation was cordial, and I couldn’t blame Petraeus for wanting to
finish the mission. If I were in your shoes, I told him, I’d want the same thing.
But a president’s job required looking at a bigger picture, I said, just as he himself
had to consider trade-offs and constraints that officers under his command did
not. As a nation, how should we weigh an additional two or three years in Iraq at
a cost of nearly $10 billion a month against the need to dismantle Osama bin

Laden and core al-Qaeda operations in northwestern Pakistan? Or against the
schools and roads not built back home? Or the erosion of readiness should
another crisis arise? Or the human toll exacted on our troops and their families?
General Petraeus nodded politely and said he looked forward to seeing me
after the election. As our delegation took its leave that day, I doubted I’d
persuaded him of the wisdom of my position any more than he had persuaded
me.
—
to be a world leader? Did I have the diplomatic skills, the
knowledge and stamina, the authority to command? The balance of the trip was
designed to answer such questions, an elaborate audition on the international
stage. There were bilateral meetings with King Abdullah in Jordan, Gordon
Brown in England, Nicolas Sarkozy in France. I met with Angela Merkel in
Germany, where I also spoke to an audience of two hundred thousand people
gathered in front of Berlin’s historic Victory Column, declaring that just as an
earlier generation had torn down the wall that once divided Europe, it was now
our job to tear down other, less visible walls: between rich and poor, between
races and tribes, between natives and immigrants, between Christians, Muslims,
and Jews. Over a couple of marathon days in Israel and the West Bank, I met
separately with Israeli prime minister Ehud Olmert and Palestinian president
Mahmoud Abbas, and did my best to understand not only the logic but also the
emotions behind an ancient and seemingly intractable conflict. In the town of
Sderot, I listened as parents described the terror of rocket shells launched from
nearby Gaza landing just a few yards from their children’s bedrooms. In
Ramallah, I heard Palestinians speak of the daily humiliations endured at Israeli
security checkpoints.
According to Gibbs, the U.S. press thought I’d passed the “looking
presidential” test with flying colors. But for me, the trip went beyond mere
optics. Even more than back home, I felt the immensity of the challenges that
awaited me if I won, the grace I’d need to do the job.
These thoughts were on my mind the morning of July 24, when I arrived at
the Western Wall in Jerusalem, built two thousand years ago to protect the sacred
Temple Mount and viewed as a gateway to divinity and a place where God
accepted the prayers of all who visit. For centuries, pilgrims from around the
world had made a custom of committing their prayers to paper and stuffing them
WAS I PREPARED

into the cracks of the wall, so before coming that morning, I’d written my own
prayer on a piece of hotel stationery.
In the gray light of dawn, surrounded by my Israeli hosts, aides, Secret Service
agents, and the clatter of media cameras, I bowed my head before the wall as a
bearded rabbi read a psalm calling for peace in the holy city of Jerusalem. As was
the custom, I laid a hand on the soft limestone, stilling myself in silent
contemplation, and then wadded up my piece of paper and pushed it deep into a
crevice in the wall.
“Lord,” I had written, “protect my family and me. Forgive me my sins, and
help me guard against pride and despair. Give me the wisdom to do what is right
and just. And make me an instrument of your will.”
I had assumed those words were between me and God. But the next day they
showed up in an Israeli newspaper before achieving eternal life on the internet.
Apparently a bystander dug my scrap of paper out of the wall after we left—a
reminder of the price that came with stepping onto the world stage. The line
between my private and public lives was dissolving; each thought and gesture was
now a matter of global interest.
Get used to it, I told myself. It’s part of the deal.
—
overseas trip, I felt like an astronaut or an explorer just
back from an arduous expedition, charged with adrenaline and vaguely
disoriented by ordinary life. With only a month to go before the Democratic
National Convention, I decided to try to normalize things a little by taking my
family to Hawaii for a week. I told Plouffe the matter wasn’t up for debate. After
campaigning for seventeen months, I needed to recharge, and so did Michelle.
Also, Toot’s health was deteriorating rapidly, and while we couldn’t know
exactly how long my grandmother might have, I didn’t intend to repeat the
mistake I had made with my mother.
Most of all, I wanted some time with my daughters. As far as I could tell, the
campaign hadn’t affected our bonds. Malia was as chatty and inquisitive with me
as ever, Sasha as buoyant and affectionate. When I was on the road, I talked to
them by phone every night, about school, their friends, or the latest SpongeBob
episode; when I was home, I read to them, challenged them to board games, and
occasionally snuck out with them for ice cream.
RETURNING FROM MY

Still, I could see from week to week how fast they were growing, how their
limbs always seemed an inch or two longer than I remembered, their
conversations at dinner more sophisticated. These changes served as a measure of
all that I had missed, the fact that I hadn’t been there to nurse them when they
were sick, or hug them when they were scared, or laugh at the jokes they told.
As much as I believed in the importance of what I was doing, I knew I wouldn’t
ever get that time back, and often found myself questioning the wisdom of the
trade.
I was right to feel guilty. It’s hard to overstate the burden I placed on my
family during those two years I ran for president—how much I relied on
Michelle’s fortitude and parenting skills, and how much I depended on my
daughters’ preternatural good cheer and maturity. Earlier that summer, Michelle
had agreed to bring the girls and join me as I campaigned in Butte, Montana, on
the Fourth of July, which also happened to be Malia’s tenth birthday. My sister
Maya and her family decided to come as well. We had our share of fun that day,
visiting a mining museum and squirting one another with water guns, but much
of my time was still devoted to vote getting. The girls trudged dutifully beside me
as I shook hands along the town’s parade route. They stood in the heat watching
me speak at an afternoon rally. In the evening, after the fireworks I’d promised
were canceled due to thunderstorms, we held an impromptu birthday party in a
windowless conference room on the lower level of the local Holiday Inn. Our
advance staff had done its best to liven up the place with a few balloons. There
was pizza and salad and a cake from the local supermarket. Still, as I watched
Malia blow out the candles and make her wish for the year ahead, I wondered
whether she was disappointed, whether she might later look back on this day as
proof of her father’s misplaced priorities.
Just then, Kristen Jarvis, one of Michelle’s young aides, pulled out an iPod
and hooked it up to a portable speaker. Malia and Sasha grabbed my hands to pull
me out of my chair. Pretty soon everyone was dancing to Beyoncé and the Jonas
Brothers, Sasha gyrating, Malia shaking her short curls, Michelle and Maya letting
loose as I showed off my best dad moves. After about half an hour, all of us
happily out of breath, Malia came over and sat on my lap.
“Daddy,” she said, “this is the best birthday ever.”
I kissed the top of her head and held her tight, not letting her see my eyes get
misty.
Those were my daughters. That’s what I’d given up by being away so much.

That’s why the days we stole in Hawaii that August were worth it, even if we lost
some ground against McCain in the polls. Splashing in the ocean with the girls,
letting them bury me in sand without having to tell them I had to get on a
conference call or leave for the airport—it was worth it. Watching the sun go
down over the Pacific with my arms wrapped around Michelle, just listening to
the wind and rustling palms—worth it.
Seeing Toot hunched over on her living room couch, barely able to raise her
head but still smiling with quiet satisfaction as her great-granddaughters laughed
and played on the floor, and then feeling her mottled, blue-veined hand squeeze
mine for perhaps the last time.
A precious sacrament.
—
the campaign entirely behind while I was in Hawaii. There
were updates from the team, thank-you calls to supporters, a preliminary outline
of my convention speech that I drafted and sent to Favs. And there was the single
most consequential decision I had to make now that I was the nominee.
Who would be my running mate?
I had narrowed it down to Governor Tim Kaine of Virginia and Senate
colleague Joe Biden of Delaware. At the time, I was much closer to Tim, who
had been the first prominent elected official outside of Illinois to endorse me for
president and had worked hard as one of our top campaign surrogates. Our
friendship came easily; we were roughly the same age, had similar midwestern
roots, similar temperaments, and even similar résumés. (Tim had worked on a
mission in Honduras while a student at Harvard Law School and had practiced
civil rights law before going into politics.)
As for Joe, we couldn’t have been more different, at least on paper. He was
nineteen years my senior. I was running as the Washington outsider; Joe had
spent thirty-five years in the Senate, including stints as chairman of the Judiciary
Committee and the Foreign Relations Committee. In contrast to my peripatetic
upbringing, Joe had deep roots in Scranton, Pennsylvania, and took pride in his
working-class Irish heritage. (It was only later, after we were elected, that we
discovered our respective Irish forebears, both boot makers, had left Ireland for
America just five weeks apart.) And if I was seen as temperamentally cool and
collected, measured in how I used my words, Joe was all warmth, a man without
I COULDN’T LEAVE

inhibitions, happy to share whatever popped into his head. It was an endearing
trait, for he genuinely enjoyed people. You could see it as he worked a room, his
handsome face always cast in a dazzling smile (and just inches from whomever he
was talking to), asking a person where they were from, telling them a story about
how much he loved their hometown (“Best calzone I ever tasted”) or how they
must know so-and-so (“An absolutely great guy, salt of the earth”), flattering
their children (“Anyone ever tell you you’re gorgeous?”) or their mother (“You
can’t be a day over forty!”), and then on to the next person, and the next, until
he’d touched every soul in the room with a flurry of handshakes, hugs, kisses,
backslaps, compliments, and one-liners.
Joe’s enthusiasm had its downside. In a town filled with people who liked to
hear themselves talk, he had no peer. If a speech was scheduled for fifteen
minutes, Joe went for at least a half hour. If it was scheduled for a half hour, there
was no telling how long he might talk. His soliloquies during committee hearings
were legendary. His lack of a filter periodically got him in trouble, as when
during the primaries, he had pronounced me “articulate and bright and clean and
a nice-looking guy,” a phrase surely meant as a compliment, but interpreted by
some as suggesting that such characteristics in a Black man were noteworthy.
As I came to know Joe, though, I found his occasional gaffes to be trivial
compared to his strengths. On domestic issues, he was smart, practical, and did his
homework. His experience in foreign policy was broad and deep. During his
relatively short-lived run in the primaries, he had impressed me with his skill and
discipline as a debater and his comfort on a national stage.
Most of all, Joe had heart. He’d overcome a bad stutter as a child (which
probably explained his vigorous attachment to words) and two brain aneurysms in
middle age. In politics, he’d known early success and suffered embarrassing
defeats. And he had endured unimaginable tragedy: In 1972, just weeks after Joe
was elected to the Senate, his wife and baby daughter had been killed—and his
two young sons, Beau and Hunter, injured—in a car accident. In the wake of this
loss, his colleagues and siblings had to talk him out of quitting the Senate, but
he’d arranged his schedule to make a daily hour-and-a-half Amtrak commute
between Delaware and Washington to care for his boys, a practice he’d continue
for the next three decades.
That Joe had survived such heartbreak was a credit to his second wife, Jill, a
lovely and understated teacher whom he’d met three years after the accident, and
who had raised Joe’s sons as her own. Anytime you saw the Bidens together, it

was immediately obvious just how much his family sustained Joe—how much
pride and joy he took in Beau, then Delaware’s attorney general and a rising star
in state politics; in Hunter, a lawyer in D.C.; in Ashley, a social worker in
Wilmington; and in their beautiful grandkids.
Family had sustained Joe, but so, too, had a buoyancy of character. Tragedy
and setbacks may have scarred him, I would learn, but they hadn’t made him
bitter or cynical.
It was on the basis of those impressions that I had asked Joe to undergo the
initial vetting process and meet me while I was campaigning in Minnesota. He
was resistant at first—like most senators, Joe had a healthy ego and disliked the
idea of playing second fiddle. Our meeting began with him explaining all the
reasons why the job of vice president might be a step down for him (along with
an explanation of why he’d be the best choice). I assured him that I was looking
not for a ceremonial stand-in but for a partner.
“If you pick me,” Joe said, “I want to be able to give you my best judgment
and frank advice. You’ll be the president, and I’ll defend whatever you decide.
But I want to be the last guy in the room on every major decision.”
I told him that was a commitment I could make.
Both Axe and Plouffe thought the world of Tim Kaine, and like me, they
knew he’d fit seamlessly into an Obama administration. But also like me, they
wondered whether putting two relatively young, inexperienced, and liberal civil
rights attorneys on a ticket might be more hope and change than the voters could
handle.
Joe carried his own risks. We figured his lack of discipline in front of a
microphone might result in unnecessary controversies. His style was old-school,
he liked the limelight, and he wasn’t always self-aware. I sensed that he could get
prickly if he thought he wasn’t given his due—a quality that might flare up when
dealing with a much younger boss.
And yet I found the contrast between us compelling. I liked the fact that Joe
would be more than ready to serve as president if something happened to me—
and that it might reassure those who still worried I was too young. His foreign
policy experience would be valuable during a time when we were embroiled in
two wars; so would his relationships in Congress and his potential to reach voters
still wary of electing an African American president. What mattered most,
though, was what my gut told me—that Joe was decent, honest, and loyal. I
believed that he cared about ordinary people, and that when things got tough, I

could trust him.
I wouldn’t be disappointed.
—
National Convention in Denver got put together is
largely a mystery to me. I was consulted on the order of the program over the
four nights it would take place, the themes that would be developed, the speakers
scheduled. I was shown biographical videos for approval and asked for a list of
family and friends who would need accommodations. Plouffe checked in to see if
I was game to hold the convention’s final night not in a traditional indoor arena,
but at Mile High Stadium, home of the Denver Broncos. With a capacity of close
to eighty thousand, it could accommodate the tens of thousands of volunteers
from across the country who’d been the foundation of our campaign. It also had
no roof, which meant we’d be exposed to the elements.
“What if it rains?” I asked.
“We pulled one hundred years’ worth of weather reports for Denver on
August 28 at eight p.m.,” Plouffe said. “It’s only rained once.”
“What if this year’s the second time? Do we have a backup plan?”
“Once we lock in the stadium,” Plouffe said, “there’s no going back.” He
gave me a slightly maniacal grin. “Remember, we’re always at our best without a
net. Why stop now?”
Why indeed.
Michelle and the girls traveled to Denver a couple of days ahead of me while
I campaigned in a few states, so by the time I arrived, the festivities were in full
swing. Satellite trucks and press tents surrounded the arena like an army laying
siege; street vendors hawked T-shirts, hats, tote bags, and jewelry adorned with
our rising sun logo or my jug-eared visage. Tourists and paparazzi clicked away at
the politicians and occasional celebrity wandering the arena.
Unlike the 2000 convention, when I’d been the kid pressing his face against
the candy store window, or the 2004 convention, when my keynote had placed
me at the center of the spectacle, I now found myself both the starring attraction
and on the periphery, trapped in a hotel suite or looking out the window of my
Secret Service vehicle, arriving in Denver only on the second-to-last night of the
convention. It was a matter of security, I was told, as well as deliberate stagecraft
—if I remained out of sight, anticipation would only build. But it made me feel
HOW THE DEMOCRATIC

restless and oddly removed, as if I were merely an expensive prop to be taken out
of the box under special conditions.
Certain moments from that week do stand out in my mind. I remember
Malia and Sasha and three of Joe’s granddaughters rolling around on a pile of air
mattresses in our hotel suite, all of them giggling, lost in their secret games and
wholly indifferent to the hoopla below. I remember Hillary stepping up to the
microphone representing the New York delegates and formally making the
motion to vote me in as the Democratic nominee, a powerful gesture of unity.
And I remember sitting in the living room of a very sweet family of supporters in
Missouri, making small talk and munching on snacks before Michelle appeared on
the television screen, luminescent in an aquamarine dress, to deliver the
convention’s opening night address.
I had deliberately avoided reading Michelle’s speech beforehand, not wanting
to meddle in the process or add to the pressure. Having seen her on the campaign
trail, I had no doubt she’d be good. But listening to Michelle tell her story that
night—seeing her talk about her mom and dad, the sacrifices they’d made and the
values they’d passed on; hearing her trace her unlikely journey and describe her
hope for our daughters; having this woman who had shouldered so much vouch
for the fact that I’d always been true to my family and to my convictions; seeing
the convention hall audience, the network anchors, and the people sitting next to
me transfixed—well, I couldn’t have been prouder.
Contrary to what some commentators said at the time, my wife didn’t “find”
her voice that night. A national audience finally had a chance to hear that voice
unfiltered.
—
I found myself holed up with Favs and Axe in a
hotel room, fine-tuning the acceptance speech I’d deliver the following evening.
It had been tough to write. We felt the moment called for more prose than
poetry, with a hard-hitting critique of Republican policies and an account of
specific steps I intended to take as president—all without being too long, too dry,
or too partisan. It had required countless revisions and I had little time to practice.
As I stood behind a mock podium delivering my lines, the atmosphere was more
workmanlike than inspired.
Only once did the full meaning of my nomination hit me. By coincidence,
FORTY-EIGHT HOURS LATER,

the last night of the convention fell on the forty-fifth anniversary of the March on
Washington and Dr. King’s historic “I Have a Dream” speech. We had decided
not to draw too much attention to that fact, figuring that it was a poor idea to
invite comparisons to one of the greatest speeches in American history. But I did
pay tribute to the miracle of that young preacher from Georgia in the closing bars
of my speech, quoting something he’d said to the people who’d gathered on the
National Mall that day in 1963: “We cannot walk alone. And as we walk, we
must make the pledge that we shall always march ahead. We cannot turn back.”
“We cannot walk alone.” I hadn’t remembered these particular lines from Dr.
King’s speech. But as I read them aloud during practice, I found myself thinking
about all the older Black volunteers I’d met in our offices around the country, the
way they’d clutch my hands and tell me they never thought they’d see the day
when a Black man would have a real chance to be president.
I thought about the seniors who wrote to me to explain how they had woken
up early and been first in line to vote during the primaries, even though they
were sick or disabled.
I thought about the doormen, janitors, secretaries, clerks, dishwashers, and
drivers I encountered anytime I passed through hotels, conference centers, or
office buildings—how they’d wave or give me a thumbs-up or shyly accept a
handshake, Black men and women of a certain age who, like Michelle’s parents,
had quietly done what was necessary to feed their families and send their kids to
school, and now recognized in me some of the fruits of their labor.
I thought of all the people who had sat in jail or joined the March on
Washington forty, fifty years ago, and wondered how they would feel when I
walked out onto that stage in Denver—how much they had seen their country
transformed, and how far things still were from what they had hoped.
“You know what…give me a second,” I said, my voice catching in my
throat, my eyes starting to brim. I went to the bathroom to splash some water on
my face. When I returned a few minutes later, Favs, Axe, and the teleprompter
operator were all quiet, unsure of what to do.
“Sorry about that,” I said. “Let’s try it again from the top.”
I had no trouble getting through the speech the second time around; the only
interruption came about halfway through my oration, when we heard a knock on
the door and found a hotel server with a Caesar salad standing in the hall (“What
can I say?” Axe said with a sheepish grin. “I was starving”). And by the following
evening, as I walked out onto the broad, blue-carpeted stage under a clear and

open sky to address a stadium full of people and millions more across the country,
all that I felt was calm.
The night was warm, the roar from the crowd infectious, the flash from
thousands of cameras mirroring the stars overhead. When I was finished speaking,
Michelle and the girls and then Joe and Jill Biden joined me to wave through a
flurry of confetti, and across the stadium we could see people laughing and
hugging, waving flags to the beat of a song by country artists Brooks & Dunn that
had become a staple on the campaign trail: “Only in America.”
—
candidate enjoys a healthy “bounce” in the polls
after a successful convention. By all accounts, ours had been close to flawless. Our
pollsters reported that after Denver, my lead over John McCain had indeed
widened to at least five points.
It lasted about a week.
John McCain’s campaign had been flailing. Despite the fact that he’d wrapped
up the Republican nomination three months before I secured mine, he hadn’t
achieved much in the way of momentum. Swing voters remained unpersuaded
by his proposal for further tax cuts on top of those Bush had already passed. In
the new, more polarized climate, McCain himself appeared hesitant to even
mention issues like immigration reform and climate change, which had previously
burnished his reputation as a maverick inside his party. In fairness, he’d been dealt
a bad hand. The Iraq War remained as unpopular as ever. The economy, already
in recession, was rapidly worsening, and so were Bush’s approval numbers. In an
election likely to hinge on the promise of change, McCain looked and sounded
like more of the same.
McCain and his team must have known they needed to do something
dramatic. And I have to give them credit—they sure did deliver. The day after
our convention ended, Michelle and I, along with Jill and Joe Biden, were on the
campaign plane waiting to take off for a few days of events in Pennsylvania when
Axe rushed up to tell us that word had leaked of McCain’s running mate. Joe
looked at the name on Axe’s BlackBerry and then turned to me.
“Who the hell is Sarah Palin?” he said.
For the next two weeks, the national press corps would obsess over that
question, giving McCain’s campaign a much-needed shot of adrenaline and
HISTORICALLY, A PRESIDENTIAL

effectively knocking our campaign off the airwaves. After adding Palin to the
ticket, McCain raked in millions of dollars in fresh donations in a single weekend.
His poll numbers leapt up, essentially putting us in a dead heat.
Sarah Palin—the forty-four-year-old governor of Alaska and an unknown
when it came to national politics—was, above all, a potent disrupter. Not only
was she young and a woman, a potential groundbreaker in her own right, but she
also had a story you couldn’t make up: She’d been a small-town basketball player
and pageant queen who’d bounced among five colleges before graduating with a
journalism degree. She’d worked for a while as a sportscaster before getting
elected mayor of Wasilla, Alaska, and then taking on the state’s entrenched
Republican establishment and beating the incumbent governor in 2006. She’d
married her high school sweetheart, had five kids (including a teenage son about
to be deployed to Iraq and a baby with Down syndrome), professed a
conservative Christian faith, and enjoyed hunting moose and elk during her spare
time.
Hers was a biography tailor-made for working-class white voters who hated
Washington and harbored the not entirely unjustified suspicion that big-city elites
—whether in business, politics, or the media—looked down on their way of life.
If the New York Times editorial board or NPR listeners questioned her
qualifications, Palin didn’t care. She offered their criticism as proof of her
authenticity, understanding (far earlier than many of her critics) that the old
gatekeepers were losing relevance, that the walls of what was considered
acceptable in a candidate for national office had been breached, and that Fox
News, talk radio, and the budding power of social media could provide her with
all the platforms she needed to reach her intended audience.
It helped, too, that Palin was a born performer. Her forty-five-minute speech
at the Republican National Convention in early September was a masterpiece of
folksy populism and well-aimed zingers. (“In small towns, we don’t quite know
what to make of a candidate who lavishes praise on working people when they’re
listening, and then talks about how bitterly they cling to their religion and guns
when those people aren’t listening.” Ouch.) The delegates were ecstatic. Touring
with Palin after the convention, McCain spoke to crowds three or four times
larger than what he normally saw on his own. And while the Republican faithful
cheered politely during his speeches, it became clear that it was his “hockey
mom” running mate they were really there to see. She was new, different, one of
them.

A “real American”—and fantastically proud of it.
In a different time and a different place—say, a swing-state Senate or
gubernatorial race—the sheer energy Palin generated within the Republican base
might have had me worried. But from the day McCain chose her and through
the heights of Palin-mania, I felt certain the decision would not serve him well.
For all of Palin’s performative gifts, a vice president’s most important qualification
was the ability, if necessary, to assume the presidency. Given John’s age and
history of melanoma, this wasn’t an idle concern. And what became abundantly
clear as soon as Sarah Palin stepped into the spotlight was that on just about every
subject relevant to governing the country she had absolutely no idea what the hell
she was talking about. The financial system. The Supreme Court. The Russian
invasion of Georgia. It didn’t matter what the topic was or what form the
question took—the Alaskan governor appeared lost, stringing words together like
a kid trying to bluff her way through a test for which she had failed to study.
Palin’s nomination was troubling on a deeper level. I noticed from the start
that her incoherence didn’t matter to the vast majority of Republicans; in fact,
anytime she crumbled under questioning by a journalist, they seemed to view it
as proof of a liberal conspiracy. I was even more surprised to witness prominent
conservatives—including those who’d spent a year dismissing me as
inexperienced, and who’d spent decades decrying affirmative action, the erosion
of intellectual standards, and the debasement of Western culture at the hands of
multiculturalists—suddenly shilling for Palin, tying themselves into knots as they
sought to convince the public that in a vice presidential candidate, the need for
basic knowledge of foreign policy or the functions of the federal government was
actually overrated. Sarah Palin, like Reagan, had “good instincts,” they said, and
once installed, she’d grow into the job.
It was, of course, a sign of things to come, a larger, darker reality in which
partisan affiliation and political expedience would threaten to blot out everything
—your previous positions; your stated principles; even what your own senses,
your eyes and ears, told you to be true.