IT TURNS OUT THAT THERE’S a

a standard design to every international summit.
Leaders pull up one by one in their limos to the entrance of a large convention
center and then walk past a phalanx of photographers—a bit like a Hollywood
red carpet without the fancy gowns and beautiful people. A protocol officer
meets you at the door and leads you into a hall where the host leader is waiting: a
smile and a handshake for the cameras, whispered small talk. Then on to the
leader’s lounge for more handshakes and small talk, until all the presidents, prime
ministers, chancellors, and kings head into an impressively large conference room
with a massive circular table. At your seat, you find a small nameplate, your
national flag, a microphone with operating instructions, a commemorative
writing pad and pen of varying quality, a headset for the simultaneous translation,
a glass and bottles of water or juice, and maybe a plate of snacks or bowl of mints.
Your delegation is seated behind you to take notes and pass along messages.
The host calls the meeting to order. He or she makes opening remarks. And
then, for the next day and a half—with scheduled breaks for one-on-one
meetings with other leaders (known as “bilaterals” or “bilats”), a “family photo”
(all the leaders lined up and smiling awkwardly, not unlike a third-grade class
picture), and just enough time in the late afternoon to go back to your suite and
change clothes before dinner and sometimes an evening session—you sit there,
fighting off jet lag and doing your best to look interested, as everyone around the
table, including yourself, takes turns reading a set of carefully scripted, anodyne,
and invariably much-longer-than-the-time-allotted remarks about whatever topic
happens to be on the agenda.
Later, after I had a few summits under my belt, I would adopt the survival
tactics of more experienced attendees—making sure I always carried paperwork
to do or something to read, or discreetly pulling other leaders aside to do a bit of
secondary business while others commanded the mic. But for that first G20
summit in London, I stayed in my seat and listened intently to every speaker.
T TURNS OUT THAT THERE’S

Like the new kid at school, I was aware that others in the room were taking the
measure of me, and I figured a bit of rookie humility might go a long way toward
rallying people around the economic measures I was there to propose.
It helped that I already knew a number of leaders in the room, starting with
our host, British prime minister Gordon Brown, who had traveled to Washington
for a meeting with me just a few weeks earlier. A former chancellor of the
exchequer in Tony Blair’s Labour government, Brown lacked the sparkly
political gifts of his predecessor (it seemed as if every media mention of Brown
included the term “dour”), and he’d suffered the misfortune of finally getting his
turn at the prime ministership just as Britain’s economy was collapsing and its
public was tiring of the Labour Party’s decade-long run. But he was thoughtful,
responsible, and understood global finance, and although his time in office would
prove short-lived, I was fortunate to have him as a partner during those early
months of the crisis.
Along with Brown, the most consequential Europeans—not just at the
London summit but throughout my first term—were German chancellor Angela
Merkel and French president Nicolas Sarkozy. The rivalry between the
continent’s two most powerful countries had caused nearly two centuries of
bloody, on-and-off war. Their reconciliation following World War II became the
cornerstone of the European Union (E.U.) and its unprecedented run of peace
and prosperity. Accordingly, Europe’s ability to move as a bloc—and to serve as
America’s wingman on the world stage—depended largely on Merkel’s and
Sarkozy’s willingness to work well together.
For the most part they did, despite the fact that temperamentally the two
leaders couldn’t have been more different. Merkel, the daughter of a Lutheran
pastor, had grown up in Communist East Germany, keeping her head down and
earning a PhD in quantum chemistry. Only after the Iron Curtain fell did she
enter politics, methodically moving up the ranks of the center-right Christian
Democratic Union party with a combination of organizational skill, strategic
acumen, and unwavering patience. Merkel’s eyes were big and bright blue and
could be touched by turns with frustration, amusement, or hints of sorrow.
Otherwise, her stolid appearance reflected her no-nonsense, analytical sensibility.
She was famously suspicious of emotional outbursts or overblown rhetoric, and
her team would later confess that she’d been initially skeptical of me precisely
because of my oratorical skills. I took no offense, figuring that in a German
leader, an aversion to possible demagoguery was probably a healthy thing.

Sarkozy, on the other hand, was all emotional outbursts and overblown
rhetoric. With his dark, expressive, vaguely Mediterranean features (he was half
Hungarian and a quarter Greek Jew) and small stature (he was about five foot five
but wore lifts in his shoes to make himself taller), he looked like a figure out of a
Toulouse-Lautrec painting. Despite coming from a wealthy family, he readily
admitted that his ambitions were fueled in part by a lifelong sense of being an
outsider. Like Merkel, Sarkozy had made his name as a leader of the center right,
winning the presidency on a platform of laissez-faire economics, looser labor
regulations, lower taxes, and a less pervasive welfare state. But unlike Merkel, he
lurched all over the map when it came to policy, often driven by headlines or
political expedience. By the time we arrived in London for the G20, he was
already vocally denouncing the excesses of global capitalism. What Sarkozy lacked
in ideological consistency, he made up for in boldness, charm, and manic energy.
Indeed, conversations with Sarkozy were by turns amusing and exasperating, his
hands in perpetual motion, his chest thrust out like a bantam cock’s, his personal
translator (unlike Merkel, he spoke limited English) always beside him to
frantically mirror his every gesture and intonation as the conversation swooped
from flattery to bluster to genuine insight, never straying far from his primary,
barely disguised interest, which was to be at the center of the action and take
credit for whatever it was that might be worth taking credit for.
As much as I appreciated the fact that Sarkozy had embraced my campaign
early on (all but endorsing me in an effusive press conference during my
preelection visit to Paris), it wasn’t hard to tell which of the two European leaders
would prove to be the more reliable partner. I came, though, to see Merkel and
Sarkozy as useful complements to each other: Sarkozy respectful of Merkel’s
innate caution but often pushing her to act, Merkel willing to overlook Sarkozy’s
idiosyncrasies but deft at reining in his more impulsive proposals. They also
reinforced each other’s pro-American instincts—instincts that, in 2009, were not
always shared by their constituents.
—
meant that they and the other Europeans were pushovers.
Guarding the interests of their countries, both Merkel and Sarkozy strongly
favored the declaration against protectionism that we were proposing in London
—Germany’s economy was especially reliant on exports—and recognized the
utility of an international emergency fund. But as Tim Geithner had predicted,
NONE

OF THIS

neither had any enthusiasm for fiscal stimulus: Merkel was worried about deficit
spending; Sarkozy preferred a universal tax on stock market transactions and
wanted to crack down on tax havens. It took most of the summit for me and Tim
to convince the two of them to join us in promoting more immediate ways to
address the crisis, calling on each G20 country to implement policies that
increased aggregate demand. They would do so, they told me, only if I could
convince the rest of the G20 leaders—particularly a group of influential nonWestern countries that came to be collectively known as the BRICS—to stop
blocking proposals that were important to them.
Economically, the five countries that made up the BRICS—Brazil, Russia,
India, China, and South Africa—had little in common, and it wasn’t until later
that they would actually formalize the group. (South Africa wouldn’t formally
join until 2010.) But even at the London G20, the animating spirit behind the
association was clear. These were big, proud nations that in one way or another
had emerged from long slumbers. They were no longer satisfied with being
relegated to the margins of history or seeing their status reduced to that of
regional powers. They chafed at the West’s outsized role in managing the global
economy. And with the current crisis, they saw a chance to start flipping the
script.
In theory, at least, I could sympathize with their point of view. Together, the
BRICS represented just over 40 percent of the world’s population but about a
quarter of the world’s GDP and only a fraction of its wealth. Decisions made in
the corporate boardrooms of New York, London, or Paris often had more impact
on their economies than the policy choices of their own governments. Their
influence within the World Bank and the IMF remained limited, despite the
remarkable economic transformations that had taken place in China, India, and
Brazil. If the United States wanted to preserve the global system that had long
served us, it made sense for us to give these emerging powers a greater say in how
it operated—while also insisting that they take more responsibility for the costs of
its maintenance.
And yet as I glanced around the table on the summit’s second day, I couldn’t
help but wonder how a larger role for the BRICS in global governance might
play out. Brazil’s president, Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva, for example, had visited the
Oval Office in March, and I’d found him impressive. A grizzled, engaging former
labor leader who’d been jailed for protesting the previous military government
and then elected in 2002, he had initiated a series of pragmatic reforms that sent
Brazil’s growth rate soaring, expanded its middle class, and provided housing and

education to millions of its poorest citizens. He also reportedly had the scruples of
a Tammany Hall boss, and rumors swirled about government cronyism,
sweetheart deals, and kickbacks that ran into the billions.
President Dmitry Medvedev, meanwhile, appeared to be a poster child for the
new Russia: young, trim, and clothed in hip, European-tailored suits. Except that
he wasn’t the real power in Russia. That spot was occupied by his patron,
Vladimir Putin: a former KGB officer, two-term president and now the country’s
prime minister, and the leader of what resembled a criminal syndicate as much as
it did a traditional government—a syndicate that had its tentacles wrapped around
every aspect of the country’s economy.
South Africa at the time was in a transition, with interim president Kgalema
Motlanthe soon to be replaced by Jacob Zuma, the leader of Nelson Mandela’s
party, the African National Congress, which controlled the country’s parliament.
In subsequent meetings, Zuma struck me as amiable enough. He spoke
eloquently of the need for fair trade, human development, infrastructure, and
more equitable distributions of wealth and opportunity on the African continent.
By all accounts, though, much of the goodwill built up through Mandela’s heroic
struggle was being squandered by corruption and incompetence under ANC
leadership, leaving large swaths of the country’s black population still mired in
poverty and despair.
Manmohan Singh, the prime minister of India, meanwhile, had engineered
the modernization of his nation’s economy. A gentle, soft-spoken economist in
his seventies, with a white beard and a turban that were the marks of his Sikh
faith but to the Western eye lent him the air of a holy man, he had been India’s
finance minister in the 1990s, managing to lift millions of people from poverty.
For the duration of his tenure as prime minister, I would find Singh to be wise,
thoughtful, and scrupulously honest. Despite its genuine economic progress,
though, India remained a chaotic and impoverished place: largely divided by
religion and caste, captive to the whims of corrupt local officials and power
brokers, hamstrung by a parochial bureaucracy that was resistant to change.
And then there was China. Since the late 1970s, when Deng Xiaoping
effectively abandoned Mao Zedong’s Marxist-Leninist vision in favor of an
export-driven, state-managed form of capitalism, no nation in history had
developed faster or moved more people out of abject poverty. Once little more
than a hub of low-grade manufacturing and assembly for foreign companies
looking to take advantage of its endless supply of low-wage workers, China now

boasted topflight engineers and world-class companies working at the cutting
edge of advanced technology. Its massive trade surplus made it a major investor
on every continent; gleaming cities like Shanghai and Guangzhou had become
sophisticated financial centers, home to a burgeoning consumer class. Given its
growth rate and sheer size, China’s GDP was guaranteed at some point to surpass
America’s. When you added this to the country’s powerful military, increasingly
skilled workforce, shrewd and pragmatic government, and cohesive fivethousand-year-old culture, the conclusion felt obvious: If any country was likely
to challenge U.S. preeminence on the world stage, it was China.
And yet watching the Chinese delegation operate at the G20, I was
convinced that any such challenge was still decades away—and that if and when it
came, it would most likely happen as a result of America’s strategic mistakes. By
all accounts, Chinese president Hu Jintao—a nondescript man in his mid-sixties
with a mane of jet-black hair (as far as I could tell, few Chinese leaders turned
gray as they aged)—was not seen as a particularly strong leader, sharing authority
as he did with other members of the Chinese Communist Party’s Central
Committee. Sure enough, in our meeting at the margins of the summit, Hu
appeared content to rely on pages of prepared talking points, with no apparent
agenda beyond encouraging continued consultation and what he referred to as
“win-win” cooperation. More impressive to me was China’s chief economic
policy maker, Premier Wen Jiabao, a small, bespectacled figure who spoke
without notes and displayed a sophisticated grasp of the current crisis; his affirmed
commitment to a Chinese stimulus package on a scale mirroring that of the
Recovery Act was probably the single best piece of news I would hear during my
time at the G20. But even so, the Chinese were in no hurry to seize the reins of
the international world order, viewing it as a headache they didn’t need. Wen
had little to say about how to manage the financial crisis going forward. From his
country’s standpoint, the onus was on us to figure it out.
This was the thing that would strike me not just during the London summit
but at every international forum I attended while president: Even those who
complained about America’s role in the world still relied on us to keep the system
afloat. To varying degrees, other countries were willing to pitch in—contributing
troops to U.N. peacekeeping efforts, say, or providing cash and logistical support
for famine relief. Some, like the Scandinavian countries, consistently punched
well above their weight. But otherwise, few nations felt obliged to act beyond
narrow self-interest; and those that shared America’s basic commitment to the
principles upon which a liberal, market-based system depended—individual

freedom, the rule of law, strong enforcement of property rights and neutral
arbitration of disputes, plus baseline levels of governmental accountability and
competence—lacked the economic and political heft, not to mention the army of
diplomats and policy experts, to promote those principles on a global scale.
China, Russia, and even genuine democracies like Brazil, India, and South
Africa still operated on different principles. For the BRICS, responsible foreign
policy meant tending to one’s own affairs. They abided by the established rules
only insofar as their own interests were advanced, out of necessity rather than
conviction, and they appeared happy to violate them when they thought they
could get away with it. If they assisted another country, they preferred to do so
on a bilateral basis, expecting some benefit in return. These nations certainly felt
no obligation to underwrite the system as a whole. As far as they were concerned,
that was a luxury only a fat and happy West could afford.
—
leaders in attendance at the G20, I was most interested in
engaging with Medvedev. The U.S. relationship with Russia was at a particularly
low point. The previous summer—a few months after Medvedev had been sworn
into office—Russia had invaded the neighboring country of Georgia, a former
Soviet republic, and illegally occupied two of its provinces, triggering violence
between the two countries and tensions with other border nations.
For us, it was a sign of Putin’s escalating boldness and general belligerence, a
troubling unwillingness to respect another nation’s sovereignty and a broader
flouting of international law. And in many ways, it appeared he’d gotten away
with it: Beyond suspending diplomatic contacts, the Bush administration had
done next to nothing to punish Russia for its aggression, and the rest of the world
had shrugged its shoulders and moved on, making any belated efforts to isolate
Russia almost certain to fail. My administration’s hope was to initiate what we
were calling a “reset” with Russia, opening a dialogue in order to protect our
interests, support our democratic partners in the region, and enlist cooperation on
our goals for nuclear nonproliferation and disarmament. To this end, we’d
arranged for me to meet privately with Medvedev a day ahead of the summit.
I relied on two Russia experts to prepare me for the meeting: the State
Department’s undersecretary for political affairs, Bill Burns, and our NSC senior
director for Russian and Eurasian affairs, Michael McFaul. Burns, a career
diplomat who’d been the Bush administration’s ambassador to Russia, was tall,
OF ALL THE BRICS

mustached, and slightly stooped, with a gentle voice and the bookish air of an
Oxford don. McFaul, on the other hand, was all energy and enthusiasm, with a
wide smile and a blond mop of hair. A native Montanan, he’d advised my
campaign while still teaching at Stanford and seemed to end every statement with
an exclamation point.
Of the two, McFaul was more bullish about our ability to have an influence
on Russia, partly because he’d lived in Moscow in the early 1990s, during the
heady days of political transformation, first as a scholar and later as the in-country
director of a pro-democracy organization funded in part by the U.S. government.
When it came to Medvedev, though, McFaul agreed with Burns that I shouldn’t
expect too much.
“Medvedev’s going to be interested in establishing a good relationship with
you, to prove that he belongs on the world stage,” he said. “But you have to
remember that Putin still calls the shots.”
Looking over his biography, I could see why everyone assumed Dmitry
Medvedev was on a short leash. In his early forties, raised in relative privilege as
the only child of two professors, he’d studied law in the late 1980s, lectured at
Leningrad State University, and gotten to know Vladimir Putin when they both
worked for the mayor of St. Petersburg in the early 1990s after the dissolution of
the Soviet Union. While Putin stayed in politics, eventually becoming prime
minister under President Boris Yeltsin, Medvedev leveraged his political
connections to secure an executive position and ownership stake in Russia’s
largest lumber company, at a time when the country’s chaotic privatization of
state-owned assets offered well-connected shareholders a guaranteed fortune.
Quietly he became a wealthy man, called upon to work on various civic projects
without having to bear the burden of the spotlight. It wasn’t until late 1999 that
he got pulled back into government, recruited by Putin for a high-level job in
Moscow. Just a month later, Yeltsin abruptly resigned, elevating Putin from
prime minister to acting president, with Medvedev rising behind him.
In other words, Medvedev was a technocrat and a behind-the-scenes
operator, without much of a public profile or political base of his own. And that’s
exactly how he came across when he arrived for our meeting at Winfield House,
the U.S. ambassador’s elegant residence on the outskirts of London. He was a
small man, dark-haired and affable, with a slightly formal, almost self-deprecating
manner, more international management consultant than politician or party
apparatchik. Apparently he understood English, although he preferred speaking

with a translator.
I opened our discussion with the subject of his country’s military occupation
of Georgia. As expected, Medvedev stuck closely to the official talking points. He
blamed the Georgian government for precipitating the crisis and insisted that
Russia had acted only to protect Russian citizens from violence. He dismissed my
argument that the invasion and continued occupation violated Georgia’s
sovereignty and international law, and he pointedly suggested that, unlike U.S.
forces in Iraq, Russian forces had genuinely been greeted as liberators. Hearing all
this, I remembered what the dissident writer Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn once said
about politics during the Soviet era, that “the lie has become not just a moral
category but a pillar of the State.”
But if Medvedev’s rebuttal on Georgia reminded me that he was no Boy
Scout, I noticed a certain ironic detachment in his delivery, as if he wanted me to
know that he didn’t really believe everything he was saying. As the conversation
shifted to other topics, so did his disposition. On the steps needed to manage the
financial crisis, he was well briefed and constructive. He expressed enthusiasm for
our proposed “reset” of U.S.-Russian relations, especially when it came to
expanding cooperation on nonmilitary issues like education, science, technology,
and trade. He surprised us by making an unprompted (and unprecedented) offer
to let the U.S. military use Russian airspace to transport troops and equipment to
Afghanistan—an alternative that would reduce our exclusive reliance on
expensive and not always reliable Pakistani supply routes.
And on my highest-priority issue—U.S.-Russian cooperation to curb nuclear
proliferation, including Iran’s possible pursuit of nuclear weapons—Medvedev
showed a readiness to engage with frankness and flexibility. He accepted my
proposal to have our respective experts immediately begin negotiations on cuts to
each country’s nuclear stockpiles as a follow-up to the existing Strategic Arms
Reduction Treaty (START), which was set to expire at the end of 2009.
Although he wasn’t prepared to commit to an international effort to constrain
Iran, he didn’t dismiss it out of hand, going so far as to acknowledge that Iran’s
nuclear and missile programs had advanced much faster than Moscow had
expected—a concession that neither McFaul nor Burns could recall a Russian
official ever having made, even in private.
Still, Medvedev was far from acquiescent. He made clear during our
discussions about nonproliferation that Russia had a priority of its own: wanting
us to reconsider the Bush administration’s decision to build a missile defense

system in Poland and the Czech Republic. He was speaking, I assumed, on behalf
of Putin, who correctly understood that the main reason the Poles and the
Czechs were eager to host our system was that it would guarantee increased U.S.
military capabilities on their soil, providing an additional hedge against Russian
intimidation.
The truth is that, unbeknownst to the Russians, we were already
reconsidering the idea of a land-based missile defense in Europe. Before I’d left
for London, Robert Gates had informed me that the plans developed under Bush
had been judged potentially less effective against the most pressing threats (chiefly
Iran) than originally envisioned. Gates had suggested that I order a review of
other possible configurations before making any decision.
I wasn’t willing to grant Medvedev’s request to fold missile defense
considerations into upcoming START negotiations. I did think, however, that it
was in our interest to reduce Russian anxiety. And the fortuitous timing allowed
me to make sure Medvedev didn’t leave London empty-handed: I presented my
intent to review our plans in Europe as a show of willingness to discuss the issue
in good faith. I added that progress on halting Iran’s nuclear program would
almost certainly have a bearing on any decision I might make—a not-so-subtle
message, to which Medvedev responded before it was even translated.
“I understand,” he said in English, with a slight smile.
Before leaving, Medvedev also extended an invitation for me to visit Moscow
during the summer, a meeting I was inclined to accept. After watching his
motorcade drive away, I turned to Burns and McFaul and asked what they
thought.
“I’ll be honest, Mr. President,” McFaul said. “I don’t know how it could’ve
gone much better. He seemed a lot more open to doing business than I would
have expected.”
“Mike’s right,” Burns said, “although I do wonder how much of what
Medvedev said was cleared with Putin beforehand.”
I nodded. “We’ll find out soon enough.”
—
of the London summit, the G20 had managed to strike a deal in
response to the global financial crisis. The final communiqué, to be issued jointly
by the leaders in attendance, included U.S. priorities like additional commitments
BY THE END

to stimulus and a rejection of protectionism, along with measures to eliminate tax
havens and improve financial oversight that were important to the Europeans.
BRICS nations could point to a commitment from the United States and the
European Union to examine possible changes in their World Bank and IMF
representation. In a rush of enthusiasm, Sarkozy grabbed both me and Tim as we
were about to leave the venue.
“This agreement is historic, Barack!” he said. “It has happened because of
you…No, no, it’s true! And Mr. Geithner here…he’s magnificent!” Sarkozy then
started chanting my Treasury secretary’s last name like a fan at a football game,
loudly enough to turn a few heads in the room. I had to laugh, not only at Tim’s
evident discomfort but also at the stricken expression on Angela Merkel’s face—
she had just finished looking over the wording of the communiqué and was now
eyeing Sarkozy the way a mother eyes an unruly child.
The international press deemed the summit a success: Not only was the deal
more substantive than expected, but our central role in the negotiations had
helped to at least partially reverse the view that the financial crisis had
permanently damaged U.S. leadership. At the closing press conference, I was
careful to credit everyone who’d played a role, praising Gordon Brown in
particular for his leadership and arguing that in this interconnected world, no
single nation could go it alone. Solving big problems, I said, demanded the kind
of international cooperation on display in London.
Two days later, a reporter followed up on this, asking for my views on
American exceptionalism. “I believe in American exceptionalism,” I said. “Just as
I suspect that the Brits believe in British exceptionalism and the Greeks believe in
Greek exceptionalism.”
Only later would I learn that Republicans and conservative news outlets had
seized upon this unremarkable statement, one made in an effort to show modesty
and good manners, as evidence of weakness and insufficient patriotism on my
part. Pundits began to characterize my interactions with other leaders and citizens
of other nations as “Obama’s Apology Tour,” although they could never point to
any actual apologies. Evidently my failure to lecture foreign audiences on
American superiority, not to mention my willingness to acknowledge our
imperfections and take the views of other countries into account, was somehow
undermining. It was another reminder of how splintered our media landscape had
become—and how an increasingly poisonous partisanship no longer stopped at
the water’s edge. In this new world, a foreign policy victory by every traditional

standard could be spun as a defeat, at least in the minds of half the country;
messages that advanced our interests and built goodwill abroad could lead to a
host of political headaches back home.
On a happier note, Michelle was a hit in her international debut, garnering
especially glowing press for a visit she made to an all-girls secondary school in
central London. As would be true throughout our time in the White House,
Michelle reveled in such interactions, able to connect with kids of any age or
background, and apparently that magic traveled well. At the school, she talked
about her own childhood and the barriers she’d had to overcome, how education
had always provided her a path forward. The girls—working-class, many of them
of West Indian or South Asian descent—listened in rapt attention as this
glamorous woman insisted that she had once been just like them. In the coming
years, she’d visit with students from the school several times, including hosting a
group of them at the White House. Later, an economist would study the data and
conclude that Michelle’s engagement with the school had led to a notable spike
in the students’ standardized test scores, suggesting that her message of aspiration
and connection made a true and measurable difference. This “Michelle Effect”
was something I was very familiar with—she had the same effect on me. Things
like this helped us remember that our work as a First Family wasn’t solely a
matter of politics and policy.
Michelle did generate her own bit of controversy, though. At a reception for
the G20 leaders and their spouses with Queen Elizabeth at Buckingham Palace,
she was photographed with her hand resting on Her Majesty’s shoulder—an
apparent breach of royalty-commoner protocol, although the queen didn’t seem
to mind, slipping her arm around Michelle in return. Also, Michelle wore a
cardigan sweater over her dress during our private meeting with the queen,
sending Fleet Street into a horrified tizzy.
“You should have taken my suggestion and worn one of those little hats,” I
told her the next morning. “And a little matching handbag!”
She smiled and kissed me on the cheek. “And I hope you enjoy sleeping on a
couch when you get home,” she said brightly. “The White House has so many
to choose from!”
—
THE NEXT FIVE D AY S

were a whirlwind—a NATO summit in Baden-Baden,

Germany, and Strasbourg, France; meetings and speeches in the Czech Republic
and Turkey; and an unannounced visit to Iraq, where—in addition to thanking a
raucous assembly of U.S. troops for their courage and sacrifice—I consulted with
Prime Minister Maliki about our withdrawal plans and Iraq’s continued transition
to parliamentary governance.
By the end of the trip I had every reason to feel pretty good. Across the
board, we had successfully advanced the U.S. agenda. There had been no major
pratfalls on my part. Everyone on my foreign policy team, from cabinet members
like Geithner and Gates to the most junior member of the advance staff, had done
outstanding work. And far from shying away from association with the United
States, the countries we visited seemed hungry for our leadership.
Still, the trip provided sobering evidence of just how much of my first term
was going to be spent not on new initiatives but on putting out fires that predated
my presidency. At the NATO summit, for instance, we were able to secure
alliance support for our Af-Pak strategy—but only after listening to European
leaders emphasize how sharply their publics had turned against military
cooperation with the United States following the Iraq invasion, and how difficult
it was going to be for them to muster political support for additional troops.
NATO’s central and Eastern European members had also been unnerved by the
Bush administration’s tepid reaction to Russia’s invasion of Georgia and
questioned whether the alliance could be counted on to defend them against
similar Russian aggression. They had a point: Before the summit, I’d been
surprised to learn that NATO lacked the plans or rapid-response capabilities to
come to the defense of every ally. It was just one more example of a dirty little
secret I was discovering as president, the same thing I’d learned during our
Afghanistan review, the same thing the world had learned following the invasion
of Iraq: For all their tough talk, Bush administration hawks like Cheney and
Rumsfeld had been surprisingly bad at backing up their rhetoric with coherent,
effective strategies. Or as Denis McDonough more colorfully put it, “Open any
White House drawer and you’ll find another turd sandwich.”
I did what I could to defuse the central European issue by proposing that
NATO develop individualized defense plans for each of its members and by
declaring that when it came to our mutual defense obligations, we should make
no distinction between junior and senior members of the alliance. This was going
to mean more work for our overstretched staff and military, but I tried not to let
it raise my blood pressure too much. I reminded myself that every president felt
saddled with the previous administration’s choices and mistakes, that 90 percent

of the job was navigating inherited problems and unanticipated crises. Only if you
did that well enough, with discipline and purpose, did you get a real shot at
shaping the future.
What did have me worried by the end of the trip was less a particular issue
than an overall impression: the sense that for a variety of reasons—some of our
own making, some beyond our control—the hopeful tide of democratization,
liberalization, and integration that had swept the globe after the end of the Cold
War was beginning to recede. Older, darker forces were gathering strength, and
the stresses brought about by a prolonged economic downturn were likely to
make things worse.
Before the financial crisis, for example, Turkey had appeared to be a nation
on the upswing, a case study in globalization’s positive effects on emerging
economies. Despite a history of political instability and military coups, the
majority-Muslim country had been largely aligned with the West since the 1950s,
maintaining NATO membership, regular elections, a market-based system, and a
secular constitution that enshrined modern principles like equal rights for women.
When its current prime minister, Recep Tayyip Erdogan, and his Justice and
Development Party had swept into power in 2002–2003, touting populist and
often overtly Islamic appeals, it had unsettled Turkey’s secular, militarydominated political elite. Erdogan’s vocal sympathy for both the Muslim
Brotherhood and Hamas in their fight for an independent Palestinian state, in
particular, had also made Washington and Tel Aviv nervous. And yet, Erdogan’s
government thus far had abided by Turkey’s constitution, met its NATO
obligations, and effectively managed the economy, even initiating a series of
modest reforms with the hope of qualifying for E.U. membership. Some
observers suggested that Erdogan might offer a model of moderate, modern, and
pluralistic political Islam and an alternative to the autocracies, theocracies, and
extremist movements that characterized the region.
In a speech before the Turkish parliament and a town hall meeting with
Istanbul college students, I tried to echo such optimism. But because of my
conversations with Erdogan, I had my doubts. During the NATO summit,
Erdogan had instructed his team to block the appointment of highly regarded
Danish prime minister Anders Rasmussen as the organization’s new secretarygeneral—not because he thought Rasmussen was unqualified but because
Rasmussen’s government had declined to act on Turkey’s demand that it censor
the 2005 publication of cartoons depicting the prophet Muhammad in a Danish
newspaper. European appeals about freedom of the press had left Erdogan

unmoved, and he had relented only after I’d promised that Rasmussen would
have a Turkish deputy and had convinced him that my upcoming visit—and U.S.
public opinion of Turkey—would be adversely affected if Rasmussen’s
appointment didn’t go through.
This set a pattern for the next eight years. Mutual self-interest would dictate
that Erdogan and I develop a working relationship. Turkey looked to the United
States for support of its E.U. bid, as well as military and intelligence assistance in
fighting Kurdish separatists who’d been emboldened by the fall of Saddam
Hussein. We, meanwhile, needed Turkey’s cooperation to combat terrorism and
stabilize Iraq. Personally, I found the prime minister to be cordial and generally
responsive to my requests. But whenever I listened to him speak, his tall frame
slightly stooped, his voice a forceful staccato that rose an octave in response to
various grievances or perceived slights, I got the strong impression that his
commitment to democracy and the rule of law might last only as long as it
preserved his own power.
My questions about the durability of democratic values weren’t restricted to
Turkey. During my stop in Prague, E.U. officials had expressed alarm about the
rise of far-right parties across Europe and how the economic crisis was causing an
uptick in nationalism, anti-immigrant sentiment, and skepticism about
integration. The sitting Czech president, Václav Klaus, to whom I made a short
courtesy visit, embodied some of these trends. A vocal “Eurosceptic” who’d been
in office since 2003, he was both ardently pro–free market and an admirer of
Vladimir Putin’s. And although we tried to keep things light during our
conversation, what I knew of his public record—he had supported efforts to
censor Czech television, was dismissive of gay and lesbian rights, and was a
notorious climate change denier—didn’t leave me particularly hopeful about
political trends in central Europe.
It was hard to tell how lasting these trends would be. I told myself it was the
nature of democracies—including America’s—to swing between periods of
progressive change and conservative retrenchment. In fact, what was striking was
how easily Klaus would have fit in with the Republican Senate caucus back
home, just as I could readily picture Erdogan as a local power broker on the
Chicago City Council. Whether this was a source of comfort or concern, I
couldn’t decide.
—

however, come to Prague to assess the state of democracy. Instead,
we had scheduled my one big public speech of the trip to lay out a top foreign
policy initiative: the reduction and ultimate elimination of nuclear weapons. I’d
worked on the issue since my election to the Senate four years earlier, and while
there were risks promoting what many considered a utopian quest, I told my
team that in some ways that was the point; even modest progress on the issue
required a bold and overarching vision. If I hoped to pass one thing on to Malia
and Sasha, it was freedom from the possibility of a human-made apocalypse.
I had a second, more practical reason for focusing on the nuclear issue in a
way that would make headlines across Europe: We needed to find a means to
prevent Iran and North Korea from advancing their nuclear programs. (The day
before the speech, in fact, North Korea had launched a long-range rocket into
the Pacific, just to get our attention.) It was time to ramp up international
pressure on both countries, including with enforceable economic sanctions; and I
knew this would be a whole lot easier to accomplish if I could show that the
United States was interested in not just restarting global momentum on
disarmament but also actively reducing its own nuclear stockpile.
By the morning of the speech, I was satisfied that we had framed the nuclear
issue with enough concrete, achievable proposals to keep me from sounding
hopelessly quixotic. The day was clear and the setting spectacular, a town square
with the ancient Prague Castle—once home to Bohemian kings and Holy
Roman emperors—looming in the background. As the Beast wended its way
through the city’s narrow and uneven streets, we passed some of the thousands
who were gathering to hear the speech. There were people of all ages, but mostly
I saw young Czechs, dressed in jeans, sweaters, and scarves, bundled up against a
crisp spring wind, their faces flushed and expectant. It was crowds like this, I
thought, that had been scattered by Soviet tanks at the end of the 1968 Prague
Spring; and it was on these same streets just twenty-one years later, in 1989, that
even bigger crowds of peaceful protesters had, against all odds, brought an end to
Communist rule.
I had been in law school in 1989. I recalled sitting alone in my basement
apartment a few miles from Harvard Square, glued to my secondhand TV set as I
watched what would come to be known as the Velvet Revolution unfold. I
remember being riveted by those protests and hugely inspired. It was the same
feeling I’d had earlier in the year, seeing that solitary figure facing down tanks in
Tiananmen Square, the same inspiration I felt whenever I watched grainy footage
of Freedom Riders or John Lewis and his fellow civil rights soldiers marching
I HAD NOT,

across the Edmund Pettus Bridge in Selma. To see ordinary people sloughing off
fear and habit to act on their deepest beliefs, to see young people risking
everything just to have a say in their own lives, to try to strip the world of the old
cruelties, hierarchies, divisions, falsehoods, and injustices that cramped the human
spirit—that, I had realized, was what I believed in and longed to be a part of.
That night, I had been unable to sleep. Rather than reading my casebooks for
class the next day, I had written in my journal deep into the night, my brain
bursting with urgent, half-formed thoughts, uncertain of what my role might be
in this great global struggle but knowing even then that the practice of law would
be no more than a way station for me, that my heart would take me elsewhere.
It felt like a long time ago. And yet looking out from the backseat of the
presidential limousine, preparing to deliver an address that would be broadcast
around the world, I realized there was a direct if wholly improbable line between
that moment and this one. I was the product of that young man’s dreams; and as
we pulled up to the makeshift holding area behind a wide stage, a part of me
imagined myself not as the politician I had become but as one of those young
people in the crowd, uncompromised by power, unencumbered by the need to
accommodate men like Erdogan and Klaus, obliged only to make common cause
with those chasing after a new and better world.
After the speech, I had a chance to visit with Václav Havel, the playwright
and former dissident who had been president of the Czech Republic for two
terms, finishing in 2003. A participant in the Prague Spring, he’d been blacklisted
after the Soviet occupation, had his works banned, and been repeatedly jailed for
his political activities. Havel, as much as anyone, had given moral voice to the
grassroots democracy movements that had brought the Soviet era to an end.
Along with Nelson Mandela and a handful of other living statesmen, he’d also
been a distant role model for me. I’d read his essays while in law school.
Watching him maintain his moral compass even after his side had won power and
he’d assumed the presidency had helped convince me that it was possible to enter
politics and come out with your soul intact.
Our meeting was brief, a victim to my schedule. Havel was in his early
seventies but looked younger, with an unassuming manner, a warm, craggy face,
rusty-blond hair, and a trim mustache. After posing for pictures and addressing
the assembled press, we settled into a conference room, where, with the help of
his personal translator, we spoke for forty-five minutes or so about the financial
crisis, Russia, and the future of Europe. He was concerned that the United States

might somehow believe that the problems of Europe were solved when in fact,
throughout the former Soviet satellites, the commitment to democracy was still
fragile. As memories of the old order faded, and leaders like him who had forged
close relationships with America passed from the scene, the dangers of a resurgent
illiberalism were real.
“In some ways, the Soviets simplified who the enemy was,” Havel said.
“Today, autocrats are more sophisticated. They stand for election while slowly
undermining the institutions that make democracy possible. They champion free
markets while engaging in the same corruption, cronyism, and exploitation as
existed in the past.” He confirmed that the economic crisis was strengthening the
forces of nationalism and populist extremism across the continent, and although
he agreed with my strategy to reengage Russia, he cautioned that the annexation
of Georgian territory was just the most overt example of Putin’s efforts to
intimidate and interfere throughout the region. “Without attention from the
U.S.,” he said, “freedom here and across Europe will wither.”
Our time was up. I thanked Havel for his advice and assured him that
America would not falter in promoting democratic values. He smiled and told me
he hoped he had not added to my burdens.
“You’ve been cursed with people’s high expectations,” he said, shaking my
hand. “Because it means they are also easily disappointed. It’s something I’m
familiar with. I fear it can be a trap.”
—
leaving Washington, my team climbed back onto Air Force
One, worn out and ready to return home. I was in the plane’s front cabin, about
to catch up on some sleep, when Jim Jones and Tom Donilon walked in to brief
me on a developing situation involving an issue I’d never been asked about
during the campaign.
“Pirates?”
“Pirates, Mr. President,” Jones said. “Off the coast of Somalia. They boarded
a cargo ship captained by an American and appear to be holding the crew
hostage.”
This problem wasn’t new. For decades, Somalia had been a failed state, a
country on the Horn of Africa carved up and shared uneasily by various warlords,
clans, and, more recently, a vicious terrorist organization called al-Shabaab.
SEVEN DAYS AFTER

Without the benefit of a functioning economy, gangs of jobless young men
equipped with motorized skiffs, AK-47s, and makeshift ladders had taken to
boarding commercial vessels traveling the busy shipping route connecting Asia to
the West via the Suez Canal and holding them for ransom. This was the first time
an American-flagged ship was involved. We had no indication that the four
Somalis had harmed any members of the twenty-person crew, but Secretary Gates
had ordered the navy destroyer USS Bainbridge and the frigate USS Halyburton to
the area, and they were expected to have the hijacked vessel within their sights by
the time we landed in Washington.
“We’ll wake you, sir, if there are further developments,” Jones said.
“Got it,” I said, feeling the weariness I’d staved off over the past few days
starting to settle in my bones. “Also wake me if the locusts come,” I said. “Or the
plague.”
“Sir?” Jones paused.
“Just a joke, Jim. Good night.”