JUST AS DELIVERING A SALUTE

became second nature to me, repeated anytime I
boarded Marine One or Air Force One or interacted with our troops, I slowly
grew more comfortable—and efficient—in my role as commander in chief. The
morning PDB became more concise as my team and I got better acquainted with
a recurring cast of foreign policy characters, scenarios, conflicts, and threats.
Connections that had once been opaque were now obvious to me. I could tell
you off the top of my head which allied troops were where in Afghanistan and
how reliable they were in a fight, which Iraqi ministers were ardent nationalists
and which carried water for the Iranians. The stakes were too high, the problems
too knotty, for any of this to ever feel entirely routine. Instead, I came to
experience my responsibilities the way I imagine a bomb-disposal expert feels
about clipping a wire or a tightrope walker feels as she steps off the platform,
having learned to shed excess fear for the sake of focus—while trying not to get
so relaxed that I made sloppy mistakes.
There was one task that I never allowed myself to get even remotely
comfortable with. Every week or so, my assistant Katie Johnson set on my desk a
folder containing condolence letters to the families of fallen service members for
me to sign. I’d close the door to my office, open the folder, and pause over each
letter, reading the name aloud like an incantation, trying to summon an image of
the young man (female casualties were rare) and what his life had been like—
where he’d grown up and gone to school, the birthday parties and summer swims
that had made up his childhood, the sports teams he’d played on, the sweethearts
he’d pined for. I’d think about his parents, and his wife and kids if he had them. I
signed each letter slowly, careful not to smudge the heavy beige paper with my
left-handed, sideways grip of the pen. If the signature didn’t look the way I
wanted, I’d have the letter reprinted, knowing full well that nothing I did would
ever be enough.
I wasn’t the only person to send such letters. Bob Gates also corresponded
UST AS DELIVERING A SALUTE

with the families of those killed in Iraq and Afghanistan, though we rarely if ever
talked about it.
Gates and I had developed a strong working relationship. We met regularly in
the Oval Office, and I found him to be practical, even-keeled, and refreshingly
blunt, with the quiet confidence to both argue his case and occasionally change
his mind. His skillful management of the Pentagon made me willing to overlook
those times he tried to manage me as well, and he wasn’t afraid to take on
Defense Department sacred cows, including efforts to rein in the defense budget.
He could be prickly, especially with my younger White House staffers, and our
differences in age, upbringing, experience, and political orientation made us
something short of friends. But we recognized in each other a common work
ethic and sense of duty—not only to the nation that had trusted us to keep it safe
but to the troops whose courage we witnessed every day, and to the families they
had left behind.
It helped that on most national security issues our judgments aligned.
Entering the summer of 2009, for example, Gates and I shared a guarded
optimism about developments in Iraq. Not that the conditions there were rosy.
The Iraqi economy was in shambles—the war had destroyed much of the
country’s basic infrastructure, while plunging world oil prices had sapped the
national budget—and due to parliamentary gridlock, Iraq’s government had
difficulty carrying out even the most basic tasks. During my brief visit there in
April, I’d offered Prime Minister Maliki suggestions for how he might embrace
needed administrative reforms and more effectively reach out to Iraq’s Sunni and
Kurdish factions. He’d been polite but defensive (apparently he wasn’t a student
of Madison’s “Federalist No. 10”): As far as he was concerned, Shiites in Iraq
were the majority, his party’s coalition had won the most votes, Sunnis and Kurds
were hindering progress with their unreasonable demands, and any notions of
accommodating the interests or protecting the rights of Iraq’s minority
populations were an inconvenience he assumed only as a result of U.S. pressure.
The conversation had been a useful reminder to me that elections alone don’t
produce a functioning democracy; until Iraq found a way to strengthen its civic
institutions and its leaders developed habits of compromise, the country would
continue to struggle. Still, the fact that Maliki and his rivals were expressing
hostility and mistrust through politics rather than through the barrel of a gun
counted as progress. Even with U.S. forces withdrawing from Iraqi population
centers, AQI-sponsored terrorist attacks had continued to decline, and our
commanders reported a steady improvement in the performance of Iraqi security

forces. Gates and I agreed that the United States would need to play a critical role
in Iraq for years to come—advising key ministries, training its security forces,
breaking deadlocks between factions, and helping finance the country’s
reconstruction. But barring significant reversals, the end of America’s war in Iraq
was finally in sight.
The same couldn’t be said about Afghanistan.
The additional troops I’d authorized in February had helped check Taliban
gains in some areas and were working to secure the upcoming presidential
election. But our forces had not reversed the country’s deepening cycle of
violence and instability, and as a result of increased fighting over a wider swath of
territory, U.S. casualties had spiked.
Afghan casualties were also on the rise, with more civilians caught in the cross
fire, falling prey to suicide attacks and sophisticated roadside bombs planted by
insurgents. Afghans increasingly complained about certain U.S. tactics—nighttime
raids on homes suspected of harboring Taliban fighters, for example—that they
viewed as dangerous or disruptive but that our commanders deemed necessary to
carry out their missions. On the political front, President Karzai’s reelection
strategy mainly consisted of buying off local power brokers, intimidating
opponents, and shrewdly playing various ethnic factions against one another.
Diplomatically, our high-level outreach to Pakistani officials appeared to have had
no effect on their continued tolerance of Taliban safe havens inside their country.
And all the while, a reconstituted al-Qaeda operating in the border areas with
Pakistan still posed a major threat.
Given the lack of meaningful progress, we were all eager to see what our new
ISAF commander, General Stanley McChrystal, had to say about the situation. At
the end of August, having spent weeks in Afghanistan with a team of military and
civilian advisors, McChrystal turned in the top-to-bottom assessment that Gates
had asked for. A few days later, the Pentagon sent it to the White House.
Rather than provide clear answers, it set off a whole new round of
troublesome questions.
—
assessment detailed what we already knew: The
situation in Afghanistan was bad and getting worse, with the Taliban
emboldened, the Afghan army weak and demoralized, and Karzai, who prevailed
MOST

OF

MCCHRYSTAL’S

in an election tainted by violence and fraud, still in charge of a government that
was viewed by the Afghan people as corrupt and inept. What got everyone’s
attention, though, was the report’s conclusion. To turn the situation around,
McChrystal proposed a full-blown counterinsurgency (COIN) campaign: a
military strategy meant to contain and marginalize insurgents not just by fighting
them but by simultaneously working to increase stability for the country’s wider
population—ideally quelling some of the fury that had driven insurgents to take
up arms in the first place.
Not only was McChrystal proposing a more ambitious approach than what
I’d envisioned when I’d adopted the Riedel report recommendations in the
spring, he was also requesting at least forty thousand troops on top of those I’d
already deployed—which would bring the total number of U.S. troops in
Afghanistan close to one hundred thousand for the foreseeable future.
“So much for being the antiwar president,” Axe said.
It was tough not to feel as if I’d been subjected to a bait and switch—that the
Pentagon’s acquiescence to my more modest initial increase of seventeen
thousand troops and four thousand military trainers had been merely a temporary,
tactical retreat on the path to getting more. Among members of my team,
divisions over Afghanistan that had been evident back in February began to
harden. Mike Mullen, the Joint Chiefs, and David Petraeus all endorsed
McChrystal’s COIN strategy in its entirety; anything less, they argued, was likely
to fail and would signal a dangerous lack of American resolve to friends and foes
alike. Hillary and Panetta quickly followed suit. Gates, who’d previously
expressed concern over the wisdom of expanding our military footprint in a
country famously resistant to foreign occupation, was more circumspect but told
me he’d been persuaded by McChrystal that a smaller U.S. force wouldn’t work,
and that if we coordinated closely with the Afghan security forces to protect local
populations and better trained our soldiers to respect Afghan culture, we could
avoid the problems that had plagued the Soviets in the 1980s. Meanwhile, Joe
and a sizable number of NSC staffers viewed McChrystal’s proposal as just the
latest attempt by an unrestrained military to drag the country deeper into a futile,
wildly expensive nation-building exercise, when we could and should be
narrowly focused on counterterrorism (CT) efforts against al-Qaeda.
After reading McChrystal’s sixty-six-page assessment, I shared Joe’s
skepticism. As far as I could tell, there was no clear exit strategy; under
McChrystal’s plan, it would take five to six years just to get U.S. troop numbers

back down to what they were now. The costs were staggering—at least $1 billion
for every thousand additional troops deployed. Our men and women in uniform,
some on their fourth or fifth tours after close to a decade of war, would face an
even greater toll. And given the resilience of the Taliban and the dysfunction of
Karzai’s government, there was no guarantee of success. In their written
endorsement of the plan, Gates and the generals acknowledged that no amount of
U.S. military power could stabilize Afghanistan “as long as pervasive corruption
and preying upon the people continue to characterize governance” inside the
country. I saw no possibility of that condition being met anytime soon.
Still, some hard truths prevented me from rejecting McChrystal’s plan out of
hand. The status quo was untenable. We couldn’t afford to let the Taliban return
to power, and we needed more time to train more capable Afghan security forces
and to root out al-Qaeda and its leadership. As confident as I felt in my own
judgment, I couldn’t ignore the unanimous recommendation of experienced
generals who’d managed to salvage some measure of stability in Iraq and were
already in the thick of the fight in Afghanistan. I therefore asked Jim Jones and
Tom Donilon to organize a series of NSC meetings where—away from
congressional politics and media grousing—we could methodically work through
the details of McChrystal’s proposal, see how they matched up with our
previously articulated objectives, and settle on the best way forward.
As it turned out, the generals had other ideas. Just two days after I received
the report, The Washington Post published an interview with David Petraeus in
which he declared that any hope for success in Afghanistan would require
substantially more troops and a “fully resourced, comprehensive” COIN strategy.
About ten days later, fresh off our first discussion of McChrystal’s proposal in the
Situation Room, Mike Mullen appeared before the Senate Armed Services
Committee for a previously scheduled hearing and made the same argument,
dismissing any narrower strategy as insufficient to the goal of defeating al-Qaeda
and keeping Afghanistan from becoming a future base for attacks against the
homeland. A few days after that, on September 21, the Post published a synopsis
of McChrystal’s report that had leaked to Bob Woodward, under the headline
MCCHRYSTAL: MORE FORCES OR “MISSION FAILURE.” This was followed in short
order by McChrystal giving an interview to 60 Minutes and delivering a speech in
London, in both instances promoting the merits of his COIN strategy over other
alternatives.
The reaction was predictable. Republican hawks like John McCain and
Lindsey Graham seized on the generals’ media blitz, offering the familiar refrain

that I should “listen to my commanders on the ground” and fulfill McChrystal’s
request. News stories appeared daily, hyping the ever-growing rift between the
White House and the Pentagon. Columnists accused me of “dithering” and
questioned whether I had the intestinal fortitude to lead a nation during wartime.
Rahm remarked that in all his years in Washington, he’d never seen such an
orchestrated, public campaign by the Pentagon to box in a president. Biden was
more succinct:
“It’s fucking outrageous.”
I agreed. It was hardly the first time that disagreements inside my team had
spilled into the press. But it was the first instance during my presidency when I
felt as if an entire agency under my charge was working its own agenda. I decided
it was also going to be the last. Shortly after Mullen’s congressional testimony, I
asked him and Gates to see me in the Oval Office.
“So,” I said after we’d taken our seats and I’d offered them coffee. “Did I not
make myself clear about how I wanted time to evaluate McChrystal’s assessment?
Or does your building just have a basic lack of respect for me?”
The two men shifted uncomfortably on the couch. As is usually the case
when I’m angry, I didn’t raise my voice.
“From the day I was sworn in,” I continued, “I’ve gone out of my way to
create an environment where everyone’s views are heard. And I think I’ve shown
myself willing to make unpopular decisions when I thought it was necessary for
our national security. Would you agree with that, Bob?”
“I would, Mr. President,” Gates said.
“So, when I set up a process that’s going to decide whether I send tens of
thousands more troops into a deadly war zone at the cost of hundreds of billions
of dollars, and I see my top military leaders short-circuiting that process to argue
their position in public, I have to wonder. Is it because they figure they know
better and don’t want to be bothered answering my questions? Is it because I’m
young and didn’t serve in the military? Is it because they don’t like my
politics…?”
I paused, letting the question linger. Mullen cleared his throat.
“I think I speak for all your flag officers, Mr. President,” he said, “when I say
we have the highest respect for you and the office.”
I nodded. “Well, Mike, I’ll take your word on that. And I give you my word
that I’ll make my decision about Stan’s proposal based on the Pentagon’s advice

and what I believe best serves the interests of this country. But until I do,” I said,
leaning in for emphasis, “I’d sure like to stop having my military advisors telling
me what I have to do on the front page of the morning paper. Is that fair?”
He agreed that it was. We moved on to other matters.
—
I’m inclined to believe Gates when he said there was no
coordinated plan by Mullen, Petraeus, or McChrystal to force my hand (although
he’d later admit to hearing from a reliable source that someone on McChrystal’s
staff had leaked the general’s report to Woodward). I know that all three men
were motivated by a sincere conviction in the rightness of their position, and that
they considered it to be part of their code as military officers to provide their
honest assessment in public testimony or press statements without regard to
political consequences. Gates was quick to remind me that Mullen’s
outspokenness had aggravated President Bush as well, and he was right to point
out that senior officials in the White House were often just as guilty of trying to
work the press behind the scenes.
But I also think that the episode illustrated just how accustomed the military
had become to getting whatever it wanted during the Bush years, and the degree
to which basic policy decisions—about war and peace, but also about America’s
budget priorities, diplomatic goals, and the possible trade-offs between security
and other values—had been steadily farmed out to the Pentagon and the CIA. It
was easy to see the factors behind this: the impulse after 9/11 to do whatever it
took to stop the terrorists and the reluctance of the White House to ask any
tough questions that might get in the way; a military forced to clean up the mess
that resulted from the decision to invade Iraq; a public that rightly saw the
military as more competent and trustworthy than the civilians who were
supposed to make policy; a Congress that was chiefly interested in avoiding
responsibility for hard foreign policy problems; and a press corps that could be
overly deferential to anyone with stars on their shoulders.
Men like Mullen, Petraeus, McChrystal, and Gates—all of them proven
leaders with a singular focus on the hugely difficult tasks before them—had
simply filled a vacuum. America had been lucky to have those men in the
positions they were in, and when it came to the later phases of the Iraq War,
they’d mostly made the right calls. But as I’d told Petraeus that first time we met
in Iraq, right before I was elected, it was the job of the president to think broadly,
LOOKING BACK,

not narrowly, and to weigh the costs and benefits of military action against
everything else that went into making the country strong.
As much as any specific differences over strategy or tactics, such fundamental
issues—the civilian control of policy making, the respective roles of the president
and his military advisors in our constitutional system, and the considerations each
brought to bear in deciding about war—became the subtext of the Afghan
debate. And it was on these issues that the differences between me and Gates
became more obvious. As one of Washington’s savviest operators, Gates
understood as well as anybody congressional pressure, public opinion, and
budgetary constraints. But for him, these were obstacles to navigate around, not
legitimate factors that should inform our decisions. Throughout the Afghan
debate, he was quick to ascribe any objections Rahm or Biden might raise—
about the difficulty in rounding up the votes in Congress for the $30 to $40
billion a year in additional spending that McChrystal’s plan might require, or the
weariness that the nation might feel after close to a decade of war—as mere
“politics.”
To other people, though never directly to me, Gates would sometimes
question my commitment to the war and the strategy I’d adopted back in March,
no doubt attributing it to “politics” as well. It was hard for him to see that what
he dismissed as politics was democracy as it was supposed to work—that our
mission had to be defined not only by the need to defeat an enemy but by the
need to make sure the country wasn’t bled dry in the process; that questions
about spending hundreds of billions on missiles and forward operating bases rather
than schools or healthcare for kids weren’t tangential to national security but
central to it; that the sense of duty he felt so keenly toward the troops already
deployed, his genuine, admirable desire that they be given every chance to
succeed, might be matched by the passion and patriotism of those interested in
limiting the number of young Americans placed in harm’s way.
—
Gates’s job to think about those things, but it was mine. And
so, from mid-September till mid-November, I presided over a series of nine twoto-three-hour meetings in the Sit Room to evaluate McChrystal’s plan. The
sheer length of the deliberations became a story in Washington, and though my
talk with Gates and Mullen had put a stop to on-the-record editorializing from
the top generals, leaks, anonymous quotes, and speculation continued to appear
MAYBE IT WASN’T

regularly in the press. I did my best to block out the noise, aided by the
knowledge that many of my loudest critics were the same commentators and socalled experts who had actively promoted or been swept up in the rush to invade
Iraq.
Indeed, one of the chief arguments for adopting McChrystal’s plan was its
similarities to the COIN strategy Petraeus had used during the U.S. surge in Iraq.
As a general matter, Petraeus’s emphasis on training local forces, improving local
governance, and protecting local populations—rather than seizing territory and
piling up insurgent body counts—made sense. But Afghanistan in 2009 wasn’t
Iraq in 2006. The two countries represented different circumstances demanding
different solutions. With each Sit Room session, it became clearer that the
expansive view of COIN that McChrystal imagined for Afghanistan not only
went beyond what was needed to destroy al-Qaeda—it went beyond what was
likely achievable within my term of office, if it was achievable at all.
John Brennan reemphasized that unlike al-Qaeda in Iraq, the Taliban was too
deeply woven into the fabric of Afghan society to be eradicated—and that despite
their sympathies toward al-Qaeda, they showed no signs of plotting attacks
outside Afghanistan against the United States or its allies. Our ambassador in
Kabul, former general Karl Eikenberry, doubted that the Karzai government
could be reformed and feared that a large troop infusion and further
“Americanization” of the war would take all pressure off Karzai to get his act
together. McChrystal’s lengthy timetable for both installing troops and pulling
them out looked less like an Iraq-style surge than a long-term occupation, leading
Biden to ask why—with al-Qaeda in Pakistan and almost entirely targeted with
drone strikes—we should commit one hundred thousand troops to rebuilding the
country next door.
In front of me, at least, McChrystal and the other generals dutifully responded
to each of these concerns—in some cases persuasively, in others not so much.
Despite their patience and good manners, they had trouble hiding their
frustration at having their professional judgments challenged, especially by those
who’d never put on a uniform. (McChrystal’s eyes narrowed when, on more
than one occasion, Biden started explaining to him what was necessary to carry
out successful counterterrorism operations.) Tensions between White House
staffers and the Pentagon got worse, with NSC staff feeling stonewalled when it
came to getting information in a timely fashion and Gates quietly fuming over
what he considered to be the NSC’s constant micromanagement. The bad blood
even spilled over into relationships within departments. Joint Chiefs vice chairman

James “Hoss” Cartwright and Lieutenant General Douglas Lute—an NSC deputy
and “war czar” during the final two years of the Bush administration whom I’d
asked to stay on—would both see their stock drop inside the Pentagon the
minute they agreed to help Biden flesh out a less troop-intensive, more CToriented alternative to McChrystal’s plan. Hillary, meanwhile, considered
Eikenberry’s end runs around official State Department channels as verging on
insubordination and wanted him replaced.
It’s fair to say, then, that by the third or fourth go-round of PowerPoint
slides, battlefield maps, and balky video feeds, along with the ever-present
fluorescent lighting, bad coffee, and stale air, everyone was sick of Afghanistan,
sick of meetings, and sick of one another. As for me—well, I felt the weight of
the office more than at any other time since I’d been sworn in. I tried not to let it
show, keeping my expressions neutral as I asked questions, took notes, and
occasionally doodled on the margins of the pad the staff had set out before me
(abstract patterns, mostly, sometimes people’s faces or beach scenes—a seagull
flying over a palm tree and ocean waves). But every so often my frustrations
would flare, especially whenever I heard anyone respond to a tough question by
falling back on the argument that we needed to send more troops in order to
show “resolve.”
What does that mean exactly? I’d ask, sometimes too sharply. That we keep
doubling down on bad decisions we’ve already made? Does anyone think that
spinning our wheels in Afghanistan for another ten years will impress our allies
and strike fear in our enemies? It reminded me, I’d later tell Denis, of the nursery
rhyme about an old lady who swallowed a spider to catch a fly.
“She ends up swallowing a horse,” I said.
“And she’s dead, of course,” Denis said.
Sometimes, after one of these marathon sessions, I’d wander back to the small
pool house near the Oval to have a cigarette and soak in the silence, feeling the
knots in my back, shoulders, neck—signs of sitting too much, but also of my state
of mind. If only the decision on Afghanistan was a matter of resolve, I thought—
just will and steel and fire. That had been true for Lincoln as he tried to save the
Union, and for FDR after Pearl Harbor, with America and the world facing a
mortal threat from expansionist powers. In such circumstances, you harnessed all
you had to mount a total war. But in the here and now, the threats we faced—
deadly but stateless terrorist networks; otherwise feeble rogue nations out to get
weapons of mass destruction—were real but not existential, and so resolve

without foresight was worse than useless. It led us to fight the wrong wars and
careen down rabbit holes. It made us administrators of inhospitable terrain and
bred more enemies than we killed. Because of our unmatched power, America
had choices about what and when and how to fight. To claim otherwise, to insist
that our safety and our standing in the world required us to do all that we could
for as long as we could in every single instance, was an abdication of moral
responsibility, the certainty it offered a comforting lie.
—
in the morning on October 9, 2009, the White House operator
jolted me from sleep to say that Robert Gibbs was on the line. Calls that early
from my staff were rare, and my heart froze. Was it a terrorist attack? A natural
disaster?
“You were awarded the Nobel Peace Prize,” Gibbs said.
“What do you mean?”
“They just announced it a few minutes ago.”
“For what?”
Gibbs tactfully ignored the question. Favs would be waiting outside the Oval
to work with me on whatever statement I wanted to make, he said. After I hung
up, Michelle asked what the call was about.
“I’m getting the Nobel Peace Prize.”
“That’s wonderful, honey,” she said, then rolled over to get a little more
shut-eye.
An hour and a half later, Malia and Sasha stopped by the dining room as I was
having breakfast. “Great news, Daddy,” Malia said, hitching her backpack over
her shoulders. “You won the Nobel Prize…and it’s Bo’s birthday!”
“Plus, it’s gonna be a three-day weekend!” Sasha added, doing a little fist
pump. They both kissed me on the cheek before heading out the door for school.
In the Rose Garden, I told the assembled press corps that less than a year into
my presidency, I didn’t feel that I deserved to be in the company of those
transformative figures who’d been honored in the past. Instead, I saw the prize as
a call to action, a means for the Nobel committee to give momentum to causes
for which American leadership was vital: reducing the threats of nuclear weapons
and climate change; shrinking economic inequality; upholding human rights; and
AROUND SIX

bridging the racial, ethnic, and religious divides that so often fed conflict. I said I
thought the award should be shared with others around the world who labored,
often without recognition, for justice, peace, and human dignity.
Walking back into the Oval, I asked Katie to hold the congratulatory calls
that were starting to come in and took a few minutes to consider the widening
gap between the expectations and the realities of my presidency. Six days earlier,
three hundred Afghan militants had overrun a small U.S. military outpost in the
Hindu Kush, killing eight of our soldiers and wounding twenty-seven more.
October would become the deadliest month for U.S. troops in Afghanistan since
the start of the war eight years earlier. And rather than ushering in a new era of
peace, I was facing the prospect of committing more soldiers to war.
—
Attorney General Eric Holder and I took a midnight flight to
Dover Air Force Base, in Delaware, to witness the return to U.S. soil of the
remains of fifteen U.S. soldiers and three drug enforcement agents who’d been
killed in back-to-back incidents in Afghanistan—a deadly helicopter crash and
two roadside bombings in Kandahar Province. A president’s attendance at these
“dignified transfers,” as they were called, was rare, but I thought it important,
now more than ever, to be present. Since the Gulf War, the Defense Department
had barred media coverage of the homecomings of service members’ caskets, but
with the help of Bob Gates, I’d reversed this policy earlier in the year—leaving
the decision to individual families. Having at least some of these transfers publicly
documented, I felt, gave our country a clearer means to reckon with the costs of
war, the pain of each loss. And on this night, at the end of a devastating month in
Afghanistan, with the future of the war under debate, one of the families had
elected to have the moment recorded.
There was a constant hush throughout the four or five hours I was on the
base. In the small, plain chapel, where Holder and I joined the families who had
gathered. Inside the cargo bay of the C-17 aircraft that held the eighteen flagdraped transfer cases, where an army chaplain’s solemn prayer echoed against the
metallic walls. On the tarmac, where we stood at attention and watched six
pallbearers dressed in army fatigues, white gloves, and black berets carry the heavy
cases one by one to the rows of waiting vehicles, the world silent except for the
howl of wind and the cadence of steps.
On the flight back, with sunrise still a few hours away, the only words I could
LATE THAT MONTH,

remember from the entire visit were those of one soldier’s mother: “Don’t leave
those boys who are still over there hanging.” She looked exhausted, her face
hollowed by grief. I promised I wouldn’t, not knowing whether that meant
sending more soldiers to finish the mission for which her son had made the
ultimate sacrifice, or winding down a muddled and lengthy conflict that would
cut short the lives of other people’s children. It was left for me to decide.
A week later, another disaster struck our military, this time closer to home.
On November 5, a U.S. Army major and psychiatrist named Nidal Hasan walked
into a building at the Fort Hood army base in Killeen, Texas, pulled out a
semiautomatic pistol he’d purchased at a local gun store, and opened fire, killing
thirteen people and wounding scores of others before being shot and
apprehended by base police officers. Once again, I flew to comfort grieving
families, then spoke at an outdoor memorial service. As a trumpet played taps, its
plaintive melody punctuated by muffled sobs in the audience, my eyes traveled
the memorials to the fallen soldiers: a framed photograph, a pair of empty combat
boots, a helmet set atop a rifle.
I thought about what John Brennan and FBI director Robert Mueller had
told me in briefings on the shooting: Hasan, a U.S.-born Muslim with a troubling
record of erratic behavior, appeared to have been radicalized over the internet. In
particular, he’d been inspired by—and repeatedly sent emails to—a charismatic
Yemeni American cleric named Anwar al-Awlaki, who had a broad international
following and was believed to be the leading figure in al-Qaeda’s increasingly
active branch in Yemen. According to Mueller and Brennan, there were early
indications that the Defense Department, the FBI, and the Joint Terrorism Task
Force had all been alerted in one way or another to Hasan’s possible drift toward
radicalism, but that interagency information-sharing systems had failed to connect
the dots in a way that might have headed off the tragedy.
The eulogies ended. Taps began again. Across Fort Hood, I imagined soldiers
busily preparing for deployments to Afghanistan and the fight against the Taliban.
And I couldn’t help but wonder whether the greater threat might now actually lie
elsewhere—not just in Yemen or Somalia but also in the specter of homegrown
terrorism; in the febrile minds of men like Hasan and a borderless cyberworld, the
power and reach of which we didn’t yet fully comprehend.
—
IN LATE NOVEMBER 2009,

we held our ninth and final Afghan review session. For

all the drama, the substantive differences between members of my team had by
this point shrunk considerably. The generals conceded that eradicating the
Taliban from Afghanistan was unrealistic. Joe and my NSC staff acknowledged
that CT operations against al-Qaeda couldn’t work if the Taliban overran the
country or inhibited our intelligence collection. We landed on a set of achievable
objectives: reducing the level of Taliban activity so they didn’t threaten major
population centers; pushing Karzai to reform a handful of key departments, like
the Ministries of Defense and Finance, rather than trying to get him to revamp
the entire government; accelerating the training of local forces that would
eventually allow the Afghan people to secure their own country.
The team also agreed that meeting even these more modest objectives was
going to require additional U.S. troops.
The only remaining dispute was how many and for how long. The generals
continued to hold out for McChrystal’s original request of forty thousand,
without providing a good explanation for why the more limited set of objectives
we’d agreed to didn’t reduce by a single soldier the number of troops needed.
The “CT Plus” option that Biden had worked up with Hoss Cartwright and
Douglas Lute called for another twenty thousand troops to be devoted solely to
CT operations and training—but it wasn’t clear why either of those functions
needed anything close to that many extra U.S. personnel. In both cases, I worried
that the numbers were still being driven by ideological and institutional concerns
rather than by the objectives we’d set.
Ultimately it was Gates who came up with a workable resolution. In a private
memo to me, he explained that McChrystal’s request anticipated the United
States replacing the ten thousand Dutch and Canadian troops their governments
had pledged to bring home. If I authorized three brigades, for a total of thirty
thousand U.S. troops, it might be possible to use that commitment to leverage
the other ten thousand from our allies. Gates also agreed that we treat any
infusion of new troops more as a surge than an open-ended commitment, both
by accelerating the pace of their arrival and by setting a timetable of eighteen
months for them to start coming home.
For me, Gates’s acceptance of a timetable was particularly significant. In the
past, he’d joined the Joint Chiefs and Petraeus in resisting the idea, claiming that
timetables signaled to the enemy that they could wait us out. He was now
persuaded that Karzai might never make hard decisions about his own
government’s responsibilities absent the knowledge that we’d be bringing troops

home sooner rather than later.
After talking it over with Joe, Rahm, and the NSC staff, I decided to adopt
Gates’s proposal. There was a logic to it that went beyond simply splitting the
difference between McChrystal’s plan and the option Biden had worked up. In
the short term, it gave McChrystal the firepower he needed to reverse the
Taliban’s momentum, protect population centers, and train up Afghan forces. But
it set clear limits to COIN and put us firmly on the path of a narrower CT
approach two years out. Haggling remained over how firm to make the thirtythousand-troop cap (the Pentagon had a habit of deploying the approved number
and then coming back with requests for thousands of “enablers”—medics,
intelligence officers, and the like—which, it insisted, shouldn’t count toward the
total), and it took some time for Gates to sell the approach in his building. But a
few days after Thanksgiving, I called an evening meeting in the Oval with Gates,
Mullen, and Petraeus, as well as Rahm, Jim Jones, and Joe, where, in essence, I
had everyone sign on the dotted line. NSC staffers had prepared a detailed memo
outlining my order, and along with Rahm and Joe they’d persuaded me that
having the Pentagon brass look me in the eye and commit to an agreement laid
out on paper was the only way to avoid their publicly second-guessing my
decision if the war went south.
It was an unusual and somewhat heavy-handed gesture, one that no doubt
grated on Gates and the generals and that I regretted almost immediately. A
fitting end, I thought, to a messy, difficult stretch for my administration. I could
take some satisfaction, though, in the fact that the review had served its purpose.
Gates acknowledged that without producing a perfect plan, the hours of debate
had made for a better plan. It forced us to refine America’s strategic objectives in
Afghanistan in a way that prevented mission creep. It established the utility of
timetables for troop deployments in certain circumstances, something that had
been long contested by the Washington national security establishment. Beyond
putting an end to Pentagon freelancing for the duration of my presidency, it
helped reaffirm the larger principle of civilian control over America’s national
security policy making.
Still, the bottom line was that I’d be sending more young people to war.
We announced the planned troop deployment on December 1 at West Point,
the oldest and most storied of America’s service academies. A Continental Army
post during the Revolutionary War, a little over an hour north of New York
City, it’s a beautiful place—a series of black-and-gray granite structures arranged

like a small city high among green rolling hills, with a view over the broad and
winding Hudson River. Before my speech, I visited with the West Point
superintendent and glimpsed some of the buildings and grounds that had
produced a who’s who of America’s most decorated military leaders: Grant and
Lee, Patton and Eisenhower, MacArthur and Bradley, Westmoreland and
Schwarzkopf.
It was impossible not to be humbled and moved by the tradition those men
represented, the service and sacrifice that had helped forge a nation, defeat
fascism, and halt the march of totalitarianism. Just as it was necessary to recall that
Lee had led a Confederate Army intent on preserving slavery and Grant had
overseen the slaughter of Indian tribes; that MacArthur had defied Truman’s
orders in Korea to disastrous effect and Westmoreland had helped orchestrate an
escalation in Vietnam that would scar a generation. Glory and tragedy, courage
and stupidity—one set of truths didn’t negate the other. For war was
contradiction, as was the history of America.
The large auditorium near the center of West Point’s campus was full by the
time I arrived, and aside from VIPs like Gates, Hillary, and the Joint Chiefs, the
audience was made up almost entirely of cadets. They were in uniform: gray
tunics with black trim over white collars. The sizable number of Blacks, Latinos,
Asian Americans, and women in their ranks offered vivid testimony to the
changes that had taken place since the school graduated its first class in 1805. As I
entered the stage to a band playing the ceremonial ruffles and flourishes, the
cadets stood in unison and applauded; and looking out at their faces—so earnest
and full of the glow of youth, so certain of their destiny and eager to defend their
country—I felt my heart swell with an almost paternal pride. I just prayed that I
and the others who commanded them were worthy of their trust.
—
I flew to Oslo to receive the Nobel Peace Prize. The image of
those young cadets weighed on me. Rather than ignore the tension between
getting a peace prize and expanding a war, I decided to make it the centerpiece of
my acceptance address. With the help of Ben Rhodes and Samantha Power, I
wrote a first draft, drawing on the writings of thinkers like Reinhold Niebuhr and
Gandhi to organize my argument: that war is both terrible and sometimes
necessary; that reconciling these seemingly contradictory ideas requires the
community of nations to evolve higher standards for both the justification and the
NINE DAYS LATER,

conduct of war; and that avoidance of war requires a just peace, founded on a
common commitment to political freedom, a respect for human rights, and
concrete strategies to expand economic opportunity around the world. I finished
writing the speech in the dead of night aboard Air Force One as Michelle slept in
our cabin, my weary eyes drawn away from the page every so often by the sight
of a spectral moon over the Atlantic.
Like everything in Norway, the Nobel ceremony—held in a brightly lit
auditorium seating a few hundred people—was sensibly austere: There was a
lovely performance by the young jazz artist Esperanza Spalding, an introduction
by the head of the Nobel committee, and then my address, all finished in around
ninety minutes. The speech itself was well received, even by some conservative
commentators who remarked on my willingness to remind European audiences
of the sacrifices made by U.S. troops in underwriting decades of peace. That
evening, the Nobel committee hosted a black-tie dinner in my honor, where I
was seated next to the king of Norway, a gracious, elderly man who told me
about sailing through his country’s fjords. My sister Maya, along with friends like
Marty and Anita, had flown in to join us, and everyone looked very sophisticated
as they sipped champagne and chewed on grilled elk and later danced to a
surprisingly good swing orchestra.
What I remember most, though, was a scene that took place before dinner, at
the hotel. Michelle and I had just finished getting dressed when Marvin knocked
on the door and told us to look out our fourth-story window. Pulling back the
shades, we saw that several thousand people had gathered in the early dusk, filling
the narrow street below. Each person held aloft a single lit candle—the city’s
traditional way to express its appreciation for that year’s peace prize winner. It
was a magical sight, as if a pool of stars had descended from the sky; and as
Michelle and I leaned out to wave, the night air brisk on our cheeks, the crowd
cheering wildly, I couldn’t help but think about the daily fighting that continued
to consume Iraq and Afghanistan and all the cruelty and suffering and injustice
that my administration had barely even begun to deal with. The idea that I, or
any one person, could bring order to such chaos seemed laughable; on some
level, the crowds below were cheering an illusion. And yet, in the flickering of
those candles, I saw something else. I saw an expression of the spirit of millions of
people around the world: the U.S. soldier manning a post in Kandahar, the
mother in Iran teaching her daughter to read, the Russian pro-democracy activist
mustering his courage for an upcoming demonstration—all those who refused to
give up on the idea that life could be better, and that whatever the risks and

hardships, they had a role to play.
Whatever you do won’t be enough, I heard their voices say.
Try anyway.