On a bright febuary

in 2007, I stood on a stage before the Old State
Capitol in Springfield—the same spot where Abe Lincoln had delivered his
“House Divided” speech while serving in the Illinois state legislature—and
announced my candidacy for president. With temperatures in the low teens, we’d
been worried that the cold might scare people off, but by the time I stepped up
to the microphone, more than fifteen thousand people had gathered in the plaza
and adjoining streets, all of them in a festive mood, bundled in parkas, scarves, ski
caps, and earmuffs, many of them hoisting handmade or campaign-provided
OBAMA signs, their collective breath hovering like patches of clouds.
My speech, carried live on cable TV, captured our campaign’s big themes—
the need for fundamental change; the need to tackle long-term problems like
healthcare and climate change; the need to move past the tired Washington
partisan divide; the need for an engaged and active citizenry. Michelle and the
girls joined me onstage to wave at the roaring crowd when I was finished, the
massive American flags hanging across nearby buildings making for a spectacular
backdrop.
From there, my team and I flew to Iowa, where in eleven months the
nation’s first contest for the nomination would take place, and where we were
counting on an early victory to catapult us past more seasoned opponents. At a
series of town hall meetings, we were once again greeted by thousands of
supporters and curiosity seekers. Backstage at an event in Cedar Rapids, I
overheard a veteran Iowa political operative explain to one of the fifty or so
national reporters who were following us that “this is not normal.”
Looking at the footage from that day, it’s hard not to get swept up in the
nostalgia that still holds sway over my former staff and supporters—the feeling
that we were kick-starting a magical ride; that over the course of two years we
would catch lightning in a bottle and tap into something essential and true about
America. But while the crowds, the excitement, the media attention of that day,
N A BRIGHT FEBRUARY MORNING

all foreshadowed my viability in the race, I have to remind myself that nothing
felt easy or predestined at the time, that again and again it felt as if our campaign
would go entirely off the rails, and that, at the outset, it seemed not just to me
but to many who were paying attention that I wasn’t a particularly good
candidate.
In many ways, my problems were a direct outgrowth of the buzz we’d
generated, and the expectations that came with it. As Axe explained, most
presidential campaigns by necessity start small—“Off-Broadway,” he called it;
small crowds, small venues, covered by local networks and small papers, where
the candidate and his or her team could test lines, smooth out kinks, commit a
pratfall, or work through a bout of stage fright without attracting much notice.
We didn’t have that luxury. From day one, it felt like the middle of Times
Square, and under the glare of the spotlight my inexperience showed.
My staff’s biggest fear was that I’d make a “gaffe,” the expression used by the
press to describe any maladroit phrase by the candidate that reveals ignorance,
carelessness, fuzzy thinking, insensitivity, malice, boorishness, falsehood, or
hypocrisy—or is simply deemed to veer sufficiently far from conventional
wisdom to make said candidate vulnerable to attack. By this definition, most
humans will commit five to ten gaffes a day, each of us counting on the
forbearance and goodwill of our family, co-workers, and friends to fill in the
blanks, catch our drift, and generally assume the best rather than the worst in us.
As a result, my initial instincts were to dismiss some of my team’s warnings.
On our way to our final stop in Iowa on announcement day, for example, Axe
glanced up from his briefing book.
“You know,” he said, “the town we’re going to, it’s pronounced
‘Waterloo.’ ”
“Right,” I said. “Waterloo.”
Axe shook his head. “No, it’s Water-loo. Not Water-loo.”
“Do that for me again.”
“Water-loo,” Axe said, his lips pursing just so.
“One more time.”
Axe frowned. “Okay, Barack…this is serious.”
It didn’t take long, though, to appreciate that the minute you announced
your candidacy for president, the normal rules of speech no longer applied; that
microphones were everywhere, and every word coming out of your mouth was

recorded, amplified, scrutinized, and dissected. At the town hall in Ames, Iowa,
on that first post-announcement tour, I was explaining my opposition to the war
in Iraq when I got sloppy and said that the Bush administration’s poorly-thoughtout decision had resulted in more than three thousand of our young troops’ lives
being “wasted.” The second I uttered the word, I regretted it. I’d always been
careful to distinguish between my views on the war and my appreciation for the
sacrifices of our troops and their families. Only a few press outlets picked up my
blunder, and a quick mea culpa tamped down any controversy. But it was a
reminder that words carried a different weight than before, and as I imagined
how my carelessness might impact a family still grieving over the loss of a loved
one, my heart sank.
By nature I’m a deliberate speaker, which, by the standards of presidential
candidates, helped keep my gaffe quotient relatively low. But my care with words
raised another issue on the campaign trail: I was just plain wordy, and that was a
problem. When asked a question, I tended to offer circuitous and ponderous
answers, my mind instinctively breaking up every issue into a pile of components
and subcomponents. If every argument had two sides, I usually came up with
four. If there was an exception to some statement I just made, I wouldn’t just
point it out; I’d provide footnotes. “You’re burying the lede!” Axe would
practically shout after listening to me drone on and on and on. For a day or two
I’d obediently focus on brevity, only to suddenly find myself unable to resist a
ten-minute explanation of the nuances of trade policy or the pace of Arctic
melting.
“What d’ya think?” I’d say, pleased with my thoroughness as I walked
offstage.
“You got an A on the quiz,” Axe would reply. “No votes, though.”
These were issues I could fix with time. Of greater concern, as we rolled into
the spring, was the fact that I was grumpy. One reason for that, I realize now, was
the toll of a two-year Senate campaign, a year of town halls as a senator, and
months of travel on behalf of other candidates. Once the adrenaline of the
announcement wore off, the sheer magnitude of the grind now before me struck
with full force.
And it was a grind. When not in Washington for Senate business, I soon
found myself in Iowa or one of the other early states, putting in sixteen-hour
days, six and a half days a week—sleeping in a Hampton Inn or a Holiday Inn or
an AmericInn or a Super 8. I’d wake up after five or six hours and try to squeeze

in a workout at whatever facility we could find (the old treadmill in the back of a
tanning salon was memorable), before packing up my clothes and gulping down a
haphazard breakfast; before hopping into a van and making fundraising calls on
the way to the first town hall meeting of the day; before interviews with the local
paper or news station, several meet-and-greets with local party leaders, a
bathroom stop, and maybe a swing by a local eatery to shake hands; before
hopping back in the van to dial for more dollars. I’d repeat this three or four
times, with a cold sandwich or a salad wedged in there somewhere, before finally
staggering into another motel around nine p.m., trying to catch Michelle and the
girls by phone before they went to bed, before reading the next day’s briefing
materials, the binder gradually slipping out of my hands as exhaustion knocked
me out.
And that’s not even counting the flights to New York or L.A. or Chicago or
Dallas for fundraisers. It was a life of not glamour but monotony, and the
prospect of eighteen continuous months of it quickly wore down my spirit. I’d
staked my claim in the presidential race, involved a big team of people, begged
strangers for money, and propagated a vision I believed in. But I missed my wife.
I missed my kids. I missed my bed, a consistent shower, sitting at a proper table
for a proper meal. I missed not having to say the exact same thing the exact same
way five or six or seven times a day.
Fortunately, along with Gibbs (who had the constitution, experience, and
general orneriness to keep me focused while on the road), I had two other
companions to help me push through my initial funk.
The first was Marvin Nicholson, a half Canadian with an easy charm and
unflappable demeanor. In his mid-thirties and a towering six foot eight, Marvin
had held a variety of jobs, from golf caddy to bartender at a strip club, before
landing work as John Kerry’s body man four years earlier. It’s a strange role, the
body man: a personal assistant and jack-of-all-trades responsible for making sure
that the candidate has everything he or she needs to function, whether a favorite
snack or a couple of Advil, an umbrella when it’s wet or a scarf when it’s cold, or
the name of the county chairman who’s striding your way for a handshake.
Marvin operated with such skill and finesse, he’d become something of a cult
figure in political circles, which had led us to hire him as our trip director,
working with Alyssa and the advance team to coordinate travel, make sure I had
the appropriate materials, and keep me at least close to on schedule.
Then there was Reggie Love. Raised in North Carolina, the son of middle-

class Black parents, six foot four and powerfully built, Reggie had starred in both
basketball and football at Duke University before Pete Rouse hired him as an
assistant in my Senate office. (An aside: People often express surprise at how tall I
am, a bit over six foot one, something I attribute in part to years of being dwarfed
by Reggie and Marvin in photographs.) Under Marvin’s tutelage, twenty-fiveyear-old Reggie took over as body man, and though he had a rough go of it at
first—somehow managing to forget my briefcase in Miami and my suit jacket in
New Hampshire during the same week—his serious work ethic and goofy good
humor quickly made him a favorite of everyone on the campaign.
For the better part of two years, Gibbs, Marvin, and Reggie would be my
caretakers, my anchors to normalcy, and a steady source of comic relief. We
played cards and shot pool. We argued about sports and swapped music. (Reggie
helped me update a hip-hop playlist that had stopped at Public Enemy.) Marvin
and Reggie told me about their social lives on the road (complicated) and their
adventures in various local stops after our work was done (tattoo parlors and hot
tubs were sometimes featured). We teased Reggie about his youthful ignorance
(once, when I mentioned Paul Newman, Reggie said, “That’s the salad dressing
guy, right?”) and Gibbs about his appetites (at the Iowa State Fair, Gibbs would
have trouble choosing between the deep-fried Twinkie and the deep-fried
Snickers bar, until the woman behind the counter helpfully said, “Honey, why
should you have to choose?”).
Anytime we could, we played basketball. Even the smallest town had a high
school gym, and if there wasn’t time for a proper game, Reggie and I would still
roll up our sleeves and get in a round of H-O-R-S-E while waiting for me to go
onstage. Like any true athlete, he remained fiercely competitive. I sometimes
woke up the day after a game of one-on-one barely able to walk, though I was
too proud to let my discomfort show. Once we played a group of New
Hampshire firefighters from whom I was trying to secure an endorsement. They
were standard weekend warriors, a bit younger than me but in worse shape. After
the first three times Reggie stole the ball down the floor and went in for
thunderous dunks, I called a time-out.
“What are you doing?” I asked.
“What?”
“You understand that I’m trying to get their support, right?”
Reggie looked at me in disbelief. “You want us to lose to these stiffs?”
I thought for a second.

“Nah,” I said. “I wouldn’t go that far. Just keep it close enough that they’re
not too pissed.”
Spending time with Reggie, Marvin, and Gibbs, I found respite from the
pressures of the campaign, a small sphere where I wasn’t a candidate or a symbol
or a generational voice or even a boss, but rather just one of the guys. Which, as I
slogged through those early months, felt more valuable than any pep talk. Gibbs
did try to go the pep-talk route with me at one point as we were boarding
another airplane at the end of another interminable day, after a particularly flat
appearance. He told me that I needed to smile more, to remember that this was a
great adventure and that voters loved a happy warrior.
“Are you having any fun?” he asked.
“No,” I said.
“Anything we can do to make this more fun?”
“No.”
Sitting in the seat in front of us, Reggie overheard the conversation and
turned back to look at me with a wide grin. “If it’s any consolation,” he said,
“I’m having the time of my life.”
It was—although I didn’t tell him that at the time.
—
I was learning a lot and quickly. I spent hours dutifully poring
over the fat briefing books prepared by my staff, inhaling the latest studies on the
value of early childhood education, new developments in battery technology that
would make clean energy more accessible, and China’s manipulation of its
currency to boost its exports.
Looking back, I realize I was doing what most of us tend to do when we’re
uncertain or floundering: We reach for what feels familiar, what we think we’re
good at. I knew policy; I knew how to consume and process information. It took
a while to figure out that my problem wasn’t a lack of a ten-point plan. Rather, it
was my general inability to boil issues down to their essence, to tell a story that
helped explain an increasingly uncertain world to the American people and make
them feel that I, as president, could help them navigate it.
My more seasoned opponents already understood this. I embarrassed myself
early in their presence at a healthcare forum sponsored by the Service Employees
International Union, held in Las Vegas on a Saturday evening late in March 2007.
ALL THE WHILE,

Plouffe had resisted my participation. In his view, such “cattle calls,” where the
candidates appeared before this or that Democratic interest group, played to the
strengths of insiders and took time away from direct voter contact. I disagreed.
Healthcare was an issue I felt strongly about—not only because I’d heard many
devastating personal stories while campaigning but because I’d never forget my
mother in her waning days, fretting not just about her chances of survival but
about whether her insurance would keep her solvent during treatment.
As it turned out, I should have listened to Plouffe. My head was crammed
with too many facts and too few answers. Before a large audience of health
workers, I stumbled, mumbled, hemmed and hawed onstage. Under pointed
questioning, I had to confess that I didn’t yet have a definitive plan for delivering
affordable healthcare. You could hear crickets in the auditorium. The Associated
Press ran a story critiquing my showing at the forum—one that would promptly
get picked up by outlets across the country—under the painful headline IS OBAMA
ALL STYLE AND LITTLE SUBSTANCE?

My performance stood in sharp contrast to those of John Edwards and Hillary
Clinton, the two leading contenders. Edwards, the handsome and polished
former vice presidential candidate, had left the Senate in 2004 to be John Kerry’s
running mate, then made a show of starting a poverty center but really never
stopped campaigning full-time for president. Though I didn’t know him well, I’d
never been particularly impressed with Edwards: Despite the fact that he had
working-class roots, his newly minted populism sounded synthetic and poll-tested
to me, the political equivalent of one of those boy bands dreamed up by a studio
marketing department. But in Las Vegas I was chastened as I watched him lay out
a crisp proposal for universal coverage, displaying all the gifts that had made him a
successful trial lawyer back in North Carolina.
Hillary was even better. Like many people, I’d spent the 1990s observing the
Clintons from afar. I’d admired Bill’s prodigious talent and intellectual firepower.
If I wasn’t always comfortable with the specifics of his so-called triangulations—
signing welfare reform legislation with inadequate protections for those who
couldn’t find jobs, the tough-on-crime rhetoric that would contribute to an
explosion in the federal prison population—I appreciated the skill with which he
had steered progressive policy making and the Democratic Party back toward
electability.
As for the former First Lady, I found her just as impressive, and more
sympathetic. Maybe it was because in Hillary’s story I saw traces of what my
mother and grandmother had gone through: all of them smart, ambitious women

who had chafed under the constraints of their times, having to navigate male egos
and social expectations. If Hillary had become guarded, perhaps overly scripted—
who could blame her, given the attacks she’d been subjected to? In the Senate,
my favorable opinion of her had been largely confirmed. In all our interactions,
she came across as hardworking, personable, and always impeccably prepared. She
also had a good, hearty laugh that tended to lighten the mood of everyone
around her.
That I’d decided to run despite Hillary’s presence in the race had less to do
with any assessment of her personal shortcomings and more to do with my feeling
that she just couldn’t escape the rancor, grudges, and hardened assumptions
arising out of the Clinton White House years. Fair or not, I didn’t see how she
could close America’s political divide, or change how Washington did business,
or provide the country with the fresh start it needed. Yet watching her speak
passionately and knowledgeably about healthcare onstage that evening at the
SEIU forum and hearing the crowd cheer enthusiastically after she was done, I
wondered if I’d miscalculated.
That forum would hardly be the last time Hillary—or, for that matter, half
the primary field—outperformed me, for it soon seemed as if we were gathered
for a debate once every two or three weeks. I had never been particularly good in
these formats myself: My long windups and preference for complicated answers
worked against me, particularly onstage with seven savvy pros and a single timed
minute to answer a question. During our first debate in April, the moderator
called time at least twice before I was done speaking. Asked about how I’d handle
multiple terrorist attacks, I discussed the need to coordinate federal help but
neglected to mention the obvious imperative to go after the perpetrators. For the
next several minutes, Hillary and the others took turns pointing out my oversight.
Their tones were somber, but the gleam in their eyes said, Take that, rookie.
Afterward, Axe was gentle in his postgame critique.
“Your problem,” he said, “is you keep trying to answer the question.”
“Isn’t that the point?” I said.
“No, Barack,” Axe said, “that is not the point. The point is to get your
message across. What are your values? What are your priorities? That’s what
people care about. Look, half the time the moderator is just using the question to
try to trip you up. Your job is to avoid the trap they’ve set. Take whatever
question they give you, give ’em a quick line to make it seem like you answered
it…and then talk about what you want to talk about.”

“That’s bullshit,” I said.
“Exactly,” he said.
I was frustrated with Axe and even more frustrated with myself. But I realized
his insight was hard to deny after watching a replay of the debate. The most
effective debate answers, it seemed, were designed not to illuminate but to evoke
an emotion, or identify the enemy, or signal to a constituency that you, more
than anyone else on that stage, were and would always be on their side. It was
easy to dismiss the exercise as superficial. Then again, a president wasn’t a lawyer
or an accountant or a pilot, hired to carry out some narrow, specialized task.
Mobilizing public opinion, shaping working coalitions—that was the job.
Whether I liked it or not, people were moved by emotion, not facts. To elicit the
best rather than the worst of those emotions, to buttress those better angels of our
nature with reason and sound policy, to perform while still speaking the truth—
that was the bar I needed to clear.
—
working to curb my screw-ups, Plouffe was running a seamless
operation from our Chicago headquarters. I didn’t see him often but was coming
to realize that the two of us had much in common. We were both analytical and
even-keeled, generally skeptical of convention and pretense. But whereas I could
be absentminded, indifferent to small details, incapable of maintaining an orderly
filing system, constantly misplacing memos, pens, and cell phones that had just
been handed to me, Plouffe turned out to be a managerial genius.
From the start, he focused unapologetically and unswervingly on winning
Iowa. Even when cable pundits and some of our supporters were calling us idiots
for being so single-minded, he wouldn’t let anyone waver an inch from the
strategy, certain it was our only path to victory. Plouffe imposed a martial
discipline, giving everyone on our team—from Axe to our most junior organizer
—a level of autonomy while also demanding accountability and a strict adherence
to process. He capped salaries as a way of eliminating needless staff dissent. He
pointedly directed resources away from bloated consulting contracts and media
budgets in order to give our field organizers what they needed on the ground.
Obsessive about data, he recruited a team of internet savants who designed a
digital program that was light-years ahead of those not just of other campaigns but
many private corporations as well.
AS I WAS

Add it all up, and in six months, from a standing start, Plouffe built a
campaign operation strong enough to go toe-to-toe with the Clinton machine. It
was a fact he quietly relished. This was another thing I came to realize about
Plouffe: Beneath the low-key persona and deep convictions, he just plain liked
the combat. Politics was his sport, and in his chosen endeavor he was as
competitive as Reggie was in basketball. Later, I’d ask Axe if he’d anticipated just
how good a campaign architect his then junior partner would turn out to be. Axe
shook his head.
“A fucking revelation,” he said.
In presidential politics, the best strategy means little if you don’t have the
resources to execute it, and this was the second thing we had going for us:
money. Given that the Clintons had been cultivating a national donor base for
nearly three decades, our working assumption had been that Hillary would have a
tremendous fundraising advantage over us. But the hunger for change in America
was proving to be stronger than even we had anticipated.
Early on, our fundraising followed a traditional pattern: Big donors from big
cities wrote and collected big checks. Penny Pritzker, a businesswoman and
longtime friend from Chicago, served as our campaign’s national finance chair,
bringing both organizational acumen and a vast network of relationships to the
effort. Julianna Smoot, our tough-talking and experienced finance director, built
an expert team and had a gift for alternately sweet-talking, shaming, and
sometimes scaring me into engaging in the endless hustle for dollars. She had a
great smile, but the eyes of a killer.
I grew accustomed to the drill, partly out of necessity, but also because as
time went on, our donors came to understand and even appreciate my terms.
This was about building a better country, I’d tell them, not about egos or
prestige. I would listen to their take on an issue, especially if they had some
expertise, but I wouldn’t shade my positions to satisfy them. If I had a spare
minute, the thank-you notes I wrote and the birthday calls I made would be
directed not to them but to our volunteers and young staff out in the field.
And if I won, they could count on me raising their taxes.
This attitude lost us a few donors but helped develop a culture among
supporters that wasn’t about perks or status. And anyway, with each successive
month, the makeup of our donor base was shifting. Small donations—in ten- or
twenty- or hundred-dollar increments—started pouring in, most coming through
the internet, from college students who pledged their Starbucks budget for the

duration of the campaign, or grandmas who’d taken up a sewing circle collection.
All told during primary season, we would raise millions from small donors,
allowing us to compete in every state for every vote. More than the money itself,
the spirit behind the giving, the sense of ownership that the accompanying letters
and email messages conveyed, infused the campaign with grassroots energy. This
is not all up to you, these donations told us. We are here, on the ground, millions of us
scattered across the country—and we believe. We are all in.
More than a strong operations strategy and effective grassroots fundraising, a
third element kept both the campaign and our spirits afloat that first year: the
work of our Iowa team and their indefatigable leader, Paul Tewes.
—
in Mountain Lake, a farm town tucked into the southwest corner
of Minnesota, a place where everyone knew and looked out for one another,
where kids biked everywhere and nobody locked their doors, and where every
student played every sport because in order to field a full team, none of the
coaches could afford to cut anybody.
Mountain Lake was also a conservative place, which made the Tewes family
stand out a little. Paul’s mom instilled in him early an allegiance to the
Democratic Party that was second only to the family’s allegiance to the Lutheran
faith. When he was six years old, he patiently explained to a classmate that he
shouldn’t support the Republicans “ ’cause your family ain’t rich.” Four years
later, he cried bitterly when Jimmy Carter lost to Ronald Reagan. Paul’s father
was proud enough of his son’s passion for politics that he shared the episode with
a friend, the town’s high school civics teacher, who in turn—perhaps hoping that
a ten-year-old’s interest in public affairs might inspire sullen teenagers—relayed it
to his class. For the next several days, older kids teased Paul mercilessly,
scrunching up their faces like crybabies whenever they spotted him in the halls.
Paul was undeterred. In high school, he organized a dance to raise money for
Democratic candidates. In college, he interned for the local state representative,
and—in a feat that gave him particular pride—somehow managed to deliver one
of Mountain Lake’s two precincts to his favored candidate, Jesse Jackson, in the
1988 presidential primary.
By the time I met him in 2007, Paul had worked on just about every type of
campaign imaginable: from mayoral races to congressional races. He’d served as
PAUL GREW UP

Al Gore’s Iowa state caucus director and as the director of field operations across
the country for the Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee. He was thirtyeight by then but looked older, stocky and slightly balding, with a pale blond
mustache and pale skin to match. There was nothing fancy about Paul Tewes; his
demeanor could be gruff, and his clothes never seemed to match, especially in the
winter, when, like a true Minnesotan, he’d sport all manner of flannel shirts,
down jackets, and ski caps. He was the kind of guy more comfortable talking to
farmers in a cornfield or drinking in a corner saloon than mingling with high-paid
political consultants. But sitting with him, you quickly realized he knew his stuff.
More than that: Beneath the tactical insights, detailed district voting histories, and
political anecdotes, you might hear—if you listened carefully enough—the heart
of the ten-year-old boy who cared enough, who believed enough, to cry over an
election.
Anyone who’s ever run for president will likely tell you that there’s nothing
simple about winning Iowa. It’s one of a number of U.S. states that hold a caucus
to determine which candidates their delegates will support. As opposed to a
traditional primary election in which citizens cast votes privately and largely at
their convenience, a caucus is more of a throwback to town hall–style
democracy, when voters showed up at an appointed hour, usually at a school gym
or a library in their precinct, and debated the merits of each candidate in a
neighborly manner for as long as it took to come up with a winner. Such
participatory democracy had much to commend it, but it was time-consuming—
a caucus could last three hours or more—and required participants to be well
informed, willing to vote publicly, and committed enough to make an evening of
it. Unsurprisingly caucuses tended to attract a small and static cross section of the
Iowa electorate, made up of older voters, party functionaries, longtime partisans
—those who hewed, in general, to the tried-and-true. This meant that
Democratic caucus-goers were more likely to support a known quantity like
Hillary Clinton than someone like me.
From the start, Tewes impressed upon Plouffe, and Plouffe in turn impressed
upon me, that if we wanted to win Iowa, we needed to run a different kind of
campaign. We’d have to work harder and longer, face-to-face, to win over
traditional caucus-goers. More important, we’d have to convince a whole lot of
likely Obama supporters—young people, people of color, independents—to
overcome the various hurdles and hang-ups and participate in the caucus for the
very first time. To do it, Tewes insisted on opening offices right away, covering
all ninety-nine Iowa counties; and for each office we’d hire a young staffer who,

with little pay or day-to-day supervision, would be responsible for engineering
their own local political movement.
It was a big investment and an early gamble, but we gave Tewes the green
light. He went to work, with an outstanding team of deputies who helped
develop his plan: Mitch Stewart, Marygrace Galston, Anne Filipic, and Emily
Parcell, all of them smart, disciplined, with experience on multiple campaigns—
and under thirty-two years old.
I spent the most time with Emily, who was an Iowa native and had worked
for former governor Tom Vilsack. Tewes figured she’d be especially helpful to
me as I navigated local politics. She was twenty-six, one of the youngest in the
group, with dark hair and sensible clothes, and diminutive enough to pass for a
high school senior. I quickly discovered she knew just about every Democrat in
the state and had no qualms about giving me very specific instructions at every
stop, covering whom I should talk to and which issues the local community most
cared about. This information was delivered in a deadpan monotone, along with
a look that suggested a low tolerance for foolishness—a quality Emily may have
inherited from her mom, who’d worked at the Motorola plant for three decades
and still managed to put herself through college.
During the long hours we spent traveling between events in a rented
campaign van, I made it my mission to coax a smile out of Emily—jokes,
wisecracks, puns, stray observations about the size of Reggie’s head. But my
charm and wit invariably crashed on the rocks of her steady, unblinking gaze, and
I settled on trying to do exactly what she told me to do.
Mitch, Marygrace, and Anne would later describe the particulars of their
work—which included collectively screening all the unorthodox ideas Tewes
routinely pitched at meetings.
“He’d have ten a day,” Mitch would explain. “Nine were ridiculous, one
would be genius.” Mitch was a gangly South Dakotan who’d worked in Iowa
politics before but had never encountered someone as passionately eclectic as
Tewes. “If he brought up the same idea to me three times,” he’d recall, “I
figured there might be something there.”
Enlisting Norma Lyon, Iowa’s “Butter Cow Lady,” who at the state fair each
year sculpted a life-sized cow out of salted butter, to make a prerecorded call
announcing her support for us, which we then blasted across the state—genius.
(She later created a twenty-three-pound “butter bust” of my head—also likely a
Tewes idea.)

Insisting that we put up billboards along the highway, with rhyming phrases
unfolding in sequence like the old 1960s Burma-Shave ads (TIME FOR CHANGE…
LET’S SHIFT GEARS…VOTE 4 THE GUY…WITH BIG EARS…OBAMA 08)—not so genius.
Promising to shave his eyebrows if the staff reached the unreachable goal of
collecting one hundred thousand supporter cards—not genius, until very late in
the campaign, when the team actually hit the mark, at which point it became
genius. (“Mitch shaved his too,” Marygrace would explain. “We have pictures. It
was horrible.”)
Tewes would set the tone for our Iowa operation—grassroots, no hierarchies,
irreverent, and slightly manic. No one—including senior staff, donors, or
dignitaries—was exempt from doing some door knocking. In the early weeks, he
hung signs on every wall in every office with a motto he’d authored: RESPECT,
EMPOWER, INCLUDE. If we were serious about a new kind of politics, he
explained, then it started right there on the ground, with every organizer
committed to listening to people, respecting what they had to say, and treating
everybody—including our opponents and their supporters—the way we wanted
to be treated. Lastly he stressed the importance of encouraging voters to get
involved instead of just selling them a candidate like a box of laundry detergent.
Anyone who breached these values got scolded and sometimes pulled from
the field. When, during our team’s weekly conference call, a new organizer made
a joke about why he’d joined the campaign, saying something about “hating
pantsuits” (a reference to Hillary’s favorite campaign attire), Tewes admonished
him in a lengthy rant for all the other organizers to hear. “It’s not what we stand
for,” he said, “not even in private.”
The team took this to heart, particularly because Tewes practiced what he
preached. Despite the occasional intemperate outburst, he never failed to show
people how much they mattered. When Marygrace’s uncle died, Tewes declared
National Marygrace Day, and had everyone in the office wear pink. He also had
me record a message announcing that for that one day, he would have to do
everything Marygrace said. (Of course, Marygrace had to put up with three
hundred days of Tewes and Mitch chewing tobacco in the office, so the ledger
never fully balanced.)
This kind of camaraderie permeated the Iowa operation. Not just at
headquarters but, more important, among the close to two hundred field
organizers we’d deployed across the state. All told, I would spend eighty-seven
days in Iowa that year. I would sample each town’s culinary specialty, shoot

hoops with schoolkids on any court we could find, and experience every possible
weather event, from funnel clouds to sideways sleet. Through it all, those young
men and women, working endless hours for subsistence wages, were my able
guides. Most were barely out of college. Many were on their first campaigns and
far away from home. Some had grown up in Iowa or the rural Midwest, familiar
with the attitudes and way of life of midsized towns like Sioux City or Altoona.
But that wasn’t typical. Assemble our organizers in a room and you’d find Italians
from Philly, Jews from Chicago, Blacks from New York, and Asians from
California; children of poor immigrants and children of the rich suburbs;
engineering majors, former Peace Corps volunteers, military veterans, and high
school dropouts. On the surface, at least, there seemed no way to connect their
wildly varied experiences to the meat-and-potatoes folks whose votes we
desperately needed.
And yet they did connect. Arriving in town with a duffel bag or a small
suitcase, living in the spare bedroom or basement of some early local supporter,
they would spend months getting to know a place—visiting the local barbershop,
setting up card tables in front of the grocery store, speaking at the Rotary Club.
They helped coach Little League, assisted local charities, and called their moms
for a banana pudding recipe so they wouldn’t show up to the potluck emptyhanded. They learned to listen to their local volunteers—most of whom were
much older, with their own jobs, families, and concerns—and got good at
recruiting new ones too. They worked each day to exhaustion and fought off
bouts of loneliness and fear. Month by month, they won people’s trust. They
were no longer strangers.
What a tonic these young kids in Iowa were! They filled me with optimism
and gratitude and a sense of coming full circle. In them, I saw myself at twentyfive, arriving in Chicago, confused and idealistic. I remembered the precious
bonds I’d made with families on the South Side, the mistakes and small victories,
the community I found—similar to what our field organizers were now forging
for themselves. Their experiences pointed me back to why I’d gone into
government in the first place, toward the taproot idea that maybe politics could
be less about power and positioning and more about community and connection.
Our volunteers across Iowa might believe in me, I thought to myself. But
they were working as hard as they were mainly because of those young
organizers. Just as those kids may have signed up to work for the campaign
because of something I’d said or done, but now they belonged to the volunteers.
What drove them, what sustained them, independent of their candidate or any

particular issue, were the friendships and relationships, the mutual loyalty and
progress born of joint effort. That and their cantankerous boss back in Des
Moines, the one who was promising to shave his eyebrows if they succeeded.
—
campaign had turned a corner. Thanks to skyrocketing internet
donations, our financial performance continued to far outstrip our projections,
allowing us to go up early on Iowa TV. With school out for the summer,
Michelle and the girls were able to join me more often on the road. Rumbling
across Iowa in an RV, the sound of their chatter in the background as I made
calls; seeing Reggie and Marvin taking on Malia and Sasha in marathon games of
UNO; feeling the gentle weight of one daughter or another sleeping against me
on an afternoon leg; and always the obligatory ice cream stops—all of it filled me
with a joy that carried over into my public appearances.
The nature of those appearances changed as well. As the initial novelty of my
candidacy wore off, I found myself speaking to more manageable crowds, a few
hundred rather than thousands, which gave me the chance once again to meet
people one-on-one and listen to their stories. Military spouses described the dayto-day struggles of running a household and fighting off the terror of possibly
hearing bad news from the front. Farmers explained the pressures that led them to
surrender their independence to big agribusiness concerns. Laid-off workers
talked me through the myriad ways that existing job-training programs had failed
them. Small-business owners detailed the sacrifices they’d made to pay for their
employees’ health insurance, until just one employee fell sick and everyone’s
premiums became unaffordable, including their own.
Informed by these stories, my stump speech became less abstract, less a matter
of the head and more a matter of the heart. People heard their own lives reflected
in these stories, learning that they were not alone in their hardship, and with that
knowledge, more and more of them signed up to volunteer on my behalf.
Campaigning on this more retail, human scale also offered the opportunity for
chance encounters that made the campaign come alive.
That’s what happened when I visited Greenwood, South Carolina, one day in
June. Though most of my time was spent in Iowa, I was also paying regular visits
to other states like New Hampshire, Nevada, and South Carolina, whose
primaries and caucuses would follow in quick succession. The trip to Greenwood
was the result of a rash promise I’d made to an influential legislator who’d offered
BY JUNE, OUR

to endorse me, but only if I visited her hometown. As it turned out, my visit was
poorly timed, coming during an especially rough week, amid bad poll numbers,
bad stories in the papers, bad moods, and bad sleep. It didn’t help that
Greenwood was more than an hour from the nearest major airport, we were
driving through torrential rains, and when I finally arrived at the municipal
building where the event was supposed to be held, I found only twenty people or
so gathered inside—all of them as damp as I was from the storm.
A wasted day, I thought to myself, mentally ticking off all the other work I
could have been doing. I was going through the motions, shaking hands, asking
people what they did for a living, quietly trying to calculate how fast I could get
out of there, when suddenly I heard a piercing voice shout out.
“Fired up!”
My staff and I were startled, thinking maybe it was a heckler, but without
missing a beat, the rest of the room responded in unison.
“Ready to go!”
Again, the same voice shouted, “Fired up!” And once again the group
responded, “Ready to go!”
Unsure of what was happening, I turned to look behind me, my eyes landing
on the source of the commotion: a middle-aged Black woman, dressed like she
had just come from church, with a colorful dress, a big hat, and an ear-to-ear grin
that included a shiny gold tooth.
Her name was Edith Childs. In addition to serving on the Greenwood
County Council and in the local NAACP chapter while also being a professional
private eye, it turned out she was well known for this particular call-andresponse. She started it at Greenwood’s football games, Fourth of July parades,
community meetings, or whenever the spirit happened to move her.
For the next few minutes, Edith led the room in hollering “Fired up! Ready
to go!” back and forth, again and again. I was confused at first, but figured it
would be impolite of me not to join in. And pretty soon, I started to feel kinda
fired up! I started to feel like I was ready to go! I noticed everybody at the meeting
suddenly was smiling too, and after the chanting was done we settled down and
talked for the next hour about the community and the country and what we
could do to make it better. Even after I left Greenwood, for the rest of the day,
every so often, I’d point to someone on my staff and ask, “You fired up?”
Eventually it became a campaign rallying cry. And that, I suppose, was the part of
politics that would always give me the most pleasure: the part that couldn’t be

diagrammed, that defied planning or analytics. The way in which, when it works,
a campaign—and by extension a democracy—proved to be a chorus rather than a
solo act.
—
learned from voters: They weren’t interested in hearing me
parrot conventional wisdom. During the first few months of campaigning, I’d
worried at least subconsciously about what Washington opinion makers thought.
In the interest of being deemed sufficiently “serious” or “presidential,” I’d
become stiff and self-conscious, undermining the very rationale that had led me
to run in the first place. But by the summer, we went back to first principles and
actively looked for opportunities to challenge the Washington playbook and tell
hard truths. Before a teachers’ union gathering, I argued not only for higher
salaries and more flexibility in the classroom but also for greater accountability—
that last bit eliciting a deafening silence and then a smattering of boos in the hall.
At the Detroit Economic Club, I told auto executives that as president I would
push hard for higher fuel economy standards, a position ardently opposed by the
Big Three automakers. When a group called Iowans for Sensible Priorities,
sponsored by Ben and Jerry of ice cream fame, gathered ten thousand signatures
from people committing to caucus for a candidate who promised to cut the
Pentagon’s defense budget, I had to call either Ben or Jerry—I don’t remember
which—to say that although I agreed with the objective and very much wanted
their support, I couldn’t as president be hamstrung by any pledge I’d made when
it came to our national security. (The group eventually opted to endorse John
Edwards.)
I was starting to look different from my Democratic rivals in more ways than
the obvious one. During a debate in late July, I was shown images of Fidel
Castro, Iranian president Mahmoud Ahmadinejad, North Korean leader Kim
Jong Il, and a couple of other despots and asked if I’d be prepared to meet with
any of them during my first year in office. Without hesitation, I said yes—I’d
meet with any world leader if I thought it could advance U.S. interests.
Well, you would have thought I had said the world was flat. When the
debate was over, Clinton, Edwards, and a bunch of the other candidates pounced,
accusing me of being naïve, insisting that a meeting with the American president
was a privilege to be earned. The press corps in large part seemed to agree.
Perhaps even a few months earlier I might have gotten wobbly, second-guessing
ANOTHER LESSON I

my choice of words and issuing a clarifying statement afterward.
But I had my legs beneath me now and was convinced I was right,
particularly on the more general principle that America shouldn’t be afraid to
engage its adversaries or push for diplomatic solutions to conflict. As far as I was
concerned, it was this disregard for diplomacy that had led Hillary and the rest—
not to mention the mainstream press—to follow George W. Bush into war.
Another foreign policy argument arose just a few days later, when during a
speech I mentioned that if I had Osama bin Laden in my sights within Pakistani
territory, and the Pakistani government was unwilling or unable to capture or kill
him, I would take the shot. This shouldn’t have been particularly surprising to
anyone; back in 2003, I had premised my opposition to the Iraq War partly on
my belief that it would distract us from destroying al-Qaeda.
But such blunt talk ran counter to the Bush administration’s public position;
the U.S. government maintained the dual fiction that Pakistan was a reliable
partner in the war against terrorism and that we never encroached on Pakistani
territory in the pursuit of terrorists. My statement threw Washington into a
bipartisan tizzy, with Joe Biden, the chair of the Senate Foreign Relations
Committee, and Republican presidential candidate John McCain both expressing
the view that I was not ready to be president.
In my mind, these episodes indicated the degree to which the Washington
foreign policy establishment got things backward—taking military action without
first testing diplomatic options, observing diplomatic niceties in the interest of
maintaining the status quo precisely when action was called for. It also indicated
the degree to which decision makers in Washington consistently failed to level
with the American people. I would never fully convince the national pundits that
I was right on these arguments, but a funny trend began to show up in the polls
after each of these dustups—Democratic primary voters agreed with me.
Having such substantive arguments felt liberating, a reminder of why I was
running. They helped me regain my voice as a candidate. That confidence
showed a few debates later, at an early-morning affair at Drake University in
Iowa. The moderator, George Stephanopoulos of ABC, quickly gave Joe Biden
the chance to explain why exactly I was not ready to be president. By the time I
got an opportunity to respond, five minutes later, I’d had to listen to practically
every other candidate onstage knock me around.
“Well, you know, to prepare for this debate, I rode in the bumper cars at the
state fair,” I said, using a line Axe had come up with, referencing my well-

publicized excursion with Malia and Sasha to the state fair earlier that week. The
audience laughed, and for the next hour I happily jousted with my opponents,
suggesting that any Democratic voter who was trying to figure out who
represented a real change from the failed policies of George Bush need look no
further than the respective positions of those of us onstage. For the first time since
the debates had begun, I enjoyed myself, and the consensus among the pundits
that morning was that I had won.
It was a gratifying result, if for no other reason than not having to endure any
dour looks from the team.
“You killed it!” Axe said, clapping me on the back.
“I guess we’ll be pushing to have all the debates at eight in the morning!”
Plouffe joked.
“That’s not funny,” I said. (I was not, and am not, a morning person.)
We piled into the car and started driving to our next stop. Along the route,
our supporters, several rows deep, could be heard shouting long after they had
disappeared from sight.
“Fired up!”
“Ready to go!”
—
reason I’d received so much attention from the moderators during
the Drake University debate was the release of an ABC poll showing me leading
in Iowa for the first time, albeit by just 1 percent, over both Clinton and
Edwards. The race was close, clearly (later polls would put me right back in third
place), but there was no denying that our Iowa organization was having an
impact, especially among younger voters. You could feel it in the crowds—in
their size, their energy, and, most important, the number of supporter cards and
volunteer sign-ups we were collecting at every stop. With less than six months to
go before the caucus, our strength was only building.
Unfortunately none of our progress showed up in national polling. Our focus
on Iowa and to a lesser extent New Hampshire meant we’d made minimal TV
buys and appearances elsewhere, and by September we remained around twenty
points behind Hillary. Plouffe did his best to educate the press as to why national
polls were meaningless at this early stage, but to no avail. Increasingly I found
myself fielding anxious phone calls from supporters around the country, many
PART OF THE

offering policy advice, advertising suggestions, complaints that we’d neglected this
or that interest group, and general questions about our competence.
Two things finally flipped the narrative, the first one not of our making. At a
late-October debate in Philadelphia, Hillary—whose performances until then had
been nearly flawless—got tangled up, unwilling to provide a straight answer on
the issue of whether undocumented workers should be allowed driver’s licenses.
Undoubtedly she’d been coached to hedge her response, since it was an issue that
divided the Democratic base. Her efforts to straddle the fence only fed the already
prevalent impression that she was a garden-variety Washington politician—
sharpening the contrast we’d been hoping to make.
And then there was what happened at the Iowa Jefferson-Jackson Dinner on
November 10, which was of our making. Traditionally the JJ Dinner signaled the
final sprint to caucus day and offered a kind of barometric reading of where the
race stood, with each candidate delivering a ten-minute speech without notes
before an arena of eight thousand potential caucus-goers as well as the national
media. As such, it was a key test of both our message’s appeal and our
organizational prowess going into the final few weeks.
We put everything we had into a successful showing, lining up buses to bring
in supporters from all ninety-nine counties across the state and dwarfing turnout
from the other campaigns. John Legend gave a short predinner concert on our
behalf for more than a thousand people, and when it was done, Michelle and I
led the entire procession down the street to the arena where the dinner was being
held, a pumped-up local high school drum and drill corps called the Isiserettes
performing beside us, their happy racket giving us the air of a conquering army.
The speech itself won the day for us. To that point in my political career, I
had always insisted on writing the bulk of any important speech myself, but
campaigning nonstop as I was, there was no way I’d have time to write the JJ
Dinner remarks on my own. I had to trust Favs, with guidance from Axe and
Plouffe, to produce a draft that effectively summarized my case for the
nomination.
And Favs delivered. In that critical moment of our campaign, with only
modest input from me, this guy just a few years out of college had produced a
great speech, one that did more than show the distinction between me and my
rivals, between Democrats and Republicans. It outlined the challenges we faced
as a nation, from war to climate change to the affordability of healthcare, and the
need for new and clear leadership, noting that the party had historically been

strongest with leaders who led “not by polls, but by principle…not by
calculation, but by conviction.” It was true to the moment, true to my aspirations
for getting into politics, and true, I hoped, to the aspirations of the country.
I memorized the speech over several late nights after we were done
campaigning. And by the time I finished delivering it—as luck would have it, the
last candidate to speak—I was as certain of its effect as I’d been after my address to
the Democratic National Convention three and a half years earlier.
Looking back, the night of the JJ Dinner was when I became convinced we
would win Iowa—and by extension the nomination. Not necessarily because I
was the most polished candidate, but because we had the right message for the
time and had attracted young people with prodigious talent to throw themselves
behind the cause. Tewes shared my assessment, telling Mitch, “I think we won
Iowa tonight.” (Mitch, who had organized the entire evening and was generally a
basket of nerves—he suffered from insomnia, shingles, and hair loss through
much of the campaign—ran to the bathroom to throw up for at least the second
time that day.) Emily was similarly bullish, although you couldn’t tell. After I was
finished, an ecstatic Valerie ran into Emily and asked what she thought.
“It was great,” Emily said.
“You don’t look very excited.”
“This is my excited face.”
—
apparently felt the shifting tide. Up to that point,
Hillary and her team had largely avoided engaging our campaign directly, content
to stay above the fray and nurse their sizable lead in national polls. But over the
next several weeks, they changed tack, deciding to go after us hard. It was mostly
standard-issue stuff, raising questions about my lack of experience and ability to
take on Republicans in Washington. Unfortunately for them, though, the two
lines of attack that attracted the most attention backfired badly.
The first grew out of a standard line in my stump speech, in which I said I
was running for president not because it was owed to me or because I’d wanted
to be president all my life, but because the times called for something new. Well,
the Clinton camp issued a memo citing a press clip in which one of my teachers
in Indonesia claimed that I had written an essay in kindergarten about wanting to
be president—proof, it seemed, that my professed idealism was merely a disguise
THE CLINTON CAMPAIGN

for a ruthless ambition.
When I heard about this, I laughed. As I told Michelle, the idea that anyone
outside my family remembered anything I said or did almost forty years earlier
was a bit far-fetched. Not to mention the difficulty of squaring my apparent
youthful plan for world domination with middling high school grades and drug
consumption, an obscure stint as a community organizer, and associations with all
kinds of politically inconvenient characters.
Of course, over the next decade we’d discover that absurdity, incoherence, or
a lack of factual support didn’t prevent various crackpot theories about me—
peddled by political opponents, conservative news outlets, critical biographers,
and the like—from gaining real traction. But in December 2007, at least, the
Clinton team’s opposition research into what I called “my kindergarten files” was
viewed as a sign of panic and widely panned.
Less amusing was an interview in which Billy Shaheen, the co-chair of
Clinton’s campaign in New Hampshire, suggested to a reporter that my selfdisclosed prior drug use would prove fatal in a matchup against the Republican
nominee. I didn’t consider the general question of my youthful indiscretions out
of bounds, but Shaheen went a bit further, implying that perhaps I had dealt
drugs as well. The interview set off a furor, and Shaheen quickly resigned from
his post.
All this happened just ahead of our final debate in Iowa. That morning, both
Hillary and I were in Washington for a Senate vote. When my team and I got to
the airport for the flight to Des Moines, Hillary’s chartered plane turned out to be
parked right next to ours. Before takeoff, Huma Abedin, Hillary’s aide, found
Reggie and let him know that the senator was hoping to speak to me. I met
Hillary on the tarmac, Reggie and Huma hovering a few paces away.
Hillary apologized for Shaheen. I thanked her and then suggested we both do
a better job of reining in our surrogates. At this, Hillary got agitated, her voice
sharpening as she claimed that my team was routinely engaging in unfair attacks,
distortions, and underhanded tactics. My efforts at lowering the temperature were
unsuccessful, and the conversation ended abruptly, with her still visibly angry as
she boarded her plane.
On the flight to Des Moines, I tried to appreciate the frustrations Hillary must
have been feeling. A woman of enormous intelligence, she had toiled, sacrificed,
endured public attacks and humiliations, all in service of her husband’s career—
while also raising a wonderful daughter. Out of the White House, she had carved

a new political identity, positioning herself with skill and tenacity to become the
prohibitive favorite to win the presidency. As a candidate, she was performing
almost flawlessly, checking every box, winning most debates, raising scads of
money. And now, to find herself suddenly in a close contest with a man fourteen
years younger, who hadn’t had to pay the same dues, who didn’t carry the same
battle scars, and who seemed to be getting every break and every benefit of the
doubt? Honestly, who wouldn’t be aggravated?
Moreover, Hillary wasn’t entirely wrong about my team’s willingness to give
as good as it got. Compared to other modern presidential campaigns, we really
were different, consistently emphasizing a positive message, highlighting what I
stood for rather than what I was against. I policed our tone from top to bottom.
More than once, I killed TV spots I felt were unfair or too harsh. Still, we
sometimes fell short of our high-minded rhetoric. In fact, the angriest I ever got
during the campaign involved a leaked memo drafted by our research team back
in June, criticizing Hillary’s tacit support of outsourcing jobs to India and with
the snarky title “Hillary Clinton (D-Punjab).” My team insisted the memo was
never meant for public consumption, but I didn’t care—its shoddy argument and
nativist tone had me ripshit for days.
In the end, I don’t think it was any specific action on our part that caused the
dustup with Hillary on the tarmac. Rather, it was the general fact of my
challenge, the intensifying heat of our rivalry. There were six other candidates
still in the race, but the polls were beginning to clarify where we were headed,
with Hillary and me battling each other until the end. It was a dynamic we’d live
with, day and night, weekends and holidays, for many months to come, our
teams flanking us like miniature armies, each staffer fully indoctrinated into the
fight. It was part of the brutal nature of modern politics, I was discovering, the
difficulty of competing in a game where there were no clearly defined rules, a
game in which your opponents are not merely trying to put a ball through a
basket or push it across your goal line, but are instead trying to convince the
broad public—at least implicitly, more often explicitly—that in matters of
judgment, intelligence, values, and character, they are more worthy than you.
You may tell yourself it’s not personal, but that’s not how it feels. Not to you
and certainly not to your family, your staff, or your supporters, who count up
every slight and every insult, real or perceived. The longer the campaign goes on,
the tighter the contest, the higher the stakes, the easier it is to justify hardball
tactics. Until those basic human responses that normally govern our daily lives—
honesty, empathy, courtesy, patience, goodwill—feel like weakness when

extended to the other side.
I can’t say all this was on my mind by the time I walked into the debate the
evening after the tarmac incident. Mostly I read Hillary’s irritation as a sign that
we were pulling ahead, that the momentum was truly ours. During the debate,
the moderator asked why, if I was so insistent on the need for change in
America’s approach to foreign policy, did I have so many former Clinton
administration officials advising me. “I want to hear that,” Hillary said into the
microphone.
I paused, letting the chuckles die down.
“Well, Hillary, I’m looking forward to you advising me as well.”
It was a good night for the team.
—
left before the caucuses, a Des Moines Register poll now showed
me with a three-point lead over Hillary. The sprint was full-on, with candidates
from both parties dashing around the state in the final weeks, trying to win over
any uncommitted voter, to find and motivate hidden pockets of people who
might not otherwise turn out on the appointed night. The Clinton campaign had
started handing out free snow shovels to supporters in case the weather got bad,
and in a move that would later be criticized as outlandishly expensive, Hillary
embarked on a blitzkrieg tour, visiting sixteen Iowa counties in a chartered
helicopter (which her campaign dubbed “the Hill-O-Copter”). John Edwards,
meanwhile, was attempting to cover similar terrain in a bus.
We had a few high-profile moments of our own, including a series of rallies
with Oprah Winfrey, who’d become a friend and supporter, and was as wise,
funny, and gracious on the trail as she was in person, attracting nearly thirty
thousand people between two rallies in Iowa, another eighty-five hundred in
New Hampshire, and almost thirty thousand in South Carolina. These gatherings
were electric, pulling in the kind of new voters we most needed. (Many on my
staff, it must be said, were starstruck around Oprah, with the predictable
exception of Emily; the only famous person she ever expressed an interest in
meeting was Tim Russert.)
In the end, though, it wasn’t the polls, or the size of the rallies, or the
celebrities who flew in that I remember most. Instead, it was how, in those last
days, the whole campaign took on the feeling of family. Michelle’s openness and
WITH A MONTH

candor had proven to be an asset; she was a natural on the stump. The Iowa team
came to call her “the Closer,” because of how many people signed up once
they’d heard her speak. Our siblings and closest friends all came to Iowa, Craig
from Chicago and Maya from Hawaii and Auma from Kenya; the Nesbitts, the
Whitakers, Valerie, and all their kids, not to mention Michelle’s passel of aunts,
uncles, and cousins. My childhood friends from Hawaii, buddies from my
organizing days, law school classmates, former state senate colleagues, and many
of our donors came, arriving in groups like big traveling reunions, often without
me even knowing they were there. Nobody asked for any special attention;
instead, they just reported to field offices where the kid in charge would hand
them a map and a list of supporters to contact so they could then celebrate the
week between Christmas and New Year’s with a clipboard in hand, knocking on
doors in the face-numbing cold.
It was more than just blood relatives or people we’d known for years. The
people of Iowa whom I’d spent so much time with felt like family too. There
were local party leaders like attorney general Tom Miller and treasurer Mike
Fitzgerald, who had taken a flier on me when few would give me a shot. There
were volunteers like Gary Lamb, a progressive farmer from Tama County who
helped us with rural outreach; Leo Peck, who at eighty-two had knocked on
more doors than just about anybody; Marie Ortiz, an African American nurse
married to a Hispanic man in a mostly white town, who came into the office to
make calls three or four times a week, sometimes cooking dinner for our
organizer there because she thought he was too skinny.
Family.
And then, of course, there were the field organizers. As busy as they were, we
decided to have them invite their parents to the JJ Dinner, and the next day we
hosted a reception for them, just so that Michelle and I could say thank you to
each of them, and to their parents for having produced such amazing sons and
daughters.
To this day, there’s nothing I wouldn’t do for those kids.
On the big night, Plouffe and Valerie decided to join me, Reggie, and
Marvin on a surprise visit to a high school in Ankeny, a suburb of Des Moines,
where several precincts would be holding their caucuses. It was January 3, just
after six p.m., less than an hour before the caucuses were scheduled to begin, and
yet the place was already packed. People streamed toward the main building from
every direction, a noisy festival of humanity. No age, race, class, or body type

appeared unrepresented. There was even one ancient-looking character dressed as
Gandalf from The Lord of the Rings, complete with a long white cloak, a pluming
white beard, and a sturdy wooden staff on top of which he’d somehow managed
to mount a small video monitor, looping a clip of my JJ Dinner speech.
We had no press with us then, and I took my time wandering through the
crowd, shaking hands and thanking those who planned to support me, asking
those who were caucusing for another candidate to please at least make me their
second choice. A few had last-minute questions about my stance on ethanol or
what I intended to do about human trafficking. Over and over again, people
rushed up to tell me that they’d never caucused before—some had never even
bothered to vote—and that our campaign had inspired them to get involved for
the very first time.
“I didn’t know I counted before,” one woman said.
On the ride back to Des Moines, we were mostly quiet, processing the
miracle of what we had just witnessed. I looked out the window at the passing
strip malls and houses and streetlights, all fuzzy behind the frosty glass, and felt a
kind of peace. We were hours, still, from knowing what would happen. The
results, when they came in, showed us winning Iowa decisively, carrying just
about every demographic group, our victory propelled by unprecedented
turnout, including tens of thousands of people who’d participated for the first
time. I knew none of this yet, but pulling away from Ankeny about fifteen
minutes before the caucuses began, I knew we had accomplished, if even for just
a moment, something real and noble.
Right there, in that high school in the middle of the country on a cold winter
night, I had witnessed the community I had so long sought, the America I
imagined, made manifest. I thought of my mom then, and how happy she would
have been to see it, and how proud she would have been, and I missed her
terribly, and Plouffe and Valerie pretended not to notice as I wiped away my
tears.
