OSAMA BIN LADEN’S PRECISE

whereabouts had been a mystery since December
2001, when, three months after the 9/11 attacks that killed nearly three thousand
innocent people, he had narrowly escaped as American and allied forces closed in
on his headquarters in Tora Bora, a mountainous area along the border of
Afghanistan and Pakistan. The search had continued in earnest for a number of
years, though by the time I took office, bin Laden’s trail had gone cold. He was
still out there, though: As al-Qaeda had slowly reorganized, basing itself in
Pakistan’s FATA region, their leader would periodically release audio and video
messages, rallying supporters with calls for jihad against Western powers.
From the very first time I spoke publicly on America’s response to 9/11,
opposing the Iraq War at Chicago’s Federal Plaza on the eve of my U.S. Senate
race in 2002, I had advocated for a renewed focus on bringing bin Laden to
justice. I’d returned to the same theme during the presidential race, pledging to
go after bin Laden inside Pakistan if the government there was unable or
unwilling to take him out. Most of Washington, including Joe, Hillary, and John
McCain, had dismissed that promise as a stunt, a way for a junior senator
unschooled in foreign policy to sound tough. And even after I took office, some
people undoubtedly assumed I would set aside the issue of bin Laden in order to
deal with other matters. But in May 2009, following a Situation Room meeting
about terrorist threats, I had brought a handful of advisors—including Rahm,
Leon Panetta, and Tom Donilon—up to the Oval Office and closed the door.
“I want to make the hunt for bin Laden a top priority,” I said. “I want to see
a formal plan for how we’re going to find him. I want a report on my desk every
thirty days describing our progress. And, Tom, let’s put this in a presidential
directive—just so everyone’s on the same page.”
There were the obvious reasons for my focus on bin Laden. His continued
freedom was a source of pain for the families of those who’d been lost in the 9/11
attacks and a taunt to American power. Even deep in hiding, he remained alSAMA BIN LADEN’S PRECISE

Qaeda’s most effective recruiter, radicalizing disaffected young men around the
world. According to our analysts, by the time I was elected, al-Qaeda was more
dangerous than it had been in years, and warnings about terrorist plots emanating
from the FATA appeared regularly in my briefings.
But I also viewed the elimination of bin Laden as critical to my goal of
reorienting America’s counterterrorism strategy. By losing our focus on the small
band of terrorists who had actually planned and carried out 9/11 and instead
defining the threat as an open-ended, all-encompassing “War on Terror,” we’d
fallen into what I believed was a strategic trap—one that had elevated al-Qaeda’s
prestige, rationalized the Iraq invasion, alienated much of the Muslim world, and
warped almost a decade of U.S. foreign policy. Rather than gin up fears about
vast terror networks and feed extremists’ fantasies that they were engaged in some
divine struggle, I wanted to remind the world (and, more important, ourselves)
that these terrorists were nothing more than a band of deluded, vicious killers—
criminals who could be captured, tried, imprisoned, or killed. And there would
be no better way of demonstrating that than by taking out bin Laden.
A day before the ninth anniversary of 9/11, Leon Panetta and his CIA
deputy, Mike Morell, asked to see me. They made a good team, I thought. As
someone who’d spent much of his career in Congress before serving as Bill
Clinton’s chief of staff, the seventy-two-year-old Panetta not only provided
steady management of the agency but also enjoyed the public stage, maintained
good relationships across Congress and with the press, and had a keen nose for
the politics of national security issues. Morell, on the other hand, was the
consummate insider, with the meticulous mind of an analyst, and while only in
his early fifties he had decades of experience at the agency.
“Mr. President, it’s very preliminary,” Leon said, “but we think we have a
potential lead on bin Laden—the best one by far since Tora Bora.”
I absorbed the news in silence. Leon and Mike explained that—thanks to
patient and painstaking work, involving the compilation and pattern mapping of
thousands of bits of information—analysts had identified the whereabouts of a
man known as Abu Ahmed al-Kuwaiti, who they believed served as an al-Qaeda
courier and had known ties to bin Laden. They had been tracking his phone and
daily habits, which had led them not to some remote location in the FATA but
rather to a large compound in an affluent neighborhood on the outskirts of the
Pakistani city of Abbottabad, thirty-five miles north of Islamabad. According to
Mike, the size and structure of the compound indicated that somebody important

lived there, quite possibly a high-value al-Qaeda member. The intelligence
community had set up surveillance on the compound, and Leon promised to
update me on anything we learned about its occupants.
After they’d gone, I made a point of tempering my expectations. Anyone
could be in that compound; even if it was someone with al-Qaeda connections,
the likelihood that bin Laden would be staying in a populated urban area seemed
small. But on December 14, Leon and Mike were back, this time with an officer
and an analyst from the CIA. The analyst was a young man with the polished,
fresh-faced look of a senior congressional staffer, the officer a lean, thickly
bearded gentleman who was older and with a slightly rumpled, professorial air.
He turned out to be the head of the CIA’s Counterterrorism Center and the
team leader for the bin Laden hunt. I imagined him holed up in some
subterranean warren, surrounded by computers and thick manila folders,
oblivious to the world as he combed through mounds of data.
The two men walked me through everything that had led us to the
Abbottabad compound—a remarkable feat of detective work. Apparently the
courier al-Kuwaiti had purchased the property under an assumed name. The
compound itself was unusually spacious and secure, eight times larger than
neighboring residences, surrounded by ten- to eighteen-foot walls topped with
barbed wire, and with additional walls inside the perimeter. As for the people
who lived there, the analysts said they went to great lengths to conceal their
identities: They had no landline or internet service, almost never left the
compound, and burned their trash instead of putting it outside for collection. But
the age and number of children in the compound’s main house appeared to
match those of bin Laden’s children. And through aerial surveillance, our team
had been able to observe a tall man who never left the property but regularly
walked in circles in a small garden area within the compound’s walls.
“We call him the Pacer,” the lead officer said. “We think he could be bin
Laden.”
I had a ton of questions, but the main one was this: What else could we do to
confirm the Pacer’s identity? Although they were continuing to explore possible
strategies, the analysts confessed that they weren’t hopeful. Given the
configuration and location of the compound, as well as the caution of its
occupants, the methods that might yield greater certainty that it was in fact bin
Laden might quickly trigger suspicion; without us ever knowing it, the occupants
could vanish without a trace. I looked at the lead officer.

“What’s your judgment?” I asked.
I could see him hesitating. I suspected that he’d been around during the runup to Iraq; the intelligence community’s reputation was still recovering from the
role it had played in supporting the Bush administration’s insistence that Saddam
Hussein was developing weapons of mass destruction. Still, I caught an expression
on his face that indicated the pride of someone who’d cracked an intricate puzzle
—even if he couldn’t prove it.
“I think there’s a good chance he’s our man,” he said. “But we can’t be
certain.”
Based on what I’d heard, I decided we had enough information to begin
developing options for an attack on the compound. While the CIA team
continued to work on identifying the Pacer, I asked Tom Donilon and John
Brennan to explore what a raid would look like. The need for secrecy added to
the challenge; if even the slightest hint of our lead on bin Laden leaked, we knew
our opportunity would be lost. As a result, only a handful of people across the
entire federal government were read into the planning phase of the operation.
We had one other constraint: Whatever option we chose could not involve the
Pakistanis. Although Pakistan’s government cooperated with us on a host of
counterterrorism operations and provided a vital supply path for our forces in
Afghanistan, it was an open secret that certain elements inside the country’s
military, and especially its intelligence services, maintained links to the Taliban
and perhaps even al-Qaeda, sometimes using them as strategic assets to ensure that
the Afghan government remained weak and unable to align itself with Pakistan’s
number one rival, India. The fact that the Abbottabad compound was just a few
miles from the Pakistan military’s equivalent of West Point only heightened the
possibility that anything we told the Pakistanis could end up tipping off our
target. Whatever we chose to do in Abbottabad, then, would involve violating
the territory of a putative ally in the most egregious way possible, short of war—
raising both the diplomatic stakes and the operational complexities.
By mid-March, in the days leading up to the Libya intervention and my trip
to Latin America, the team had presented what they cautioned were only
preliminary concepts for an assault on the compound in Abbottabad. Roughly
speaking, I had two options. The first was to demolish it with an air strike. The
benefits of that approach were obvious: No American lives would be risked on
Pakistani soil. Publicly, at least, this option also offered a certain deniability—the
Pakistanis would, of course, know that we were the ones who’d carried out the

strike, but they would have an easier time maintaining the fiction that we might
not be, which could help quell outrage among their people.
As we delved into the details of what a missile strike would look like, though,
the downsides were significant. If we destroyed the compound, how would we
ever be certain that bin Laden had been there? If al-Qaeda denied that bin Laden
had been killed, how would we explain having blown up a residence deep inside
Pakistan? Moreover, there were an estimated five women and twenty children
living with the four adult males at the Abbottabad compound, and, in its initial
iteration, the proposed strike would not only annihilate the compound but almost
certainly level several adjacent residences as well. Not long into the meeting, I
told Joint Chiefs vice chairman Hoss Cartwright that I’d heard enough: I was not
going to authorize the killing of thirty or more people when we weren’t even
certain it was bin Laden in the compound. If we were going to use a strike,
they’d have to come up with a much more precise plan.
The second option was to authorize a special ops mission, in which a select
team would covertly fly into Pakistan via helicopter, raid the compound, and get
out before the Pakistani police or military had time to react. To preserve the
secrecy of the operation, and deniability if something went awry, we’d have to
conduct it under the authority of the CIA rather than the Pentagon. On the
other hand, for a mission of this magnitude and risk, we needed a topflight
military mind—which is why we had the Defense Department’s Vice Admiral
William McRaven, head of Joint Special Operations Command (JSOC), in the
room to walk us through what a raid might entail.
The chance to work closely with the men and women of the U.S. armed
forces—to witness firsthand their teamwork and sense of duty—had been one of
the most humbling aspects of my two years in office. And if I’d had to pick one
individual to represent everything right about our military, Bill McRaven might
have been that person. In his mid-fifties, with a friendly, open face, a deadpan
sense of humor, and a plainspoken, can-do demeanor, he reminded me of a
sandy-haired Tom Hanks—if Tom Hanks had been a career Navy SEAL. Like his
predecessor at JSOC, Stan McChrystal, for whom he’d served as deputy,
McRaven had helped write the book on special ops. For his postgraduate thesis
eighteen years earlier, in fact, McRaven had studied a series of twentieth-century
commando operations—including a 1943 glider rescue of Mussolini ordered by
Hitler, and the 1976 Israeli operation to free hostages in Entebbe—examining the
conditions under which a small group of well-rehearsed, highly trained soldiers
could use stealth to maintain short-term superiority over larger or better armed

forces.
McRaven had gone on to develop a model for special operations that shaped
U.S. military strategy around the world. During his storied career, he had
personally commanded or carried out more than a thousand special ops in some
of the most dangerous settings imaginable, most recently going after high-value
targets in Afghanistan. He was also famously cool under pressure. As a SEAL
captain, he’d survived a 2001 parachuting accident in which he was knocked
semiconscious during a jump and plunged four thousand feet before his chute
properly deployed. (The accident broke his back and tore his leg muscles and
tendons from his pelvis.) Although the CIA had developed its own internal
special ops teams, Leon had wisely chosen to consult with McRaven in mapping
out what a raid on Abbottabad might look like. He’d concluded that no CIA
operators could match the skill and experience of McRaven’s Navy SEAL team
and, thus, had recommended an unusual arrangement in which the chain of
command ran from me to him to McRaven, who would have complete authority
to design and conduct the mission if we decided to go forward with it.
Guided by data collected by aerial photography, the CIA had built a small
three-dimensional replica of the Abbottabad compound, and during our March
meeting McRaven walked us through how a raid might go: A select team of
SEALs would fly one or more helicopters for nearly an hour and a half under the
cover of darkness from Jalalabad, Afghanistan, to the target, landing inside the
compound’s high walls. They would then secure every perimeter entry point,
door, and window before breaking into the three-story main house, searching the
premises, and neutralizing any resistance they encountered. They would
apprehend or kill bin Laden and fly back out, stopping to refuel somewhere
inside Pakistan before returning to the base in Jalalabad. When McRaven’s
presentation was over, I asked him if he thought his team could pull it off.
“Sir, right now we’ve just sketched out a concept,” he said. “Until I can get a
larger team together to run through some rehearsals, I won’t know if what I’m
currently thinking is the best way to do it. I also can’t tell you how we would get
in and out—we need detailed air planners for that. What I can tell you is that if
we get there, we can pull off the raid. But I can’t recommend the mission itself
until I’ve done the homework.”
I nodded. “Let’s do the homework, then.”
Two weeks later, on March 29, we reconvened in the Situation Room, and
McRaven reported feeling highly confident that the raid could be executed.

Getting out, on the other hand, he said, might be a little more “sporty.” Based on
his experience with similar raids and the preliminary rehearsals he’d run, he was
fairly certain that the team could finish the job before any Pakistani authorities
caught wind of what was happening. Nevertheless, we considered all the
scenarios in which that assumption proved incorrect. What would we do if
Pakistani fighters intercepted our helicopters, either on the way in or on the way
out? What if bin Laden was on-site but hidden or in a safe room, thus extending
the amount of time the special ops team spent on the ground? How would the
team respond if Pakistani police or military forces surrounded the compound
during the raid?
McRaven emphasized that his planning was built on the premise that his team
should avoid a firefight with Pakistani authorities; and if the authorities
confronted us on the ground, his inclination would be to have the SEALs hold in
place while our diplomats tried to negotiate a safe exit. I appreciated those
instincts; his proposed approach was yet another example of the prudence I’d
consistently encountered when dealing with our top military commanders. But
with U.S.-Pakistan relations in a particularly precarious state, both Bob Gates and
I expressed serious reservations about this strategy. U.S. drone strikes against alQaeda targets in the FATA had been generating increasing opposition from the
Pakistani public. Anti-American sentiment had been further inflamed late in
January when a CIA contractor named Raymond Allen Davis killed two armed
men who approached his vehicle in the teeming city of Lahore, setting off angry
protests over the CIA presence in Pakistan and resulting in nearly two months of
tense diplomatic drama as we brokered Davis’s release. I told McRaven and the
team that I was not going to risk putting the fate of our SEALs in the hands of a
Pakistani government that would no doubt face intense public pressure over
whether to jail or release them—especially if it turned out that bin Laden wasn’t
in the compound. I therefore wanted him to beef up plans to get the raiding
party out no matter what—possibly adding two extra helicopters to provide
backup for the team in the compound.
Before we adjourned, Hoss Cartwright offered a new, more surgical option
for an air strike—one involving a drone that would fire a small, thirteen-pound
missile directly at the Pacer while he was taking his daily walk. According to
Cartwright, the collateral damage would be minimal, and given the experience
our military had developed in targeting other terrorist operatives, he felt satisfied
that it could do the job while avoiding the risks inherent in a raid.
The possible courses of action were now in focus. McRaven would oversee

the construction of a full-scale model of the Abbottabad compound at Fort Bragg,
North Carolina, where the SEAL team would conduct a series of dress rehearsals.
Should I decide to authorize the raid, he said, the optimal time to do it would be
the first weekend in May, when a couple of moonless nights would provide the
SEALs with extra cover. Left unstated were obvious concerns that with each step
we took to plan and prepare, and every day that passed, more people were being
read into our secret. I told both McRaven and Cartwright that I wasn’t yet ready
to make a decision as to which option, if any, we’d pursue. But for planning
purposes, I said, “Assume it’s a go.”
—
we carried on with business as usual at the White House. I was
tracking the situation in Libya, the war in Afghanistan, and the Greek debt crisis,
which had flared up again and was once more starting to affect U.S. markets. One
day, on the way back from the Situation Room, I ran into Jay Carney, who’d
succeeded Robert Gibbs as my press secretary. Jay was a former journalist who’d
had a front-row seat for all sorts of historic moments. He’d covered the breakup
of the Soviet Union as Time magazine’s Moscow correspondent and had been on
Air Force One with President Bush on the morning of 9/11. Now he was telling
me he’d just spent part of his daily press briefing fielding questions about whether
my birth certificate was valid.
It had been more than a month since Donald Trump had inserted himself into
the national political dialogue. My advisors and I had assumed that, having milked
it for all it was worth, the media would gradually tire of his obsession with my
birth. And yet, like algae in a stagnant pond, the number of stories on his
conspiratorial musings proliferated with each passing week. Cable shows ran long
segments on Trump and his theories. Political reporters searched for fresh angles
on the sociological significance of birtherism, or its impact on my reelection
campaign, or (with barely acknowledged irony) what it said about the news
business. A major point of discussion was the fact that the document we’d made
available on the internet in 2008 was a “short-form” birth certificate, which was
the standard document issued by the Hawaii State Department of Health and
could be used to obtain a passport, Social Security number, or driver’s license.
According to Trump and his fellow birthers, however, the short-form document
proved nothing. Why hadn’t I produced the original long-form version of my
birth certificate? we were asked. Had information on the long form been
ALL THE WHILE,

deliberately omitted from the short form—perhaps some clue that I was Muslim?
Had the long form itself been doctored? What was Obama hiding?
Finally I decided I’d had enough. I called in White House counsel Bob Bauer
and told him to go ahead and obtain the long-form birth certificate from its home
in a bound volume, somewhere deep in the bowels of the Hawaii Vital Records
office. I then let David Plouffe and Dan Pfeiffer know that I planned not just to
release the document but to say something publicly as well. They thought this
was a bad idea, arguing that I’d just feed the story, and anyway, answering such
ridiculous charges was beneath both me and the office of the president.
“That,” I said, “is exactly the point.”
On April 27, I walked to the podium in the White House briefing room and
greeted the press. I began by remarking on the fact that the national TV networks
had all decided to break from their regularly scheduled programming to carry my
remarks live—something they very rarely did. I observed that two weeks earlier,
when the House Republicans and I had issued sharply contrasting budget
proposals, with profound implications for the nation, the news had instead been
dominated by talk of my birth certificate. I noted that America faced enormous
challenges and big decisions; that we should expect serious debates and sometimes
fierce disagreements, because that was how our democracy was supposed to
work, and I was certain that we had it in us to shape a better future together.
“But,” I said, “we’re not going to be able to do it if we are distracted. We’re
not going to be able to do it if we spend time vilifying each other. We’re not
going to be able to do it if we just make stuff up and pretend that facts are not
facts. We’re not going to be able to solve our problems if we get distracted by
sideshows and carnival barkers.” I looked out at the assembled reporters. “I know
that there’s going to be a segment of people for which, no matter what we put
out, this issue will not be put to rest. But I’m speaking to the vast majority of the
American people, as well as to the press. We do not have time for this kind of
silliness. We’ve got better stuff to do. I’ve got better stuff to do. We’ve got big
problems to solve. And I’m confident we can solve them, but we’re going to
have to focus on them—not on this.”
The room was quiet for a moment. I exited through the sliding doors that led
back into the communications team’s offices, where I encountered a group of
junior members of our press shop who’d been watching my remarks on a TV
monitor. They all looked to be in their twenties. Some had worked on my
campaign; others had only recently joined the administration, compelled by the

idea of serving their country. I stopped and made eye contact with each one of
them.
“We’re better than this,” I said. “Remember that.”
—
Situation Room the next day, my team and I conducted a final
review of our options for a possible Abbottabad operation to take place that
weekend. Earlier in the week, I had given McRaven approval to dispatch the
SEAL team and helicopter assault force to Afghanistan, and the group was now in
Jalalabad, awaiting further orders. In order to make sure that the CIA had
adequately pressure-tested its work, Leon and Mike Morell had asked the chief of
the National Counterterrorism Center, Mike Leiter, to have a fresh team of
analysts pore over the available intelligence on the compound and its residents, to
see how the agency’s conclusions matched up with those of Langley. Leiter
reported that his team had expressed a 40 to 60 percent degree of certainty that it
was bin Laden, compared to the CIA team’s assessment of 60 to 80 percent. A
discussion ensued about what accounted for the difference. After a few minutes, I
interrupted.
“I know we’re trying to quantify these factors as best we can,” I said. “But
ultimately, this is a fifty-fifty call. Let’s move on.”
McRaven let us know that preparations for the raid were complete; he and
his men were ready. Cartwright likewise confirmed that the drone missile option
had been tested and could be activated at any time. With the options before us, I
went around the table to get everyone’s recommendations. Leon, John Brennan,
and Mike Mullen favored the raid. Hillary said that for her, it was a 51–49 call,
carefully ticking through the risks of a raid—especially the danger that we could
rupture our relations with Pakistan, or even find ourselves in a confrontation with
the Pakistani military. She added, however, that considering that this was our best
lead on bin Laden in ten years, she ultimately came down on the side of sending
in the SEALs.
Gates recommended against a raid, although he was open to considering the
strike option. He raised the precedent of the April 1980 attempt to rescue the
fifty-three American hostages held in Iran, known as Desert One, which had
turned catastrophic after a U.S. military helicopter crashed in the desert, killing
eight servicemembers. It was a reminder, he said, that no matter how thorough
BACK IN THE

the planning, operations like this could go badly wrong. Beyond the risk to the
team, he worried that a failed mission might adversely impact the war in
Afghanistan. Earlier that same day, I had announced Bob’s planned retirement
after four years as secretary of defense and my intention to nominate Leon as his
successor. As I listened to Bob’s sober, well-reasoned assessment, I was reminded
of just how valuable he’d been to me.
Joe also weighed in against the raid, arguing that given the enormous
consequences of failure, I should defer any decision until the intelligence
community was more certain that bin Laden was in the compound. As had been
true in every major decision I’d made as president, I appreciated Joe’s willingness
to buck the prevailing mood and ask tough questions, often in the interest of
giving me the space I needed for my own internal deliberations. I also knew that
Joe, like Gates, had been in Washington during Desert One. I imagined he had
strong memories of that time: the grieving families, the blow to American
prestige, the recrimination, and the portrayal of Jimmy Carter as both reckless and
weak-minded in authorizing the mission. Carter had never recovered politically.
The unspoken suggestion was that I might not either.
I told the group that they would have my decision by morning—if it was a go
on the raid, I wanted to make sure that McRaven had the widest window
possible to time the operation’s launch. Tom Donilon walked back to the Oval
Office with me, his usual assortment of binders and notebooks tucked under his
arm, and we quickly went down his checklist of potential action items for the
weekend ahead. He and Brennan had prepared a playbook for every contingency,
it seemed, and I could see the strain and nervousness on his face. Seven months
into his tenure as my national security advisor, he’d been trying to exercise more
and lay off the caffeine but was apparently losing the battle. I’d come to marvel at
Tom’s capacity for hard work, the myriad details he kept track of, the volume of
memos and cables and data he had to consume, the number of snafus he fixed and
interagency tussles he resolved, all so that I could have both the information and
the mental space that I needed in order to do my job. I’d asked Tom once where
his drive and diligence came from, and he’d attributed it to his background. He’d
grown up in an Irish working-class family, putting himself through law school
and serving on various political campaigns to eventually become a heavy-hitting
foreign policy expert; but despite his successes, he said, he still constantly felt the
need to prove himself, terrified of failure.
I’d laughed and said I could relate.

Michelle and the girls were in rare form at dinner that night, teasing me
relentlessly about what they called my “ways”—how I ate nuts a handful at a
time, always shaking them in my fist first; how I always wore the same pair of
ratty old sandals around the house; how I didn’t like sweets (“Your dad doesn’t
believe in delicious things…too much joy”). I hadn’t told Michelle about my
pending decision, not wanting to burden her with a secret until I knew for
certain what I planned to do, and if I was more tense than usual, she didn’t seem
to notice. After tucking the girls in, I retired to the Treaty Room and turned on
a basketball game, my gaze following the moving ball as my mind ran through
various scenarios one last time.
The truth was, I’d narrowed the scope of the decision at least a couple of
weeks earlier; every meeting since had helped confirm my instincts. I wasn’t in
favor of a missile strike, even one as precise as Cartwright had devised, feeling
that the gamble wasn’t worth it without the ability to confirm that bin Laden had
been killed. I was also skeptical of giving the intelligence community more time,
since the extra months we’d spent monitoring the compound had yielded
virtually no new information. Beyond that, considering all the planning that had
already taken place, I doubted we could hold our secret another month.
The only remaining question was whether or not to order the raid. I was
clear-eyed about the stakes involved. I knew we could mitigate the risks but not
eliminate them. I had supreme confidence in Bill McRaven and his SEALs. I
knew that in the decades since Desert One and the years since the Black Hawk
Down incident in Somalia, America’s special forces capability had been
transformed. For all the strategic mistakes and ill-conceived policies that had
plagued the Iraq and Afghanistan wars, they had also produced a cadre of men
who had carried out innumerable operations and learned to respond to almost
every situation imaginable. Given their skill and professionalism, I trusted that the
SEALs would find a safe way out of Abbottabad, even if some of our calculations
and assumptions proved to be incorrect.
I watched Kobe Bryant launch a turnaround jumper in the paint. The Lakers
were playing the Hornets, on their way to wrapping up the first round of the
play-offs. The grandfather clock ticked from its spot against the Treaty Room
wall. Over the past two years, I’d made countless decisions—on the faltering
banks, on Chrysler, pirates, Afghanistan, healthcare. They had left me familiar
with, if never casual about, the possibilities of failure. Everything I did or had
done involved working the odds, quietly and often late at night in the room
where I now sat. I knew that I could not have come up with a better process to

evaluate those odds or surrounded myself with a better mix of people to help me
weigh them. I realized that through all the mistakes I’d made and the jams I’d had
to extract us from, I had in many ways been training for exactly this moment.
And while I couldn’t guarantee the outcome of my decision, I was fully prepared
and fully confident in making it.
—
THE NEXT DAY— Friday,

April 29—was mostly travel. I was going to Tuscaloosa,
Alabama, to survey the damage from a devastating tornado outbreak and had an
evening commencement address to deliver in Miami. In between, I was
scheduled to take Michelle and the girls to Cape Canaveral to see the final launch
of the space shuttle Endeavour before it was decommissioned. Ahead of leaving, I
sent an email asking Tom, Denis, Daley, and Brennan to meet me in the
Diplomatic Reception Room, and they found me just as the family exited to the
South Lawn, where Marine One awaited. With the roar of the helicopter in the
background (along with the sound of Sasha and Malia engaging in some sisterly
bickering), I officially gave the go-ahead for the Abbottabad mission, emphasizing
that McRaven had full operational control and that it would be up to him to
determine the exact timing of the raid.
The operation was now largely out of my hands. I was glad to get out of
Washington, if only for the day—to occupy my mind with other work and, as it
turned out, to appreciate the work of others. Earlier in the week, a monstrous
supercell storm had swept across the southeastern states, dropping tornadoes that
killed more than three hundred people, which made it the deadliest natural
disaster since Hurricane Katrina. A single mile-and-a-half-wide tornado fueled by
190-mile-per-hour winds had ripped through Alabama, destroying thousands of
homes and businesses.
Landing in Tuscaloosa, I was met by the director of FEMA, a burly, low-key
Floridian named Craig Fugate, and along with state and local officials the two of
us toured neighborhoods that looked like they’d been flattened by a megaton
bomb. We visited a relief center to offer solace to families that had lost everything
they owned. Despite the devastation, nearly every person I talked to—from the
state’s Republican governor to the mother comforting her toddler—praised the
federal response, mentioning how quickly teams had been on the ground; how
effectively they had worked with local officials; how every request, no matter
how small, had been handled with care and precision. I wasn’t surprised, for

Fugate had been one of my best hires, a no-nonsense, no-ego, no-excuses public
servant with decades of experience dealing with natural disasters. Still, it gave me
satisfaction to see his efforts recognized, and I was once again reminded that so
much of what really mattered in government came down to the daily, unheralded
acts of people who weren’t seeking attention but simply knew what they were
doing and did it with pride.
In Cape Canaveral, we were disappointed to learn that NASA had been
forced to scrub the space shuttle launch at the last minute due to problems in an
auxiliary power unit, but our family still had a chance to talk to the astronauts and
spend time with Janet Kavandi, the director of flight crew operations at the
Johnson Space Center in Houston, who’d come to Florida for the launch. As a
kid, I’d been fascinated by space exploration, and while president I’d made it a
priority to highlight the value of science and engineering whenever possible,
including instituting an annual science fair at the White House at which students
proudly showcased their robots, rockets, and solar-powered cars. I’d also
encouraged NASA to innovate and prepare for a future mission to Mars, in part
by collaborating with commercial ventures on low-orbit space travel. Now I
watched Malia and Sasha grow wide-eyed as Kavandi emphasized all the people
and the hours of diligent work that went into even a single launch, and as she
described her own path from being a young girl entranced by the night sky over
her family’s cattle farm in rural Missouri to becoming an astronaut who had flown
on three space shuttle missions.
My day ended at the graduation ceremony for students at Miami Dade,
which, with more than 170,000 students on eight campuses, was the country’s
largest college. Its president, Eduardo Padrón, had attended the school in the
1960s as a young Cuban immigrant with rudimentary English and no other
options for a higher education. After receiving his associate’s degree there and
later earning a PhD in economics from the University of Florida, he’d turned
down lucrative job offers in the private sector to return to Miami Dade, where
for the past forty years he’d made it his mission to throw others the same lifeline
the school had thrown him. He described the college as “a dream factory” for its
students, who primarily came from low-income, Latino, Black, and immigrant
families and were, in most cases, the first in their families to attend college. “We
don’t give up on any student,” he told me, “and if we’re doing our jobs, we
don’t let them give up on themselves.” I couldn’t help being inspired by the
generosity of his vision.
In my remarks to the graduates that evening, I spoke about the American

idea: what their accomplishment said about our individual determination to reach
past the circumstances of our birth, as well as our collective capacity to overcome
our differences to meet the challenges of our time. I recounted an early childhood
memory of sitting on my grandfather’s shoulders and waving a tiny American flag
in a crowd gathered to greet the astronauts from one of the Apollo space missions
after a successful splashdown in the waters off Hawaii. And now, more than forty
years later, I told the graduates, I’d just had a chance to watch my own daughters
hear from a new generation of space explorers. It had caused me to reflect on all
that America had achieved since my own childhood; it offered a case of life
coming full circle—and proof, just as their diplomas were proof, just as my
having been elected president was proof, that the American idea endures.
The students and their parents had cheered, many of them waving American
flags of their own. I thought about the country I’d just described to them—a
hopeful, generous, courageous America, an America that was open to everyone.
At about the same age as the graduates were now, I’d seized on that idea and
clung to it for dear life. For their sake more than mine, I badly wanted it to be
true.
—
as I felt during the trip on Friday, I knew that
my Saturday night back in Washington—when Michelle and I were scheduled to
attend the White House Correspondents’ Dinner—promised to be decidedly less
inspiring. Hosted by the White House press corps and attended at least once by
every president since Calvin Coolidge, the dinner had originally been designed to
give journalists and those they covered a chance, for one evening, to set aside
their often-adversarial stance toward one another and have some fun. But over
time, as the news and entertainment businesses had begun to blend, the annual
gathering had evolved into Washington’s version of the Met Gala or the Oscars,
with a performance from a comedian, televised on cable, and with a couple of
thousand journalists, politicians, business tycoons, and administration officials, plus
an assortment of Hollywood celebrities, packing themselves into an
uncomfortable hotel ballroom to schmooze, be seen, and listen to the president
deliver what amounted to a stand-up routine, roasting rivals and joking about the
latest political news of the day.
At a time when people across the country were still trying to figure out how
to find a job, keep their homes, or pay their bills in the wake of a recession, my
AS ENERGIZED AND OPTIMISTIC

attendance at the black-tie affair—with its clubbishness and red-carpet glitz—had
always felt politically awkward. But because I’d shown up the past two years, I
knew I couldn’t afford to raise any suspicions by skipping out of this year’s dinner
at the last minute; despite the knowledge that McRaven would soon join the
SEAL team in Jalalabad and could likely launch the operation within hours, I’d
have to do my best to act like everything was normal in front of a ballroom full of
reporters. Fortunately it turned out that the country’s leading distraction had been
invited to sit at the Washington Post’s table that night, and those of us aware of
what was going on took odd comfort in knowing that once Donald Trump
entered the room, it was all but guaranteed that the media would not be thinking
about Pakistan.
To some degree, the release of my long-form birth certificate and my
scolding of the press in the White House briefing room had yielded the desired
effect: Donald Trump had grudgingly acknowledged that he now believed I was
born in Hawaii, while taking full credit for having forced me—on behalf of the
American people—to certify my status. Still, the whole birther controversy
remained on everybody’s mind, as became clear that Saturday, when I met with
Jon Favreau and the team of writers who’d prepared my remarks—none of
whom were aware of the operation about to take place. They’d come up with an
inspired monologue, though I paused on a line that poked fun at the birthers by
suggesting that Tim Pawlenty, the former Republican governor of Minnesota,
who was exploring a run for president, had been hiding the fact that his full name
was actually “Tim bin Laden Pawlenty.” I asked Favs to change “bin Laden” to
“Hosni,” suggesting that given Mubarak’s recent turn in the news, it would be
more current. I could tell he didn’t see my edit as an improvement, but he didn’t
argue the point.
At the end of the afternoon, I placed a last call to McRaven, who let me
know that due to some foggy weather in Pakistan, his intention was to wait until
Sunday night to commence the operation. He assured me that everything was in
place and his team was ready. I told him that wasn’t the main reason for my call.
“Tell everyone on the team how much I appreciate them,” I said.
“Yes, sir.”
“Bill,” I said, not having the words at that moment to convey how I felt. “I
mean it. Tell them this.”
“I will, Mr. President,” he said.
That night, Michelle and I motorcaded over to the Washington Hilton, took

pictures with various VIPs, and sat on a dais for a couple of hours, making small
talk while guests like Rupert Murdoch, Sean Penn, John Boehner, and Scarlett
Johansson mingled over wine and overcooked steaks. I kept my face fixed in an
accommodating smile, as I quietly balanced on a mental high wire, my thoughts
thousands of miles away. When it was my turn to speak, I stood up and started
my routine. About halfway through, I turned my attention directly to Trump.
“Now, I know that he’s taken some flak lately,” I said, “but no one is
happier, no one is prouder to put this birth certificate matter to rest than the
Donald. And that’s because he can finally get back to focusing on the issues that
matter—like, Did we fake the moon landing? What really happened in Roswell?
And where are Biggie and Tupac?” As the audience broke into laughter, I
continued in this vein, noting his “credentials and breadth of experience” as host
of Celebrity Apprentice and congratulating him for how he’d handled the fact that
“at the steakhouse, the men’s cooking team did not impress the judges from
Omaha Steaks….These are the kinds of decisions that would keep me up at
night. Well handled, sir. Well handled.”
The audience howled as Trump sat in silence, cracking a tepid smile. I
couldn’t begin to guess what went through his mind during the few minutes I
spent publicly ribbing him. What I knew was that he was a spectacle, and in the
United States of America in 2011, that was a form of power. Trump trafficked in
a currency that, however shallow, seemed to gain more purchase with each
passing day. The same reporters who laughed at my jokes would continue to give
him airtime. Their publishers would vie to have him sit at their tables.
Far from being ostracized for the conspiracies he’d peddled, he in fact had
never been bigger.
—
early the next morning, before the White House operator’s regular
wake-up call. We’d taken the unusual step of canceling the public tours of the
West Wing for the day, presuming there were important meetings ahead. I’d
decided to get in a quick nine holes of golf with Marvin, as I often did on quiet
Sundays, partly to avoid telegraphing anything else being out of the ordinary and
partly to get outside rather than sit checking my watch in the Treaty Room,
waiting for darkness to fall in Pakistan. It was a cool, windless day, and I hacked
around the course, losing three or four balls in the woods. Returning to the
White House, I checked in with Tom. He and the rest of the team were already
I WAS UP

in the Situation Room, making sure we were set to respond to whatever might
happen. Rather than distract them with my presence, I asked that he notify me
once the helicopters carrying the SEAL team were in the air. I sat in the Oval,
trying to read through some papers, but got nowhere, my eyes running over the
same lines again and again. I finally called in Reggie, Marvin, and Pete Souza—all
of whom by this time had been read into what was about to transpire—and the
four of us sat down in the Oval dining room to play Spades.
At two p.m. eastern time, two Black Hawk helicopters that had been
modified for stealth lifted off from Jalalabad Airfield, carrying twenty-three
members of the SEAL team, along with a Pakistani American CIA translator and
a military dog named Cairo—the commencement of what was officially known
as Operation Neptune’s Spear. It would take them ninety minutes to reach
Abbottabad. I left the dining room and went back down to the Situation Room,
which had effectively been converted into a war room. Leon was on a
videoconference line from Langley, relaying information from McRaven, who
was holed up in Jalalabad and in continuous, direct communication with his
SEALs. The atmosphere was predictably tense, with Joe, Bill Daley, and most of
my national security team—including Tom, Hillary, Denis, Gates, Mullen, and
Blinken—already seated at the conference table. I was given updates on plans for
notifying Pakistan and other countries and our diplomatic strategies in the event
of either success or failure. If bin Laden was killed in the raid, preparations had
been made for a traditional Islamic burial to take place at sea, avoiding the
creation of a pilgrimage site for jihadists. After a time, I could tell that the team
was simply covering old ground for my benefit. Worried that I was sidetracking
them, I went back upstairs until shortly before three-thirty, when Leon
announced that the Black Hawks were approaching the compound.
The team had planned for us to follow the operation indirectly, through
Leon, since Tom was concerned about the optics of me communicating directly
with McRaven, which might leave the impression that I was micromanaging the
operation—a bad practice generally and a political problem if the mission failed.
On my way back into the Situation Room, though, I had noticed that a live
aerial view of the compound, as well as McRaven’s voice, was being transmitted
to a video monitor in a smaller conference room across the hall. As the
helicopters drew close to the target, I stood up from my seat. “I need to watch
this,” I said, before heading to the other room. There I found a blue-uniformed
air force brigadier general, Brad Webb, seated in front of his computer at a small
table. He tried to offer me his seat. “Sit down,” I said, putting a hand on his

shoulder and finding a spot in a side chair. Webb let McRaven and Leon know
that I had changed venues and was watching the feed. Soon the entire team had
squeezed into the room.
This was the first and only time as president that I’d watch a military
operation unfold in real time, with ghostly images moving across the screen.
We’d been following the action for barely a minute when one of the Black
Hawks lurched slightly on descent, and before I could grasp exactly what was
happening, McRaven informed us that the helicopter had momentarily lost lift
and then clipped the side of one of the compound’s walls. For an instant, I felt an
electric kind of fear. A disaster reel played in my head—a chopper crashing, the
SEALs scrambling to get out before the machine caught fire, a neighborhood of
people emerging from their homes to see what happened as the Pakistani military
rushed to the scene. McRaven’s voice interrupted my nightmare.
“It’ll be fine,” he said, as though remarking on a car fender bumping into a
shopping cart at the mall. “The pilot’s the best we have, and he’ll bring it down
safely.”
And that’s exactly what happened. I’d later learn that the Black Hawk had
been caught in a vortex caused by higher than anticipated temperatures and the
rotor’s downwash of air getting trapped inside the compound’s high walls, forcing
the pilot and the SEALs on board to improvise both a landing and their exit. (In
fact, the pilot had purposely set the tail of the chopper on the wall to avoid a
more perilous crash.) But all I saw in the moment were grainy figures on the
ground, rapidly moving into position and entering the main house. For twenty
excruciating minutes, even McRaven had a limited view of what was taking place
—or perhaps he was staying silent on the details of the room-to-room search his
team was conducting. Then, with a suddenness I didn’t expect, we heard
McRaven’s and Leon’s voices, almost simultaneously, utter the words we’d been
waiting to hear—the culmination of months of planning and years of intelligence
gathering.
“Geronimo ID’d…Geronimo EKIA.”
Enemy killed in action.
Osama bin Laden—code-named “Geronimo” for the purposes of the mission
—the man responsible for the worst terrorist attack in American history, the man
who had directed the murder of thousands of people and set in motion a
tumultuous period of world history, had been brought to justice by a team of
American Navy SEALs. Inside the conference room, there were audible gasps.

My eyes remained glued to the video feed.
“We got him,” I said softly.
Nobody budged from their seats for another twenty minutes, while the SEAL
team finished its business: bagging bin Laden’s body; securing the three women
and nine children present and questioning them in one corner of the compound;
collecting computers, files, and other material of potential intelligence value; and
attaching explosives to the damaged Black Hawk, which would then be
destroyed, replaced by a rescue Chinook that had been hovering a short distance
away. As the helicopters took off, Joe placed a hand on my shoulder and
squeezed.
“Congratulations, boss,” he said.
I stood up and nodded. Denis gave me a fist bump. I shook hands with others
on the team. But with the helicopters still rotoring through Pakistani airspace, the
mood remained quiet. It wasn’t until around six p.m., when the choppers had
safely landed in Jalalabad, that I finally felt some of the tension start to drain out
of me. Over a video teleconference line a short while later, McRaven explained
that he was looking at the body as we spoke, and that in his judgment it was
definitely bin Laden; the CIA’s facial recognition software would soon indicate
the same. To further confirm, McRaven had a six-foot-two member of his team
lie next to the body to compare his height to bin Laden’s purported six-foot-four
frame.
“Seriously, Bill?” I teased. “All that planning and you couldn’t bring a tape
measure?”
It was the first lighthearted thing I’d said all day, but the laughter didn’t last
long, as photographs of bin Laden’s corpse were soon passed around the
conference table. I glanced at them briefly; it was him. Despite the evidence,
Leon and McRaven said that we couldn’t be fully certain until the DNA results
came back, which would take another day or two. We discussed the possibility of
holding off on an official announcement, but reports of a helicopter crash in
Abbottabad were already starting to pop up on the internet. Mike Mullen had put
a call in to Pakistan’s army chief, General Ashfaq Parvez Kayani, and while the
conversation had been polite, Kayani had requested that we come clean on the
raid and its target as quickly as possible in order to help his people manage the
reaction of the Pakistani public. Knowing there was no way to hold the news for
another twenty-four hours, I went upstairs with Ben to quickly dictate my
thoughts on what I would say to the nation later that evening.

For the next several hours, the West Wing ran at full throttle. While
diplomats began to contact foreign governments and our communications team
got ready to brief the press, I placed calls to George W. Bush and Bill Clinton
and told them the news, making a point to acknowledge with Bush that the
mission was the culmination of a long, hard process begun under his presidency.
Though it was the middle of the night across the Atlantic, I contacted David
Cameron as well, to recognize the stalwart support our closest ally had provided
from the very beginning of the Afghan War. I expected my most difficult call to
be with Pakistan’s beleaguered president, Asif Ali Zardari, who would surely face
a backlash at home over our violation of Pakistani sovereignty. When I reached
him, however, he expressed congratulations and support. “Whatever the fallout,”
he said, “it’s very good news.” He showed genuine emotion, recalling how his
wife, Benazir Bhutto, had been killed by extremists with reported ties to alQaeda.
Meanwhile, I hadn’t seen Michelle all day. I’d let her know earlier what
would be happening, and rather than sit anxiously at the White House, waiting
for news, she’d left Malia and Sasha in their grandmother’s care and gone out to
dinner with friends. I had just finished shaving and putting on a suit and tie when
she walked through the door.
“So?” she said.
I gave a thumbs-up, and she smiled, pulling me into a hug. “That’s amazing,
babe,” she said. “Really. How do you feel?”
“Right now, just relieved,” I said. “But check back with me in a couple of
hours.”
Back in the West Wing, I sat with Ben to put the finishing touches on my
remarks. I had given him a few broad themes. I wanted to recall the shared
anguish of 9/11, I said, and the unity we’d all felt in the days that immediately
followed. I wanted to salute not just those involved in this mission but everyone
in our military and intelligence communities who continued to sacrifice so much
to keep us safe. I wanted to reiterate that our fight was with al-Qaeda and not
Islam. And I wanted to close by reminding the world and ourselves that America
does what it sets out to do—that as a nation we were still capable of achieving big
things.
As usual, Ben had taken my stray thoughts and crafted a fine speech in less
than two hours. I knew that this one mattered to him more than most, since the
experience of watching the Twin Towers collapse had changed the trajectory of

his life, propelling him to Washington with a burning drive to make a difference.
It brought back my own memories of that day: Michelle having just taken Malia
to her first day of preschool; me standing outside the State of Illinois Building in
downtown Chicago, feeling overwhelmed and uncertain after assuring Michelle
over the phone that she and the girls would be okay; three-month-old Sasha
sleeping on my chest later that night as I sat in the dark watching the news reports
and trying to contact friends in New York. No less than Ben’s, my own course in
life had been fundamentally altered by that day, in ways that at the time I could
not possibly have predicted, setting off a chain of events that would somehow
lead to this moment.
After scanning the speech one last time, I stood up and clapped Ben on the
back. “Good job, brother,” I said. He nodded, a jumble of emotions passing
across his face before he rushed out the door to get the final edits on my remarks
entered into the teleprompter. It was now almost eleven-thirty p.m. The major
networks had already reported bin Laden’s death and were waiting to take my
address live. Celebratory crowds had gathered outside the White House gates,
thousands of people filling the streets. As I stepped into the cool night air and
started walking down the colonnade toward the East Room, where I’d give my
remarks, I could hear the raucous, rhythmic chants of “USA! USA! USA!”
coming from Pennsylvania Avenue—a sound that echoed far and wide and
would continue deep into the night.
—
jubilation quieted down, all of us in the White House could feel
a palpable shift in the country’s mood in the days immediately following the
Abbottabad raid. For the first and only time in my presidency, we didn’t have to
sell what we’d done. We didn’t have to fend off Republican attacks or answer
accusations from key constituencies that we’d compromised some core principle.
No issues with implementation or unforeseen consequences sprang up. I still had
decisions to make, including whether to release photos of bin Laden’s dead body.
(My answer was no: We didn’t need to “spike the football” or hoist a ghoulish
trophy, I told my staff, and I didn’t want the image of bin Laden shot in the head
to become a rallying point for extremists.) We still had to patch up relations with
Pakistan. While the documents and computer files seized from the compound
proved to be a treasure trove of intelligence, confirming that bin Laden had
continued to play a central role in planning attacks against the United States, as
EVEN AFTER THE

well as the enormous pressure we’d managed to put on his network through our
targeting of its leaders, none of us believed that the threat from al-Qaeda was
over. What was beyond dispute, though, was that we’d dealt the organization a
decisive blow, moving it a step closer to strategic defeat. Even our harshest critics
had to acknowledge that the operation had been an unequivocal success.
As for the American people, the Abbottabad raid offered a catharsis of sorts.
In Afghanistan and Iraq, they’d seen our troops wage almost a decade of war,
with outcomes they knew to be ambiguous at best. They’d expected that violent
extremism was here to stay in one form or another, that there’d be no conclusive
battle or formal surrender. As a result, the public instinctively seemed to seize on
bin Laden’s death as the closest we’d likely ever get to a V-Day—and at a time of
economic hardship and partisan rancor, people took some satisfaction in seeing
their government deliver a victory.
Meanwhile, the thousands of families who’d lost loved ones on 9/11
understood what we’d done in more personal terms. The day after the operation,
my daily batch of ten constituent letters contained a printed email from a young
woman named Payton Wall, who’d been four years old at the time of the attacks
and was now fourteen. She explained that her dad had been in one of the Twin
Towers and had called to speak to her before it collapsed. All her life, she wrote,
she’d been haunted by the memory of her father’s voice, along with the image of
her mother weeping into the phone. Although nothing could change the fact of
his absence, she wanted me and all those who’d been involved in the raid to
know how much it meant to her and her family that America hadn’t forgotten
him.
Sitting alone in the Treaty Room, I reread that email a couple of times, my
eyes clouded with emotion. I thought about my daughters and how profoundly
the loss of their mother or father would hurt them. I thought about young people
who’d signed up for the armed forces after 9/11, intent on serving the nation, no
matter the sacrifice. And I thought about the parents of those wounded or killed
in Iraq and Afghanistan—the Gold Star moms Michelle and I had comforted, the
fathers who’d shown me pictures of their departed sons. I felt an overwhelming
pride in those who’d been part of the mission. From the SEALs themselves, to
the CIA analysts who’d pieced together the trail to Abbottabad, to the diplomats
who had prepared to manage the fallout, to the Pakistani American translator
who’d stood outside the compound shooing away curious neighbors as the raid
took place—they had all worked together seamlessly and selflessly, without regard
to credit or turf or political preferences, to achieve a shared goal.

With these thoughts came another: Was that unity of effort, that sense of
common purpose, possible only when the goal involved killing a terrorist? The
question nagged at me. For all the pride and satisfaction I took in the success of
our mission in Abbottabad, the truth was that I hadn’t felt the same exuberance as
I had on the night the healthcare bill passed. I found myself imagining what
America might look like if we could rally the country so that our government
brought the same level of expertise and determination to educating our children
or housing the homeless as it had to getting bin Laden; if we could apply the
same persistence and resources to reducing poverty or curbing greenhouse gases
or making sure every family had access to decent day care. I knew that even my
own staff would dismiss these notions as utopian. And the fact that this was the
case, the fact that we could no longer imagine uniting the country around
anything other than thwarting attacks and defeating external enemies, I took as a
measure of how far my presidency still fell short of what I wanted it to be—and
how much work I had left to do.
I set such musings aside for the rest of that week, allowing myself a chance to
savor the moment. Bob Gates would attend his last cabinet meeting and get a
rousing ovation, appearing, for a moment, genuinely moved. I spent time with
John Brennan, who had been involved one way or another in the hunt for bin
Laden for close to fifteen years. Bill McRaven stopped by the Oval Office and,
along with my heartfelt thanks for his extraordinary leadership, I presented him
with a tape measure I’d had mounted on a plaque. And on May 5, 2011, just four
days after the operation, I traveled to New York City and had lunch with the
firefighters of Engine Company 54/Ladder 4/Battalion 9, which had lost all
fifteen members who’d been on duty the morning of the attack, and participated
in a wreath-laying ceremony at Ground Zero. Some of the first responders who
had rushed into the burning towers served in the honor guard that day, and I had
a chance to meet with the 9/11 families in attendance—including Payton Wall,
who got a big hug from me and promptly asked if I could arrange for her to meet
Justin Bieber (I told her I was pretty sure I could make that happen).
The next day, I flew to Fort Campbell, Kentucky, where McRaven
introduced me and Joe to the SEAL team and pilots involved in the Abbottabad
raid. A small-scale model of the compound had been set up at the front of the
room, and as the commanding officer methodically walked us through the
operation, I studied the thirty or so elite military members seated before me in
folding chairs. Some of them looked the part—strapping young men whose
muscles bulged through their uniforms. But I was struck by how many of them

could have passed for accountants or high school principals—guys in their early
forties, with graying hair and understated demeanors. They were a testament to
the role that skill and judgment born of experience played in successfully
navigating the most dangerous missions—experience, the commander
emphasized, that had also cost the lives of many of their colleagues. When the
briefing was over, I shook hands with everyone in the room and presented the
team with the Presidential Unit Citation, the highest award a military unit could
receive. In return, the men surprised me with a gift: an American flag they had
taken with them to Abbottabad, now in a frame with their signatures on the
back. At no point during my visit did anyone mention who had fired the shot
that killed bin Laden—and I never asked.
On the flight back, Tom gave me an update on Libya. Bill Daley and I
reviewed my schedule for the month ahead, and I caught up on some paperwork.
By six-thirty p.m., we’d landed at Andrews Air Force Base, and I boarded Marine
One for the short ride back to the White House. I was in a quiet mood as I gazed
out at the rolling Maryland landscape and the tidy neighborhoods below, and
then the Potomac, glistening beneath the fading sun. The helicopter began its
gentle turn, due north across the Mall. The Washington Monument suddenly
materialized on one side, seeming almost close enough to touch; on the other
side, I could see the seated figure of Lincoln, shrouded in shadow behind the
memorial’s curved marble columns. Marine One began to shudder a bit, in a way
that was now familiar to me, signaling the final descent as it approached the South
Lawn, and I looked down at the street below, still thick with rush-hour traffic—
fellow commuters, I thought, anxious to get home.
