O

and halls and landmarks that make up the White House and its
grounds, it was the West Colonnade that I loved best.
For eight years that walkway would frame my day, a minute-long, open-air
commute from home to office and back again. It was where each morning I felt
the first slap of winter wind or pulse of summer heat; the place where I’d gather
my thoughts, ticking through the meetings that lay ahead, preparing arguments
for skeptical members of Congress or anxious constituents, girding myself for this
decision or that slow-rolling crisis.
In the earliest days of the White House, the executive offices and the First
Family’s residence fit under one roof, and the West Colonnade was little more
than a path to the horse stables. But when Teddy Roosevelt came into office, he
determined that a single building couldn’t accommodate a modern staff, six
boisterous children, and his sanity. He ordered construction of what would
become the West Wing and Oval Office, and over decades and successive
presidencies, the colonnade’s current configuration emerged: a bracket to the
Rose Garden north and west—the thick wall on the north side, mute and
unadorned save for high half-moon windows; the stately white columns on the
west side, like an honor guard assuring safe passage.
As a general rule, I’m a slow walker—a Hawaiian walk, Michelle likes to say,
sometimes with a hint of impatience. I walked differently, though, on the
colonnade, conscious of the history that had been made there and those who had
preceded me. My stride got longer, my steps a bit brisker, my footfall on stone
echoed by the Secret Service detail trailing me a few yards back. When I reached
the ramp at the end of the colonnade (a legacy of FDR and his wheelchair—I
picture him smiling, chin out, cigarette holder clenched tight in his teeth as he
strains to roll up the incline), I’d wave at the uniformed guard just inside the
glass-paned door. Sometimes the guard would be holding back a surprised flock
of visitors. If I had time, I would shake their hands and ask where they were
F ALL THE ROOMS

from. Usually, though, I just turned left, following the outer wall of the Cabinet
Room and slipping into the side door by the Oval Office, where I greeted my
personal staff, grabbed my schedule and a cup of hot tea, and started the business
of the day.
Several times a week, I would step out onto the colonnade to find the
groundskeepers, all employees of the National Park Service, working in the Rose
Garden. They were older men, mostly, dressed in green khaki uniforms,
sometimes matched with a floppy hat to block the sun, or a bulky coat against the
cold. If I wasn’t running late, I might stop to compliment them on the fresh
plantings or ask about the damage done by the previous night’s storm, and they’d
explain their work with quiet pride. They were men of few words; even with
one another they made their points with a gesture or a nod, each of them focused
on his individual task but all of them moving with synchronized grace. One of
the oldest was Ed Thomas, a tall, wiry Black man with sunken cheeks who had
worked at the White House for forty years. The first time I met him, he reached
into his back pocket for a cloth to wipe off the dirt before shaking my hand. His
hand, thick with veins and knots like the roots of a tree, engulfed mine. I asked
how much longer he intended to stay at the White House before taking his
retirement.
“I don’t know, Mr. President,” he said. “I like to work. Getting a little hard
on the joints. But I reckon I might stay long as you’re here. Make sure the garden
looks good.”
Oh, how good that garden looked! The shady magnolias rising high at each
corner; the hedges, thick and rich green; the crab apple trees pruned just so. And
the flowers, cultivated in greenhouses a few miles away, providing a constant
explosion of color—reds and yellows and pinks and purples; in spring, the tulips
massed in bunches, their heads tilted toward the sun; in summer, lavender
heliotrope and geraniums and lilies; in fall, chrysanthemums and daisies and
wildflowers. And always a few roses, red mostly but sometimes yellow or white,
each one flush in its bloom.
Each time I walked down the colonnade or looked out the window of the
Oval Office, I saw the handiwork of the men and women who worked outside.
They reminded me of the small Norman Rockwell painting I kept on the wall,
next to the portrait of George Washington and above the bust of Dr. King: five
tiny figures of varying skin tones, workingmen in dungarees, hoisted up by ropes
into a crisp blue sky to polish the lamp of Lady Liberty. The men in the painting,

the groundskeepers in the garden—they were guardians, I thought, the quiet
priests of a good and solemn order. And I would tell myself that I needed to work
as hard and take as much care in my job as they did in theirs.
With time, my walks down the colonnade would accumulate with memories.
There were the big public events, of course—announcements made before a
phalanx of cameras, press conferences with foreign leaders. But there were also
the moments few others saw—Malia and Sasha racing each other to greet me on
a surprise afternoon visit, or our dogs, Bo and Sunny, bounding through the
snow, their paws sinking so deep that their chins were bearded white. Tossing
footballs on a bright fall day, or comforting an aide after a personal hardship.
Such images would often flash through my mind, interrupting whatever
calculations were occupying me. They reminded me of time passing, sometimes
filling me with longing—a desire to turn back the clock and begin again. This
wasn’t possible on my morning walk, for time’s arrow moved only forward then;
the day’s work beckoned; I needed to focus on only those things to come.
The night was different. On the evening walk back to the residence, my
briefcase stuffed with papers, I would try to slow myself down, sometimes even
stop. I’d breathe air laced with the scent of soil and grass and pollen, and listen to
the wind or the patter of rain. I sometimes stared at the light against the columns,
and the regal mass of the White House, its flag aloft on the roof, lit bright, or I’d
look toward the Washington Monument piercing the black sky in the distance,
occasionally catching sight of the moon and stars above it, or the twinkling of a
passing jet.
In moments like these, I would wonder at the strange path—and the idea—
that had brought me to this place.
—
from a political family. My maternal grandparents were
midwesterners from mostly Scots-Irish stock. They would have been considered
liberal, especially by the standards of the Depression-era Kansas towns they were
born in, and they were diligent about keeping up with the news. “It’s part of
being a well-informed citizen,” my grandmother, whom we all called Toot (short
for Tutu, or Grandma, in Hawaiian), would tell me, peering over the top of her
morning Honolulu Advertiser. But she and my grandfather had no firm ideological
or partisan leanings to speak of, beyond what they considered to be common
I

DON’T

COME

sense. They thought about work—my grandmother was vice president of escrow
at one of the local banks, my grandfather a life insurance salesman—and paying
the bills, and the small diversions that life had to offer.
And anyway, they lived on Oahu, where nothing seemed that urgent. After
years spent in places as disparate as Oklahoma, Texas, and Washington State,
they’d finally moved to Hawaii in 1960, a year after its statehood was established.
A big ocean now separated them from riots and protests and other such things.
The only political conversation I can recall my grandparents having while I was
growing up had to do with a beachside bar: Honolulu’s mayor had torn down
Gramps’s favorite watering hole in order to renovate the beachfront at the far end
of Waikiki.
Gramps never forgave him for it.
My mother, Ann Dunham, was different, full of strong opinions. My
grandparents’ only child, she rebelled against convention in high school—reading
beatnik poets and French existentialists, joyriding with a friend to San Francisco
for days without telling anyone. As a kid, I’d hear from her about civil rights
marches, and why the Vietnam War was a misguided disaster; about the women’s
movement (yes on equal pay, not as keen on not shaving her legs) and the War
on Poverty. When we moved to Indonesia to live with my stepfather, she made
sure to explain the sins of government corruption (“It’s just stealing, Barry”),
even if everyone appeared to be doing it. Later, during the summer I turned
twelve, when we went on a month-long family vacation traveling across the
United States, she insisted we watch the Watergate hearings every night,
providing her own running commentary (“What do you expect from a
McCarthyite?”).
She didn’t just focus on headlines either. Once, when she discovered I had
been part of a group that was teasing a kid at school, she sat me down in front of
her, lips pursed with disappointment.
“You know, Barry,” she said (that’s the nickname she and my grandparents
used for me when I was growing up, often shortened to “Bar,” pronounced
“Bear”), “there are people in the world who think only about themselves. They
don’t care what happens to other people so long as they get what they want.
They put other people down to make themselves feel important.
“Then there are people who do the opposite, who are able to imagine how
others must feel, and make sure that they don’t do things that hurt people.
“So,” she said, looking me squarely in the eye. “Which kind of person do

you want to be?”
I felt lousy. As she intended it to, her question stayed with me for a long
time.
For my mother, the world was full of opportunities for moral instruction. But
I never knew her to get involved in a political campaign. Like my grandparents,
she was suspicious of platforms, doctrines, absolutes, preferring to express her
values on a smaller canvas. “The world is complicated, Bar. That’s why it’s
interesting.” Dismayed by the war in Southeast Asia, she’d end up spending most
of her life there, absorbing the language and culture, setting up micro-lending
programs for people in poverty long before micro-credit became trendy in
international development. Appalled by racism, she would marry outside her race
not once but twice, and go on to lavish what seemed like an inexhaustible love
on her two brown children. Incensed by societal constraints put upon women,
she’d divorce both men when they proved overbearing or disappointing, carving
out a career of her own choosing, raising her kids according to her own standards
of decency, and pretty much doing whatever she damn well pleased.
In my mother’s world, the personal really was political—although she
wouldn’t have had much use for the slogan.
None of this is to say that she lacked ambition for her son. Despite the
financial strain, she and my grandparents would send me to Punahou, Hawaii’s
top prep school. The thought of me not going to college was never entertained.
But no one in my family would ever have suggested I might hold public office
someday. If you’d asked my mother, she might have imagined that I’d end up
heading a philanthropic institution like the Ford Foundation. My grandparents
would have loved to see me become a judge, or a great courtroom lawyer like
Perry Mason.
“Might as well put that smart mouth of his to use,” Gramps would say.
Since I didn’t know my father, he didn’t have much input. I vaguely
understood that he had worked for the Kenyan government for a time, and when
I was ten, he traveled from Kenya to stay with us for a month in Honolulu. That
was the first and last I saw of him; after that, I heard from him only through the
occasional letter, written on thin blue airmail paper that was preprinted to fold
and address without an envelope. “Your mother tells me you think you may
want to study architecture,” one letter might read. “I think this is a very practical
profession, and one that can be practiced anywhere in the world.”
It was not much to go on.

As for the world beyond my family—well, what they would see for most of
my teenage years was not a budding leader but rather a lackadaisical student, a
passionate basketball player of limited talent, and an incessant, dedicated partyer.
No student government for me; no Eagle Scouts or interning at the local
congressman’s office. Through high school, my friends and I didn’t discuss much
beyond sports, girls, music, and plans for getting loaded.
Three of these guys—Bobby Titcomb, Greg Orme, and Mike Ramos—
remain some of my closest friends. To this day, we can laugh for hours over
stories of our misspent youth. In later years, they would throw themselves into
my campaigns with a loyalty for which I will always be grateful, becoming as
skilled at defending my record as anyone on MSNBC.
But there were also times during my presidency—after they had watched me
speak to a big crowd, say, or receive a series of crisp salutes from young Marines
during a base tour—when their faces would betray a certain bafflement, as if they
were trying to reconcile the graying man in a suit and tie with the ill-defined
man-child they’d once known.
That guy? they must have said to themselves. How the hell did that happen?
And if my friends had ever asked me directly, I’m not sure I’d have had a
good answer.
—
that sometime in high school I started asking questions—about my
father’s absence and my mother’s choices; about how it was I’d come to live in a
place where few people looked like me. A lot of the questions centered on race:
Why did Blacks play professional basketball but not coach it? What did that girl
from school mean when she said she didn’t think of me as Black? Why were all
the Black men in action movies switchblade-wielding lunatics except for maybe
the one decent Black guy—the sidekick, of course—who always seemed to end
up getting killed?
But I wasn’t concerned only with race. It was class as well. Growing up in
Indonesia, I’d seen the yawning chasm between the lives of wealthy elites and
impoverished masses. I had a nascent awareness of the tribal tensions in my
father’s country—the hatred that could exist between those who on the surface
might look the same. I bore daily witness to the seemingly cramped lives of my
grandparents, the disappointments they filled with TV and liquor and sometimes
I DO KNOW

a new appliance or car. I noticed that my mother paid for her intellectual
freedom with chronic financial struggles and occasional personal chaos, and I
became attuned to the not-so-subtle hierarchies among my prep school
classmates, mostly having to do with how much money their parents had. And
then there was the unsettling fact that, despite whatever my mother might claim,
the bullies, cheats, and self-promoters seemed to be doing quite well, while those
she considered good and decent people seemed to get screwed an awful lot.
All of this pulled me in different directions. It was as if, because of the very
strangeness of my heritage and the worlds I straddled, I was from everywhere and
nowhere at once, a combination of ill-fitting parts, like a platypus or some
imaginary beast, confined to a fragile habitat, unsure of where I belonged. And I
sensed, without fully understanding why or how, that unless I could stitch my life
together and situate myself along some firm axis, I might end up in some basic
way living my life alone.
I didn’t talk to anyone about this, certainly not my friends or family. I didn’t
want to hurt their feelings or stand out more than I already did. But I did find
refuge in books. The reading habit was my mother’s doing, instilled early in my
childhood—her go-to move anytime I complained of boredom, or when she
couldn’t afford to send me to the international school in Indonesia, or when I had
to accompany her to the office because she didn’t have a babysitter.
Go read a book, she would say. Then come back and tell me something you learned.
There were a few years when I lived with my grandparents in Hawaii while
my mother continued her work in Indonesia and raised my younger sister, Maya.
Without my mother around to nag me, I didn’t learn as much, as my grades
readily attested. Then, around tenth grade, that changed. I still remember going
with my grandparents to a rummage sale at the Central Union Church, across the
street from our apartment, and finding myself in front of a bin of old hardcover
books. For some reason, I started pulling out titles that appealed to me, or
sounded vaguely familiar—books by Ralph Ellison and Langston Hughes, Robert
Penn Warren and Dostoyevsky, D. H. Lawrence and Ralph Waldo Emerson.
Gramps, who was eyeing a set of used golf clubs, gave me a confused look when
I walked up with my box of books.
“Planning to open a library?”
My grandmother shushed him, finding my sudden interest in literature
admirable. Ever practical, she did suggest I might want to focus on my class
assignments before digging into Crime and Punishment.

I ended up reading all those books, sometimes late, after I got home from
basketball practice and a six-pack with my friends, sometimes after bodysurfing
on a Saturday afternoon, sitting alone in Gramps’s rickety old Ford Granada with
a towel around my waist to avoid getting the upholstery wet. When I finished
with the first set of books, I went to other rummage sales, looking for more.
Much of what I read I only dimly understood; I took to circling unfamiliar words
to look up in the dictionary, although I was less scrupulous about decoding
pronunciations—deep into my twenties I would know the meaning of words I
couldn’t pronounce. There was no system to this, no rhyme or pattern. I was like
a young tinkerer in my parents’ garage, gathering up old cathode-ray tubes and
bolts and loose wires, not sure what I’d do with any of it, but convinced it would
prove handy once I figured out the nature of my calling.
—
books probably explains why I not only survived high school but
arrived at Occidental College in 1979 with a thin but passable knowledge of
political issues and a series of half-baked opinions that I’d toss out during latenight bull sessions in the dorm.
Looking back, it’s embarrassing to recognize the degree to which my
intellectual curiosity those first two years of college paralleled the interests of
various women I was attempting to get to know: Marx and Marcuse so I had
something to say to the long-legged socialist who lived in my dorm; Fanon and
Gwendolyn Brooks for the smooth-skinned sociology major who never gave me
a second look; Foucault and Woolf for the ethereal bisexual who wore mostly
black. As a strategy for picking up girls, my pseudo-intellectualism proved mostly
worthless; I found myself in a series of affectionate but chaste friendships.
Still, these halting efforts served a purpose: Something approaching a
worldview took shape in my mind. I was helped along by a handful of professors
who tolerated my iffy study habits and my youthful pretensions. I was helped
even more by a handful of mostly older students—Black kids from the inner city,
white kids who had scratched their way into college from small towns, firstgeneration Latino kids, international students from Pakistan or India or countries
in Africa that teetered on the edge of chaos. They knew what mattered to them;
when they spoke in class, their views were rooted in actual communities, actual
struggles. Here’s what these budget cuts mean in my neighborhood. Let me tell you about
my school before you complain about affirmative action. The First Amendment is great, but
MY INTEREST IN

why does the U.S. government say nothing about the political prisoners in my country?
The two years I spent at Occidental represented the start of my political
awakening. But that didn’t mean I believed in politics. With few exceptions,
everything I observed about politicians seemed dubious: the blow-dried hair, the
wolfish grins, the bromides and self-peddling on TV while behind closed doors
they curried the favor of corporations and other monied interests. They were
actors in a rigged game, I decided, and I wanted no part of it.
What did capture my attention was something broader and less conventional
—not political campaigns but social movements, where ordinary people joined
together to make change. I became a student of the suffragists and early labor
organizers; of Gandhi and Lech Wałesa and the African National Congress. Most
of all I was inspired by the young leaders of the civil rights movement—not just
Dr. King but John Lewis and Bob Moses, Fannie Lou Hamer and Diane Nash. In
their heroic efforts—going door-to-door to register voters, sitting down at lunch
counters, and marching to freedom songs—I saw the possibility of practicing the
values my mother had taught me; how you could build power not by putting
others down but by lifting them up. This was true democracy at work—
democracy not as a gift from on high, or a division of spoils between interest
groups, but rather democracy that was earned, the work of everybody. The result
was not just a change in material conditions but a sense of dignity for people and
communities, a bond between those who had once seemed far apart.
This, I decided, was an ideal worth pursuing. I just needed focus. After my
sophomore year I transferred to Columbia University, figuring it would be a new
start. For three years in New York, holed up in a series of dilapidated apartments,
largely shorn of old friends and bad habits, I lived like a monk—reading, writing,
filling up journals, rarely bothering with college parties or even eating hot meals.
I got lost in my head, preoccupied with questions that seemed to layer themselves
one over the next. What made some movements succeed where others failed?
Was it a sign of success when portions of a cause were absorbed by conventional
politics, or was it a sign that the cause had been hijacked? When was compromise
acceptable and when was it selling out, and how did one know the difference?
Oh, how earnest I was then—how fierce and humorless! When I look back
on my journal entries from this time, I feel a great affection for the young man
that I was, aching to make a mark on the world, wanting to be a part of
something grand and idealistic, which evidence seemed to indicate did not exist.
This was America in the early 1980s, after all. The social movements of the

previous decade had lost their vibrancy. A new conservatism was taking hold.
Ronald Reagan was president; the economy was in recession; the Cold War was
in full swing.
If I were to travel back in time, I might urge the young man I was to set the
books aside for a minute, open the windows, and let in some fresh air (my
smoking habit was then in full bloom). I’d tell him to relax, go meet some
people, and enjoy the pleasures that life reserves for those in their twenties. The
few friends I had in New York tried to offer similar advice.
“You need to lighten up, Barack.”
“You need to get laid.”
“You’re so idealistic. It’s great, but I don’t know if what you’re saying is
really possible.”
I resisted these voices. I resisted precisely because I feared they were right.
Whatever I was incubating during those hours spent alone, whatever vision for a
better world I’d let flourish in the hothouse of my youthful mind, it could hardly
withstand even a simple conversational road test. In the gray light of a Manhattan
winter and against the overarching cynicism of the times, my ideas, spoken aloud
in class or over coffee with friends, came off as fanciful and far-fetched. And I
knew it. In fact, it’s one of the things that may have saved me from becoming a
full-blown crank before I reached the age of twenty-two; at some basic level I
understood the absurdity of my vision, how wide the gap was between my grand
ambitions and anything I was actually doing in my life. I was like a young Walter
Mitty; a Don Quixote with no Sancho Panza.
This, too, can be found in my journal entries from that time, a pretty accurate
chronicle of all my shortcomings. My preference for navel-gazing over action. A
certain reserve, even shyness, traceable perhaps to my Hawaiian and Indonesian
upbringing, but also the result of a deep self-consciousness. A sensitivity to
rejection or looking stupid. Maybe even a fundamental laziness.
I took it upon myself to purge such softness with a regimen of selfimprovement that I’ve never entirely shed. (Michelle and the girls point out that
to this day I can’t get into a pool or the ocean without feeling compelled to swim
laps. “Why don’t you just wade?” they’ll say with a snicker. “It’s fun. Here…
we’ll show you how.”) I made lists. I started working out, going for runs around
the Central Park Reservoir or along the East River and eating cans of tuna fish
and hard-boiled eggs for fuel. I stripped myself of excess belongings—who needs
more than five shirts?

What great contest was I preparing for? Whatever it was, I knew I wasn’t
ready. That uncertainty, that self-doubt, kept me from settling too quickly on
easy answers. I got into the habit of questioning my own assumptions, and this, I
think, ultimately came in handy, not only because it prevented me from
becoming insufferable, but because it inoculated me against the revolutionary
formulas embraced by a lot of people on the left at the dawn of the Reagan era.
Certainly that was true when it came to questions of race. I experienced my
fair share of racial slights and could see all too well the enduring legacy of slavery
and Jim Crow anytime I walked through Harlem or parts of the Bronx. But, by
dint of biography, I learned not to claim my own victimhood too readily and
resisted the notion held by some of the Black folks I knew that white people
were irredeemably racist.
The conviction that racism wasn’t inevitable may also explain my willingness
to defend the American idea: what the country was, and what it could become.
My mother and grandparents had never been noisy in their patriotism.
Reciting the Pledge of Allegiance in class, waving small flags on the Fourth of
July—these were treated as pleasant rituals, not sacred duties (their attitudes
toward Easter and Christmas were pretty much the same). Even Gramps’s service
in World War II was downplayed; he told me more about eating K rations
—“Terrible!”—than he ever told me about the glory of marching in Patton’s
army.
And yet the pride in being American, the notion that America was the
greatest country on earth—that was always a given. As a young man, I chafed
against books that dismissed the notion of American exceptionalism; got into
long, drawn-out arguments with friends who insisted the American hegemon was
the root of oppression worldwide. I had lived overseas; I knew too much. That
America fell perpetually short of its ideals, I readily conceded. The version of
American history taught in schools, with slavery glossed over and the slaughter of
Native Americans all but omitted—that, I did not defend. The blundering
exercise of military power, the rapaciousness of multinationals—yeah, yeah, I got
all that.
But the idea of America, the promise of America: this I clung to with a
stubbornness that surprised even me. “We hold these truths to be self-evident,
that all men are created equal”—that was my America. The America Tocqueville
wrote about, the countryside of Whitman and Thoreau, with no person my
inferior or my better; the America of pioneers heading west in search of a better

life or immigrants landing on Ellis Island, propelled by a yearning for freedom.
It was the America of Thomas Edison and the Wright brothers, making
dreams take flight, and Jackie Robinson stealing home. It was Chuck Berry and
Bob Dylan, Billie Holiday at the Village Vanguard and Johnny Cash at Folsom
State Prison—all those misfits who took the scraps that others overlooked or
discarded and made beauty no one had seen before.
It was the America of Lincoln at Gettysburg, and Jane Addams toiling in a
Chicago settlement home, and weary GIs at Normandy, and Dr. King on the
National Mall summoning courage in others and in himself.
It was the Constitution and the Bill of Rights, crafted by flawed but brilliant
thinkers who reasoned their way to a system at once sturdy and capable of
change.
An America that could explain me.
“Dream on, Barack” is how those arguments with my college friends would
usually end, as some smug bastard dropped a newspaper in front of me, its
headlines trumpeting the U.S. invasion of Grenada or cuts in the school lunch
program or some other disheartening news. “Sorry, but that’s your America.”
—
state when I graduated in 1983: big ideas and nowhere to go.
There were no movements to join, no selfless leader to follow. The closest I
could find to what I had in mind was something called “community
organizing”—grassroots work that brought ordinary people together around
issues of local concern. After bouncing around in a couple of ill-fitting jobs in
New York, I heard about a position in Chicago, working with a group of
churches that were trying to stabilize communities racked by steel plant closures.
Nothing grand, but a place to start.
I’ve recorded elsewhere my organizing years in Chicago. Victories were small
and transitory in the mostly Black working-class neighborhoods where I spent my
time; my organization was a bit player in its attempts to address the changes that
were sweeping not just Chicago but cities across the country—the decline of
manufacturing, white flight, the rise of a discrete and disconnected underclass
even as a new knowledge class began to fuel gentrification in the urban core.
But if my own impact on Chicago was small, the city changed the arc of my
life.
SUCH WAS MY

For starters, it got me out of my own head. I had to listen to, and not just
theorize about, what mattered to people. I had to ask strangers to join me and
one another on real-life projects—fixing up a park, or removing asbestos from a
housing project, or starting an after-school program. I experienced failure and
learned to buck up so I could rally those who’d put their trust in me. I suffered
rejections and insults often enough to stop fearing them.
In other words, I grew up—and got my sense of humor back.
I came to love the men and women I worked with: the single mom living on
a ravaged block who somehow got all four children through college; the Irish
priest who threw open the church doors every evening so that kids had an option
other than gangs; the laid-off steelworker who went back to school to become a
social worker. Their stories of hardship and their modest victories confirmed for
me again and again the basic decency of people. Through them, I saw the
transformation that took place when citizens held their leaders and institutions to
account, even on something as small as putting in a stop sign on a busy corner or
getting more police patrols. I noticed how people stood up a little straighter, saw
themselves differently, when they learned that their voices mattered.
Through them, I resolved the lingering questions of my racial identity. For it
turned out there was no single way to be Black; just trying to be a good man was
enough.
Through them, I discovered a community of faith—that it was okay to doubt,
to question, and still reach for something beyond the here and now.
And because I heard in church basements and on bungalow porches the very
same values—honesty, and hard work, and empathy—that had been drilled into
me by my mother and grandparents, I came to trust the common thread that
existed between people.
I can’t help but wonder sometimes what would have happened if I had stayed
with organizing, or at least some version of it. Like many local heroes I’ve met
over the years, I might have managed to build up an institution that could
reshape a neighborhood or a portion of the city. Anchored deep in a community,
I might have steered money and imagination to change not the world but just
that one place or that one set of kids, doing work that touched the lives of
neighbors and friends in some measurable and useful way.
But I didn’t stay. I left for Harvard Law School. And here’s where the story
gets murkier in my mind, with my motives open to interpretation.

—
I TOLD MYSELF THEN —and

like to tell myself still—that I left organizing because
I saw the work I was doing as too slow, too limited, not able to match the needs
of the people I hoped to serve. A local job-training center couldn’t make up for
thousands of steel jobs lost by a plant closing. An after-school program couldn’t
compensate for chronically underfunded schools, or kids raised by their
grandparents because both parents were doing time. On every issue, it seemed,
we kept bumping up against somebody—a politician, a bureaucrat, some distant
CEO—who had the power to make things better but didn’t. And when we did
get concessions from them, it was most often too little, too late. The power to
shape budgets and guide policy was what we needed, and that power lay
elsewhere.
Moreover, I came to realize that just two years before I arrived, there had
been a movement for change in Chicago, one that was both social and political—
a deep swift current that I had failed to fully appreciate because it hadn’t
conformed to my theories. It was the movement to elect Harold Washington as
the city’s first Black mayor.
It seemed like it sprang out of nowhere, as grassroots a political campaign as
anything modern politics had ever seen. A small band of Black activists and
business leaders, tired of the chronic bias and inequities of America’s most
segregated big city, decided to register a record number of voters, and then
drafted a rotund congressman of prodigious talent but limited ambition to run for
an office that appeared well out of reach.
Nobody thought it had a chance; even Harold was skeptical. The campaign
operated hand to mouth, staffed largely by inexperienced volunteers. But then it
happened—some form of spontaneous combustion. People who had never
thought about politics, people who had never even voted, got swept up in the
cause. Seniors and schoolchildren started sporting the campaign’s blue buttons. A
collective unwillingness to keep putting up with a steady accumulation of
unfairness and slights—all the bogus traffic stops and secondhand textbooks; all
the times Black folks walked past a Park District field house on the North Side
and noticed how much nicer it was than the one in their neighborhood; all the
times they’d been passed over for promotions or denied bank loans—gathered
like a cyclone and toppled city hall.
By the time I arrived in Chicago, Harold was halfway through his first term.
The city council, once a rubber stamp for Old Man Daley, had divided into racial

camps, a controlling majority of white aldermen blocking every reform that
Harold proposed. He tried to wheedle and cut deals, but they wouldn’t budge. It
was riveting television, tribal and raw, but it limited what Harold could deliver
for those who’d elected him. It took a federal court redrawing a racially
gerrymandered aldermanic map for Harold to finally get the majority and break
the deadlock. And before he could realize many of the changes he’d promised, he
was dead of a heart attack. A scion of the old order, Rich Daley, ultimately
regained his father’s throne.
Far from the center of the action, I watched this drama unfold and tried to
absorb its lessons. I saw how the tremendous energy of the movement couldn’t
be sustained without structure, organization, and skills in governance. I saw how
a political campaign based on racial redress, no matter how reasonable, generated
fear and backlash and ultimately placed limits on progress. And in the rapid
collapse of Harold’s coalition after his death, I saw the danger of relying on a
single charismatic leader to bring about change.
And yet what a force he was for those five years. Despite the roadblocks,
Chicago changed on his watch. City services, from tree trimming to snow
removal to road repair, came to be spread more evenly across wards. New schools
were built in poor neighborhoods. City jobs were no longer subject solely to
patronage, and the business community at long last started paying attention to the
lack of diversity in their ranks.
Above all, Harold gave people hope. The way Black Chicagoans talked about
him in those years was reminiscent of how a certain generation of white
progressives talked about Bobby Kennedy—it wasn’t so much what he did as
how he made you feel. Like anything was possible. Like the world was yours to
remake.
For me, this planted a seed. It made me think for the first time that I wanted
to someday run for public office. (I wasn’t the only one thus inspired—it was
shortly after Harold’s election that Jesse Jackson would announce he was running
for president.) Wasn’t this where the energy of the civil rights movement had
migrated—into electoral politics? John Lewis, Andrew Young, Julian Bond—
hadn’t they run for office, deciding this was the arena where they could make the
most difference? I knew there were pitfalls—the compromises, the constant
money chase, the losing track of ideals, and the relentless pursuit of winning.
But maybe there was another way. Maybe you could generate the same
energy, the same sense of purpose, not just within the Black community but

across racial lines. Maybe with enough preparation, policy know-how, and
management skills, you could avoid some of Harold’s mistakes. Maybe the
principles of organizing could be marshaled not just to run a campaign but to
govern—to encourage participation and active citizenship among those who’d
been left out, and to teach them not just to trust their elected leaders, but to trust
one another, and themselves.
That’s what I told myself. But it wasn’t the whole story. I was also struggling
with narrower questions of my own ambitions. As much as I’d learned from
organizing, I didn’t have much to show for it in terms of concrete
accomplishments. Even my mother, the woman who’d always marched to a
different drummer, worried about me.
“I don’t know, Bar,” she told me one Christmas. “You can spend a lifetime
working outside institutions. But you might get more done trying to change
those institutions from the inside.
“Plus, take it from me,” she said with a rueful laugh. “Being broke is
overrated.”
And so it was that in the fall of 1988, I took my ambitions to a place where
ambition hardly stood out. Valedictorians, student body presidents, Latin scholars,
debate champions—the people I found at Harvard Law School were generally
impressive young men and women who, unlike me, had grown up with the
justifiable conviction that they were destined to lead lives of consequence. That I
ended up doing well there I attribute mostly to the fact that I was a few years
older than my classmates. Whereas many felt burdened by the workload, for me
days spent in the library—or, better yet, on the couch of my off-campus
apartment, a ball game on with the sound muted—felt like an absolute luxury
after three years of organizing community meetings and knocking on doors in the
cold.
There was also this: The study of law, it turned out, wasn’t so different from
what I’d done during my years of solitary musing on civic questions. What
principles should govern the relationship between the individual and society, and
how far did our obligations to others extend? How much should the government
regulate the market? How does social change happen, and how can rules ensure
that everybody has a voice?
I couldn’t get enough of this stuff. I loved the back-and-forth, especially with
the more conservative students, who despite our disagreements seemed to
appreciate the fact that I took their arguments seriously. In classroom discussions,

my hand kept shooting up, earning me some well-deserved eye rolls. I couldn’t
help it; it was as if, after years of locking myself away with a strange obsession—
like juggling, say, or sword swallowing—I now found myself in circus school.
Enthusiasm makes up for a host of deficiencies, I tell my daughters—and at
least that was true for me at Harvard. In my second year, I was elected the first
Black head of the Law Review, which generated a bit of national press. I signed a
contract to write a book. Job offers arrived from around the country, and it was
assumed that my path was now charted, just as it had been for my predecessors at
the Law Review: I’d clerk for a Supreme Court justice, work for a top law firm or
the Office of the United States Attorney, and when the time was right, I could, if
I wanted to, try my hand at politics.
It was heady stuff. The only person who questioned this smooth path of
ascent seemed to be me. It had come too quickly. The big salaries being dangled,
the attention—it felt like a trap.
Luckily I had time to consider my next move. And anyway, the most
important decision ahead would end up having nothing to do with law.

