UR ENTIRE NATIONAL SECURITY TEAM

spent the next four days absorbed by the
drama unfolding on the open seas off Somalia. The quick-thinking crew of the
cargo-carrying Maersk Alabama had managed to disable the ship’s engine before
the pirates boarded, and most of its members had hidden in a secure room. Their
American captain, a courageous and levelheaded Vermonter named Richard
Phillips, meanwhile, had stayed on the bridge. With the 508-foot ship inoperable
and their small skiff no longer seaworthy, the Somalis decided to flee on a
covered lifeboat, taking Phillips as a hostage and demanding a $2 million ransom.
Even as one of the hostage-takers surrendered, negotiations to release the
American captain went nowhere. The drama only heightened when Phillips
attempted escape by jumping overboard, only to be recaptured.
With the situation growing more tense by the hour, I issued a standing order
to fire on the Somali pirates if at any point Phillips appeared to be in imminent
danger. Finally, on the fifth day, we got the word: In the middle of the night, as
two of the Somalis came out into the open and the other could be seen through a
small window holding a gun to the American captain, Navy SEAL snipers took
three shots. The pirates were killed. Phillips was safe.
The news elicited high fives all around the White House. The Washington Post
headline declared it AN EARLY MILITARY VICTORY FOR OBAMA. But as relieved as I
was to see Captain Phillips reunited with his family, and as proud as I was of our
navy personnel for their handling of the situation, I wasn’t inclined to beat my
chest over the episode. Partly, it was a simple recognition that the line between
success and complete disaster had been a matter of inches—three bullets finding
their targets through the darkness rather than being thrown off just a tad by a
sudden ocean swell. But I also realized that around the world, in places like
Yemen and Afghanistan, Pakistan and Iraq, the lives of millions of young men
like those three dead Somalis (some of them boys, really, since the oldest pirate
was believed to be nineteen) had been warped and stunted by desperation,
UR ENTIRE NATIONAL SECURITY TEAM

ignorance, dreams of religious glory, the violence of their surroundings, or the
schemes of older men. They were dangerous, these young men, often deliberately
and casually cruel. Still, in the aggregate, at least, I wanted somehow to save them
—send them to school, give them a trade, drain them of the hate that had been
filling their heads. And yet the world they were a part of, and the machinery I
commanded, more often had me killing them instead.
—
my job involved ordering people to be killed wasn’t a surprise,
although it was rarely framed that way. Fighting terrorists—“on their ten-yard
line and not ours” as Gates liked to put it—had provided the entire rationale
behind the wars in Afghanistan and Iraq. But as al-Qaeda had scattered and gone
underground, metastasizing into a complex web of affiliates, operatives, sleeper
cells, and sympathizers connected by the internet and burner phones, our national
security agencies had been challenged to construct new forms of more targeted,
nontraditional warfare—including operating an arsenal of lethal drones to take
out al-Qaeda operatives within the territory of Pakistan. The National Security
Agency, or NSA, already the most sophisticated electronic-intelligence-gathering
organization in the world, employed new supercomputers and decryption
technology worth billions of dollars to comb cyberspace in search of terrorist
communications and potential threats. The Pentagon’s Joint Special Operations
Command, anchored by Navy SEAL teams and Army Special Forces, carried out
nighttime raids and hunted down terrorist suspects mostly inside—but sometimes
outside—the war zones of Afghanistan and Iraq. And the CIA developed new
forms of analysis and intelligence gathering.
The White House, too, had reorganized itself to manage the terrorist threat.
Each month, I chaired a meeting in the Situation Room, bringing all the
intelligence agencies together to review recent developments and ensure
coordination. The Bush administration had developed a ranking of terrorist
targets, a kind of “Top 20” list complete with photos, alias information, and vital
statistics reminiscent of those on baseball cards; generally, whenever someone on
the list was killed, a new target was added, leading Rahm to observe that “alQaeda’s HR department must have trouble filling that number 21 slot.” In fact,
my hyperactive chief of staff—who’d spent enough time in Washington to know
that his new, liberal president couldn’t afford to look soft on terrorism—was
obsessed with the list, cornering those responsible for our targeting operations to
THAT PART OF

find out what was taking so long when it came to locating number 10 or 14.
I took no joy in any of this. It didn’t make me feel powerful. I’d entered
politics to help kids get a better education, to help families get healthcare, to help
poor countries grow more food—it was that kind of power that I measured
myself against.
But the work was necessary, and it was my responsibility to make sure our
operations were as effective as possible. Moreover, unlike some on the left, I’d
never engaged in wholesale condemnation of the Bush administration’s approach
to counterterrorism (CT). I’d seen enough of the intelligence to know that alQaeda and its affiliates were continuously plotting horrific crimes against innocent
people. Its members weren’t amenable to negotiations or bound by the normal
rules of engagement; thwarting their plots and rooting them out was a task of
extraordinary complexity. In the immediate aftermath of 9/11, President Bush
had done some things right, including swiftly and consistently trying to tamp
down anti-Islamic sentiment in the United States—no small feat, especially given
our country’s history with McCarthyism and Japanese internment—and
mobilizing international support for the early Afghan campaign. Even
controversial Bush administration programs like the Patriot Act, which I myself
had criticized, seemed to me potential tools for abuse more than wholesale
violations of American civil liberties.
The way the Bush administration had spun the intelligence to gain public
support for invading Iraq (not to mention its use of terrorism as a political cudgel
in the 2004 elections) was more damning. And, of course, I considered the
invasion itself to be as big a strategic blunder as the slide into Vietnam had been
decades earlier. But the actual wars in Afghanistan and Iraq hadn’t involved the
indiscriminate bombing or deliberate targeting of civilians that had been a routine
part of even “good” wars like World War II; and with glaring exceptions like
Abu Ghraib, our troops in theater had displayed a remarkable level of discipline
and professionalism.
As I saw it, then, my job was to fix those aspects of our CT effort that needed
fixing, rather than tearing it out root and branch to start over. One such fix was
closing Gitmo, the military prison at Guantánamo Bay—and thus halting the
continuing stream of prisoners placed in indefinite detention there. Another was
my executive order ending torture; although I’d been assured during my
transition briefings that extraordinary renditions and “enhanced interrogations”
had ceased during President Bush’s second term, the disingenuous, cavalier, and

sometimes absurd ways that a few high-ranking holdovers from the previous
administration described those practices to me (“A doctor was always present to
ensure that the suspect didn’t suffer permanent damage or death”) had convinced
me of the need for bright lines. Beyond that, my highest priority was creating
strong systems of transparency, accountability, and oversight—ones that included
Congress and the judiciary and would provide a credible legal framework for
what I sadly suspected would be a long-term struggle. For that I needed the fresh
eyes and critical mindset of the mostly liberal lawyers who worked under me in
the White House, Pentagon, CIA, and State Department counsels’ offices. But I
also needed someone who had operated at the very center of U.S. CT efforts,
someone who could help me sort through the various policy trade-offs that were
sure to come, and then reach into the bowels of the system to make sure the
needed changes actually happened.
John Brennan was that person. In his early fifties, with thinning gray hair, a
bad hip (a consequence of his dunking exploits as a high school basketball player),
and the face of an Irish boxer, he had taken an interest in Arabic in college,
studied at the American University in Cairo, and joined the CIA in 1980 after
answering an ad in The New York Times. He would spend the next twenty-five
years with the agency, as a daily intelligence briefer, a station chief in the Middle
East, and, eventually, the deputy executive director under President Bush,
charged with putting together the agency’s integrated CT unit after 9/11.
Despite the résumé and the tough-guy appearance, what struck me most
about Brennan was his thoughtfulness and lack of bluster (along with his
incongruously gentle voice). Although unwavering in his commitment to destroy
al-Qaeda and its ilk, he possessed enough appreciation of Islamic culture and the
complexities of the Middle East to know that guns and bombs alone wouldn’t
accomplish that task. When he told me he had personally opposed waterboarding
and other forms of “enhanced interrogation” sanctioned by his boss, I believed
him; and I became convinced that his credibility with the intel community would
be invaluable to me.
Still, Brennan had been at the CIA when waterboarding took place, and that
association made him a nonstarter as my first agency director. Instead, I offered
him the staff position of deputy national security advisor for homeland security
and counterterrorism. “Your job,” I told him, “will be to help me protect this
country in a way that’s consistent with our values, and to make sure everyone else
is doing the same. Can you do that?” He said he could.

For the next four years, John Brennan would fulfill that promise, helping
manage our efforts at reform and serving as my go-between with a sometimes
skeptical and resistant CIA bureaucracy. He also shared my burden of knowing
that any mistake we made could cost people their lives, which was the reason he
could be found stoically working in a windowless West Wing office below the
Oval through weekends and holidays, awake while others were sleeping, poring
over every scrap of intelligence with a grim, dogged intensity that led folks
around the White House to call him “the Sentinel.”
—
pretty quickly that putting the fallout from past CT practices
behind us and instituting new ones where needed was going to be a slow, painful
grind. Closing Gitmo meant we needed to figure out alternative means to house
and legally process both existing detainees and any terrorists captured in the
future. Prompted by a set of Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) requests that
had worked their way through the courts, I had to decide whether documents
related to the CIA’s Bush-era waterboarding and rendition programs should be
declassified (yes to legal memos justifying such practices, since both the memos
and the programs themselves were already widely known; no to photos of the
practices themselves, which the Pentagon and State Department feared might
trigger international outrage and put our troops or diplomats in greater danger).
Our legal teams and national security staff wrestled daily with how to set up
stronger judicial and congressional oversight for our CT efforts and how to meet
our obligations for transparency without tipping off New York Times–reading
terrorists.
Rather than continue with what looked to the world like a bunch of ad hoc
foreign policy decisions, we decided I’d deliver two speeches related to our antiterrorism efforts. The first, intended mainly for domestic consumption, would
insist that America’s long-term national security depended on fidelity to our
Constitution and the rule of law, acknowledging that in the immediate aftermath
of 9/11 we’d sometimes fallen short of those standards and laying out how my
administration would approach counterterrorism going forward. The second,
scheduled to be given in Cairo, would address a global audience—in particular,
the world’s Muslims. I had promised to deliver a speech like this during the
campaign, and although with everything else going on some of my team
suggested canceling it, I told Rahm that backing out wasn’t an option. “We may
IT BECAME CLEAR

not change public attitudes in these countries overnight,” I said, “but if we don’t
squarely address the sources of tension between the West and the Muslim world,
and describe what peaceful coexistence might look like, we’ll be fighting wars in
the region for the next thirty years.”
To help write both speeches I enlisted the immense talents of Ben Rhodes,
my thirty-one-year-old NSC speechwriter and soon-to-be deputy national
security advisor for strategic communications. If Brennan represented someone
who could act as a conduit between me and the national security apparatus I’d
inherited, Ben connected me to my younger, more idealistic self. Raised in
Manhattan by a liberal Jewish mother and a Texas lawyer father, both of whom
had held government jobs under Lyndon Johnson, he had been pursuing a
master’s degree in fiction writing at NYU when 9/11 happened. Fueled by
patriotic anger, Ben had headed to D.C. in search of a way to serve, eventually
finding a job with former Indiana congressman Lee Hamilton and helping to
write the influential 2006 Iraq Study Group report.
Short and prematurely balding, with dark brows that seemed perpetually
furrowed, Ben had been thrown into the deep end of the pool, immediately
asked by our understaffed campaign to crank out position papers, press releases,
and major speeches. There’d been some growing pains: In Berlin, for example, he
and Favs had landed on a beautiful German phrase—“a community of fate”—to
tie together the themes of my one big preelection speech on foreign soil, only to
discover a couple of hours before I was to go onstage that the phrase had been
used in one of Hitler’s first addresses to the Reichstag. (“Probably not the effect
you’re going for,” Reggie Love deadpanned as I burst into laughter and Ben’s
face turned bright red.) Despite his youth, Ben wasn’t shy about weighing in on
policy or contradicting my more senior advisors, with a sharp intelligence and a
stubborn earnestness that was leavened with a self-deprecating humor and healthy
sense of irony. He had a writer’s sensibility, one I shared, and it formed the basis
for a relationship not unlike the one I’d developed with Favs: I could spend an
hour with Ben dictating my arguments on a subject and count on getting a draft a
few days later that not only captured my voice but also channeled something
more essential: my bedrock view of the world, and sometimes even my heart.
Together, we knocked out the counterterrorism speech fairly quickly, though
Ben reported that each time he sent a draft to the Pentagon or CIA for
comments, it would come back with edits, red lines drawn through any word,
proposal, or characterization deemed even remotely controversial or critical of
practices like torture—not-so-subtle acts of resistance from the career folks, many

of whom had come to Washington with the Bush administration. I told Ben to
ignore most of their suggestions. On May 21, I delivered the speech at the
National Archives, standing beside original copies of the Declaration of
Independence, the Constitution, and the Bill of Rights—just in case anybody
inside or outside the government missed the point.
The “Muslim speech,” as we took to calling the second major address, was
trickier. Beyond the negative portrayals of terrorists and oil sheikhs found on
news broadcasts or in the movies, most Americans knew little about Islam.
Meanwhile, surveys showed that Muslims around the world believed the United
States was hostile toward their religion, and that our Middle East policy was based
not on an interest in improving people’s lives but rather on maintaining oil
supplies, killing terrorists, and protecting Israel. Given this divide, I told Ben that
the focus of our speech had to be less about outlining new policies and more
geared toward helping the two sides understand each other. That meant
recognizing the extraordinary contributions of Islamic civilizations in the
advancement of mathematics, science, and art and acknowledging the role
colonialism had played in some of the Middle East’s ongoing struggles. It meant
admitting past U.S. indifference toward corruption and repression in the region,
and our complicity in the overthrow of Iran’s democratically elected government
during the Cold War, as well as acknowledging the searing humiliations endured
by Palestinians living in occupied territory. Hearing such basic history from the
mouth of a U.S. president would catch many people off guard, I figured, and
perhaps open their minds to other hard truths: that the Islamic fundamentalism
that had come to dominate so much of the Muslim world was incompatible with
the openness and tolerance that fueled modern progress; that too often Muslim
leaders ginned up grievances against the West in order to distract from their own
failures; that a Palestinian state would be delivered only through negotiation and
compromise rather than incitements to violence and anti-Semitism; and that no
society could truly succeed while systematically repressing its women.
—
working on the speech when we landed in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia,
where I was scheduled to meet with King Abdullah bin Abdulaziz Al Saud,
Custodian of the Two Holy Mosques (in Mecca and Medina) and the most
powerful leader in the Arab world. I’d never set foot in the kingdom before, and
at the lavish airport welcoming ceremony, the first thing I noticed was the
WE WERE STILL

complete absence of women or children on the tarmac or in the terminals—just
rows of black-mustached men in military uniforms or the traditional thawb and
ghutra. I had expected as much, of course; that’s how things were done in the
Gulf. But as I climbed into the Beast, I was still struck by how oppressive and sad
such a segregated place felt, as if I’d suddenly entered a world where all the colors
had been muted.
The king had arranged for me and my team to stay at his horse ranch outside
Riyadh, and as our motorcade and police escort sped down a wide, spotless
highway under a blanched sun, the massive, unadorned office buildings, mosques,
retail outlets, and luxury car showrooms quickly giving way to scrabbly desert, I
thought about how little the Islam of Saudi Arabia resembled the version of the
faith I’d witnessed as a child while living in Indonesia. In Jakarta in the 1960s and
’70s, Islam had occupied roughly the same place in that nation’s culture as
Christianity did in the average American city or town, relevant but not dominant.
The muezzin’s call to prayer punctuated the days, weddings and funerals followed
the faith’s prescribed rituals, activities slowed down during fasting months, and
pork might be hard to find on a restaurant’s menu. Otherwise, people lived their
lives, with women riding Vespas in short skirts and high heels on their way to
office jobs, boys and girls chasing kites, and long-haired youths dancing to the
Beatles and the Jackson 5 at the local disco. Muslims were largely
indistinguishable from the Christians, Hindus, or college-educated nonbelievers,
like my stepfather, as they crammed onto Jakarta’s overcrowded buses, filled
theater seats at the latest kung-fu movie, smoked outside roadside taverns, or
strolled down the cacophonous streets. The overtly pious were scarce in those
days, if not the object of derision then at least set apart, like Jehovah’s Witnesses
handing out pamphlets in a Chicago neighborhood.
Saudi Arabia had always been different. Abdulaziz Ibn Saud, the nation’s first
monarch and the father of King Abdullah, had begun his reign in 1932 and been
deeply wedded to the teachings of the eighteenth-century cleric Muhammad bin
Abd al-Wahhab. Abd al-Wahhab’s followers claimed to practice an uncorrupted
version of Islam, viewing Shiite and Sufi Islam as heretical and observing religious
tenets that were considered conservative even by the standards of traditional Arab
culture: public segregation of the sexes, avoidance of contact with non-Muslims,
and the rejection of secular art, music, and other pastimes that might distract from
the faith. Following the post–World War I collapse of the Ottoman Empire,
Abdulaziz consolidated control over rival Arab tribes and founded modern Saudi
Arabia in accordance with these Wahhabist principles. His conquest of Mecca—

birthplace of the prophet Muhammad and the destination for all Muslim pilgrims
seeking to fulfill the Five Tenets of Islam—as well as the holy city of Medina
provided him with a platform from which to exert an outsized influence over
Islamic doctrine around the world.
The discovery of Saudi oil fields and the untold wealth that came from it
extended that influence even further. But it also exposed the contradictions of
trying to sustain such ultraconservative practices in the midst of a rapidly
modernizing world. Abdulaziz needed Western technology, know-how, and
distribution channels to fully exploit the kingdom’s newfound treasure and
formed an alliance with the United States to obtain modern weapons and secure
the Saudi oil fields against rival states. Members of the extended royal family
retained Western firms to invest their vast holdings and sent their children to
Cambridge and Harvard to learn modern business practices. Young princes
discovered the attractions of French villas, London nightclubs, and Vegas gaming
rooms.
I’ve wondered sometimes whether there was a point when the Saudi
monarchy might have reassessed its religious commitments, acknowledging that
Wahhabist fundamentalism—like all forms of religious absolutism—was
incompatible with modernity, and used its wealth and authority to steer Islam
onto a gentler, more tolerant course. Probably not. The old ways were too
deeply embedded, and as tensions with fundamentalists grew in the late 1970s,
the royals may have accurately concluded that religious reform would lead
inevitably to uncomfortable political and economic reform as well.
Instead, in order to avoid the kind of revolution that had established an
Islamic republic in nearby Iran, the Saudi monarchy struck a bargain with its most
hard-line clerics. In exchange for legitimizing the House of Saud’s absolute
control over the nation’s economy and government (and for being willing to
look the other way when members of the royal family succumbed to certain
indiscretions), the clerics and religious police were granted authority to regulate
daily social interactions, determine what was taught in schools, and mete out
punishments to those who violated religious decrees—from public floggings to
the removal of hands to actual crucifixions. Perhaps more important, the royal
family steered billions of dollars to these same clerics to build mosques and
madrassas across the Sunni world. As a result, from Pakistan to Egypt to Mali to
Indonesia, fundamentalism grew stronger, tolerance for different Islamic practices
grew weaker, drives to impose Islamic governance grew louder, and calls for a
purging of Western influences from Islamic territory—through violence if

necessary—grew more frequent. The Saudi monarchy could take satisfaction in
having averted an Iranian-style revolution, both within its borders and among its
Gulf partners (although maintaining such order still required a repressive internal
security service and broad media censorship). But it had done so at the price of
accelerating a transnational fundamentalist movement that despised Western
influences, remained suspicious of Saudi dalliances with the United States, and
served as a petri dish for the radicalization of many young Muslims: men like
Osama bin Laden, the son of a prominent Saudi businessman close to the royal
family, and the fifteen Saudi nationals who, along with four others, planned and
carried out the September 11 attacks.
—
to be something of a misnomer. With its massive grounds
and multiple villas fitted with gold-plated plumbing, crystal chandeliers, and plush
furnishings, King Abdullah’s complex looked more like a Four Seasons hotel
plopped in the middle of the desert. The king himself—an octogenarian with a
jet-black mustache and beard (male vanity seemed to be a common trait among
world leaders)—greeted me warmly at the entrance to what appeared to be the
main residence. With him was the Saudi ambassador to the United States, Adel
al-Jubeir, a clean-shaven, U.S.-educated diplomat whose impeccable English,
ingratiating manner, PR savvy, and deep Washington connections had made him
the ideal point person for the kingdom’s attempts at damage control in the wake
of 9/11.
The king was in an expansive mood that day, and with al-Jubeir acting as
translator, he fondly recalled the 1945 meeting between his father and FDR
aboard the USS Quincy, emphasized the great value he placed on the U.S.-Saudi
alliance, and described the satisfaction he had felt at seeing me elected president.
He approved of the idea of my upcoming speech in Cairo, insisting that Islam
was a religion of peace and noting the work he had personally done to strengthen
interfaith dialogues. He assured me, too, that the kingdom would coordinate with
my economic advisors to make sure oil prices didn’t impede the post-crisis
recovery.
But when it came to two of my specific requests—that the kingdom and
other members of the Arab League consider a gesture to Israel that might help
jump-start peace talks with Palestinians and that our teams discuss the possible
transfer of some Gitmo prisoners to Saudi rehabilitation centers—the king was
“RANCH” TURNED OUT

noncommittal, clearly wary of potential controversy.
The conversation lightened during the midday banquet the king hosted for
our delegation. It was a lavish affair, like something out of a fairy tale, the fiftyfoot table laden with whole roasted lambs and heaps of saffron rice and all manner
of traditional and Western delicacies. Of the sixty or so people eating, my
scheduling director, Alyssa Mastromonaco, and senior advisor Valerie Jarrett were
two of the three women present. Alyssa seemed cheery enough as she chatted
with Saudi officials across the table, although she appeared to have some trouble
keeping the headscarf she was wearing from falling into the soup bowl. The king
asked about my family, and I described how Michelle and the girls were adjusting
to life in the White House. He explained that he had twelve wives himself—
news reports put the number closer to thirty—along with forty children and
dozens more grandchildren and great-grandchildren.
“I hope you don’t mind me asking, Your Majesty,” I said, “but how do you
keep up with twelve wives?”
“Very badly,” he said, shaking his head wearily. “One of them is always
jealous of the others. It’s more complicated than Middle East politics.”
Later, Ben and Denis came by the villa where I was staying so we could talk
about final edits to the Cairo speech. Before settling in to work, we noticed a
large travel case on the mantelpiece. I unsnapped the latches and lifted the top.
On one side there was a large desert scene on a marble base featuring miniature
gold figurines, as well as a glass clock powered by changes in temperature. On the
other side, set in a velvet case, was a necklace half the length of a bicycle chain,
encrusted with what appeared to be hundreds of thousands of dollars’ worth of
rubies and diamonds—along with a matching ring and earrings. I looked up at
Ben and Denis.
“A little something for the missus,” Denis said. He explained that others in
the delegation had found cases with expensive watches waiting for them in their
rooms. “Apparently, nobody told the Saudis about our prohibition on gifts.”
Lifting the heavy jewels, I wondered how many times gifts like this had been
discreetly left for other leaders during official visits to the kingdom—leaders
whose countries didn’t have rules against taking gifts, or at least not ones that
were enforced. I thought again about the Somali pirates I had ordered killed,
Muslims all, and the many young men like them across the nearby borders of
Yemen and Iraq, and in Egypt, Jordan, Afghanistan, and Pakistan, whose earnings
in a lifetime would probably never touch the cost of that necklace in my hands.

Radicalize just 1 percent of those young men and you had yourself an army of
half a million, ready to die for eternal glory—or maybe just a taste of something
better.
I set the necklace down and closed the case. “All right,” I said. “Let’s work.”
—
metropolitan area contained more than sixteen million
people. We didn’t see any of them on the following day’s drive from the airport.
The famously chaotic streets were empty for miles, save for police officers posted
everywhere, a testimony to the extraordinary grip Egyptian president Hosni
Mubarak held on his country—and the fact that an American president was a
tempting target for local extremist groups.
If Saudi Arabia’s tradition-bound monarchy represented one path of modern
Arab governance, Egypt’s autocratic regime represented the other. In the early
1950s, a charismatic and urbane army colonel named Gamal Abdel Nasser had
orchestrated a military overthrow of the Egyptian monarchy and instituted a
secular, one-party state. Soon after, he nationalized the Suez Canal, overcoming
attempted military interventions by the British and French, which made him a
global figure in the fight against colonialism and far and away the most popular
leader in the Arab world.
Nasser went on to nationalize other key industries, initiate domestic land
reform, and launch huge public works projects, all with the goal of eliminating
vestiges of both British rule and Egypt’s feudal past. Overseas, he actively
promoted a secular, vaguely socialist pan-Arab nationalism, fought a losing war
against the Israelis, helped form the Palestinian Liberation Organization (PLO)
and the Arab League, and became a charter member of the Non-Aligned
Movement, which ostensibly refused to take sides in the Cold War but drew the
suspicion and ire of Washington, in part because Nasser was accepting economic
and military aid from the Soviets. He also ruthlessly cracked down on dissent and
the formation of competing political parties in Egypt, particularly targeting the
Muslim Brotherhood, a group that sought to establish an Islamic government
through grassroots political mobilization and charitable works, but also included
members who occasionally turned to violence.
So dominant was Nasser’s authoritarian style of governance that even after his
death in 1970, Middle Eastern leaders sought to replicate it. Lacking Nasser’s
THE GREATER CAIRO

sophistication and ability to connect with the masses, though, men like Syria’s
Hafez al-Assad, Iraq’s Saddam Hussein, and Libya’s Muammar Gaddafi would
maintain their power largely through corruption, patronage, brutal repression,
and a constant if ineffective campaign against Israel.
After Nasser’s successor, Anwar Sadat, was assassinated in 1981, Hosni
Mubarak took control using roughly the same formula, with one notable
difference: Sadat’s signing of a peace accord with Israel had made Egypt a U.S.
ally, leading successive American administrations to overlook the regime’s
increasing corruption, shabby human rights record, and occasional anti-Semitism.
Flush with aid not just from the United States but from the Saudis and other oilrich Gulf states, Mubarak never bothered to reform his country’s stagnant
economy, which now left a generation of disaffected young Egyptians unable to
find work.
Our motorcade arrived at Qubba Palace—an elaborate mid-nineteenthcentury structure and one of three presidential palaces in Cairo—and after a
greeting ceremony, Mubarak invited me to his office for an hour-long discussion.
He was eighty-one but still broad-shouldered and sturdy, with a Roman nose,
dark hair combed back from his forehead, and heavy-lidded eyes that gave him
the air of a man both accustomed to and slightly weary of his own command.
After talking with him about the Egyptian economy and soliciting suggestions on
how to reinvigorate the Arab-Israeli peace process, I raised the issue of human
rights, suggesting steps he might take to release political prisoners and ease
restrictions on the press.
Speaking accented but passable English, Mubarak politely deflected my
concerns, insisting that his security services targeted only Islamic extremists and
that the Egyptian public strongly supported his firm approach. I was left with an
impression that would become all too familiar in my dealings with aging
autocrats: Shut away in palaces, their every interaction mediated by the hardfaced, obsequious functionaries that surrounded them, they were unable to
distinguish between their personal interests and those of their nations, their
actions governed by no broader purpose beyond maintaining the tangled web of
patronage and business interests that kept them in power.
What a contrast it was, then, to walk into Cairo University’s Grand Hall and
find a packed house absolutely crackling with energy. We’d pressed the
government to open my address to a wide cross section of Egyptian society, and it
was clear that the mere presence of university students, journalists, scholars,

leaders of women’s organizations, community activists, and even some prominent
clerics and Muslim Brotherhood figures among the three thousand people present
would help make this a singular event, one that would reach a wide global
audience via television. As soon as I stepped onto the stage and delivered the
Islamic salutation “Assalamu alaikum,” the crowd roared its approval. I was careful
to make clear that no one speech was going to solve entrenched problems. But as
the cheers and applause continued through my discussions of democracy, human
rights and women’s rights, religious tolerance and the need for a true and lasting
peace between a secure Israel and an autonomous Palestinian state, I could
imagine the beginnings of a new Middle East. In that moment, it wasn’t hard to
envision an alternate reality in which the young people in that auditorium would
build new businesses and schools, lead responsive, functioning governments, and
begin to reimagine their faith in a way that was at once true to tradition and open
to other sources of wisdom. Perhaps the high-ranking government officials who
sat grim-faced in the third row could imagine it as well.
I left the stage to a prolonged standing ovation and made a point of finding
Ben, who as a rule got too nervous to watch any speech he’d helped to write and
instead holed up in some back room, tapping into his BlackBerry. He was
grinning from ear to ear.
“I guess that worked,” I said.
“That was historic,” he said, without a trace of irony.
—
critics and even some of my supporters would have a field day
contrasting the lofty, hopeful tone of the Cairo speech with the grim realities that
would play out in the Middle East during my two terms in office. For some, it
showed the sin of naïveté, one that undermined key U.S. allies like Mubarak and
thus emboldened the forces of chaos. For others, the problem was not the vision
set forth in the speech but rather what they considered my failure to deliver on
that vision with effective, meaningful action. I was tempted to answer, of course
—to point out that I’d be the first to say that no single speech would solve the
region’s long-standing challenges; that we’d pushed hard on every initiative I
mentioned that day, whether large (a deal between the Israelis and the
Palestinians) or small (the creation of training programs for would-be
entrepreneurs); that the arguments I made in Cairo were ones I’d still make.
IN LATER YEARS,

But in the end, the facts of what happened are the facts, and I’m left with the
same set of questions I first wrestled with as a young organizer. How useful is it
to describe the world as it should be when efforts to achieve that world are bound
to fall short? Was Václav Havel correct in suggesting that by raising expectations,
I was doomed to disappoint them? Was it possible that abstract principles and
high-minded ideals were and always would be nothing more than a pretense, a
palliative, a way to beat back despair, but no match for the more primal urges that
really moved us, so that no matter what we said or did, history was sure to run
along its predetermined course, an endless cycle of fear, hunger and conflict,
dominance and weakness?
Even at the time, doubts came naturally to me, the sugar high of the speech
quickly replaced with thoughts of all the work awaiting me back home and the
many forces arrayed against what I hoped to do. The excursion we took
immediately after the speech deepened my brooding: a fifteen-minute helicopter
ride, high over the sprawling city, until suddenly the jumble of cream-colored,
Cubist-looking structures was gone and there was only desert and sun and the
wondrous, geometric lines of the Pyramids cutting across the horizon. Upon
landing, we were greeted by Cairo’s leading Egyptologist, a happily eccentric
gentleman with a floppy wide-brimmed hat straight out of an Indiana Jones
movie, and for the next several hours my team and I had the place to ourselves.
We scaled the ancient, boulder-like stones of each pyramid’s face. We stood in
the shadow of the Sphinx, staring up at its silent, indifferent gaze. We climbed a
narrow, vertical chute to stand within one of the pharaohs’ dark inner chambers,
the mystery of which was punctuated by Axe’s timeless words during our careful
descent back down the ladder:
“Goddamn it, Rahm, slow down—your ass is in my face!”
At one point, as I stood watching Gibbs and some of the other staffers trying
to mount camels for the obligatory tourist pictures, Reggie and Marvin motioned
for me to join them inside the corridor of one of the Pyramids’ lesser temples.
“Check it out, boss,” Reggie said, pointing at the wall. There, carved in the
smooth, porous stone, was the dark image of a man’s face. Not the profile typical
of hieroglyphics but a straight-on head shot. A long, oval face. Prominent ears
sticking straight out like handles. A cartoon of me, somehow forged in antiquity.
“Must be a relative,” Marvin said.
We all had a laugh then, and the two of them wandered off to join the camel
riders. Our guide couldn’t tell me just who it was that the image depicted, or

even whether it dated back to the time of the Pyramids. But I stood at the wall
for an extra beat, trying to imagine the life behind that etching. Had he been a
member of the royal court? A slave? A foreman? Maybe just a bored vandal,
camped out at night centuries after the wall had been built, inspired by the stars
and his own loneliness to sketch his own likeness. I tried to imagine the worries
and strivings that might have consumed him and the nature of the world he’d
occupied, likely full of its own struggles and palace intrigues, conquests and
catastrophes, events that probably at the time felt no less pressing than those I’d
face as soon as I got back to Washington. All of it was forgotten now, none of it
mattered, the pharaoh, the slave, and the vandal all long turned to dust.
Just as every speech I’d delivered, every law I passed and decision I made,
would soon be forgotten.
Just as I and all those I loved would someday turn to dust.
—
I retraced a more recent history. President Sarkozy
had organized a commemoration of the sixty-fifth anniversary of the Allied
landing at Normandy and had asked me to speak. Rather than head directly to
France, we stopped first in Dresden, Germany, where Allied bombing toward the
end of World War II resulted in a firestorm that engulfed the city, killing an
estimated twenty-five thousand people. My visit was a purposeful gesture of
respect for a now-stalwart ally. Angela Merkel and I toured a famous eighteenthcentury church that had been destroyed by the air raids, only to be rebuilt fifty
years later with a golden cross and orb crafted by a British silversmith whose
father had been one of the bomber pilots. The silversmith’s work served as a
reminder that even those on the right side of war must not turn away from their
enemy’s suffering, or foreclose the possibility of reconciliation.
Merkel and I were later joined by the writer and Nobel laureate Elie Wiesel
for a visit to the former Buchenwald concentration camp. This, too, had practical
political significance: We’d originally considered a trip to Tel Aviv to follow my
speech in Cairo, but in deference to the Israeli government’s wishes that I not
make the Palestinian question the primary focus of my speech—nor feed the
perception that the Arab-Israeli conflict was the root cause of the Middle East’s
turmoil—we had settled instead on a tour of one of the epicenters of the
Holocaust to signal my commitment to the security of Israel and the Jewish
people.
BEFORE RETURNING HOME,

I had a more personal reason as well for wanting to make this pilgrimage. As a
young man in college, I’d had a chance to hear Wiesel speak and had been deeply
moved by how he chronicled his experiences as a Buchenwald survivor. Reading
his books, I’d found an impregnable moral core that both fortified me and
challenged me to be better. It had been one of the great pleasures of my time in
the Senate that Elie and I became friends. When I told him that one of my greatuncles, Toot’s brother Charles Payne, had been a member of the U.S. infantry
division that reached one of Buchenwald’s subcamps in April 1945 and began the
liberation there, Elie had insisted that one day we would go together. Being with
him now fulfilled that promise.
“If these trees could talk,” Elie said softly, waving toward a row of stately
oaks as the two of us and Merkel slowly walked the gravel path toward
Buchenwald’s main entrance. The sky was low and gray, the press at a respectful
distance. We stopped at two memorials to those who died at the camp. One was
a set of stone slabs featuring the names of the victims, including Elie’s father. The
other was a list of the countries they came from, etched on a steel plate that was
kept heated to thirty-seven degrees Celsius: the temperature of the human body,
meant to be a reminder—in a place premised on hate and intolerance—of the
common humanity we share.
For the next hour, we wandered the grounds, passing guard towers and walls
lined with barbed wire, staring into the dark ovens of the crematorium and
circling the foundations of the prisoners’ barracks. There were photographs of the
camp as it had once been, mostly taken by U.S. army units at the moment of
liberation. One showed Elie at sixteen looking out from one of the bunks, the
same handsome face and mournful eyes but jagged with hunger and illness and
the enormity of all he had witnessed. Elie described to me and Merkel the daily
strategies he and other prisoners had used to survive: how the stronger or luckier
ones would sneak food to the weak and the dying; how resistance meetings took
place in latrines so foul that no guards ever entered them; how adults organized
secret classes to teach children math, poetry, history—not just for learning’s sake,
but so those children might maintain a belief that they would one day be free to
pursue a normal life.
In remarks to the press afterward, Merkel spoke clearly and humbly of the
necessity for Germans to remember the past—to wrestle with the agonizing
question of how their homeland could have perpetrated such horrors and
recognize the special responsibility they now shouldered to stand up against
bigotry of all kinds. Then Elie spoke, describing how in 1945—paradoxically—he

had emerged from the camp feeling hopeful about the future. Hopeful, he said,
because he assumed that the world had surely learned once and for all that hatred
was useless and racism stupid and “the will to conquer other people’s minds or
territories or aspirations…is meaningless.” He wasn’t so sure now that such
optimism was justified, he said, not after the killing fields of Cambodia, Rwanda,
Darfur, and Bosnia.
But he beseeched us, beseeched me, to leave Buchenwald with resolve, to try
to bring about peace, to use the memory of what had happened on the ground
where we stood to see past anger and divisions and find strength in solidarity.
I carried his words with me to Normandy, my second-to-last stop on the trip.
On a bright, nearly cloudless day, thousands of people had gathered at the
American Cemetery there, set atop a high coastal bluff that overlooked the
English Channel’s blue, white-capped waters. Coming in by helicopter, I gazed
down at the pebbled beaches below, where sixty-five years earlier more than
150,000 Allied troops, half of them Americans, had pitched through high surf to
land under relentless enemy fire. They had taken the serrated cliffs of Pointe du
Hoc, eventually establishing the beachhead that would prove decisive in winning
the war. The thousands of marble headstones, bone-white rows across the deepgreen grass, spoke to the price that had been paid.
I was greeted by a group of young Army Rangers who earlier in the day had
re-created the parachute jumps that had accompanied D-Day’s amphibious
landings. They were in dress uniform now, handsome and fit, smiling with a
well-earned swagger. I shook hands with each of them, asking where they were
from and where they were currently deployed. A sergeant first class named Cory
Remsburg explained that most of them had just come back from Iraq; he’d be
heading out to Afghanistan in the coming weeks, he said, for his tenth
deployment. He quickly added, “That’s nothing compared to what the men did
here sixty-five years ago, sir. They made our way of life possible.”
A survey of the crowd that day reminded me that very few D-Day or World
War II vets were still alive and able to make the trip. Many who had made it
needed wheelchairs or walkers to get around. Bob Dole, the acerbic Kansan who
had overcome devastating injuries during World War II to become one of the
most accomplished and respected senators in Washington, was there. So was my
Uncle Charlie, Toot’s brother, who’d come with his wife, Melanie, as my guest.
A retired librarian, he was one of the most gentle and unassuming men I knew.
According to Toot, he’d been so shaken by his experiences as a soldier that he

barely spoke for six months after returning home.
Whatever wounds they carried, these men exuded a quiet pride as they
gathered in their veterans’ caps and neat blazers pinned with well-polished service
medals. They swapped stories, accepted handshakes and words of thanks from me
and other strangers, and were surrounded by children and grandchildren who
knew them less for their war heroism than for the lives they had led afterward—
as teachers, engineers, factory workers, or store owners, men who had married
their sweethearts, worked hard to buy a house, fought off depression and
disappointments, coached Little League, volunteered at their churches or
synagogues, and seen their sons and daughters marry and have families of their
own.
Standing on the stage as the ceremony began, I realized that the lives of these
eighty-something-year-old veterans more than answered whatever doubts stirred
in me. Maybe nothing would come of my Cairo speech. Maybe the dysfunction
of the Middle East would play itself out regardless of what I did. Maybe the best
we could hope for was to placate men like Mubarak and kill those who would try
to kill us. Maybe, as the Pyramids had whispered, none of it mattered in the long
run. But on the only scale that any of us can truly comprehend, the span of
centuries, the actions of an American president sixty-five years earlier had set the
world on a better course. The sacrifices these men had made, at roughly the same
age as the young Army Rangers I’d just met, had made all the difference. Just as
the witness of Elie Wiesel, a beneficiary of those sacrifices, made a difference; just
as Angela Merkel’s willingness to absorb the tragic lessons of her own nation’s
past made a difference.
It was my turn to speak. I told the stories of a few of the men we had come
to honor. “Our history has always been the sum total of the choices made and the
actions taken by each individual man and woman,” I concluded. “It has always
been up to us.” Turning back to look at the old men sitting behind me on the
stage, I believed this to be true.