It has always been impossible for me to reconcile myself to any one  member of the body politic remaining out of use. I have always been  loath to hide or connive at the weak points of the community or to  press for its rights without having purged it of its blemishes.  Therefore, ever since my settlement in Natal, I had been endeavouring to clear the community of a charge that had been  leveled against it, not without a certain amount of truth. The  charge had often been made that the Indian was slovenly in his  habits and did not keep his house and surroundings clean. The  principal men of the community had, therefore, already begun to put  their houses in order, but house-to-house inspection was undertaken  only when plague was reported to be imminent in Durban. This was  done after consulting, and gaining the approval of, the city  fathers, who had desired our co-operation. Our co-operation made  work easier for them and at the same time lessened our hardships.  For whenever there is an outbreak of epidemics, the executive, as a  general rule, get impatient, take excessive measures and behave to  such as may have incurred their displeasure with a heavy hand. The  community saved itself from this oppression by voluntarily taking  sanitary measures.  But I had some bitter experiences. I saw that I could not so easily  count on the help of the community in getting it to do its own duty,  as I could in claiming for it rights. At some places I met with  insults, at others with polite indifference. It was too much for  people to bestir themselves to keep their surroundings clean. To  expect them to find money for the work was out of the question.  These experiences taught me, better than ever before, that without  infinite patience it was impossible to get the people to do any  work. It is the reformer who is anxious for the reform, and not  society, from which he should expect nothing better than opposition,  abhorrence and even mortal persecution. Why may not society regard  as retrogression what the reformer holds dear as life itself?  Nevertheless the result of this agitation was that the Indian  community learnt to recognize more or less the necessity for keeping  their houses and environments clean. I gained the esteem of the  authorities. They saw that, though I had made it my business to  ventilate grievances and press for rights, I was no less keen and  insistent upon self-purification.  There was one thing, however, which still remained to be done,  namely, the awakening in the Indian settler of a sense of duty to  the motherland. India was poor, the Indian settler went to South  Africa in search of wealth, and he was bound to contribute part of  his earnings for the benefit of his countrymen in the hour of their  adversity. This the settler did during the terrible famines of 1897  and 1899. They contributed handsomely for famine relief, and more so  in 1899 than in 1897. We had appealed to Englishmen also for funds,  and they had responded well. Even the indentured Indians gave their  share to the contribution, and the system inaugurated at the time of  these famines has been continued ever since, and we know that  Indians in South Africa never fail to send handsome contributions to  India in times of national calamity.  Thus service of the Indians in South Africa ever revealed to me new  implications of Truth at every stage. Truth is like a vast tree,  which yields more and more fruit, the more you nurture it. The  deeper the search in the mine of Truth, the richer the discovery of  the gems buried there, in the shape of openings for an ever greater  variety of service. 