 12 To Jail   On 1 October 1907, the Permit Office – which Indian Opinion had taken to calling the ‘Plague Office’ – opened in Johannesburg, which was the Transvaal’s largest and richest city and had the largest (and richest) concentration of Indians as well. The fate of the Asiatic Law Amendment Act would be determined by what happened here. Gandhi warned picketers against any intimidation or violence. ‘A watchman’s duty is to watch, not to assault … Our whole struggle is based on our submitting ourselves to hardships, not inflicting them on anyone else, be he an Indian or European.’ A meeting of Indians was held every Sunday in the premises of the Hamidia Islamic Society, in the Johannesburg district of Pageview. When Gandhi was in town, he was always the main speaker. Prominent Gujarati merchants such as Essop Mia and Abdul Gani often spoke. The Tamils were represented by Thambi Naidoo, the carrier who was rapidly emerging as a leading activist in the struggle. To show that the movement was not racist, Henry Polak sometimes added his voice to the chorus. The leader of the Chinese Association, Leung Quinn, was an occasional guest speaker. Speeches were also being made elsewhere, and by other people. In the first week of October, Jan Smuts told his constituents that the Indians were ‘detrimental to the everlasting prosperity of South Africa’. Smuts claimed that their frugal ways were a cause of the current economic depression. He charged that certificates of residence were bought and sold not just in Johannesburg, but also in Durban and as far afield as Bombay. ‘I have no quarrel with the Indians,’ said Smuts: ‘the object is not persecution, but a stoppage of the influx of Indians. We have made up our mind to make this a white man’s country, and, however difficult the task before us is in this matter, we have put our foot down, and shall keep it there.’ His remarks were greeted with ‘loud applause’.  Meanwhile, a white-owned newspaper warned Indians not to listen to Gandhi, a ‘mischief-monger’ who, after the current conflict was over, would ‘pick up his briefcase and go elsewhere’. The warning was disregarded. The picketing in Johannesburg was largely successful. The tactics of Gandhi’s own newspaper certainly helped here, for it now published two lists each week, one of new subscribers, the other of Indians who had taken out permits – lists of loyalists and traitors respectively. Among the traitors was a certain S. Haloo, who went to Gandhi’s office to explain why he had applied for a permit. Some militants wrote to the lawyer saying that if he entertained this blackleg again, he too would be boycotted. Gandhi endorsed the threat – he wanted, he said, ‘all Indians to have the same burning enthusiasm always’. Through September and October, a petition against the Act, drafted by Gandhi, was circulated among the towns and villages of the Transvaal, and 4,522 signatures were obtained. The document was then posted to General Smuts, along with a breakdown of signatories by religious and provincial affiliations – namely, Surtis (1,476), Konkanis (141), Memons (140), Gujarati Hindus (1,600), Madrassis (991), Northerners (157) and Parsis (17). Of perhaps 8,000 Indians resident in the Transvaal, only about 350 had applied for permits. Ninety-five per cent of these came from a single community, the Memons, a cautious, conservative caste of traders and merchants. The petition was evidence of Gandhi’s wish to show the depth of his support, and a last attempt to get Smuts to withdraw the Ordinance. He was not, it seems, absolutely certain the ‘burning enthusiasm’ of the Indians would translate itself into courting arrest. For his part, Smuts extended the deadline for Indians to register for a month, from 31 October to 30 November. The two lawyers, placed on opposite sides, each hoped the other would blink first. Gandhi thought the weight of numbers carried by the petition would convince Smuts to repeal the Act. Smuts hoped the passage of time would lead the Indians to reconsider their opposition. A very large proportion of Indians in the Transvaal were now solidly behind Gandhi. There was a surge in subscriptions to Indian Opinion – now up to 3,000, more than twice as many as when the passive resistance movement started.An Indian in Europe was less impressed with Gandhi’s movement; this was his former friend and sparring partner, Shyamaji Krishnavarma. In the summer of  1907, Krishnavarma had fled London – after charges were brought against him for preaching disaffection against the Empire – to the relative safety of Paris. From there he followed, with interest and increasing dismay, the progress of the passive resistance movement in the Transvaal. Krishnavarma’s hatred for the British Empire compelled him to make common cause with the Boers. Like the Indians in India, he argued, they were a beleaguered community, fighting for freedom. Recalling Gandhi’s support for the British during the war of 1899–1902, he asked, ‘What right have the Indians to claim good treatment from the people whom they once injured both morally and politically out of selfish motives?’ Under ‘such provoking circumstances’, he thought the Boers would ‘be justified in expelling from the Transvaal, nay extirpating every Indian who had any claim in depriving them of their national political individuality’. He prefaced his broadside by speaking of Gandhi as ‘an amiable person’, whose ‘gentility and suavity of manner endear him to all with whom he comes in contact’. Despite his ‘personal regard’ for the lawyer, the radical felt obliged to expose ‘him for the mischief he is doing by his public acts and utterances to the cause of political freedom’. It is not clear whether Gandhi read this article, which was published in an émigré journal printed in Paris. The British Indian Association now had a new chairman – Essop Mia, who had replaced Abdul Gani. On 4 November, Mia posted a letter (written, naturally, by Gandhi) to the President of the Indian National Congress. The annual session of the Congress was to meet the next month in the Gujarati port town of Surat. Mia/Gandhi urged that their struggle be ‘in the forefront of the subjects to be dealt with by the Congress’. For, in opposing the Asiatic Ordinance in the Transvaal, they regarded themselves as ‘the representatives, in this country, of our Motherland, and it is impossible for us, as patriotic Indians, to keep silence under an insult that is levied against our race and our national honour.’ This was heartfelt, and also true. But then Mia/Gandhi went on to make a larger claim. We hold that our movement of passive resistance merits the approval of all religious men, of all true patriots, of all men of commonsense and integrity. It is a movement so potent as to compel the respect of our adversaries by virtue of our very non-resistance, of our willingness to suffer; and we are the more firm in our determination to offer this opposition, because we consider that our example,  on a small scale in this Colony, whether successful or unsuccessful, may well be adopted by every oppressed people [and] by every oppressed individual, as being a more reliable and more honourable instrument for securing the redress of wrongs than any which has heretofore been adopted.8 ‘A more reliable and more honourable method of fighting injustice than any which has heretofore been adopted.’ This was a daring, even reckless claim. Not a single Indian had yet courted arrest in the Transvaal. On the other hand, Indians in several provinces (Bombay, Bengal, Madras, Punjab) had been jailed during the Swadeshi movement. Gandhi had attended a solitary Congress (in Calcutta in 1901), giving one of the minor speeches. But here he was, telling Gokhale, Tilak and other nationalist stalwarts that, among a small group of expatriates in South Africa, he had forged a patriotic spirit that equalled theirs, and invented a political technique that they would do well to emulate.  In the second week of November 1907, the case of the first Indian to be prosecuted under the Asiatic Law came up in court. This pioneering offender was a Hindu priest based in Germiston, a railway town some ten miles from Johannesburg. Named Ram Sundar, he was born and raised in the holy city of Banaras, where he learnt Sanskrit, and in time became a priest (and hence acquired the title ‘Pandit’). He migrated to Natal in about 1898, married a local Indian girl, and they had two children. In 1905 he moved to the Transvaal to take charge of a temple run by a Hindu trust, the Sanatana Dharma Sabha. Ram Sundar stayed in Germiston on a temporary permit, which was extended two months at a time. On 30 September 1907 his request for renewal was refused. Asked to leave the colony, the priest said he would not obey the order, ‘as he had to remain [in Germiston] to perform his religious duties, there being no one to take his place, and he was quite prepared to suffer the consequences of his disobedience’. October was the grace period granted by Smuts to the Indians. At the beginning of the next month, the Government decided to act. The recalcitrant Ram Sundar was its first target. On 8 November he was placed under arrest. One of his first visitors in Germiston jail was Henry Polak. As a token of support for Ram Sundar, Indian stores throughout the Transvaal were closed for a day. Indian hawkers went off the roads, and Indian newspaper boys did not do their rounds.  On the 11th, the priest was produced in court, and Gandhi had him released on bail. As he came out of the building, Ram Sundar was received by a shower of flowers. A congratulatory meeting was then convened in the premises of the Sanatana Dharma Sabha. It was chaired by a Muslim priest, Moulvi Saheb Ahmed Mukhtiar, who said it was the duty of holy men of all faiths ‘to take the lead in such times of difficulty’. The Tamil activist Thambi Naidoo added ‘that the fight would become more exciting only when Punditji went to gaol’. Ram Sundar’s case came up for hearing on 14 November. The first witness for the defence was a Muslim, Imam Abdul Kadir. Prodded by Gandhi, he said that ‘the whole of the [Indian] community – both Hindus and Mahomedans – felt very bitterly about the prosecution of the accused.’ The next witness was a Hindu from Germiston, Lala Bahadur Singh. He said the Pandit ‘had preached against the Asiatic Act purely on religious grounds, because it was against their religious scruples’. The priest observed in his own testimony that their religion prohibited their giving their wives’ names, and he objected to giving impressions of his ten fingers. The courtroom was packed, with a mixed audience of Indians and Europeans (some 300 others were turned away at the door). They heard Gandhi subject Montford Chamney to an intense cross-examination. The Protector of Asiatics said that he had received complaints from white and Coloured people that the Pandit was inciting people against the Government. Addressing the court, Gandhi insisted his client was arrested not because he did not hold a permit but ‘because he had dared to hold strong views about the Asiatic Act and had not hesitated to place them before his countrymen.’ If ‘that was a crime,’ Gandhi went on, ‘then the majority of Indians were guilty equally with the accused’. At this stage, the magistrate, C. C. Gillfillian, interjected to express the ‘hope that Mr Gandhi would not burden the records with too much evidence’. Summing up, the magistrate congratulated Gandhi on his ‘very able’ handling of the case. He himself felt a ‘great deal of sympathy’ with ‘persons who had to suffer from acts performed from a purely religious point of view’. However, he had to administer the law as it stood. It was not for him to judge whether it was right or wrong. As an act of leniency (or compassion), he would inflict the ‘minimum punishment’ possible, which in this case was one month’s imprisonment without hard labour. This magnanimous speech from the Bench  added to the lustre around Ram Sundar. As he left the court, the priest shook hands individually with all present. When he came outside, escorted by policemen, ‘he was greeted with loud cheers by the Indians who had assembled.’ Gandhi was greatly encouraged by the cross-class and cross-religious support for Ram Sundar Pandit. A week after the priest was consigned to jail, three delegates left Transvaal to attend the forthcoming Surat session of the Indian National Congress. They were carrying, among other things, a letter from Gandhi to his mentor, Gopal Krishna Gokhale. This stated that the struggle we are undergoing here has resulted in making us feel that we are Indians first and Hindus, Mahomedans, Tamils, Parsees, etc. afterwards. You will notice, too, that all our delegates are Mahomedans. I am personally proud of the fact … May I ask you to interest yourself in them and make them feel perfectly at home? A Hindu–Mahomedan compact may even become a special feature of the Congress.10 Once more, a lowly lawyer in South Africa was lecturing his more exalted compatriots in India. Gandhi had already told Gokhale about the worldwide relevance of a small passive resistance movement then still unfolding; now he was suggesting that the religious harmony forged in the diaspora might serve as a model for the overcoming of sectarian differences at home.  With the protests continuing, General Smuts wrote to the Transvaal Governor, Lord Selborne, complaining that ‘the Indians, headed by the lawyer Gandhi and certain other agitators, seem to think any concession made to be a symptom of weakness.’The Governor now asked two liberal-minded whites, William Hosken and a Justice of the Peace named David Pollock, to try and reconcile the warring parties. Gandhi once more suggested that the Government withdraw the Act and allow Indians to voluntarily take out certificates of domicile, which would contain ‘full identification particulars’. The issue of fingerprints could be left in abeyance, but Gandhi insisted that Montford Chamney be replaced, since he ‘is entirely incompetent for the office he holds, in having no legal ability to sift evidence’. Pollock and Hosken took this proposal back to Smuts, who met it with a ‘blunt refusal’.12 On Sunday 24 November, some 2,000 Indians converged on the Fordsburg Mosque to discuss their future course of action. ‘There were men everywhere, on the verandah of the mosque, its terrace and roof.’ A dozen men spoke, but the  star turn was Gandhi. He claimed that a growing number of whites sympathized with their cause; in any case, their ‘petition no longer lay with an earthly ruler; it was to be addressed to the Creator’. Answering questions about what to do when they were arrested, Gandhi said that if asked to provide fingerprints in prison, they should give them. ‘This was a struggle for freedom from slavery, not against digit-impressions.’ In case Gandhi himself was jailed, then ‘Mr Polak would be able to attend to all work, such as sending telegrams, etc.’ In the last week of November, the Governor, Lord Selborne, had a further meeting with whites seeking to mediate between the State and the Indians. A Congregational minister named Charles Phillips told Lord Selborne that ‘the coloured people and the educated natives are watching this struggle closely, and that for the first time they recognise that they have an instrument in their hands – that is, combination and passive resistance – of which they had not previously thought.’ Selborne himself believed that Africans were incapable of ‘combination and organized action’. He worried however that the ‘manufacture of martyrs’ by the jailing of Indian protesters had undermined the credibility of the Government. Selborne now wrote to Smuts asking whether it was not possible to ‘build a bridge’ to the Indians. Perhaps the General could allow them to register voluntarily. Smuts wrote back saying that while he was prepared to meet Gandhi and company in a ‘friendly spirit’, among his colleagues there was a ‘strong popular feeling’ against any concessions to them.14 Writing to a Cape politician, Smuts admitted that ‘the Indian question is a very difficult one here – under the influence of their leaders they have made a very successful resistance to the fingerprint registration.’ If the protests continued, the Government would be ‘forced to resort to drastic steps such as the deportation of the leaders’.15 With the Government unyielding, the protests continued. On Sunday, 1 December, another large meeting was held in Fordsburg Mosque. All those present, wrote a reporter on the spot, ‘regarded themselves, Hindoos and Mohammedans alike, as attending a religious ceremony’. They ‘were all prepared to go to gaol, and even to close their stores’. Watching these developments from Phoenix was John Cordes. Reading Gandhi in Indian Opinion, and reading about the struggle in the white-owned  press, prompted him to write a letter of admiration and support. The letter is lost, but we can guess its contents from the answer it elicited. ‘You talk of my generalship,’ wrote Gandhi to Cordes: This shows how little you understand me. I do not think that there is any generalship in me at all, but, if my action has been hitherto serviceable to the Indian cause, it simply means to that extent a triumph of truth. My faith in God and truth (two convertible terms) is almost invincible, and if appropriate things come from my pen on appropriate occasions, you may take it that I am not to be credited.17 The resolve of the Indians had, by now, impressed some Europeans less in thrall to Gandhi himself. In late November, an article in praise of the resisters appeared in a newspaper published in the Afrikaner stronghold of Bloemfontein. Compulsory registration, it said, had led to ‘suffering to the Asiatic community of a kind and to an extent which we are certain the governing race never intended. It is a martyrdom that the Asiatics are now undergoing. No other word would be exact, because their suffering is voluntary, and marks their refusal to comply with what they consider a degrading law.’ The paper urged a ‘reasonable compromise’ on both parties, namely, a return to the offer of voluntary registration that the British Indians had originally made. To continue enforcing the Ordinance as it stood would ‘drive the self-respecting class of Indians out of the colony [through deportation] and retain only the moral rabble [i.e. those who register] within it. A law which … expels the best and keeps the worst stands self-condemned.’ Two weeks later, the Transvaal Leader printed a long letter from David Pollock. As of 1 December, noted Pollock, 95 per cent of all Indians in the colony were unregistered, and hence liable to arrest and possible deportation. This was now ‘not merely a question of local economics’, but ‘a matter of grave Imperial concern’. For, said this open-minded white, ‘we cannot send thousands of agitators (and agitators for conscience sake, remember!) to complicate still further the problem with which the Government of India is struggling’ (namely, the growing movement against colonial rule within India itself). Pollock urged the Government to ‘scorn the petty role of persecution’, repeal the Asiatic Act, and issue certificates of domicile to all lawfully resident Asiatics. It was time, he said, to recognize that a mistake had been made, and to set it right.  On 9 December, Gandhi appeared in court in the town of Volksrust, close to the Transvaal–Natal border. He was defending thirty-seven Indians who had deliberately entered the province without valid permits. Of the protesters only four were Muslims, the others being Hindu. This revealed an interesting lopsidedness, which may have had several causes – among them the example of the Hindu priest Ram Sundar and the charisma of the Hindu lawyer Gandhi; and, on the other side, the reluctance of many Muslim merchants actually to test their commitment by courting arrest. On 13 December, Ram Sundar Pandit was discharged from prison. He was ‘enthusiastically received with garlands and bouquets’. As advised by Gandhi, the priest now wrote to General Smuts that although he had been ordered to leave the colony in seven days, he would stay on to serve his flock in Germiston. Two weeks later, arrest warrants were issued against twenty-three resisters in the Transvaal. They included Gandhi, Thambi Naidoo (described as ‘chief picket, Johannesburg’), the Chinese leader Leung Quinn and Ram Sundar Pandit. Five Muslim merchants also came forward to court arrest. However, the most surprising name was that of C. M. Pillay. Sometime during the course of the year and the struggle, this Tamil rival of Gandhi had become reconciled to his leadership. Gandhi heard of the arrest warrant against him on the morning of 27 December. The Police Commissioner told him that he was at liberty for twenty- four hours, but had to appear in court the next day. The same evening, a meeting was hurriedly convened in the Hamidia Hall. Here Gandhi termed the legislation under which he faced imprisonment as ‘the savage Act of a … Government that dares to call itself Christian. If Jesus Christ came to Johannesburg and Pretoria and examined the hearts of General Botha, General Smuts and the others, he thought he would notice something strange, something quite strange to the Christian spirit.’ Back in 1894, on visiting a Trappist monastery in highland Natal, Gandhi had said ‘a religion appears divine or devilish, according as its professors choose to make it appear.’ In later years he had sometimes lectured Natal colonists on how their acts or actions departed from the spirit of Christ. His remarks here were in character: Gandhi asked Hindus and Muslims as much as Christians to recall the  nobler values and practices of their own moral or religious tradition. Had they read these remarks, however, Generals Botha and Smuts would scarcely have appreciated them. Not even the most broad-minded Afrikaner would abide being preached to by a Hindu lawyer with a brown skin.  The case of M. K. Gandhi versus the Transvaal Government came up for hearing in Johannesburg’s B Court on the morning of 28 December 1907. Many friends of the accused were present, mostly Indians but also Henry Polak. When Gandhi asked to make a statement, the judge, H. H. Jordan, refused permission, saying, ‘I don’t want any political speeches made.’ Gandhi said he ‘simply asked the indulgence of the Court for five minutes’. The judge answered, ‘I don’t think this is a case in which the Court should grant any indulgence. You have defied the law.’ He then gave his order, which was that if Gandhi did not leave the colony within seven days, he would be sentenced to a month in prison for not possessing a valid permit. If he stayed on in the colony for more than a week after that sentence expired, he would be sentenced next time to six months in prison. The newspaper report on the case continues: Mr Gandhi, interrupting the Magistrate, asked him to make the order for 48 hours. If they could get it shorter even than that, they would be more satisfied. Mr jordan: If that is the case, I should be the last person in the world to disappoint you. Leave the Colony within 48 hours is my order. Immediately after he was sentenced, Gandhi defended the others accused of violating the law. C. M. Pillay, asked why he did not register, said he believed ‘that any self-respecting man would not comply with the provisions of the Act, as it simply places our liberty in the hands of the Registrar of Asiatics who, in my humble opinion, is not [a] fit and proper person to hold this post’. This irritated the magistrate, who said ‘he would not listen to nonsense of this kind. He thought it was a piece of gross impertinence for a person to come there and abuse an official of the Government in that way.’ Gandhi agreed that the remarks were improper, and then asked Pillay: ‘Do you object to the officer or the Act?’ to get the answer he wanted, namely, ‘Mainly to the Act.’ Thambi Naidoo, for his part, told the judge that he ‘objected to registration as it placed him lower than a Kaffir, and it was against his religion.’ Then it was the turn of two Chinese resisters to speak. One, a Mr Easton, said ‘he was not permitted by his religion – Taoism – to give any impressions’; the other, Leung  Quinn, said ‘he did not take out a permit because it was a law disgraceful to himself and his nation.’ The judge, in sentencing the accused to prison, said they had deliberately defied the Government and had taken up a very serious position – one which he was sorry to see any resident in this country adopt. It had been a mistake, he had no doubt, which had been copied from the [Nonconformist] passive resisters at Home in connection with the Education Bill, and that was an attitude which had never appealed to him in any shape at all. The laws of a country must be complied with by the people resident there, and if they could not do that, there was but one alternative – such people must go somewhere else.22 One of the accused had in fact already decided to go somewhere else. On the 27th, Ram Sundar Pandit was present in Gandhi’s chambers when the Police Commissioner’s notice came. He promised to attend court the next day, but when he reached Germiston that evening, he ‘called one or two of his disciples and told them that he was thinking of running away, since he could not face a second term of imprisonment. His disciples expostulated with him but he was overcome with fear.’ On the morning of the 28th, the Pandit picked up his belongings and took a train to Natal. Gandhi dryly commented that Ram Sundar’s fall was as sudden as his rise. I have written at great length about him in this paper. All this has turned out to be mistaken. The poems about him have been meaningless. A bad coin will always remain a bad coin. This is a struggle such as will expose everyone in his true colours. So far as the community is concerned, Ram Sundar is dead henceforth. We are to forget him.23 Meanwhile, as news of Gandhi’s own conviction spread, messages of support began pouring into the offices of the British Indian Association. They came from (among other places) Durban, Pietermaritzburg, the Cape, Bombay and Madras. ‘Mr Gandhi will not leave [the Transvaal]’, ran one news headline in Natal, continuing, ‘Widespread Sympathy’.24 The day that Gandhi was tried and convicted, the year’s last issue of Indian Opinion was printed in Durban. Copies reached Johannesburg by the evening. Readers would have noticed a call urging them to send in Indian equivalents for the terms ‘passive resistance’ and ‘civil disobedience’, which had been coined by British Nonconformists and an American writer respectively. Gandhi wanted indigenous replacements, since ‘to respect our own language, speak it well and use in it as few foreign words as possible – this is also a part of patriotism.’ The  prize for the best entry was ten copies of a booklet on the Asiatic Act, which the winner could circulate among his friends.  On 28 December Gandhi had been ordered to leave the colony within forty-eight hours. A week passed, but the summons did not come, perhaps because magistrates and policemen alike were occupied with the New Year’s festivities. Telegrams protesting the charges were flying thick and fast between the three continents with which the accused had connections. The British Indian Association in Transvaal wired the South Africa British India Committee in London that the impending arrest of Gandhi and his colleagues placed an ‘undue strain [on] Indian loyalty’. The Government of India in Calcutta wired the Imperial Government in London that a meeting of more than 7,000 Gujaratis in Surat had asked the Viceroy to intervene in having the charges against Gandhi and company dropped, and the Act itself withdrawn. On New Year’s Day, 1908, a Baptist minister named Joseph J. Doke walked into Gandhi’s chambers at the corner of Anderson and Rissik Street. From a family of Cornish tin miners, Doke had followed his father into the ministry. As a young man he travelled extensively through India, concluding from his experiences of Banaras, Calcutta and Bombay, and Hindus, Muslims and Parsis, that the land was a ‘perfect mixture of opposites: I don’t understand it.’ In later years, he served as a minister in Devon and in New Zealand, before moving to a church in Grahamstown, in the Cape, in 1903. In November 1907, he took charge of the Central Baptist Church in Johannesburg. Gandhi’s campaign appealed to Doke because of its obvious resonances with the passive resistance of his fellow Baptists against the Education Act in England, which discriminated against children (and families) who were not of the dominant Anglican faith. That this Hindu lawyer regularly and approvingly quoted Christ was an added point in his favour. Doke, writes his biographer, was distressed by the fact that ‘the leaders of Christian thought and energy on the Rand were either apathetic or antagonistic’ to Indian aspirations. He, on the other hand, could not remain ‘untouched and indifferent to the cry of a people where a question of conscience, even religion, was involved’.26 When he walked into Gandhi’s chambers on New Year’s Day, Doke found a crowd of Indians already there. Later, he sketched the scene from memory: men  in turbans, standing; women in saris, squatting, some with children in their arms. In the ante-room a flaxen-haired woman could be seen taking down a client’s particulars.27 This was Gandhi’s young secretary, Sonja Schlesin, a Lithuanian Jew who had arrived in Johannesburg via Moscow and Cape Town. Hermann Kallenbach had recommended her to Gandhi, who became greatly dependent on her shorthand and typing skills.By his own admission, Gandhi knew ‘very few whose writing is worse than mine’;it fell now to Miss Schlesin to decipher his drafts and render them in legible English. Doke went past the secretary’s room into the lawyer’s office, which, he found, was ‘meagrely furnished and dusty’. As for the man himself, the minister had expected to find ‘a tall and stately figure, and a bold, masterful face, in harmony with the influence he seemed to exert in Johannesburg.’ To his surprise, Gandhi turned out to be ‘small, lithe, spare’, with a dark skin and dark eyes. His hair was black, with a sprinkling of grey. Seeing the white minister enter, the Indians who were already there silently left the room. Doke immediately asked Gandhi a direct question: ‘How far are you prepared to make a martyr of yourself for the good of the cause?’ and received an equally direct answer: ‘It is a matter with me of complete surrender … I am willing to die at any time, or to do anything for the cause.’  Gandhi met the Reverend Joseph Doke on the morning of 1 January 1908; the same afternoon, he participated in a meeting held in the Fordsburg Mosque. He spoke for himself, but also for his secretary, Sonja Schlesin, who had written a speech but was too shy to read it herself. Gandhi, stepping in, conveyed the European lady’s advice that the Indians should ‘continue steadfast in your heroic resolve to give up all, aye life itself, for the noble cause of country and religion’. She, and he, reminded them of the struggle of suffragettes in England, who, ‘for the sake of a principle’, had ‘to brave innumerable trials’, including imprisonment. On 3 January, Gandhi defended two passive resisters in court. They were former soldiers of the Indian Army, both Pathans, who had seen action and suffered wounds in the Anglo-Boer War. These facts their lawyer successfully impressed on the magistrate sentencing them. A few days later, Gandhi told the Star newspaper that Indians were actually worse off now than under the Boer  regime. In another interview, with the Transvaal Leader, he complained that Smuts had referred to Indians as ‘coolies’. So long as the General ‘holds British Indians so cheap and denies them the full status of British subjects’, he insisted, ‘so long must Indians rest content with imprisonment or deportation’. However, he was still open to a compromise, telling a correspondent from Reuters that if the Act was suspended, he would undertake that every Indian in Transvaal would register himself within a month, ‘in accordance with a form to be mutually agreed upon’. Composing that week’s ‘Johannesburg Letter’ for Indian Opinion, Gandhi noted that of the several suggestions for an Indian equivalent to ‘passive resistance’, one was described as ‘not bad’. This was sadagraha, which roughly translated as ‘firmness in a good cause’. The suggestion came from Maganlal Gandhi. His uncle, and leader, took the liberty of refining it further, to satyagraha, or the ‘force of truth in a good cause’. ‘Though the phrase does not exhaust the connotations of the word “passive”’, remarked Gandhi, ‘we shall use satyagraha till a word is available which deserves the prize.’ On 10 January, this particular passive resister – or satyagrahi – was called to appear before a judge for not complying with the sentence to leave the colony. Gandhi reached the court by 10 a.m., with many supporters in tow. The hearing had however been postponed to the afternoon. The Indians then repaired to the Fordsburg Mosque, where, in an impromptu meeting, their leader told them to refute Smuts’ claim that ‘the whole of this agitation depended upon a few Indians.’ If they now demonstrated to the General that ‘the majority of Indians were not going to accept the Act, but would rather suffer imprisonment and degradation, [and] forfeiture of all their goods’, then Smuts would come to appreciate their qualities and himself say, ‘these are the people whom I shall prize as fellow-citizens’. After lunch, the accused and his associates proceeded to court. It had begun to rain, so an admirer held an umbrella for Gandhi to walk under. A rush of Indians entered the courtroom, before the police barred the rest. Inside, Gandhi pleaded guilty to the charge of disobeying the order to leave the Colony within forty- eight hours. He asked for the ‘heaviest penalty’ under the law, which was six months in prison with hard labour and a fine of £500. The judge, the same H. H.  Jordan, declined to meet his request, instead sentencing him to two months without hard labour.34 Gandhi was taken to the Fort Prison, sited on Hospital Hill, a great mound of earth overlooking the cricket and rugby grounds known as ‘The Wanderers’. Built in the 1890s, the prison had separate quarters for whites and natives. As an Indian, Gandhi could not be placed with the former, so he had perforce to be put in with the latter. As a free man, he had lived pretty austerely. Although his forefathers had served kings, his own homes were modest. Even so, his new place of residence must have seemed confining, a narrow, dark, ‘native block’ that contained some seventy-two prisoners. The arrest of Gandhi, and the course of the passive resistance movement in the Transvaal generally, attracted attention in the neighbouring colony of Natal. Militant whites thought Natal should emulate Transvaal by framing laws ‘that will force the Asiatic to leave with disgust’.36 Less short-sighted whites were not so sanguine; a ‘perplexing inter-Colonial situation’ might develop should, as some suspected, General Smuts attempt to push the offenders out of the Transvaal. The ‘deportation of recalcitrants’ would result in an ‘unseemly state of things upon the Natal border’. As the Natal Mercury put it, ‘in this Colony we have our own Asiatic problem, and we do not wish it to be aggravated by the conversion of Natal into a dumping ground for the people of whom the Transvaal wants to rid itself.’ Natal was smaller in size than the Transvaal, yet already had ten times as many Asians. Besides, unlike the Boers, the British had a sentimental and imperial connection to India. The growing movement for national independence there worried them. These fears underlay the somewhat critical coverage given by the Mercury to the speeches of General Smuts. It warned that his tactics of intimidation would only make martyrs of Gandhi and his colleagues, and ‘produce quite unforeseen results, both here and in India.’ The Natal Indians, for their part, threw their numbers and their funds behind the passive resistance movement. Hindu and Muslim merchants competed with one another to offer support for the wives and children of those sent to prison in the Transvaal. The ever-generous Parsi Rustomjee pledged to ‘stake every penny I had in the world to free South African Indians from the degradation of the  Asiatic Act’. Pietermaritzburg alone contributed £3,700 to a fund for the resisters.38 The day after Gandhi was incarcerated, a large meeting was convened by the Natal Indian Congress, held in the market adjoining the mosque off West Street in Durban. Here Parsee Rustomjee said the arrests would further test India’s loyalty to the Empire, already under strain due to food scarcity and the drain of wealth to England. A second speaker, Hassim Jooma, was reported as saying that all Mr Gandhi asked was that no odious class legislation be inflicted indiscriminately upon high and low, educated and illiterate, bonafide pre-war residents and unauthorised entrants into the country. Their blood boiled when they remembered that the Indian ex-soldiers, who, after the war, had made the Transvaal their home, had been given rigorous imprisonment … although they fought for the land on behalf of Britain, suffered all the horrors of war, sustained physical wounds and indescribable misery, and now, after the conquest, they were not allowed a peaceful residence in the very land they fought to acquire. A third speaker, a Dr Nanji, said that there was no need to pity Gandhi, for by his sacrifice ‘he had made a name for himself and was known all over the world. But it was Mrs. Gandhi who was grieving over her loss, and they must sympathise with her (Applause).’ The meeting sent a collective telegram to Phoenix offering ‘their sincere sympathy to Mrs. Gandhi and family during their trouble for the splendid self-sacrifice made by Mr Gandhi in the Indian cause. May India produce many more Gandhis.’ This was one of forty-eight telegrams received by Kasturba in the first day after Gandhi’s arrest, in which (as Indian Opinion reported) ‘the prevailing tone was one of congratulation rather than commiseration.’ That the whites of Natal would be ambivalent about the struggle in the Transvaal, and that the Indians of the colony would be supportive, was to be expected. More surprising was the endorsement of Gandhi’s movement by the African educator John L. Dube. Writing anonymously in his newspaper Ilanga lase Natal, Dube praised ‘the courageous manner in which the Indians are acting in the Transvaal.’ ‘It is common for the Bantu to admire “pluck”,’ said the reformer, ‘especially when the plucky contender has a fair claim for justice.’ He sagaciously added that ‘slaves never yet made a nation or an Empire; meanness and hopelessness of life are the factors that weaken the Empire, no matter how strong it may have been at first.’ In Dube’s view, the conflict in the Transvaal  was ‘the outcome of vanity and inability to guide the differing influences into their respective and proper channels’. The assessment was wise, and the sentiments uncommonly generous. Dube’s own Inanda settlement lay in close proximity to Gandhi’s Phoenix farm. This, and his own big-heartedness, may have led him to forgive or forget the Indians’ characteristic tendency to distinguish their cause from that of the ‘Kaffirs’, whom they thought less civilized than themselves.            