 11 From Conciliation to Confrontation   Gandhi returned to South Africa in the third week of December 1906. Landing at Cape Town, he and his colleague H. O. Ally took the train to Johannesburg. Arriving on the morning of the 22nd, they were met at Park Station by a large crowd of Indians. The next day an even larger gathering welcomed the duo at the hall of the Hamidia Islamic Society. The next week Gandhi and Ally were in Natal, speaking at Verulam and then at Durban, where so many gathered to hear them that the meeting was shifted from the Congress Hall to the covered market at Pine Street. Afterwards, Parsee Rustomjee hosted a dinner in their honour. The next day, Gandhi took Ally and a few others on a tour of Phoenix, where ‘the various departments were inspected with interest and the visitors expressed pleasure at what they saw.’ That, at any rate, was the claim of Indian Opinion; perhaps the epicurean Ally, unused to and disenchanted by the ascetic life, saw things rather differently. Gandhi had come to Natal not merely to garner praise. The Natal Government was planning fresh curbs on merchants who were not white. On board the RMS Briton he had written a note urging that Indian traders be allowed to import clerks and assistants; that when denied a licence they be permitted to appeal to the courts; and that educated or propertied Indians be granted the municipal franchise. Gandhi insisted that ‘Natal cannot be allowed to draw upon India for a supply of indentured labour when she refuses to treat the resident Indian population with justice and decency.’ Sent the note by the Imperial Government, the Natal Ministers refuted Gandhi’s points one by one. There were already more Indians than whites in Natal; now, ‘if permission were accorded to Indian clerks or domestic servants to enter the Colony temporarily, as proposed by Mr Gandhi, insuperable difficulties would be opposed to returning them at the end of their time.’ As for greater leeway in the granting or renewal of dealers’ licences, ‘the Indian Merchant has  already a very strong footing in the Colony’ and his European rivals were ‘determined that Natal shall be a white-man’s colony and that they shall not be ousted by those who are incapable of governing the Colony and whose only object is to make money’. Since the Indians were said to be more loyal to India than to Natal, they could not be trusted with the vote either: ‘The European Colonists intend to reserve the franchise, political and municipal, for those who will exercise it for the best interests of Natal.’ Fourteen years of representative government had made the Natal colonists more truculent, more willing to disregard the Imperial interest and treat their coloured subjects as they pleased. Inspectors of the Natal Government would not renew Indian traders’ licences, citing unsanitary conditions or unconventional book-keeping. These were the professed reasons; often, it was prejudice or fear of competition that lay behind the refusal. In the Cape, traditionally the most liberal of the South African provinces, feelings against Indians likewise hardened. When, in 1907, the councillors of Cape Town considered nine applications by Indian traders, they rejected seven outright, referring the other two for more information. The report of the meeting contained the forceful yet representative views of a councillor named Gibbs: ‘Indians’, said Mr Gibbs with great scorn, ‘I want none of them – none of that nationality! I’m not in favour of these Indians coming here at all, and I would like to see as many of them as possible getting out of this country … I really think a good deal of the depression existing at this time is due to them. Why, they live on the smell of an oil-rag, and sleep on the butter! (laughter) I’ll do everything possible in my power, whatever Council I’m on, to drive them out. Look at the Post Office returns, and you’ll see that all their money gets sent out of the country’.6 Soon afterwards, the Cape Assembly constituted a committee to look into the question. The Indians who gave testimony complained about harassment by immigration officials, and insisted that their premises were clean and their accounts up-to-date. European merchants, on the other hand, complained that the Indians ‘eat curry and rice without any spoons’. A trader named Philips said ‘the Indians come here merely as blood suckers, it is a vulgar term, but true’. Claiming that many Europeans had to ‘close their doors’ because of competition, the committee concluded that ‘it is impossible to view the extinction of the European storekeeper without the gravest fears for the future of the Colony’.  Faced with renewed hostility to his compatriots, Gandhi characteristically did not give up hope. Perhaps if the Indians presented a better face they might be treated more kindly? In two striking articles in Indian Opinion, he asked shopkeepers in Natal to maintain proper accounts, keep their premises clean, and dress well in order to make sure their licences were renewed. And he urged them not to spit, belch or break wind in public. ‘It is sheer stupidity to believe that all these things will not prejudice the Europeans,’ he wrote. ‘While we live in this country, we should so behave that the whites’ prejudices against us are weakened.’ Gandhi also proposed that some Indians from Natal be sent to the United Kingdom to qualify for the Bar. His former assistant Joseph Royeppen was in London, qualifying at Lincoln’s Inn. Royeppen had gone under his own steam; Gandhi’s friend Pranjivan Mehta – now a prosperous jeweller in Burma – offered to fund another student to follow him. Gandhi’s choice fell on Chhaganlal. ‘You seem to be the only person who can be depended upon to carry forward the heritage of my thought and words,’ he told his nephew. ‘Our ultimate capital is not the money we have, but our courage, our faith, our truthfulness and our ability. If therefore you go to England, your intellect remains unspoiled and you return with your physical and mental powers strengthened, our capital will have appreciated to that extent.’ Chhaganlal was the son of Gandhi’s first cousin Khushalchand. He was a nephew once removed, yet far closer to him than this relationship might suggest. Twelve years younger than his mentor, he was devoted to Gandhi’s example and his ideas. He had acquired his trust by the manner in which he supervised the composing, printing and distribution of Indian Opinion. In their father’s absence he had to supervise the education of Gandhi’s children as well. Gandhi’s letters to Chhaganlal thus run seamlessly from matters of politics to the upbringing of his sons. A letter of 7 February 1907 says: ‘I know that Manilal is weak in his arithmetic. Please give him adequate attention’; and further – ‘Though Harilal has agreed to stay [in South Africa], I find some uncertainty in what he writes. Therefore, I wrote to you to treat him in such a manner as to have a steadying influence on his mind.’Soon afterwards, Chhaganlal had a child of his own, whereupon Gandhi instructed him on how best to raise his baby. He suggested that Chhagan invest in an English cradle, and make sure that the mother’s bed  was ‘kept neat and tidy’. The father should do the cleaning himself, even though this particular form of labour was not consistent with his caste. In the rearing of the child, said Gandhi, ‘please do not allow our old customs about untouchability, which are useless and wicked, to come in the way’.11 In the third week of February 1907 the white males of Transvaal voted to elect their first government. The party of the Boers, Het Volk, won a majority. General Louis Botha was sworn in as Prime Minister. Another former General, J. C. Smuts, was appointed Colonial Secretary. Louis Botha was a quintessential Afrikaner – of farming stock, brought up on a large estate in wide open country in a family which read the Bible out loud several times a day. He had been a brave commander during the war, his resistance delaying the British victory by more than a year. Now, however, Botha ‘stood for the magic cause of reconciliation between the [Boer and British] races’. The war had ravaged the economy of the Transvaal. To restore it to health the one-time rivals had to work together. Botha himself recognized that there was, after all, ‘a great deal in common between the Boer and the English country gentleman – in their joy in country sports, their suspicion of change, their habit of command’. More than a love of hunting, what compelled Boer and Briton to now stand together was the need to deny people of colour the elementary rights of citizenship. One of the new Government’s first acts was to have the Asiatic Ordinance of 1906 made into law. A bill embodying its provisions was introduced in the Transvaal Assembly on 20 March. It went through three readings in a single day, before being sent for approval to the Legislative Council. On the 22nd its passage was announced in the government gazette. Lord Selborne wrote to London urging that the King grant his assent as soon as possible. The ‘illicit and unauthorized influx of Asiatics,’ he claimed, was ‘proceeding at an alarming rate’; the bill, which aimed to check this, represented ‘the unanimous demand of all sections of the white community in the Transvaal.’ On 29 March, the British Indian Association convened a meeting to protest the haste with which the bill was passed. More than a dozen people spoke, in at least four languages. Abdul Gani, Chairman of the BIA, said the bill showed that  ‘our legislators [are] the custodians of the whites alone’. Else ‘how could the members become familiar in a night with a bill, which was admittedly very important and complicated?’ Another merchant, Essop Mia, extended the charge of racial prejudice to the Governor, noting that ‘Lord Selborne has been ill- disposed towards us from the outset. He has always regarded us all as coolies and no better than locusts.’ A Hindu priest from Germiston, Ram Sundar Pundit, remarked that ‘the mother gives her child milk, but a step-mother eats him up. The Government is like a step-mother.’ The meeting passed a resolution offering ‘to submit to voluntary registration’ in order to ‘satisfy the Government and popular prejudice’. If this offer was rejected, the Indians requested ‘full Imperial protection by reason of the fact that British Indians have no voice in the choice of the legislators, and represent a very small and weak minority.’ Speaking last, Gandhi said the procedure of voluntary registration would ‘be based on mutual understanding … If gaol-going – which we have been contemplating – comes after this proposal, it will appear more graceful.’ The Chinese of the Transvaal had joined the Indians in their protest. About 1,100 in all, they worked as merchants, gardeners and laundrymen. The new Act would bear down hard on them too. Their leader, Leung Quinn, decided to make common cause with Gandhi. Originally from Canton, Quinn was a partner in a firm of mineral-water manufacturers in Johannesburg. He had ‘no intention of registering under any circumstances’. The Chinese Association wrote to the Transvaal Government that it endorsed the resolutions passed by the Indian meeting of 29 March. Thus, as the Rand Daily Mail observed, ‘the Asiatic communities of the Transvaal are now as unanimously against the act, as perhaps, the white communities are in favour of it.’ The protests were amplified in London, where L. W. Ritch was now based. Ritch sent the Colonial Office a series of letters detailing Indian handicaps in the Transvaal. He asked that Royal Assent to the new Ordinance be withheld.16 A more pointed petition came from Joseph Royeppen, once a clerk in Gandhi’s law office in Durban, now a Cambridge graduate and qualified lawyer himself. After a decade studying in the best colleges in England, Royeppen wished to return to South Africa and practise as a lawyer in the Transvaal. But, as he told Lord Elgin, while he was ‘entitled to follow my calling anywhere in His Majesty’s  Dominions, I shall not be able to do so in a British Colony neighbouring my own home.’ The liberties that he had enjoyed in England would be denied Royeppen in the country of his birth, ruled as it was by ‘obnoxious restrictions emanating from unreasoning prejudice’. It is likely that Gandhi put Royeppen up to this challenge; for his case highlighted the hypocrisies of the rulers like no other. Royeppen was a Christian, a Cambridge man, and a barrister of Lincoln’s Inn. However, he was not white. If a man with his qualifications was debarred from entering the Transvaal, then ‘Indians as a whole will have just reasons for losing much of their faith in the Briton’s sense of justice in the colonies.’ Back in the Transvaal, Gandhi asked for and was granted an appointment with the new Colonial Secretary, Jan Christian Smuts, a man who – in the decades to follow – was also to have a most profound impact on the history of the British Empire. Born a few months after Gandhi – on 24 May 1870 – Smuts was, unlike the Indian, ‘an expert examination hurdler’. Of proud Boer stock (his family had been in South Africa since the 1690s), Smuts got a first-class in his matriculation, a double first in his BA (from Victoria College, Stellenbosch), and then another first in his Law Tripos at Cambridge. A lover of poetry (particularly that of Walt Whitman, on whom he wrote an unpublished book), and a keen student of philosophy and science (especially ecology and botany), Smuts returned to his homeland in 1895 and sought to enter public life. In an early speech at Kimberley, he argued that the Boers and the Britons had to close ranks, or else their position would ‘become untenable in the face of that overwhelming majority of prolific barbarism’. However, the Jameson Raid made him suspicious of British intentions. In 1897 he shifted from Cape Town to the South African Republic, in an expression of solidarity with his fellow Boers. In June 1898 he was appointed State Attorney there. He became a protégé of President Kruger, their relationship akin to, and sometimes described as, that between father and son. When war broke out Smuts went at once to the front. Put in charge of a unit of commandos, he led them in a series of marches, attacks and retreats. He gave his troops a sense of discipline and direction, thereby acquiring the rank of General. When hostilities ceased he played a key role in the Treaty of Vereeniging. His  command of English, his education in England, his love of American poetry and his knowledge of European philosophy all made Smuts – in the eyes of his erstwhile enemies – an exception. An English friend wrote to him that ‘you are the only Afrikander … who has the power of expressing on paper the sentiments, moral and political, of your people.’ Smuts stood out, as ‘for the most part the Afrikander people are still dumb, only able to express themselves in deeds.’ Smuts’ cosmopolitanism, however, did not cross the boundaries of race. The treaty as drafted by Lord Milner had a clause that read: ‘The Franchise will not be given to Natives until after the introduction of self-government.’ Smuts had this changed to: ‘The question of granting the Franchise to Natives will not be decided until after the introduction of self-government.’ The British hoped to delay the granting of citizenship rights to those who were not white; Smuts and company wanted to deny those rights for ever. After the war Smuts built a successful practice at the Bar, and raised a brood of children. Then he re-entered politics, helping his neighbour and former Commander-in-Chief, Louis Botha, to form a party, known as Het Volk, representing the Afrikaner interest. When their party won the first elections by a whites-only franchise, Botha asked Smuts to serve as Colonial Secretary. Like Botha, Smuts realized that Boer and Briton had to mend fences to keep out the (coloured) hordes. In August 1902, he wrote to a prominent British politician in the Cape that the ‘only hope for the future is that the two parts of the [white] population will be sensible enough to work together on a common basis and leave alone the old rivalries and feuds’. At the end of the year, when Joseph Chamberlain came out to South Africa, Smuts wrote to him on behalf of the Transvaal Afrikaners that the new political arrangements must ‘make it plain to the Natives that the war altered the relations between the two white races but not between the white and coloured population of the country’. A memorandum of September 1903, also written by Smuts, opposed the entry of Asians into the Transvaal. The Government, still run by British administrators, was warned of the example of Natal, where ‘the Coolie and the Kaffir are gradually encroaching on ground which formerly belonged to whites, and in many of the towns and villages the Coolies are becoming a permanent, if not predominant factor.’ It would ‘be disastrous to the interests of the white population of South Africa,’  said Smuts, if Transvaal were to follow ‘the desperate and ruinous example of Natal’. Now, with the passing of the Asiatic acts, Smuts came face to face with his fellow lawyer, fellow family man and fellow belletrist Mohandas K. Gandhi. On Thursday 4 April, 1907, Gandhi, along with five others (including Abdul Gani and H. O. Ally) set off from Johannesburg to Pretoria to meet Smuts. They boarded the 8.35 a.m. express train, normally reserved for whites, but here allowed to carry a few Indians courtesy of a one-time exemption granted by the General Manager of the South African Railways. At the meeting, Mr Gandhi narrated all the facts to Mr Smuts. He reminded Mr Smuts that the Indian community had itself registered several times. He … showed in other ways also that the Indians were trustworthy. It was with the help of the Indian community that officials of the Asiatic Office who took bribes had been arrested. Taking all this into consideration, Mr Gandhi said, the Government should, on this occasion, agree to the proposal of voluntary registration. The others spoke in support of Gandhi’s proposal. Smuts listened patiently, and after the Indians had been at it for close to an hour, said he had heard several things for the first time, and would make enquiries and send them a written reply. This, when it came some days later, was deeply disappointing. Smuts said that compulsory registration was required because of the ‘strong evidence’ of ‘unlawful infiltration’ of Asiatics into the Transvaal. He hoped the Indians ‘would co-operate with the Government in every way by registering themselves lawfully, gracefully and expeditiously’. The BIA replied to Smuts, pointing out again ‘that the new law gravely offends against [the community’s] feelings’, and urging once more that ‘the Indian proposal be given a trial before the law is enforced.’ This exchange of letters with Jan Smuts on questions of public policy was immediately followed by another exchange on family matters. In early April, Gandhi’s brother Laxmidas had written to him with a long list of complaints. The letter is unavailable, but from Mohandas’s reply one gets a clear sense of its contents. The brother in South Africa began by outlining the roots of their growing estrangement: ‘I am afraid our outlooks differ widely and I see no possibility, for the present, of their being reconciled. You seek peace and happiness through money. I don’t depend on money for my peace …’  Fifteen years after the palace break-in at Porbandar had destroyed his chances of preferment, Laxmidas remained a bitter and frustrated man. His desire for wealth and fame remained unfulfilled. Now, he chastised his younger brother for not caring enough about the family. Mohandas answered: I fail to understand what you mean by the word “family”. To me, the family includes not only the two brothers but the sister as well. It also includes our cousins. Indeed, if I could say so without arrogance, I would say that my family comprises all living beings: the only difference being that those who are more dependent on me, because of blood relationship or other circumstances, get more help from me. He then came to the question of money. As for your demand for a hundred rupees a month, I must say that I see neither the means at present nor the need of meeting it. I run the Phoenix Press with borrowed money. Moreover, I may have to go to gaol in the struggle against the new Ordinance. In that case I may become poorer still … If, however, the condition here improves during the next few months and I am free from trouble, I shall try to send you the money you have asked for by money order with the sole intention of pleasing you. Gandhi accepted that, as brothers, ‘you and Karsandas have [a right to] a share in my earnings’. He admitted that, by raising the money for him to study in London, Laxmidas had placed him in his debt. However, he pointed out that, while his legal education had cost Rs 13,000, he had since sent his brothers more than Rs 60,000 from South Africa (equivalent to perhaps £320,000 today). ‘I do not consider that I have obliged [you] by doing this,’ he remarked. ‘Even if nothing was done for me, whatever I have to do for my blood-brother I would do as a matter of duty.’ Then he censoriously added, ‘I must say with deep sorrow that, on account of your extravagant and thoughtless way of life, you have squandered a lot of money on pleasures and on pomp and show. You kept a horse and carriage, gave parties, and spent money on selfish friends; and some money was spent in what I consider immoral ways’ (presumably on prostitutes or on a mistress). The Gandhi brothers had once been very close – it was Laxmidas who had stood with Mohandas against their parochial fellow Banias when he wished to go to England, and who then raised the money for his fees and living expenses. But over the years they had drifted apart. Proximity to hedonistic princes in Kathiawar had made Laxmidas less inclined to follow the austere ways of his forebears. His brother, meanwhile, had taken Bania austerity to ever greater extremes in South Africa – simplifying his diet, working with his hands, placing  himself in the service of his fellows. Hence the harsh, even savage, letter, in which a once deferential younger brother chastises his elder for his wastefulness and sinfulness.  The brother put in his place, Gandhi returned to the struggle in the Transvaal. With the local and Imperial governments unyielding, the pledge first made in the Empire Theatre in September 1906 would be honoured. To recall Gandhi’s words in that meeting, the time had come for ‘a heroic step to be taken’. As a lawyer in Natal, Gandhi had sometimes saved clients – rebellious indentured labourers or Indians out at night without a pass – from a prison sentence. He was the son and grandson of diwans, among whose responsibilities had been the management of prisons and prisoners. His forefathers had sent people to jail, whereas as a lawyer he worked to keep them out. The voluntary courting of arrest was foreign to his class and profession, as it was to the class and profession of the people he now hoped to mobilize. Gandhi knew that merchants, whether Gujarati or otherwise, were not the likeliest of volunteers for jail terms. Back in September 1906, carried along by the popular mood in the Empire Theatre, the traders had pledged to court arrest; now, several months later, were they really prepared to abandon their shops, their homes, their families, their businesses? In an article for Indian Opinion, Gandhi clarified the future course of action. Anyone charged or arrested for not taking out a permit would be defended by him free of charge. In court, he would say that the client had acted on his advice, in which case it was likely that ‘Mr Gandhi will be arrested and his client let off.’ Even if protesters were prosecuted and sent to jail, ‘the chances are that they will soon be released and the law amended suitably.’ The wife and children of anyone in jail would be maintained by public subscription. ‘There is no disgrace attached to going to gaol on this occasion,’ said Gandhi. ‘On the contrary, it will positively add to one’s prestige.’ Indian Opinion’s leader for 11 May 1907 was headlined ‘To the Gaol!’ Now that the Asiatic Act had been sent for royal sanction, ‘the goal for British Indians in Transvaal is the Transvaal gaol.’ The previous September, they had pledged to court imprisonment if the ordinance became law, with their resolution ‘flashed  across the cable to the world. In the sight of God as well as man, they now stand pledged to the resolve, and by their deed they shall be judged by ever after.’ This editorial, though unsigned, was probably written by Henry Polak. Through May and June, Gandhi published a series of articles under his own name, aimed at strengthening the resolve of the Indians. He quoted a poem by Narmadashanker on the achievements of Columbus, Napoleon, Martin Luther and Alexander. ‘With such examples before them,’ commented Gandhi, ‘how can the Transvaal Indians lose heart even in the smallest degree?’ Another essay invoked the Prophet Mohammed, who was in a cave with two disciples when a hostile army came by. The disciples were overcome by fear and terror, until the Prophet told them: ‘We are not three. God, Who is a match for all, is also with us.’ In the end the army passed the cave without even looking in. A third essay referred the reader to the ongoing protests in the Punjab against oppressive land policies. The leader of the movement, Lala Lajpat Rai, was an uncompromising opponent of Western colonialism. Gandhi admired the method without endorsing the end. The Transvaal Indians should ‘show the same courage ourselves, but instead of desiring the end of British rule, let us aspire to be as able and spirited as the Colonists are, and demand and secure the rights we want’. A fourth essay rehearsed the struggles and sacrifices of Cromwell, Mazzini and George Washington, which showed ‘that one must pass through suffering before tasting happiness. For [the] public good, men have to suffer hardships even to the point of death.’ The exhortations had their effect. In late May, it was reported that Indians in the Transvaal ‘are quietly and persistently making all arrangements for carrying out the historic gaol resolution’. Indian Opinion began printing the names of those who had pledged to court arrest. They included Hindus and Muslims, Tamils and Gujaratis. On 1 June, Gandhi wrote to the Prime Minister, General Botha, seeking an interview. The request was declined. The General and his Government were in no mood to compromise. They had received a reassuring letter from Lord Elgin, which said that since the bill represented ‘the general will of the Colony, clearly expressed by its first elected representatives’, he would advise the King not to disallow its passing.27 Later that month the Royal Assent was received. The Act would come into force from 1 July, when Permit Offices would open in various  towns, to allow Indians to register. In his ‘Johannesburg Letter’ of 29 June, Gandhi observed that ‘The Government Gazette announces that Mr Chamney has been appointed Registrar under the new law. I hope the Indian community will see that he only sits and yawns. This correspondent’s name will never be arrested in the register. It is my constant prayer to God that the same may be true of every Indian.’ His overtures to the Government spurned, Gandhi was now in a combative mood. In a letter to the white-owned Rand Daily Mail he adopted an unusual, or at any rate untypical, tone of sarcasm. The Secretary of State had apparently stated that thumb and finger impressions were all the same; and that their intent was not to offend or degrade the Indians. ‘Lord Elgin may certainly, sitting in his cushioned chair,’ remarked Gandhi, see no distinction between making a mark with the thumb instead of a pen, but I know that he belongs to that nation which would rise in rebellion from end to end to resent an attack on personal liberty, and that he would be the first person to cry out against even a forcible tracing of his signature. It is the compulsion that stings, not the digit-impression … That in the mind of the Government there is no desire to degrade is true only on the assumption that my countrymen are already sufficiently degraded [not] to feel any further degradation in this land of freedom for people other than Asiatics.29 A week later, Gandhi wrote once more to the Rand Daily Mail, to correct the newspaper’s claim that the passive resistance now being planned by the Indians was a ‘new way’ of protest. Gandhi clarified that picketing is by no means a new thing to the Indian mind. The network of castes in India simply illustrates the use and value of that weapon, provided it is rightly used. Ostracism and excommunication are the most powerful instruments resorted to today in India, in unfortunately trivial matters, and, if the Registration Act now enables my countrymen to realize the use of that terrible weapon for a higher purpose, both Lord Elgin and the Transvaal Government will have deserved their gratitude.30 In writing this, Gandhi had in mind his own boycott at the hands of his fellow Modh Banias when, as a young man, he had chosen to study in London. On his return to India he had to dip into rivers and throw feasts to gain readmittance. His caste mates had boycotted him for a ‘trivial’ matter; whereas he and his fellows were now boycotting the Permit Offices for a decidedly higher purpose.  Pretoria was the first town designated for the registration of Indians. A white newspaper praised the Government’s decision to issue permits district by district.  If the Ordinance had been introduced simultaneously in the whole colony, ‘there might have been a movement to ignore the Act upon something like the large scale hinted at by Mr Gandhi.’ ‘Pretoria is notoriously the weakest spot in the organisation of the Indians,’ said the paper, ‘and we do not think that the resistance movement there will make any headway.’ The Permit Office was to open in Pretoria on 1 July. The previous day, 30 June, several hundred Indians met in the town’s mosque. The meeting lasted for four hours. The mood was defiant. Gandhi spoke, but the star turn was an imam, Maulvi Mukhtiar, who ‘created a sensation’ by producing a letter from the South African Railways to the effect that Christian and Jewish ministers were allowed concessionary travel. The privilege was not extended to holy men of other faiths. ‘This information added fuel to the fire and showed Indians that a death struggle underlay the Act.’ The Permit Office opened the next morning as scheduled, but no certificates were issued. Encouraged by Gandhi, groups of Indians converged outside the office, ‘courteously’ persuading those who wished to go in to return home instead. The town was plastered by posters in Gujarati and English, reading: ‘boycott, boycott permit office! by going to gaol we do not resist, but suffer for our common good and self-respect. loyalty to the king demands loyalty to the king of kings [namely, God].’ In its issue of 20 July, Indian Opinion reported with glee that the Permit Officer, a Mr Cody, had in effect enjoyed a fortnight’s paid holiday. The reports of the protests in the Transvaal reached Natal. In an inspired show of support, the Durban Indians staged a play in eight acts to raise money for the struggle. In Act I, a Parsi gentleman, two Muslim merchants and several hawkers expressed their readiness to defy the law and court arrest. In Act II, the women were seen supporting them; in Act III, the Permit Office in Pretoria was shown, with its officials ‘sitting yawning and smoking cigarettes’. In Act IV, native policemen came and arrested the resisters. In Act V, the Indians trooped into gaol in batches, ‘greeted with loud cheers’ by those already inside. In Act VI the prisoners were released by the Colonial Secretary and given fifteen days to register, to no avail, as the Permit Office was shown deserted once more. Act VII presented, so to speak, a counterfactual alternative – a depiction of events as if the Indians had been so foolish or so weak as to have submitted to  the Act. ‘All the miserable details of finger-impressions and the giving of names were gone through in the presence of the registration staff, an interpreter and the Kaffir police. Cries of “shame!” greeted this realistic performance.’ The final act, an anti-climax perhaps, showed an Indian charged in court with having a false permit, actually a legal document with some trifling defect, for which he was sent to jail. After the performance, Parsee Rustomjee came on stage and thanked the actors. A sum of £50 was raised for the passive resisters.34 The play was staged in the Indian Theatre on Victoria Street on 13 July. A week later Gandhi visited Durban himself. Speaking to the Natal Indian Congress, he observed with some pride that in India, ‘the Government succeeds by setting the two cats – Hindus and Muslims – against each other. Here it is not so. Both the communities are united, hence our courage will bear fruit.’ He asked his friends in Natal to ‘join us in our sufferings … When all Indians in the Transvaal are prepared to suffer any loss in the struggle, you should not lag behind in giving monetary help.’ As the end of July approached, the rumour gained ground that the Government would begin arresting the resisters. To those worried by the prospect, Gandhi offered this spine-stiffening advice: I recommend that, on and from August 1, no Indian whatever should carry any money with him and certainly not gold in any case. Temptation is a very bad thing. Not being used to the idea of gaol, on hearing the sentence of fine, the accused may find his hands unconsciously straying into his pocket or he may cast an imploring glance at his friends. When this happens, he should mentally ask for God’s forgiveness, remove his hand [from his pocket], stand erect and, clearing his throat, declare that he will not pay the fine but go to gaol.36 On the evening of 24 July, Gandhi was in Pretoria for work. He was met at the train station by a group of merchants, who told him that one of their fellows, named Khamisa, had broken ranks and decided to register. He was coercing his customers to do likewise. Gandhi and his companions went at once to Khamisa’s shop, where they ran into a detective. Sharp words were exchanged, the policeman telling the lawyer, ‘you know the law, do what is proper’. They were told to leave the premises at once. That same night, at Khamisa’s shop, some twenty men registered, and thus ‘blackened their hands and faces, and brought a slur on the good name of the Indian community’. Gandhi termed it a ‘ghastly  betrayal’; the culprits knew they were doing a ‘shameful thing’, which is why they had taken out permits secretly, at midnight.37 Meanwhile, a betrayal of another kind had been committed by Gandhi’s colleague H. O. Ally. He had written to Justice Ameer Ali in London, insinuating that the struggle in the Transvaal was motivated by the interests of Hindu hawkers rather than Muslim merchants. The Justice was an important member of the South Africa British Indian Committee. ‘We take it as a disgrace to the Indian community that Mr Ally should have penned such words,’ wrote Gandhi. ‘The Transvaal struggle affects Hindus and Muslims alike.’ To mark a month of continuous protest, some 2,000 Indians met in the grounds of the Pretoria Mosque on 31 July. A special train was chartered to ferry protesters from Johannesburg. Others came from the smaller towns of the colony. A reporter from the Pretoria News found the scene one of ‘intense interest’; ‘in the background, the Mosque with its deep verandahs, its suggestion of solemn worship’, and ‘in the grounds outside, the great concourse of Indians of all castes and religions, very much in earnest’. Their leader, Mohandas Gandhi, was described as a ‘learned Doctor of Laws, scholar and philosopher, to whom the Municipality of Pretoria deny the right to use the footpath, and who may not occupy a seat in the Municipal trams.’ The meeting passed three resolutions. The first chastised the Indians who had applied for certificates of registration. The second congratulated those who had refused to succumb. The third urged the Government to accept, even now, the offer of voluntary registration. Afterwards, the liberal white politician William Hosken spoke. Originally from Cornwall, a Methodist by faith, Hosken had migated to the Transvaal to work as a manager in the mines. He was a friend of Gandhi and sympathethic to the Indians, frequently lobbying for them in the Johannesburg Town Council and the Transvaal Assembly. But now he urged the protesters to recognize that there was, as he termed it, ‘a dead wall of opposition against them’. He considered the new law ‘inevitable’, and saw no difference between voluntary and compulsory registration. Hosken called the decision to defy the law a ‘mistake’, and hoped they would recant. He recognized the spirit behind their opposition – that they did it to retain their dignity as free men, because they believed it to be their duty. But, said Hosken, ‘he considered it even a greater call of duty to submit to the inevitable.’  Hosken’s speech was translated by Gandhi, who then added some comments of his own. He ‘thought and felt most deeply that neither Mr Hosken nor any member of a Western race … was capable of understanding what an Eastern mind understood by the inevitable’. Himself ‘one of the most peacable men in South Africa’, Gandhi had ‘not embark[ed] upon this crusade without mature thought and deliberation’. The Act was ‘most despicable’, and had to be opposed. For the policy of passive resistance now in place, the lawyer ‘personally took full responsibility’. The man from the Pretoria News thought Gandhi’s gloss had the effect of ‘cleverly discounting and weakening the effect which [Hosken’s speech] might have had on the less resolute brethren.’ On 8 August, Gandhi wrote to Smuts’ secretary disputing the Government’s contention that he alone was ‘responsible for the agitation against the Asiatic Law Amendment Act’. If the imputation meant ‘that my countrymen do not resent the Act at all but that I unnecessarily inflame them,’ he remarked, ‘I venture to repudiate it altogether. On the other hand, if it means that I have voiced their sentiments and that I have endeavoured, to the best of my ability, to place before them accurately what the Law means, I beg to accept the entire responsibility.’ After this combative opening, Gandhi softened his tone, saying, ‘I am as anxious to serve the Government as I am to serve my countrymen and I feel that the question is one of very serious and Imperial importance.’ He suggested an amendment to the Act, making registration voluntary, exempting children under sixteen years of age from registering, and deleting the clause asking that the certificate be produced whenever required. This would meet the requirements of the Government while removing the stigma attached to the law in the eyes of the Indians. Smuts, however, rejected the compromise; he and his Government were determined to ‘carry out in full the provisions of the Asiatic Law Amendment Act and if the resistance of the Indians residing in this country leads to results which they do not seriously face at present, they will have only themselves and their leaders to blame.’ The struggle continued. In Pietersburg, where the Permit Office had now moved, Indian sources claimed the boycott was 100 per cent successful. Even the white papers admitted that fewer than 10 out of 200 residents had registered.The high rate of success may have been influenced by the fact that Indian Opinion  had printed the names of the renegades in Pretoria who had ‘applied for the title- deed of slavery’. The terrible weapon of communal ostracism had also brought poor H. O. Ally to his knees. In the second week of August he sent a statement to the press clarifying that he supported passive resistance in the Transvaal. At the same time, he announced that he was shifting back to Cape Town. Indian Opinion commented that the harm done by his earlier letter had been ‘partly undone’; it asked Ally to ‘render patriotic service’ and ‘infuse vigour’ into community organizations in the Cape. The conflict was now escalating. In August 1907, the Star of Johannesburg wrote of Gandhi that ‘he has certainly marshalled his forces well, and the Indians as a rule are prepared to follow him to the extreme.’ The lawyer was ‘now the recognised leader of the Indian community in South Africa’. He had ‘an attractive personality,’ said the Star, ‘and infuses his utterances with that dynamic force that carries conviction. In conversation he has a forcible manner. His eyes brighten with enthusiasm when discussing the subjects uppermost in his mind, and one cannot wonder at the hold he has over the Indians.’ Back in 1895, a reporter in Natal had stressed the stammer in Gandhi’s speech, his slow, hesitant delivery when making submissions in court. The next year Gandhi was too shy to read out a text before an audience in Bombay. Now, a decade later, he had clearly matured as a public speaker. His voice was still soft, but the conviction (and courage) it carried was manifest both to dogged follower and to impartial observer. The lawyer had become a leader, indeed, the recognized leader of the Indian community in South Africa. The Transvaal Government had now introduced a new bill, making it mandatory for immigrants or returning residents to fill in a form in a European language. Yiddish was classified as a European language under the Act, whereas Indian languages of greater antiquity and literary sophistication (such as Tamil) were excluded. The insult was compounded by the company the Indians were being made to keep. For the bill had specified various categories of ‘prohibited immigrants’, which included prostitutes, indigents, lunatics, lepers, spies and convicted criminals.44 The Rand Daily Mail had claimed that the Asiatics were ‘unanimously’ against the Act, and the whites just as unanimously in favour of it. There were,  in fact, some exceptions – Indians who secretly signed on for permits; Europeans who openly crossed racial boundaries and identified with the protesters. Hermann Kallenbach sent a letter to the Star deploring the depiction of men ‘who are unselfishly and strenuously’ working for their compatriots as ‘aggressive agitators’. ‘I shall consider it a privilege to visit my Indian friends in gaol,’ said Kallenbach, ‘and to do my utmost to reduce the hardships of prison life which they are prepared to undergo.’ Similar letters were sent to the press by other white sympathizers, among them a jeweller named Isaac and a draper named Vogl (both also Jewish). But the European who most explicitly identified with the Indians was Henry Polak. Polak published a series of sharp and occasionally savage essays in Indian Opinion. One article made fun of the paranoia in the white press about the leader of the passive resisters: That remarkable man Mr Gandhi will go down to posterity as a miracle-worker. In the first place, he is supposed to be the fons et origo of the opposition to the Law; then he is supposed to have actively incited every Indian in the Transvaal not to obey its provisions; and, lastly, he is supposed to be here, there, and everywhere at the same time urging a policy of non-submission. These remarks were prompted by reports in one paper that Gandhi had addressed a meeting in Pietersburg; in another paper that he had done the same in Potchefstroom. In fact he had been in neither place recently. ‘What feeble creatures Indians are supposed to be!’, commented Polak. ‘They must always have their nurse with them before they can be trusted to trot along alone.’ No one from Johannesburg visited Pietersburg when the Permit Office was opened, nor would anyone go to Potchefstroom or Klerksdorp when the Office shifted there, for ‘the local Indians don’t require any pin-pricks to make them jump.’ Polak was prophetic. The Permit Office moved on, and the Indians moved away. In early September he wrote mockingly of how ‘that ramshackle machine, the Government “perambulator”, is still squeaking from town to town, unoiled for lack of registration.’ Two weeks later he wrote that ‘the “perambulator” is at last to find a resting place for a whole month at a time, after which, no doubt, it will be relegated to the Pretoria Museum, to be kept there until the next Asiatic invasion arrives.’ When the Permit Office did reopen, as planned, in Johannesburg, ‘the tobacconists of this town shall rejoice greatly at the prospects  of all the cigarettes that will be smoked’ as the Registration Officials ‘while away the weary hours waiting for the unregenerate to reform’.47 Some of Polak’s pieces were signed, others unsigned. Yet others used the nom de plume ‘A. Chessell Piquet’.48 An essay under this name presented a series of satirical ‘silhouettes’ of how whites saw the conflict. For the ‘Small White Storekeeper’ the new law was ‘a splendid thing’, keeping the coolies in their place. The ‘European Wholesale Merchant’ thought both the Government and Indians were fools. (Complaining that he hadn’t had an order from an Indian merchant for months, he said he would meet Smuts and ‘ask him to administer the Law mildly’.) The ‘Consumer’ admitted the Indians charged far less than the white shopkeepers who lived in style, with ‘their plate-glass and stained ceilings’. As for the ‘Registration Official’, while pleased that ‘accommodation up country is much better than it was three or four years ago’, he complained that the Indians were ‘absolutely misled by their leaders’. He could not bear anyone to mention ‘G[andhi]’, whose name made him ‘quite nervous’. There was, finally, the ‘Common-Sense Individual’, who thought the passive resistance movement ‘splendid’, and the ‘only way to make an impression on these colour- blind fanatics.’ Henry Polak may have been exceeded in energy and commitment by Gandhi, and by some other Indian passive resisters. But no one enjoyed the struggle as much as he did, the joy – and the passion – expressed in the stream of polemics and satires that poured out from his pen.  In September 1907 the name of Henry David Thoreau appeared in the columns of Indian Opinion for the first time. Gandhi had only recently become acquainted with his tract on civil disobedience. The jail-going resolution of 11 September 1906 had been invented on the spot; in later weeks and months, Gandhi sought precedents in Indian traditions of boycott and protest. Then he began using the term ‘passive resistance’, whose origins lay rather in the boycott by Nonconformists of schools that indoctrinated their pupils in the teachings of the Church of England. Now, a full year after the technique of protest was first proposed, the teachings of an American radical were invoked to support it. In Gandhi’s paraphrase, Thoreau said that ‘we should be men before we are subjects, and that there is no obligation imposed upon us by our conscience to  give blind submission to any law, no matter what force or majority backs it.’ The American’s ‘example and writings,’ thought Gandhi, ‘are at present exactly applicable to the Indians in the Transvaal.’ This was unexceptionable. But Gandhi also wrote that ‘historians say that the chief cause of the abolition of slavery in America was Thoreau’s imprisonment and the publication by him of the above-mentioned book [On the Duty of Civil Disobedience] after his release.’ No historians were named, perhaps because they could not be. That Thoreau’s tract helped end slavery was, of course, outrageous hyperbole. Was Gandhi writing out of ignorance, or did the claim need to be made to boost his people’s morale? The answer, very likely, is the latter. In a letter written many years later, Henry Polak disputed, as I have here, the view that Gandhi derived his ideas from Thoreau’s tract on civil disobedience. Passive resistance had been going on for some time in South Africa before Gandhi became acquainted with the American thinker. However, once he read Thoreau, Gandhi seized upon his ideas as proof of the power of his own approach. In this sense, noted Polak, what Thoreau provided Gandhi with was ‘encouragement, not inspiration’. As passive resistance in the Transvaal gathered momentum, Gandhi was engaged in an intense exchange of letters with a Christian priest who wished to become his disciple. Of German extraction, John Cordes had once been a missionary in Rhodesia. At some stage he acquired and divorced (or abandoned) an African wife. His readings and journeys had turned him away from conventional Christianity and towards Theosophy, the hybrid, occultist religion then gathering a rush of new converts across the world. Cordes contacted Gandhi in early 1907. He felt constrained by the company of his fellow whites, and thought a spell with Indians in general, and this Indian in particular, would free him more fully from the prejudices of his upbringing. He had heard of Gandhi’s work from mutual friends, and had also been reading Indian Opinion. He wanted now to cut himself loose, to ‘throw the race goggles on the dust heap, to better enjoy the mountain air of freedom from social trammels and acquire a sight fitted for wider truths’. In Johannesburg, immersed in the protests against the Asiatic Act, Gandhi could not supervise Cordes directly. So he suggested the priest move to Phoenix,  where he would be part of a living community. The settlement was now in its third year. It had eight homes, built of corrugated iron supported by wooden planks. Each had two small bedrooms, a living-and-dining room, a kitchen and a bathroom. The fittings in the last were ingenious: with water dripping down from the roof into a watering can, held up by a rope, which served as a shower. The more adventurous could bathe in the stream running through the property. Drinking water came from the heavens; rainwater being collected and stored for future use. Each house had a vegetable plot attached to it; some settlers maintained these energetically, while others left them to the elements. There were no domesticated animals; no cows and sheep, nor any dogs (but plenty of snakes and jackals). The nearest shops were in Durban, fourteen miles away. During the day the press hummed with activity, compositors setting type and working it through the machines. After dusk, the only noises one heard were the chirping of birds; the only lights one saw flickered in Zulu homes in the valley.53 In the first week of July 1907, John Cordes took a train from Rhodesia to Natal. He told his new mentor (whom he had not yet met) that he ‘had no breakfast, managing my pursestrings on strictly Gandhian lines’. Within a few days of his arrival at Phoenix he was exulting in the surroundings. ‘What a blessing it is,’ he told Gandhi, ‘to get away from town & its noise & smell, how pleasant to be rid of cuffs & collars, braces and the trappings of towns’ war- paint. The wind is nothing, being the mere equinoctial night & morning breeze, to which I am accustomed from Bulawayo.’ Cordes was equally impressed by the human material at Phoenix. ‘Dev[a]das will make a splendid lawyer,’ he told the (mostly) absent father, ‘fancy him cross questioning his elder brother Ramdas the way he does. Manilal will not bless many visitors like me I reckon, he had to work like a horse, & did so like a Trojan, betw[een] his lessons, & his composting job.’Gandhi, in reply, shifted the conversation from his sons to his wife. ‘How were you received by Mrs. Gandhi?’ he asked Cordes. ‘She tells me she feels too shy to sit at the same table with you … [S]he is terrified ever having to attend to a guest who is a perfect stranger, and, what is more, wearing a white skin … What changes you may have wrought in her mental condition after presenting yourself and your credentials I do not know.’  Gandhi approved of Cordes’s desire to ‘reach the ladies through the kiddies. I have no doubt that you will succeed. It is the best point of attack.’ He was keen to have the visitor’s opinion about a community he had founded but could rarely be part of. ‘I want to know everything about you and your view of the surroundings,’ said Gandhi. ‘Are you in tune with them?’ Manilal and Ramdas reported to Gandhi how Cordes was getting along. They told him the priest was doing odd jobs in and around the house. Gandhi wrote to Cordes approvingly; he had, it seems, ‘won Mrs. Gandhi entirely to your side. She now says you can remain with her for as long as you like.’ To make himself even more at home, Cordes should learn Gujarati, so that ‘you may understand the people around you and for whom you are working’. By October, Cordes was well settled at Phoenix, with a plot of land to call his own, and a modest house under construction. ‘Mrs. Gandhi tells me that your palace is visibly growing,’ wrote Gandhi in encouragement. ‘I only hope that it will be perfectly satisfactory when it is finished, that is to say simple, artistic, hygienic, rain-proof, rat-proof, and a temple of peace.’ These letters between a Christ-loving Hindu and a Hindu-loving Christian escaped the attention of the editors of the Collected Works, for they lay in a private home in the town of Haifa, in Israel, a country with which India had no diplomatic relations for decades. The correspondence provides a fascinating window into Gandhi’s gift for friendship and his penchant for attracting disciples. Six months after John Cordes moved to Phoenix, he received a letter from Henry Polak agreeing that it is very difficult to develop a spirit such as that which moves Mr Gandhi. You are perfectly right in calling it a privilege to be invited to assist him in the task that he has set before himself, and it is in that light that I have always regarded the matter. Whilst I have the ordinary human sympathy for the people down there being kept up all hours of the day and night towards the end of the week [when Indian Opinion went to press], I will admit to you quite frankly and privately that I think that no one at Phoenix should raise his voice against it, even though it means death to him. I consider this is a splendid cause to die for, if it is not possible to live for it. The difficulty is, as always, to develop the faculties of imagination and sympathy. It is rarely that his purpose so possessed a man as to make him forget his own comfort, his own health, his own interests, and the happiness of those who serve him. I am more and more coming round to the Ibsen idea that truth must be sought at any cost, and to realise day by day more vividly that, in the words of Dr. Staubman, the greatest man is he who stands most alone. All this, of course, is for your private consumption.59  These remarks beautifully capture the ideals and eccentricities of the Gujarati lawyer whom these two Europeans now acknowledged as their mentor and master.            