 14 Prisoner of Conscience   The escalation of passive resistance in the second half of 1908 was viewed with some dismay by the white press. A paper in Pretoria thought General Smuts had ‘lowered the prestige of the Colony by his handling of the Asiatic question’. It chastised him for having ‘started another controversy with Mr Gandhi’. A paper in Johannesburg was less even-handed. It argued that Gandhi’s testimony that Smuts had promised the repeal of the 1907 Act was ‘certainly not conclusive’; in any case, the General would have had to ratify the promise in the legislature. The paper concluded that ‘whatever hardships the Asiatics have suffered they owe entirely to the recalcitrancy and folly of their leader.’ Whether sympathetic to Gandhi or hostile, such comments represented a huge leap in the Indian’s standing in the Transvaal. Before the satyagraha of 1907–8, his opposite number on the white side was Montford Chamney. In fact and in fancy, the lawyer was opposed to the bureaucrat, the permit-seeker to the permit- giver. Now, however, he was being equated with the scholar and war hero General Smuts in the popular imagination. They were the leaders of their respective communities, engaged in an argument about the rights and claims of those they represented. This new equivalence is reflected in the cartoons of the time, which, for example, showed the Asiatics led by Gandhi as akin to an elephant, barring the passage of a steamroller driven by the General himself.2 On 14 August 1908, Gandhi wrote to Smuts announcing that the Indians would meet soon to burn their registration certificates. Then, characteristically, he tempered his militancy, asking the General to recognize that ‘the difference between you, as representing the Government, and the British Indians is very small indeed.’ The discrepancy could be removed by the Government accepting the admission of educated Indians and pre-war residents of the Transvaal.3 On the afternoon of Sunday 16 August, some 3,000 Asians congregated outside the Fordsburg Mosque. On a raised plaform sat Gandhi, Essop Mia of the  British Indian Association, Dawad Mahomed and Parsee Rustomjee of the Natal Indian Congress, the Cape Indian leader Adam Mahomed, and Leung Quinn to represent the Chinese. Below the podium was ‘the Press table, and beyond that, a sea of upturned and expectant faces, with determination and a bitter merriment stamped deep upon each of them.’ The main speaker, inevitably, was Gandhi. Once too shy to read from a prepared text, he was now, a decade later, very willing to directly address a large (and mostly captive) audience. Claiming the country to be ‘as much the Indians’ as the Europeans”, he said the recent laws sought to treat them as cattle and not men. ‘I would far rather pass the whole of my lifetime in gaol and be perfectly happy than see my fellow-countrymen subjected to indignity and I should come out of gaol.’ The lesson of their struggle was that unenfranchised though we are, unrepresented though we are in the Transvaal, it is open to us to clothe ourselves with an undying franchise, and this consists in recognizing our humanity, in recognizing that we are part and parcel of the great universal whole, that there is the Maker of us all ruling over the destinies of mankind and that our trust should be in Him rather than in earthly kings, and if my countrymen recognize that position I say that no matter what legislation is passed over our heads, if that legislation is in conflict with our ideas of right and wrong, if it is in conflict with our conscience, if it is in conflict with our religion, then we can say that we will not submit to the legislation. This flight into the Empyrean was followed by a direct attack on an earthly being – the Protector of Asiatics, whom Gandhi charged with ‘hopeless incompetence and ignorance’. Unless Montford Chamney was removed from his job, claimed the lawyer, ‘there will be no peace’. After Gandhi had spoken, the Indians came up to place their individual certificates in a large three-legged pot previously saturated with wax. Paraffin was then poured in, and the certificates set on fire, amid a scene of the wildest enthusiasm. The crowd hurrahed and shouted themselves hoarse; hats were thrown in the air, and whistles blown. One Indian, said to be a leading blackleg, walked on to the platform, and, setting alight his certificate, held it aloft. The Chinese then mounted the platform, and put in their certificates with the others.6 The day after this conflagration, Gandhi was summoned to Pretoria to meet General Smuts. Also present were the Prime Minister (General Botha), the leading Opposition politician Sir Percy Fitzpatrick (representing the British interest), William Hosken, Albert Cartwright and Leung Quinn. They talked for three hours; eventually, the Government agreed to allow prewar residents to  return and register; not to register children under sixteen; and to allow thumb impressions or signatures when issuing trading licences. Having yielded on many points, the Government remained adamant that it could not allow the admittance of educated Indians. As for the 1907 Act, it would not be repealed but remain a ‘dead letter’.7 Three days after this meeting, Smuts introduced a new bill in the Transvaal Legislature, which contained the concessions regarding Boer certificates and minors, but still barred educated Indians. Moving this ‘Asiatic Registration Amendment Bill’, the Colonial Secretary admitted the depth of the popular opposition he had faced from the Indians. There was, he said, no more awkward position for a Government than a movement of passive resistance … In more primitive times one would have met it by simply issuing a declaration of war. But in these times it is impossible to do that, and therefore the situation became a very difficult one for us to handle. I did my best … to carry out the law and apply the penalties which have been fixed under the law, and as a result early this year many Asiatics were languishing in prisons from one end of the country to the other. This was an undesirable state of affairs.8 With outright repression having failed, said Smuts, he had decided to release Gandhi and his colleagues, and draft a bill less onerous than its predecessor, providing for the voluntary registration of all Asiatics legally resident in the Transvaal. Smuts assured his colleagues that compromise certainly did not mean capitulation. Thus, Mr Gandhi has referred to Indians being in partnership with the white population of this country. I have nothing to say against that. It is a claim which may appeal strongly to the Indians and those who are interested in them, but it is a claim that the white population will never allow (sustained cheers). It will be impossible to meet them on that ground.9 The former Jameson Raider Percy Fitzpatrick spoke next. Before the War, Smuts and he were on opposite sides; now, with Boer and Briton reconciled, he endorsed the closed-door policy against the Indians. The House had to ‘be absolutely firm on the policy that this Colony was not going to be the home for immigrant Asiatics (Cheers)’. South Africa, thundered Fitzpatrick, ‘was redeemed from barbarism by the white people’; and it was ‘the white people who will have to carry it on, and defend it if needs be.’ The bill was passed by the House within twenty-four hours of its first reading. Writing to the Governor of the Transvaal, Prime Minister Botha claimed it met ‘every reasonable claim’ put forward by the Indians. The Governor, in turn,  wrote to the Colonial Office asking it to recommend that His Majesty assent to it immediately, otherwise ‘the Indians will continue their campaign of resistance against the laws in force in the hope that by so doing they may influence the judgement of the Imperial authorities for the purpose of obtaining concessions they are not entitled to in law, in justice, or in reason.’ The questions that immediately come to mind when reading this, are of course: Whose Justice? Which Rationality? The concessions offered by the Government did not satisfy the Indians. For the notorious Asiatic Act had not been formally repealed, while educated Indians were still barred from entering the Transvaal. So, on 23 August, another bonfire of certificates was organized outside the Fordsburg Mosque. This time, some Pathans also joined in after having ‘admitted their previous errors’. The next day, Gandhi wrote to Smuts about this meeting and the strong sentiments expressed therein. He hoped that ‘colonial statesmanship will still find a way out of the difficulty, and close the struggle that has now gone on for nearly two years’. The General chose not to answer. Gandhi now asked four Indians from Natal, among them his old friend and patron Parsee Rustomjee, to come and show their support (the others included the president and secretary of the Natal Indian Congress). The Natalians toured the towns of the Transvaal, collecting certificates to burn. After a week on the road, they were arrested and deported. They re-entered the colony and recommenced their propaganda activities, going around Indian homes in Johannesburg and raising £200 for the campaign; then, hat in hand, going to Heidelberg and Standerton. In early September they were arrested once more; this time, their sentence was three months in jail with hard labour. The Natalians were all men of property, and they were all Gujaratis. Gandhi’s hope was that their example would inspire Gujarati merchants in the Transvaal to more actively court arrest. At the moment, the Tamils were more ready to take the plunge. Gandhi found them to be ‘most enthusiastic’ for the struggle; by the end of August, fully one-fourth of the Tamil community had been to prison at least once. They included hawkers, artisans, cooks and waiters, all risking their livelihoods for the larger cause of community self-respect.  Gandhi had now made a new suggestion to the Transvaal Government – that a certain number of educated Indians (say six) be allowed into the colony each year. The suggestion was prompted in part by personal considerations – the sense that as a lawyer himself he should not bar the way to other qualified Indians – and in part by national pride, the sense that given the chance, Indians were fully the equal of Europeans in the modern, high-status professions.16 Gandhi’s demand, said one Johannesburg paper, was very reasonable, for ‘even if the full number of six came every year, we doubt if that formidable invasion would ruin the Transvaal.’ Other colonies such as Australia and Canada permitted a certain number of Asians to enter each year. By instituting a colour bar, the Transvaal Legislature had ‘enacted, for the first time in the history of the Empire, so far as we know, that in no circumstances, under no conditions, shall the people from another of the Imperial states set foot here’. General Smuts and his fellow ministers saw it differently. One Gandhi was trouble enough. If six such lawyers were allowed in every year, would they not mobilize the Indians for more and greater rights? The problem with educated Indians was that they might instil in their working-class compatriots the dangerous idea that the avowal or denial of equal citizenship should have nothing to do with the colour of one’s skin. Joseph Doke was in London on holiday. Reading the news from the Transvaal and regularly meeting the members of the South African British Indian Committee, he was itching to get back to where his friend was. On 11 September he wrote to Gandhi that ‘you may be sure that my whole heart goes out to you and the Indians in their great affliction … So go on; the cause is righteous and it must prevail. It’s only a matter of some time and suffering. We shall be the victors. It’s a fight not for South African Indians only but for the dumb millions of India!’ In the second week of September, the British Indian Association announced that its chairman, Essop Mia, was resigning in order to go on pilgrimage to Mecca. He was replaced by Ahmed Mahomed Cachalia, also a prominent merchant, who had already proved his credentials by going to jail. On the other side, the Transvaal Government began toughening its stand. The shops of merchants who had courted arrest were boarded up, and their goods confiscated and auctioned.  In the last week of September, Gandhi went to Phoenix for a spell. A small school had been established there, with a Gujarati, Purushottamdas Desai, as principal, and Albert West and John Cordes among the teachers. On this visit, Gandhi hoped to open the school to boarders from elsewhere in Natal. The curriculum was in both Gujarati and English, and included instruction in the religion of the boy’s choice. Desai would teach Hindu boys the elements of their faith, West would take care of the Christians, a visiting maulvi the Muslims, while (in a typically Gandhian touch) the Theosophist Cordes would instruct those with more unorthodox, experimental leanings. Just as characteristically, Gandhi paid close attention to what the boys would eat. They were encouraged to consume green vegetables, fresh fruit and pulses. On the other hand, tea, cocoa and coffee were forbidden, as these ‘are produced through the labour of men who work more or less in conditions of slavery’. In Natal, Gandhi was interviewed by a correspondent of the colony’s most influential newspaper. He was described as ‘the doughty champion of the Indians’ cause in the Transvaal’ (this said with some relief, since he was no longer the doughty champion of the Indians’ cause in Natal). Gandhi told the paper that whites in the Transvaal were ‘frightened with the bogey of an invasion of half-educated youths from Natal’. The passive resisters were fighting for something larger, namely ‘the honour of India, and for a principle … viz. that restriction should be based on sensible [criteria] and not on grounds of colour or race’. The education test was not the issue; it could be made as severe as they wanted. It was the exclusion on racial grounds that they opposed. The paper was reminded of the larger Imperial consequences of the controversy. Englishmen ‘could not have India as the brightest jewel in the British Crown, and yet use the jewel as a target from every point.’ Joseph Doke, now back in South Africa, had resolved to write a life of his friend, and thus to tell a story of struggle and sacrifice that must and would triumph, a story based in part on what Doke had seen and in part on what the subject could or would tell him. On the last day of September he wrote to Gandhi begging him to try and not get confiscated and deported or any thing of that kind – if you can help it just now. I have a thousand questions to ask – on any one of which of course the welfare of the British Empire depends. I want to know why the Indians recalled you from India by cable [in 1902]. I want to know whether the Durban people gave the Indian stretcher-bearers a good send off when they went to  Colenso and Spion Kop, and did the work done on the battle fields make them more friendly to you? I want to know all that happened since, and especially I want a good cabinet photograph of yourself – without your hat. So don’t get caught!22 In contrast to Doke’s wishes, Gandhi had now decided that he must more actively challenge the Government to arrest him. Gathering a group of Natal Indians, he crossed the Transvaal border on 6 October, and was detained at Volksrust. When asked to produce his registration certificate he said he had none. He was remanded to Volksrust prison, from where he sent a written message to Indian Opinion, reminding its readers that ‘this campaign knows no distinctions of Hindus, Muslims, Parsis, Christians, Bengalis, Madrasis, Gujaratis, Punjabis and others. All of us are Indians, and are fighting for India.’ On the 14th, Gandhi and those who had crossed the border with him were brought before a magistrate in Volksrust. Gandhi told the judge that ‘he took sole responsibility for having advised them to enter the Colony.’ He added that ‘he was quite prepared to suffer the consequences of his action, as he always had been.’ He was convicted and fined £25, or, in default of payment, sentenced to two months imprisonment with hard labour. The news of Gandhi’s arrest was communicated by word of mouth across the Transvaal. The telegraph carried it to London, where, a mere two days after he was convicted, a protest meeting was held in Caxton Hall. Present in London at this time were some celebrated Indian nationalists. One, Lajpat Rai, said that ‘Mr Gandhi, in his gaol, had the satisfaction of knowing that he was making history.’ Another, Bipan Chandra Pal, said that ‘every stroke of Mr Gandhi’s hammer on the stones meant a stroke on the shackles which bound their country; every piece of stone severed from another piece by that hammer was a link that removed [Indians] from the chain that bound them to the Mother Country’ [i.e. England]. To a great burst of cheering, the Bengali radical continued: ‘Go on, brother Gandhi.’ Rai and Pal were two of the three main leaders of the Swadeshi movement; the third was Bal Gangadhar Tilak. The trio were known with affection and admiration as ‘Lal, Bal and Pal’. That Gandhi was so extravagantly praised by Lal and Pal in London (Bal was then in jail in India) testified to his rising stature  in the national consciousness. His actions in the Transvaal were appreciated both by the established and the emergent nationalists. Thus one of the resolutions at the Caxton Hall meeting was seconded by the radical student leader V. D. Savarkar; another by the young art critic and historian Ananda Coomaraswamy.25 Back in the Transvaal, a meeting was held on 18 October to condemn Gandhi’s arrest. Some 1,500 people from all over the colony came to the Hamidia Hall. Two black flags were flown at half-mast, to mark the sacrifices of the compatriots in jail. The main speech was by A. M. Cachalia. The Government hoped that by arresting their leader the movement would collapse. Cachalia dismissed this as a ‘fallacy of the first order’. With Gandhi in prison, he said, ‘each one of us must be prepared to play the leader.’ Harilal Gandhi also spoke at this meeting. ‘The day his father was arrested was a festival day for him,’ said the son, ‘but he could not help feeling how ridiculously the latter had been charged and punished. Asking a man who has been practising in South Africa for 13 years to give his identification particulars was nothing short of cowardice.’ Naturally, the white press in the Rand viewed Gandhi’s arrest somewhat differently. In giving Gandhi only two months in jail, said the Star of Johannesburg, ‘the Transvaal Government has been unduly lenient towards the malicious activities of the leader of the Asiatic movement’. ‘Far better it is that the gaols should be crowded,’ remarked the paper, ‘than that the native population – already somewhat unsettled on the Rand – should be tempted to emulate the tactics of their coloured brethren from the Far East’. Gandhi was sent to Volksrust Prison, to join (among others) his old Durban friend Parsee Rustomjee. It was the month of Ramadan, so the Muslim prisoners were fasting. In any case, with the preponderance of mealie pap at meals there ‘was incessant grumbling about food’. These grumbles reached the ears of Joseph Doke. The good Christian called on the Director of Prisons, telling him that mealie pap was abhorrent to Hindu prisoners, who were mostly vegetarian; as well as to Muslims, since the animals from whom the fat was extracted were not killed in the prescribed fashion.  To fulfil the sentence of ‘hard labour’, the prisoners were taken every morning to a field with stony soil which they had to dig with spades. The work was new to Gandhi, and he found his hands were soon covered in blisters. ‘It was difficult to bend down, and the spade seemed to weigh a maund.’ After ten days, Gandhi was moved to Johannesburg, where he was to appear as a witness in a court case. He was taken by train in a third-class compartment. When he disembarked, with his escort, at the city’s Park Station, he was noticed by a group of Tamil hawkers. They watched, with fascination and not a little dismay, as their leader – clad in convict’s garb of jacket with a numbered badge, short trousers and leather sandals – was marched out of the station and into the road outside. The warder accompanying Gandhi offered him the option of taking a cab to the prison (for which he would have to pay) or walking. The prisoner chose to walk, climbing up the hill with his bags. He was followed, at a respectful distance, by the Tamils, until he disappeared into a prison on whose entrance was carved the motto, ‘Union Makes Strength’. The Tamil hawkers conveyed what they had seen to Henry Polak. Polak issued a statement claiming that the treatment of Gandhi was reminiscent of the Spanish Inquisition, which likewise marched its victims ‘clothed in bag-shaped yellow garb’ through the town before disposing of them.He also sent an angry telegram to L. W. Ritch in London, who passed on the complaint to the Colonial Office. They, in turn, wrote to the Transvaal Government asking if it was correct that ‘Gandhi was marched through the streets in convict dress’. The charge was admitted, but qualified by the claim that when conducted from the station to the prison, Gandhi did not have to wear handcuffs, and ‘when in Court as a witness he did not appear in prison clothes.’ In Johannesburg Prison, Gandhi was put with convicts serving time for murder and larceny. He felt ‘extremely uneasy’, more so when an African and a Chinese ‘exchanged obscene jokes, uncovering each other’s genitals’. For comfort he read the copy of the Bhagavad-Gita he had brought with him. His mood improved when Polak came to visit, and when Kallenbach sent a supply of bread and cheese. On 4 November Gandhi was taken back to Volksrust. Seeing him enter the train in prison uniform, the hawkers on the platform ‘were filled with tears’. Word of his journey got around, so that en route, at Heidelberg and at  Standerton, Indians met him with supplies of food, which his escort allowed him to accept. Shortly after moving back to Volksrust Prison, Gandhi heard from Albert West at Phoenix that Kasturba had suffered a haemorrhage. The doctor attending her was not sure she would survive. West suggested that Gandhi pay his fine and join her. He answered that this would be ‘impossible’, since ‘when I embarked upon the struggle I counted the cost. If Mrs. Gandhi must leave me without even the consolation a devoted husband could afford, so be it.’ Kasturba’s illness had once more brought to the fore the competing claims on Gandhi’s life. The obligations of family clashed with the demands of the struggle. Kasturba and he had now been married for more than twenty-five years. They had, in the emotional as well as sexual sense, always been true to one another. Perhaps because of their periodic, extended separations, Kasturba deeply cherished their time together. Rajkot, Bombay, Durban, Johannesburg, Phoenix – in all of these places she had lived with him and for him, but never really felt at home. Not fluent in English, reserved by nature, forbidden by custom and tradition to seek out strangers on her own, Kasturba was comfortable in, and comforted by, the company of her children and her husband. The children were with her, mostly, while her husband was mostly absent. And so, all through their time in South Africa, it was her husband’s company and attention that she craved most. Her love was reciprocated. Yet unlike Kasturba, Gandhi had more than his family to look out for or answer to. Asked to choose – as he was here – Gandhi would place the interests of the community above those of his own wife. He explained both the dilemma and his choice in a letter that Manilal could read to her. He told Kasturba that since he had ‘offered my all to the satyagraha struggle’, he could not cut short his sentence by paying the fine. He asked however for a daily bulletin on her health, and then added these words of encouragement and consolation: If you keep courage and take the necessary nutrition, you will recover. If, however, my ill luck so has it that you pass away, I should only say that there would be nothing wrong in your doing so in your separation from me while I am still alive. I love you so dearly that even if you are dead, you will be alive to me. Your soul is deathless. I repeat what I have frequently told you and assure you that if you do succumb to your illness, I will not marry again.33  This is a letter of an unusual and perhaps unexpected tenderness. According to custom and tradition, part of the duties of a Hindu wife was to make sure that she did not predecease her husband. This prospect must have worried Kasturba; so too, perhaps, the prospect of Gandhi taking a second wife. His own father had done so, and while his first wife was still alive. Hence Gandhi’s assurances, here made (as he notes) not for the first time. Gandhi was released from Volksrust on 12 December, having completed his term. Before he left the prison, he presented a kindly warder with an inscribed copy of Tolstoy’s The Kingdom of God is Within You.34 When he reached Johannesburg, he was met at the station by a crowd of 300, mostly Indians, but also including Henry and Millie Polak, Joseph Doke, and Sonja Schlesin. As ‘he jumped from the train, Mr Gandhi was garlanded amidst terrific cheers’. He was then carried shoulder high to the mosque in Fordsburg, where he spoke briefly to a ‘most orderly’ crowd of some 1,500 people. While Gandhi was in prison, meetings in solidarity were regularly held at the Hamidia Mosque in Johannesburg. In the last week of November, ‘practically the whole Indian community in Johannesburg’ turned up for a meeting outside the mosque. The Chinese leader Leung Quinn spoke first. The star turn, however, was A. M. Cachalia, the Gujarati trader who was now chairman of the British Indian Association. Cachalia first quoted Booker T. Washington, who said the black man had to do better than the white man to get any recognition. He then provided a robust defence of satyagraha. Some Europeans feared that the Indians’ avowal of passive resistance would provoke the Africans to adopt similar methods, and proceed from there to violent protest. Cachalia thought this preposterous – ‘surely passive resistance,’ he said sarcastically, ‘was not the spark that set ablaze the Natal rebellion of 1906. Rightly or wrongly, it was their sense of injustice that caused that outbreak.’ In Cachalia’s opinion, Men do not proceed from passive to active resistance. The passive resister is higher in the moral scale, and in that of human development than the active resister … Passive resistance is a matter of heart, of conscience, of trained understanding. The natives of South Africa need many generations of culture and development before they can hope to be passive resisters in the true sense of the term. Meanwhile, they will be what robust men are – grateful for justice done them, resentful of injustice, and in the latter case they will probably seek their remedy irrespective of example, until the difficult lesson of non-resistance to evil is learnt. But surely our critics would be better advised to urge the  natives to substitute for the rifle and the assegai the peaceful methods of the passive resister, and better advised still if they removed the need of any resistance whatsoever … by doing justice though the heavens fall.36 Cachalia saw, much more clearly than Gandhi, that the roots of native discontent lay in discrimination and expropriation by Europeans. His speech manifested a sure grasp of the thought of Gandhi’s own mentor, Tolstoy. And it provided a compelling defence of non-violence as the most moral means of challenging injustice.  As the Indians went in and out of jail in the Transvaal, there was a significant development among their compatriots in Natal. They now had a second weekly newspaper, complementing Gandhi’s Indian Opinion. Named African Chronicle, this was edited by a Tamil named P. S. Aiyar, who had come out to Durban in 1898 and married a local girl. Despite its name the new paper, like Gandhi’s own, gave little coverage to ‘African’ issues. Rather, it was a vehicle for the Tamils of Natal, who did not feel wholly represented in or by Indian Opinion, which now carried articles in English and Gujarati only. African Chronicle made its first appearance in June 1908. It ran to sixteen pages: four in English, eight in Tamil, with a final four pages containing advertisements taken out by Tamil traders and shopkeepers. It carried news of indentured labourers on plantations, and of merchants in towns. Sport was a passion, with football and boxing matches being extensively reported. The editor was particularly preoccupied with the £3 tax on freed labourers, and regularly wrote asking for its abolition. The paper also keenly followed developments in the Transvaal. Early issues praised Gandhi for his ‘steadfastness of purpose’ and ‘deadly earnestness’. His arrest in October 1908 had ‘cast a gloom over the Indian community’. Gandhi was ‘our esteemed leader’ – esteemed for, among other things, his ‘characteristic plain and straightforward manner’. The ‘meritorious struggle’ he led was ‘fighting for the honour and freedom of the nation’. The paper endorsed ‘Mr M. K. Gandhi’s known intense desire to effect a union between these great sections of the Indian population’ (namely, Hindus and Muslims). African Chronicle shared Gandhi’s dislike of Montford Chamney – whom it called ‘a little tin-god’ – as well as his admiration of Thambi Naidoo. When Naidoo was arrested for the third time, the paper ‘congratulate[d] the Indians in South Africa for possessing such a man’.   The conflict between the Indians and the Transvaal Government was played out against the backdrop of a growing movement for the union of the South African colonies. The architects of the war against the Boers, Joseph Chamberlain and Alfred Milner, had always hoped that victory would be followed by a creation of a single integrated state, forming part of the British Empire. In his farewell speech in February 1903, Chamberlain told his audience to ‘make preparation for the ultimate federation of South Africa which is destined, I hope in the near future, to establish a new nation under the British flag, who shall be “daughter in her mother’s house and mistress in her own”.’ In 1906 Transvaal became a ‘self-governing colony’ on the model of Natal and the Cape. Orange Free State followed two years later. In May 1908, white politicians from the four territories met in an ‘intercolonial’ conference to discuss the prospects of a united federation. This was followed by a full-fledged ‘National Convention’, which first met in Durban in October 1908, followed by meetings in other towns of South Africa. The motivations of those seeking union were partly economic. The standardization of customs duties, taxes and railway lines would make business much easier. Whites in South Africa were impressed by the example of Canada and Australia, where once discrete territories had come together as single federations. However, they faced a problem largely absent in those other British dominions – a very large native population. Some Africans and some Indians were voters in the Cape. While a few liberals sought an extension of the Cape franchise, most people at the Convention thought that people of colour should not be granted the vote. The Transvaal politician Percy Fitzpatrick insisted that the ‘black man was incapable of civilization’. Abraham Fischer of the Orange Free State remarked that since ‘self-preservation was the first law of nature’, whites should keep the vote to themselves. Another Free Stater, C. R. De Wet, said that ‘Providence had drawn the line between black and white and we must make that clear to the Natives [and] not instil into their minds false ideas of equality.’ The delegates from the Afrikaner-controlled colonies prevailed. The Transvaal Prime Minister, Louis Botha, persuaded his Cape colleagues that their priority must be to bring about a ‘union of the white races in South Africa’.  Complications about the native franchise would imperil this union. It was agreed that while the coloured voters in the Cape would not immediately be disenfranchised, in other colonies only whites would vote; and whites alone would sit in the Union Parliament. In December 1908, as Gandhi was leaving jail, the Governor of the Transvaal, Lord Selborne, circulated to the members of the Convention some ‘informal suggestions on the question of the Native Franchise’. This proposed a ‘civilization qualification’, whereby to be eligible for the franchise, a man had to (a) commit to monogamy; (b) speak a European language; (c) meet a certain property or income qualification; and (d) be ‘habitually wearing clothes and living in a house as distinct from a hut’. European males who fulfilled these criteria would each have a full vote. On the other hand, ‘every non-European who proves the possession of the civilisation qualification before an impartial tribunal’ would be given ‘a vote equal in value to one tenth the vote of a European’. The son of this civilized native voter, if he likewise met those four criteria, would be awarded one ninth of a vote, his son one eighth, and so on. Selborne’s scheme allowed for the possibility of miscegenation. The son of a European father and a non-European mother would – provided he enjoyed the ‘civilizational qualification’ – have one-fifth of a vote, his son a quarter of a vote, and so on. Finally, there was also an age stipulation. Whereas qualified European males voted at the age of twenty- one, a civilized native or Asian would be allowed to vote only at thirty-one, his son at thirty, his grandson at twenty-nine. The offspring of mixed unions would be granted the franchise at twenty-six. Selborne’s proposals were surely influenced by the ongoing protests of the Indians in the Transvaal. As an Englishman, he knew also of precedents in the home country, where some Indians had been granted the vote and two of them had even entered Parliament. Gandhi himself believed that, given the chance and the freedom, all Indians could prove themselves to be as worthy as all Europeans. To be sure, he thought this might take some time. But his incrementalism was positively radical in comparison to the ideas of colonialists like Lord Selborne. Unlike Gandhi, the Governor thought that only individuals, and not whole communities, could ever ascend upwards on the civilizational ladder. His horizons were also far more extended. Whereas Gandhi hoped for  racial parity in his own lifetime, the Governor thought that in ten generations, or perhaps two hundred years’ time, a particular man of colour might – always assuming he or his forebears did not slip backwards into polygamy, ignorance of a European language, etc. – come to enjoy the same political rights as a white man. To be fair to Selborne, his mind at least admitted the odd shade of grey. Most members of the National Convention, on the other hand, thought only in black and white. They wished to deny the vote, any vote, even a fraction of a vote, to non-whites altogether. His Lordship’s proposals were rejected immediately. To this chorus in favour of white supremacy in South Africa, there were two dissenting voices – the brother and sister duo of W. P. Schreiner and Olive Schreiner. W. P. Schreiner was a former prime minister of Cape Colony, a liberal by instinct and a humanist by conviction. At the National Convention he urged that members of non-European descent be allowed at least to sit in the Senate, or upper house, of the Union Parliament. Writing to General Smuts, he said that ‘to my mind the fundamental question is that of our policy regarding “colour”.’ To embody in the Union Constitution ‘a vertical line or barrier separating its people upon the grounds of colour into a privileged class or caste and an unprivileged, inferior proletariat is, as I see the problem, as imprudent as it would be to build a grand building upon unsound and sinking foundations’. When he failed to move his colleagues in South Africa, Schreiner travelled to England, to lobby British opinion. The Act of Union being prepared, said Schreiner, was better viewed as ‘an Act of Separation between the minority and the majority of the people of South Africa’. Under it, ‘the coloured inhabitants are barred from the opportunity to rise and evolve naturally, which is the right of every free man in a free country’. On this question, the writer Olive Schreiner was even more radical than her brother. Raised in the Cape countryside, she was an autodidact, who read Herbert Spencer, John Stuart Mill and Darwin, while also (like Gandhi) being inspired by the Sermon on the Mount. Writing stories from an early age, Olive was best known for The Story of an African Farm (1883), a novel set in the Karoo featuring a brutal overseer named Bonaparte and, to counter him, a woman who sought freedom outside marriage, later described as ‘the first wholly  feminist’ character in the English novel. Olive had lived in London for several years in the 1880s, where she befriended left-wing thinkers such as George Bernard Shaw and Eleanor Marx. This experience informed her book, Dreams, published in 1890, which presented a series of allegories excoriating the rich and advocating an ethical socialism. In December 1908, Olive Schreiner was asked this question by a Transvaal newspaper: ‘What form of Closer Union do you favour – Federation or Unification; and for what reasons?’ She answered that ‘all persons born in the country or permanently resident here should be one in the eye of the State’, and all should enjoy the Franchise, regardless of race or colour. She then offered this arresting vision of the future: The problems of the twentieth century will not be a repetition of those of the nineteenth or those which went before it. The walls dividing continents are breaking down: everywhere European, Asiatic and African will inter-lard. The world on which the twenty-first century will open its eyes, will be one widely different from that which the twentieth sees at its awakening. And the problem which this century will have to solve, is the accomplishment of this interaction of distinct human varieties on the largest and most beneficent lines, making for the development of humanity as a whole, and carried out in a manner consonant with modern ideals and modern social wants. It will not always be the European who forms the upper layer. The South Africa that Olive Schreiner strove for would draw democratically on all its constituent elements. She spoke thus of the special characteristics of the Europeans – who, ‘at least for themselves, have always loved freedom and justice’; of the natives of the country, the Bantu as she called them following contemporary usage – ‘one of the finest breeds of the African stock’; and of the Asiatics – ‘a section of people sober, industrious, and intelligent’. She argued that ‘it is out of this great, heterogeneous mass of humans that the South African nation will be built’. Mindful of the divisions within, she pointedly and prophetically asked: ‘As long as nine-tenths of our community have no permanent stake in the land, and no right or share in our government, can we ever feel safe? Can we ever know peace?’ The previous May, speaking to the YMCA in Johannesburg, Gandhi put forward the idea that South Africa should be a nation for more than whites alone. Olive Schreiner now provided a sharper, more passionate statement of that point of view. One does not know whether she had read Gandhi’s speech, but her own reflections were reprinted in Indian Opinion, where the editor (Henry Polak) said  the journal agreed ‘entirely’ that ‘a people kept in a state of political helotage are a source of danger to the State, sooner or later’. Women such as Olive Schreiner, wrote Polak, ‘are of greater permanent value to the world than a continent of Napoleons’.45 Within a week of his release, Gandhi was back in court defending passive resisters. Once the new, amended Act came into force, some Indians had begun queueing up for certificates. They were picketed by a group of satyagrahis led by Thambi Naidoo. On 18 December, appearing for a group charged with ‘causing trouble among Asiatics who are desirous of complying with the law’, Gandhi told the judge that his clients ‘only want to let those who forget their manhood know that there is such a thing as ostracism’. (The judge answered that it was not ostracism but ‘a wholesale fear of incurring grievous bodily harm’.) The fact that picketing had to be recommenced spoke of a real rift in the community. Exhausted by the struggle, hoping to get on with their lives, many Indians were reluctant to go to jail again or to live without certificates of residence. Noting the rush to register under the new Act, Gandhi said ‘this need not depress us’. For ‘the great Thoreau said that one sincere man is [worth] more than a hundred thousand insincere men.’ The cleavages within the movement were of class and of ethnicity. Hawkers, and Tamils, were now more likely to become satyagrahis than traders or Gujaratis. ‘The Tamils have surpassed all expectations,’ wrote Gandhi in Indian Opinion: ‘All their leaders are now in gaol.’ Also worthy of praise were the Parsees who, despite their small numbers, had made a huge contribution to the political field in India. In South Africa too, ‘we do not find a Parsee who has complied with the Government’s senseless law.’ Gandhi thought that ‘Muslims and Gujarati Hindus should hang their heads in shame before the Tamils and the Parsees.’ In the last week of December, Gandhi went to Durban to be with Kasturba. He stayed three weeks in all, with one eye on the health of his wife, and the other on the future of the struggle. On 5 January he wrote to Olive Doke that he had ‘not come to Natal to rest and am having none. You wish you were in Phoenix. So do You would then have assisted me in nursing Mrs. Gandhi. Now that you may say is very selfish. But self plays a very important part in our lives.’  Gandhi moved Kasturba from Phoenix to Durban, where she stayed with and was attended by a Dr Nanji. He was the best Indian doctor in Natal, and also a close friend who had supported the satyagraha struggle and spoken out in public on its behalf. On 16 January Gandhi left for the Transvaal. That night he wrote a letter to Chanchal Gandhi asking her to ‘give up the idea of staying with Harilal for the present’. ‘It will do good for both of you’, said the patriarch. ‘Harilal will grow by staying apart and will perform his other duties. Love for you does not consist only in staying with you.’ As the letter suggests, it appeared that Gandhi’s son Harilal was facing a conflict between the needs of his self and the claims of his society. By January 1909, the twenty-year-old had been to jail twice already. He now prepared to court arrest for a third time. In between jail terms he was based in Johannesburg, assisting in the campaign. His wife Chanchal, at Phoenix, missed him terribly. They now had a baby girl who – if things went on the same way – would grow up with an absent father, much as Harilal himself had done. In a vivid memoir, Harilal’s youngest brother recalled the competing claims on the first of Gandhi’s sons. Devadas was some thirteen years younger than Harilal, and just a little older than his brother’s child. He adored Harilal, with his cheery manner and his handsome face, his hair parted in the middle ‘with beautiful curls over the forehead’. Before one of his departures from Phoenix to court arrest, Harilal told the boy, ‘Yes, Devadas, I will send you your top from Durban.’ ‘I forget the top,’ wrote the boy, decades later. ‘But I remember sharing sweets with my niece the next day, while my sister-in-law shed tears over a letter.’ Harilal was torn between his wife, whom he loved dearly, and with whom he had (by all accounts) a companionable marriage, and his obligations to his father and the movement he led. At this time, Harilal was briefly back at Phoenix with Chanchal. How long he would stay there was not certain, since he might at any moment be asked to re-enter the Transvaal and seek arrest. He communicated his confusions to his father, who answered that he could see that you are unhappy. I have got to accept your opinion as to whether you would be unhappy or not on account of separation. However, I see that you will have to undergo imprisonment for a long period … The struggle is likely to be a prolonged one. There are some indications of its being a short  one also. There is a likelihood of Lord Curzon interceding. Let me know what arrangement should be made in regard to Chanchal during your absence. The letter ends with this intriguing line: ‘I have not been able to follow what you say about taking a stone in exchange for a pie. In what context have you written that?’ It seems reasonable to assume that Harilal was contrasting the pie of marital bliss with the stone of physical separation.50 In the first week of the New Year, The Times printed a letter signed by twenty- six Europeans living in the Transvaal. The first signatory was W. Hosken. The others included seven clergymen (among them Joseph Doke and Charles Phillips), several accountants, the jeweller Gabriel Isaacs, the draper W. M. Vogl, and the missionary-turned-advocate A. W. Baker, all old friends of Gandhi. The letter reminded the British public that ‘there is an important body of sympathizers in the European section of the community who are grieved and hurt at the treatment being meted out to the Asiatics [in the Transvaal] for no apparent purpose at all.’ The signatories saluted the ‘courage and self-sacrifice’ of a movement in which ‘all faiths and castes are represented’. Morality and the Imperial interest mandated that their demands be conceded. For passive resisters deported to India from the Transvaal would ‘not be slow to ventilate [their grievances] amidst the sympathetic surroundings of their native land’. At this time, Gandhi himself was unsure as to whether the struggle would be long or short. He had, as he indicated to Harilal, some hope that the former Viceroy of India, Lord Curzon, would help bring about a settlement. As Viceroy, Curzon had written with feeling about the ‘invidious’ and ‘odious’ handicaps facing Indians in the Transvaal.He was now in South Africa, on a private visit. Gandhi asked to meet him when he passed through Johannesburg; Curzon said this would not be possible since he had ‘so short a time here’. However, he asked the Indians to ‘give me as full a statement of their case as they can’; he would read this on the train to Cape Town, where he was due to meet Generals Botha and Smuts. On 29 January, Gandhi wrote a remarkable letter to his nephew Maganlal. Some Gujarati merchants were turning away from the struggle, and the Pathans had been sceptical of Gandhi in any case. With earlier attempts on his life in mind, he told Maganlal that  I may have to meet death in South Africa at the hands of my countrymen. If that happens you should rejoice. It will unite the Hindus and Mussalmans … The enemies of the community are constantly making efforts against such a unity. In such a great endeavour, someone will have to sacrifice his life. If I make that sacrifice, I shall regard myself, as well as you, my colleagues, fortunate.54 The letter was posted from Natal, where Gandhi had come again to spend time with his wife. Dr Nanji had diagnosed her as suffering from pernicious anaemia, for which the textbook treatment included a healthy dose of beef extract. When Gandhi discovered what Kasturba had been given, he decided to take her back to Phoenix and treat her by his own, naturopathic methods. The doctor remonstrated; he was a man of science, as well as a Parsi, for whom there were no taboos as regards beef. He argued that Kasturba was too sick to be moved. Besides, it was raining heavily. Gandhi was unmoved; he sent a message to Phoenix to make preparations for their arrival. Albert West met them at the station with hot milk, umbrellas, and six men to carry Kasturba home in a hammock. ‘Dr and Mrs Nanji were much grieved’ by his removing Kasturba from their care, wrote Gandhi to Kallenbach. ‘They do not believe in water treatment. They consider me to be a brutal husband and Dr Nanji certainly considers me to be either mad or over conceited. I have risked friendships for the sake of a principle.’ At Phoenix, Gandhi gave Kasturba a series of cold baths. He also put her on a diet of fruit. ‘She appears to be none the worse for it,’ he reported to Kallenbach: She is probably better. But she has lost heart. She cannot bear the idea of my leaving her bedside for a single minute. Like a baby she clings to me and hugs me. I fear that my departure next week will send her to her grave. It is a great conflict of duty for me. Yet there is no doubt in my mind that I must leave her next week and accept the King’s hospitality. It was a curious sequence of phrases and sentiments: recognizing that he faced, yet again, a serious conflict between family duties and societal obligations, Gandhi had ‘no doubt’ that (yet again) he would choose to go to prison rather than stay with his ailing wife. On 2 February, Curzon wrote to Gandhi reporting on his meeting with the Boer soldier-politicians. Botha and Smuts had promised ‘to treat the British Indians in the Transvaal in a spirit of liberality and justice’. But no specific promises were made with regard to, for example, the repeal of the 1907 Act or the admittance of educated Indians. Curzon’s own view was that ‘a final and  satisfactory settlement of the vexed problem’ would have to await the creation of a single, unified government of all the South African colonies. The letter was posted to the Johannesburg address of the British Indian Association, who sent it on to Phoenix. Its non-committal, even unhelpful, contents made Gandhi decide to renew the struggle. He may also have been provoked by derisive comments in the Transvaal press, suggesting that passive resistance was on its last legs. ‘Mr Gandhi has been beaten,’ wrote one paper, ‘and the sooner he admits it and tells his deluded fellow-countrymen frankly that they have not the ghost of a chance of altering the opinions of the people of this Colony, so much the better for all concerned.’ In the second week of February, Gandhi dispatched Harilal across the border from Natal, to seek (and obtain) his third term of imprisonment. The father followed ten days later. Like his eldest son, he was arrested for refusing to produce a valid registration certificate, and remanded in police custody. On 25 February Gandhi was brought to trial before a magistrate in Volksrust. He told the court that he would ‘continue to incur the penalties so long as justice, as I conceive it, has not been rendered by the State to a portion of its citizens’. Sentenced to pay a £50 fine or accept three months in prison with hard labour, he opted for the latter. Afterwards, he released two letters that he had composed before going to court. The first, in Gujarati, was addressed to the weak-kneed who had succumbed to the Government’s demands. It reflected a certain resignation; where once the blacklegs were fiercely chastised, now they were asked to do what they could. ‘Those who are fallen can rise again,’ said Gandhi. ‘They can still go to gaol … Even if they cannot, they can offer monetary help, and send statements to newspapers to say that, though they have surrendered, they are in favour of the fight and wish it success.’ The second letter, in English, was addressed to his ‘Tamil brethren’, whom he praised for having discharged their duties ‘brilliantly’ and borne ‘the brunt of the battle’. To his ‘great pleasure’, in Volksrust prison Gandhi was placed in the company of some fifty fellow satyagrahis. They included Harilal, and his old and valued friend Parsee Rustomjee. The food this time was ‘nice and clean’ and included large helpings of ghee. The ‘hard labour’ they were put to involved repairing roads and weeding fields.  A day after he was sentenced, Gandhi wrote to Chanchal asking her to read ‘good writing and poems’ to Kasturba, to take care of her own health, and to breastfeed her child for some more time. Then he added: ‘Harilal and I are quite well [in Volksrust jail]. Be sure that we are happier here than you.’ (He spoke for himself, but perhaps not for Harilal.) After a week in Volksrust, Gandhi was shifted to Pretoria. He travelled with escort, and at night, shivering under a blanket. His cell in this jail was marked ‘isolated’; the bed was hard, there was no pillow, and ghee was served only twice a week (but the dreadful mealie pap every day). The other prisoners were all Africans; one asked Gandhi whether his crime was theft, another if it was the illegal sale of alcohol. The work he was put to in Pretoria was dreary, namely, polishing the floor of his cell and the corridor. He was also denied permission to write letters in Gujarati. He pleaded that his wife was recovering from a serious illness, and that his letters ‘served as medicine to her’, but the authorities were unyielding. Since he could not communicate directly with his wife, Gandhi sent her a message via Albert West. ‘Please tell Mrs G. that I am all right,’ he wrote to West. She knows that my happiness depends more upon my mental state than upon physical surroundings. Let her cherish this thought and not worry about me. For the sake of the children, she should help herself get better. She should have the bandages regularly and add hip-baths if necessary. She should adhere to the diet I used to give. She ought not to start walking till she is quite restored.62 It was brave and unselfish of Gandhi not to draw attention to his own condition. For this, without question, was his harshest prison term yet. He could write only one letter a month, and there were strict curbs on visitors. Henry Polak applied three times to see him, but was refused permission. However, Gandhi’s agent in Pretoria was allowed to visit. This was M. Lichtenstein, the man who, back in September 1906, had offered the vote of thanks at the Empire Theatre meeting which first proposed passive resistance. Now, visiting the leader of the satyagraha in jail, he was dismayed to find him in solitary confinement, where his warders ‘regularly abuse and humiliate him’, while giving him ‘a worse diet than that of a Kaffir prisoner’. Lichtenstein communicated what he saw to Polak, adding as his own view that he thought Gandhi ‘was very near a break-down’. Polak then wrote an anguished  letter of complaint to David Pollock, a Justice of the Peace and a well respected resident of Johannesburg. He found it ‘heart-breaking’ that ‘this high-minded gentleman, who has all along conducted a campaign with clean hands and a lofty spirit, is being tortured in this way’. Knowing the prisoner as he did, Polak was certain that what is in Mr Gandhi’s mind today, in the midst of these degrading circumstances by which he finds himself surrounded, is no thought for himself and his own personal sufferings, but the feeling that, if this treatment is meted out to him, a cultured man, a barrister, a member of a noble Indian family, a man who has refused the Chief Justiceship of his native State, what must be the attitude of the Authorities to his less highly-equipped brethren in the Transvaal who are voiceless … In a postscript whose tone matched that of the letter itself, Polak said he dared not communicate these things to Gandhi’s wife Kasturba. For ‘the poor lady’s life is sufficient of a tragedy as it is, with her husband in gaol and her eldest son in gaol … She is now just managing to drag herself about after a long and painful illness, and it will almost certainly mean a relapse for her, if I so much as whisper what is going on.’ David Pollock passed on this letter to the Governor of the Transvaal, with a note marking his own dismay that Gandhi, ‘of all people in South Africa’, was marched in handcuffs ‘like a common felon through the streets of the Capital’ when conveyed from the prison to the courts to testify in a case. He urged Lord Selborne to institute an enquiry ‘into the specific allegation that the considerate treatment accorded to political prisoners in civilized territories has not been extended to Mr Gandhi’. Pollock received a brusque reply, stating that ‘Mr Gandhi, when he voluntarily sought imprisonment, did [so] of course knowing that he could not expect treatment in any way different from other prisoners.’ This suggests that whereas the Transvaal Government thought Gandhi to be a common criminal, in the eyes of his friends and supporters he was (as Henry Polak put it) ‘a political prisoner, fighting for conscience’s sake and the self- respect of his people.’ Their complaints reached London, and from London were re-directed to Pretoria. This had some effect, for the Transvaal Prime Minister sent David Pollock a terse note saying that ‘Prisoner M. K. Gandhi is confined at Pretoria Gaol, where he has been shown special consideration. He was offered ghee but declined. He has however accepted the sleeping outfit reserved for Europeans and is well supplied with books.’  That conditions markedly improved after the interventions of Polak and Pollock is confirmed by Gandhi’s own account. The prison director now allowed him the use of a notebook and pencil, and substituted the stitching and mending of clothes for the scrubbing of floors. As a gesture of goodwill, General Smuts also sent him two books on religion.Gandhi answered in kind, asking the boys at Phoenix to make his adversary what the General’s son described as a ‘stout pair of leather sandals’. Smuts’ gesture, and the more lenient treatment Gandhi was now getting in jail, may have been influenced by the fact that he had recently been issued with a glowing testimonial in the House of Lords. Speaking on 24 March, a former Governor of Madras, Lord Ampthill, drew the attention of his fellow peers to the plight of Indians in the Transvaal. A previous speaker had spoken of Gandhi as a mere ‘agitator’ and of the protests as ‘simply sentimental’. Ampthill vigorously disagreed. The laws the Indians had opposed were, he said, ‘humiliating and offensive and unnecessary’. Their leader, ‘the son of an Indian gentleman of good birth and high position’, and a London-trained barrister himself, had undergone three terms of imprisonment with hard labour ‘for the sake of his opinions and because he is defending what he regards as the honour of his community’. Despite his privileged birth and professional qualifications, Gandhi devotes all his means and most of his time and energy to public service and to the purest philanthrophy … This is the man who is leading this movement, and with him there are several hundreds of others who, I can assure your Lordships from the knowledge I possess, will protest to the bitter end, whatever be the extremity of ruin or misery it brings upon them. In these circumstances it is simply fatuous to say that they have no good reason for undergoing sufferings of this kind.68 This was an impressive speech; even more impressive, perhaps, was a private letter that Smuts received from his Cambridge friend H. J. Wolstenholme, a don at Christ’s College described (by Smuts’ biographer) as ‘a lapsed Christian who retained his Christian conscience’.69 The two had been close from their days at university – exchanging notes on works of philosophy and literature, and commenting on each other’s manuscripts. Now, reading about the protests by, and the arrests of, Indians in the Transvaal, Wolstenholme reminded Smuts that those he had jailed belong to a race, or complex of races, with an ancient civilization behind them, and a mental capacity not inferior to that of the highest Western people, who are developing rapidly a feeling of nationality and a capacity for the more active and practical life of the more materialized West … [The] Indians  with whom you have to deal may have little share in this civilization of their race, through lack of education, and this through national poverty, but they are championed by leaders who identify themselves with them, and resent keenly what they regard as unjust and insulting treatment of their people, the more keenly because it is directed against them as a race, a race marked out as ‘inferior’, like the ‘niggers’ of America and the ‘heathen Chinese’, as coloured. The Cambridge scholar saw an ‘epoch-making’ change taking place in relations between East and West, whereby the Japanese, the Chinese and the Indians would no longer accept exclusion and disability on the grounds of race. It was increasingly clear that those whom Europeans had dismissed as ‘inferior peoples’ were not inferior in capacity; they claimed, demanded, and deserved equal rights. Wolstenholme told Smuts that ‘it would surely be wise statesmanship, as well as good human fellowship, to concede in time and with a good grace what is sure eventually to be won by struggle.’ These were radical ideas, even by the standards of the Cambridge of the 1900s. In the Transvaal of the day they were completely heretical. Smuts’ answer to this letter is unavailable; perhaps he had none. In the last months of 1908, as a steady stream of satyagrahis entered prison, Indian Opinion began carrying poems written in Gujarati paying tribute to them. A prolific writer of these salutary verses was Sheikh Mehtab, Gandhi’s former schoolfriend and housemate. A poem of January 1909 said Parsee Rustomjee was as brave as (the sixth-century) Arab poet Hatem and (the eleventh-century) Hindu monarch Raja Bhoja. M. C. Anglia and Sorabji Shapoorji were also praised, while Thambi Naidoo was described as ‘the lamp of India, the real fighter!’. ‘If you remain united like this,’ Mehtab urged the satyagrahis, ‘you will see Smuts’ resignation.’ In another poem, he said ‘we lost India [to the British] due to disunity and quarrels’. He recalled an older and more hallowed epoch, when, ‘with unity Ram and Laxman got Sita back’. In yet another, he wrote, If the whole community is brave Eid and Diwali can be celebrated Otherwise [the] Union Jack will tear us apart And fire will be ablaze. Here the Muslim poet invoked a Hindu idiom; meanwhile, from the other side, a versifier named Jayshanker Govindji saluted the heroism of the trader A. M. Cachalia, who had seen his business tumble by going to jail. Cachalia was ‘the  light of his family’, ‘a true gem of India’. His sacrifice had ‘drenched [him] in many colours’. Gandhi’s own stoicism in jail is manifest in the monthly letter he was permitted to write. In the last week of March he wrote to his son Manilal enquiring about Kasturba’s health. ‘Does she now walk about freely?’ he asked: ‘I hope she and all of you would continue to take sago and milk in the morning.’ A Hindu swami, Shankeranand, was then touring Natal. The swami was from the Arya Samaj, a brand of militant, adversarial Hinduism which was at odds with Gandhi’s more plural and accommodating faith. When he first heard of Shankeranand’s militant proselytizing, Gandhi wrote to Maganlal, ‘it is very regrettable. It is because of such results that the venerable Kavi [Raychand] used to say that in modern times we should beware of religious teachers.’ The Natal Mercury thought that Shankeranand was ‘flattening out Mr Gandhi’ in the colony, winning the lawyer’s followers over to his side. The African Chronicle disagreed: ‘The responsible section of the Tamil and Hindoostani people,’ it insisted, ‘stand by Mr Gandhi to one man despite what Swami Shankeranand may say.’ The Swami now decided to carry the battle into the enemy camp. Visiting Phoenix while Gandhi was in jail, he told Manilal that, as a boy of high caste, he should wear a sacred thread. Gandhi wrote to his son that he ‘respectfully disagree[d] with the Swamiji in his propaganda … As it is, we have too much of the false division between the shudras [lower castes] and others. The sacred thread is therefore today rather a hindrance than a help.’ The next month it was Polak’s turn to receive the one sanctioned letter. Gandhi was worried about their financial situation: ‘I hate the idea about Phoenix being in debt,’ he wrote. He suggested the debt be cleared by selling jewellery and their law books. Turning to the education of the children at Phoenix, he advised them to read Tolstoy’s Life and Confessions and the works of Raychandbhai. ‘The more I consider his life and his writings, the more I consider him to be the best Indian of his times,’ remarked Gandhi of his late mentor. ‘Indeed, I put him much higher than Tolstoy in religious perception.’ Then, turning to personal matters, he asked: ‘Is Chanchi cheerful? Or does she  brood over her separation from Harilal? Does Mrs. G now take part in household work?’ In February 1909, when Gandhi was in between prison terms, his secretary Sonja Schlesin had articled herself as a clerk in his office. Miss Schlesin’s application was witnessed by Gandhi, Polak and her father. Normally, after three years as a clerk one could qualify for the Bar. This Miss Schlesin was very keen to do – she wished to become the first woman lawyer in South Africa, just as her employer had been the first coloured lawyer. She was extremely intelligent and well read, and after five years in Gandhi’s office had become closely acquainted with the law, especially as it applied to Indians. Meeting Gandhi’s wide range of clients, and observing lawyers and judges at work, had turned the once-shy girl into an assured (and occasionally combative) young woman. Miss Schlesin, wrote her employer, ‘would not hesitate even to the point of insulting a man and telling him to his face what she thought of him. Her impetuosity often landed me in difficulties, but her open and guileless temperament removed them as soon as they were created.’ Gandhi indulged Miss Schlesin’s idiosyncrasies because of her competence and her commitment. ‘Colour prejudice was foreign to her,’ he recalled, adding, ‘I have often signed without revision letters typed by her, as I considered her English to be better than mine, and had fullest confidence in her loyalty’. The woman who contributed most to Gandhi’s work and career was his wife Kasturba. Next, albeit by some distance, was his secretary Sonja Schlesin. She had a natural sympathy with the Indians and great respect for their leader. Yet despite her admiration for Gandhi, Miss Schlesin was keen to do more than draft and type letters. Her intelligence and passion needed more challenging outlets, which qualifying for the Bar could provide her with. In preparation for her change in profession, Miss Schlesin cut her hair short and began wearing a shirt and tie. In April 1909, the Transvaal Law Society wrote back rejecting her application. ‘The articling of women,’ they said, ‘is entirely without precedent in South Africa and was never contemplated by the Law.’ Miss Schlesin suppressed her disappointment and returned to her regular duties in Gandhi’s office.  Gandhi was released from Pretoria Prison on 24 May 1909. The authorities set him free early in the morning, in the hope ‘of preventing a demonstration’. However, when he came out at 7.30 a.m. several hundred Indians were waiting at the prison gate, with bouquets and garlands. They conveyed him to the home of G. P. Vyas (a prominent local resister), where he had breakfast. Gandhi proceeded to the Indian mosque in Pretoria, where he made a plea for donations. ‘While in gaol, I learnt from Mr Polak’s letter that the British Indian Association has become bankrupt … Therefore, those who have been carrying on their business [while others have been in jail] must lighten their pockets.’ He carried on to Johannesburg, where he was received at Park Station by a large crowd – mostly Indians, with a few Chinese and European friends such as Joseph Doke. He was garlanded and taken in a procession to the Hamidia Mosque. Gandhi expressed his displeasure at being called the ‘King of Hindus and Muslims’ by the crowd. He was merely a servant of the community. Urging more people to volunteer for the movement, he said that ‘a task that needs a thousand men cannot be accomplished by ten, as it were. The struggle is being prolonged because not enough men join it.’ Two weeks after coming out of prison, Gandhi spoke on ‘The Ethics of Passive Resistance’ to the Germiston Literary and Debating Society. The Society was run for and by liberal-minded whites. Here, the practitioner-turned-theorist of satyagraha argued that his method of protesting injustice, based on ‘soul- force’, was superior to rival methods based on physical force; not least because it ‘never caused suffering to others’. Therefore, argued Gandhi, the colonists should not take exception to Indians ‘making use of this [soul] force in order to obtain a redress of their grievances. Nor could such a weapon, if used by the Natives, do the slightest harm. On the contrary, if the Natives could rise so high as to understand and utilize this force, there would probably be no native question left to be solved.’ On 16 June 1909, a meeting of about 1,500 Indians was held outside the Fordsburg Mosque. It resolved to send a deputation to London to present their views to the Imperial Government. There was a heated discussion on the composition of the delegation. Some argued that a knowledge of English was essential. Others insisted that those who had not been to jail be excluded.  The British Indian Association nominated five men: its chairman, Ahmed Mahommed Cachalia; V. A. Chettiar, chairman of the Tamil Benefit Society; the English-and Gujarati-speaking lawyer, Gandhi; the Parsi, Nadeshir Cama, who had left his job as a postmaster to court arrest; and the Pretoria merchant Hajee Habib, who had previously stayed away from the movement but now declared himself a ‘passive resister’. Cachalia, Chettiar and Cama were all in prison, so only Gandhi and Habib were free to go. The meeting also decided that Henry Polak would travel to India to drum up support for their cause. Before leaving for London, Gandhi spoke to a journalist in Johannesburg, who sent a report on to the Daily Republican, published out of Springfield, Massachussets. The article described the sufferings of the Indians, and their satyagrahas against harsh laws, in sympathetic terms. Of Gandhi – whom he had met ‘a number of times’ – the journalist wrote: The struggle has reduced him to poverty, but this he does not regret, nor is he discouraged. Ultimate success he regards as sure. Passive resistance he considers more potent than the exercise of any physical force. Its strength is spiritual and must prevail. ‘I am absolutely convinced,’ he says, ‘of the invincibility of passive resistance. It will be the deliverance of Indians in South Africa and India as well.’82 In 1909, as in 1906, Gandhi had as his companion to London a representative of the merchant community. The two men left Johannesburg for Cape Town on 21 June. On the train, Gandhi scribbled a series of letters to Henry Polak. The plan was to send Polak to India, to lobby the Government and to raise funds. The letters provided specific instructions on what to say in the press and whom to contact for support. Articles written by Polak ‘should be translated in all the principal languages and widely circulated in India’. Polak was at Phoenix; he was advised that ‘unless you find complete encouragement from the people [in Durban] do not go to India.’ In an intriguing postscript, Gandhi asked him, in case he did go to India, to come back with a copy of a book on Saddarshan Samuccaya, the six schools of Indian philosophy.83 On reaching Cape Town, Gandhi was interviewed by a local newspaper. The Indians, he said, hoped the Imperial Government would act before the union of the four colonies was finalized. Their ‘great fear’ was ‘that under the Constitution, it will be a union of white races against British Indians and the Coloured races’.84  Boarding ship on the 23rd, Gandhi and Habib were seen off by a group of Cape Indians. The novelist Olive Schreiner had come to bid goodbye to a relative; seeing Gandhi, she insisted on coming on board ship to shake his hand, her gesture watched by many whites. Gandhi, who knew of her work, and who had certainly read her meditations on race reprinted in Indian Opinion, was immensely flattered. As he wrote to Polak, ‘Fancy the author of “Dreams” paying a tribute to passive resistance’.85 Meanwhile, a tribute of a different kind was being conveyed to Gandhi by means of a letter sent from India. The writer was Meer Allam Khan, the man who had assaulted Gandhi back in February 1908. The Pathan and the Gujarati had since mended fences, so much so that Khan had joined the satyagraha. He was arrested, and along with several dozen other resisters, deported to India. Arriving in the motherland in the middle of June, he wrote Gandhi a letter, in English, whose errors of grammar and construction cannot mask its manifest sincerity: I arrived in Bombay and hoping you are well. I have published all news of Transvaal’s operations in Bombay Gujarati newspapers, and I shall publish also in Punjab when I will go there. Please, sir, let me know about the Government law settlement and I hoping you will let me all the news of the case. Besides I shall attend to Lahore Anjumani Islam meeting and I shall speak at the meeting in Lahore all the above operation at Transvaal and shall see to Mr Lala Lajpatrai at Lahore and I shall take his opinion on the above matter and publish in all the Anglo-Indian newspapers. And when I shall approach to frontier then also I shall publish to all of our friend, and I shall try my best and daresay that you may not fear and don’t afraid I shall take much effect in this case and I shall go to Afghanistan and will inform each and everyone. The letter reached Johannesburg just after Gandhi left for London. It was read by Henry Polak, who immediately printed it in Indian Opinion. He sent on a copy to Gandhi, who would have read it with interest, pleasure, and, one thinks, a certain sense of vindication.            