 15 Big Little Chief   When Gandhi travelled to London in 1906, his companion was the larger-than- life H. O. Ally. His partner this time, Hajee Habib, was also a Muslim merchant; there the parallels ended. Habib did not smoke or drink, and said his prayers five times a day. He was happy to share Gandhi’s diet of fruit and vegetables, although he occasionally indulged himself with fish, and (again unlike the abstemious lawyer) drank tea and coffee. The British Indian Association had sent their delegates by first class, where Gandhi found himself ‘looked after by servants as though they were so many babies. There is something to eat every two hours. We cannot even lift a glass of water with our own hands.’ The passengers, he wrote to a friend, are ‘too much pampered’. On ship, he had ‘to live hedged in on all sides. My prayers here lack the depth, the serenity and concentration they had when I was in gaol.’ He wrote this not ‘in a frivolous mood, but after deep reflection … [W]e would all profit from the kind of simplicity and solitude we find in gaol.’ Gandhi and Habib disembarked in Southampton on the morning of 10 July. They proceeded to London, where they left their bags at their hotel and went to see L. W. Ritch. After lunch, they got to work, or at least Gandhi did. In 1906, a lady sent by Polak’s father had served as his secretary; this time, Henry’s unmarried sister, Maud, had agreed to take dictation and type his letters. On this, the first day, appointments were sought with Lord Ampthill, the former Governor of Madras who now served as the Chairman of the South Africa British Indian Committee, and with other friends and sympathizers in London and around.2 On the 14th, Gandhi wrote to Polak that he was ‘very pleased’ to have Maud working with him; she had come quite willingly, as she was jobless at home and ‘does not like her own company’. Polak himself was now in Gandhi’s homeland, promoting his friend’s cause, which was also his own. He was instructed ‘to see  most of the leading Anglo-Indians and Indians … You will require all the patience and tact you can command.’ Gandhi gave Polak the London news. Mrs Ritch was ill, after his oldest English friend had ‘bungled’ an operation on her. ‘Dr [Josiah] Oldfield,’ he complained, ‘has entirely fallen – even his supposed surgical skill is now no more … It hurts me to have to write of a man I have held in high estimation, but we have often to break our idols.’ On the other hand, other friends were gaining in esteem – such as Lord Ampthill, who, when he met him, had ‘transparent honesty, courtesy and genuine humility written on his face’. Gandhi’s compatriot Pranjivan Mehta was also in London, where he had come from Rangoon to admit his son to school. Fortunately, and probably not by accident, he was staying at the same hotel, the Westminster Palace. Gandhi found the Indians in London in a fever pitch of excitement. On 1 July 1909, shortly before he arrived, a student named Madanlal Dhingra had shot Sir Curzon Wyllie, who had been a senior army officer and civil servant in India. The incident occurred at a party at the Imperial Institute, where a large number of Indian students and British guests had gathered. Shortly before 11 p.m., as the guests were leaving, Dhingra went up to Wyllie and fired four shots at him at close range. He died instantly. At the time, Dhingra was studying engineering at University College, London. A native of Amritsar, he had matriculated from the Punjab University. He told his fellow students he hoped to qualify for the Indian Civil Service. That was a red herring; but of his intelligence there was no question. The doctor called to examine him after the murder found him ‘well educated, and of an intellectual type’, if ‘somewhat reticent in conversation’. He showed ‘no signs nor symptoms of insanity’. At his trial, on 23 July, Dhingra said he did ‘not think that any English Law Court has any authority to arrest me or detain me in prison’. He held the English responsible for hanging, deporting and starving to death millions of his countrymen, and for draining wealth out of India estimated at £100 million a year. It was thus ‘perfectly justifiable on our part to kill an Englishman who is polluting our sacred land’. He offered this telling analogy: In case this country is occupied by Germans, and an Englishman not bearing to see the Germans walking with the insolence of conquerors in the streets of London, goes and kills one or two  Germans, then if that Englishman is to be held as a patriot by the people of this country, then certainly I am a patriot, too, working for the emancipation of my motherland. Dhingra hoped to be sentenced to death, ‘for in that case, the vengeance of my countrymen will be all the more keener’. Among the Indians most moved by Dhingra’s act was a student from Maharashtra named Vinayak Damodar Savarkar. Deeply committed to the freedom of India – by any means possible – Savarkar, wrote an English friend of his, was imbued with ‘a curious and single-minded recklessness’.6 The judge did not allow Dhingra’s statement to be part of the official record, but Savarkar got hold of a copy and leaked it to the press, but not before embellishing it. Here Indian patriotism was given a religious colouring, with Dhingra invoking those divine slayers of evil, Rama and Krishna, in support of his own act. His one prayer, he added, was that he ‘may be reborn of the same mother [Goddess, India,] and may I re-die in the same cause till the cause is successful’. Savarkar and Dhingra were both associated with India House, the institution founded and funded by Shyamaji Krishnavarma, who was now in exile in France. The Times noted that Dhingra had ‘imbibed with disastrous effect the teaching of Mr Krishnavarma and others who more or less directly favour and commend political assassination.’When he met Krishnavarma in London in 1906, Gandhi had found him both interesting and intriguing. However, the satyagrahas he led in South Africa in 1907–8 had convinced him of the moral superiority of non-violent resistance. Now, back in London, Gandhi was horrified by the outcome of Krishnavarma’s preachings. Dhingra’s violent and vengeful act, he wrote, ‘has done India much harm; the deputation’s efforts have also received a setback … Mr Dhingra’s defence is inadmissible. In my view, he has acted like a coward. All the same, one can only pity the man. He was egged on to do this by ill-digested reading of worthless writings.’ Wyllie, noted Gandhi, had come as a guest among the Indian students. ‘No act of treachery can ever profit a nation,’ he insisted: Even should the British leave in consequence of such murderous acts, who will rule in their place? The only answer is: the murderers. Who will then be happy? Is the Englishman bad because he is an Englishman? Is it that everyone with an Indian skin is good? … India can gain nothing from the rule of murderers – no matter whether they are black or white.9  The fall-out of the Dhingra case was the topic of daily discussion between Gandhi and his friend, the doctor-jeweller from Rangoon, Pranjivan Mehta. A sharp critic of British colonial rule, Mehta was at first predisposed to the methods of armed struggle. However, after long arguments in their hotel, he came round to Gandhi’s point of view. These shifts are captured in a series of letters Gandhi wrote Henry Polak. On 20 August, Gandhi told Polak that Dr Mehta now ‘understands the struggle much better … [H]e has begun to see that passive resistance is a sovereign remedy for most of the ills of life.’ A week later, he reported ‘further important chats with Dr. Mehta. I think he is convinced now that ours is the right plan.’ In another week, Dr Mehta had agreed to fund a scholarship to England for one of the boys being schooled at Phoenix. He wanted this to be one of Gandhi’s own sons, but the latter, mindful of propriety, said he would send his nephew Chhaganlal instead. Chhagan would enrol himself at an Inns of Court, take a vow of poverty, stay with a vegetarian family in London, and during his stay ‘seek contact with every Indian student, in fact, force himself on their attention and, after insinuating himself in their favour, should present both in his life and by conversations, the Phoenix ideals to them’.The idea, evidently, was to use a convinced follower of non-violence to convert young Indians away from the path laid down by Madanlal Dhingra. Meanwhile, a student he was talking to in London had cleared up one of Gandhi’s old confusions. Gandhi had once toyed with the idea of coming to the United Kingdom to study medicine. Now, a young Indian from Cape Town, studying to be a doctor, told him that in two years he had had to kill fifty frogs. ‘If this is so,’ wrote Gandhi to Polak, ‘I have absolutely no desire to go in for medical studies. I would neither kill a frog, nor use one for dissecting, if it has been specially killed for the purpose of dissection.’ From London, Gandhi also wrote regularly to his other Jewish friend, Hermann Kallenbach. We don’t, alas, have Kallenbach’s letters, but Gandhi’s mix affection with instruction. Kallenbach was asked to read a book on the morals of diet, and told to ‘count your pennies’ and ‘hold your possessions in trust for humanity’. With Gandhi far away, Kallenbach sought consolation by visiting his family at Phoenix. Kasturba and he got on famously. He passed on an account of his visit  to Gandhi, who wrote back: That you should describe Mrs. Gandhi as your mother, shows your ultra-regard for me … That you can make yourself comfortable in my home (have I one?) without me and with all the awkward ways of Mrs. Gandhi and the children shows the height you have attained. You remind me of friendships of bygone ages of which one reads in histories and novels.12 While Dhingra was being tried, and then executed, Gandhi turned his attention to his own cause and his own methods. He had come to London to lobby, peacefully, for the rights of Indians in the Transvaal. ‘The best part of the day,’ he wrote to Olive Doke, ‘has to be devoted to interviewing people and explaining the same thing to them over and over and writing to them. At times one has to enter into elaborate explanations of things which may appear to one to be perfectly simple.’ Then he added: ‘I have done no sightseeing. I seem to have lost all desire for it.’ The lawyer’s main adviser in London was Lord Ampthill. Born the same year as Gandhi, 1869, Ampthill was – as described in the Dictionary of National Biography – an ‘instinctive liberal’, descended on both sides from famous Whig politicians. He had hoped to succeed Curzon as Viceroy of India; but the Secretary of State, Lord Morley, found him too pro-Indian for his taste.He certainly displayed much vigour in taking up Gandhi’s case. The two men wrote each other almost daily, the Indian sending typed missives (since he had ‘a very indifferent and illegible hand’), the Englishman writing by pen, in an elegant, cursive hand. The Parsi grandee, Sir Mancherjee Bhownaggree, had advised Gandhi to issue a statement to the newspapers about their mission. Ampthill demurred, saying that ‘no public pressure would be opportune or wise at the moment’; it might merely ‘make the authorities again harden their hearts’.The choice, for Gandhi and the Indians, lay ‘between the “diplomatic” and the “political” method’. If they chose the former, then they must leave the conduct of the negotiations entirely to Lord Ampthill and not go to the press, since ‘diplomacy is only possible through individual agency and by private action’. He told Gandhi ‘not to publish or circulate anything without first consulting me. It would be fatal if any of the responsible statesmen were offended or put out at the present juncture.’ Only if Ampthill’s negotiations failed should Gandhi try the public route advocated by Bhownaggree.  Ampthill asked Gandhi two questions. If the Asiatic Act was repealed and six educated Indians admitted annually, would that ‘finally remove the sense of injustice and indignity under which the Indian community in the Transvaal is suffering’? He added that there was ‘much prejudice in high quarters on account of a belief that “Passive Resistance” in the Transvaal is being fomented and financed by the party of sedition in India who do not desire that the question should be settled. Please tell me how I am to meet this charge.’ Gandhi replied that if the two concessions were granted, ‘I would certainly be contented.’ To the charge of being a pawn or tool in the hands of revolutionaries in India, he answered, I know of no Indian whether here, in South Africa or in India, who has so steadily, even defiantly, set his face against sedition – as I understand it – as I have. It is part of my faith not to have anything to do with it, even at the risk of my life … The movement in the Transvaal, with which I have identified myself, is an eloquent and standing protest in action against such methods. The test of passive resistance is self-suffering and not infliction of suffering on others. We have, therefore, not only never received a single farthing from the ‘party of sedition’ in India or elsewhere, but even if there was any offer, we should, if we were true to our principles, decline to receive it.16 The Cape politician J. X. Merriman was also in London at this time. So was General Smuts. Knowing the friendship between the two men, Gandhi asked the liberal Briton to press the hardline Boer into making the necessary concessions. He had, he told Merriman, just received a cable from South Africa ‘saying that the struggle has taken its first victim. A young Indian who was serving imprisonment as a passive resister, was discharged in a dying condition and died six days after his discharge. There are at present about 100 Indians in the Transvaal gaols and during the struggle, over 2,500 Indians have passed through them.’ The situation was dire, yet the solution, said Gandhi to Merriman, was ‘exceedingly simple’. All General Smuts had to do was repeal the Asiatic Act, while ‘placing highly educated Indians on a footing of equality under the Immigration Act’. The Government could make the education test as severe as it wished; and restrict the number of Indians who came in every year. But ‘what we resent,’ said Gandhi, ‘is the racial bar, involving as it does a national insult.’ Merriman declined to intervene, so Gandhi now met Lord Morley, who was Secretary of State for India, as well as Lord Crewe, Secretary of State for the  Colonies. Both gave him a ‘sympathetic hearing’, but without any specific assurances. Crewe had spoken with General Smuts, who said he was prepared to allow six educated Indians a year into the Transvaal, but as an administrative concession, not a legal right. If ‘equality is conceded in principle,’ said Smuts, then ‘the practice would ultimately have to conform to the principle, and in the end the Asiatic immigrant would be on the same footing as the European’ – a denouement which was, of course, quite unacceptable to the colonists, whether Boer or British. Smuts also met Ampthill, who told him that Gandhi was ‘as clear, convincing, and unyielding from his point of view as you are from yours’. Before the Transvaal Acts of 1907, Indians had enjoyed the theoretical right of entry to any part of the British Empire. Gandhi, wrote Ampthill to Smuts, is contending for a principle which he regards as essential and, so far as I can judge, he is no more likely to abandon a cause which he considers vital and just than any of us are likely to abandon our life-long principles of politics or religion … It is impossible not to admire the man, for it is evident that he recognises no court of appeal except that of his own conscience. Smuts answered that he was willing to repeal Act 2 of 1907 – the original legislation aimed at Asiatics, that had so offended Gandhi and his colleagues – and to admit a certain number of educated Indians, but without conceding the principle of theoretical equality. Ampthill now advised Gandhi to accept these concessions. ‘I am anxious,’ he said, for the sake of your community, that the struggle should cease, because I think you have already done enough for the sake of honour. You will be gaining something very substantial in the repeal of Act 2 of 1907 and you can make it quite clear that your opinions on the question of right remain unaltered even though you feel justified in giving up a quixotic struggle.19 As the word ‘quixotic’ suggests, after six weeks of intense lobbying on his behalf, Ampthill was a little exasperated with Gandhi. The Indian was getting increasingly impatient too. Joseph Doke reported to Kallenbach that he had received a letter from their mutual friend written in a ‘resigned-hopeless strain’.Soon, Gandhi made his sentiments public in a dispatch to Indian Opinion. ‘The more experience I have of meeting so-called big men or even men who are really great,’ he wrote, the more disgusted I feel after every such meeting. All such efforts are no better than pounding chaff. Everyone appears preoccupied with his own affairs. Those who occupy positions of power show little inclination to do justice. Their only concern is to hold on to their positions. We have to spend a whole  day in arranging for an interview with one or two persons. Write a letter to the person concerned, wait for his reply, acknowledge it and then go to his place. One may be living in the north and another in the south [of London]. Even after all this fuss, one cannot be very hopeful about this outcome. If considerations of justice had any appeal, we would have got [what we wanted] long before now. The only possibility is that some concessions may be gained through fear. It can give no pleasure to a satyagrahi to have to work in such conditions.21 Gandhi spent most Sundays with Millie Polak, who was now living in London with her young children. He renewed contacts with ‘Esoteric Christians’ he had first befriended in the 1880s.22 He sought an appointment with, and may even have met, Tolstoy’s British biographer Aylmer Maude. He took Pranjivan Mehta and Maud Polak to a farm outside London, run by a Tolstoyan named George Allen. They all enjoyed the visit; however, when Gandhi suggested they walk back to London in the spirit of the occasion, Maud protested, and they had to take the train instead.23 These encounters emboldened Gandhi to write directly to Tolstoy. He had, of course, been reading his work for many years now. He was an eager consumer of books and pamphlets written by Tolstoy and published by his acolytes in English translation. He also read books about the Russian master: among the volumes in his library were Ernest Howard Crosby’s Tolstoy as a Schoolmaster (1904) and Percy Redfern’s Tolstoy – A Study (1907).24 Gandhi was not the first Indian to write to Tolstoy. This was most likely a Madras journalist called A. Ramaseshan, who in 1901 wrote to the novelist describing the pitiful condition of India under British rule. Tolstoy answered that these sufferings would continue ‘as long as your people agree to serve [the rulers] as sepoys … [Y]ou must not help the English in their rule by violence and you must not participate in any way in the government based on violence.’ In the following years, Tolstoy was sent letters by Indian Muslims and Indian Hindus, each urging him to study their scriptures. Most recently, in June 1908, a Bengali radical named Taraknath Das (then in exile in America) asked Tolstoy to support them in their fight against the British. Das had asked for an endorsement of armed struggle; in reply, Tolstoy wrote despairingly of ‘the amazing stupidity indoctrinated in you by the advocates of the use of violence’. He asked the Indian to resist the ruler not by arms, but by non-violent non-cooperation. If Indians took no part ‘either in the violent deeds of the administration, in the law  courts, in the collection of taxes, or above all in soldiering, no one in the world will be able to enslave you’. Some of these letters had been reproduced in the Indian press, where Gandhi may have read them. In any case, he had his own reasons for writing to Tolstoy. In a letter posted from London on 1 October 1909, Gandhi said the Russian’s life and work had ‘left a deep impression on his mind’. He explained the genesis of the satyagraha in South Africa. He now planned an essay competition on the ethics and efficacy of Passive Resistance, and wanted to know whether Tolstoy thought this consistent with his idea of morality. Gandhi also asked for permission to reprint, in Indian Opinion, the letter written to Taraknath Das deploring the use of violence in political movements. If Tolstoy agreed, he wished to delete the slighting reference to reincarnation, which the Russian did not believe in, but which ‘is a cherished belief with millions in India, indeed, in China also … It explains reasonably the many mysteries of life. With some of the passive resisters who have gone through the gaols of the Transvaal, it has been their solace.’ Tolstoy wrote back immediately. He was pleased to hear of the struggle of ‘our dear brothers and co-workers in the Transvaal’. In Russia, ‘the same struggle of the tender against the harsh, of meekness and love against pride and violence, is every year making itself more and more felt among us also’, as in the growing refusals to undertake military service. However, he thought that ‘a competition, i.e., an offer of a monetary inducement in connection with a religious matter would, I think, be out of place.’ He agreed to the reprinting of his letter to Taraknath Das. Left to himself, he would not delete the sentence Gandhi disagreed with, ‘for, in my opinion, belief in reincarnation can never be as firm as belief in the soul’s immortality and in God’s justice and love. You may, however, do as you like about omitting it.’ Gandhi reproduced the modified ‘Letter to a Hindu’ in Indian Opinion. He introduced it as the work of ‘one of the clearest thinkers in the western world, one of the greatest writers, one who as a soldier has known what violence is and what it can do’. To those Indians at home (and abroad) who saw armed struggle as the necessary route to national salvation, Gandhi pointed out that ‘the assassination of Sir Curzon Wyllie was an illustration of that method in its worst and most detestable form. Tolstoy’s life has been devoted to replacing the  method of violence for removing tyranny or securing reform by the method of non-resistance to evil. He would meet hatred expressed in violence by love expressed in suffering’. Joseph Doke’s biography of Gandhi had just been published in London. This covered the main events of his life thus far – the upbringing in Kathiawar, the student years in London, the insult in the train and the attack on the Point, the racial laws in Natal and the Transvaal and Gandhi’s opposition to them – while interpreting his mission in a Christian idiom. In Doke’s eyes, the simplicity of Gandhi’s life and the truthfulness of his conduct, his readiness to court death in pursuit of justice, made him come closer to ‘the Jew of Nazareth’ than most practising Christians. Gandhi had himself told Doke that the New Testament, and the Sermon on the Mount in particular, had awakened him ‘to the rightness and value of Passive Resistance’. For all this, if Gandhi was not ‘a Christian in any orthodox sense’, then ‘orthodox Christianity has itself to blame’. Christians in the colonies denied the faith in their laws and their practice. This ‘discrepancy between a beautiful creed and our treatment of the Indian at the door,’ wrote Doke, ‘repels the man who thinks’. To recognize the justice of Gandhi’s struggle, to salute the suffering of the satyagrahis, would be the proper Christian thing to do. Doke asked thus for a repeal of the racial laws, a prelude to the construction of ‘a new Jerusalem, whose beautiful gates are ever open to all nations; where no ‘colour-bar’ is permitted to challenge the Indian, and no racial prejudice to daunt the Chinese; into whose walls even an Asiatic may build those precious stones which, one day, will startle us with their glory.’ Tolstoy was mentioned in Doke’s biography, as a significant influence on its subject. Gandhi now sent the book to the Russian writer, with this gloss on its contents: This struggle of the Indians in the Transvaal is the greatest of modern times, inasmuch as it has been idealised both as to the goal as also the methods adopted to reach the goal. I am not aware of a struggle in which the participators are not to derive any personal advantage at the end of it, and in which 50 per cent. of the persons affected have undergone great suffering and trial for the sake of a principle. It has not been possible for me to advertise the struggle as much as I should like. You command, possibly, the widest public today. If you are satisfied as to the facts you will find set forth in Mr Doke’s book, and if you consider that the conclusions I have arrived at are justified by the facts, may I ask you to use your influence in any manner you think fit to popularise the movement?  This letter is somewhat self-promoting. Yet it speaks of an extraordinary self- confidence. The struggle in the Transvaal involved a few thousand Indians in a single colony of a single country, and yet Gandhi was already seeing it in world- historic terms – as, indeed, ‘the greatest of modern times’.29 Even as Gandhi asked Tolstoy to publicize his struggle, he used Tolstoy’s name to legitimize the movement in South Africa itself. He published their correspondence in Indian Opinion, saying, ‘it is a matter of deep satisfaction that we have the support of such a great and holy man. His letters shows us convincingly that soul-force – satyagraha – is our only resort. Deputations and the like are all vain efforts.’ He spoke of Tolstoy’s fearlessness at the age of eighty, as manifest in his continuing criticisms of the Russian state. He quoted passages from Tolstoy’s writings chastising ‘those who oppress, imprison or hang thousands of men’, and which dared ‘the tyrannical officers’ to arrest him. A man who can write this, who has such thoughts and can act up to them has mastered the world, has conquered suffering and achieved his life’s end. True freedom is to be found only in such a life. That is the kind of freedom we want to achieve in the Transvaal. If India were to achieve such freedom, that indeed would be swarajya.30  The production of Joseph Doke’s book on Gandhi had been underwritten by Pranjivan Mehta. Mehta now offered to fund the printing and circulation of Tolstoy’s ‘Letter to a Hindoo’ as well. He would pay for its publication as a pamphlet in Gujarati and English, and for its distribution in England and South Africa. Mehta thought that Gandhi’s nephew Chhaganlal should travel through India promoting these books and booklets. He would pay for that, too. Further, he suggested that Gandhi have a friend (perhaps a British Tolstoyan) write an independent essay ‘following Tolstoy’s thoughts’ and outlining the European writer’s interest in India. ‘It will be great,’ wrote Mehta to Gandhi, ‘if the essay reaches those [English people] who believe that India is harmful for people of England (except for the rich and those who make their living in India). If we find a person with such thoughts to write the essay, it would be good.’ Mehta’s generosity was prompted by his patriotism, and by his affection for Gandhi. From very early in their relationship he had seen in his friend a future leader of India and Indians. In this London autumn of 1909, Mehta and Gandhi spent many evenings at the Westminster Palace Hotel, discussing India’s future and Gandhi’s place in it. The jeweller was certain that the lawyer would play a  central role in the emancipation of their motherland. He wanted Gandhi to come back to India sooner rather than later. If this mission to London was successful, and the constitution of the new Union of South Africa adequately safeguarded Indian rights, the lawyer would be free to return home, to act as a political leader (and moral exemplar) in a much larger territory and among many more of his own people. That Mehta could in some way aid in the elevation of Gandhi was a matter of pride. A letter written as he was leaving London indicates how he viewed the relationship. ‘I forgot to return to you 6 pence I borrowed from you from the hotel stairs,’ wrote Mehta to Gandhi, ‘I will send a check for it and other expenses tomorrow.’ Mehta would look to Gandhi for moral and political guidance, so long as financial transactions ran strictly and always in the other direction. In the middle of September, after ten fruitless weeks in London, Gandhi wrote asking for a further interview with Lord Morley, the celebrated liberal thinker who was now serving as Secretary of State for India. ‘We cannot believe,’ wrote Gandhi, ‘that Lord Morley, who is regarded all over the world as the type of British Liberalism would regard with indifference so reactionary and illiberal a policy as that which has been adopted by the Transvaal Government.’ Having appealed to Morley’s reputation, he now appealed to the duties of his office, by speaking of the support that Henry Polak was receiving on his tour through the subcontinent, which showed that ‘India is deeply hurt by the insult that is put upon her by the racial disqualification imported for the first time into colonial legislation, and is much moved by the sufferings that have been gone through by hundreds of British Indians in the Transvaal.’ The letter received an arch reply, which noted that ‘the point which you wish to press upon Lord Morley is not new to him’. Morley would not grant another interview. Gandhi and Habib were told to meet the Secretary of State for the Colonies, Lord Crewe, instead. When they did, Crewe asked: ‘Can you not accept the substantial thing that General Smuts is willing to give?’ Gandhi answered that Smuts’ proposal to admit educated Indians by administrative discretion ‘still leaves the racial taint on the Statute-book’. Crewe responded,  ‘What you say is just and proper, but General Smuts is not an Englishman and, therefore, does not like the idea even of theoretical equality.’ At this stage, Hajee Habib played the Imperial card, noting that ‘the matter was exciting a very great deal of commotion in India.’ Gandhi added that ‘the racial question is being very keenly resented in India.’ Crewe said he had already spoken to Smuts of the wider repercussions, but the General felt that ‘if theoretical equality were kept up, it might be used for fresh agitation in order to increase the demands.’ Gandhi clarified that if the principle of right was conceded, ‘we should not raise any further agitation.’ Crewe said, in closing, that he would discuss the question again with Smuts.33 Henry Polak’s campaign in India – mentioned meaningfully to Lords Morley and Crewe – had indeed been bearing fruit. Landing in Bombay in the first week of August, he met newspaper editors, leading industrialists (such as the Parsi, Jehangir Petit), rising lawyers (among them the London-educated Gujarati Muslim, Mohammed Ali Jinnah) and veteran nationalists, notably Dadabhai Naoroji, who, despite being very old and very frail, read Indian Opinion regularly and said he admired Gandhi’s ‘persistence and perseverence’. ‘All my time has been occupied,’ wrote Polak to Gandhi, ‘in seeing people [and] being interviewed.’ His friend’s mentor, Gopal Krishna Gokhale, had placed ‘the whole of his organisation [the Servants of India Society] at my disposal’. Although Gokhale was ‘killing himself with overwork’, and had just received ‘a most depressing report’ from his doctor, he had found time to read a draft of a pamphlet Polak had written on the situation in South Africa. The Professor ‘thinks it good, has read it, and whilst he thinks it much too strong in parts (I have since toned it down somewhat), has passed it.’ Polak was now in search of a publisher, armed with an assurance from Jehangir Petit that he would underwrite the cost of printing 20,000 copies.34 Having acquired a smattering of Hindustani, Polak had taken to addressing Gandhi as ‘Bhai’, or brother (he later amended this to ‘Bada Bhai’, elder brother). Hearing of the stonewalling by the big men in London, Polak wrote that ‘yours is splendid patience. I envy you. I see more and more the beauty of the Gita teaching – act, and don’t worry about results. But I see more and more how difficult it is to do this and admire the man who can.’  Three weeks talking to Indians in India had only consolidated Polak’s respect for Gandhi. ‘The conclusion I have [come] to after all these conversations and interviews,’ he wrote, is that India, even at its most intelligent, is many miles behind us in the Transvaal. The people here admit the value of passive resistance, but say that you wouldn’t get anyone to go to gaol. I don’t know what my countrymen are worrying about India for. It seems a harmless enough country. Provided they don’t send another Curzon or anyone … approaching one here, the country is safe for apparently hundreds of years. They want a couple of hundred Gandhis here. Do you know, I haven’t met a man here who approaches you spiritually or in intensity of devotion. Mr G[opal] K[rishna] G[okhale] is the nearest, and though he is probably ahead of you intellectually, in public experience, and in administrative power, he is not in the running so far as pure religion is concerned and he himself admits it.35 On 14 September, a large public meeting in support of the Transvaal Indians was held in Bombay’s Town Hall. Polak and sundry Servants of India did the organizing. An array of knights were in attendance, of different faiths – Sir J. B. Petit, Sir V. D. Thackersey, Sir Currimbhoy Ibrahim. Among the untitled grandees were the lawyer M. A. Jinnah and the editor K. Natarajan. The main speaker was Gokhale, who, after rehearing the facts of discrimination and the course of the struggle, saluted the leadership of ‘the indomitable Gandhi, a man of tremendous spiritual power, one who is made of the stuff of which great heroes and martyrs are made’. Gandhi and his colleagues were ‘fighting not for themselves but for the honour and future interests of our motherland’. ‘I am sure,’ said Gokhale, that ‘if any of us had been in the Transvaal during these days we should have been proud to range ourselves under Mr Gandhi’s banner and work with him and suffer in the cause.’ This was extraordinary praise, from a man who was perhaps the pre-eminent Indian statesman of his day. Polak, speaking after Gokhale, stressed the unity that had been forged by the struggle. The Indians in the Transvaal had thrown aside ‘all ancient misunderstandings. Hindu, Mahomedan, Parsi, Christian, and Sikh have … stood in the same prisoner’s dock and starved in the same gaol.’ Class as well as community differences were transcended, as ‘the merchant and the hawker, the lawyer and the priest, the Brahmin and the man of low caste, have all drunk the same bitter sweet draught, have all eaten from the same dish of bitter experience.’ Polak then named some stalwarts, such as the Tamil Thambi Naidoo, ‘who goes to jail with a smile on his face’; the Muslim A. M. Cachalia, who ‘lost his whole fortune rather than break his solemn oath’ (to go to jail); the Parsi, Rustamjee, who  would ‘give all he could himself, in the cause of his country’; and, not least, ‘Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi, saint and patriot, who would gladly allow his body to be torn asunder by wild horses rather than compromise his honour and that of his country.’ The press reports of this meeting reached Gandhi in London, to cheer and console him after the failure to get the Imperial Government to see his point of view. Later letters from Polak, who had been to stay with the Indian leader in Poona, passed on confirmation of Gokhale’s admiration. He held Gandhi up ‘as an example of patriotism, moderation, endurance, self-sacrifice and practical endeavour’. ‘His profoundest regret,’ continued Polak, ‘is that you are not here to join him and inspire him in his work. Were you two together, it would be a rare combination of soul forces.’ From Bombay, Polak proceeded to Gandhi’s homeland, Gujarat, where meetings were held in Surat, Kathore and Ahmedabad, all passing resolutions condemning the ‘unjust and degrading legislation’ in Transvaal and saluting the sacrifice of those who opposed it. Polak now moved south to Madras, to the land of the Tamils who had been in the vanguard of the satyagraha in the Transvaal. His host there was G. A. Natesan, an energetic editor, printer and publisher known to his friends as an ‘American hustler’. Polak spoke at a public meeting, where, as he told Gandhi, ‘I had a fine ovation, and people told me it drew tears. Isn’t it wonderful! And yet, the Transvaal story is enough to bring tears.’ The people he met in Madras were, like Gokhale, impressed above all by the inter-religious harmony that underlay the struggle in South Africa. ‘Everybody to whom I have spoken,’ he reported, ‘Hindu, Mahomedan and Parsi alike, feels that we are far advanced politically over the majority of Indians here. They all feel that we have sent a lesson which they ought to follow but that they will have the greatest possible difficulty in following.’ Polak travelled from Madras to the mofussil, to the interior of the Tamil country where so many of the indentured labourers in Natal had their roots. Among the towns Polak visited and spoke in were Madurai, Tirunelveli, Trichy and Tuticorin, drawing the comment from Gandhi that he had seen ‘practically the whole of India – a privilege I have myself not yet been able to enjoy’.Not the ‘whole of India’, actually, for, as Polak cheekily told his friend, he still hoped  to ‘go over to Malabar before I leave here, in order to see the Nair women, who I am told, take one husband after another. That beats you all, who take one wife after another. I am inclined to think the women are right!’ In the last week of October, G. A. Natesan brought out Henry Polak’s pamphlet The Indians of South Africa: Helots Within the Empire and How They Are Treated. This was divided into two parts, the first providing an overview of Indian migration into South Africa, the migrants’ work as labourers and traders, and the restrictions they faced in different provinces; the second focusing on the Transvaal and the resistance movement there. Written with passion and clarity, it described indenture as a system of ‘heartlessness and cruelty’, and the free Indian as always living ‘in peril of having his feelings outraged and his sense of decency offended in a number of ways’. The anti-Asiatic prejudices of colonial statesmen like Lord Milner and General Smuts were exposed and documented. The struggle of the Indians, who had ‘deliberately pitted soul-force against brute-strength’, was narrated and celebrated. While Polak spoke at length of the heroism of ordinary folk, he did not fail to draw attention to Gandhi’s own sufferings. He mentioned a protest by him which led to better food being served to the prisoners. He wrote in vivid, even lurid, detail of how a Chinese prisoner attempted a ‘bestial act’ on an African, with Gandhi, in the same cell, ‘dread[ing] every moment that the Chinese, foiled of his horrible purpose with the powerful Kaffir, would direct his attentions to himself (Mr Gandhi)’. On another occasion, Gandhi, reaching for a closet to answer nature’s call, ‘was seized by a burly Kaffir, lifted high in the air, and dashed violently to the ground. Had he not seized hold of a door-post as he fell he would undoubtedly have had his skull split open!’ Polak ended his pamphlet with a pointed, passionate wake-up call to India and Indians: Do the names of Gandhi, Dawood Mahomed, Rustomjee Jeevanjee, Cachalia, Aswat, Thambi Naidoo, Vyas, Imam Abdul Kadir Bawazeer, and a host of others, not call forth the flush of shame and indignation upon the cheek of the leaders of Indian thought and life, that these men should have done so much for India, and they so little for their humble suffering brethren in the Transvaal? Mahomedan, Hindu, Parsee, Christian, Sikh, lawyer, priest, merchant, trader, hawker, servant, soldier, waiter, poor man, rich man, grey-beard, child, man, and woman have suffered alike in this gigantic struggle to maintain the national honour unsullied. The Transvaal Indians have understood that upon their efforts depended whether or not this race-virus should infect the rest of South Africa and the rest of the Empire, whether India herself would not have to suffer and drink deep of the cup  of humiliation. What of all this has India realized? Have the bitter cries from the Transvaal Indians penetrated to the ears of their brethren in the Motherland? What patriotic Indians should do, said Polak, was to form a national body with branches in every major city, which would make ‘powerful representations’ to the Government on the condition of their compatriots in South Africa. Simultaneously, ‘the press should agitate the question in season and out of season.’ Surely it was not ‘beyond the powers of the accumulated intelligence of India … to keep the ship of State off the rocks of racialism’. Polak’s pamphlet was deemed dangerous enough for the South African authorities to publicly denounce it.On the other hand, his publisher, G. A. Natesan, was so impressed that he now asked Polak to write a short life of Gandhi, in a series that had previously seen profiles of Dadabhai Naoroji, M. G. Ranade, G. K. Gokhale, Lajpat Rai and other leaders of the Indian national movement. Modestly titled M. K. Gandhi: A Sketch of His Life and Work, this second pamphlet was published anonymously. Polak began by speaking of Gandhi’s ‘extraordinary love of truth’, his ‘proverbial’ generosity, his ‘sense of public duty’. The ‘majestic personality of Mohandas Gandhi’, wrote this friend and follower, ‘overshadows his comparatively insignficant physique. One feels oneself in the presence of a moral giant, whose pellucid soul is a clear, still lake, in which one sees Truth clearly mirrored.’ These personal qualities were oriented towards a large cause. ‘Mr Gandhi had appointed for himself one supreme task – to bring Hindus and Mussalmans together and to make them realise that they were one brotherhood and sons of the same Motherland.’ Polak made the large, daring, claim that ‘perhaps, in this generation, India has not produced such a noble man – saint, patriot, statesman in one.’ Gandhi, said his English admirer, ‘lives for God and for India’. His ‘one desire is to see unity among his fellow-countrymen’. By forging unity among Hindus and Muslims in South Africa, Gandhi had demonstrated ‘the possibility of Indian national unity and the lines upon which the national edifice shall be constructed’. Polak wrote to his friend that ‘with your great modesty you will probably be unable to appreciate the fact that you are regarded as one of India’s greatest men today. But I am afraid I shall play but a poor Boswell to your Johnson.’ In  another letter he was slightly less modest. ‘I have revealed to the Indian leaders what sort of man you are,’ wrote Polak to Gandhi. ‘Do you know, I have not met one man to equal you in meekness, spirituality, devotion, and practical energy. I don’t believe any other country could have given you birth.’ Through his conversations, speeches and writings in India, Polak had helped make Gandhi far better known in his own country. The admiration was manifest and genuine, and the subject was suitably grateful. When an Anglo-Indian paper dismissed Polak as a ‘paid agent’ of the Transvaal Indians, Gandhi wrote a spirited rejoinder, praising his commitment and sacrifice, and saying, with uncharacteristic sharpness, that ‘if a son in a joint family dying in the performance of his sonship may be described as a paid agent, because he is clothed and fed out of the family funds, then Mr Polak is undoubtedly a paid agent, but not until then.’ The Government of India knew how important and effective Polak’s work was. He was followed everywhere by police spies, who tampered with his mail, and asked questions of those working in the homes and inns where he stayed. Polak noticed this with amusement at first, but with time also with irritation. ‘The authorities must be mad,’ he told Gandhi, ‘to follow that damnable Russian System [of spying] which in England we affect to condemn but apparently it is all lies and hypocrisy!’ When told of the spies, Gandhi told Polak that he could ‘understand my letters to you being opened, but that Millie’s letters to you are deliberately opened, passes my comprehension. Let us hope they are wiser for having read the letters, and also that they have learnt the meaning of wifely devotion.’Polak’s reply underscored the difference between the marriage of the Gandhis, based as it was on obligation and tradition, and his own, based rather on love and romance. ‘You take the opening of Millie’s letter more philosophically than she and I do,’ he remarked. ‘I see that your days of writing love-letters are over! I am sorry for you! I haven’t yet authorised Millie to start classes in marital devotion!’ Polak’s extended trip to India was itself an object lesson in devotion to a friend and a cause. The real nature of his sacrifice is revealed in a letter that thanked Gandhi, with sincerity and also envy, for spending so much time with his family in London. ‘Don’t you find Millie more lovable as time passes?’ he wrote, adding, ‘I do!!! (Amazing discovery, isn’t it?)’  From Madras, Polak took a boat to Rangoon. He was met at the wharf by Pranjivan Mehta – now back from London – and by Madanjit Vyavaharik, one of Gandhi’s original collaborators on Indian Opinion, who was also based here, editing a journal called United Burma.48 Polak stayed with Mehta, discussing, among other things, the past and future of their mutual friend. Either off his own bat, or in consultation with Polak, Mehta wrote Gopal Krishna Gokhale a remarkable letter which began: Dear Sir, During my last trip to Europe I saw a great deal of Mr Gandhi. From year to year (I have known him intimately for over twenty years) I have found him getting more and more selfless. He is now leading almost an ascetic sort of life – not the life of an ordinary ascetic that we usually see but that of a great Mahatma and the one idea that engrosses his mind is his motherland. It seems to me that any one who desires to work for his country ought to study Gandhi and his latest institution – Phoenix Colony and Phoenix School. The passive resistance as carried on in the Transvaal under his Guidance can also be better studied on the spot. Mr Polak who is now here and living with me, tells me that the ‘Servants of India’ are doing excellent work; it seems to me that the study of every worker for India is not complete unless he has studied Mr Gandhi and his Institutions. Mehta went on to offer to fund an associate of Gokhale’s to go to South Africa ‘and put himself absolutely at the disposal of Mr Gandhi’. He even suggested a name – that of the Madras scholar and orator, V. S. Srinivasa Sastri.49 This was a precocious pronouncement of Mohandas K. Gandhi’s greatness. Particularly striking is Mehta’s use of the honorific ‘Mahatma’, ‘great and holy soul’, normally reserved for spiritual figures whose influence resonates down the centuries, here conferred on a mere lawyer and activist. The conventional wisdom has it that it was the poet Rabindranath Tagore who, around 1919, first began to call Gandhi ‘Mahatma’, after he had become a major figure in Indian politics. An alternate claim has been made on behalf of the Gujarat town of Gondal, which seems to have conferred the title on Gandhi when he visited it on his return from South Africa in 1915. Pranjivan Mehta preceded them both – although, of course, in a private letter rather than a public declaration. We do not know whether Polak read Mehta’s letter before it was sent, and it appears that Gandhi never saw or knew of it at all. The recipient of the letter, although a man of great wisdom and selflessness, must have read it with mixed emotions. Gandhi professed Gokhale to be his mentor; but here was Mehta telling the teacher that he could learn a lesson from the student in South Africa,  that the struggle for the emancipation of millions in India could profit from a close study of the struggle of a few thousand migrants in Natal and the Transvaal. After staying with Mehta in Rangoon, Polak sailed to Calcutta to carry on his campaign for the South African Indians. A large public meeting was held here on 3 December, ‘to protest against the treatment of Indians in the Transvaal’. The gathering was ecumenical – it included the prominent Hindu liberals Bhupendranath Basu and Surendranath Bannerjee, leading Bengali Muslims, as well as some Marwari businessmen of the city. From Calcutta, Polak proceeded to the north of the country, speaking at towns across the United Provinces and Punjab. In Banaras the meeting was chaired by Annie Besant, the former British socialist who was now an Indian spiritualist. Besant, said Polak, ‘delivered the finest address that I have heard for many years. There was no play acting in it. What she said was from the heart and she spoke very strongly.’ Mrs Besant subscribed Rs 30 for a fund for the South African Indians, which had collected Rs 1,000 by the end of the meeting. This pleased Polak, as did a ‘most refreshing dip’ the next day in the river Ganges, a rite of passage for a Hindu, but purely optional for this mostly lapsed Jew. Polak’s talks and writings were noticed by, among other people, the brilliant Bengali radical Aurobindo Ghose (later known as Sri Aurobindo). In April 1907, Ghose had written a series of essays on the possibilities of passive resistance in India.He had not, it appears, read Gandhi at that stage; nor, it seems, had Gandhi read him. Now, Polak’s visit spurred the Bengali revolutionary to write a fascinating essay on the situation in South Africa. ‘The great glory of the Transvaal Indians,’ wrote Ghose, is that while men under such circumstances have always sunk into the condition to which they have been condemned and needed others to help them out of the mire, these sons of Bharatavarsha, inheritors of an unexampled moral and spiritual tradition, have vindicated the superiority of the Indian people and its civilisation to all other peoples in the globe and all other civilisations by the spirit in which they have refused to recognise the dominance of brute force over the human soul. Stripped of all means of resistance, a helpless handful in a foreign land, unaided by India, put off with empty professions of sympathy by English statesmen, they, ignored by humanity, are fighting humanity’s battle in the pure strength of the spirit, with no weapon but the moral force of their voluntary sufferings and utter self-sacrifice … The passive resistance which we had not the courage and unselfishness to carry out in India, they have carried to the utmost in the Transvaal under far more arduous circumstances, with far less right to hope for success. Whether they win or lose in the struggle, they have contributed far more than their share to the future greatness of their country.53  Indian politics was then divided into ‘Moderate’ and ‘Extreme’ camps, the former politely, even apologetically, asking for concessions from the British, the latter militantly, even angrily, demanding them. Aurobindo Ghose was in political terms an ‘extremist’, indeed, an extreme Extremist. He had close contacts with terrorist groups in Bengal, and in May 1908 he and his brother Barindranath were arrested in what became known as the Alipore Bomb Case. Barin was sentenced to life imprisonment; Aurobindo, however, was released after a year in prison.54 The party of the Ghoses had (the word is inescapable) extreme contempt for Moderates like Gandhi’s mentor, Gokhale. It is a measure of Polak’s success as a publicist that he could obtain, for their cause in the Transvaal, the endorsement of both Gopal Krishna Gokhale and Aurobindo Ghose.  With Gandhi in London and Polak in the subcontinent, the English pages of Indian Opinion were being edited by the Reverend Joseph Doke. As before, the journal carried weekly updates on the struggle. One issue noticed the death of a young Tamil named Nagappen, who had contracted pneumonia in jail. Thirty horse-driven cabs accompanied the cortège to the cemetery. There was a wreath from the British Indian Association, and another ‘from Leung Quinn with deepest sympathy; he died for conscience’s sake.’ An editorial in Indian Opinion praised the contributions of Tamil women. ‘They have seen their husbands and sons imprisoned, they have taken up the duties of life which do not usually fall to a woman’s lot and have borne the heaviest burdens to make it possible for those they love to be true to conscience.’ Gandhi’s journal also wrote about a failed assassination attempt on the Viceroy of India. ‘As passive resisters,’ commented the paper, we have absolutely no sympathy with the employment of bombs and such like symbols of force to achieve Nationalist objects … We are thankful to believe that the upholders of bomb throwing are a small minority of the responsible men, who are working for the uplifting of India, and we trust that the ethics of passive resistance, which are now prominent in our Motherland through the interest which she is taking in our welfare [in South Africa], may lay hold of the judgment of our people. This was written by the standin editor, Joseph Doke, who had to ventriloquize in the absence of Gandhi and speak thus of India as his ‘Motherland’, too. In other issues, Harilal’s fourth term in prison was noticed, as also the fresh incarcerations of Parsee Rustomjee, Thambi Naidoo and others. In other places  and past times, remarked Indian Opinion, jail-going ‘brought shame, humiliation and the criminal taint with it.’ In this place at this time, however, ‘the glory of heroism rests like a halo upon it – and in the Transvaal the man who has not been to gaol is the questionable character.’ As before, meetings were held every Sunday at the Hamidia Mosque in Johannesburg, where the latest batch of satyagrahis released were welcomed and the latest batch of satyagrahis who had courted arrest were saluted. At one meeting, in early September, Joseph Doke made a special point of praising the Chinese resisters. He told his Indian friends that they ‘ought to be delighted how loyally they were standing by their Asiatic brethren, so that Mr Quinn and 74 Chinese had just been arrested, and would have to face imprisonment.’ Gandhi was keeping in touch with South Africa through Indian Opinion and via letters from friends. One of these was Thambi Naidoo, now temporarily out of jail. When he emerged from his most recent prison sentence, Indian Opinion wrote that ‘Mr Thambi Naidoo looks well and hardy, and he has come out a giant in purpose. His is an uncrushable spirit.’In early October, Thambi wrote to Gandhi that ‘all Tamil prisoners discharged from the prison during your absence are ready to go to jail again and again until the Government will grant to [sic] our request.’ The Tamil leader travelled to Pretoria in the last week of September, receiving a batch of resisters who had recently been discharged. He found them ‘thin and weak’ owing to the ‘insufficiency of food and the absence of ghee’ in the prison diet, and yet ‘they are all prepare[d] to go back to gaol.’ Thambi saluted their human will, adding however that ‘I depend upon no other than Bhagawan [God], he is the only one who can bring the Government down to do their duty towards [the] weak.’ By October 1909 it was clear that the diplomatic method advocated by Lord Ampthill had failed. Gandhi now wrote to the Colonial Office that since a settlement was not forthcoming, he intended to address a series of public meetings before returning to South Africa. He spoke to a group of Parsis in London, where he saluted the sacrifice of their co-religionists – Parsee Rustomjee, Shapurji Sorabjee, et al. – in South Africa. On 24 October, he spoke to a mixed gathering of Indians, sharing a platform with V. D. Savarkar. It was Vijaya Dashami, the last day of the Dasehra festival, marking the victory on the  battlefield of Ram over Ravan. The moderate and the extremist were a study in contrast. Gandhi wore a tailcoat and a dress shirt. Savarkar was dressed more casually. Gandhi wrote later that ‘Mr Savarkar delivered a spirited speech on the great excellence of the Ramayana.’ Savarkar had insisted that just as, in ancient times, Hindu gods had vanquished Lankan demons with the force of arms, so with the same methods would modern Hindus now put their British conquerors to flight. A young student who was present remembered – forty years later – the contrast between the two men. Savarkar was ‘by far the most arresting personality’ at the meeting; for ‘around him had been built a flaming galaxy of violent revolutionism’. Gandhi, on the other hand, seemed shy and diffident; the students had to ‘ben[d] their heads forward to hear the great Mr Gandhi speak’. His voice and speech were of a piece with his manner – ‘calm, unemotional, simple, and devoid of rhetoric’. It fell to Gandhi to introduce Savarkar at the Dasehra meeting. In public he was polite, saying he did not want to stand between the speaker and his audience. His real feelings were communicated in a letter to Lord Ampthill, which noted the unmistakable ‘awakening of the national consciousness’ among Indians in London, tarred somewhat by an ‘impatience of British rule. In some cases the hatred of the whole [white] race is virulent.’ Gandhi had been in discussion with the extremists, trying to ‘convince them of the errors of their ways’. One extremist (whom he does not name, but who most likely was Savarkar) spoke to Gandhi ‘with a view to convince me that I was wrong in my methods and that nothing but the use of violence, covert or open or both, was likely to bring about redress of the wrongs they consider they suffer.’ Gandhi answered that he wished to take his own ‘humble share in national regeneration’, albeit with gentler, more incremental methods. Gandhi was alarmed by the hostility of the extremists towards his mentor, Gopal Krishna Gokhale. Their house journal, Bande Matram, had dismissed the Poona leader as ‘mean and cowardly’. In a public rejoinder, Gandhi saluted Gokhale’s decades of service, remarking that ‘it is the duty of both the extremists and moderates to see that they do not pull down the work of those who have been called the pillars of India; they are welcome to build further on it. Otherwise, they will be cutting off the very branch on which they are sitting.’  Gandhi also wrote to Gokhale, reporting the ‘extreme bitterness’ against him among Savarkar and company in London. The criticism could best be answered, he thought, by Gokhale visiting the Transvaal and identifying with the movement. ‘I claim that the Transvaal struggle is national in every sense of the term,’ wrote Gandhi. ‘It deserves the greatest encouragement. I have considered it to be the greatest struggle of modern time. That it will succeed in the end I have not the slightest doubt. But an early success will break up the violence movement in India.’ Gandhi wanted Gokhale to come ‘to the Transvaal, publicly declaring that it was your intention to share our sorrows and, therefore, to cross the Transvaal border as a citizen of the Empire’. His coming would give the cause a ‘world-wide significance, the struggle will soon end and your countrymen will know you better. The last consideration may not weigh with you. But it does with me … If you are arrested and imprisoned, I should be delighted. I may be wrong, but I do feel that it is a step worth taking for the sake of India.’This was a letter as confidently presumptuous as that written to Tolstoy. To be sure, it was written out of concern for his mentor, and for his reputation. Gokhale’s reply is unavailable. But he could scarcely have gone back on the principles and prejudices of a lifetime. His style was to reason and appeal, to draft petitions and make sonorous – if occasionally also ponderous – speeches in the Imperial Council. To court arrest was as foreign to his temperament as the firing of a gun was to Gandhi’s. In London, Gandhi continued to monitor, from long distance, the moral education of his son Manilal. The boy was now fifteen, and his father was determined that his passage into adulthood would be smoother – or at any rate less rocky – than his brother Harilal’s. The excerpts below are revealing.  Gandhi to Manilal, 10 August 1909: Thinking of the state of affairs in the country, I believe very few Indians need marry at the present time … A person who marries in order to satisfy his carnal desire is lower than even the beast. For the married, it is considered proper to have sexual intercourse only for having progeny. The scriptures also say so … I want you to understand the purport of what I said above; and, understanding it, conquer your senses. Do not be scared by this and think that I want to bind you not to marry even after the age of 25. I do not want to put undue pressure on you or anyone whatever. I just want to give you advice. If you do not think of marriage even at the age of 25, I think it will be to your good.  Gandhi to Manilal, 17 September, on hearing that the boy had been nursing the ailing Albert West: To do good to others and serve them without any sense of egoism – this is real education. Gandhi to Manilal, 27 September, in reply to an apparently anxious, confused letter: You get nervous at the question, ‘What are you going to do?’ If I was to answer on your behalf, I would say that you are going to do your duty. Your present duty is to serve your parents, to study as much as you can get the opportunity to do and to work in the fields … You must be definite on this point at least – that you are not going to practise law or medicine. We are poor and want to remain so … Our mission is to elevate Phoenix; for through it we can find our soul and serve our country. Be sure that I am always thinking of you. The true occupation of man is to build his character … He who does not leave the path of morality never starves, and is not afraid if such a contingency arises … While writing this I feel like meeting and embracing you; and tears come to my eyes as I am unable to do that. Be sure that Bapu [Father] will not be cruel to you. Whatever I do, I do it because I think it will be in your interest. You will never come to grief, for you are doing service to others. Gandhi to Manilal, 22 October: I see that you have again begun to be worried about your education. Can you not give an answer to the question, ‘What class are you in?’ Hence-forward you may say that you are in Bapu’s class. Why does the idea of study haunt you again and again? If you want to study for earning your livelihood, it is not proper; for God gives food to all. You can get enough to eat even by doing manual labour … I want you to shed all fear. Do have faith in me.66 Manilal appears from these letters to be less truculent or questioning than his elder brother, if likewise concerned with his education and his sexuality. As for the father, he cannot but be hortatory, yet one notices an undercurrent of tenderness, absent in the often unfeeling letters to his elder son. A letter written to his third son, Ramdas, also displays a softness that is new. ‘Do not be angry with me if I have not brought anything for you [from London]. There was nothing I liked. What could I do if nothing European appealed to me?’ wrote Gandhi. Then he added, ‘Do not be upset with me if I go to gaol; rather you should rejoice. I should be where Harilal is.’ It does appear that Gandhi was, albeit slowly, growing into fatherhood.  On 3 November 1909, the Colonial Office wrote to Gandhi that ‘Mr Smuts was unable to accept the claim that Asiatics should be placed in a position of equality with Europeans in respect of right of entry or otherwise’.68 The rejection was definitive. Two days later, Gandhi and Hajee Habib released a statement to the  press, summarizing their visit, their meetings with Imperial officials, the refusal of General Smuts to introduce a non-racial law. The Transvaal legislation, they said, ‘cuts at the very root’ of the principle of ‘elementary equality’ of all British subjects. Interviewed by Reuters, Gandhi said Habib and he expected to be arrested when they sought to re-enter the Transvaal. Their campaign would be ‘continued most strenuously’ in India, the United Kingdom and South Africa. A week later, the Nonconformist minister F. B. Meyer hosted a farewell dinner for Gandhi. In attendance were the Parsi statesman M. M. Bhownaggree, several serving Members of Parliament, and the rising Indian politician Motilal Nehru. Some who could not come sent heart-felt letters of support. Gertrude Toynbee, daughter of the reformer Arnold, wrote to Gandhi that the Indian struggle in the Transvaal ‘raises one’s conception of the possibilities of humanity’. A Christian from Fife wrote to the Reverend Meyer that although the cause they [Gandhi and colleagues] represent is passing through a dark hour, I am not dismayed. In the history of the human race it has always been darkest before dawn … Never did the cause of the Negro seem more hopeless than during the years that preceded the abolition of slavery … May I add with all reverence that the saviour of the world himself seemed lost in the moment that brought about our redemption? And so I join you in spirit in wishing God-Speed to Messrs Gandhi and Haji Habib.70 Also present at the party for Gandhi was Sir Frederick Lely, who, back in 1888 and 1889, had refused to provide the aspiring law student with a scholarship from the State of Porbandar. Twenty years later, now living in retirement in London, the once unfeeling Administrator issued a partial mea culpa. Remembering his years in Kathiawar, and his friendship with Kaba Gandhi, Sir Frederick told the gathering that ‘he was quite sure that his old friend Mr Gandhi, had he been alive now, would have been proud of his son’. As for Gandhi himself, he spoke at this reception of how their struggle turned on a question of national honour. They had refused to meet violence with violence, and instead adopted passive resistance. He explained this method with reference to the Bible, namely the chapter where Daniel refused to accept the laws of the Medes and the Persians.72 Afterwards, L. W. Ritch sent a report to his fellow Gandhi worshipper Henry Polak: Our big little chief left for S. Africa on Monday. A big crowd was at the St[atio]n to wish the little man farewell, and his going creates a gap in our circle of workers … Gandhi’s magnificent  personality attracted about him the best spirits among the Indians resident here, and those Europeans who are capable of quiet solid work.73 The person who missed Gandhi most was Maud Polak. With his departure, she would work under L. W. Ritch on the South African British Indian Committee. ‘She is throwing herself heart and soul into the work,’ wrote Ritch to her brother. ‘Gandhi has influenced her wonderfully and I am looking upon her as a sister.’ Precisely how wonderful the chief’s influence was is described in two little-known letters written by Gandhi himself to Henry Polak. On 11 November, the day before Meyer’s party, he wrote that Maud was ‘very seriously thinking’ of coming to South Africa. ‘Last evening she could not restrain herself, and told me she wanted to go to South Africa very badly and work for the cause.’ Gandhi said that while Maud was ‘very sweet-natured’ and ‘capable of great self-sacrifice’, he did not know how far the Phoenix life would suit her … I have told her all I could about things. I have told her as well as I could about the jarring notes there, and I have told her, too, that there is no money in it. I have further told her how Millie herself finds it difficult to reconcile … to life at Phoenix … I have told her, too, that however much she may regard my view, and like it, I consider myself incompetent to enter into all a woman’s feelings, and when she has accessible to her Millie’s loving assistance and advice, she cannot do better than rely upon her judgment.74 Four days later, while on board ship, Gandhi wrote to Polak again about his sister’s growing attachment to himself and his cause. ‘She cannot tear herself away from me,’ he remarked: I was watching her closely at the station. She was on the point of breaking down. She would not shake hands with me. She wanted a kiss. That she could not have at the station, not that she or I was afraid but it would be misunderstood. So she stood right on the platform … If all she has shown to be genuine she may eclipse you [in devotion to me]. Maud Polak had been desperately keen to accompany Gandhi to South Africa. Her sister-in-law Millie, probably at his urgings, filled her in on the ‘jarring notes’: namely, ‘beetles everywhere, spiders, ants in the milk, no baths, water bad, people half naked, filth too, lift a plate and you will find an insect underneath, snakes hanging from the tree, you have not only to tolerate this but love the insect life, you may not destroy any life …’ Maud Polak was undeterred by these descriptions – she still wanted to go where Gandhi was. South Africa was to her terra nova. Jobless, unmarried, stuck with her parents in London, it was a land with enormous appeal, not least because Gandhi lived there. The past  four months had been spent almost continuously in his company. Maud’s feelings for Gandhi were intense, and probably romantic. (Years later, with his sister’s attachment to his friend in mind, Polak recalled that while Gandhi ‘was by no means good-looking by Indian standards … throughout his life many notable women were greatly attracted by his personality, and he always had women friends, both British and Indian.’) Maud Polak was attracted by Gandhi’s personality, and perhaps also by his profile – a successful lawyer, a leader of a popular movement, an Indian who parleyed with Secretaries of State and Members of Parliament. His feelings for her, on the other hand, were paternal. Gandhi’s letter to her brother Henry thus continues: I have told her [Maud] that I consider Indian civilization to be the best in the world and therefore [what] it means for her to be more Indianized than you are. She revels in the thought. Such is the condition in which I have left her. Mrs. G[andhi] used to describe you as my first born lovingly. She would accept Maud as my first born lovingly. She I think will fill her life. Mark a father’s selfishness. You are to me – Chhota Bhai – a younger brother and yet more than a brother … Maud on the other hand can be my first born and therefore in some ways more than you are to me. She will claim more of me. Can I give it? Am I worthy of all affection? Is she worthy of it from me? Unless she is a downright impostor which she is not, she is quite capable of it. The other theory is that the whole thing is a nine days wonder due to the glamour of my personality. If so, I should be shot on sight. For if people can be so falsely enthused by me, I am useless – a power more for harm than good. However that may be, there is a huge problem for you and me to solve. May Maud go to Phoenix? If her affection is real it will be a sin for anybody to prevent that. I leave it at that.76 Gandhi also wrote to Millie, who, in London, had seen his friendship with her sister-in-law develop at rather close quarters. The ‘intensity of affection’ that Maud displayed, her insistence that she would go wherever Gandhi was – was ‘all this real’, he wondered, ‘or is it the glamour of my presence?’ Gandhi asked Millie now ‘to observe Maud, analyse her, cross-examine her and find out where she is. There is no present need of anybody at Phoenix. And yet if Maud is what she says she is, she will always be wanted.’ To Millie, Gandhi likewise described Maud as ‘my first-born daughter’. Her devotion to him was apparently unconditional – so unlike the attitude towards him of his first-born biological son. In London, Maud could attend to Gandhi from daybreak to dusk, but in South Africa, of course, there were other claimants on his time. Henry and Millie Polak seem to have advised her to treat the friendship as a nine weeks’ wonder, and not to pursue Gandhi across the oceans.  Millie Polak has left a vivid portrait of Gandhi entertaining his guests in the Westminster Palace Hotel. At lunchtime, his friends and associates would come in to discuss the progress of the negotiations. As the guests trooped in, the table in the centre, normally covered with a nice velvet cloth … would be cleared. Books and papers would get stacked upon the floor. Then newspapers would be spread over the table, and piles of oranges, apples, bananas, perhaps grapes, and a big bag of unshelled monkey-or pea-nuts, would be put ready. Mr Gandhi would ring for the waiter, and when an attendant, resplendent in white shirt and tailcoat, appeared, he would order tea and toast for those who desired it … Soon the silver tea- tray, beautifully appointed, would be brought in; then we would set to work, eating, drinking, talking and laughing. Some would walk about or stand, and the nut-shells would fly around the room, orange juice would run over the paper-covered table, and at the end of the meal the room looked rather as if an ill-bred party of schoolboys had been let loose in it … Mr Gandhi would be totally untroubled by all the mess and muddle in the room, and the waiter never lost his dignified gravity as he cleared away the rubbish.78 It had been an intense four and a half months in London, in which Gandhi had argued with Indian extremists, exchanged courtesies with British Baptists, and exchanged letters with the most famous Russian novelist of his time (or any other). He had developed a relationship of rare, if wholly non-sexual, intimacy with a young Englishwoman. Even so, the visit had to be reckoned a failure, for the concessions he had sought for Indians in the Transvaal were denied him. Letters written by his associates in the week of Gandhi’s departure keenly capture the disappointment. Lord Ampthill, writing to Lord Curzon, lamented that it was a Liberal Government that, for the first time in the history of the Empire, had instituted ‘an actual “colour” bar’. He planned to move a motion in the House of Lords, and expected Curzon to support him. The ‘spirit of the Transvaal Indians has not been broken,’ noted Ampthill. ‘Meanwhile, the question has become thoroughly understood in India and there will be irreparable mischief if the situation is not saved at once’.79            