 21 Farewell to Africa   On 2 January, 1914, two English clergymen arrived in Durban to meet Gandhi. Their names were C. F. Andrews and W. W. Pearson. Both taught at St Stephen’s College in Delhi; both were associates and admirers of Rabindranath Tagore. Andrews in particular had identified strongly with the people of India. Like an Indian sadhu he was celibate, lived simply, and cultivated friendships with a wide cross-section of society. C. F. Andrews was an old acquaintance of Gokhale’s. After they met at a Congress session in 1906, he wrote to Gokhale that ‘if at any time there is any way you can suggest in which I can help the national cause you know how glad I shall be to do so if it is within my power.’Gokhale remembered this promise, and some years later decided to redeem it. In December 1913, when Gandhi and company were still in jail, he asked Andrews and Pearson to go out to South Africa to mediate between the Indians and the Government. Introducing them to Albert West of the Phoenix Settlement, Gokhale described them as ‘both great friends of India’.3 Andrews was a ‘non-official’ mediator. His official counterpart was Sir Benjamin Robertson, the civil servant deputed by the Viceroy to represent the Government of India. Robertson was briefed by Gokhale, who sent him copies of Indian Opinion for the middle months of 1913, which showed ‘that every possible effort was made by Mr Gandhi to arrive at a settlement before resuming the struggle’. Gokhale then listed, for Robertson’s benefit, the five major demands of the Indians in South Africa, namely, the removal of racial handicaps in the immigration law; the restoration of the right of South Africa born Indians to enter Cape Province; the abolition of the £3 tax; the recognition of monogamous marriages performed under the rites of Indian religions; and, finally, a more generous and sympathetic administration of all laws concerning Indians. Gokhale recalled the assurance given him in 1912 that the £3 tax would  be repealed, and said that without a recognition of Hindu and Muslim marriages, ‘the position of Indian women in South Africa cannot be honourable.’ When C. F. Andrews and W. W. Pearson arrived in Durban, the local Indians hosted a reception in their honour. Here Andrews spoke with ‘deep feeling’ about the widespread sympathy in India with their sufferings. A ‘profound impression was caused when Mr Andrews recited, with beautiful accent and effect, a Sanskrit mantra, which was given to him as a message to South African Indians by the poet Tagore.’So reported the Natal Mercury, whereas Indian Opinion highlighted the songs sung in the visitor’s honour by Gandhi’s old schoolmate Sheikh Mehtab. The two were now quite reconciled, with the erstwhile sportsman, meat-eater and brothel visitor having become a singer and passive resister. The songs rendered at this Durban reception, reported Indian Opinion, had ‘been specially composed by Mr Shaikh Mehtab as a tribute to the devotion of Messrs. Andrews and Pearson to the Indian cause’.6 Also present at the meeting was Gandhi’s friend from Cape Town, Betty Molteno. At this Indian welcome for their English visitors, she spoke of a deeper humanity that would overcome divisions of race and gender. ‘After the Boer War,’ said Miss Molteno, I saw that Boer and Briton would have to unite, but would they try to do it at the cost of their dark brothers? Broken-hearted I went to England. For eight long years I remained away from Africa – in body – never in soul and spirit. And England and Europe have sent me back with this message to white South Africa: ‘Open your hearts – your souls - to your brethren of colour’. We are in the 20th century. Rise to the heights of this glorious century. Try to comprehend the words of Du Bois – that grand and sympathetic soul: ‘The 20th century will be the century of colour.’ And I say it is also the century of the woman. She, too, is divine and supreme. She, too, must play her God-appointed part – and in this 20th century her part will be a great one.7 The morning after the Durban meeting, the clergymen went off with Gandhi to Phoenix. Despite Andrews’ arrival, Gandhi was not hopeful of a settlement. He had yielded to Gokhale’s plea and called off the march to Pretoria; now, given the character of the Enquiry Commission, he wanted satyagraha to resume. Among the volunteers who would have to court arrest was his eldest son. ‘Subject your sanction feel Harilal should come,’ Gandhi wired Gokhale. ‘He vowed see struggle through as resister. Should be permitted fulfil obligation. My opinion gaol other experiences substantial education.’  This wire, sent on 3 January, is best read in juxtaposition with a letter sent the next day to his second son. Manilal was serving a sentence of three months in prison; he awaited release pending a formal amnesty. His father said that on his discharge he must come straight to Phoenix to see Kasturba and himself. ‘Ramdas is looking well and has done well,’ wrote Gandhi. ‘Dev[a]das has proved a hero. He has developed a sense of responsibility which was unexpected.’There is a note here of quiet pride with regard to the growing closeness of the family during the campaign. The father as leader; the mother as a pioneering woman resister; the second and third sons as satyagrahis themselves; the youngest son, only twelve, who could not go to jail but played his part in keeping Phoenix going – all had acquitted themselves honourably. Only Harilal was in India and out of it altogether. Gandhi had for some time wanted Harilal back in South Africa. In late December he had cabled his son to take a ship to Durban. That cable is lost, but its contents can be guessed at from one sent by Gokhale to Gandhi, which read: ‘Your son Harilal saw me Bombay, told me you had asked him return South Africa immediately rejoin struggle. I have taken on myself responsibility asking him remain India and continue studies. Forgive my intervention.’ The intervention was disregarded. Thus Gandhi’s cable of 3 January, which Gokhale passed on to Harilal himself. Harilal wrote back from the family home in Rajkot, where he then was. He asked about Gokhale’s health – reported to be indifferent – offering his own prayer ‘that you may soon be out of bed and be working again’. ‘Before reading the news of your health,’ wrote Harilal, my friends and me all here in our house used always to chat away with much éclat about you and the S[outh] A[frican] struggle … I notice my father’s reply to your cable. I admit I promised my father and others to return to rejoin the struggle if necessary. I will not refuse to keep it. I shall go if I must, though I certainly feel that my education is being hampered. As it is, it is after a long interruption of six years that I have again come to India for University education. However I shall leave for S[outh] A[frica] in about a fortnight.11 Harilal’s letter was written in a firm, clear hand, and in direct and economical prose. The form barely masked the contents, which are of a young man deeply torn between the expectations of his father and his own hopes and desires. Gokhale was moved by Harilal’s predicament in person; and must surely have been moved by his letter, whose apparent willingness to catch a ship to Durban is hedged and qualified in such telling ways. As it happens, Harilal did not return  to South Africa. We do not know why – whether Gokhale wrote again to Gandhi pleading on behalf of the boy, whether Gandhi himself chose not to press the point, whether Harilal decided to follow his own instincts rather than his father’s command.  The clergyman visiting from India, C. F. Andrews, was one of nature’s reconcilers. At Phoenix he prevailed upon Gandhi to meet Smuts to seek a compromise. The always complicated, fraught relations between the two had recently gone through a very bitter phase. Through the mass march across the border, Gandhi had mounted an open challenge to Smuts. The General had responded by putting his tormentor in jail. Pressed by the Imperial and Indian Governments, Smuts released him. Then they exchanged sharp letters about the constitution of the Enquiry Committee. Now, Gandhi was persuaded by Andrews (acting on Gokhale’s behalf) that it was time to talk to Smuts again. On 6 January, ‘much to his surprise’, the General received a letter from Gandhi asking for an appointment.12 Smuts said he could meet Gandhi on either Friday the 9th or Saturday the 10th. Gandhi and Andrews reached Pretoria on the 8th, to be met first by a reporter, who was struck by the Indian’s ‘extraordinary appearance, with his shaven head, his mourning suit of unbleached calico and his bare feet’. Meanwhile, a nationwide strike of white workers had broken out, forcing the General’s attention in that direction. Andrews was impressed by Gandhi’s ‘gentlemanly conduct’, as he waited patiently while Smuts ‘put him off again and again on account of the General Strike’. They had a brief meeting on the 13th, when, as Andrews reported, Gandhi ‘was so kindly and courteous that the old relation of respect between them gradually came back again’. On the 14th, in a conversation of seconds as it were, C. F. Andrews met the Governor-General, Lord Gladstone. The clergyman ‘impressed me favourably,’ reported Gladstone, not least because he seemed to ‘have an exceptionally intimate acquaintance with the working of Mr Gandhi’s mind’. Andrews said the two main demands that must be met were the abolition of the £3 tax and the recognition of Indian marriages. These had been promised by the leader to his increasingly militant followers, and were non-negotiable. ‘Nothing could shake Mr Gandhi on matters of conscience,’ remarked Andrews. He reminded the  Governor-General of how, in Johannesburg in 1908, Gandhi had been assaulted and nearly killed ‘because after taking a vow he had come to an agreement’ with the Government. A capitulation on those two points would make Gandhi vulnerable to another attempt on his life. Gandhi met Smuts for a longer conversation on the 16th. He asked, in addition to the repeal of the tax and the recognition of marriages, for the entry of South African Indians into the Cape, and for the removal of an overt racial bar in the laws of the Free State. (The logic of allowing free entry into the Cape was that, like Natal, it was originally a British colony, with greater and older obligations to British imperial subjects than Transvaal or the Orange Free State.) Smuts was sympathetic, but requested Gandhi to state these issues in front of the Enquiry Commission, who, in turn, could then formally recommend these changes to the Government. Gandhi answered that they could not go back now on their boycott of the Commission. Reporting this interview to the Colonial Office, Lord Gladstone said: General Smuts has shown a most patient and conciliatory temper. In spite of a series of conflicts extending over many years, he retains a sympathetic interest in Mr Gandhi as an unusual type of humanity, whose peculiarities, however inconvenient they may be to the Minister, are not devoid of attraction to the student … It is no easy task for a European to conduct negotiations with Mr Gandhi. The workings of his conscience are inscrutable to the occidental mind and produce complications in wholly unexpected places. His ethical and intellectual attitude, based as it appears to be on a curious compound of mysticism and astuteness, baffles the ordinary processes of thought. Nevertheless, a tolerably practical understanding has been reached.16 Gandhi and Andrews returned to Durban. Letters and phone calls passed between Phoenix and Pretoria, with Smuts assuring Gandhi that he need feel no serious apprehensions as to the probable nature of the Commission’s recommendations on his four points and as to the Government’s intentions, but he should promise not to revive passive resistance until the Commission had reported and the Government had been given an opportunity of acting on the report.17 Gandhi also had several long meetings with Sir Benjamin Robertson, which focused on the marriage question. He said the Commission, and the law, should recognize as valid all de facto monogamous marriages celebrated anywhere in the past. Monogamous marriages contracted in the future could be solemnized before a priest and, if required, registered. This anterior recognition, said  Gandhi, was crucial; otherwise the children of such unions were in danger of being stigmatized as ‘illegitimate’. Gandhi further asked that wives who were de facto monogamous be admitted into South Africa; and that existing plural wives of Indians who had rights of residence in South Africa be registered. The Government was especially worried about the legitimacy accorded by Indian faiths to polygamy. Gandhi argued that an acceptance of his proposals ‘as to legal recognition of de facto monogamous unions enables the State to popularise monogamy to an extent hitherto unknown’ in South Africa. The course of the negotiations with Smuts and others were reported to Gokhale in a long and intensely felt letter written to him by C. F. Andrews. This stressed Gandhi’s goodness of character, but also the fragility of his nerves, on edge as a consequence of the crises he had faced these past few months. As he was negotiating with Smuts, Kasturba again fell ill, while his old rivals P. S. Aiyar and M. C. Anglia had decided to renege on the boycott and testify to the Commission. When the General’s letter outlining the settlement came, Gandhi was ‘terribly excited and said that from first to last the letter was a studied insult’. Andrews was now ‘in despair’. Gandhi had expected a personal letter, corresponding with the friendliness of the interviews. What he got was a missive in neutral, even officious language. Going over the communication sentence by sentence, Andrews ‘saw at last where the one omission lay. It lay in General Smuts not recognizing the honourableness of Mr Gandhi’s motives.’ The priest went up to meet Smuts once more, and had a clause inserted that satisfied Gandhi’s honour. It had been a close-run thing, wrote Andrews to Gokhale, which he had recounted in detail as it bore on Gandhi’s own future and the future of the Indians in South Africa. In a magisterial analysis of Gandhi’s personality, Andrews observed, His work in S. Africa is done – and nobly done: and this time it was very near to a collapse. Everyone here says he is ‘played out’. Polak, Kallenbach, Ritch, etc. – All say the same. He must go, both for his own sake and for the community’s. Yes! For the community’s: for if he stays on he will dwarf everyone else and there will be no leaders here for at least another generation. It is painfully, palpably evident already: and it will be more evident still in a year’s time, if he does not go. Let this honourable settlement be reached and then immediately without a moment’s delay let him go to India and be with you or at one of the Servant of India Houses. It is pitiful to see him here at work. He does everything – he will do everything: and people simply get to lean on him more and more and the  selfish ones take advantage of his goodness. He gets into the way of giving hasty orders without careful thinking (having to settle so many affairs) and when it comes to the big things on which the whole issue is staked again and again lately he has acted or thought hastily … He is one of the best men in the world! … He has made the noblest fight that has been made for years, and I cannot bear to think that it should all end in some great and huge mistake made in haste … but persisted in because of a mind distracted or outworn.19 This is a perceptive letter, showing (pace Lord Gladstone) that at least one European understood the mind and methods of (the mystical) Mr Gandhi. These past months had been incredibly intense for Gandhi. Planning for the satyagraha without knowing where the volunteers or funds would come from; courting arrest and the spell in jail; the illness of his wife and the still problematic relationship with his eldest son; the difficult and still unresolved negotiations with his old adversary; indeed the whole question of whether or not he should even remain in South Africa – all these issues agonized and troubled him. And he would yet ride all the horses – ‘he does everything – he will do everything’, as Andrews put it, the accumlated stress making his friends fearful that he might be headed for a breakdown.  Throughout January, batches of passive resisters were released from prison. They were met at the jail gates by their comrades, and then conveyed to receptions in Durban. When Mrs Sheikh Mehtab and her mother were released on 12 January, Maganlal Gandhi and his wife were at hand to receive them. Eight days later it was the turn of Mrs Thambi Naidoo and her fellow Tamils to be freed. The ladies were taken from the Durban prison to Parsee Rustomjee’s store on Field Street, where they were garlanded and fed with home-cooked food. Their stoicism and sacrifice was saluted in speeches made by, among others, Henry and Millie Polak, and Sonja Schlesin. Songs of praise were sung by Sheikh Mehtab and his pupils in Hindustani, and by the Moodley sisters, in Tamil. In the second week of February Gandhi came down to Cape Town with Kasturba and C. F. Andrews. The Hindu couple and their Christian friend stayed with a Muslim family, the Gools. On the 14th, Andrews gave a lecture on the life and work of Rabindranath Tagore at the Town Hall. The Governor-General, Lord Gladstone, presided. Among the ‘large [and] distinguished audience’ were some Members of Parliament. The point of Andrews’ talk was to demonstrate that  India was not merely a land of ‘coolies’ but also of ‘noble ideals’. He expressed the ‘warmest appreciation of higher Indian life and thought’, as represented particularly by Tagore.21 The conflict in South Africa was not mentioned, but Andrews clearly had it in mind when stressing Tagore’s universalism, his capacity to rise above parochial identities of language and race. The poet’s work, he argued, offered the hope that in the higher phases of life and thought East and West may become wholly and intimately one … [Where] the disruptive forces and jealous rivalries of race and colour and intolerant creeds, of commerce and trade and party politics, are so seemingly strong and outwardly powerful, it is indeed no small blessing to mankind, if even a single voice can be heard above their discordant tumult, speaking a message which East and West alike acknowledge to be true and great … [The] sovereignty of the poet is no shadowy thing. It is already heralding the downfall of ancient tyrannies and the coming in of new world forces which make for peace.22 On 19 February, the Indians of Cape Town threw a farewell party for C. F. Andrews. The guest of honour was the liberal MP W. P. Schreiner, who saluted the priest as a representative of ‘the entire brotherhood of humanity’. So, of course, was the speaker himself. Andrews’s blindness to matters of race was rare enough among white men in British India, but truly exceptional in Schreiner’s South Africa. Andrews himself spoke both in Hindustani and English. He had penned a last message for the newspapers, which thanked South Africans for their hospitality, and observed that the atmosphere regarding the Indian question had ‘wonderfully changed’ in recent weeks. The credit for this change he gave to ‘Mr Gandhi’s chivalrous attitude’ and ‘General Smuts’ great considerateness’. He modestly omitted to mention his own reconciling role. Andrews left by the SS Briton on 21 February. Five days later, he sent Gandhi a letter suffused with love and regard. When ‘I saw you on the wharf standing with hands raised in prayer and benediction,’ he wrote, ‘I knew, as I had not known, even in Pretoria, how very, very dear you had become to me and I gazed and gazed and the sadness grew upon me and even the thought that I was on my way to India could not overcome it.’ Later, when he felt seasick, he was consoled by the memory of his friend, of this new gift in my life which God had given me; and it made me so happy, Mohan, even while I was in utter physical misery, – just to think of it and remember it! … Somehow I didn’t quite know how much you had learnt to love me till that morning when you put your hand on my shoulder and spoke of the loneliness that there would be to you when I was gone.  In the six weeks that Gandhi and Andrews had spent in each other’s company, they had come to be soulmates. The word, or cliché, is inescapable, and apposite. These were both seekers after truth and God, men of sentiment and conscience who sought heroically to reconcile East and West, white and brown, colonizer and colonized, and, not least, Hinduism and Christianity. More than the £3 tax and the marriage question and the personality of General Smuts, the duo had discussed – at Phoenix, Pretoria, Johannesburg, Cape Town – the multiple paths to God. Thus, after its intimate and emotionally charged prologue, Andrews’ letter moved on to matters of faith. His month with Gandhi had inspired him to write a book on the comparative history of religion, on how the ‘persistent voice of conscience’ had ‘become marvellously developed and expressed in the two great races which possessed religious genius, – the Semitic and the Indo-Aryan’. The writing of this book would mean ‘a lonely pilgrimage’, because – no doubt under the influence of his new Hindu friend – it would mean ‘giving up claims for the Christian position which everyone in the West whom I know and love … could not conceive of doing’.24 Shortly after his new friend had left, a letter arrived for Gandhi from his oldest friend, Pranjivan Mehta. This asked for a receipt for Mehta’s contributions in 1913 – amounting to the considerable sum of Rs 32,000 – and added: ‘I hope the [proposed] new Bill [embodying the agreement between Gandhi and Smuts] has mitigated your hardships.’Left unspoken was the other (and greater) hope, so long and so passionately held by Mehta, that his friend would now move back to India and prepare to take charge of the political movement there. There had been several occasions in the past when Gandhi had been on the verge of returning home. In October 1901 he left Durban with his family, in his eyes for good. A little over a year later, he was brought back to negotiate the rights of South African Indians in the post-War settlement. He came, hoping however to return as soon as he possibly could. In September 1904 he offered a compromise solution to Lord Milner, a halfway house between the extreme demands of the White Leaguers and those of the more radical Indians. Had this been accepted, Gandhi would have rejoined Kasturba and the children, and had a third try at establishing himself in the Bombay High Court.  When Milner rebuffed him, Gandhi asked the family to join him in Johannesburg instead. In 1906 and 1909 he visited London to lobby for the rights of the Indian community; on either occasion, had their demands been met he would have returned to India. In the summer of 1911 he once more had strong hopes that Smuts would acquiesce to their main demands. That, too, was not to be – so a fresh round of satyagraha was launched. Now, finally, a honourable settlement was about to be inked into law – and the Gandhis could fulfil Pranjivan Mehta’s deepest desire and go back to their homeland. Back in 1911, preparing for his eventual departure from South Africa, Gandhi had handed over his practice in Johannesburg to L. W. Ritch. Then in May 1913, Henry Polak moved to Durban, opening an office on Smith Street, where he met clients as well as subscribers to Indian Opinion.26 Gandhi’s hope now was that since he had arranged for experienced hands to represent the community, he – who had come to South Africa to settle a single dispute, staying on, with interruptions, for two decades – could finally return to India himself. In the last week of February 1914, Gandhi wrote to Gokhale that he planned to depart in April with his family, and with some boys from the Phoenix School. His mentor had bound him to a vow of silence on political matters, operative for a full year after his return to India. That vow he would ‘scrupulously observe’. His ‘present ambition’, he told Gokhale, was to ‘be by your side as your nurse and attendant. I want to have the real discipline of obeying someone whom I love and look up to. I know I made a bad secretary in South Africa. I hope to do better in the Motherland if I am accepted.’ Gandhi was still in Cape Town, in part because he wished to be at hand while the report of the Enquiry Commission was finalized, and in part because Kasturba was very ill. She could not sit without support, and could not eat solid food either. Grapes and orange juice were her main sustenance. Gandhi was anxious about the settlement, and anxious about his wife’s health. She had developed ‘ominous swellings’ whose cause the doctor, their friend and host Dr. Gool, could not yet locate.Kasturba lay ‘hanging between life and death’. She was claiming Gandhi’s ‘undivided attention’; she wanted him ‘by her side the whole day’. In one twenty-four hour period, all she consumed was the juice of two tomatoes and a teaspoonful of oil. ‘It seems to me,’ wrote Gandhi to Kallenbach, that ‘she is gradually sinking.’  These factors explain, but do not excuse, the extraordinary harshness of a letter Gandhi wrote his son Harilal on 2 March. ‘I have your letter,’ he began. ‘You apologize in every letter of yours and put up a defence as well. It all seems to me sheer hypocrisy now. For years, you have been slack in writing letters, and then come forward with apologies. Will this go on until death, I forgiving every time.’ Gandhi went on to compare Harilal with his brothers. ‘You violate all the conditions I had made and you promised to fulfil,’ he complained: You were never asked to go in for studies at the cost of your health. You have failed to take care of it. No wonder that Ramdas and Manilal have outdone you. And Ramdas has put in a fine effort, indeed, and grown in size as well. Manilal, too, has plenty of strength and would have been stronger yet if he had not taken to the evil ways of pleasure [with Jeki Mehta]. Even their studies I take to be sounder than yours. Harilal had expressed a desire to go to Bombay to continue his studies. In that case, said Gandhi, he must leave his wife Chanchi and children in Gujarat. ‘Weighing my advice against that of others,’ concluded Gandhi, ‘do what you think best. I am a father who is prejudiced against you. I do not approve of your ways at all. I doubt whether you have any love for us. This statement sounds very harsh, but I see extreme insincerity in your letters.’ Gandhi sent Harilal’s letter to Manilal. ‘Think over the wretched state he has been reduced to,’ he remarked. ‘The fault is not his, but mine. During his childhood, I followed a way of life none too strict in its rule and he is still under its influence. Tear off the letter after reading it.’ The prejudiced father hoped that the second son would make up for the deficencies of his brother. Once they returned, said Gandhi to Manilal, ‘It is my desire to see you esteemed in India as a brahmachari of a high order, your conduct so naturally well-disciplined that it cannot but produce an impression on others. This will require hard work, study and purity in you.’ By the second week of March, Kasturba’s health had improved. Gandhi attributed the recovery to his own methods of healing. There was speculation that the swelling in her stomach might be cancerous. Gandhi believed that cancer ‘never yields to medical treatment but it must yield to fasting treatment if the patient has stamina’.32 He put his wife on an extended fast, feeding her only with neem leaves in water. The pain in her stomach eased. She could now sit up, and eat. ‘If she survives,’ he told his nephew Maganlal, ‘take it for certain that our  [nature-cure] remedies and faith in God have saved her. She has come to realize that the doctor’s medicine was the cause of her breakdown.’ Kasturba’s life was no longer in danger, but now her husband’s life was. Word that the Enquiry Commission would only recognize monogamous marriages had reached the Muslim merchants in the Transvaal. These merchants had brought Gandhi to South Africa; they had funded his early campaigns; many of them had gone to jail under his leadership. But recognition of the right of a man to have multiple wives was a central article of their faith. Now they accused Gandhi of betraying their interests, and, more crucially, their religion. In early March, Gandhi heard that his brother Laxmidas had passed away in Porbandar. He had been sick for some time. Although they had not met for more than a decade, in recent years they had become somewhat reconciled. Gandhi had forgiven or forgotten the intrigue that got the family into trouble in Porbandar in 1891. Laxmidas had gloried in the popular acclaim his younger brother was receiving in India for the work he was doing in South Africa. Gandhi’s other brother, Karsandas, had died the previous June. Preoccupied with the satyagraha, he did not comment in public on either death; but he knew now that he would go back to a India bereft of his parents and his brothers too. Only his sister Raliat, herself a widow, still survived. On 11 March, Gandhi wrote to his nephew Chhaganlal that he had heard that ‘they are plotting again in Johannesburg to take my life. That would indeed be welcome and a fit end to my work.’ In case he was killed, Gandhi left instructions on what the family must do. They should live like farmers on the land, simply. Gandhi had to provide for five widows, these being his sister, the wives of his two dead brothers, and two other family members. If Gandhi was now murdered by his enemies, the money for this could be taken from Pranjivan Mehta. Over the course of time, however, sons should assume responsibility for their widowed mothers, including Harilal for Kasturba.35 It was a young man named Medh who had written to Gandhi about the plot to murder him. We do not know who the plotters were. The Pathans who had assaulted and nearly killed him in 1908? And were they to act on their own or as mercenaries of the merchants? How active was the plot in any case? Had Medh drawn hasty conclusions from words spoken in anger? What we do know is there were increasing concerns in Johannesburg about what the Commission would  say on the marriage question. In the last week of March, a ‘largely attended meeting representing all sections of Mohammedans in the Transvaal’ took place in the Hamidia Hall. Gandhi had often spoken here to appreciative and even admiring crowds. But this time he was, so to speak, an absent presence. The meeting resolved that ‘the recommendation of recognising one wife only and her children … if carried out, will molest and violate the principle of our sacred religion.’ The meeting further made ‘it known to whom it may concern that Messrs Gandhi, Polak and their associates have no right or authority whatsoever to represent the Moslem community or any matters concerning them.’ In the last week of March, the report of the Enquiry Commission was published. It was ambivalent about Gandhi, acknowledging that he was ‘the recognised leader of the Indian community’, but regretting that he and his followers chose ‘entirely to ignore the Commission’, so that no witnesses came forward to substantiate the allegations of the excessive use of force against the strikers. Compelled to rely on the evidence of the police, the Commission concluded that in the places where men in uniform had shot bullets into crowds, ‘the use of firearms was fully justified’. Other recommendations of the Commission were more comforting to the Indians. It asked the Government to pass legislation that would, among other things, allow Indian residents in South Africa to bring in one wife and minor children by her; permit the appointment of Indian priests of different denominations to solemnize marriages in South Africa; register de facto monogamous marriages already in existence; repeal the £3 tax applied annually on Indians in Natal; issue identification certificates for three years at a time (rather than for one year, the existing practice); and to provide interpreters to assist Indians in making applications to register marriages, obtain certificates, etc. Gandhi was pleased with the report, whose promptness justified his boycott. Had the Indians given evidence, he argued, then the Europeans would have insisted on doing likewise, and the report would have been delayed by months. Indians and whites would have exchanged bitter words in public, and it would ‘not have been possible for Mr Andrews to do what he did, sowing the seeds of conciliation so silently and with such deep love and humility’. In any case, the  Commission’s recommendations on the £3 tax and marriage question ‘could not possibly have been better even if we had tendered voluminous evidence’. He now hoped that the Government would meet Indian demands in the Cape and the Free State. The favourable recommendations of the Enquiry Commission were noted in the press in India, which gave the credit to the passive resisters. Sadhva, a Kannada weekly published in Mysore, published a striking paean to the distinctiveness of Gandhi’s political method. Thus not a sword was drawn, not a gun fired … Mr Gandhi merely defied the unjust laws of the South African Government, agitated for their removal, even went to jail, and renewed his campaign of passive resistance the moment he was released. In this manner he raised an uproar against their iniquities and finally forced them to the right path. He performed, so to speak, the obsequies of unrighteousness. History has its heroes in men of the type of Alexander the Great whose fame is measured by the havoc and devastation they caused, but heroism of the type displayed by Mr Gandhi in making iniquity’s defeat its own end is without a parallel.39 In early May the Gandhis were back at Phoenix, where Kasturba’s health continued to improve. ‘If her progress continues,’ wrote her husband to Gokhale, ‘in a month’s time she should regain most of her former health. In that case and in any case I could come to London taking her with me. And after consultation with you, we may both proceed to India directly and the rest of the party may leave here after we have left.’ Gokhale was spending the summer in London, as was C. F. Andrews. They had long talks, the gist of which were passed on to Gandhi in Durban. Unlike the priest and the ascetic, Gokhale was not a seeker for or after God. He told Andrews that ‘his love for the Motherland, his vision, his absorption in its life and future was to him religion itself and made the Divine real to him.’ Patriotism was Gokhale’s religion; a patriotism that did not rule out partnership with the foreign rulers as long as they remained on Indian soil. Gokhale told Andrews that ‘there was the need of three kinds of national work – that in connection with the foreign Government, that in independence of it, and that in opposition to it. And all were needed.’ He worried that Gandhi’s insistence on the ‘independence’ of Indians from Government ‘would be a stumbling block’ in his working for, and in, the Servants of India Society. Meanwhile, back at Phoenix, Gandhi’s attentions were again diverted to rumours of sexual transgression at the ashram. In mid April Kasturba told  Gandhi that she suspected Jeki Mehta of still harbouring romantic feelings for Manilal. Gandhi dismissed the speculation. Kasturba, he thought, was excessively prejudiced against Pranjivan Mehta’s daughter; she tended to ‘spit fire’ on Jeki at every opportunity. Kasturba then accused Gandhi of shielding Jeki. He answered that she was paranoid. The disagreement spiralled into a fearful row, by all accounts the most intense the Gandhis had had in the thirty years of their marriage. The husband’s version, outlined in a letter to Kallenbach, ran: Immediately she began to howl. I had made her leave all the good food in order to kill her. I was tired of her, I wished her to die, I was a hooded snake … The more I spoke the more vicious she became … She is quite normal today. But yesterday’s was one of the richest lessons of my life. All the charges she brought against me she undoubtledly means. She has contrary emotions. I have nursed her as a son would nurse his mother. But my love has not been sufficiently intense and selfless to make her change her nature … Yes, a man who wishes to work with detachment must not marry. I cannot complain of her being a particularly bad wife … On the other hand no other woman would probably have stood the changes in her husband’s life as she has. On the whole she has not thwarted me and has been most exemplary … My point is that you cannot attach yourself to a particular woman and yet live for humanity. The two do not harmonise. That is the real cause of the devil waking in her now and again. Otherwise he might have remained in her asleep and unnoticed.42 As with Harilal, Gandhi’s relations with his wife were tested again and again by his tendency to place career and cause above family and marriage. In this case, Kasturba was protective about her second son, and thus inclined to blame Jeki for her romance with Manilal. Gandhi was more even-handed, seeing the son as equally responsible for the transgression. This particular dispute brought to the fore other disagreements the couple had over the years. In his reflections on their relationship, Gandhi is detached and (to a degree) balanced. With Harilal he tended to be more one-sided. The boy was blamed, and blamed again, for not living up to the ideals of the father. On the other hand, this letter to Kallenbach, while unable to conceal a sense of impatience with Kasturba, sees her discontent as having its origins in choices made by him, that she (and he) were unaware of when they got married in their teens in Porbandar. Two weeks after Kasturba and Gandhi quarrelled, Jeki Mehta was found making sexual overtures to another man, not Manilal. Gandhi was hurt and angry. Jeki was a ‘finished hypocrite’, a pathological liar who had betrayed him,  her father and the community. He decided to send her back to join her husband Manilal Doctor in Fiji.43 To atone for Jeki’s new lapse, and his own inadequate supervision, Gandhi decided to go on a two-week fast. Kasturba asked him to desist; she feared for his health. Her husband went ahead anyway. After it ended, he wrote to Kallenbach that this fast has brought me as near death’s door. I can still hardly crawl, can eat very little, restless nights, mouth bad … The fast was a necessity. I was so grossly deceived. I owed it to Manilal of Fiji, to Dr. Mehta, and to myself. It was one of the severest lessons of my life. The discipline was very great. Everyone around me was most charming. Mrs. Gandhi was divine. Immediately she realized that there was no turning me back, she set about making my path smooth. She forgot her own sorrows and became my ministering angel.44 In the last week of May, a bill embodying the Enquiry Commission’s recommendations was published. This provided for the recognition of past monogamous marriages conducted under the tenets of any Indian religion the parties professed; recognized the rights of children such unions produced; mandated the appointment of priests of any Indian religion to be marriage officers; abolished the £3 tax and waived the right of the state to collect past arrears against it; and permitted the Government to provide free passage to anyone in South Africa who wished to go back permanently to India. Gandhi spent the whole of June in Cape Town, lobbying MPs and meeting ministers. The bill passed through Parliament in stages, meeting opposition which was skilfully negotiated and eventually overcome by General Smuts and the Prime Minister, General Botha. The Governor-General wrote to the Colonial Office praising the duo ‘for their courage in forcing a thoroughly distasteful policy upon their followers’. For ‘the strength of the anti-Indian prejudice among our Dutch legislators and the extraordinary cussedness of some of our British Natalians [were] really amazing’. The former were loth to recognize any Indian marriages; the latter loth to give up the punitive £3 tax. To tame the opposition, Botha and Smuts had to use all their ‘powers of persuasion’; in fact, ‘but for party loyalty all the Dutch back-benchers would have voted against the Bill.’ On 27 June, there was a meeting of Europeans and Indians in Cape Town to celebrate the passage of the Indians’ Relief Bill. Here Gandhi thanked ‘the many European friends whose help had most materially contributed to the success now realized’. He said that  potent, however, though passive resistance was as an instrument for winning reforms – perhaps the mightiest instrument on earth – it could not have achieved success had the Indian community not moderated their demands to what was reasonable and practical. This, again, was not possible until some of them were able to see the question of Indian rights from the European standpoint … The Indians knew perfectly well which was the dominant and governing race. They aspired to no social equality with Europeans. They felt that the path of their development was separate. They did not even aspire to the franchise, or, if the aspiration existed, it was with no idea of its having present effect. Ultimately – in the future – he believed his people would get the franchise if they deserved to get it, but the matter did not belong to practical politics. All he would ask for the Indian community was that, on the basis of the rights now conceded to them, they should be suffered to live with dignity and honour on the soil of South Africa.47 As the bill was making its progress through Parliament, Gandhi wrote to Gokhale that Kallenbach would accompany Kasturba and him to London. The architect had long wished to visit India; to this wish was now added the desire not to be separated from his friend. After Gandhi had consulted with Gokhale in London, and Kallenbach said goodbye to his family in Europe, they would carry on to India. With the bill now gazetted, their bookings were made for 18 July. ‘My one desire,’ wrote Gandhi to Gokhale, ‘is now to meet you and see you, take my orders from you and leave at once for India.’ On 1 July, Gandhi left Cape Town. He travelled via Kimberley and Johannesburg, reaching Durban on the 4th. Two weeks were left for his departure; two weeks to bid goodbye to the friends, followers, associations and places that he had known and experienced in twenty years in South Africa. On 8 July, there was a farewell meeting for the Gandhis in the Durban Town Hall. Back in 1897, this had been the venue for the meetings of the mob that wanted to lynch him. Now, Indians and Europeans gathered in friendship, to hear Gandhi say that ‘he did not deserve all the praise bestowed on him. Nor did his wife claim to deserve all that had been said of her. Many an Indian woman had done greater service during the struggle than Mrs. Gandhi.’ He thanked all the Europeans who had helped him and the struggle, from the lawyer F. A. Laughton, who ‘stood by him against the mob’ in 1897, to Mrs Alexander, the policeman’s wife who ‘protected him with her umbrella from the missiles thrown by the excited crowd’, to his long-time comrades Kallenbach and Polak. He would go away with ‘no ill-will against a single European. I have received many hard knocks in my life, but here I admit that I have received those most precious gifts from Europeans – love and sympathy.’  The Town Hall meeting was ecumenical. The next day, the Gandhis were congratulated by their own community, the Gujaratis of Durban. Gandhi asked the audience to ‘learn their mother-tongue and study the history and traditions of their Motherland, where he hoped to see them one day’. He urged them to treat members of other communities like guests in their house. Gandhi himself had ‘always shown the same respect for Muslims as for Hindus … If every Indian lived thus in amity with others, there is not the slightest doubt that we shall make great advance in South Africa.’ The same day, the 9th, Gandhi spoke at a sports day for children, held in the Albert Park. He was pleased that the trophy had been presented by Parsee Rustomjee, of whom he said the Indians had no better, no more constant leader to work with in South Africa. Mr Rustomjee knew no distinction of race or religion. He was a Parsee among Parsees, but also a Mahomedan among Mahomedans in that he would do for them, die for them, live for them. He was a Hindu among Hindus and would do for them likewise. Also on the 9th, Gandhi attended a reception hosted by the Dheds, a caste of untouchables charged with sanitary duties. The reformer saw them as ‘our own brethren’, and said that ‘to regard them with the slightest disrespect not only argues our own unworthiness but is morally wrong, for it is contrary to the teaching of the Bhagavad Gita.’ Two days later, Gandhi spoke at a banquet hosted by the Europeans of Durban. The value of the recent settlement, he said here, ‘lay in the struggle which preceded it – a struggle which quickened the conscience of South Africa – and the fact that there was a different tone prevailing today’. However, while the Commission and the Act had sorted out some difficulties, ‘it was not a full settlement. It was not a charter of full liberties.’ He especially urged a ‘sense of justice’ in administering and granting licences, on which many Indians who were traders depended. The hosts had presented an address to Gandhi, and a set of books to Sonja Schlesin. The latter was not present, so Gandhi accepted the books on her behalf, noting that ‘Miss Schlesin had played a great part in the passive resistance movement. She had worked night and day and thrown herself into the work. She had not hesitated to court imprisonment but that was denied her.’  In Durban, Gandhi also called on his friend-turned-rival M. C. Anglia. Anglia had recently started a newspaper that regularly ran articles critical of Gandhi, complaining in particular that the settlement with the Government prohibited polygamy.51 Notably, while Gandhi sought to mend fences with Anglia he did not do the same with P. S. Aiyar, judging perhaps that this critic was too far gone to be reconciled. Gandhi then travelled to Phoenix where, on 11 July, there was a farewell party for him and Kasturba hosted by the settlers. There were two short speeches: one by Gandhi, the other by Albert West, who, ‘in a few brief sentences, referred to the ever-growing friendship, commenced eleven years ago, between Mr Gandhi and himself and its influence upon their lives and the history of the Phoenix Settlement. The singing of some favourite hymns in English and Gujarati brought the proceedings to a close.’ West had played a vital role in sustaining Phoenix and sustaining the struggle. He was one of Gandhi’s two greatest supporters in Natal; the other, equally self-effacing, was Parsee Rustomjee, who on this occasion too chipped in by providing the food. Gandhi now moved deeper into the countryside. He spoke to a large audience of indentured labourers in Verulam. This, to him, was like going on a pilgrimage, for the Indian friends here played a great part in the recent strike; and in what wonderful a manner! When all the so-called leaders [in Durban] were resting in their private rooms or were busy making money, the indentured brethren of this place, the moment they happened to hear that a strike was on in Charlestown and elsewhere about the £3 tax, struck work too. They looked for no leaders. With the settlement in place, said Gandhi to the labourers, they could stay on in South Africa as free men, without paying tax or re-indenturing. Although he was leaving for India, they could approach those who remained at Phoenix for advice and help. And wherever he was, said Gandhi, ‘I shall, of course, continue to work for you. You are under indenture for one person for five years, but I am under indenture with 300 millions [of Indians] for a life-time. I shall go on with that service and never displace you from my hearts.’ There was a sprinkling of white managers in the crowd. Addressing them directly, Gandhi said that sometimes the European employer was inclined to be selfish, and he asked them to bear in mind that the indentured Indians were human beings, with the same sentiments as themselves. They were not cattle, but had all the weaknesses of themselves, and all the virtues if only they were brought out. He  made a plea for sanitary housing, and asked that the Europeans would look upon their indentured Indians as fellow-beings, and not as Asiatics who had nothing in common with them. The indentured Indian was a moral being.53 Everywhere he went, Gandhi was presented with addresses and sometimes with a purse, which he said he would use for public work only. His speeches at these farewells were artful but also sincere, addressing the specific concerns and anxieties of the audience, while underlining his own special connection to them. Europeans, Indians, labourers, merchants, high-castes, low-castes, Hindus, Muslims, Christians, Parsis – all had worked with Gandhi at various points in his years in Natal. His links with these groups were varied – political, personal, professional; social, spiritual, sentimental. One group however is absent from this otherwise capacious list – the Africans. To them alone were Gandhi’s connections too slight to merit a formal and public farewell. This was a sign in part of his own orientation, and a sign, perhaps in greater part, of the times.  On 12 July, Gandhi and Kasturba left for Johannesburg. This city he had come to later than Durban, but had come to know more intimately. It was where he had befriended Polak, Kallenbach, L. W. Ritch, A. M. Cachalia, Sonja Schlesin, Joseph Doke and Thambi Naidoo; where he had first formulated the theory of satyagraha; and where, with the aid of Gujarati merchants and later of Tamils, he had put this theory to the test. On the 13th, Gandhi was interviewed by a representative of the Transvaal Leader. Asked to recall ‘the more remarkable incidents in his career’, he selected some from the recent march across the border. He spoke of how he had convinced the striking miners ‘that they would win, not by putting their sticks over the shoulders of others, but over their own’. He praised their doggedness, their ability to march days and days on meagre rations. Then he praised the Europeans who had helped them, such as the station-master who had offered the marchers milk, the woman shopkeeper who invited them to take what they wanted, the hotel-owner who said they would be warmer spending the night inside his premises – gestures made spontaneously and without asking for payment, proof of the ‘old British sense of sympathy’ present in some whites in South Africa. Gandhi told the newspaper that he was leaving for good, ‘with the intention of never returning’. If ‘I ever have to return to South Africa or leave India,’ he said,  ‘it will be owing to circumstances beyond my control, and at present beyond my conception’. The definitiveness of this departure prompted an elegy for the man and what he represented. ‘So it is humanly certain’, remarked the Leader, that the most arresting figure in the Indian community in South Africa to-day is to say goodbye to a country in which he has spent many years, crowded with experience and exertion, his work on behalf of his countrymen at last crowned with success. When a man has been imprisoned so often that were his offences not merely political he would have qualified as a ‘habitual’, when he has time without number endured fatigue, and fasted with a smile, when he has moved steadily on over obstacles that might daunt the bravest, to the goal to which his eye has been fixed, you might picture him physically as an Apollo, and imagine his heart made of the fibre that belongs to martyrs. In the qualities of the heart and of the soul you may believe the best of Gandhi, but you would wonder, did you see him, that so frail a figure could house so vigorous a character.54 Gandhi would surely have read this tribute. Swept along by its eloquence, did he recall that this was the same paper that, a bare nine months previously, had written off his leadership and his movement? In September 1913 the Leader had spoken of an ‘astonishing apathy’ among the Indians, of an ‘absolute distrust’ in Gandhi. It had suggested that the satyagraha campaign was ‘threatened with collapse’. Now, after the march and the mass strike, the arrest of hundreds of Indians (including women and children) and the acceptance of their demands by the Enquiry Commission, the supposedly failed leader had become a ‘most arresting figure’, his exertions ‘crowned with success’. The Leader was, as some newspapers tend to do, bowing and bending with the wind. The day after its reporter met Gandhi, a meeting in honour of the Indian hero was held at Johannesburg’s Masonic Lodge. Addresses were presented on behalf of the British Indian Association, the Cantonese Club, the Tamil Benefit Society, the Transvaal Indian Women’s Association, the European Committee, and the Gujarati, Mahomedan and Parsee communities of the city. In a dramatic gesture, Thambi Naidoo offered his four sons to Gandhi, to become under his guidance, ‘servants of India’. The details of some of these tributes have come down to us. That presented by the British Indian Association had as its first signatories A. M. Cachalia and Thambi Naidoo, respectively the foremost Gujarati and Tamil colleague of Gandhi in the satyagraha. It praised the leader’s ‘nobility, steadfastness, self- sacrifice, and indomitable courage’. It also offered salutations to ‘the dignified and silent devotion, to the cause of Indian Womanhood, of the Gracious Lady who shares your joys and sorrows’. Kasturba’s ‘wonderful self-surrender’, the  tribute noted, had played a key role in mobilizing the Indians against the marriage laws, now amended in light of their struggle. For their part, the Cantonese Club of Johannesburg offered thanks for Gandhi’s ‘wise counsel’ and the ‘remarkable example’ of his ‘character and conduct’. Through the campaigns of which he was the ‘shining exemplar’, he had ‘raised the prestige of the Asiatic name not only throughout the Union of South Africa, but in the whole civilised world’. Responding to the tributes, Gandhi gave a speech whose contents were noted by a reporter who was present. He lovingly marked his own memories of, and debts to, this city of gold, greed, conflict and conscience: Johannesburg was not a new place to him. He saw many friendly faces there, many who had worked with him in many struggles in Johannesburg. He had gone through much in life. A great deal of depression and sorrow had been his lot, but he had also learnt during all those years to love Johannesburg even though it was a Mining Camp. It was in Johannesburg that he had found his most precious friends. It was in Johannesburg that the foundation for the great struggle of Passive Resistance was laid in the September of 1906. It was in Johannesburg that he had found a friend, a guide, and a biographer in the late Mr Doke. It was in Johannesburg that he had found in Mrs. Doke a loving sister, who had nursed him back to life when he had been assaulted by a countryman who had misunderstood his mission and who misunderstood what he had done. It was in Johannesburg that he had found a Kallenbach, a Polak, a Miss Schlesin, and many another who had always helped him, and had always cheered him and his countrymen … It was in Johannesburg again that the European Committee had been formed, when Indians were going through the darkest stage in their history, presided over then, as it still was, by Mr Hosken. Having praised his European friends, Gandhi now turned to the Indians of the city who had given their lives in and for the satyagraha campaign. He singled out three names: all Tamil, all young; two men, one woman; two who had died in prison and one who had died while being deported to India. It was, said Gandhi, Johannesburg that had given Valiamma, that young girl, whose picture rose before him even as he spoke, who had died in the cause of truth … [I]t was Johannesburg again that had produced a Nagappen and Narayansamy, two lovely youths hardly out of their teens, who also died. But both Mrs Gandhi and he stood living before them. He and Mrs Gandhi had worked in the lime-light; those others had worked behind the scenes, not knowing where they were going, except this, that what they were doing was right and proper, and, if any praise was due anywhere at all, it was due to the three who died.56 The meeting was followed by a dinner, the invitation for which has survived. It was advertised as a farewell to ‘Mr and Mrs. M. K. Gandhi and Mr H. Kallenbach’. The union of brown and white was symbolized by a portrait of a handshake. The chairman’s name was also printed: he was the Hon. H. A.  Wyndham, M.L.A. The other side of the card contained the menu, this divided into hors d’oeuvres (‘various’), soups (milk and celery, tomato), main dishes (seven in all, including mashed potatoes, aubergine cutlets, macaroni with cheese, stuffed tomatoes, asparagus à la vinaigrette) and sweets (among them apple pie and custard, blancmange, plum tart and pastries). In deference to the chief guests, no alcohol was served (the drinks on offer being coffee and mineral water), and the food was wholly vegetarian. Still, the spread was substantial, and one wonders whether Gandhi and Kallenbach did anything other than pick at what was put in front of them. Perhaps, as was their custom, they feasted chiefly on two items also printed on the menu, namely, ‘fruits’ and ‘nuts’. The next day, the 15th, Gandhi attended four meetings in Johannesburg. In the morning, he unveiled tablets at Bramfontein Cemetery in memory of Nagappen, who had died in 1909 and Valiamma, the young woman resister who had died in February 1914. Gandhi recalled the harsh conditions in which they perished, in jail, with ‘no feather mattress … simply the wooden floor’. He moved next to a meeting of the Transvaal Indian Women’s Association, where he asked for the blessings of his sisters for his work in India. A third meeting was of Tamils, whom Gandhi praised for having ‘borne the brunt of the struggle’. The majority of the deportees, passive resisters and women in jail were Tamil. The Tamils, said their grateful leader, ‘had shown so much pluck, so much faith, so much devotion to duty and such noble simplicity, and yet had been so self-effacing’. Gandhi turned to the terms of the settlement, stressing that ‘the £3 tax was now a matter of the past’, and that ‘all those dear sisters who had gone to gaol could now be called the wives of their husbands, whilst but yesterday they might have been called so out of courtesy by a friend but were not so in the eyes of the law.’ Despite his debts to the Tamils, Gandhi still had some advice for them. For ‘he had known something of Madras, and how sharp caste distinctions were there. He felt that they would have come to South Africa in vain if they were to carry those caste prejudices with them … They should remember that they were not high caste or low caste, but all Indians, all Tamils.’ The most important meeting attended by Gandhi on this day, 15 July 1914, was held at that once familiar venue, the Hamidia Hall. Here, he heard a long harangue from his one-time comrade Essop Mia, who had worked shoulder-to- shoulder with him during their first satyagrahas, who had been with him when he  was nearly beaten to death in 1908, and then suffered an assassination attempt himself. Now, six years later, Mia charged Gandhi with having obtained only one-and-a-half of the four points they had asked for. He had now ‘left them with the battle to be fought all over again’. Replying to these criticisms, Gandhi said the settlement had abolished the £3 tax, recognized wives and children, and clarified the Cape and Free State questions. Then he added, tellingly: The merchants had gained everything that the community had gained, and had gained probably most of all. The Indian community had raised its status in the estimation of Europeans throughout South Africa. They could no longer be classed as coolies by General Botha and others. The term had been removed as a term of reproach, silently but effectively. If they had not fought for the past eight years, no trace would have been left here of Indians as a self-respecting community. The ‘half’ point Essop Mia mentioned related to the absence of the explicit recognition of polygamy, a practice sacred to Islam. Another speaker, H. O. Ally – he who had accompanied the lawyer to London in 1906 – said he had told Gandhi ‘not to bind the Mussulmans with regard to one man one wife’, since ‘it was impossible for Mussulmans to break one syllable out of their holy Koran.’ Gandhi answered that the settlement had legalized monogamous marriages, and ‘all he expected the South African Government to do was to become tolerant of polygamy, but not to legalise it.’ The meetings with the Tamils and the Gujaratis were a study in contrast, one marked by a mutual respect and affection between the speaker and his audience, the other by mutual reserve, and even antagonism. The Gandhi of 1906 was supported morally and financially by Gujarati merchants; the Gandhi of 1914 was a leader largely of working-class Tamils. The contrast, implied and implicit, was made manifest in his last engagement in Johannesburg. Speaking to a group mostly of Gujarati Hindus on the 16th, he observed that ‘my Gujarati brethren have done a great deal for me and Mrs. Gandhi but they did not, I must say, render as much service in the cause of the struggle as the Tamil community did. I wish the Gujaratis to learn a lesson from the Tamils. Though I do not know their language, they have given me the greatest help in the fight.’On 16 July, Gandhi made a hurried trip to Pretoria, where the merchant Hajee Habib – who had accompanied Gandhi to London in 1909 – organized a party for him. In attendance was Montford Chamney, the long-time Protector-cum-Persecutor of the Indians. Gandhi recalled that he had certainly stood up against Mr Chamney and the management of his office, but there had been  no personal ill-will on the speaker’s part, and he had always received the utmost courtesy at Mr Chamney’s hands. He appreciated the compliment Mr Chamney paid him by coming out to arrest him with only one man to assist, when the speaker was at the head of 2,000 men and women. It showed the confidence Mr Chamney had in him as a passive resister.60 The same night, Gandhi, Kasturba and Kallenbach took a train to Cape Town. They arrived on the morning of the 18th, to be met at Monument Station by friends with garlands, who took them in carriages into the city. The procession was headed by a band playing music, marching under a banner wishing ‘Bon voyage to the great Indian patriot, M. K. Gandhi, and family, also Mr Kallenbach. God be with you until we meet again.’ The Gandhis spent their last night in South Africa at the home of a Jewish couple who were friends of Hermann Kallenbach. Morris Alexander was a liberal lawyer and MP; his wife Ruth was a fiery radical from a family of learned rabbis.61 Gandhi ‘spoke long and earnestly of his mission for his fellow men, and begged that his small band of supporters [in South Africa] should continue to defend their interests’. What struck Morris Alexander was his guest’s simplicity – refusing the use of the master bedroom, he slept instead on the floor. His wife Ruth was moved by Gandhi’s patience with his hosts, by ‘how uncondemning’ he was of things (such as the ostentatious furniture) of which he must have disapproved. The Indian, she concluded, was one of the ‘three great souls’ she had known (the others being her father and Olive Schreiner).62 The next day, the Gandhis and Kallenbach proceeded to the docks. Here addresses were presented to Gandhi on behalf of, among others, the Tamils of Cape Town and Port Elizabeth. He was also presented with a gold watch, while Kallenbach was given a pair of binoculars, presents that Gandhi politely yet publicly rejected as ‘inconsistent with his life here and with the life he had marked out for himself in India’. He disavowed the gifts but not the praise, here offered by Dr Gool on behalf of the Indian community, and Dr Abdurahman on behalf of the Coloured people of the Cape. In his own speech, Gandhi articulated the hope that with the settlement in place, the ‘Europeans of South Africa [would] take a humanitarian and Imperial view of the Indian question’. He was optimistic, for Cape Town itself had produced such people as the liberal MPs W. P. Schreiner and J. X. Merriman, and the great writer Olive Schreiner. Striking a personal note, he ‘expressed warm gratitude for what had been done for him by the Europeans of South Africa, and, turning to Mr Kallenbach, placed his hand  on the latter’s shoulder and said that South Africa had done this for him – it had given him a brother.’ After the speeches, the Gandhis and Kallenbach boarded the SS Kinfaus Castle, bound for London. A crowd of friends and admirers walked with them up to the ship, before – as a journalist on the spot reported – ‘coming down the gangway wiping the tears from their eyes’. One person was conspicuously missing from that round of farewells for Mohandas and Kasturba Gandhi – their old friend and one-time house-mate Henry Polak. Polak had gone to England to spend time with his family. He sailed back to South Africa in July, and on board wrote an emotional letter to Gandhi, saying he was feeeling ‘miserable’ because of the probability that I shall not see you again for some years at least … There must be some peculiar bond between us that keeps us near each other in spite of these prolonged absences … I suppose that your Indian relation of elder and younger brother most nearly approaches it, and possibly I realise it more intimately because of my Oriental trend of thought. It is strange, this persistent turning to the East with me, and Millie’s equally persistent turning to the West. I suppose that it is this union of East and West that makes for the best of all human understandings. In case he returned after Gandhi had left, he asked him to spend an evening at their house and have ‘a heart to heart talk with Millie, so that she may know, and I may know, what you hope for, and what you propose to do’.64 The letter was written on 14 July; since the Gandhis left four days later, they didn’t get to see it. They, and Kallenbach, were booked third class on the Kinfaus Castle. Gandhi himself had travelled in the lowest class often on trains, but never before on a ship. They mostly ate fruits and boiled peanuts, a diet to which Gandhi attributed his lack of seasickness.65 Following the Gandhis from South Africa were a torrent of telegrams, sent from different people representing different interests in different parts of South Africa. These 132 telegrams of farewell lie in the National Archives of India. They came from Natal, Transvaal and the Cape, from Hindus, Muslims and Parsis. Sorabjee Rustomjee of Durban, son of the brave and generous Parsee Rustomjee, said ‘we younger Indians who are colonial born look to your self sacrificing life as an inspiration to work in a similar spirit for the sake of motherland may almighty shower richest blessings upon your labours and grant long life health and strength to continue labour love for beloved motherland  goodbye’. Sorabjee spoke for a particular generation (the young); others offered their wishes and admiration on behalf of groups such as the Catholic Indians, the Natal Zoroastrian Anjuman, the Anjuman-i-Islam, the Tamil Benefit Society of Johannesburg, the Gujarati Hindus of the same city and the Kathiawar Arya Mandal of Durban. From outside the community, there was a wire from a certain ‘Mulder’, secretary of the African Political Organization, who wrote that ‘members of Doornfontein branch wish you a hearty farewell and bon voyage to your motherland.’ Among the wires sent by and on behalf of individuals were several sent by Muslims. ‘May Allah take you and Mrs. Gandhi’, said Abdurawoof Thangay of Vereeniging – a Tamil Muslim from the sound of his name – ‘to our holy fatherland and wishing you every success in future please express my thanks to Kallenbach goodbye’. Abdul Gaffar Fajandar from Johannesburg wrote that ‘your departure from this country has been a great grief to the Indian community who will never cease to remember your trojan like heroic and [sic] self sacrifice your personality will be ever idolised’. Other wires were sent by lovers of the Hindu epics. The Ramayan Sabha of Lugenberthy wired: ‘Our loss our mothers gain her care of us our comfort.’ Perhaps the most emotional message came from Bughwan from Durban, who ‘was exited station could not therefore wish goodbye as my heart desired forgive our weaknesses pray for us’. The most evocative came from the ‘Farewell Committee’ of the same city, which observed that the light of their communal existence disappears with your departure their consolation being that it may be a lighthouse to them from the heights of Mount Everest shining near and far may god in his plenitude bestow the spirit to burn for the good of humanity to you and your compatriots.66 These wishes and felicitations provide a conspectus of the social and geographical range of Gandhi’s influence in the large, complex and conflicted land that, for two decades, was his home. It may be apposite, however, to juxtapose to these endorsements a comment on Gandhi’s departure from someone who was not sorry to see him go. This was General Jan Christian Smuts. In May 1914 Smuts received a letter from Emily Hobhouse, who was now back in London. This conveyed news about mutual friends, and went on to discuss a man whom the Quaker now considered a friend but whom the Afrikaner still could not. ‘I have been reading Gandhi’s Home  Rule for India – Hind Swaraj,’ wrote Hobhouse to Smuts. ‘Have you read it? I like it very much, all about India and the harm English Civilization is doing there … It is a book you would have enjoyed at one period of your life.’ Smuts’ reply is unrecorded. Whatever he might have thought of the English on the battlefield, after the war ended he had been first in the ranks of those seeking to unite the white people against the coloured. Hobhouse’s endorsement of Gandhi’s attack on Western civilization could scarcely have pleased him. In recent years he had read and seen too much of the man in any case. His feelings are contained in a letter he wrote to Sir Benjamin Robertson, where he said that after the Viceroy’s representative had returned to India, ‘Gandhi approached me on a number of small administrative points, some of which I could meet him on, and as a result, the saint has left our shores – I sincerely hope for ever.’            