 20 Breaking Boundaries   In 1913, it was twenty years since Mohandas Gandhi had first come out to South Africa. In that time the Indian community had become larger and more varied in its composition. The population in Natal had tripled, from just over 40,000 in the early 1890s to about 135,000 now. A large number were indentured labourers, working in sugar plantations and coal mines. In the year 1911 the import of labour was stopped; well before that, Indians had moved out of the fields into other trades and professions. They were a visible component of the population of Natal, present in the tens of thousands in the main city, Durban, streets and sections of which were dominated by them. Indian families were also scattered through the countryside, working as farmers and traders in the towns and villages of the province. There were roughly 10,000 Indians in the Transvaal. These included some prosperous merchants, a larger number of petty traders and hawkers, and a significant sector of clerks, hotel workers and other members of the salariat. The Cape had about 6,500 Indians, among them some successful traders and professionals. There were, according to the 1911 census, a mere 106 Indians in the Orange Free State. Of the main provinces of South Africa, only the Free State had no real ‘Indian problem’ at all. A key difference from the time of Gandhi’s first arrival was that many more Indians were now born and raised in South Africa. There was even a ‘Colonial- Born’ Indian Association in Natal. This was their home and, increasingly, their homeland. Their connections to the Indian subcontinent now were more sentimental than substantial. It was in South Africa that they would raise families and make their future. Younger Indians especially were keen to move out of the working class into more secure and highly regarded professions such as medicine, the law and government service.  Despite his own extended stay in South Africa, Gandhi still considered himself Indian. Yet he recognized the profound change in the orientation of the community he worked with. He would return to India, but the others would stay on, to live and labour under a government – and ruling race – that was often strongly prejudiced against their interests. This is why Gandhi was so keen to arrive at a settlement with General Smuts, whereby the rights to work and residence of Indians in all provinces of the Union were safeguarded, existing policies that bore down unfairly on them (such as the £3 tax in Natal) removed, and proposed policies that threatened the integrity of the community (such as the marriage restrictions implied by the Searle judgment) withdrawn. Ever the incrementalist, Gandhi had appealed to Smuts and his colleagues to have these changes in the laws made. Through 1912 and much of 1913 he had written hundreds of letters, printed dozens of appeals, sought audiences with Smuts, and lobbied MPs. By September 1913, this series of preliminary steps had got nowhere. With the government still disinclined to concede their claims, the Indians now prepared, under Gandhi’s leadership, to use their final recourse and reserve weapon, that of satyagraha.  On Monday, 15 September 1913, a party of sixteen Indians left the settlement at Phoenix to illegally enter the Transvaal. Such transgressions of provincial boundaries had been commonly practised during past satyagrahas. What was novel, this time, was that some of the protesters were women. They were breaking a boundary far more rigid or sacrosanct than that dividing one province of South Africa from another. While in London in 1906 and 1909, Gandhi had seen the suffragettes at work – and admired them. Their courage and suffering, he thought, could inspire Indians facing discrimination in South Africa. Apart from the suffragettes, Gandhi had also been influenced by his friendship with Millie Polak. Millie believed that ‘all the questions relating to life really belong to women’. She argued that for ‘thousands of years, men have used women and the greatest beauties in their nature rather to their detriment than her glory’. She insisted that ‘only when the finer forces of life are realised can woman come into her own.’ In India itself, the idea that women could participate in popular social movements was out of the question. Middle-class women, whether Hindu or  Muslim, were not expected to mix socially with members of the other sex. The only men they spoke to were family members, or servants, or itinerant traders who came knocking at their door. They were not supposed to leave the house unescorted. The Swadeshi movement in Bengal and Maharashtra had been an all-male affair. The terrorists who assassinated British officials were all men. By the 1910s, a sprinkling of upper-class women had begun attending the meetings of the Indian National Congress. But none had gone to jail. The possibility did not, could not, enter their heads – not least because it would have appalled their husbands. However much they disliked colonial rule, Indian patriots (both Hindu and Muslim) saw struggle and sacrifice in exclusively male terms. The most progressive nationalist in India, c. 1913, could scarcely have countenanced his wife being fed and ordered about by male jailors not of her kin or caste. In this respect, the Tamil women in the diaspora were ahead of their sisters at home. In the summer of 1909, the wives of satyagrahis in prison held a meeting in a temple in Germiston, which passed the following resolution: ‘As our religion teaches us that a wife may not be separated from her husband, we pray the Government to send us to gaol with our husbands, and to confiscate our property, if that be justice.’. The resolution was moved by one Thayee Ammall, and seconded by a Mrs Marriam and a Mrs Chengalaraya Moodaley.3 The Tamil ladies were dissuaded from courting arrest. Four years later, with the struggle reaching its climax, Gandhi’s wife, Kasturba, offered to go to jail. This was a spontaneous reaction, an outraged response to a judge and a judgment that called into question the validity of her own marriage. That Gandhi agreed to let his wife court imprisonment may have been a result of his encounters with suffragettes in England and Tamil women in Transvaal. There was also the example of African women in the Orange Free State, who had recently turned in their passes to the authorities, pledging never to carry them again.4 As for Kasturba, without diminishing in any way the radical and unprecedented nature of her gesture, perhaps she had been prepared for it by the years spent living in proximity to that energetic feminist Millie Polak. Three days before the first batch of satyagrahis were to leave Phoenix, Gandhi wrote to Kallenbach asking him to come down from Johannesburg to the  Transvaal border to meet them. ‘I shall send the resisters from here on Monday’, wrote Gandhi: They will reach Volksrust on Tuesday. You should leave Monday night by the mail train so that you are at the station when the Kaffir Mail reaches Volksrust on Tuesday evening. You should simply watch as a spectator. They are not to speak in English. One of them only will speak in that tongue, interpret for the others. They will not give finger-prints. If the police arrest them, they must ask for shelter at the police station. If the police do not arrest them, you should, there and then, buy tickets for them and proceed to Johannesburg. I then suggest their being housed at Mountain View … No more than Boer meal and a little dholl and rice will be required and fruits and nuts of course. If they are arrested, you should attend court, send full wire to me from Volksrust as also full letter. If they are imprisoned you should immediately see the gaol doctor and the jailor and tell them of religious and health foods they may take and not take. But you should also say that they will not complain if they do not get what they want. Mrs. Gandhi will be purely fruitarian. Jeki and others will not touch bread. Some of them will be able to take only one meal. The names and further details later. It is well that you will be free from your business even if passive resistance is to start. Your whole time will be wanted for the struggle.5 This is a striking letter, demonstrating that Gandhi was at once a theorist and moralist of non-violent resistance, and its strategist and tactician too. Essays in Indian Opinion from 1907 onwards had outlined the philosophy and relevance of satyagraha – within South Africa, and to the world. Now, as a fresh satyagraha was about to commence, Gandhi was providing detailed instructions to each of its main participants and patrons. The first batch of resisters left Phoenix Farm on 15 September. Work in the fields, the press and the school was suspended for the day. The children helped the women pack their bags and carry them to the station. Before they left the settlement, the satyagrahis gathered for one last meeting, where Gandhi told the departing mothers that their children were safe in the hands of God. Some hymns were sung, but (as a boy staying back recalled) ‘nobody’s voice was clear. Everyone was overwhelmed.’ Gandhi wrote to Manilal – who was in Johannesburg – that ‘Ba and others boarded the train with great courage on Monday.’ The ‘others’ included their son Ramdas, Parsee Rustomjee, Jeki Mehta, and the wives of Chhaganlal and Maganlal (named Kashi and Santok respectively), the last two offering to go out of solidarity with their aunt. The party – numbering sixteen in all, four women and twelve men – crossed the border, and were detained at Volksrust. Kasturba and company were tried on 23 September, and pleaded guilty to the charge of violating the immigration acts. They refused to offer further testimony, and  waived their right to ask questions of the prosecutor or judge. A reporter noted that ‘the case created great commotion among the local [Indian] community, most of whom were present in court.’ The satyagrahis were all sentenced to three months in prison. They were at first taken to a jail at Volksrust, and later shifted to Maritzburg. The women were housed in the same cell as African women convicts; the boys put to work in the prison orchards. Gandhi, meanwhile, wrote two strong, stirring articles in Indian Opinion. The first called for Indians in every town to join the fight and court arrest. The second said that removing the £3 ‘blood tax’ was ‘the central point of this struggle’. Recalling the promise made by the leading whites to Gokhale, he said the removal of the tax ‘is a simple, primary duty every Indian in South Africa owes to his country, to Mr Gokhale and to the poor men who are the victims of gold hunger’.9 This, too – the foregrounding of the poorest Indians in South Africa – was a departure. Indentured labourers had been among Gandhi’s clients, and he had campaigned for better working conditions for them. However, in past satyagrahas in Transvaal, hawkers, merchants and professionals had been in the vanguard. Now, the ‘central point’ was the abolition of a discriminatory tax that hit the poor most. On the morning of 25 September, Gandhi left Phoenix for the Transvaal. His hope was that he would be arrested and follow Kasturba into jail. He was under great stress, as a growing number of Indians in Natal now resented his leadership. During the last struggle, he had found it increasingly hard to get volunteers from the merchant class. Now, as the struggle recommenced, Gandhi was confronted with questions to which the answers seemed unclear. How would the satyagraha turn out? How readily would the Indians in either province court arrest? His nerves were on edge. On the 25th, in a hurry to catch the train, he lost his temper with the children at Phoenix while eating breakfast. Later, from his carriage, he wrote Maganlal an abashed, apologetic letter that revealed ‘the awful state’ he was in. As he ‘ran for the train’, remembered Gandhi, I gave no end of trouble to the boys. Everyone was delayed because of me … Thinking of this, I felt extremely miserable. Even those of my actions which I believed to be for a spiritual purpose have a big flaw in them … It is never the mark of a spiritual aspirant to be in too great a hurry and make himself a nuisance to others. He may, of course, not overtax himself – ought not to. What an ignoble  state to be in! All this is the consequence of initial mistakes. I also realized that if I had skipped the meal, I could have worked with an unruffled mind, with plenty of time on hand, and would have been no trouble to any of you … I felt ashamed within myself even as I was on the way. I reproached myself. I, who used to believe that I had perhaps something in me, find myself today in a humiliating state. I tell you all this because you attribute so many excellences to me. You should see the faults in me in order that you may save yourself from like faults. Plunged as I have been in the affairs of South Africa, I think I can be entirely free only in India. But please warn me whenever I take upon myself too heavy a burden. You will be with me, no doubt, even in India. If I am imprisoned, it will be all peace and nothing but peace for me. If not, I may return there [to India]. But please warn me if ever in future, even in South Africa, you find today’s story being repeated. We could have done without bread for Mr Kallenbach and without groundnut jam for me. We need not have been particular about feeding the children. Or rather, we might have pleased ourselves in all these ways and yet things would have been all right if I had not insisted on having my meal. But I would ride all the horses and that is why God ordained my fall. Surely, this is not the first occasion when such a thing has happened to me. This time, however, the lesson has been brought home to me. I will now change myself a little.10 The self-scrutiny, the self-criticism, was in character. The key phrase perhaps is ‘I would ride all the horses’. Seeking simultaneously to be a conscientious (by his lights) teacher, father, editor, opponent of racial injustice (whether suffered by hawkers, merchants, professionals, or labourers) and multi-purpose reformer (of diet, health, sexual attitudes, relations between religions), Gandhi would, from time to time, find the obligations of one calling competing with the demands of another, the clash leading to a loss of temper or loss of direction, this then recognized and, if possible, rectified.  Gandhi crossed into Transvaal without being detained. He proceeded to Johannesburg, where he addressed two meetings on 28 September, speaking once to an audience of men, the other time to women who had decided to court arrest.11 Two days later, the Transvaal Leader wrote that ‘the Indian passive resistance movement is threatened with collapse.’ The story’s headlines ran: ‘No Money for Martyrs Passive Resisters in a Pickle Indian Merchants against the Campaign / Support Very Scanty’. The newspaper claimed that while Gandhi and his colleague A. M. Cachalia – chairman of the British Indian Association – were ‘proclaiming the opening of hostilities, and urging their compatriots to fill the gaols, there are growls and curses from the rank and file, open defiance, and frank avowals of contentment with the present order of things’. Last time, there were more than 3,000 convictions; but ‘on this occasion’, it was being said that ‘Mr Gandhi himself  does not expect that more than 150 persons will go to prison in the cause.’ Even this was thought to be an over-estimate, since ‘a leading Indian merchant’ interviewed by the paper thought that at most fifty people in Johannesburg would ‘risk their liberty’. That the arrests so far had been of people from Natal showed, to the newspaper, that ‘whatever measure of success Mr Gandhi achieves amongst the poorer and more ignorant of his countrymen, the wealthy Indian traders [of the Transvaal] … are making no secret of their antagonism to the passive resistance campaign.’ The same day, Gandhi wrote to the Transvaal Leader disputing this story. The meeting of 28 September had, he pointed out, been attended by many merchants. He called the paper’s claim that passive resisters were ‘demand[ing] payment for their penance’ an ‘atrocious libel, and a cruel wrong to the men and women who have suffered during the last campaign, and who will suffer now’. The protests continued. On 1 October, Manilal Gandhi was detained in Johannesburg for hawking without a licence. Like the other resisters, he chose to go to jail rather than pay a fine.Two of the Gandhi boys were now in prison; perhaps the eldest, an experienced jailbird, could be summoned to join them. Gandhi thus wrote to Harilal saying ‘both of you may come over here [from India] and get arrested. Chanchi may come while the fight is on only if she has the courage to go to gaol.’ In the second week of October, General Smuts – who had now resumed charge of the Interior Ministry – spoke to the Governor-General’s secretary about the developing situation. Smuts said ‘Gandhi was suffering from one of his periodic attacks of mental derangement, and was, for the time being, attracted by the role of prophet and martyr.’ The General ‘doubted whether there was much real enthusiasm or financial support behind it [the passive resistance movement], and he rather expected that it would soon collapse.’ Asked about specific grievances he said, with regard to the marriage question, that it was impossible to give ‘legal recognition to a polygamous system’. He was personally opposed to the £3 tax and was keen to repeal it, ‘but the narrow-minded folly of the [white] Natalians had been, and still was, an insuperable obstacle’. The planters wanted the tax as a means to get the workers to re-indenture; the non-planters wanted it to induce them to return to India.  On 12 October, the first Muslim woman joined the satyagraha movement. This was the wife of Gandhi’s old classmate Sheikh Mehtab. Mrs Mehtab left Durban with her mother, son and servant, aiming to cross the border and court arrest. She was seen off at the station by a large crowd, who presented her with bouquets and parcels of food for the journey. The same day, Gandhi journeyed in the reverse direction, from the Transvaal to Natal. At a meeting in Durban’s Union Theatre, he was asked why Henry Polak had recently been sent to England. Did the Indians need to have ‘paid European workers’? Gandhi answered that Polak had been deputed at Gokhale’s request. Gandhi now left for the coal-mining town of Newcastle. A meeting held here on the evening of the 13th ended ‘with cheers to the brave son of India, Mr M. K. Gandhi’. Thambi Naidoo also spoke, in Tamil, after which the mineworkers endorsed both Gandhi and passive resistance; they were particularly exercised by the £3 tax. Gandhi returned to Durban, where there had recently been sharp criticism of his methods. He had spent much of the past decade in the Transvaal; in his absence, other leaders had emerged, who did not always endorse his views. In July 1913, Gandhi’s old adversary P. S. Aiyar had claimed that passive resistance had outlived its usefulness. Instead of fighting for their rights in South Africa, said Aiyar, the Indians should depart en masse for the motherland. The South African Government should be made to buy their properties at market price, and pay for their passage back to India. Now, in October, at a well-attended meeting of the Natal Indian Congress, Gandhi was attacked for his ‘provocative and inefficient leadership’. A Gujarati merchant named M. C. Anglia said that Gandhi’s methods had not made their position more secure or elevated their standing among the whites. Why should they support him now? So long as the Indians ‘have a professional and political agitator at the head of political affairs’, said Anglia, ‘we are doomed to failure with the Government and the European public of South Africa.’ Some people rose to defend Gandhi, and since ‘passions were rising on either side’ the chairman closed the meeting, upon which his supporters ‘carried Mr Gandhi shoulder high through the Victoria, Albert, Queen and Field Streets’.  In the days after the contentious meeting, Gandhi’s leadership was endorsed by the Hindustani Association of Durban and by a group of Muslim merchants. Among his newer admirers were the workers in mines and plantations, whose endorsement turned out to be definitive. By now, some 2,000 Indians working in the Natal collieries were on strike. The districts of Dundee and Newcastle were said to be ‘in a feverish state of excitement’. The striking miners assembled in the grounds of Dundee’s Hindu Temple, where they ‘expressed confidence in the leadership of Mr Gandhi’. They had been mobilized by eleven Tamil-speaking women, among them Mrs Thambi Naidoo. As Gandhi admiringly noted, ‘the presence of these brave women who had never suffered hardship and had never spoken at public meetings acted like electricity, and the men left their work’. For speaking at these meetings and urging the workers to strike, Mrs Thambi Naidoo and her colleagues were sentenced to three months in prison with hard labour. In the second and third weeks of October, Gandhi addressed crowds of striking workers in Durban, Newcastle, Hatting Spruit and other towns in Natal. Contemporary photographs show people listening to him in all variety of dress, Indian and Western, and in all manner of headgear – caps, hats, topis and turbans. The gatherings were large and densely packed, with several thousand Indians come to support their leader.26 On 24 October, Gandhi wrote to Maganlal that ‘great things are happening in Newcastle. There is a move to lead a march of 2,000 men to Transvaal.’ The next day he told mine and plantation owners that their workers were on strike because of the Government’s failure to honour their promise to Gokhale to abolish the £3 tax.A Tamil poster circulated in the plantations quoted Gandhi as saying: ‘I have no grievances against the employers … I ask [them] to assist in getting the tax repealed. I am quite aware of the loss and hardship my unfortunate brethren have to suffer, and I trust even if you have to beg you would not return to work until the tax is repealed.’ Reading these reports in Pretoria, General Smuts was provoked to deny them. In a speech on the 26th, he said the £3 tax was part of the contract signed by labourers in India before coming out to Natal. The Government had not promised Gokhale that the tax would be repealed; merely that they would consider the question afresh. Smuts wired the mineowners’ association that to  repeal the tax now, under the pressure of Gandhi and company, ‘would be [a] public disaster’. He claimed that ‘with Gandhi repeal of tax is an afterthought, and is intended to influence Natal Indians to whom the real grounds on which he has started passive resistance and which never included this tax, do not appeal.’ The evidence on this question supports Gandhi rather than Smuts. Gokhale was clearly given the impression the tax would be repealed; for that is what he told the Governor-General on 15 November 1912, immediately after he had met the Prime Minister, Louis Botha. In March 1913, when the South African Immigration Bill came up for debate, Gokhale again told a senior official of the Government of India that ‘Ministers have promised him, and quite publicly, that the Natal £3 licence tax will be revoked.’ The repeal of the tax was manifestly one of the ‘real grounds’ on which the current satyagraha was begun. Truth was on Gandhi’s side, and so, as it happens, were the workers. A news report dated Wednesday, 29 October, tells this part of the story: ‘The [coal-mine] managers assembled the Indians on the mines this morning, but the Indians declined to listen, insulting the managers, and intimating that they were only prepared to receive instructions and advice from Mr Gandhi.’ Back in July 1913, the Durban journalist P. S. Aiyar had written off passive resistance as a method of assering one’s rights. Two months later the first batch of satyagrahis, led by Kasturba Gandhi, courted arrest. Hundreds more followed them into jail. The Indian workers in the coal mines and sugar plantations downed tools. The editor of the African Chronicle was now obliged to do his professional duty, which was to report the news. The bravery of Kasturba’s pioneering band of resisters was praised. Two pages of the journal were devoted to the ‘Progress of Passive Resistance’, reporting arrests, speeches and strikes in different parts of Natal. But the editor could not suppress his prejudices entirely, calling upon the Indians to ‘keep in view the cause, not the man’ (namely, Gandhi). In challenging Gandhi’s claims to lead the Indians, P. S. Aiyar was always fighting an uphill battle. The surge of support for the satyagraha now made his a pretty hopeless task. A report in his own newspaper conveyed the comprehensiveness of his defeat. In November 1913 the Chronicle was  compelled to reduce its pages from sixteen to eight, noting that ‘the compositors, employed in our office, having joined the ranks of the strikers, we regret, we are unable to publish our paper in its usual form.’  The Indians on strike moved out of the collieries and plantations to the towns of Dundee and Newcastle, so that they could not be coerced back to work. When agents of the owners reached these towns nevertheless, it was decided to shift the striking workers to Charlestown, thirty-five miles away, closer to the border with the Transvaal. ‘To provide railway fare for thousands was out of the question’, so they walked, with Gandhi leading the first batch. The workers shouted ‘Vande Matram!’ and ‘Ramchandra ki jai!’, the first slogan a salute to the motherland, the second a homage to the mythical just and good king, Ram. They carried their own rice and dal. The marchers slept the first night in the open, reaching Charlestown the next day. But keeping so many people close together was deemed a risk – what if plague broke out? Gandhi liked walking. In the 1880s, he walked the streets of London in the company of his vegetarian comrade Josiah Oldfield. In the 1890s, he walked to the Bombay High Court from his home in Santa Cruz. In the 1900s, he walked a lot with Kallenbach in Johannesburg. He liked walking so much that when Henry Polak wrote a profile of his friend, he placed him not in the law court or his office, not in the Phoenix or Tolstoy settlements, not even in a vegetarian restaurant, but on the road. ‘Here he is,’ wrote Polak of Gandhi, a slim-built man of middle height, the tanned cheeks a little sunken, bare-headed, somewhat close- cropped and grizzled, with a small moustache. You see him walking along the road in profound meditation or animatedly conversing with a companion, the shoulders bent, the head thrown slightly forward, his arms behind his back, the left wrist grasped in the right hand, the sandaled feet outspread – a not too gainly walk, rather rapid, for he is an accomplished pedestrian from long practice, preference, and force of circumstance.33 Gandhi liked walking, but this was a very long march, even by his standards. For the satyagrahis under his command had now decided to walk on to the Transvaal. If not detained at the border, they would proceed onwards, all the way to Johannesburg, several hundred miles into the interior. A rich Hindu offered a 600-acre farm to host them; to this was added the 1,100 acres of Tolstoy Farm. Kallenbach was excited by the prospect. ‘We will have “common” tables and ordinary family life will not exist for the time being,’ the architect told a reporter.  ‘This system was properly tested during the last campaign, and it can be carried on indefinitely … Passive Resistance does not mean idleness. There will be no lack of funds. Merchants everywhere are giving freely, and Professor Gokhale is with us heart and soul.’ Proof of the last statement was provided in an accompanying report, which quoted Gokhale in Bombay as saying that the Indian public would send £2,000 a month for the next six months to sustain the passive resisters. On 29 October, a large public meeting was held at Johannesburg’s West End Bioscope Hall, to coincide with the Hindu festival of Dasehra. The Indians turned out in force, as did their European sympathizers, W. Hosken, L. W. Ritch, Sonja Schlesin, et al. The Gujarati S. K. Patel, in the chair, said this Dasehra day, which should be ‘one of rejoicing and festivity’, had instead been turned by the Government into one ‘of sadness and mourning’. He was followed by L. W. Ritch, whose message was more hopeful. The resisters, said Ritch, should be congratulated for ‘using the weapons of the soul and not the weapons of the mob’ (these being the ‘bludgeon and the bomb’). The audience was then asked to stand as a mark of respect for the women resisters. A photograph of the Johannesburg ladies in jail (Mrs Thambi Naidoo and company) was flashed on the screen. Collections were then called for, and a scene of great enthusiasm followed. Rings, pocket-knives, caps, watches, etc., were offered up by their owners, and were put up for auction, fetching extraordinary prices. An umbrella was sold for five guineas, a ring for seventeen guineas, pocket knives for 10s. 6d., a bottle of sweets for £1 10s. A large amount was contributed both in cash and provisions. On the termination of the proceedings, those present formed in procession and quietly marched along Fox and Commissioner Streets, then up Rissik Street and through Pritchard Street to the house of the Chairman [of the British Indian Association] in Diagonal Street. The procession was preceded by two men carrying black flags and all wore rosettes to mark the present sufferings of the community.35 The same day, Gandhi set out for the Transvaal border with some 200 men, women and children.Other batches followed. ‘We may any hour get the news of G[andhi]’s arrest’, wired Polak to Gokhale on the 30th. By 3 November, 1,500 passive resisters had reached Charlestown. ‘All were in sole charge of Mr Gandhi,’ reported the Natal Mercury. The marchers were fed in the grounds of the local mosque, with the food provided, for free, by local merchants. Also in attendance was Sonja Schlesin, who had come down especially from Johannesburg to look after the women in the gathering.  A journalist from the Natal Advertiser, visiting Charlestown on 5 November, reported that ‘the whole appearance of the town resembled nothing but an Indian bazaar.’ He found Gandhi ‘at the back of an Indian store, in the yard, serving out curry and rice to his followers, who marched up, and each man received his quota. One baker sold 500 loaves to the Indians in one day.’ On the morning of the 6th, the resisters left Charlestown, walking towards Volksrust, the town just the other side of the border. They halted there for refreshments, and then proceeded deeper into the Transvaal. Till they reached the border, Gandhi was at the rear, but once they entered Volksrust he led from the front. He told a reporter that they would march to their final destination, Tolstoy Farm, in eight stages, covering twenty-four miles every day. On Monday the 3rd, while the marchers were camped in Charlestown, the Governor-General summoned General Smuts for a meeting. Smuts said he intended, for the moment, to adopt a policy of laissez-faire. He thought ‘Mr Gandhi appeared to be in a position of much difficulty. Like Frankenstein, he found his monster an uncomfortable creation, and he would be glad to be relieved of further responsibility for its support.’ If the Government arrested Gandhi, argued Smuts, then ‘he would be able to disclaim responsibility for the maintenance of his array of strikers.’ The longer the march continued, the more difficult it would be to feed them, at which point the strikers would themselves ‘ask to be sent back to their work in Natal’. The police, however, were pressing Smuts to arrest Gandhi. They were worried about the adverse publicity, and perhaps also that the marchers might turn violent. On the evening of the 6th, when the march had reached the town of Palmford, Gandhi was taken into custody. The next morning, he appeared in court in Volksrust and was charged with breaching the law regarding the movement of people across provinces. Gandhi appealed for bail, which ‘was strongly opposed by the Public Prosecutor’. The judge, however, granted the application, asking for a deposit of £50, a sum ‘promptly found by the local Indian merchants’. Kallenbach had attended the court proceedings at Volksrust. No sooner was Gandhi granted bail than the two of them jumped into a car to rejoin the marchers. A reporter climbed in too, and they drove ‘through beautiful grassy country’. They caught up with their fellows some thirty miles from Volksrust.  ‘All along the road,’ noted the accompanying journalist, ‘the car passed stragglers, who lined up and saluted Mr Gandhi, calling him “Bapoo”, or father.’ On 7 November, with their leader back to lead them, the strikers continued on their journey. That night they camped at Krorndraai, by the river. The next morning they carried on towards Vaal. At Standerton they were stopped, and Gandhi was detained once more. He was taken to court, where he was released on bail and returned to the march.44 His antagonist Montford Chamney then came down from Johannesburg to stop Gandhi, accompanied by a posse of police. For General Smuts had finally come round to the view that the Indians who had illegally entered the Transvaal must be sent back across the border. Chamney and his companions met the Indians west of Standerton. Years later, he recalled his first sight of the march and the marchers, the memory made more colourful by the passage of time: Three determined men marching abreast with single purpose at steady, rhythmic pace, Ghandi, Polak, and another, followed closely by a great company that stretched far back like a moving ribbon until lost beyond the next rise of the ground. Many of these wore the gay colours of the East, a few were clad in cheap European garb while others had little beyond the Oriental loin-cloth and mantle. Ready-made boots had been supplied to the poorer classes, but this unfamiliar form of Western footgear only proved an impediment that was soon removed, the owners carrying the boots strung by the laces from their necks. But every class of marcher seemed to carry something – a babe, a basket or perhaps a few household chattels.45 The police halted the column, and a warrant for Gandhi’s arrest was executed. He was taken to the town of Dundee, where he was charged with inducing the strike and inciting the strikers. This time his request for bail was rejected and he was sent off to prison. From there he wrote a remarkable letter to the magistrate, which, among other things, gives the lie to Smuts’ charge that Gandhi was keen to wash his hands of the strikers: Sir, I have the honour to request you to lay before the Government by telegram the following facts: Whilst I was marching from Charlestown with nearly 2,000 men women and children to Tolstoy Farm Lawley, nearly 150 men women and children were footsore and otherwise disabled had to be left at Paarsdekop at the store of Mr M. C. Desai. These people have to be attended to and I suggest that the Government take charge of them. Yesterday at Val there were eight or nine men footsore and otherwise ill. One or two men were even seriously ill. I had hoped to be able to make complete arrangements about them today. They  were left in charge of Mr Patel an Indian storekeeper at Val. These men should in my humble opinion receive medical attention without delay. Probably 150 Indians entered the Transvaal without a leader on Thursday last. They were last heard of at Standerton and rations were supplied to them. I could have, during my march, traced them and fed them. These men should be traced and fed. Eight men who were not seriously ill but were too fatigued to walk entrained at Val for Balfour where they were to join the main body. These too should be traced and provisioned. If my information is correct I understand that the Government intend to put back the main body of the Indians who marched with me on the Natal Border in a helpless condition. In that event the men will attempt, I feel, to reenter. I venture to suggest that they should be dealt with under the Indentured Indians Immigration Law of Natal or otherwise taken charge of and fed. I have the Honour to be Sir Your obedient servant M. K. Gandhi.46 After their leader was taken away, the marchers were escorted by the police to the town of Balfour, from where they were sent back to Natal in three trains. ‘The men appear in no way dispirited after their fruitless tramp,’ reported one observer, ‘and expressed their intention to further the passive resistance movement again when Mr Gandhi is at liberty.’ On 11 November Gandhi was tried at Dundee, charged with inducing indentured labour to leave Natal. His lawyer said ‘he was under an obligation to the defendant not to plead in mitigation in any way whatsoever’. In his statement, Gandhi referred to himself as an old resident of Natal and a member of its Bar, who ‘was in honour bound, in view of the position of things between Mr Smuts and Professor Gokhale, to produce a striking demonstration’. He pleaded guilty, and was sentenced to nine months in prison with hard labour. Three days later Gandhi was tried at Volksrust, charged this time with bringing prohibited immigrants into Transvaal. He pleaded guilty once more, noting however that ‘throughout the march into the Transvaal, I endeavoured to keep the men under control and to prevent them from dispersing, and I claim that not a single Indian left the column if it may be so called.’ In his defence, he called upon a miner named Poldat. Asked why he had entered the Transvaal, Poldat answered that he had done so in protest against the £3 tax. Asked if he would have gone back to work if the tax had been repealed, Poldat said yes, he would have.  The point made, Gandhi added that he was aware that the steps he had taken were fraught with the greatest risks and intense personal suffering by those who had accepted his advice, but after very mature consideration, based on twenty years experience in South Africa, he had come to the conclusion that nothing short of such suffering would move the conscience of the Government, as also of the [white] inhabitants of the Union, of which, in spite of the so-called breach of the statutory laws, he claimed to be a sane and law-abiding citizen. He was sentenced to an additional three months in prison.  As the march swelled and its leader was arrested, released, arrested again, released again, Polak and Kallenbach supervised it in the periodic, enforced absences of Gandhi. The architect was accustomed to simple living, but the journalist – husband of the aesthete Millie, and a man who stayed away from the Tolstoy and Phoenix settlements himself – had to strive strenuously to put cause before body. Later, he wrote with some feeling about trying to get to sleep under the sky and the stars: I shall not easily forget that night! Our small campfires gradually flickered out as we lay down to rest and sleep after a very frugal meal that had been cooked in the early morning. The clouds rolled up heavily and a thunderstorm played in the distance. A light rain fell at intervals during the night and a cool wind blew in gusts, increasing the general discomfort. I had not slept in the open for years, and the blanket that I carried with me was little protection against the roughness and inequalities of the ground upon which we lay. On either side of me was a poor wretched striker in the early stages, apparently, of consumption, and they coughed continually throughout the night. It was, therefore, with considerable relief that I rose with the dawn, and we struck camp after a hurried wash and without eating for we were due at the township of Balfour, where we understood arrangements had been made for the next meal. Characteristically, after laying bare his own squeamishness, Polak then praised the resolution of his Indian comrades. The morning’s march, he wrote, ‘was one that would have done credit to a well-drilled army since we did the distance to Balfour at the rate of three and a half miles an hour. These mine coolies were splendid fellows, full of courage and strong of purpose.’ Polak and Kallenbach were themselves arrested on 10 November, and took their punishment gladly. Polak wrote to Lord Ampthill that ‘in view of the fact that I, as an outsider, had so often counselled Indian passive resisters to challenge arrest, I felt that it would be highly dishonourable for me – an Englishman – to draw back before a risk, and I did not hesitate to join [the Indians].’Kallenbach explained – or justified – his jail-going in a long letter to his sister, where he detailed the discriminations against the Indians and argued  that satyagraha – ‘the teaching not to meet force and violence in a likewise manner, but to meet them with passive suffering’ – was consistent with the teachings of ‘almost all religions’, Judaism among them. Kallenbach and Polak were both tried before a judge named Jooste. In his testimony, the architect began by describing himself as ‘an intimate friend of Mr Gandhi for many years’. The ‘voiceless and voteless’ Indians had drawn attention to their grievances through petitions and representations. Having tried and failed with these methods, their leader, Gandhi, then introduced what Kallenbach considered ‘the only effective means of securing redress, viz., passive resistance, a means in which I, for many years a disciple of Tolstoy, thoroughly believe.’ Polak spoke of his long association with the Indians of South Africa, and his work as editor of their weekly newspaper. He supported their passive resistance movement as an Englishman, a Jew, and a member of the legal profession. As an Englishman, he said, it is impossible for me to sit silent whilst the Government of the Union, claiming to speak in my name, repudiate, as they have done twice this year, their solemn pledges towards my fellow-British subject of Indian nationality, in defiance of what is best in British public opinion, and regardless of Imperial obligations and responsibilities towards the people of India … As a Jew, it is impossible for me to associate myself, even passively, with the persecution of any race or nationality. My co-religionists to-day, in certain parts of Europe, are undergoing suffering and persecution on racial grounds, and, finding the same spirit of persecution in this country, directed against the Indian people, I have felt impelled to protest against it with every fibre of my being. As a member of the legal profession, I have made a declaration of loyalty to the Crown and to do my duty as an Attorney of this honourable court. In taking the part of the Indian passive resisters, loyal subjects of the Crown, in their demand for justice, I claim to have proved my loyalty in the most practical possible manner, and, as an Attorney, I claim to have given the only advice to them possible to me as an honourable man who places justice before loyalty and moral law before human law. Polak then added a fourth reason – that he was a friend of Gokhale’s, a man revered by millions of Indians, who had been promised by the South African Government that the £3 tax would be repealed. Polak called the tax ‘a relic of barbarism’, whose ‘direct effect is to drive the tax-payers back to conditions of servitude, dishonourable to British traditions of freedom, or to expel them from this country, which has reaped the fruits of their labour for a period of years.’ These statements of Gandhi’s closest colleagues were both deeply moving. Yet they were very differently articulated. Kallenbach’s was spontaneous and  heart-felt, drawing attention to the friend who was leading the struggle. Polak’s was more closely crafted. The work of a writer and polemicist, it stressed rather the principles by which one who was not an Indian himself would choose to support their movement. Kallenbach was unattached, but Polak had a wife and children. When Millie Graham came out to South Africa in 1905 to join him, she was prepared for a life of service. But surely she would not have anticipated that this would land her husband in prison. Now, she was consoled and cheered by a lovely letter from her husband’s best friend, which read: My Dear Millie, You are brave. So I know you will consider yourself a proud and happy wife in having a husband who has dared to go to gaol for a cause he believes in. The £3 tax is the cause of the helpless and the dumb. And I ask you to work away in the shape of begging, advising and doing all you can. Do not wait for their call but call the workers. Seek them out even though they should insult you. Miss S[chlesin] knows the struggle almost like Henry. Assist her. I have asked her to move forward and backward and assume full control. Draw upon West and Maganbhai for your needs. May you have strength of mind and body to go through the fire. With love, Yours Bhai.54 A third Jewish supporter of the satyagraha, L. W. Ritch, could not seek arrest, since he had to run Gandhi’s law practice. But he showed his solidarity in other ways, peppering the press with letters defending the Indian cause. When General Smuts claimed that the new marriage laws were necessary because Muslim men had only to utter ‘talaq’ three times to secure a divorce, Ritch answered that the practice was in fact so rare that when it occurred, it was regarded as a ‘scandal of communal importance’. He estimated that there had not been more than fifty cases of talaq in the past thirty years among the Indian community in South Africa. On the other hand, divorce was rampant among Europeans in Natal and the Transvaal. ‘South African lawyers cannot complain of lack of practice in this branch of our profession,’ said Ritch sarcastically. ‘A husband absents himself from his wife for a few months, ignores the ensuing order of court, and the divorce is granted. Almost as simple as saying [talaq], don’t you think?’ Then, when a Johannesburg paper claimed that the Indians wanted an ‘open door to immigration’, Ritch answered that what they actually asked for was fair  treatment for those resident in South Africa. In his view, the policy of the Union Government resembles nothing as much as the conduct of Holy Russia towards Russia’s Jewish population. All the same elements are present – repression, segregation, studied insult and neglect. And the same excuses are advanced by way of justification: economic danger, unassimilability, alien race, incompatibility of ideas – and all the rest of it. That Russia’s attitude is one of criminal folly nobody doubts; that the future will prove us to have similarly erred is to my mind no less certain.56 No less tireless was a fourth Jewish friend of the Indians, Gandhi’s secretary Sonja Schlesin. She came down to Natal, shuttling between Phoenix and the prisons, nourishing the morale and the stomach of first-time satyagrahis. She sent Gokhale, in India, a series of telegrams, updating him on the struggle. The duties assigned to her were substantial, and she sometimes took upon other tasks voluntarily. When a white planter, angry with the strike, assaulted and injured two of his workers, Miss Schlesin had their wounds attended to. She also photographed their bruises, sending the prints to the press and to the Government. Gandhi and his friends were sent to Volksrust Prison, before the authorities decided to separate them. Polak was shifted to Boksburg, and Kallenbach to Krugersdorp. Gandhi himself was transferred first to Pietermaritzburg and then to Bloemfontein. The leader was away, yet the protests continued. On 13 November, 2,000 Indians working in sugar fields and sugar mills in southern Natal went on strike. At one major estate, Mount Edgecombe, the managers ‘enrolled a corps of special police, and drew a cordon around the estate, with the idea of keeping out the agitators and apostles of Gandhi, and of protecting loyal Indians from intimidation.’ The coercion failed, with an estimated 1,500 out of the 2,700 labourers at Mount Edgecombe downing tools and going off to join their fellows. In the fifty years that they had worked on the sugar plantations and coal mines, Indian labourers had occasionally protested against harsh working conditions or brutal supervisors and managers. When provoked or humiliated, they had deserted their work, marched in a body to their manager’s office, petitioned government authorities, and sometimes even assaulted their employers.Still, the strikes in 1913 were unprecedented in their scale and  scope. In the sugar plantations of the south these were wholly self-organized. Indian workers had heard of the protests among the mines in the north; and of the leaders who had organized them. They were disturbed and moved by Gandhi’s arrest. But Gandhi had not ever worked with or mobilized sugar workers. These now came out on their own, in a remarkable display of solidarity with their compatriots. By the middle of November, some 15,000 sugar workers were on strike. A rumour spread that Gokhale was coming out again from India to have the £3 tax abolished. Many workers believed that Gandhi had sent a message urging them to down tools. Some strikers left the plantations and moved into towns nearby; others converged on the settlement founded by Gandhi at Phoenix. While Gandhi’s name was invoked, the methods of protest were not always ‘Gandhian’. Angry strikers burned cane fields, and attacked policemen with sticks and stones (and even cane knives). In clashes between constables with guns and Indians with swords, there were many casualties, some fatal. European planters, unnerved, sent their wives and children to the comparative safety of Durban. As the strike spread through the colony, the army was called in. Several hundred mounted riflemen under the command of a brigadier-general were sent to the sugar country. The navy was also put on alert, in case troops had to be sent from the Cape to Durban. The show of force failed once more. The strike now spread to the brick kilns and to Durban, where Indians employed by the City Corporation and in the port stopped work. At a well-attended meeting, the strikers were ‘unanimous in their decision, which was a refusal to work until the £3 tax had been repealed, and until Gandhi was released.’ On Saturday, 15 November, 1,200 Indians gathered in Pietermaritzburg to discuss the state of their movement. A certain T. R. Naidoo said that while ‘he was not against the passive resistance movement as a matter of principle, he was against the Maritzburg Indians doing anything which would be likely to jeopardize the trade or interests of the Indians by adopting an antagonistic attitude towards the Europeans’. Other speakers vigorously disagreed. One Ramsingh pointed out that ‘Mr Gandhi had gone to prison for them all, and he wanted to know whether they were going to leave him to face the trouble alone,  or whether they were going to join forces with him.’ A priest named Dhonduram Maharaj praised Gandhi for bringing Hindus and Muslims together. Under his leadership, they had made ‘common [cause] in the passive resistance movement’. The mood of the meeting was very clearly pro-satyagraha and pro- Gandhi.On the crucial issue of the £3 tax, it accused the Government of betrayal. Thus when one speaker ‘asked whether his confrères placed reliance on General Smuts or on Mr Gokhale, there was a loud cry of Mr Gokhale’. On Sunday, 16 November, a meeting of Indians in Johannesburg asked the Government to release Gandhi and begin talks.66 Meanwhile, Natal’s largest town, Durban, ‘was seething with the strike spirit’. On the afternoon of the 16th, 3,000 Indians gathered for a meeting, where ‘cheers were given for Mr Gandhi and the strikers.’ One speaker asked hospital and sanitary workers to return to duty as an act of courtesy to their fellow citizens. Otherwise, the strike embraced all trades and professions. It was ‘practically universal amongst the Indians in the Borough’. The chief magistrate of Durban toured the city, urging the strikers to return to work. At each place he was informed that ‘they had been told by their “Rajah” or “King”, Mr Gandhi, that they were to strike until the £3 Licence was repealed.’ Then he toured the plantations outside the town, to be told there too that ‘Gandhi had ordered them to strike’. The magistrate thought that beyond the specific grievance of the £3 tax, the protestors also wanted the franchise and ‘equal rights’.67 Across Natal, Indians had stopped working in sugar plantations, coal mines, railways, ships, shops and hotels. The authorities sought to compel them back to work. The police arrested 120 ‘ringleaders’ in Durban. In the country districts, riflemen marched up and down the plantations in a show of strength, sometimes provoking clashes with angry Indians. In a scuffle at Avoica several indentured labourers were injured. At the Beneva sugar estate, ‘the coolies came out in strength and a volley was fired’. Two Indians were killed by bullets, and ten seriously wounded. At Mount Edgecombe, soldiers with revolvers battled coolies with sticks and stones. Five Europeans were injured, as against four Indians killed and twenty-four wounded. One eyewitness to the conflict was the Zulu reformer John Dube. He saw Indian strikers congregate on a piece of open ground, and refuse to move despite  being beaten by the police. Constables mounted on horses ran through them, and yet they did not disperse. Dube was impressed by their courage and endurance, telling a friend that while he had once thought plantation coolies crude and uncivilized, now he had ‘acquired a sense of respect for all the Indians’. The Indian satyagraha also came in for praise from the leader of the Cape Coloureds, Dr Abdurahman. In the last week of November, he told the annual conference of the African Political Organization that if a handful of Indians, in a matter of conscience, can so firmly resist what they consider injustice, what could the coloured races not do if they were to adopt this practice of passive resistance? We must all admire what these British Indians have shown, and are showing, in their determination to maintain what they deem to be their right.70 In response to the Indian upsurge, the Europeans in Natal reinforced their own solidarities of race and class. Angry letters to the papers singled out Gandhi as the chief trouble-maker. One spoke of ‘the rebellion on the part of Indians at the bidding of Gandhi and Co.’; another spoke sarcastically of agitators ‘elevating Gokhale and Gandhi to the level of little gods’. A third asked the South African Government to ‘deport to India and permanently banish Gandhi, Polak, Kallenbach, [Thambi] Naidoo, and all Indians convicted of agitation in the “strike”’. A fourth said the best answer to the strike was to demonstrate that ‘we can do without the Indian.’ The whites should sweep their own backyards and blacken their own boots. They could then ‘do away with 50 per cent of these Indians and coincidentally smash up the backbone of this Young India menace’. On 26 November the Natal Mercury carried an interview with a local legislator, J. T. Henderson. Henderson noted that in 1874 there were a mere 6,000 Indians in Natal; now they were in excess of 130,000. If the £3 tax on free Indians was abolished, the numbers would increase even more, and ‘the outlook for the white population here [would be] a very dark one indeed.’ The ambition of the Indians was worrying; they tended to look ‘for a higher plane of employment’ than labouring in fields and mines, and were ‘exceedingly keen’ on education. The tax was necessary to discourage them from challenging the whites even more directly than they presently did. The legislator was refuted by F. A. Laughton, in whose opinion the £3 tax was illegal. Since wages on plantations were much below market rates, Indians were  ‘under no obligation either to leave Natal after the expiration of their indentures or to take out a licence if they remain’. This opinion from a ‘jurist of standing’ led to ‘jubilation among local Indians and considerable astonishment amongst Europeans’.73 Meanwhile, back in the Transvaal, the Boer party, Het Volk, renewed its call to deport the Indians en masse. The party paper Die Transvaler complained that the Indians ‘have increased their demands, become more obstreperous than they have ever been, caused more trouble than ever before, and evidently they are never going to be satisfied until every article of the Immigration Act has been repealed’. ‘South Africa has had enough of these Indians,’ said the Boer organ. ‘We want no more of them from India or elsewhere.’ In the last week of November, the Government renewed its efforts to break the strike in Natal by force. Contingents of police were dispatched to get labourers back to work. Fleeing the police, many workers swarmed on to the farm at Phoenix. They were taken in hand by Albert West and Maganlal Gandhi, who fed them and allowed them to sleep over at the settlement. The workers ‘repeatedly stated that they would rather die than go back to their work, and they seemed to be really afraid’. West wired the Government, suggesting that it ‘allow people [to] remain quietly here until disturbance is over, or Government supply food and take charge [of the] camp’.75 The upsurge in Natal, and the arrest of Gandhi and company, provoked a wave of sympathy and support in the protesters’ homeland. ‘India thrilling with indignation,’ wired Gokhale to Millie Polak. ‘Protests pouring upon [Indian] Government for forwarding Imperial Government.’ A public subscription had already collected £5,000; Gokhale wanted to know where to send it. He also asked who was leading the movement in the absence of Gandhi. ‘Full information present position prospects necessary,’ he said. The range and depth of the Indian interest in Gandhi’s movement is manifest in a series of wires sent by the Viceroy on to London. Here are two samples:  Viceroy to India Office, 26 November 1913: My telegram dated 22nd November S. Africa. 23 further telegrams received, two from private individuals, twenty are from Chairmen of meetings held at Ahmedabad, Ongole, Amalapuram, Bezwada, Tanuku, Yeotmal, two meetings Bombay, Coonoor, Lucknow, Narsapur, Rajkot, Bapatla,  Poona, Guntur, Nasik, Kovur, Ellore, Rampurhat, Gudiwada, and Bhimavaram. Contents similar to that of previous telegrams reported to you protesting against treatment of Indians in Natal and urging government intervention. Viceroy to India Office, 8 December 1913: Thirteen further telegrams received from women of Bombay and citizens of Rangoon, Hyderabad, Sind, Cawnpore, Hardoi, from All India Muslim League Lucknow; Chairmen public meetings Calicut, Yeotmal, Ajmer, Bombay mill-hands, Sanghsabha Shanghai, Chandra Chairman Political Association Kimberley, public of Kotdwara, and letter from Chairmen of public meetings Nellore, Raipur, and Coimbatore, and from Joint Secretary Godavari District Association Cocanada praying for adoption of measures for the prevention of sufferings of Indians in S. Africa.77 The interest in the South African struggle was particularly keen in South India, the region from where the majority of the satyagrahis came. A Tamil paper published out of Madras praised the ‘wonderful determination’ of ‘Mr Gandhi and his followers’; they had ‘glorif[ied] the good name of India by means of their noble and courageous conduct, risking even their lives’. A Kannada paper printed in Bangalore saluted ‘the leadership of that zealous servant of India, that generous and heroic personage, Mr Gandhi’. A Telugu weekly in Guntur reached for mythic parallels – Gandhi, the leader of the resistance, was like Arjuna, brave and fearless, while Gokhale was like Krishna, providing sage advice from behind the scenes.78 To raise money for the struggle, G. A. Natesan reprinted Polak’s booklet on Gandhi. In December 1913, a rival publisher in Madras, Ganesh and Company, commissioned its own capsule biography of ‘the hero of the Passive Resistance Movement’, its proceeds to go ‘in relief of our brethren in South Africa in their present struggle’.And a rising lawyer in Salem, C. Rajagopalachari, reprinted Gandhi’s account of his jail experiences for the same purpose. Rajagopalachari said Gandhi ‘must be ranked with the Avatars’, while his followers, ‘even in these degenerate days, act[ed] like real heroes in the cause of the Nation’. The booklet sold rapidly, so quickly in fact that the lawyer was able to send a cheque for Rs 1,500 to aid the struggle in South Africa.80 The massively enhanced stature of Gandhi in his homeland was most strikingly underlined by a Telugu play in five acts, performed at this time in the Andhra country. The first four acts detail the handicaps of the Indians in South Africa. In the final act Gandhi appears in the flesh and embarks on an extended soliloquy. He reflects on the condition of his compatriots, and on the degradation  and humiliation they suffer in the workplace and away from it. The cruelties of the poll-tax and the marriage laws are dwelt upon. The (prosperous) lawyer then asks himself: ‘Am I to live in this mansion while my fellow-brothers and sisters are suffering from untold miseries?’, and provides this answer: O, Gandhi; O mind of mine! Have no desire for wealth or fame. No more happiness so long as the children of Bharata [India] are in slavery. You shall have no peace until you put an end to the racial hatred that has converted these South Africans into brutes. To achieve this you do not require the strength of the sword … Truth is your existence. Your colour is justice, your name is liberty … Throughout the length and breadth of this sacred land of Bharata one determination is blazing forth in one flame and resounding in one voice. The Lord has sent his message. It is resounding from the craggy Cape Comorin to the snow-peaked Himalayas. No gaols can oppose our determination. The whips cannot cow down our spirits. Even the cannon balls cannot keep our country behind. Victory to our motherland. This play was originally published in Telugu in a journal called the Kistna Patrika, and then translated into English and printed afresh in Dublin, from where copies were posted to school and college teachers across South India, to be staged in public. Copies were intercepted by the police; but one copy reached an archive in London, providing the basis of this account. That Gandhi’s struggle could prompt such a passionate rendering in Telugu is remarkable; for in 1913 Gandhi had not been in India for a decade, and he had never visited the Andhra country at all.81 Across the subcontinent, in the holy city of Banaras, protesters burned effigies of Generals Botha and Smuts. In a meeting chaired by the celebrated nationalist leader Madan Mohan Malaviya, a Hindi poet named Pratap read out verses urging patriots to hear the ‘far cry from distant Africa’, where ‘heroes like Gandhi in jail’ were ‘showing the bravery of India to the world’. Back in 1910, Gandhi had published Hind Swaraj as a direct response to, and a passionate intervention in, debates on Indian nationalist politics. The book was banned in both its Gujarati and English versions. Even had it been available in India, one wonders how widely it would have been read. It bore the marks of its hasty production; and in a society with such low levels of literacy, there wasn’t much of a market for books in any case. Nonetheless, by 1913 many parts of India were familiar with Gandhi’s name. More Indians read newspapers than books; more still attended or heard of meetings organized in solidarity with the South African protests. That so many of their countrymen had so heroically resisted racial oppression in that faraway land was now known in towns across  the subcontinent. Their leader was saluted and celebrated in talks, editorials, reports, poems, and at least one play. This was testimony not so much to the originality of his political ideas as to the vigour of his political practice. Mohandas Gandhi had made a definite impact on the popular consciousness of the motherland; not, however, as the author of an obscure text named Hind Swaraj, but as the chief inspirer of the collective defiance of discriminatory laws and the collective courting of imprisonment by Indians in South Africa.  One of the many ‘indignation meetings’ was held in Gandhi’s place of birth, Porbandar. The princely states had thus far kept out of the national movement. They were insulated from British India, whose political ferment did not affect them. The princes themselves were resolutely loyal to the Raj. But now the residents of Porbandar were moved to act, because some of the satyagrahis in South Africa came from the Kathiawar coast, and because their leader was born and raised in the town. The resolutions passed at this meeting included one praising ‘the inspiring leadership’ of the native son, M. K. Gandhi, and another thanking ‘Major F. de Hancock, our popular administrator for the liberal and munificent State contribution of Rs 1,000 towards the fund [for Indians in South Africa] and for allowing the use of the Victoria Memorial Hall for convening their meeting.’ In 1888, the British Administrator in Porbandar had refused to pay for Gandhi’s studies in London; now, twenty-five years later, his successor was funding the lawyer-turned-activist’s campaign chest. In this respect, Porbandar was no exception; at other meetings, too, large sums of money were raised and dispatched to Gokhale in Poona. On 28 November, Sonja Schlesin passed on a message from Gandhi to his mentor: ‘He says that you are not to worry yourself about funds. If they did not come, we should manage here somehow.’ Gokhale’s response was to wire £5,000 two days later. On 3 December, a further instalment of £5,000 was sent to Maganlal Gandhi at Phoenix. All kinds of people chipped in, some famous, some obscure. In the first category fell the poet Rabindranath Tagore, who had recently been awarded the Nobel Prize for literature. In November, Tagore sent Gokhale Rs 100 as his ‘humble contribution’ to the South African Indian Fund.Three weeks later he sent another cheque, apologizing for its niggardly contents. ‘I am ashamed to  own that the response has been feeble in Bengal to the call of our countrymen in trouble in South Africa,’ wrote the poet. ‘But I can assure you that my boys’ hearts were moved to genuine sympathy when appealed to and little though these children were able to raise for the fund it was not the less valuable in its moral worth.’ More surprising than Tagore’s endorsement was that of the Bishop of Madras, a pillar of the Establishment and, of course, an Englishman. ‘I frankly confess,’ remarked the Bishop in December 1913, ‘though it pains me to say it, that I see in Mr Gandhi, the patient sufferer for the cause of righteousness and mercy, a truer representative of the Crucified Saviour, than the men who have thrown him into prison and yet call themselves by the name of Christ.’ More surprising still was the support for Gandhi and company expressed by the most powerful individual in India, the Viceroy, Lord Hardinge. Also speaking in Madras, he said the passive resisters in South Africa had ‘the deep and burning sympathy of India and also of those who like myself, without being Indian, sympathise with the people of this country’. The Viceroy argued that ‘if the South African Government desires to justify itself in the eyes of India and the world, the only course open to it is to appoint a strong impartial committee, whereon Indian interests will be represented, to conduct the most searching enquiry.’ There were some less well-known supporters of the struggle too. One A. K. Hariharan sent Rs 250 to Gokhale from Kuala Lumpur, on behalf of ‘the Indians who are employed in Railways and other petty positions in the town’. The ‘Heroes of South Africa’, said this representative of the Indian diaspora, ‘are superior to our adversaries in courage, in devotion, and in knowledge of the wants of the people’. A certain A. E. Lall, manager of a motor agency in the northern town of Peshawar, wrote to Gokhale offering his services. He had previously lived in South Africa, claimed to have ‘known Mr Gandhi intimately’, counting him ‘the best man I have met in any part of the world’.89 Kasturba Gandhi also came in for her share of praise. In early December, while speaking at a meeting in the Bombay Town Hall, Sir Pherozeshah Mehta recalled the ‘touching episode’ wherein Kasturba told Gandhi that if the court claimed her marriage was illegal, then she would insist on joining the satyagraha. Mehta said that  Mr Gandhi must have known what it was to expose tender women to the hardship of the campaign, but in spite of his pleading, that brave lady decided to cast in her lot with those men who were fighting for the cause. History records the deeds of many heroines and I feel Mrs Gandhi will stand as one of the foremost heroines in the whole world.90 By the end of November 1913, more than 1,000 Indians were in jail. A majority were workers from Natal, punished for going on strike. The others included merchants and hawkers from the Transvaal, and followers, friends and family members of M. K. Gandhi. Only one letter written by Gandhi from jail has survived. Written to Albert West’s sister, Devi, this asked about the routine of the boys at Phoenix, and told her to ‘remind Dev[a]das of the promises he has made me at various times’. ‘Much of my spare time is being devoted to Tamil study,’ added Gandhi. In this latest satyagraha the Tamils had shone more brightly still, and their leader was, it seems, suitably grateful. Gandhi’s letter had specific instructions for one resident of Phoenix. This was Jeki Mehta, who had just been released from jail after the expiry of her sentence. Gandhi now wrote to Devi West that Jekiben should adhere to the promises made by her to me. Please tell her that hardly a day passes when I do not give much thought to her. As to her diet, I do not bind her to any promises or resolutions she may have made. She may take whatever suits her constitution. But she must not only keep good health but be robust. She must grow her hair unless she has definitely heard otherwise from Dr. Mehta.91 Meanwhile, unknown to Gandhi, Jeki Mehta was the subject of angry letters written to the Government of South Africa by her estranged husband, Manilal Doctor. This other Manilal was now in Fiji, having shifted there from Mauritius. He had set up practice as a barrister in Suva, servicing the town’s Indian residents. When rumours of what his wife had been up to with his namesake Manilal Gandhi reached him, Doctor wrote to the Governor-General, Lord Gladstone, asking that he arrange for Jeki to be sent to Fiji. The message was passed on, but Jeki declined to go. She wanted to remain with the satyagraha in South Africa. His wife’s refusal to join him infuriated Manilal Doctor. He wrote once more to Lord Gladstone, suggesting that if Jeki courted arrest again, the sentence should be deportation, ‘in which case there would be greater chances of her cure  from Mr Gandhi’s influences and therefore of settling down to a stable life with me here’. He was willing to pay the expenses of his wife’s travel to Fiji. Since Gandhi was in jail, Manilal Doctor could not communicate with him directly. So he asked the Governor-General to tell him that my wife’s father and I myself desire her to leave his place and that he would spare me the painful necessity of taking legal steps against himself and his son Manilal Gandhi for intercepting the smooth flow of my married life in the way they have in fact done. Allow me to add that my wife is a minor, I am legally her guardian, and that Mr Gandhi is no relation at all to us.92 Manilal Doctor certainly spoke for himself. But did he also speak for Pranjivan Mehta, who was his father-in-law, but also Gandhi’s closest and oldest friend? Alas, the archives are silent on the matter. Dr Mehta could not have been pleased with Jeki’s affair with Gandhi’s son Manilal – but would he have laid the blame for this at Gandhi’s own door? That seems unlikely. Jeki herself seems to have been unwilling to rejoin her husband. She was focused on staying in South Africa – but whether out of admiration for Gandhi’s politics or love for Gandhi’s son we cannot say.  In the second week of December, the South African Government announced that it would set up an ‘Indian Enquiry Commission’ to report on the recent disturbances and their causes. In his speech in Madras in late November, the Viceroy of India had called for such a commission. The Viceroy’s idea had now been taken forward by Lord Gladstone, the Governor-General of South Africa. For the protests by the Indians had been unprecedented in scope and scale. They had breached the boundaries of province, class and gender. They had fully stretched the forces of law and order, and had seriously endangered the economy of Natal. Despite brave talk in the newspapers, whites were not really prepared to labour in mines, plantations, hotels or shops. Gladstone thus suggested to General Smuts that the Commission should go into the marriage and tax questions that had so exercised the Indians.93 Smuts agreed. A three-member Commission was appointed, to be chaired by the jurist Sir William Solomon. As a gesture to the Indians, Gandhi was released from jail on the morning of 18 December. Polak and Kallenbach were set free the same day. At a public meeting in Johannesburg, Gandhi said he was not satisfied with the constitution of the Enquiry Commission. Sir William Solomon  was fine, but the other two members, Lt.-Col. Wylie and Edward Esselen, were known to have anti-Indian views. Gandhi said that ‘rather than have a weighted or packed Commission, which would militate against the welfare of the Indian community in South Africa, he would prefer to go back to prison and allow the Indian case to stand upon its own merits.’ In response, William Hosken ‘begged’ Gandhi to retain his ‘self-control’, and ‘to do nothing that would bring discredit on their cause’.94 The next day, Gandhi proceeded by train to Durban. As he stepped on to the platform on arrival, ‘flowers were thrown round him, and the Indians clambered around him’. He was conveyed from the station into an open carriage, which was pulled by young men ‘through the streets with every manifestation of enthusiasm’. It was a triumphant return to his first home in South Africa, but also a sombre one. In jail, Gandhi had shaved his head and chosen to wear white. His feet were bare. Speaking to a crowd of 5,000 assembled at the Durban racecourse, Gandhi said he had changed his dress when he heard of the police firing on Indian strikers. The bullets that shot his countrymen shot him through the heart as well. Henceforth, he would dress like an indentured labourer. Then he spoke of the Commission just appointed. He complained that Indians had no voice, while two of its three members were known for their hostility to them. Unless ‘the Commission is supplemented by responsible South African members of known standing, who are not prejudiced against Asiatics generally,’ he said, ‘we shall certainly be against it’. On 21 December, Gandhi wrote to Smuts suggesting the addition of two members to the Commission. W. P. Schreiner and Sir James-Innes were both known for their liberal views. Smuts rejected the suggestion, insisting that the Commission as it stood was ‘impartial and judicious’. Gandhi now said the Indians would boycott the Commission. The composition of the Enquiry Commission angered the rank-and-file even more. ‘The Government have treated us in such a rascally manner in the appointment of this Commission,’ wrote Henry Polak to his family in England, adding, ‘I fear that it will be impossible to avoid a revival of the struggle in its most bitter form.’ In that case Polak would court arrest once more, for which he  asked in advance for the ‘sympathy and understanding’ of his parents. The senior Polaks admired and liked Gandhi, but as loyalist, assimilationist Jews, they were naturally not very keen for their son to follow him all the way into jail. ‘Whatever the consequences may be both personally and publicly,’ wrote Henry Polak to his parents, ‘I feel I am bound to support Mr Gandhi in his present attitude, of which I wholly approve. It may not be customary politics, but the Passive Resistance struggle has never been based upon politics but upon principles.’ Speaking to reporters on 21 December, L. W. Ritch claimed that if their demands were not conceded, the Indians would once more go on strike. ‘Mr Gandhi will collect all the Indians who follow him,’ said Ritch, ‘and will march to Pretoria’, the march to commence on 1 January. Ritch predicted that Gandhi ‘would leave Durban with a thousand Indians, and by the time he reached the border, if he does so, his “army” will increase to at least 20,000’.98 The next day Kasturba Gandhi was released from prison. Gandhi had come up from Durban to Maritzburg to meet her. The Indians of the town had preceded him. They met Kasturba and her fellow prisoners outside the jail and pulled them in a flower-strewn carriage through the streets. At the meeting that followed, the speakers included Gandhi, Kallenbach and Millie Polak. Millie said that this was essentially a women’s movement, and there was no question that had it not been for the women taking the lead, there would have been no strike. When women once realized the enormous power they had they would rise up and make their own lives and the world what they wished (loud applause).99 Kasturba and her comrades had spent eight weeks in jail. Unfortunately, whereas Gandhi wrote in much detail of his various prison terms, his wife left no record of her ordeal. How did she cope with this radically new experience? Since her fellow satyagrahis included her nephews’ wives, at least she had some people to speak Gujarati with. In other respects life would have been altogether different, and much harder, than what she had been accustomed to in Porbandar, Rajkot, Johannesburg and Phoenix. The food in South African jails was uniformly bad. As a vegetarian, Kasturba had to make do with the terrible mealie pap. Her sentence also included ‘hard labour’, which took the form of washing clothes in the prison courtyard.100  Millie Polak saluted Kasturba’s spirit; her husband, meanwhile, was shocked at the state of her health. ‘Mrs Gandhi discharged prison almost irrecognisably altered owing refusal special diet’, Polak wired Gokhale. ‘Reduced skeleton tottering appearance old woman heart breaking sight.’ Between 21 and 28 December, Gandhi and Gokhale wired each other once or twice a day. Gokhale said the boycott of the Commission would be a ‘grave mistake’, alienating friends and sympathisers, and forgoing the chance to present evidence of cruelty to Indians. Gandhi answered that he was ‘besieged by people all day’ protesting against the Commission and calling for a march on Pretoria. Gokhale said both boycott and march would constitute a ‘great personal humiliation’ to the Viceroy. Gokhale had persuaded Lord Hardinge to depute a senior civil servant named Sir Benjamin Robertson as the representative of the Government of India to the Commission. Even if Gandhi persisted with a boycott, Sir Benjamin would convey his concerns to the body. Gokhale’s counsel prevailed. Speaking to reporters on the 29th, Gandhi said that ‘at the request of friends’ he had postponed the march to Pretoria. They would ‘wait until we know that we have left no stone unturned to arrive at a honourable settlement’. Gokhale had asked Gandhi to be restrained; on the other side, Smuts was urged to be magnanimous by the British social reformer Emily Hobhouse. A Quaker by religious conviction, Hobhouse had endeared herself to the General during the Anglo-Boer War. In the first half of 1901 she travelled through South Africa, documenting the harsh treatment of Boer prisoners of war. She returned to England to present her findings before the British public, before taking a ship back to continue her investigations. Her criticisms had so angered British colonists, that – in a striking reprise of Gandhi’s own experience in Durban in 1896–7 – she had not been allowed to land in Cape Town. In the latter part of 1913 Emily Hobhouse was back in South Africa, where she contacted Gandhi. They were introduced by a common friend, Elizabeth Molteno. The daughter of the first prime minister of the Cape Colony, Betty Molteno had left South Africa in disgust following the Anglo-Boer War. She had met Gandhi in London in 1909, returning from exile soon afterwards. In December 1913, after Gandhi and Kasturba were released from prison, Betty Molteno travelled from Cape Town to Natal to meet them. She was moved  by their stories of jail life, and by the cross-class support for the satyagraha. She passed on her impressions to Emily Hobhouse, urging her to press the Indian case on Smuts. Miss Hobhouse was sympathetic, not least because several members of her family had served in India, and back home in England she had friends from the subcontinent. From Millie Polak on through Sonja Schlesin, Maud Polak and beyond, Gandhi got along with independent-minded Western women. Betty Molteno and he had hit it off from their first meeting, and so now did he and Emily Hobhouse. They discussed the Indian question, of course, but also other matters such as the tactics of the suffragettes and the respective merits of city life versus rural living. Miss Hobhouse had been unwell, so Gandhi wrote inviting her to Phoenix, where ‘the scenery around is certainly very charming’, where ‘there is no bustle or noise’, and where she would ‘find loving hands to administer to your wants’. Nothing, said Gandhi to Miss Hobhouse, ‘would give me personally greater pleasure than, if I were free, to be able to wait upon you and nurse you’.105 On 29 December, Miss Hobhouse wrote to Smuts as someone who was not ‘South African or Indian but in fullest sympathy with both’. While recognizing that white South Africa already ‘has as many Indians as it can digest’, she hoped the General would find ‘a modus vivendi to suit their amour propre’. To begin with, he could, she suggested, ‘readjust the marriage question and abolish that stupid £3 tax’. There was now talk in Gandhi’s circle of starting the march to Pretoria on 15 January. Before then, said Hobhouse to Smuts, ‘some way should be found [of] giving private assurance to the leaders that satisfaction is coming to them.’ The grievance of the Indians, she continued, is really moral not material and so, having all the power of the spiritual behind him, he [Gandhi] and you are like [the British suffragette] Mrs Pankhurst and [the British Home Secretary Reginald] McKenna and never never will governmental physical force prevail against a great moral and spiritual upheaval.106 Like that other English friend of Smuts, the Cambridge don H. J. Wolstenholme, Emily Hobhouse was far in advance of white opinion in South Africa. More representative was an article published in the Natal Advertiser on 30 December, entitled ‘The Political Creed of Mr Gandhi’. The paper ‘deemed it well to enlighten the South African public, from Mr Gandhi’s own mouth, as to  what manner of man this is, and what his ultimate political creed is as to the relations between the British and the Indian people’. A string of quotations from Gandhi’s book Hind Swaraj followed, damning modern civilization and British rule in India. ‘And it is an Indian capable of this farago of incoherent, inconsequent and hysterical nonsense,’ commented the newspaper, whom our Union Government is negotiating with as a representative of the concrete demands of the South African Indian community! … This is the language of acute hypocrisy! If Western civilisation be so immoral as Mr Gandhi says, a British Dominion should be the last place he would wish his compatriots to enter … And it is a man capable of using this language to the British of India who is posing as a martyr here in South Africa because denied the privileges of a European British citizen!107 That was one view of Gandhi, expressed in public by whites angry and humiliated by the consequences of the recent uprising. Another view was expressed in private by Gopal Krishna Gokhale, in a letter written to Sir Benjamin Robertson on 31 December. ‘I do not think you have met Mr Gandhi,’ said Gokhale to the Viceroy’s emissary to the Enquiry Commission: He is a thoroughly straightforward, honourable and high-minded man and though he may at times appear obstinate and even fanatical, he is really open to conviction … The bulk of the community there is devoted to Mr Gandhi and any confidence that you may repose in him will not only be amply justified by him by his conduct, but will be repaid tenfold by the gratitude which it will inspire in the community.108 Gandhi himself stressed what he owed the Indian community in South Africa, not what they owed him. On 31 December 1913, Indian Opinion printed its last issue for the year. This noted that the last satyagraha campaign ‘has hardly a parallel in history. The real credit for this goes to the Hindi and Tamil speaking brothers and sisters living in this country.’ To mark their sacrifice, and the memory of those killed by soldiers’ bullets, the periodical would now resume the publication of sections in Tamil and Hindi.109            