    
 A
  
 
  
   
 I I A   I 
 .
New Salem, June 13, 1836.
TO THE EDITOR OF THE “JOURNAL” — In your paper of
last Saturday I see a communication, over the signature of
“Many Voters,” in which the candidates who are announced
in the Journal are called upon to “show their hands.”
Agreed. Here’s mine.
I go for all sharing the privileges of the government who
assist in bearing its burdens. Consequently, I go for
admitting all whites to the right of suﬀrage who pay taxes
or bear arms (by no means excluding females).
If elected, I shall consider the whole people of Sangamon
my constituents, as well those that oppose as those that
support me.
While acting as their representative, I shall be governed
by their will on all subjects upon which I have the means of
knowing what their will is; and upon all others I shall do
what my own judgment teaches me will best advance their
interests. Whether elected or not, I go for distributing the
proceeds of the sales of the public lands to the several
States, to enable our State, in common with others, to dig
canals and construct railroads without borrowing money
and paying the interest on it. If alive on the ﬁrst Monday in
November, I shall vote for Hugh L. White for President.
 Very respectfully, A. LINCOLN.
     
    
  
 I I A   
 A
TO ROBERT ALLEN
NEW SALEM, JUNE 21, 1836
DEAR COLONEL: — I am told that during my absence
last week you passed through this place, and stated
publicly that you were in possession of a fact or facts
which, if known to the public, would entirely destroy the
prospects of N. W. Edwards and myself at the ensuing
election; but that, through favor to us, you should forbear
to divulge them. No one has needed favors more than I,
and, generally, few have been less unwilling to accept
them; but in this case favor to me would be injustice to the
public, and therefore I must beg your pardon for declining
it. That I once had the conﬁdence of the people of
Sangamon, is suﬀiciently evident; and if I have since done
anything, either by design or misadventure, which if known
would subject me to a forfeiture of that conﬁdence, he that
knows of that thing, and conceals it, is a traitor to his
country’s interest.
I ﬁnd myself wholly unable to form any conjecture of
what fact or facts, real or supposed, you spoke; but my
opinion of your veracity will not permit me for a moment to
doubt that you at least believed what you said. I am
ﬂattered with the personal regard you manifested for me;
 but I do hope that, on more mature reﬂection, you will view
the public interest as a paramount consideration, and
therefore determine to let the worst come. I here assure
you that the candid statement of facts on your part,
however low it may sink me, shall never break the tie of
personal friendship between us. I wish an answer to this,
and you are at liberty to publish both, if you choose.
Very respectfully, A. LINCOLN.
  
 
I   
A   
 
 .
VANDALIA, December 13, 1836.
MARY: — I have been sick ever since my arrival, or I
should have written sooner. It is but little diﬀerence,
however, as I have very little even yet to write. And more,
the longer I can avoid the mortiﬁcation of looking in the
post-oﬀice for your letter and not ﬁnding it, the better. You
see I am mad about that old letter yet. I don’t like very well
to risk you again. I’ll try you once more, anyhow.
The 
new 
State 
House 
is 
not 
yet 
ﬁnished, 
and
consequently the Legislature is doing little or nothing. The
governor delivered an inﬂammatory political message, and
it is expected there will be some sparring between the
parties about it as soon as the two Houses get to business.
Taylor delivered up his petition for the new county to one of
our members this morning. I am told he despairs of its
success, on account of all the members from Morgan
County opposing it. There are names enough on the
petition, I think, to justify the members from our county in
going for it; but if the members from Morgan oppose it,
which they say they will, the chance will be bad.
Our chance to take the seat of government to Springﬁeld
is better than I expected. An internal-improvement
convention 
was 
held 
there 
since 
we 
met, 
which
 recommended a loan of several millions of dollars, on the
faith of the State, to construct railroads. Some of the
Legislature are for it, and some against it; which has the
majority I cannot tell. There is great strife and struggling
for the oﬀice of the United States Senator here at this time.
It is probable we shall ease their pains in a few days. The
opposition men have no candidate of their own, and
consequently they will smile as complacently at the angry
snarl of the contending Van Buren candidates and their
respective friends as the Christian does at Satan’s rage.
You recollect that I mentioned at the outset of this letter
that I had been unwell. That is the fact, though I believe I
am about well now; but that, with other things I cannot
account for, have conspired, and have gotten my spirits so
low that I feel that I would rather be any place in the world
than here. I really cannot endure the thought of staying
here ten weeks. Write back as soon as you get this, and, if
possible, say something that will please me, for really I
have not been pleased since I left you. This letter is so dry
and stupid that I am ashamed to send it, but with my
present feelings I cannot do any better.
Give my best respects to Mr. and Mrs. Able and family.
Your friend, LINCOLN
