    
   
A    
  A   
   
  I   A
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES, January 17, 1839.
MR. LINCOLN, FROM Committee on Finance, to which the
subject was referred, made a report on the subject of
purchasing of the United States all the unsold lands lying
within the limits of the State of Illinois, accompanied by
resolutions that this State propose to purchase all unsold
lands at twenty-ﬁve cents per acre, and pledging the faith
of the State to carry the proposal into eﬀect if the
government accept the same within two years.
Mr. Lincoln thought the resolutions ought to be seriously
considered. In reply to the gentleman from Adams, he said
that it was not to enrich the State. The price of the lands
may be raised, it was thought by some; by others, that it
would be reduced. The conclusion in his mind was that the
representatives in this Legislature from the country in
which the lands lie would be opposed to raising the price,
because it would operate against the settlement of the
lands. He referred to the lands in the military tract. They
had fallen into the hands of large speculators in
consequence of the low price. He was opposed to a low
price of land. He thought it was adverse to the interests of
the poor settler, because speculators buy them up. He was
opposed to a reduction of the price of public lands.
 Mr. 
Lincoln 
referred 
to 
some 
oﬀicial 
documents
emanating from Indiana, and compared the progressive
population of the two States. Illinois had gained upon that
State under the public land system as it is. His conclusion
was that ten years from this time Illinois would have no
more public land unsold than Indiana now has. He referred
also to Ohio. That State had sold nearly all her public lands.
She was but twenty years ahead of us, and as our lands
were equally salable — more so, as he maintained — we
should have no more twenty years from now than she has
at present.
Mr. Lincoln referred to the canal lands, and supposed
that the policy of the State would be diﬀerent in regard to
them, if the representatives from that section of country
could themselves choose the policy; but the representatives
from other parts of the State had a veto upon it, and
regulated the policy. He thought that if the State had all the
lands, the policy of the Legislature would be more liberal to
all sections.
He referred to the policy of the General Government. He
thought that if the national debt had not been paid, the
expenses of the government would not have doubled, as
they had done since that debt was paid.
  
 
 
  
.
SPRINGFIELD, June 11, 1839 DEAR ROW: 
MR. REDMAN INFORMS me that you wish me to write you
the particulars of a conversation between Dr. Felix and
myself relative to you. The Dr. overtook me between
Rushville and Beardstown.
He, after learning that I had lived at Springﬁeld, asked if
I was acquainted with you. I told him I was. He said you
had lately been elected constable in Adams, but that you
never would be again. I asked him why. He said the people
there had found out that you had been sheriﬀ or deputy
sheriﬀ in Sangamon County, and that you came oﬀ and left
your securities to suﬀer. He then asked me if I did not know
such to be the fact. I told him I did not think you had ever
been sheriﬀ or deputy sheriﬀ in Sangamon, but that I
thought you had been constable. I further told him that if
you had left your securities to suﬀer in that or any other
case, I had never heard of it, and that if it had been so, I
thought I would have heard of it.
If the Dr. is telling that I told him anything against you
whatever, I authorize you to contradict it ﬂatly. We have no
news here.
Your friend, as ever, A. LINCOLN.
      H 
 
A I
A   A
IN THE HALL OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
SPRINGFIELD, ILLINOIS, DECEMBER 20, 1839.
FELLOW-CITIZENS: — It is peculiarly embarrassing to
me to attempt a continuance of the discussion, on this
evening, which has been conducted in this hall on several
preceding ones. It is so because on each of those evenings
there was a much fuller attendance than now, without any
reason for its being so, except the greater interest the
community feel in the speakers who addressed them then
than they do in him who is to do so now. I am, indeed,
apprehensive that the few who have attended have done so
more to spare me mortiﬁcation than in the hope of being
interested in anything I may be able to say. This
circumstance casts a damp upon my spirits, which I am
sure I shall be unable to overcome during the evening. But
enough of preface.
The subject heretofore and now to be discussed is the
subtreasury scheme of the present administration, as a
means 
of 
collecting, 
safe-keeping, 
transferring, 
and
disbursing, the revenues of the nation, as contrasted with a
national bank for the same purposes. Mr. Douglas has said
that we (the Whigs) have not dared to meet them (the
Locos) in argument on this question. I protest against this
 assertion. I assert that we have again and again, during
this discussion, urged facts and arguments against the
subtreasury which they have neither dared to deny nor
attempted to answer. But lest some may be led to believe
that we really wish to avoid the question, I now propose, in
my humble way, to urge those arguments again; at the
same time begging the audience to mark well the positions
I shall take and the proof I shall oﬀer to sustain them, and
that they will not again permit Mr. Douglas or his friends to
escape the force of them by a round and groundless
assertion that we “dare not meet them in argument.”
Of the subtreasury, then, as contrasted with a national
bank for the before-enumerated purposes, I lay down the
following propositions, to wit: (1) It will injuriously aﬀect
the community by its operation on the circulating medium.
(2) It will be a more expensive ﬁscal agent. (3) It will be a
less secure depository of the public money. To show the
truth of the ﬁrst proposition, let us take a short review of
our condition under the operation of a national bank. It was
the depository of the public revenues. Between the
collection of those revenues and the disbursement of them
by the government, the bank was permitted to and did
actually loan them out to individuals, and hence the large
amount of money actually collected for revenue purposes,
which by any other plan would have been idle a great
portion of the time, was kept almost constantly in
circulation. Any person who will reﬂect that money is only
valuable while in circulation will readily perceive that any
device which will keep the government revenues in
 constant circulation, instead of being locked up in idleness,
is no inconsiderable advantage. By the subtreasury the
revenue is to be collected and kept in iron boxes until the
government wants it for disbursement; thus robbing the
people of the use of it, while the government does not itself
need it, and while the money is performing no nobler oﬀice
than that of rusting in iron boxes. The natural eﬀect of this
change of policy, every one will see, is to reduce the
quantity of money in circulation. But, again, by the
subtreasury scheme the revenue is to be collected in
specie. I anticipate that this will be disputed. I expect to
hear it said that it is not the policy of the administration to
collect the revenue in specie. If it shall, I reply that Mr. Van
Buren, in his message recommending the subtreasury,
expended nearly a column of that document in an attempt
to persuade Congress to provide for the collection of the
revenue in specie exclusively; and he concludes with these
words:
“It may be safely assumed that no motive of convenience
to the citizens requires the reception of bank paper.” In
addition to this, Mr. Silas Wright, Senator from New York,
and the political, personal and conﬁdential friend of Mr.
Van Buren, drafted and introduced into the Senate the ﬁrst
subtreasury bill, and that bill provided for ultimately
collecting the revenue in specie. It is true, I know, that that
clause was stricken from the bill, but it was done by the
votes of the Whigs, aided by a portion only of the Van Buren
senators. No subtreasury bill has yet become a law, though
two or three have been considered by Congress, some with
 and some without the specie clause; so that I admit there is
room for quibbling upon the question of whether the
administration favor the exclusive specie doctrine or not;
but I take it that the fact that the President at ﬁrst urged
the specie doctrine, and that under his recommendation the
ﬁrst bill introduced embraced it, warrants us in charging it
as the policy of the party until their head as publicly
recants it as he at ﬁrst espoused it. I repeat, then, that by
the subtreasury the revenue is to be collected in specie.
Now mark what the eﬀect of this must be. By all estimates
ever made there are but between sixty and eighty millions
of specie in the United States. The expenditures of the
Government for the year 1838 — the last for which we have
had the report — were forty millions. Thus it is seen that if
the whole revenue be collected in specie, it will take more
than half of all the specie in the nation to do it. By this
means more than half of all the specie belonging to the
ﬁfteen millions of souls who compose the whole population
of the country is thrown into the hands of the public oﬀice-
holders, and other public creditors comprising in number
perhaps not more than one quarter of a million, leaving the
other fourteen millions and three quarters to get along as
they best can, with less than one half of the specie of the
country, and whatever rags and shinplasters they may be
able to put, and keep, in circulation. By this means, every
oﬀice-holder and other public creditor may, and most likely
will, set up shaver; and a most glorious harvest will the
specie-men have of it, — each specie-man, upon a fair
division, having to his share the ﬂeecing of about ﬁfty-nine
 rag-men. In all candor let me ask, was such a system for
beneﬁting the few at the expense of the many ever before
devised? And was the sacred name of Democracy ever
before made to indorse such an enormity against the rights
of the people?
I have already said that the subtreasury will reduce the
quantity 
of 
money 
in 
circulation. 
This 
position 
is
strengthened by the recollection that the revenue is to be
collected in Specie, so that the mere amount of revenue is
not all that is withdrawn, but the amount of paper
circulation that the forty millions would serve as a basis to
is withdrawn, which would be in a sound state at least one
hundred millions. When one hundred millions, or more, of
the circulation we now have shall be withdrawn, who can
contemplate without terror the distress, ruin, bankruptcy,
and beggary that must follow? The man who has purchased
any article — say a horse — on credit, at one hundred
dollars, when there are two hundred millions circulating in
the country, if the quantity be reduced to one hundred
millions by the arrival of pay-day, will ﬁnd the horse but
suﬀicient to pay half the debt; and the other half must
either be paid out of his other means, and thereby become
a clear loss to him, or go unpaid, and thereby become a
clear loss to his creditor. What I have here said of a single
case of the purchase of a horse will hold good in every case
of a debt existing at the time a reduction in the quantity of
money occurs, by whomsoever, and for whatsoever, it may
have been contracted. It may be said that what the debtor
loses the creditor gains by this operation; but on
 examination this will be found true only to a very limited
extent. It is more generally true that all lose by it — the
creditor by losing more of his debts than he gains by the
increased value of those he collects; the debtor by either
parting with more of his property to pay his debts than he
received in contracting them, or by entirely breaking up his
business, and thereby being thrown upon the world in
idleness.
The general distress thus created will, to be sure, be
temporary, because, whatever change may occur in the
quantity of money in any community, time will adjust the
derangement produced; but while that adjustment is
progressing, all suﬀer more or less, and very many lose
everything that renders life desirable. Why, then, shall we
suﬀer a severe diﬀiculty, even though it be but temporary,
unless we receive some equivalent for it?
What I have been saying as to the eﬀect produced by a
reduction of the quantity of money relates to the whole
country. I now propose to show that it would produce a
peculiar and permanent hardship upon the citizens of those
States and Territories in which the public lands lie. The
land-oﬀices in those States and Territories, as all know,
form the great gulf by which all, or nearly all, the money in
them is swallowed up. When the quantity of money shall be
reduced, and consequently everything under individual
control brought down in proportion, the price of those
lands, being ﬁxed by law, will remain as now. Of necessity it
will follow that the produce or labor that now raises money
suﬀicient to purchase eighty acres will then raise but
 suﬀicient to purchase forty, or perhaps not that much; and
this diﬀiculty and hardship will last as long, in some
degree, as any portion of these lands shall remain
undisposed of. Knowing, as I well do, the diﬀiculty that
poor people now encounter in procuring homes, I hesitate
not to say that when the price of the public lands shall be
doubled or trebled, or, which is the same thing, produce
and labor cut down to one half or one third of their present
prices, it will be little less than impossible for them to
procure those homes at all....
Well, then, what did become of him? (Postmaster General
Barry) Why, the President immediately expressed his high
disapprobation of his almost unequaled incapacity and
corruption by appointing him to a foreign mission, with a
salary and outﬁt of  18,000 a year! The party now attempt
to throw Barry oﬀ, and to avoid the responsibility of his
sins. Did not the President indorse those sins when, on the
very heel of their commission, he appointed their author to
the very highest and most honorable oﬀice in his gift, and
which is but a single step behind the very goal of American
political ambition?
I return to another of Mr. Douglas’s excuses for the
expenditures of 1838, at the same time announcing the
pleasing intelligence that this is the last one. He says that
ten millions of that year’s expenditure was a contingent
appropriation, to prosecute an anticipated war with Great
Britain on the Maine boundary question. Few words will
settle this. First, that the ten millions appropriated was not
made till 1839, and consequently could not have been
 expended in 1838; second, although it was appropriated, it
has never been expended at all. Those who heard Mr.
Douglas 
recollect 
that 
he 
indulged 
himself 
in 
a
contemptuous expression of pity for me. “Now he’s got
me,” thought I. But when he went on to say that ﬁve
millions of the expenditure of 1838 were payments of the
French indemnities, which I knew to be untrue; that ﬁve
millions had been for the post-oﬀice, which I knew to be
untrue; that ten millions had been for the Maine boundary
war, which I not only knew to be untrue, but supremely
ridiculous also; and when I saw that he was stupid enough
to hope that I would permit such groundless and audacious
assertions to go unexposed, — I readily consented that, on
the score both of veracity and sagacity, the audience should
judge whether he or I were the more deserving of the
world’s contempt.
Mr. Lamborn insists that the diﬀerence between the Van
Buren party and the Whigs is that, although the former
sometimes err in practice, they are always correct in
principle, whereas the latter are wrong in principle; and,
better to impress this proposition, he uses a ﬁgurative
expression in these words: “The Democrats are vulnerable
in the heel, but they are sound in the head and the heart.”
The ﬁrst branch of the ﬁgure — that is, that the Democrats
are vulnerable in the heel — I admit is not merely
ﬁguratively, but literally true. Who that looks but for a
moment 
at 
their 
Swartwouts, 
their 
Prices, 
their
Harringtons, and their hundreds of others, scampering
away with the public money to Texas, to Europe, and to
 every spot of the earth where a villain may hope to ﬁnd
refuge from justice, can at all doubt that they are most
distressingly aﬀected in their heels with a species of
“running itch”? It seems that this malady of their heels
operates on these sound-headed and honest-hearted
creatures very much like the cork leg in the comic song did
on its owner: which, when he had once got started on it,
the more he tried to stop it, the more it would run away. At
the hazard of wearing this point threadbare, I will relate an
anecdote which seems too strikingly in point to be omitted.
A witty Irish soldier, who was always boasting of his
bravery when no danger was near, but who invariably
retreated without orders at the ﬁrst charge of an
engagement, being asked by his captain why he did so,
replied: “Captain, I have as brave a heart as Julius Caesar
ever had; but, somehow or other, whenever danger
approaches, my cowardly legs will run away with it.” So
with Mr. Lamborn’s party. They take the public money into
their hand for the most laudable purpose that wise heads
and honest hearts can dictate; but before they can possibly
get it out again, their rascally “vulnerable heels” will run
away with them.
Seriously this proposition of Mr. Lamborn is nothing
more or less than a request that his party may be tried by
their professions instead of their practices. Perhaps no
position that the party assumes is more liable to or more
deserving of exposure than this very modest request; and
nothing but the unwarrantable length to which I have
 already extended these remarks forbids me now attempting
to expose it. For the reason given, I pass it by.
I shall advert to but one more point. Mr. Lamborn refers
to the late elections in the States, and from their results
conﬁdently predicts that every State in the Union will vote
for Mr. Van Buren at the next Presidential election. Address
that argument to cowards and to knaves; with the free and
the brave it will eﬀect nothing. It may be true; if it must, let
it. Many free countries have lost their liberty, and ours may
lose hers; but if she shall, be it my proudest plume, not that
I was the last to desert, but that I never deserted her. I
know that the great volcano at Washington, aroused and
directed by the evil spirit that reigns there, is belching
forth the lava of political corruption in a current broad and
deep, which is sweeping with frightful velocity over the
whole length and breadth of the land, bidding fair to leave
unscathed no green spot or living thing; while on its bosom
are riding, like demons on the waves of hell, the imps of
that evil spirit, and ﬁendishly taunting all those who dare
resist its destroying course with the hopelessness of their
eﬀort; and, knowing this, I cannot deny that all may be
swept away. Broken by it I, too, may be; bow to it I never
will. The probability that we may fall in the struggle ought
not to deter us from the support of a cause we believe to be
just; it shall not deter me. If ever I feel the soul within me
elevate and expand to those dimensions not wholly
unworthy of its almighty Architect, it is when I contemplate
the cause of my country deserted by all the world beside,
and I standing up boldly and alone, and hurling deﬁance at
 her victorious oppressors. Here, without contemplating
consequences, before high heaven and in the face of the
world, I swear eternal ﬁdelity to the just cause, as I deem
it, of the land of my life, my liberty, and my love. And who
that thinks with me will not fearlessly adopt the oath that I
take? Let none falter who thinks he is right, and we may
succeed. But if, after all, we shall fail, be it so. We still shall
have the proud consolation of saying to our consciences,
and to the departed shade of our country’s freedom, that
the cause approved of our judgment, and adored of our
hearts, in disaster, in chains, in torture, in death, we never
faltered in defending.
  
  
H
  .    A  .
SPRINGFIELD, December 23, 1839.
DEAR STUART:
Dr. Henry will write you all the political news. I write this
about some little matters of business. You recollect you told
me you had drawn the Chicago Masark money, and sent it
to the claimants. A hawk-billed Yankee is here besetting me
at every turn I take, saying that Robert Kinzie never
received the eighty dollars to which he was entitled. Can
you tell me anything about the matter? Again, old Mr.
Wright, who lives up South Fork somewhere, is teasing me
continually about some deeds which he says he left with
you, but which I can ﬁnd nothing of. Can you tell me where
they are? The Legislature is in session and has suﬀered the
bank to forfeit its charter without beneﬁt of clergy. There
seems to be little disposition to resuscitate it.
Whenever a letter comes from you to Mrs. I carry it to
her, and then I see Betty; she is a tolerable nice “fellow”
now. Maybe I will write again when I get more time.
Your friend as ever, A. LINCOLN
P. S. — The Democratic giant is here, but he is not much
worth talking about. A.L.
