    
      H I
 I  I
I    
I  A 
  .
January [?], 1837
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Lest I should fall into the too
common error of being mistaken in regard to which side I
design to be upon, I shall make it my ﬁrst care to remove
all doubt on that point, by declaring that I am opposed to
the resolution under consideration, in toto. Before I
proceed to the body of the subject, I will further remark,
that it is not without a considerable degree of apprehension
that I venture to cross the track of the gentleman from
Coles [Mr. Linder]. Indeed, I do not believe I could muster a
suﬀiciency of courage to come in contact with that
gentleman, were it not for the fact that he, some days
since, most graciously condescended to assure us that he
would never be found wasting ammunition on small game.
On the same fortunate occasion, he further gave us to
understand, that he regarded himself as being decidedly
the superior of our common friend from Randolph [Mr.
Shields]; and feeling, as I really do, that I, to say the most
of myself, am nothing more than the peer of our friend from
Randolph, I shall regard the gentleman from Coles as
decidedly my superior also, and consequently, in the course
of what I shall have to say, whenever I shall have occasion
to allude to that gentleman, I shall endeavor to adopt that
 kind of court language which I understand to be due to
decided superiority. In one faculty, at least, there can be no
dispute of the gentleman’s superiority over me and most
other men, and that is, the faculty of entangling a subject,
so that neither himself, or any other man, can ﬁnd head or
tail to it. Here he has introduced a resolution embracing
ninety-nine printed lines across common writing paper, and
yet more than one half of his opening speech has been
made upon subjects about which there is not one word said
in his resolution.
Though his resolution embraces nothing in regard to the
constitutionality of the Bank, much of what he has said has
been with a view to make the impression that it was
unconstitutional in its inception. Now, although I am
satisﬁed that an ample ﬁeld may be found within the pale of
the resolution, at least for small game, yet, as the
gentleman has traveled out of it, I feel that I may, with all
due humility, venture to follow him. The gentleman has
discovered that some gentleman at Washington city has
been 
upon 
the 
very 
eve 
of 
deciding 
our 
Bank
unconstitutional, 
and 
that 
he 
would 
probably 
have
completed his very authentic decision, had not some one of
the Bank oﬀicers placed his hand upon his mouth, and
begged him to withhold it. The fact that the individuals
composing our Supreme Court have, in an oﬀicial capacity,
decided in favor of the constitutionality of the Bank, would,
in my mind, seem a suﬀicient answer to this. It is a fact
known to all, that the members of the Supreme Court,
together with the Governor, form a Council of Revision, and
 that this Council approved this Bank charter. I ask, then, if
the extra-judicial decision not quite but almost made by the
gentleman at Washington, before whom, by the way, the
question of the constitutionality of our Bank never has, nor
never can come — is to be taken as paramount to a decision
oﬀicially made by that tribunal, by which, and which alone,
the constitutionality of the Bank can ever be settled? But,
aside from this view of the subject, I would ask, if the
committee which this resolution proposes to appoint are to
examine into the Constitutionality of the Bank? Are they to
be clothed with power to send for persons and papers, for
this object? And after they have found the bank to be
unconstitutional, and decided it so, how are they to enforce
their decision? What will their decision amount to? They
cannot compel the Bank to cease operations, or to change
the course of its operations. What good, then, can their
labors result in? Certainly none.
The gentleman asks, if we, without an examination, shall,
by giving the State deposits to the Bank, and by taking the
stock reserved for the State, legalize its former misconduct.
Now I do not pretend to possess suﬀicient legal knowledge
to decide whether a legislative enactment proposing to, and
accepting from, the Bank, certain terms, would have the
eﬀect to legalize or wipe out its former errors, or not; but I
can assure the gentleman, if such should be the eﬀect, he
has already got behind the settlement of accounts; for it is
well known to all, that the Legislature, at its last session,
passed a supplemental Bank charter, which the Bank has
since accepted, and which, according to his doctrine, has
 legalized all the alleged violations of its original charter in
the distribution of its stock.
I now proceed to the resolution. By examination it will be
found that the ﬁrst thirty-three lines, being precisely one
third of the whole, relate exclusively to the distribution of
the stock by the commissioners appointed by the State.
Now, Sir, it is clear that no question can arise on this
portion of the resolution, except a question between
capitalists in regard to the ownership of stock. Some
gentlemen have their stock in their hands, while others,
who have more money than they know what to do with,
want it; and this, and this alone, is the question, to settle
which we are called on to squander thousands of the
people’s money. What interest, let me ask, have the people
in the settlement of this question? What diﬀerence is it to
them whether the stock is owned by Judge Smith or Sam
Wiggins? If any gentleman be entitled to stock in the Bank,
which he is kept out of possession of by others, let him
assert his right in the Supreme Court, and let him or his
antagonist, whichever may be found in the wrong, pay the
costs of suit. It is an old maxim, and a very sound one, that
he that dances should always pay the ﬁddler. Now, Sir, in
the present case, if any gentlemen, whose money is a
burden to them, choose to lead oﬀ a dance, I am decidedly
opposed to the people’s money being used to pay the
ﬁddler. No one can doubt that the examination proposed by
this resolution must cost the State some ten or twelve
thousand dollars; and all this to settle a question in which
the people have no interest, and about which they care
 nothing. These capitalists generally act harmoniously and
in concert, to ﬂeece the people, and now that they have got
into a quarrel with themselves we are called upon to
appropriate the people’s money to settle the quarrel.
I leave this part of the resolution and proceed to the
remainder. It will be found that no charge in the remaining
part of the resolution, if true, amounts to the violation of
the Bank charter, except one, which I will notice in due
time. It might seem quite suﬀicient to say no more upon
any of these charges or insinuations than enough to show
they are not violations of the charter; yet, as they are
ingeniously framed and handled, with a view to deceive and
mislead, I will notice in their order all the most prominent
of them. The ﬁrst of these is in relation to a connection
between our Bank and several banking institutions in other
States. Admitting this connection to exist, I should like to
see the gentleman from Coles, or any other gentleman,
undertake to show that there is any harm in it. What can
there be in such a connection, that the people of Illinois are
willing to pay their money to get a peep into? By a
reference to the tenth section of the Bank charter, any
gentleman can see that the framers of the act contemplated
the 
holding 
of 
stock 
in 
the 
institutions 
of 
other
corporations. Why, then, is it, when neither law nor justice
forbids it, that we are asked to spend our time and money
in inquiring into its truth?
The next charge, in the order of time, is, that some
oﬀicer, director, clerk or servant of the Bank, has been
required to take an oath of secrecy in relation to the aﬀairs
 of said Bank. Now, I do not know whether this be true or
false — neither do I believe any honest man cares. I know
that 
the 
seventh 
section 
of 
the 
charter 
expressly
guarantees to the Bank the right of making, under certain
restrictions, such by-laws as it may think ﬁt; and I further
know that the requiring an oath of secrecy would not
transcend those restrictions. What, then, if the Bank has
chosen to exercise this right? Whom can it injure? Does not
every merchant have his secret mark? and who is ever silly
enough to complain of it? I presume if the Bank does
require any such oath of secrecy, it is done through a
motive of delicacy to those individuals who deal with it.
Why, Sir, not many days since, one gentleman upon this
ﬂoor, who, by the way, I have no doubt is now ready to join
this hue and cry against the Bank, indulged in a philippic
against one of the Bank oﬀicials, because, as he said, he
had divulged a secret.
Immediately following this last charge, there are several
insinuations in the resolution, which are too silly to require
any sort of notice, were it not for the fact that they
conclude by saying, “to the great injury of the people at
large.” In answer to this I would say that it is strange
enough, that the people are suﬀering these “great injuries,”
and yet are not sensible of it! Singular indeed that the
people should be writhing under oppression and injury, and
yet not one among them to be found to raise the voice of
complaint. If the Bank be inﬂicting injury upon the people,
why is it that not a single petition is presented to this body
on the subject? If the Bank really be a grievance, why is it
 that no one of the real people is found to ask redress of it?
The truth is, no such oppression exists. If it did, our people
would groan with memorials and petitions, and we would
not be permitted to rest day or night, till we had put it
down. The people know their rights, and they are never
slow to assert and maintain them, when they are invaded.
Let them call for an investigation, and I shall ever stand
ready to respond to the call. But they have made no such
call. I make the assertion boldly, and without fear of
contradiction, that no man, who does not hold an oﬀice, or
does not aspire to one, has ever found any fault of the
Bank. It has doubled the prices of the products of their
farms, and ﬁlled their pockets with a sound circulating
medium, and they are all well pleased with its operations.
No, Sir, it is the politician who is the ﬁrst to sound the
alarm (which, by the way, is a false one.) It is he, who, by
these unholy means, is endeavoring to blow up a storm that
he may ride upon and direct. It is he, and he alone, that
here proposes to spend thousands of the people’s public
treasure, for no other advantage to them than to make
valueless in their pockets the reward of their industry. Mr.
Chairman, this work is exclusively the work of politicians; a
set of men who have interests aside from the interests of
the people, and who, to say the most of them, are, taken as
a mass, at least one long step removed from honest men. I
say this with the greater freedom, because, being a
politician myself, none can regard it as personal.
Again, it is charged, or rather insinuated, that oﬀicers of
the Bank have loaned money at usurious rates of interest.
 Suppose this to be true, are we to send a committee of this
House to inquire into it? Suppose the committee should
ﬁnd it true, can they redress the injured individuals?
Assuredly not. If any individual had been injured in this
way, is there not an ample remedy to be found in the laws
of the land? Does the gentleman from Coles know that
there is a statute standing in full force making it highly
penal for an individual to loan money at a higher rate of
interest than twelve per cent? If he does not he is too
ignorant to be placed at the head of the committee which
his resolution purposes and if he does, his neglect to
mention it shows him to be too uncandid to merit the
respect or conﬁdence of any one.
But besides all this, if the Bank were struck from
existence, could not the owners of the capital still loan it
usuriously, as well as now? whatever the Bank, or its
oﬀicers, may have done, I know that usurious transactions
were much more frequent and enormous before the
commencement of its operations than they have ever been
since.
The next insinuation is, that the Bank has refused specie
payments. This, if true is a violation of the charter. But
there is not the least probability of its truth; because, if
such had been the fact, the individual to whom payment
was refused would have had an interest in making it public,
by suing for the damages to which the charter entitles him.
Yet no such thing has been done; and the strong
presumption is, that the insinuation is false and groundless.
 From this to the end of the resolution, there is nothing
that merits attention — I therefore drop the particular
examination of it.
By a general view of the resolution, it will be seen that a
principal object of the committee is to examine into, and
ferret out, a mass of corruption supposed to have been
committed by the commissioners who apportioned the
stock of the Bank. I believe it is universally understood and
acknowledged that all men will ever act correctly unless
they have a motive to do otherwise. If this be true, we can
only suppose that the commissioners acted corruptly by
also supposing that they were bribed to do so. Taking this
view of the subject, I would ask if the Bank is likely to ﬁnd
it more diﬀicult to bribe the committee of seven, which, we
are about to appoint, than it may have found it to bribe the
commissioners?
(Here Mr. Linder called to order. The Chair decided that
Mr. Lincoln was not out of order. Mr. Linder appealed to the
House, but, before the question was put, withdrew his
appeal, saying he preferred to let the gentleman go on; he
thought he would break his own neck. Mr. Lincoln
proceeded:)
Another gracious condescension! I acknowledge it with
gratitude. I know I was not out of order; and I know every
sensible man in the House knows it. I was not saying that
the gentleman from Coles could be bribed, nor, on the other
hand, will I say he could not. In that particular I leave him
where I found him. I was only endeavoring to show that
there was at least as great a probability of any seven
 members that could be selected from this House being
bribed to act corruptly, as there was that the twenty-four
commissioners had been so bribed. By a reference to the
ninth section of the Bank charter, it will be seen that those
commissioners were John Tilson, Robert K. McLaughlin,
Daniel Warm, A.G. S. Wight, John C. Riley, W. H. Davidson,
Edward M. Wilson, Edward L. Pierson, Robert R. Green,
Ezra Baker, Aquilla Wren, John Taylor, Samuel C. Christy,
Edmund Roberts, Benjamin Godfrey, Thomas Mather, A. M.
Jenkins, W. Linn, W. S. Gilman, Charles Prentice, Richard I.
Hamilton, A.H. Buckner, W. F. Thornton, and Edmund D.
Taylor.
These are twenty-four of the most respectable men in the
State. Probably no twenty-four men could be selected in the
State with whom the people are better acquainted, or in
whose honor and integrity they would more readily place
conﬁdence. And I now repeat, that there is less probability
that those men have been bribed and corrupted, than that
any seven men, or rather any six men, that could be
selected from the members of this House, might be so
bribed and corrupted, even though they were headed and
led on by “decided superiority” himself.
In all seriousness, I ask every reasonable man, if an issue
be joined by these twenty-four commissioners, on the one
part, and any other seven men, on the other part, and the
whole depend upon the honor and integrity of the
contending parties, to which party would the greatest
degree of credit be due? Again: Another consideration is,
that we have no right to make the examination. What I shall
 say upon this head I design exclusively for the law-loving
and law-abiding part of the House. To those who claim
omnipotence for the Legislature, and who in the plenitude
of their assumed powers are disposed to disregard the
Constitution, law, good faith, moral right, and everything
else, I have not a word to say. But to the law-abiding part I
say, examine the Bank charter, go examine the Constitution,
go examine the acts that the General Assembly of this State
has passed, and you will ﬁnd just as much authority given
in each and every of them to compel the Bank to bring its
coﬀers to this hall and to pour their contents upon this
ﬂoor, as to compel it to submit to this examination which
this resolution proposes. Why, Sir, the gentleman from
Coles, the mover of this resolution, very lately denied on
this ﬂoor that the Legislature had any right to repeal or
otherwise meddle with its own acts, when those acts were
made in the nature of contracts, and had been accepted
and acted on by other parties. Now I ask if this resolution
does not propose, for this House alone, to do what he, but
the other day, denied the right of the whole Legislature to
do? He must either abandon the position he then took, or
he must now vote against his own resolution. It is no
diﬀerence to me, and I presume but little to any one else,
which he does.
I am by no means the special advocate of the Bank. I
have long thought that it would be well for it to report its
condition to the General Assembly, and that cases might
occur, when it might be proper to make an examination of
its aﬀairs by a committee. Accordingly, during the last
 session, while a bill supplemental to the Bank charter was
pending before the House, I oﬀered an amendment to the
same, in these words: “The said corporation shall, at the
next session of the General Assembly, and at each
subsequent General Session, during the existence of its
charter, report to the same the amount of debts due from
said corporation; the amount of debts due to the same; the
amount of specie in its vaults, and an account of all lands
then owned by the same, and the amount for which such
lands have been taken; and moreover, if said corporation
shall at any time neglect or refuse to submit its books,
papers, and all and everything necessary for a full and fair
examination of its aﬀairs, to any person or persons
appointed by the General Assembly, for the purpose of
making such examination, the said corporation shall forfeit
its charter.”
This amendment was negatived by a vote of 34 to 15.
Eleven of the 34 who voted against it are now members of
this House; and though it would be out of order to call their
names, I hope they will all recollect themselves, and not
vote for this examination to be made without authority,
inasmuch as they refused to receive the authority when it
was in their power to do so.
I have said that cases might occur, when an examination
might be proper; but I do not believe any such case has
now occurred; and if it has, I should still be opposed to
making an examination without legal authority. I am
opposed to encouraging that lawless and mobocratic spirit,
whether in relation to the Bank or anything else, which is
 already abroad in the land and is spreading with rapid and
fearful impetuosity, to the ultimate overthrow of every
institution, of every moral principle, in which persons and
property have hitherto found security.
But supposing we had the authority, I would ask what
good can result from the examination? Can we declare the
Bank unconstitutional, and compel it to desist from the
abuses of its power, provided we ﬁnd such abuses to exist?
Can we repair the injuries which it may have done to
individuals? Most certainly we can do none of these things.
Why then shall we spend the public money in such
employment? Oh, say the examiners, we can injure the
credit of the Bank, if nothing else, Please tell me,
gentlemen, who will suﬀer most by that? You cannot injure,
to any extent, the stockholders. They are men of wealth —
of large capital; and consequently, beyond the power of
malice. But by injuring the credit of the Bank, you will
depreciate the value of its paper in the hands of the honest
and unsuspecting farmer and mechanic, and that is all you
can do. But suppose you could eﬀect your whole purpose;
suppose you could wipe the Bank from existence, which is
the grand ultimatum of the project, what would be the
consequence? why, Sir, we should spend several thousand
dollars of the public treasure in the operation, annihilate
the currency of the State, render valueless in the hands of
our people that reward of their former labors, and ﬁnally be
once more under the comfortable obligation of paying the
Wiggins loan, principal and interest.
   
 I I
  
 
   
 
ADDRESS BEFORE THE YOUNG MEN’S LYCEUM OF
SPRINGFIELD, ILLINOIS.
JANUARY 27, 1837.
As a subject for the remarks of the evening, “The
Perpetuation of our Political Institutions” is selected.
In the great journal of things happening under the sun,
we, the American people, ﬁnd our account running under
date of the nineteenth century of the Christian era. We ﬁnd
ourselves in the peaceful possession of the fairest portion
of the earth as regards extent of territory, fertility of soil,
and salubrity of climate. We ﬁnd ourselves under the
government of a system of political institutions conducing
more essentially to the ends of civil and religious liberty
than any of which the history of former times tells us. We,
when mounting the stage of existence, found ourselves the
legal inheritors of these fundamental blessings. We toiled
not in the acquirement or establishment of them; they are a
legacy bequeathed us by a once hardy, brave, and patriotic,
but now lamented and departed, race of ancestors. Theirs
was the task (and nobly they performed it) to possess
themselves, and through themselves us, of this goodly land,
and to uprear upon its hills and its valleys a political ediﬁce
of liberty and equal rights; it is ours only to transmit these
 — the former unprofaned by the foot of an invader, the
latter undecayed by the lapse of time and untorn by
usurpation — to the latest generation that fate shall permit
the world to know. This task gratitude to our fathers,
justice to ourselves, duty to posterity, and love for our
species in general, all imperatively require us faithfully to
perform.
How then shall we perform it? At what point shall we
expect the approach of danger? By what means shall we
fortify against it? Shall we expect some transatlantic
military giant to step the ocean and crush us at a blow?
Never! All the armies of Europe, Asia, and Africa combined,
with all the treasure of the earth (our own excepted) in
their military chest, with a Bonaparte for a commander,
could not by force take a drink from the Ohio or make a
track on the Blue Ridge in a trial of a thousand years.
At what point then is the approach of danger to be
expected? I answer: If it ever reach us it must spring up
amongst us; it cannot come from abroad. If destruction be
our lot we must ourselves be its author and ﬁnisher. As a
nation of freemen we must live through all time, or die by
suicide.
I hope I am over-wary; but if I am not, there is even now
something of ill omen amongst us. I mean the increasing
disregard for law which pervades the country — the
growing disposition to substitute the wild and furious
passions in lieu of the sober judgment of courts, and the
worse than savage mobs for the executive ministers of
justice. This disposition is awfully fearful in any community;
 and that it now exists in ours, though grating to our
feelings to admit, it would be a violation of truth and an
insult to our intelligence to deny. Accounts of outrages
committed by mobs form the everyday news of the times.
They have pervaded the country from New England to
Louisiana; they are neither peculiar to the eternal snows of
the former nor the burning suns of the latter; they are not
the creature of climate, neither are they conﬁned to the
slave holding or the non-slave holding States. Alike they
spring up among the pleasure-hunting masters of Southern
slaves, and the order-loving citizens of the land of steady
habits. Whatever then their cause may be, it is common to
the whole country.
It would be tedious as well as useless to recount the
horrors of all of them. Those happening in the State of
Mississippi and at St. Louis are perhaps the most
dangerous in example and revolting to humanity. In the
Mississippi case they ﬁrst commenced by hanging the
regular gamblers — a set of men certainly not following for
a livelihood a very useful or very honest occupation, but
one which, so far from being forbidden by the laws, was
actually licensed by an act of the Legislature passed but a
single year before. Next, negroes suspected of conspiring
to raise an insurrection were caught up and hanged in all
parts of the State; then, white men supposed to be leagued
with the negroes; and ﬁnally, strangers from neighboring
States, going thither on business, were in many instances
subjected to the same fate. Thus went on this process of
hanging, from gamblers to negroes, from negroes to white
 citizens, and from these to strangers, till dead men were
seen literally dangling from the boughs of trees upon every
roadside, and in numbers almost suﬀicient to rival the
native Spanish moss of the country as a drapery of the
forest.
Turn then to that horror-striking scene at St. Louis. A
single victim only was sacriﬁced there. This story is very
short, and is perhaps the most highly tragic of anything of
its length that has ever been witnessed in real life. A
mulatto man by the name of McIntosh was seized in the
street, dragged to the suburbs of the city, chained to a tree,
and actually burned to death; and all within a single hour
from the time he had been a freeman attending to his own
business and at peace with the world.
Such are the eﬀects of mob law, and such are the scenes
becoming more and more frequent in this land so lately
famed for love of law and order, and the stories of which
have even now grown too familiar to attract anything more
than an idle remark.
But you are perhaps ready to ask, “What has this to do
with the perpetuation of our political institutions?” I
answer, It has much to do with it. Its direct consequences
are, comparatively speaking, but a small evil, and much of
its danger consists in the proneness of our minds to regard
its direct as its only consequences. Abstractly considered,
the hanging of the gamblers at Vicksburg was of but little
consequence. They constitute a portion of population that is
worse than useless in any community; and their death, if no
pernicious example be set by it, is never matter of
 reasonable regret with any one. If they were annually
swept from the stage of existence by the plague or
smallpox, honest men would perhaps be much proﬁted by
the operation. Similar too is the correct reasoning in regard
to the burning of the negro at St. Louis. He had forfeited
his life by the perpetration of an outrageous murder upon
one of the most worthy and respectable citizens of the city,
and had he not died as he did, he must have died by the
sentence of the law in a very short time afterwards. As to
him alone, it was as well the way it was as it could
otherwise have been. But the example in either case was
fearful. When men take it in their heads to-day to hang
gamblers or burn murderers, they should recollect that in
the confusion usually attending such transactions they will
be as likely to hang or burn some one who is neither a
gambler nor a murderer as one who is, and that, acting
upon the example they set, the mob of to-morrow may, and
probably will, hang or burn some of them by the very same
mistake. And not only so: the innocent, those who have ever
set their faces against violations of law in every shape,
alike with the guilty fall victims to the ravages of mob law;
and thus it goes on, step by step, till all the walls erected
for the defense of the persons and property of individuals
are trodden down and disregarded. But all this, even, is not
the full extent of the evil. By such examples, by instances of
the perpetrators of such acts going unpunished, the lawless
in spirit are encouraged to become lawless in practice; and
having been used to no restraint but dread of punishment,
they thus become absolutely unrestrained. Having ever
 regarded government as their deadliest bane, they make a
jubilee of the suspension of its operations, and pray for
nothing so much as its total annihilation. While, on the
other hand, good men, men who love tranquillity, who
desire to abide by the laws and enjoy their beneﬁts, who
would gladly spill their blood in the defense of their
country, seeing their property destroyed, their families
insulted, and their lives endangered, their persons injured,
and seeing nothing in prospect that forebodes a change for
the better, become tired of and disgusted with a
government that oﬀers them no protection, and are not
much averse to a change in which they imagine they have
nothing to lose. Thus, then, by the operation of this
mobocratic spirit which all must admit is now abroad in the
land, the strongest bulwark of any government, and
particularly of those constituted like ours, may eﬀectually
be broken down and destroyed — I mean the attachment of
the people. Whenever this eﬀect shall be produced among
us; whenever the vicious portion of population shall be
permitted to gather in bands of hundreds and thousands,
and burn churches, ravage and rob provision-stores, throw
printing presses into rivers, shoot editors, and hang and
burn obnoxious persons at pleasure and with impunity,
depend on it, this government cannot last. By such things
the feelings of the best citizens will become more or less
alienated from it, and thus it will be left without friends, or
with too few, and those few too weak to make their
friendship eﬀectual. At such a time, and under such
circumstances, men of suﬀicient talent and ambition will
 not be wanting to seize the opportunity, strike the blow, and
overturn that fair fabric which for the last half century has
been the fondest hope of the lovers of freedom throughout
the world.
I know the American people are much attached to their
government; I know they would suﬀer much for its sake; I
know they would endure evils long and patiently before
they would ever think of exchanging it for another, — yet,
notwithstanding all this, if the laws be continually despised
and disregarded, if their rights to be secure in their
persons and property are held by no better tenure than the
caprice of a mob, the alienation of their aﬀections from the
government is the natural consequence; and to that, sooner
or later, it must come.
Here, then, is one point at which danger may be
expected.
The question recurs, How shall we fortify against it? The
answer is simple. Let every American, every lover of liberty,
every well-wisher to his posterity swear by the blood of the
Revolution never to violate in the least particular the laws
of the country, and never to tolerate their violation by
others. As the patriots of seventy-six did to the support of
the Declaration of Independence, so to the support of the
Constitution and laws let every American pledge his life, his
property, and his sacred honor. Let every man remember
that to violate the law is to trample on the blood of his
father, and to tear the charter of his own and his children’s
liberty. Let reverence for the laws be breathed by every
American mother to the lisping babe that prattles on her
 lap; let it be taught in schools, in seminaries, and in
colleges; let it be written in primers, spelling books, and in
almanacs; let it be preached from the pulpit, proclaimed in
legislative halls, and enforced in courts of justice. And, in
short, let it become the political religion of the nation; and
let the old and the young, the rich and the poor, the grave
and the gay of all sexes and tongues and colors and
conditions, sacriﬁce unceasingly upon its altars.
While ever a state of feeling such as this shall universally
or even very generally prevail throughout the nation, vain
will be every eﬀort, and fruitless every attempt, to subvert
our national freedom.
When, I so pressingly urge a strict observance of all the
laws, let me not be understood as saying there are no bad
laws, or that grievances may not arise for the redress of
which no legal provisions have been made. I mean to say no
such thing. But I do mean to say that although bad laws, if
they exist, should be repealed as soon as possible, still,
while they continue in force, for the sake of example they
should be religiously observed. So also in unprovided cases.
If such arise, let proper legal provisions be made for them
with the least possible delay, but till then let them, if not
too intolerable, be borne with.
There is no grievance that is a ﬁt object of redress by
mob law. In any case that may arise, as, for instance, the
promulgation of abolitionism, one of two positions is
necessarily true — that is, the thing is right within itself,
and therefore deserves the protection of all law and all
good citizens, or it is wrong, and therefore proper to be
 prohibited by legal enactments; and in neither case is the
interposition of mob law either necessary, justiﬁable, or
excusable.
But it may be asked, Why suppose danger to our political
institutions? Have we not preserved them for more than
ﬁfty years? And why may we not for ﬁfty times as long?
We hope there is no suﬀicient reason. We hope all danger
may be overcome; but to conclude that no danger may ever
arise would itself be extremely dangerous. There are now,
and will hereafter be, many causes, dangerous in their
tendency, which have not existed heretofore, and which are
not 
too 
insigniﬁcant 
to 
merit 
attention. 
That 
our
government should have been maintained in its original
form, from its establishment until now, is not much to be
wondered at. It had many props to support it through that
period, which now are decayed and crumbled away.
Through that period it was felt by all to be an undecided
experiment; now it is understood to be a successful one.
Then, all that sought celebrity and fame and distinction
expected to ﬁnd them in the success of that experiment.
Their all was staked upon it; their destiny was inseparably
linked with it. Their ambition aspired to display before an
admiring world a practical demonstration of the truth of a
proposition which had hitherto been considered at best no
better than problematical — namely, the capability of a
people to govern themselves. If they succeeded they were
to be immortalized; their names were to be transferred to
counties, and cities, and rivers, and mountains; and to be
revered and sung, toasted through all time. If they failed,
 they were to be called knaves and fools, and fanatics for a
ﬂeeting hour; then to sink and be forgotten. They
succeeded. The experiment is successful, and thousands
have won their deathless names in making it so. But the
game is caught; and I believe it is true that with the
catching end the pleasures of the chase. This ﬁeld of glory
is harvested, and the crop is already appropriated. But new
reapers will arise, and they too will seek a ﬁeld. It is to
deny what the history of the world tells us is true, to
suppose that men of ambition and talents will not continue
to spring up amongst us. And when they do, they will as
naturally seek the gratiﬁcation of their ruling passion as
others have done before them. The question then is, Can
that gratiﬁcation be found in supporting and in maintaining
an ediﬁce that has been erected by others? Most certainly
it cannot. Many great and good men, suﬀiciently qualiﬁed
for any task they should undertake, may ever be found
whose ambition would aspire to nothing beyond a seat in
Congress, a Gubernatorial or a Presidential chair; but such
belong not to the family of the lion, or the tribe of the
eagle. What! think you these places would satisfy an
Alexander, a Caesar, or a Napoleon? Never! Towering
genius disdains a beaten path. It seeks regions hitherto
unexplored. It sees no distinction in adding story to story
upon the monuments of fame erected to the memory of
others. It denies that it is glory enough to serve under any
chief. It scorns to tread in the footsteps of any predecessor,
however illustrious. It thirsts and burns for distinction; and
if possible, it will have it, whether at the expense of
 emancipating 
slaves 
or 
enslaving 
freemen. 
Is 
it
unreasonable, then, to expect that some man possessed of
the loftiest genius, coupled with ambition suﬀicient to push
it to its utmost stretch, will at some time spring up among
us? And when such an one does it will require the people to
be united with each other, attached to the government and
laws, and generally intelligent, to successfully frustrate his
designs.
Distinction will be his paramount object, and although he
would as willingly, perhaps more so, acquire it by doing
good as harm, yet, that opportunity being past, and nothing
left to be done in the way of building up, he would set
boldly to the task of pulling down.
Here then is a probable case, highly dangerous, and such
an one as could not have well existed heretofore.
Another reason which once was, but which, to the same
extent, is now no more, has done much in maintaining our
institutions thus far. I mean the powerful inﬂuence which
the interesting scenes of the Revolution had upon the
passions of the people as distinguished from their
judgment. By this inﬂuence, the jealousy, envy, and avarice
incident to our nature, and so common to a state of peace,
prosperity, and conscious strength, were for the time in a
great measure smothered and rendered inactive, while the
deep-rooted principles of hate, and the powerful motive of
revenge, instead of being turned against each other, were
directed exclusively against the British nation. And thus,
from the force of circumstances, the basest principles of
our nature were either made to lie dormant, or to become
 the active agents in the advancement of the noblest of
causes — that of establishing and maintaining civil and
religious liberty.
But this state of feeling must fade, is fading, has faded,
with the circumstances that produced it.
I do not mean to say that the scenes of the Revolution are
now or ever will be entirely forgotten, but that, like
everything else, they must fade upon the memory of the
world, and grow more and more dim by the lapse of time.
In history, we hope, they will be read of, and recounted, so
long as the Bible shall be read; but even granting that they
will, their inﬂuence cannot be what it heretofore has been.
Even then they cannot be so universally known nor so
vividly felt as they were by the generation just gone to rest.
At the close of that struggle, nearly every adult male had
been a participator in some of its scenes. The consequence
was that of those scenes, in the form of a husband, a father,
a son, or a brother, a living history was to be found in every
family — a history bearing the indubitable testimonies of its
own authenticity, in the limbs mangled, in the scars of
wounds received, in the midst of the very scenes related —
a history, too, that could be read and understood alike by
all, the wise and the ignorant, the learned and the
unlearned. But those histories are gone. They can be read
no more forever. They were a fortress of strength; but what
invading foeman could never do the silent artillery of time
has done — the leveling of its walls. They are gone. They
were a forest of giant oaks; but the all-restless hurricane
has swept over them, and left only here and there a lonely
 trunk, despoiled of its verdure, shorn of its foliage,
unshading and unshaded, to murmur in a few more gentle
breezes, and to combat with its mutilated limbs a few more
ruder storms, then to sink and be no more.
They were pillars of the temple of liberty; and now that
they have crumbled away that temple must fall unless we,
their descendants, supply their places with other pillars,
hewn from the solid quarry of sober reason. Passion has
helped us, but can do so no more. It will in future be our
enemy. Reason cold, calculating, unimpassioned reason —
must furnish all the materials for our future support and
defense. Let those materials be moulded into general
intelligence, sound morality, and in particular, a reverence
for the Constitution and laws; and that we improved to the
last, that we remained free to the last, that we revered his
name to the last, that during his long sleep we permitted no
hostile foot to pass over or desecrate his resting place,
shall be that which to learn the last trump shall awaken our
Washington.
Upon these let the proud fabric of freedom rest, as the
rock of its basis; and as truly as has been said of the only
greater institution, “the gates of hell shall not prevail
against it.”
   
     I
  H  I  I
I    
I  A 
   
  H
 
      
    A    .
March 3, 1837.
THE FOLLOWING PROTEST was presented to the House,
which was read and ordered to be spread in the journals, to
wit:
“Resolutions upon the subject of domestic slavery having
passed both branches of the General Assembly at its
present session, the undersigned hereby protest against
the passage of the same.
“They believe that the institution of slavery is founded on
both injustice and bad policy, but that the promulgation of
abolition doctrines tends rather to increase than abate its
evils.
“They believe that the Congress of the United States has
no power under the Constitution to interfere with the
institution of slavery in the diﬀerent States.
“They believe that the Congress of the United States has
the power, under the Constitution, to abolish slavery in the
District of Columbia, but that the power ought not to be
exercised, unless at the request of the people of the
District.
“The diﬀerence between these opinions and those
contained in the said resolutions is their reason for
 entering this protest.
“DAN STONE, “A. LINCOLN,
“Representatives from the County of Sangamon.”
  
 
I   
A   
 
 .
SPRINGFIELD, May 7, 1837.
MISS MARY S. OWENS.
FRIEND MARY: — I have commenced two letters to send
you before this, both of which displeased me before I got
half done, and so I tore them up. The ﬁrst I thought was not
serious enough, and the second was on the other extreme. I
shall send this, turn out as it may.
This thing of living in Springﬁeld is rather a dull
business, after all; at least it is so to me. I am quite as
lonesome here as I ever was anywhere in my life. I have
been spoken to by but one woman since I have been here,
and should not have been by her if she could have avoided
it. I ‘ve never been to church yet, and probably shall not be
soon. I stay away because I am conscious I should not know
how to behave myself.
I am often thinking of what we said about your coming to
live at Springﬁeld. I am afraid you would not be satisﬁed.
There is a great deal of ﬂourishing about in carriages here,
which it would be your doom to see without sharing it. You
would have to be poor, without the means of hiding your
poverty. Do you believe you could bear that patiently?
Whatever woman may cast her lot with mine, should any
ever do so, it is my intention to do all in my power to make
 her happy and contented; and there is nothing I can
imagine that would make me more unhappy than to fail in
the eﬀort. I know I should be much happier with you than
the way I am, provided I saw no signs of discontent in you.
What you have said to me may have been in the way of jest,
or I may have misunderstood you. If so, then let it be
forgotten; if otherwise, I much wish you would think
seriously before you decide. What I have said I will most
positively abide by, provided you wish it. My opinion is that
you had better not do it. You have not been accustomed to
hardship, and it may be more severe than you now imagine.
I know you are capable of thinking correctly on any subject,
and if you deliberate maturely upon this subject before you
decide, then I am willing to abide your decision.
You must write me a good long letter after you get this.
You have nothing else to do, and though it might not seem
interesting to you after you had written it, it would be a
good deal of company to me in this “busy wilderness.” Tell
your sister I don’t want to hear any more about selling out
and moving. That gives me the “hypo” whenever I think of
it.
Yours, etc., LINCOLN.
  
  
H
   
   .
SPRINGFIELD, ILL., Aug. 5, 1837. JOHN BENNETT, ESQ.
DEAR SIR:-MR. EDWARDS tells me you wish to know
whether the act to which your own incorporation provision
was attached passed into a law. It did. You can organize
under the general incorporation law as soon as you choose.
I also tacked a provision onto a fellow’s bill to authorize
the relocation of the road from Salem down to your town,
but I am not certain whether or not the bill passed, neither
do I suppose I can ascertain before the law will be
published, if it is a law. Bowling Greene, Bennette Abe? and
yourself are appointed to make the change. No news. No
excitement except a little about the election of Monday
next.
I suppose, of course, our friend Dr. Heney stands no
chance in your diggings.
Your friend and humble servant, A. LINCOLN.
  
 
A   
 
 .
SPRINGFIELD, Aug. 16, 1837
FRIEND MARY: YOU will no doubt think it rather strange
that I should write you a letter on the same day on which
we parted, and I can only account for it by supposing that
seeing you lately makes me think of you more than usual;
while at our late meeting we had but few expressions of
thoughts. You must know that I cannot see you, or think of
you, with entire indiﬀerence; and yet it may be that you are
mistaken in regard to what my real feelings toward you are.
If I knew you were not, I should not have troubled you
with this letter. Perhaps any other man would know enough
without information; but I consider it my peculiar right to
plead ignorance, and your bounden duty to allow the plea.
I want in all cases to do right; and most particularly so in
all cases with women.
I want, at this particular time, more than any thing else
to do right with you; and if I knew it would be doing right,
as I rather suspect it would, to let you alone I would do it.
And, for the purpose of making the matter as plain as
possible, I now say that you can drop the subject, dismiss
your thoughts (if you ever had any) from me for ever and
leave this letter unanswered without calling forth one
accusing murmur from me. And I will even go further and
 say that, if it will add anything to your comfort or peace of
mind to do so, it is my sincere wish that you should. Do not
understand by this that I wish to cut your acquaintance. I
mean no such thing. What I do wish is that our further
acquaintance shall depend upon yourself. If such further
acquaintance would contribute nothing to your happiness, I
am sure it would not to mine. If you feel yourself in any
degree bound to me, I am now willing to release you,
provided you wish it; while on the other hand I am willing
and even anxious to bind you faster if I can be convinced
that it will, in any considerable degree, add to your
happiness. This, indeed, is the whole question with me.
Nothing would make me more miserable than to believe
you miserable, nothing more happy than to know you were
so.
In what I have now said, I think I cannot be
misunderstood; and to make myself understood is the only
object of this letter.
If it suits you best not to answer this, farewell. A long life
and a merry one attend you. But, if you conclude to write
back, speak as plainly as I do. There can neither be harm
nor danger in saying to me anything you think, just in the
manner you think it. My respects to your sister.
Your friend, LINCOLN.
   
A   
I  
  
I
  .s. 
en. A
A
TO THE PEOPLE.
“SANGAMON JOURNAL,” SPRINGFIELD, ILL., Aug.
19, 1837.
In accordance with our determination, as expressed last
week, we present to the reader the articles which were
published in hand-bill form, in reference to the case of the
heirs of Joseph Anderson vs. James Adams. These articles
can now be read uninﬂuenced by personal or party feeling,
and with the sole motive of learning the truth. When that is
done, the reader can pass his own judgment on the matters
at issue.
We only regret in this case, that the publications were
not made some weeks before the election. Such a course
might have prevented the expressions of regret, which have
often been heard since, from diﬀerent individuals, on
account of the disposition they made of their votes.
To the Public:
It is well known to most of you, that there is existing at
this time considerable excitement in regard to Gen.
Adams’s titles to certain tracts of land, and the manner in
which he acquired them. As I understand, the Gen. charges
that the whole has been gotten up by a knot of lawyers to
injure his election; and as I am one of the knot to which he
 refers, and as I happen to be in possession of facts
connected with the matter, I will, in as brief a manner as
possible, make a statement of them, together with the
means by which I arrived at the knowledge of them.
Sometime in May or June last, a widow woman, by the
name of Anderson, and her son, who resides in Fulton
county, came to Springﬁeld, for the purpose as they said of
selling a ten acre lot of ground lying near town, which they
claimed as the property of the deceased husband and
father.
When they reached town they found the land was
claimed by Gen. Adams. John T. Stuart and myself were
employed to look into the matter, and if it was thought we
could do so with any prospect of success, to commence a
suit for the land. I went immediately to the recorder’s oﬀice
to examine Adams’s title, and found that the land had been
entered by one Dixon, deeded by Dixon to Thomas, by
Thomas to one Miller, and by Miller to Gen. Adams. The
oldest of these three deeds was about ten or eleven years
old, and the latest more than ﬁve, all recorded at the same
time, and that within less than one year. This I thought a
suspicious circumstance, and I was thereby induced to
examine the deeds very closely, with a view to the discovery
of some defect by which to overturn the title, being almost
convinced then it was founded in fraud. I discovered that in
the deed from Thomas to Miller, although Miller’s name
stood in a sort of marginal note on the record book, it was
nowhere in the deed itself. I told the fact to Talbott, the
recorder, and proposed to him that he should go to Gen.
 Adams’s and get the original deed, and compare it with the
record, and thereby ascertain whether the defect was in
the original or there was merely an error in the recording.
As Talbott afterwards told me, he went to the General’s, but
not ﬁnding him at home, got the deed from his son, which,
when compared with the record, proved what we had
discovered was merely an error of the recorder. After Mr.
Talbott corrected the record, he brought the original to our
oﬀice, as I then thought and think yet, to show us that it
was right. When he came into the room he handed the deed
to me, remarking that the fault was all his own. On opening
it, another paper fell out of it, which on examination proved
to be an assignment of a judgment in the Circuit Court of
Sangamon County from Joseph Anderson, the late husband
of the widow above named, to James Adams, the judgment
being in favor of said Anderson against one Joseph Miller.
Knowing that this judgment had some connection with the
land aﬀair, I immediately took a copy of it, which is word
for word, letter for letter and cross for cross as follows:
Joseph Anderson, vs. Joseph Miller.
Judgment in Sangamon Circuit Court against Joseph
Miller obtained on a note originally 25 dolls and interest
thereon accrued. I assign all my right, title and interest to
James Adams which is in consideration of a debt I owe said
Adams.
his JOSEPH x ANDERSON. mark.
As the copy shows, it bore date May 10, 1827; although
the judgment assigned by it was not obtained until the
October afterwards, as may be seen by any one on the
 records 
of 
the 
Circuit 
Court. 
Two 
other 
strange
circumstances attended it which cannot be represented by
a copy. One of them was, that the date “1827” had ﬁrst
been made “1837” and, without the ﬁgure “3,” being fully
obliterated, the ﬁgure “2” had afterwards been made on
top of it; the other was that, although the date was ten
years old, the writing on it, from the freshness of its
appearance, was thought by many, and I believe by all who
saw it, not to be more than a week old. The paper on which
it was written had a very old appearance; and there were
some old ﬁgures on the back of it which made the freshness
of the writing on the face of it much more striking than I
suppose it otherwise might have been. The reader’s
curiosity is no doubt excited to know what connection this
assignment had with the land in question. The story is this:
Dixon sold and deeded the land to Thomas; Thomas sold it
to Anderson; but before he gave a deed, Anderson sold it to
Miller, and took Miller’s note for the purchase money. When
this note became due, Anderson sued Miller on it, and
Miller procured an injunction from the Court of Chancery
to stay the collection of the money until he should get a
deed for the land. Gen. Adams was employed as an attorney
by Anderson in this chancery suit, and at the October term,
1827, the injunction was dissolved, and a judgment given in
favor of Anderson against Miller; and it was provided that
Thomas was to execute a deed for the land in favor of
Miller and deliver it to Gen. Adams, to be held up by him
till Miller paid the judgment, and then to deliver it to him.
Miller left the county without paying the judgment.
 Anderson moved to Fulton county, where he has since died
When the widow came to Springﬁeld last May or June, as
before mentioned, and found the land deeded to Gen.
Adams by Miller, she was naturally led to inquire why the
money due upon the judgment had not been sent to them,
inasmuch as he, Gen. Adams, had no authority to deliver
Thomas’s deed to Miller until the money was paid. Then it
was the General told her, or perhaps her son, who came
with her, that Anderson, in his lifetime, had assigned the
judgment to him, Gen. Adams. I am now told that the
General is exhibiting an assignment of the same judgment
bearing date “1828” and in other respects diﬀering from
the one described; and that he is asserting that no such
assignment as the one copied by me ever existed; or if
there did, it was forged between Talbott and the lawyers,
and slipped into his papers for the purpose of injuring him.
Now, I can only say that I know precisely such a one did
exist, and that Ben. Talbott, Wm. Butler, C.R. Matheny, John
T. Stuart, Judge Logan, Robert Irwin, P. C. Canedy and S. M.
Tinsley, all saw and examined it, and that at least one half
of them will swear that IT WAS IN GENERAL ADAMS’S
HANDWRITING!! And further, I know that Talbott will
swear that he got it out of the General’s possession, and
returned it into his possession again. The assignment which
the General is now exhibiting purports to have been by
Anderson in writing. The one I copied was signed with a
cross.
I am told that Gen. Neale says that he will swear that he
heard Gen. Adams tell young Anderson that the assignment
 made by his father was signed with a cross.
The above are ‘facts,’ as stated. I leave them without
comment. I have given the names of persons who have
knowledge of these facts, in order that any one who
chooses may call on them and ascertain how far they will
corroborate my statements. I have only made these
statements because I am known by many to be one of the
individuals against whom the charge of forging the
assignment and slipping it into the General’s papers has
been made, and because our silence might be construed
into a confession of its truth. I shall not subscribe my name;
but I hereby authorize the editor of the Journal to give it up
to any one that may call for it.
  I
 
 
 A
  A  
   I
        
 
 
.
A
A
 .
“SANGAMON JOURNAL,” SPRINGFIELD, ILL., Oct. 28,
1837.
IN THE REPUBLICAN of this morning a publication of Gen.
Adams’s appears, in which my name is used quite
unreservedly. For this I thank the General. I thank him
because it gives me an opportunity, without appearing
obtrusive, of explaining a part of a former publication of
mine, which appears to me to have been misunderstood by
many.
In the former publication alluded to, I stated, in
substance, that Mr. Talbott got a deed from a son of Gen.
Adams’s for the purpose of correcting a mistake that had
occurred on the record of the said deed in the recorder’s
oﬀice; that he corrected the record, and brought the deed
and handed it to me, and that on opening the deed, another
paper, being the assignment of a judgment, fell out of it.
This statement Gen. Adams and the editor of the
Republican have seized upon as a most palpable evidence
of fabrication and falsehood. They set themselves gravely
about proving that the assignment could not have been in
the deed when Talbott got it from young Adams, as he,
Talbott, would have seen it when he opened the deed to
 correct the record. Now, the truth is, Talbott did see the
assignment when he opened the deed, or at least he told
me he did on the same day; and I only omitted to say so, in
my former publication, because it was a matter of such
palpable and necessary inference. I had stated that Talbott
had corrected the record by the deed; and of course he
must have opened it; and, just as the General and his
friends argue, must have seen the assignment. I omitted to
state the fact of Talbott’s seeing the assignment, because
its existence was so necessarily connected with other facts
which I did state, that I thought the greatest dunce could
not but understand it. Did I say Talbott had not seen it? Did
I say anything that was inconsistent with his having seen it
before? Most certainly I did neither; and if I did not, what
becomes of the argument? These logical gentlemen can
sustain their argument only by assuming that I did say
negatively everything that I did not say aﬀirmatively; and
upon the same assumption, we may expect to ﬁnd the
General, if a little harder pressed for argument, saying that
I said Talbott came to our oﬀice with his head downward,
not that I actually said so, but because I omitted to say he
came feet downward.
In his publication to-day, the General produces the
aﬀidavit of Reuben Radford, in which it is said that Talbott
told Radford that he did not ﬁnd the assignment in the
deed, in the recording of which the error was committed,
but that he found it wrapped in another paper in the
recorder’s 
oﬀice, 
upon 
which 
statement 
the 
Genl.
comments as follows, to wit: “If it be true as stated by
 Talbott to Radford, that he found the assignment wrapped
up in another paper at his oﬀice, that contradicts the
statement of Lincoln that it fell out of the deed.”
Is common sense to be abused with such sophistry? Did I
say what Talbott found it in? If Talbott did ﬁnd it in another
paper at his oﬀice, is that any reason why he could not have
folded it in a deed and brought it to my oﬀice? Can any one
be so far duped as to be made believe that what may have
happened at Talbot’s oﬀice at one time is inconsistent with
what happened at my oﬀice at another time?
Now Talbott’s statement of the case as he makes it to me
is this, that he got a bunch of deeds from young Adams, and
that he knows he found the assignment in the bunch, but he
is not certain which particular deed it was in, nor is he
certain whether it was folded in the same deed out of which
it was taken, or another one, when it was brought to my
oﬀice. Is this a mysterious story? Is there anything
suspicious about it?
“But it is useless to dwell longer on this point. Any man
who is not wilfully blind can see at a ﬂash, that there is no
discrepancy, and Lincoln has shown that they are not only
inconsistent with truth, but each other” — I can only say,
that I have shown that he has done no such thing; and if the
reader is disposed to require any other evidence than the
General’s assertion, he will be of my opinion.
Excepting 
the 
General’s 
most 
ﬂimsy 
attempt 
at
mystiﬁcation, in regard to a discrepance between Talbott
and myself, he has not denied a single statement that I
made in my hand-bill. Every material statement that I made
 has been sworn to by men who, in former times, were
thought as respectable as General Adams. I stated that an
assignment of a judgment, a copy of which I gave, had
existed — Benj. Talbott, C. R. Matheny, Wm. Butler, and
Judge Logan swore to its existence. I stated that it was said
to be in Gen. Adams’s handwriting — the same men swore
it was in his handwriting. I stated that Talbott would swear
that he got it out of Gen. Adams’s possession — Talbott
came forward and did swear it.
Bidding adieu to the former publication, I now propose to
examine the General’s last gigantic production. I now
propose to point out some discrepancies in the General’s
address; and such, too, as he shall not be able to escape
from. Speaking of the famous assignment, the General
says: “This last charge, which was their last resort, their
dying eﬀort to render my character infamous among my
fellow citizens, was manufactured at a certain lawyer’s
oﬀice in the town, printed at the oﬀice of the Sangamon
Journal, and found its way into the world some time
between two days just before the last election.” Now turn
to Mr. Keys’ aﬀidavit, in which you will ﬁnd the following,
viz.: “I certify that some time in May or the early part of
June, 1837, I saw at Williams’s corner a paper purporting
to be an assignment from Joseph Anderson to James
Adams, which assignment was signed by a mark to
Anderson’s name,” etc. Now mark, if Keys saw the
assignment on the last of May or ﬁrst of June, Gen. Adams
tells a falsehood when he says it was manufactured just
before the election, which was on the 7th of August; and if
 it was manufactured just before the election, Keys tells a
falsehood when he says he saw it on the last of May or ﬁrst
of June. Either Keys or the General is irretrievably in for it;
and in the General’s very condescending language, I say
“Let them settle it between them.”
Now again, let the reader, bearing in mind that General
Adams has unequivocally said, in one part of his address,
that the charge in relation to the assignment was
manufactured just before the election, turn to the aﬀidavit
of Peter S. Weber, where the following will be found viz.: “I,
Peter S. Weber, do certify that from the best of my
recollection, on the day or day after Gen. Adams started for
the Illinois Rapids, in May last, that I was at the house of
Gen. Adams, sitting in the kitchen, situated on the back
part of the house, it being in the afternoon, and that
Benjamin Talbott came around the house, back into the
kitchen, and appeared wild and confused, and that he laid a
package of papers on the kitchen table and requested that
they should be handed to Lucian. He made no apology for
coming to the kitchen, nor for not handing them to Lucian
himself, but showed the token of being frightened and
confused both in demeanor and speech and for what cause
I could not apprehend.”
Commenting on Weber’s aﬀidavit, Gen. Adams asks,
“Why this fright and confusion?” I reply that this is a
question for the General himself. Weber says that it was in
May, and if so, it is most clear that Talbott was not
frightened on account of the assignment, unless the
General lies when he says the assignment charge was
 manufactured just before the election. Is it not a strong
evidence, that the General is not traveling with the pole-
star of truth in his front, to see him in one part of his
address roundly asserting that the assignment was
manufactured just before the election, and then, forgetting
that position, procuring Weber’s most foolish aﬀidavit, to
prove that Talbott had been engaged in manufacturing it
two months before?
In another part of his address, Gen. Adams says: “That I
hold an assignment of said judgment, dated the 20th of
May, 1828, and signed by said Anderson, I have never
pretended to deny or conceal, but stated that fact in one of
my circulars previous to the election, and also in answer to
a bill in chancery.” Now I pronounce this statement
unqualiﬁedly false, and shall not rely on the word or oath of
any man to sustain me in what I say; but will let the whole
be decided by reference to the circular and answer in
chancery of which the General speaks. In his circular he did
speak of an assignment; but he did not say it bore date 20th
of May, 1828; nor did he say it bore any date. In his answer
in chancery, he did say that he had an assignment; but he
did not say that it bore date the 20th May, 1828; but so far
from it, he said on oath (for he swore to the answer) that as
well as recollected, he obtained it in 1827. If any one
doubts, let him examine the circular and answer for
himself. They are both accessible.
It will readily be observed that the principal part of
Adams’s defense rests upon the argument that if he had
been base enough to forge an assignment he would not
 have been fool enough to forge one that would not cover
the case. This argument he used in his circular before the
election. The Republican has used it at least once, since
then; and Adams uses it again in his publication of to-day.
Now I pledge myself to show that he is just such a fool that
he and his friends have contended it was impossible for him
to be. Recollect — he says he has a genuine assignment;
and that he got Joseph Klein’s aﬀidavit, stating that he had
seen it, and that he believed the signature to have been
executed by the same hand that signed Anderson’s name to
the answer in chancery. Luckily Klein took a copy of this
genuine assignment, which I have been permitted to see;
and hence I know it does not cover the case. In the ﬁrst
place it is headed “Joseph Anderson vs. Joseph Miller,” and
heads oﬀ “Judgment in Sangamon Circuit Court.” Now,
mark, there never was a case in Sangamon Circuit Court
entitled Joseph Anderson vs. Joseph Miller. The case
mentioned in my former publication, and the only one
between these parties that ever existed in the Circuit
Court, was entitled Joseph Miller vs. Joseph Anderson,
Miller being the plaintiﬀ. What then becomes of all their
sophistry about Adams not being fool enough to forge an
assignment that would not cover the case? It is certain that
the present one does not cover the case; and if he got it
honestly, it is still clear that he was fool enough to pay for
an assignment that does not cover the case.
The General asks for the proof of disinterested witnesses.
Whom does he consider disinterested? None can be more
so than those who have already testiﬁed against him. No
 one of them had the least interest on earth, so far as I can
learn, to injure him. True, he says they had conspired
against him; but if the testimony of an angel from Heaven
were introduced against him, he would make the same
charge of conspiracy. And now I put the question to every
reﬂecting man, Do you believe that Benjamin Talbott, Chas.
R. Matheny, William Butler and Stephen T. Logan, all
sustaining high and spotless characters, and justly proud of
them, would deliberately perjure themselves, without any
motive whatever, except to injure a man’s election; and
that, too, a man who had been a candidate, time out of
mind, and yet who had never been elected to any oﬀice?
Adams’s 
assurance, 
in 
demanding 
disinterested
testimony, is surpassing. He brings in the aﬀidavit of his
own son, and even of Peter S. Weber, with whom I am not
acquainted, but who, I suppose, is some black or mulatto
boy, from his being kept in the kitchen, to prove his points;
but when such a man as Talbott, a man who, but two years
ago, ran against Gen. Adams for the oﬀice of Recorder and
beat him more than four votes to one, is introduced against
him, he asks the community, with all the consequence of a
lord, to reject his testimony.
I 
might 
easily 
write 
a 
volume, 
pointing 
out
inconsistencies between the statements in Adams’s last
address with one another, and with other known facts; but I
am aware the reader must already be tired with the length
of this article. His opening statements, that he was ﬁrst
accused of being a Tory, and that he refuted that; that then
the Sampson’s ghost story was got up, and he refuted that;
 that as a last resort, a dying eﬀort, the assignment charge
was got up is all as false as hell, as all this community must
know. Sampson’s ghost ﬁrst made its appearance in print,
and that, too, after Keys swears he saw the assignment, as
any one may see by reference to the ﬁles of papers; and
Gen. Adams himself, in reply to the Sampson’s ghost story,
was the ﬁrst man that raised the cry of toryism, and it was
only by way of set-oﬀ, and never in seriousness, that it was
bandied back at him. His eﬀort is to make the impression
that his enemies ﬁrst made the charge of toryism and he
drove them from that, then Sampson’s ghost, he drove
them from that, then ﬁnally the assignment charge was
manufactured just before election. Now, the only general
reply he ever made to the Sampson’s ghost and tory
charges he made at one and the same time, and not in
succession as he states; and the date of that reply will
show, that it was made at least a month after the date on
which Keys swears he saw the Anderson assignment. But
enough. In conclusion I will only say that I have a character
to defend as well as Gen. Adams, but I disdain to whine
about it as he does. It is true I have no children nor kitchen
boys; and if I had, I should scorn to lug them in to make
aﬀidavits for me.
A. LINCOLN, September 6, 1837.
  
. A
A
   
  
      
  
 I
 
TO THE PUBLIC.
“SANGAMON JOURNAL,” SPRINGFIELD, Ill, Oct.28,
1837.
Such is the turn which things have taken lately, that
when Gen. Adams writes a book, I am expected to write a
commentary on it. In the Republican of this morning he has
presented the world with a new work of six columns in
length; in consequence of which I must beg the room of one
column in the Journal. It is obvious that a minute reply
cannot be made in one column to everything that can be
said in six; and, consequently, I hope that expectation will
be answered if I reply to such parts of the General’s
publication as are worth replying to.
It may not be improper to remind the reader that in his
publication of Sept. 6th General Adams said that the
assignment charge was manufactured just before the
election; and that in reply I proved that statement to be
false by Keys, his own witness. Now, without attempting to
explain, he furnishes me with another witness (Tinsley) by
which the same thing is proved, to wit, that the assignment
was not manufactured just before the election; but that it
was some weeks before. Let it be borne in mind that Adams
made this statement — has himself furnished two witnesses
 to prove its falsehood, and does not attempt to deny or
explain it. Before going farther, let a pin be stuck here,
labeled “One lie proved and confessed.” On the 6th of
September he said he had before stated in the hand-bill
that he held an assignment dated May 20th, 1828, which in
reply I pronounced to be false, and referred to the hand-bill
for the truth of what I said. This week he forgets to make
any explanation of this. Let another pin be stuck here,
labelled as before. I mention these things because, if, when
I convict him in one falsehood, he is permitted to shift his
ground and pass it by in silence, there can be no end to this
controversy.
The ﬁrst thing that attracts my attention in the General’s
present production is the information he is pleased to give
to “those who are made to suﬀer at his (my) hands.”
Under present circumstances, this cannot apply to me,
for I am not a widow nor an orphan: nor have I a wife or
children who might by possibility become such. Such,
however, I have no doubt, have been, and will again be
made to suﬀer at his hands! Hands! Yes, they are the
mischievous agents. The next thing I shall notice is his
favorite expression, “not of lawyers, doctors and others,”
which he is so fond of applying to all who dare expose his
rascality. Now, let it be remembered that when he ﬁrst
came to this country he attempted to impose himself upon
the community as a lawyer, and actually carried the
attempt so far as to induce a man who was under a charge
of murder to entrust the defence of his life in his hands,
and ﬁnally took his money and got him hanged. Is this the
 man that is to raise a breeze in his favor by abusing
lawyers? If he is not himself a lawyer, it is for the lack of
sense, and not of inclination. If he is not a lawyer, he is a
liar, for he proclaimed himself a lawyer, and got a man
hanged by depending on him.
Passing over such parts of the article as have neither fact
nor argument in them, I come to the question asked by
Adams whether any person ever saw the assignment in his
possession. This is an insult to common sense. Talbott has
sworn once and repeated time and again, that he got it out
of Adams’s possession and returned it into the same
possession. Still, as though he was addressing fools, he has
assurance to ask if any person ever saw it in his possession.
Next I quote a sentence, “Now my son Lucian swears
that when Talbott called for the deed, that he, Talbott,
opened it and pointed out the error.” True. His son Lucian
did swear as he says; and in doing so, he swore what I will
prove by his own aﬀidavit to be a falsehood. Turn to
Lucian’s aﬀidavit, and you will there see that Talbott called
for the deed by which to correct an error on the record.
Thus it appears that the error in question was on the
record, and not in the deed. How then could Talbott open
the deed and point out the error? Where a thing is not, it
cannot be pointed out. The error was not in the deed, and
of course could not be pointed out there. This does not
merely prove that the error could not be pointed out, as
Lucian swore it was; but it proves, too, that the deed was
not opened in his presence with a special view to the error,
for if it had been, he could not have failed to see that there
 was no error in it. It is easy enough to see why Lucian
swore this. His object was to prove that the assignment was
not in the deed when Talbott got it: but it was discovered
he could not swear this safely, without ﬁrst swearing the
deed was opened — and if he swore it was opened, he must
show a motive for opening it, and the conclusion with him
and his father was that the pointing out the error would
appear the most plausible.
For the purpose of showing that the assignment was not
in the bundle when Talbott got it, is the story introduced
into Lucian’s aﬀidavit that the deeds were counted. It is a
remarkable fact, and one that should stand as a warning to
all liars and fabricators, that in this short aﬀidavit of
Lucian’s he only attempted to depart from the truth, so far
as I have the means of knowing, in two points, to wit, in the
opening the deed and pointing out the error and the
counting of the deeds, — and in both of these he caught
himself. About the counting, he caught himself thus — after
saying the bundle contained ﬁve deeds and a lease, he
proceeds, “and I saw no other papers than the said deed
and lease.” First he has six papers, and then he saw none
but two; for “my son Lucian’s” beneﬁt, let a pin be stuck
here.
Adams again adduces the argument, that he could not
have forged the assignment, for the reason that he could
have had no motive for it. With those that know the facts
there is no absence of motive. Admitting the paper which
he has ﬁled in the suit to be genuine, it is clear that it
cannot answer the purpose for which he designs it. Hence
 his motive for making one that he supposed would answer
is obvious. His making the date too old is also easily
enough accounted for. The records were not in his hands,
and then, there being some considerable talk upon this
particular subject, he knew he could not examine the
records to ascertain the precise dates without subjecting
himself to suspicion; and hence he concluded to try it by
guess, and, as it turned out, missed it a little. About Miller’s
deposition I have a word to say. In the ﬁrst place, Miller’s
answer to the ﬁrst question shows upon its face that he had
been tampered with, and the answer dictated to him. He
was asked if he knew Joel Wright and James Adams; and
above three-fourths of his answer consists of what he knew
about Joseph Anderson, a man about whom nothing had
been asked, nor a word said in the question — a fact that
can only be accounted for upon the supposition that Adams
had secretly told him what he wished him to swear to.
Another of Miller’s answers I will prove both by common
sense and the Court of Record is untrue. To one question he
answers, “Anderson brought a suit against me before James
Adams, then an acting justice of the peace in Sangamon
County, before whom he obtained a judgment.
“Q. — Did you remove the same by injunction to the
Sangamon Circuit Court? Ans. — I did remove it.”
Now mark — it is said he removed it by injunction. The
word “injunction” in common language imports a command
that some person or thing shall not move or be removed; in
law it has the same meaning. An injunction issuing out of
chancery to a justice of the peace is a command to him to
 stop all proceedings in a named case until further orders. It
is not an order to remove but to stop or stay something that
is already moving. Besides this, the records of the
Sangamon Circuit Court show that the judgment of which
Miller swore was never removed into said Court by
injunction or otherwise.
I have now to take notice of a part of Adams’s address
which in the order of time should have been noticed before.
It is in these words: “I have now shown, in the opinion of
two competent judges, that the handwriting of the forged
assignment diﬀered from mine, and by one of them that it
could not be mistaken for mine.” That is false. Tinsley no
doubt is the judge referred to; and by reference to his
certiﬁcate it will be seen that he did not say the
handwriting of the assignment could not be mistaken for
Adams’s 
— 
nor 
did 
he 
use 
any 
other 
expression
substantially, or anything near substantially, the same. But
if Tinsley had said the handwriting could not be mistaken
for Adams’s, it would have been equally unfortunate for
Adams: for it then would have contradicted Keys, who says,
“I looked at the writing and judged it the said Adams’s or a
good imitation.”
Adams speaks with much apparent conﬁdence of his
success 
on 
attending 
lawsuits, 
and 
the 
ultimate
maintenance of his title to the land in question. Without
wishing to disturb the pleasure of his dream, I would say to
him that it is not impossible that he may yet be taught to
sing a diﬀerent song in relation to the matter.
 At the end of Miller’s deposition, Adams asks, “Will Mr.
Lincoln now say that he is almost convinced my title to this
ten acre tract of land is founded in fraud?” I answer, I will
not. I will now change the phraseology so as to make it run
— I am quite convinced, 
c. I cannot pass in silence
Adams’s assertion that he has proved that the forged
assignment was not in the deed when it came from his
house by Talbott, the recorder. In this, although Talbott has
sworn that the assignment was in the bundle of deeds when
it came from his house, Adams has the unaccountable
assurance to say that he has proved the contrary by
Talbott. Let him or his friends attempt to show wherein he
proved any such thing by Talbott.
In his publication of the 6th of September he hinted to
Talbott, that he might be mistaken. In his present, speaking
of Talbott and me he says “They may have been imposed
upon.” Can any man of the least penetration fail to see the
object of this? After he has stormed and raged till he hopes
and imagines he has got us a little scared he wishes to
softly whisper in our ears, “If you’ll quit I will.” If he could
get us to say that some unknown, undeﬁned being had
slipped the assignment into our hands without our
knowledge, not a doubt remains but that he would
immediately discover that we were the purest men on
earth. This is the ground he evidently wishes us to
understand he is willing to compromise upon. But we ask
no such charity at his hands. We are neither mistaken nor
imposed upon. We have made the statements we have
 because we know them to be true and we choose to live or
die by them.
Esq. Carter, who is Adams’s friend, personal and
political, will recollect, that, on the 5th of this month, he
(Adams), with a great aﬀectation of modesty, declared that
he would never introduce his own child as a witness.
Notwithstanding this aﬀectation of modesty, he has in his
present publication introduced his child as witness; and as
if to show with how much contempt he could treat his own
declaration, he has had this same Esq. Carter to administer
the oath to him. And so important a witness does he
consider him, and so entirely does the whole of his entire
present production depend upon the testimony of his child,
that in it he has mentioned “my son,” “my son Lucian,”
“Lucian, my son,” and the like expressions no less than
ﬁfteen diﬀerent times. Let it be remembered here, that I
have shown the aﬀidavit of “my darling son Lucian” to be
false by the evidence apparent on its own face; and I now
ask if that aﬀidavit be taken away what foundation will the
fabric have left to stand upon?
General Adams’s publications and out-door maneuvering,
taken in connection with the editorial articles of the
Republican, are not more foolish and contradictory than
they are ludicrous and amusing. One week the Republican
notiﬁes the public that Gen. Adams is preparing an
instrument that will tear, rend, split, rive, blow up,
confound, overwhelm, annihilate, extinguish, exterminate,
burst asunder, and grind to powder all its slanderers, and
 particularly Talbott and Lincoln — all of which is to be done
in due time.
Then for two or three weeks all is calm — not a word
said. Again the Republican comes forth with a mere passing
remark that “public” opinion has decided in favor of Gen.
Adams, and intimates that he will give himself no more
trouble about the matter. In the meantime Adams himself is
prowling about and, as Burns says of the devil, “For prey,
and holes and corners tryin’,” and in one instance goes so
far as to take an old acquaintance of mine several steps
from a crowd and, apparently weighed down with the
importance of his business, gravely and solemnly asks him
if “he ever heard Lincoln say he was a deist.”
Anon the Republican comes again. “We invite the
attention of the public to General Adams’s communication,”
c. “The victory is a great one, the triumph is
overwhelming.” I really believe the editor of the Illinois
Republican is fool enough to think General Adams leads oﬀ
— “Authors most egregiously mistaken 
c. Most woefully
shall their presumption be punished,” 
c. (Lord have
mercy on us.) “The hour is yet to come, yea, nigh at hand —
(how long ﬁrst do you reckon?) — when the Journal and its
junto shall say, I have appeared too early.” “Their infamy
shall be laid bare to the public gaze.” Suddenly the General
appears to relent at the severity with which he is treating
us and he exclaims: “The condemnation of my enemies is
the inevitable result of my own defense.” For your health’s
sake, dear Gen., do not permit your tenderness of heart to
aﬄict you so much on our account. For some reason
 (perhaps because we are killed so quickly) we shall never
be sensible of our suﬀering.
Farewell, General. I will see you again at court if not
before — when and where we will settle the question
whether you or the widow shall have the land.
A. LINCOLN. October 18, 1837.
