    
    
 
 I
  A  A 
HI
 
   I
 A
   I
 I  
  I  I
I   
A  H        .
THE OBJECT OF the meeting was stated by Mr. Lincoln of
Springﬁeld, who oﬀered the following resolutions, which
were unanimously adopted: Resolved, That a tariﬀ of duties
on imported goods, producing suﬀicient revenue for the
payment of the necessary expenditures of the National
Government, and so adjusted as to protect American
industry, is indispensably necessary to the prosperity of the
American people.
Resolved, That we are opposed to direct taxation for the
support of the National Government.
Resolved, That a national bank, properly restricted, is
highly necessary and proper to the establishment and
maintenance of a sound currency, and for the cheap and
safe collection, keeping, and disbursing of the public
revenue.
Resolved, That the distribution of the proceeds of the
sales of the public lands, upon the principles of Mr. Clay’s
bill, accords with the best interests of the nation, and
particularly with those of the State of Illinois.
Resolved, That we recommend to the Whigs of each
Congressional district of the State to nominate and support
at the approaching election a candidate of their own
principles, regardless of the chances of success.
 Resolved, That we recommend to the Whigs of all
portions of the State to adopt and rigidly adhere to the
convention system of nominating candidates.
Resolved, That we recommend to the Whigs of each
Congressional district to hold a district convention on or
before the ﬁrst Monday of May next, to be composed of a
number of delegates from each county equal to double the
number of its representatives in the General Assembly,
provided, each county shall have at least one delegate. Said
delegates to be chosen by primary meetings of the Whigs,
at such times and places as they in their respective
counties may see ﬁt. Said district conventions each to
nominate one candidate for Congress, and one delegate to
a national convention for the purpose of nominating
candidates for President and Vice-President of the United
States. The seven delegates so nominated to a national
convention to have power to add two delegates to their own
number, and to ﬁll all vacancies.
Resolved, That A. T. Bledsoe, S. T. Logan, and A. Lincoln
be appointed a committee to prepare an address to the
people of the State.
Resolved, That N. W. Edwards, A. G. Henry, James H.
Matheny, John C. Doremus, and James C. Conkling be
appointed a Whig Central State Committee, with authority
to ﬁll any vacancy that may occur in the committee.
  I  
 A    
 
HI
  
I    .
Address to the People of Illinois.
FELLOW-CITIZENS:-BY A RESOLUTION of a meeting of
such of the Whigs of the State as are now at Springﬁeld,
we, the undersigned, were appointed to prepare an address
to you. The performance of that task we now undertake.
Several resolutions were adopted by the meeting; and
the chief object of this address is to show brieﬂy the
reasons for their adoption.
The ﬁrst of those resolutions declares a tariﬀ of duties
upon foreign importations, producing suﬀicient revenue for
the support of the General Government, and so adjusted as
to protect American industry, to be indispensably necessary
to the prosperity of the American people; and the second
declares direct taxation for a national revenue to be
improper. Those two resolutions are kindred in their
nature, and therefore proper and convenient to be
considered together. The question of protection is a subject
entirely too broad to be crowded into a few pages only,
together with several other subjects. On that point we
therefore content ourselves with giving the following
extracts from the writings of Mr. Jeﬀerson, General
Jackson, and the speech of Mr. Calhoun:
 “To be independent for the comforts of life, we must
fabricate them ourselves. We must now place the
manufacturer by the side of the agriculturalist. The grand
inquiry now is, Shall we make our own comforts, or go
without them at the will of a foreign nation? He, therefore,
who is now against domestic manufactures must be for
reducing us either to dependence on that foreign nation, or
to be clothed in skins and to live like wild beasts in dens
and caverns. I am not one of those; experience has taught
me that manufactures are now as necessary to our
independence as to our comfort.” Letter of Mr. Jeﬀerson to
Benjamin Austin.
“I ask, What is the real situation of the agriculturalist?
Where has the American farmer a market for his surplus
produce? Except for cotton, he has neither a foreign nor a
home market. Does not this clearly prove, when there is no
market at home or abroad, that there [is] too much labor
employed in agriculture? Common sense at once points out
the remedy. Take from agriculture six hundred thousand
men, women, and children, and you will at once give a
market for more breadstuﬀs than all Europe now furnishes.
In short, we have been too long subject to the policy of
British merchants. It is time we should become a little more
Americanized, and instead of feeding the paupers and
laborers of England, feed our own; or else in a short time,
by continuing our present policy, we shall all be rendered
paupers ourselves.” — General Jackson’s Letter to Dr.
Coleman.
 “When our manufactures are grown to a certain
perfection, as they soon will be, under the fostering care of
government, the farmer will ﬁnd a ready market for his
surplus produce, and — what is of equal consequence — a
certain and cheap supply of all he wants; his prosperity will
diﬀuse itself to every class of the community.” Speech of
Hon. J. C. Calhoun on the Tariﬀ.
The question of revenue we will now brieﬂy consider. For
several years past the revenues of the government have
been unequal to its expenditures, and consequently loan
after loan, sometimes direct and sometimes indirect in
form, has been resorted to. By this means a new national
debt has been created, and is still growing on us with a
rapidity fearful to contemplate — a rapidity only reasonably
to be expected in time of war. This state of things has been
produced by a prevailing unwillingness either to increase
the tariﬀ or resort to direct taxation. But the one or the
other must come. Coming expenditures must be met, and
the present debt must be paid; and money cannot always
be borrowed for these objects. The system of loans is but
temporary in its nature, and must soon explode. It is a
system not only ruinous while it lasts, but one that must
soon fail and leave us destitute. As an individual who
undertakes to live by borrowing soon ﬁnds his original
means devoured by interest, and, next, no one left to
borrow from, so must it be with a government.
We repeat, then, that a tariﬀ suﬀicient for revenue, or a
direct tax, must soon be resorted to; and, indeed, we
believe this alternative is now denied by no one. But which
 system shall be adopted? Some of our opponents, in theory,
admit the propriety of a tariﬀ suﬀicient for a revenue, but
even they will not in practice vote for such a tariﬀ; while
others boldly advocate direct taxation. Inasmuch, therefore,
as some of them boldly advocate direct taxation, and all the
rest — or so nearly all as to make exceptions needless —
refuse to adopt the tariﬀ, we think it is doing them no
injustice to class them all as advocates of direct taxation.
Indeed, we believe they are only delaying an open avowal
of the system till they can assure themselves that the
people will tolerate it. Let us, then, brieﬂy compare the two
systems. The tariﬀ is the cheaper system, because the
duties, being collected in large parcels at a few commercial
points, will require comparatively few oﬀicers in their
collection; while by the direct-tax system the land must be
literally covered with assessors and collectors, going forth
like swarms of Egyptian locusts, devouring every blade of
grass and other green thing. And, again, by the tariﬀ
system the whole revenue is paid by the consumers of
foreign goods, and those chieﬂy the luxuries, and not the
necessaries, of life. By this system the man who contents
himself to live upon the products of his own country pays
nothing at all. And surely that country is extensive enough,
and its products abundant and varied enough, to answer all
the real wants of its people. In short, by this system the
burthen of revenue falls almost entirely on the wealthy and
luxurious few, while the substantial and laboring many who
live at home, and upon home products, go entirely free. By
the direct-tax system none can escape. However strictly the
 citizen may exclude from his premises all foreign luxuries,
— ﬁne cloths, ﬁne silks, rich wines, golden chains, and
diamond rings, — still, for the possession of his house, his
barn, and his homespun, he is to be perpetually haunted
and harassed by the tax-gatherer. With these views we
leave it to be determined whether we or our opponents are
the more truly democratic on the subject.
The third resolution declares the necessity and propriety
of a national bank. During the last ﬁfty years so much has
been said and written both as to the constitutionality and
expediency of such an institution, that we could not hope to
improve in the least on former discussions of the subject,
were we to undertake it. We, therefore, upon the question
of constitutionality content ourselves with remarking the
facts that the ﬁrst national bank was established chieﬂy by
the same men who formed the Constitution, at a time when
that instrument was but two years old, and receiving the
sanction, as President, of the immortal Washington; that
the second received the sanction, as President, of Mr.
Madison, to whom common consent has awarded the proud
title of “Father of the Constitution”; and subsequently the
sanction of the Supreme Court, the most enlightened
judicial tribunal in the world. Upon the question of
expediency, we only ask you to examine the history of the
times during the existence of the two banks, and compare
those times with the miserable present.
The fourth resolution declares the expediency of Mr.
Clay’s land bill. Much incomprehensible jargon is often
used against the constitutionality of this measure. We
 forbear, in this place, attempting an answer to it, simply
because, in our opinion, those who urge it are through
party zeal resolved not to see or acknowledge the truth.
The question of expediency, at least so far as Illinois is
concerned, seems to us the clearest imaginable. By the bill
we are to receive annually a large sum of money, no part of
which we otherwise receive. The precise annual sum
cannot be known in advance; it doubtless will vary in
diﬀerent years. Still it is something to know that in the last
year — a year of almost unparalleled pecuniary pressure —
it amounted to more than forty thousand dollars. This
annual income, in the midst of our almost insupportable
diﬀiculties, in the days of our severest necessity, our
political opponents are furiously resolving to take and keep
from us. And for what? Many silly reasons are given, as is
usual in cases where a single good one is not to be found.
One is that by giving us the proceeds of the lands we
impoverish the national treasury, and thereby render
necessary an increase of the tariﬀ. This may be true; but if
so, the amount of it only is that those whose pride, whose
abundance 
of 
means, 
prompt 
them 
to 
spurn 
the
manufactures of our country, and to strut in British cloaks
and coats and pantaloons, may have to pay a few cents
more on the yard for the cloth that makes them. A terrible
evil, truly, to the Illinois farmer, who never wore, nor ever
expects to wear, a single yard of British goods in his whole
life. Another of their reasons is that by the passage and
continuance of Mr. Clay’s bill, we prevent the passage of a
bill which would give us more. This, if it were sound in
 itself, is waging destructive war with the former position;
for if Mr. Clay’s bill impoverishes the treasury too much,
what shall be said of one that impoverishes it still more?
But it is not sound in itself. It is not true that Mr. Clay’s bill
prevents the passage of one more favorable to us of the
new States. Considering the strength and opposite interest
of the old States, the wonder is that they ever permitted
one to pass so favorable as Mr. Clay’s. The last twenty-odd
years’ eﬀorts to reduce the price of the lands, and to pass
graduation bills and cession bills, prove the assertion to be
true; and if there were no experience in support of it, the
reason itself is plain. The States in which none, or few, of
the public lands lie, and those consequently interested
against parting with them except for the best price, are the
majority; and a moment’s reﬂection will show that they
must ever continue the majority, because by the time one of
the original new States (Ohio, for example) becomes
populous and gets weight in Congress, the public lands in
her limits are so nearly sold out that in every point material
to this question she becomes an old State. She does not
wish the price reduced, because there is none left for her
citizens to buy; she does not wish them ceded to the States
in which they lie, because they no longer lie in her limits,
and she will get nothing by the cession. In the nature of
things, the States interested in the reduction of price, in
graduation, in cession, and in all similar projects, never can
be the majority. Nor is there reason to hope that any of
them can ever succeed as a Democratic party measure,
because we have heretofore seen that party in full power,
 year after year, with many of their leaders making loud
professions in favor of these projects, and yet doing
nothing. What reason, then, is there to believe they will
hereafter do better? In every light in which we can view
this question, it amounts simply to this: Shall we accept our
share of the proceeds under Mr. Clay’s bill, or shall we
rather reject that and get nothing?
The ﬁfth resolution recommends that a Whig candidate
for Congress be run in every district, regardless of the
chances of success. We are aware that it is sometimes a
temporary gratiﬁcation, when a friend cannot succeed, to
be able to choose between opponents; but we believe that
that gratiﬁcation is the seed-time which never fails to be
followed by a most abundant harvest of bitterness. By this
policy we entangle ourselves. By voting for our opponents,
such of us as do it in some measure estop ourselves to
complain of their acts, however glaringly wrong we may
believe them to be. By this policy no one portion of our
friends can ever be certain as to what course another
portion may adopt; and by this want of mutual and perfect
understanding our political identity is partially frittered
away and lost. And, again, those who are thus elected by
our aid ever become our bitterest persecutors. Take a few
prominent examples. In 1830 Reynolds was elected
Governor; in 1835 we exerted our whole strength to elect
Judge Young to the United States Senate, which eﬀort,
though failing, gave him the prominence that subsequently
elected him; in 1836 General Ewing, was so elected to the
United States Senate; and yet let us ask what three men
 have been more perseveringly vindictive in their assaults
upon all our men and measures than they? During the last
summer the whole State was covered with pamphlet
editions of misrepresentations against us, methodized into
chapters and verses, written by two of these same men, —
Reynolds and Young, in which they did not stop at charging
us with error merely, but roundly denounced us as the
designing enemies of human liberty, itself. If it be the will of
Heaven that such men shall politically live, be it so; but
never, never again permit them to draw a particle of their
sustenance from us.
The sixth resolution recommends the adoption of the
convention system for the nomination of candidates. This
we believe to be of the very ﬁrst importance. Whether the
system is right in itself we do not stop to inquire;
contenting ourselves with trying to show that, while our
opponents use it, it is madness in us not to defend
ourselves with it. Experience has shown that we cannot
successfully defend ourselves without it. For examples, look
at the elections of last year. Our candidate for governor,
with the approbation of a large portion of the party, took
the ﬁeld without a nomination, and in open opposition to
the system. Wherever in the counties the Whigs had held
conventions and nominated candidates for the Legislature,
the aspirants who were not nominated were induced to
rebel against the nominations, and to become candidates,
as is said, “on their own hook.” And, go where you would
into a large Whig county, you were sure to ﬁnd the Whigs
not contending shoulder to shoulder against the common
 enemy, but divided into factions, and ﬁghting furiously with
one another. The election came, and what was the result?
The governor beaten, the Whig vote being decreased many
thousands since 1840, although the Democratic vote had
not increased any. Beaten almost everywhere for members
of the Legislature, — Tazewell, with her four hundred Whig
majority, sending a delegation half Democratic; Vermillion,
with her ﬁve hundred, doing the same; Coles, with her four
hundred, sending two out of three; and Morgan, with her
two hundred and ﬁfty, sending three out of four, — and this
to say nothing of the numerous other less glaring examples;
the whole winding up with the aggregate number of
twenty-seven Democratic representatives sent from Whig
counties. As to the senators, too, the result was of the same
character. And it is most worthy to be remembered that of
all the Whigs in the State who ran against the regular
nominees, a single one only was elected. Although they
succeeded in defeating the nominees almost by scores, they
too were defeated, and the spoils chucklingly borne oﬀ by
the common enemy.
We do not mention the fact of many of the Whigs
opposing the convention system heretofore for the purpose
of censuring them. Far from it. We expressly protest
against such a conclusion. We know they were generally,
perhaps universally, as good and true Whigs as we
ourselves claim to be.
We mention it merely to draw attention to the disastrous
result it produced, as an example forever hereafter to be
avoided. That “union is strength” is a truth that has been
 known, illustrated, and declared in various ways and forms
in all ages of the world. That great fabulist and philosopher
Aesop illustrated it by his fable of the bundle of sticks; and
he whose wisdom surpasses that of all philosophers has
declared that “a house divided against itself cannot stand.”
It is to induce our friends to act upon this important and
universally acknowledged truth that we urge the adoption
of the convention system. Reﬂection will prove that there is
no other way of practically applying it. In its application we
know there will be incidents temporarily painful; but, after
all, those incidents will be fewer and less intense with than
without the system. If two friends aspire to the same oﬀice
it is certain that both cannot succeed. Would it not, then, be
much less painful to have the question decided by mutual
friends some time before, than to snarl and quarrel until
the day of election, and then both be beaten by the common
enemy?
Before leaving this subject, we think proper to remark
that we do not understand the resolution as intended to
recommend the application of the convention system to the
nomination of candidates for the small oﬀices no way
connected with politics; though we must say we do not
perceive that such an application of it would be wrong.
The seventh resolution recommends the holding of
district conventions in May next, for the purpose of
nominating candidates for Congress. The propriety of this
rests upon the same reasons with that of the sixth, and
therefore needs no further discussion.
 The eighth and ninth also relate merely to the practical
application of the foregoing, and therefore need no
discussion.
Before closing, permit us to add a few reﬂections on the
present condition and future prospects of the Whig party. In
almost all the States we have fallen into the minority, and
despondency seems to prevail universally among us. Is
there just cause for this? In 1840 we carried the nation by
more than a hundred and forty thousand majority. Our
opponents charged that we did it by fraudulent voting; but
whatever they may have believed, we know the charge to
be untrue. Where, now, is that mighty host? Have they gone
over to the enemy? Let the results of the late elections
answer. Every State which has fallen oﬀ from the Whig
cause since 1840 has done so not by giving more
Democratic votes than they did then, but by giving fewer
Whig. Bouck, who was elected Democratic Governor of
New York last fall by more than 15,000 majority, had not
then as many votes as he had in 1840, when he was beaten
by seven or eight thousand. And so has it been in all the
other States which have fallen away from our cause. From
this it is evident that tens of thousands in the late elections
have not voted at all. Who and what are they? is an
important question, as respects the future. They can come
forward and give us the victory again. That all, or nearly
all, of them are Whigs is most apparent. Our opponents,
stung to madness by the defeat of 1840, have ever since
rallied with more than their usual unanimity. It has not
been they that have been kept from the polls. These facts
 show what the result must be, once the people again rally
in their entire strength. Proclaim these facts, and predict
this result; and although unthinking opponents may smile
at us, the sagacious ones will “believe and tremble.” And
why shall the Whigs not all rally again? Are their principles
less dear now than in 1840? Have any of their doctrines
since then been discovered to be untrue? It is true, the
victory of 1840 did not produce the happy results
anticipated; but it is equally true, as we believe, that the
unfortunate death of General Harrison was the cause of the
failure. It was not the election of General Harrison that was
expected to produce happy eﬀects, but the measures to be
adopted by his administration. By means of his death, and
the unexpected course of his successor, those measures
were never adopted. How could the fruits follow? The
consequences we always predicted would follow the failure
of those measures have followed, and are now upon us in
all their horrors. By the course of Mr. Tyler the policy of
our opponents has continued in operation, still leaving
them with the advantage of charging all its evils upon us as
the results of a Whig administration. Let none be deceived
by this somewhat plausible, though entirely false charge. If
they ask us for the suﬀicient and sound currency we
promised, let them be answered that we only promised it
through the medium of a national bank, which they, aided
by Mr. Tyler, prevented our establishing. And let them be
reminded, too, that their own policy in relation to the
currency has all the time been, and still is, in full operation.
Let us then again come forth in our might, and by a second
 victory accomplish that which death prevented in the ﬁrst.
We can do it. When did the Whigs ever fail if they were fully
aroused and united? Even in single States, under such
circumstances, defeat seldom overtakes them. Call to mind
the contested elections within the last few years, and
particularly those of Moore and Letcher from Kentucky,
Newland and Graham from North Carolina, and the famous
New Jersey case. In all these districts Locofocoism had
stalked omnipotent before; but when the whole people
were aroused by its enormities on those occasions, they put
it down, never to rise again.
We declare it to be our solemn conviction, that the Whigs
are always a majority of this nation; and that to make them
always successful needs but to get them all to the polls and
to vote unitedly. This is the great desideratum. Let us make
every eﬀort to attain it. At every election, let every Whig
act as though he knew the result to depend upon his action.
In the great contest of 1840 some more than twenty one
hundred thousand votes were cast, and so surely as there
shall be that many, with the ordinary increase added, cast
in 1844 that surely will a Whig be elected President of the
United States.
A. LINCOLN. S. T. LOGAN. A. T. BLEDSOE.
March 4, 1843.
  
  
H
   
   .
SPRINGFIELD, March 7, 1843.
FRIEND BENNETT: Your letter of this day was handed
me by Mr. Miles. It is too late now to eﬀect the object you
desire. On yesterday morning the most of the Whig
members from this district got together and agreed to hold
the convention at Tremont in Tazewell County. I am sorry to
hear that any of the Whigs of your county, or indeed of any
county, should longer be against conventions. On last
Wednesday evening a meeting of all the Whigs then here
from all parts of the State was held, and the question of the
propriety of conventions was brought up and fully
discussed, and at the end of the discussion a resolution
recommending the system of conventions to all the Whigs
of the State was unanimously adopted. Other resolutions
were also passed, all of which will appear in the next
Journal. The meeting also appointed a committee to draft
an address to the people of the State, which address will
also appear in the next journal.
In it you will ﬁnd a brief argument in favor of
conventions — and although I wrote it myself I will say to
you that it is conclusive upon the point and can not be
reasonably answered. The right way for you to do is hold
your meeting and appoint delegates any how, and if there
 be any who will not take part, let it be so. The matter will
work so well this time that even they who now oppose will
come in next time.
The convention is to be held at Tremont on the 5th of
April and according to the rule we have adopted your
county is to have delegates — being double your
representation.
If there be any good Whig who is disposed to stick out
against conventions get him at least to read the arguement
in their favor in the address.
Yours as ever,
A. LINCOLN.
  
 H A  .     
.
SPRINGFIELD, March 24, 1843.
DEAR SPEED: — We had a meeting of the Whigs of the
county here on last Monday to appoint delegates to a
district convention; and Baker beat me, and got the
delegation instructed to go for him. The meeting, in spite of
my attempt to decline it, appointed me one of the
delegates; so that in getting Baker the nomination I shall be
ﬁxed a good deal like a fellow who is made a groomsman to
a man that has cut him out and is marrying his own dear
“gal.” About the prospects of your having a namesake at
our town, can’t say exactly yet.
A. LINCOLN.
  
 
A  I
 
. 
  I .
SPRINGFIELD, ILL., March 26, 1843.
FRIEND MORRIS: Your letter of the a 3 d, was received
on yesterday morning, and for which (instead of an excuse,
which you thought proper to ask) I tender you my sincere
thanks. It is truly gratifying to me to learn that, while the
people of Sangamon have cast me oﬀ, my old friends of
Menard, who have known me longest and best, stick to me.
It would astonish, if not amuse, the older citizens to learn
that I (a stranger, friendless, uneducated, penniless boy,
working on a ﬂatboat at ten dollars per month) have been
put down here as the candidate of pride, wealth, and
aristocratic family distinction. Yet so, chieﬂy, it was. There
was, too, the strangest combination of church inﬂuence
against me. Baker is a Campbellite; and therefore, as I
suppose, with few exceptions got all that church. My wife
has some relations in the Presbyterian churches, and some
with the Episcopal churches; and therefore, wherever it
would tell, I was set down as either the one or the other,
while it was everywhere contended that no Christian ought
to go for me, because I belonged to no church, was
suspected of being a deist, and had talked about ﬁghting a
duel. With all these things, Baker, of course, had nothing to
do. Nor do I complain of them. As to his own church going
 for him, I think that was right enough, and as to the
inﬂuences I have spoken of in the other, though they were
very strong, it would be grossly untrue and unjust to
charge that they acted upon them in a body or were very
near so. I only mean that those inﬂuences levied a tax of a
considerable per cent. upon my strength throughout the
religious controversy. But enough of this.
You say that in choosing a candidate for Congress you
have an equal right with Sangamon, and in this you are
undoubtedly correct. In agreeing to withdraw if the Whigs
of Sangamon should go against me, I did not mean that
they alone were worth consulting, but that if she, with her
heavy delegation, should be against me, it would be
impossible for me to succeed, and therefore I had as well
decline. And in relation to Menard having rights, permit me
fully to recognize them, and to express the opinion that, if
she and Mason act circumspectly, they will in the
convention be able so far to enforce their rights as to
decide absolutely which one of the candidates shall be
successful. Let me show the reason of this. Hardin, or some
other Morgan candidate, will get Putnam, Marshall,
Woodford, Tazewell, and Logan — making sixteen. Then you
and Mason, having three, can give the victory to either
side.
You say you shall instruct your delegates for me, unless I
object. I certainly shall not object. That would be too
pleasant a compliment for me to tread in the dust. And
besides, if anything should happen (which, however, is not
probable) by which Baker should be thrown out of the ﬁght,
 I would be at liberty to accept the nomination if I could get
it. I do, however, feel myself bound not to hinder him in any
way from getting the nomination. I should despise myself
were I to attempt it. I think, then, it would be proper for
your meeting to appoint three delegates and to instruct
them to go for some one as the ﬁrst choice, some one else
as a second, and perhaps some one as a third; and if in
those instructions I were named as the ﬁrst choice, it would
gratify me very much. If you wish to hold the balance of
power, it is important for you to attend to and secure the
vote of Mason also: You should be sure to have men
appointed delegates that you know you can safely conﬁde
in. If yourself and James Short were appointed from your
county, all would be safe; but whether Jim’s woman aﬀair a
year ago might not be in the way of his appointment is a
question. I don’t know whether you know it, but I know him
to be as honorable a man as there is in the world. You have
my permission, and even request, to show this letter to
Short; but to no one else, unless it be a very particular
friend who you know will not speak of it.
Yours as ever, A. LINCOLN.
P. S Will you write me again?
  
 
A  I
 
. 
  I .
April 14, 1843.
FRIEND MORRIS: I have heard it intimated that Baker
has been attempting to get you or Miles, or both of you, to
violate the instructions of the meeting that appointed you,
and to go for him. I have insisted, and still insist, that this
cannot be true. Surely Baker would not do the like. As well
might Hardin ask me to vote for him in the convention.
Again, it is said there will be an attempt to get up
instructions in your county requiring you to go for Baker.
This is all wrong. Upon the same rule, Why might not I ﬂy
from the decision against me in Sangamon, and get up
instructions to their delegates to go for me? There are at
least twelve hundred Whigs in the county that took no part,
and yet I would as soon put my head in the ﬁre as to
attempt it. Besides, if any one should get the nomination by
such extraordinary means, all harmony in the district would
inevitably be lost. Honest Whigs (and very nearly all of
them are honest) would not quietly abide such enormities. I
repeat, such an attempt on Baker’s part cannot be true.
Write me at Springﬁeld how the matter is. Don’t show or
speak of this letter.
A. LINCOLN
  
 
 
.  .  . HA 
I
.
SPRINGFIELD, May 11, 1843.
FRIEND HARDIN: Butler informs me that he received a
letter from you, in which you expressed some doubt
whether the Whigs of Sangamon will support you cordially.
You may, at once, dismiss all fears on that subject. We have
already resolved to make a particular eﬀort to give you the
very largest majority possible in our county. From this, no
Whig of the county dissents. We have many objects for
doing it. We make it a matter of honor and pride to do it;
we do it because we love the Whig cause; we do it because
we like you personally; and last, we wish to convince you
that we do not bear that hatred to Morgan County that you
people have so long seemed to imagine. You will see by the
journals of this week that we propose, upon pain of losing a
barbecue, to give you twice as great a majority in this
county as you shall receive in your own. I got up the
proposal.
Who of the ﬁve appointed is to write the district address?
I did the labor of writing one address this year, and got
thunder for my reward. Nothing new here.
Yours as ever, A. LINCOLN.
P. S. — I wish you would measure one of the largest of
those swords we took to Alton and write me the length of it,
 from tip of the point to tip of the hilt, in feet and inches. I
have a dispute about the length.
A. L.
