    
 A
      
  H    
    
   A
A
 
  .
March 9, 1832.
FELLOW CITIZENS: — Having become a candidate for
the honorable oﬀice of one of your Representatives in the
next General Assembly of this State, in according with an
established 
custom 
and 
the 
principles 
of 
true
Republicanism it becomes my duty to make known to you,
the people whom I propose to represent, my sentiments
with regard to local aﬀairs.
Time and experience have veriﬁed to a demonstration
the public utility of internal improvements. That the
poorest and most thinly populated countries would be
greatly beneﬁted by the opening of good roads, and in the
clearing of navigable streams within their limits, is what no
person will deny. Yet it is folly to undertake works of this or
any other without ﬁrst knowing that we are able to ﬁnish
them — as half-ﬁnished work generally proves to be labor
lost. There cannot justly be any objection to having
railroads and canals, any more than to other good things,
provided they cost nothing. The only objection is to paying
for them; and the objection arises from the want of ability
to pay.
With respect to the County of Sangamon, some....
 Yet, however desirable an object the construction of a
railroad through our country may be, however high our
imaginations may be heated at thoughts of it, — there is
always a heart-appalling shock accompanying the amount
of its cost, which forces us to shrink from our pleasing
anticipations. The probable cost of this contemplated
railroad is estimated at  290,000; the bare statement of
which, in my opinion, is suﬀicient to justify the belief that
the improvement of the Sangamon River is an object much
better suited to our infant resources.......
What the cost of this work would be, I am unable to say.
It is probable, however, that it would not be greater than is
common to streams of the same length. Finally, I believe
the improvement of the Sangamon River to be vastly
important and highly desirable to the people of the county;
and, if elected, any measure in the Legislature having this
for its object, which may appear judicious, will meet my
approbation and receive my support.
It appears that the practice of loaning money at
exorbitant rates of interest has already been opened as a
ﬁeld for discussion; so I suppose I may enter upon it
without claiming the honor or risking the danger which
may await its ﬁrst explorer. It seems as though we are
never to have an end to this baneful and corroding system,
acting almost as prejudicially to the general interests of the
community as a direct tax of several thousand dollars
annually laid on each county for the beneﬁt of a few
individuals only, unless there be a law made ﬁxing the
limits of usury. A law for this purpose, I am of opinion, may
 be made without materially injuring any class of people. In
cases of extreme necessity, there could always be means
found to cheat the law; while in all other cases it would
have its intended eﬀect. I would favor the passage of a law
on this subject which might not be very easily evaded. Let
it be such that the labor and diﬀiculty of evading it could
only be justiﬁed in cases of greatest necessity.
Upon the subject of education, not presuming to dictate
any plan or system respecting it, I can only say that I view
it as the most important subject which we as a people can
be engaged in. That every man may receive at least a
moderate education, and thereby be enabled to read the
histories of his own and other countries, by which he may
duly appreciate the value of our free institutions, appears
to be an object of vital importance, even on this account
alone, to say nothing of the advantages and satisfaction to
be derived from all being able to read the Scriptures, and
other works both of a religious and moral nature, for
themselves.
For my part, I desire to see the time when education —
and by its means, morality, sobriety, enterprise, and
industry — shall become much more general than at
present, and should be gratiﬁed to have it in my power to
contribute something to the advancement of any measure
which might have a tendency to accelerate that happy
period.
With regard to existing laws, some alterations are
thought to be necessary. Many respectable men have
suggested that our estray laws, the law respecting the
 issuing of executions, the road law, and some others, are
deﬁcient in their present form, and require alterations. But,
considering the great probability that the framers of those
laws were wiser than myself, I should prefer not meddling
with them, unless they were ﬁrst attacked by others; in
which case I should feel it both a privilege and a duty to
take that stand which, in my view, might tend most to the
advancement of justice.
But, fellow-citizens, I shall conclude. Considering the
great degree of modesty which should always attend youth,
it is probable I have already been more presuming than
becomes me. However, upon the subjects of which I have
treated, I have spoken as I have thought. I may be wrong in
regard to any or all of them; but, holding it a sound maxim
that it is better only sometimes to be right than at all times
to be wrong, so soon as I discover my opinions to be
erroneous, I shall be ready to renounce them.
Every man is said to have his peculiar ambition. Whether
it be true or not, I can say, for one, that I have no other so
great as that of being truly esteemed of my fellow-men, by
rendering myself worthy of their esteem. How far I shall
succeed in gratifying this ambition is yet to be developed. I
am young, and unknown to many of you. I was born, and
have ever remained, in the most humble walks of life. I
have no wealthy or popular relations or friends to
recommend me. My case is thrown exclusively upon the
independent voters of the county; and, if elected, they will
have conferred a favor upon me for which I shall be
unremitting in my labors to compensate. But, if the good
 people in their wisdom shall see ﬁt to keep me in the
background, I have been too familiar with disappointments
to be very much chagrined.
Your friend and fellow-citizen, A. LINCOLN.
New Salem, March 9, 1832.
