EXPANSION

A man who dares to waste one hour of time has not discovered the value of life.
– Charles Darwin
Founder of the scientific theory of evolution

4.1

Tamaso Ma Jyotirgamaya

India of the ages is not dead nor has she spoken her last creative word; she lives and has still
something to do for herself and the human peoples.
– Sri Aurobindo

r Kalam first met Dr Govindappa Venkataswamy, a pioneer in mass eye
care, in Madurai in 1990, when Dr Kalam’s brother, A.P.J.M. Maracayer,
required treatment for his eye. Dr Kalam had advised the apprehensive
Maracayer to take the train to Madurai, and told him he would meet him there to
accompany him to the clinic. He had heard many good things about Dr
Venkataswamy and thought it fit to attend with his brother personally. That way,
he would provide moral support to his elder brother and also meet the noble
doctor.
At Dr Venkataswamy’s Aravind Eye Hospital, Dr Kalam was astonished by
the meticulous way in which the doctors attended to the patients. Moreover, he
observed the impeccable courtesy and kindness shown to the patients by the
hospital staff, and sensed an uncommon depth of concern for their welfare. Most
significant, and doubtless the inspiration for this excellence, was Dr
Venkataswamy himself. Everyone called him Dr V, an endearment which
conveyed respect and love in equal measure. Dr Kalam felt that this elderly
gentleman with an engaging smile radiated divinity, and found him even more
impressive at their meeting than his illustrious reputation would suggest. A great
friendship would develop between the pair. In spite of their different fields of
endeavour, they were kindred spirits.
Dr V was taken aback that a renowned scientist such as Dr Kalam should
come to meet him for such a small matter. Dr Kalam explained it was Dr V’s

D

eminence that drew him there. Dr V insisted that Dr Kalam and Maracayer share
tea with him in his house before leaving, and together they walked to the small
one-room cottage by the side of the hospital where Dr V lived. Dr V unfolded
steel chairs and made tea for Dr Kalam and Maracayer while they talked. In a
sense, Dr Kalam and Dr V were quite alike: they were both absorbed by their
duty, and had little energy for sophistication. Dr V’s simple furniture reminded
Dr Kalam of the way his father had lived:
On the coast of Coromandel
Where the earthy shells blow,
In the middle of the sands
Lived some really rich souls.
One cotton lungi and half a candle –
One old jug without a handle
There were all the worthy possessions
Of these kings without a scandal.1

Dr Kalam asked Dr V how he became such a great eye doctor. Dr V said that
he never wanted to be an eye doctor, but it was simply God’s will, and so he
became one. After medical college, he joined the military, but was bedridden for
two years with severe rheumatoid arthritis. With almost preternatural will, he
managed to return to medical training, battling the severe pain that was to be his
companion for life. But his dream of becoming a gynaecologist and obstetrician
was dashed. Arthritis had deformed his hands and fingers; he could only perform
fine, delicate movements such as those for eye surgery.
Dr V continued his story. He retired from government service in 1976, aged
fifty-eight. He was entitled to a small pension and could have retired in peace, as
most people of that era did. Dr V, however, conceived a project that he believed
in. He opened an eleven-bed eye clinic in a modest, rented house in Madurai. He
had no business plan and meagre financial resources; but he had a powerful
sense of duty and a vision perfectly aligned. He rejected business prudence,
preferring to rely on Sri Aurobindo and the Mother for spiritual guidance, and
named the hospital Aravind Eye Hospital after his guru. From this small base, he
would venture to remote villages with his team, to perform vital ocular
procedures for the most underprivileged in society.

At first, some derided him for his efforts. He was ridiculed for trying to
popularize what colleagues disparagingly referred to as ‘roadside surgery’. But
he steadfastly persisted with his work in the areas of greatest need. ‘I identified
myself with the poor and destitute, suffering darkness in their lives. So what if I
did not have a hospital? I had my skills, and so be it,’ he told Dr Kalam. Dr V
described his eye-clinic camps: ‘My team and I would begin operating at five in
the morning and work without rest until seven or eight in the evening. Only then
would we eat. And all of them would sit together – the doctors, the nurses, the
cleaning staff and the villagers. There was no segregation between “low-caste”
menial workers from “upper-caste” professionals. We were doing rugged, barebones operations. We converted schools into operating theatres and sterilized the
classroom. The more operations we did, the more the demand grew. The eye
camps taught me the lesson that when you begin doing the work you are destined
to do, unexpected resources will find you. Slowly, a powerful ripple of goodwill
spread.’
A humble man despite his accolades and success, Dr V thanked Dr Kalam for
leaving his important work for the nation and coming all the way to Madurai to
meet him.
Dr Kalam and Dr V corresponded over the years, and they developed a
powerful bond of friendship. Each of these great men possessed a humanity
balanced between innate simplicity and a refined spiritual awareness, which
united them with a concern for the welfare of others. It came as no surprise, then,
that when a letter came from Dr Venkataswamy inviting President Kalam to
open the Aravind Eye Hospital in Pondicherry, he promptly accepted. The date
was carefully chosen to mark the 125th anniversary of the Mother’s birth. The
event, President Kalam told his personal secretary Sheridon, would allow him to
fulfil his long-standing wish to visit Pondicherry. He had studied about this
former French colony in Schwartz High School at Ramanathapuram, but had
never had a chance to visit there.
I received a call from President Kalam sometime in mid-February, and he
asked me to join him ‘on a pilgrimage’ on 21 February 2003. It was only after
reaching Delhi from Hyderabad that I realized that he was taking me south again
to Pondicherry. There, we would visit the Sri Aurobindo Ashram, and that is
why he had called it a pilgrimage. But I later understood that my assumption was

based on an incomplete picture: this tour was a pilgrimage for Dr Kalam on two
counts. He deeply revered Dr Venkataswamy, and he saw his opening Aravind
Eye Hospital as work for the divine.
The divine grace is infinitely more powerful than any worldly force, and it
had guided Dr V’s humanitarian endeavours from their inception. The Aravind
Eye Care System flouted the usual rules of business to restore sight to the blind.
It has, however, grown into a network of eye hospitals that has had a major
impact in eradicating cataract-related blindness in India. As of 2015, Aravind
has treated nearly thirty-six million patients and performed five million
surgeries. The vast majority of these have been low-cost or even free, which has
helped make Aravind the world’s largest and most prolific eye-care service
group.
The model of Aravind Eye Care hospitals has been widely acclaimed and has
become the subject of numerous case studies across the world. It has also
become a modern-day testimony to a socially responsible business model that is
at once feasible, viable and competitive. Its success demonstrates that choices
which seem naive or unworkable – when executed with wisdom and integrity –
can yield bafflingly extraordinary results.
Dr V had a vision larger than other enterprises in the field: To see all as one;
to give sight for all, and to eliminate curable blindness. There were some twelve
million cases of blindness in India susceptible to reversal by medical treatment.
The radical essence of Dr V’s strategy was to provide free eye care to those least
able to pay. The Aravind Eye Care System has thus treated more than a third of
its patients, numbering in the millions, free of cost. Patients choose whether to
pay. Those who could pay willingly paid. Those who could not pay gratefully
received treatment without charge. There were no favours shown or obligations
elicited. That Aravind’s novel approach to its accounts has proved workable is
almost as much a testament to the Indian people’s integrity, as it is to Dr V’s
generosity.
An approach to mass medicine that appeared naive was in fact underpinned
by eminently practical goals. Dr V, a keen innovator and proponent of inclusive
progress, always recognized good health, especially good vision, as a major
contributor to economic well-being. He authored three books in Tamil on eye
diseases and diabetes. Efforts to duplicate the Aravind model have found success

in many developing countries, and Dr V’s vision was to start at least a hundred
hospitals across the country.
To reach Dr V’s hospital inauguration, we boarded a special aircraft in Delhi
for the flight to Chennai, and took a helicopter a further 150 kilometres south
from there to Pondicherry. There is a certain majesty in approaching a city in a
helicopter. The forms of the buildings in Pondicherry, whitewashed against the
greenery of its boulevards, now remain as a dream-like imprint on my memory.
The chief minister of Pondicherry, N. Rangasamy, the lieutenant governor, K.R.
Malkani, the French consul general, His Excellency Michel Segury and the vice
chancellor of Pondicherry University, Prof. V.T. Patil, accompanied President
Kalam. When Dr V greeted him with traditional folded hands, President Kalam
responded with a warm hug; a rare gesture from a head of state.
President Kalam spoke in Tamil for a few minutes and then switched to
English. He said that 30 per cent of the country’s population lived below the
poverty line, and medical care had to be provided to this large sector of the
population. As ever, he was looking to the future:
We have the best doctors and technologists in India. We have core competence in design and
software engineering. Emerging technologies in virtual reality and micro machines will transform
the healthcare scenario. This transformation should lead to helping the people who cannot afford
modern medical care. If we remove their pain, God will bless us.2

Dr V had remained a bachelor like Dr Kalam, and he gave his entire life to
serving his patients, without worldly comforts or pleasures. As with Dr Kalam,
his work and service to people was its own reward. Dr Kalam had asked me to
record six things that he felt made Dr Venkataswamy’s Aravind Eye Hospitals
one of the best social enterprises in the world. There could be many more than
six, but I made mention of those that first came to my mind.
First, aspiration is always more consequential than resources. Dr V didn’t
have any venture capital or funds to make his initial project a sizeable
endeavour. But he created a business model that allowed him to build, day after
day, a sustainable social enterprise. When there were insufficient beds, he
promptly added new ones. When there was not enough space, he simply built
new floors. When the hospital could not cater to the increasing numbers of
patients, he just built other hospitals. And when there were calls for hospitals

outside India, he built them in seven different countries. This was his great
aspiration – and it was so powerful, it transcended the usual imperative of
business plans, capital backing and so forth.
Second, Dr V had taken control of his life, and his mission was to change the
world as he could. This is a distinct characteristic of social entrepreneurs. If they
see something that is wrong, instead of complaining, they do something about it.
They change the prevailing reality. Dr V had an overriding conviction that there
was a way to make things change, despite his want of material resources. And
obviously, he was a great leader who was able to inspire people and convince
them of his vision. In his hospital, he wanted to change the lives of blind people
who could not afford their treatment, and he knew he could do this with a
groundbreaking, commercially sustainable business.
Third, Aravind Eye Hospitals had an inspirational leader. There are different
facets of ability in a professional context. You can be a highly capable
individual, a contributing team member, a competent executive or an effective
manager; but only leaders are able to change the world. Dr V built enduring
greatness through a seemingly paradoxical combination of personal humility and
willpower. He had a tremendous vision of combining social responsibility with
innovative marketing and a revolutionary delivery strategy, which appears
equally paradoxical by any standard business wisdom. He led by example: his
simple lifestyle, his capacity for hard work and his encouragement of others’
potential were an inspiration to his staff, not to mention his patients.
Fourth, Dr V had grown his organization from good to great. Dr V knew that
an organization is indeed built by its people. He therefore focused on people and
their development. He faced harsh realities, which would have discouraged even
the most optimist entrepreneur. Youth was no longer on his side, and neither
could he rely on family resources; he was fifty-eight and he didn’t have any
wealth to speak of. But he faced his situation; he would weave his fabric of
success from the attributes that life had given him – his skills, his vision and his
tenacity. Another crucial attribute in building his organization was his patience.
He knew it would take a lot of time to realize his dream, but he wasn’t the least
discouraged by this, in spite of his advancing years.
Fifth, sound organizational values were the foundation of the hospital group.
Dr V was guided by the principle of treating whoever came to his door. Even if

patients did not have money, he found a way to cure them. That’s how his crosssubsidizing model that takes money from one person out of three was conceived.
He also possessed the necessary personal values to bring his rather novel vision
to being. His practice was hallmarked by compassion, which translated into eye
care for all and sensitivity to patients’ needs, regardless of their status. Also,
equity underpinned Aravind’s operation: Dr V devised an amazing system of
standardization that mandated a consistent level of care for all patients.
Moreover, the manner in which the hospitals conducted business was
transparent. Treatment was affordable, and the charges for those who could
afford to pay were fixed across the organization for a given service.
The sixth and the most important aspect of Dr V’s Aravind Eye Hospital was
his ability to think like the big players. Dr V developed a franchise business
model, with its advantages in economies of scale and manifold ways of
optimizing efficiency. When he began the enterprise, the cost of an intraocular
lens for surgery was USD 200. He applied the franchise model and managed to
lower it to five dollars. Dr V followed the shift from sutured extra-capsular
cataract surgery to small-incision cataract surgery. Phaco-emulsification with
foldable lenses became the surgical choice. Dr V worked tirelessly to elevate the
Indian intra-ocular lens industry. He firmly directed it away from cost-cutting
manufacturing practices, to make it a quality-conscious, technology-driven and
value-priced industry, competitive in the global market. This allowed Aravind
Eye Care to export lenses to eighty-five countries.
In any event, the foundation of Dr V’s life – and Dr Kalam’s life, for that
matter – was his faith in the divine. Dr V followed the venerable poet sage Sri
Aurobindo. Dr Kalam was intrigued with the rather colourful life of Sri
Aurobindo. Unlike other spiritual leaders who were born with a spiritual
temperament or renounced the world in their childhood or youth, Sri
Aurobindo’s early promise was in the academic field. Far from being raised in a
yogic tradition, his largely anglicized family was successful in every sense of the
world, inhabiting the upper echelons of Bengali colonial society.
Young Aurobindo Ghose’s father was the civil assistant of Rangpur district in
Bengal (now in Bangladesh) and raised his children speaking English at home.
Aurobindo and his two elder siblings were sent to the English-speaking Loreto
House boarding school in Darjeeling, which was a centre of British life in India.

The school was run by Irish nuns, through which the boys would have been
exposed to Christian religious teachings and symbolism. Aurobindo studied for
the Indian Civil Service at King’s College, Cambridge, England, and
successfully completed its required examinations. Life as a servant of the British
Raj held no appeal to him though, and after returning to India, he took up
various academic posts and civil service duties under the maharaja of the
princely state of Baroda. He then began to involve himself in politics, for which
he was to find fame and notoriety.
Aurobindo quickly became an ardent proponent of independence. His
eloquent speech and scholarly articles brought him at odds with the British
authorities, who accused him of involvement in revolutionary activities. He was
imprisoned by the British colonial government, and held in solitary confinement
for a year. It was during this solitary confinement that Aurobindo had a series of
mystical and spiritual experiences that were to alter the course of his life.
Despite being acquitted of all charges and released from prison, the colonial
authorities continued their persecution of him, issuing warrants for his arrest for
sedition on account of articles he had published. In 1910, to escape their wrath,
he moved to Pondicherry, abandoning politics for spiritual work.
At the beginning of Aurobindo’s stay at Pondicherry, there were few
followers and little material sustenance, but with time their numbers grew,
resulting in the formation of the Sri Aurobindo Ashram. After a few years, Mirra
Richard, later known as ‘The Mother’, became Sri Aurobindo’s close spiritual
collaborator. The Mother was a French national, born in Paris on 21 February
1878. After meeting Sri Aurobindo during a brief stay in Pondicherry in the
shadow of World War I, she returned and permanently settled there in 1920. Sri
Aurobindo considered the Mother his spiritual equal.
When he retired to a life of renunciation and seclusion on 24 November 1926,
Sri Aurobindo entrusted the Mother with the day-to-day running of the ashram
and care of their disciples. From this time until his death, he communicated with
thousands of his followers exclusively through letters. Sri Aurobindo died on 5
December 1950, and around 100,000 people attended his funeral. The Mother
continued their spiritual work in the ashram, guiding their many followers until
she passed away at the ripe age of ninety-five in 1973.
After we had attended the opening of Aravind Eye Hospital in Pondicherry,

we made our way in the presidential motorcade along roads cleared of traffic to
the ashram. I was privileged to sit next to Dr Kalam. It was, as usual, a noisy and
stately affair. The presidential car was the third in a regal procession of fifteen to
twenty cars: a pilot police vehicle with a flashing red light and wailing siren
leading from the front, and an ambulance bringing up the rear. Police had
carefully shepherded everyone to the sides of the roads, and saluted as we
passed. President Kalam was not one for ceremonial; pomp and circumstance
held little appeal for him. But this was part of the government machinery, and he
knew he had to go along for the ride.
He was not entirely passive in cooperating with his minders, though. He
would wind down his window and wave to the children who were standing on
the roadside, hoping to catch a glimpse of their favourite Indian leader. This was
against usual protocol, and created panic in his aides for the danger an open
window could pose to his safety – the president would be an easy target for an
assassin without the protection of bulletproof glass. I said to him, ‘You shouldn’t
do that, it’s not safe for you.’ He replied, ‘Funny guy, these are my children.
They’re not going to kill me,’ and continued waving to the delighted youngsters.
And he was right.
At Sri Aurobindo Ashram, the managing trustee, Manoj Das Gupta, received
President Kalam. After going through various rooms in the ashram and laying
floral tributes at the samadhi of Sri Aurobindo and the Mother, Dr Kalam went
to the room where Sri Aurobindo had lived for twenty-four long years in
seclusion. Is it really possible for a person to sentence himself to such a long
solitary confinement? It is especially significant that he did so after suffering the
brutality of solitary confinement at the hands of British colonial masters. Perhaps
in this self-imposed imprisonment, he had found freedom. What would Sri
Aurobindo have felt here? President Kalam asked to be left alone for a while in
Sri Aurobindo’s room and spent more than fifteen minutes there, deep in
contemplation.
When he emerged from his meditations, a saying of the Mother displayed on
the wall captured his gaze: ‘Sri Aurobindo came to tell us: One need not leave
the earth to find the Truth, one need not leave the life to find his soul, one need
not abandon the world or have only limited beliefs to enter into relation with the
Divine. The Divine is everywhere, in everything and if He is hidden, it is

because we do not take the trouble to discover Him.’
When we returned to Delhi it was late in the night. President Kalam asked me
if I was tired and sleepy. I was. But curious upon his inquiry, I said, ‘No, sir’,
and he invited me for a midnight walk in the Mughal Gardens. The waning
gibbous moon was a little more than a luminous crescent in the sky. I heard
perhaps the longest dissertation I had heard from Dr Kalam on that night. It was
almost as if he had composed a didactic play, and was reciting it to himself and
feeding me my lines.
Kalam: Do you know, buddy, why it is that of all the great
civilizations that arose on this planet 5,000–7,000 years ago, it is perhaps
the Indian civilization alone that has continued unbroken down the long
and tortuous corridors of time?
Arun: Sir, there were other great civilizations that were even older, with
magnificent structures and ruins, but these civilizations have
disappeared.
Kalam: It is India – and to some extent China – that has maintained this
continuity. Do you know why?
Arun: No, sir. Please tell me.
Kalam: There are two reasons. How many?
Arun: Two, sir.
Kalam: First, there has been a spiritual and philosophical foundation for
Indian culture provided by the great scriptures. No other civilization has
this kind of vast literature. Arabs had the Quran, Jews had the Torah, but
thousands of years before these two great books, India had the Vedas and
Upanishads. This literature sustained Indian culture even in the most
terrible and tragic circumstances.
Arun: Yes, sir. The scriptures constantly gave Indian culture the capacity
for regeneration and renewal over time.
Kalam: Second, a series of great men and women have articulated these
truths. These philosophical truths are not merely intellectual constructs,
but have been an inspiration for people in their daily lives. I have
realized this today.
Arun: In Sri Aurobindo’s room?
Kalam: Yes. You know, buddy, when I was there in the room, it suddenly

occurred to me that three great souls were sailing in three different
directions in 1893. Sri Aurobindo was sailing to India from England.
Swami Vivekananda was sailing from Japan to Canada to attend the
Chicago World Parliament of Religions. Mahatma Gandhi was sailing
from London to Durban to start his career.
Arun: It is indeed true, sir. It never occurred to me.
Kalam: You are a funny guy. You are good at seeing. Develop the skill of
feeling that is not visible. The hand of God was already making strokes
that would create a new picture of India. Three great so uls were
launched on to their respective missions that would converge decades
later into the Independence of India.
Arun: Sure, sir. What else did you feel in Sri Aurobindo’s room?
Kalam: I felt that the nation is not only a political construct; it was in
fact a divinity. I realized the meaning of Bharat Mata today, Mother
India.
Arun: So it is a divinity into which one had to be prepared to offer
everything as a sacrifice?
Kalam: Yes. This is what Dr Venkataswamy has done. He gave his
everything for bringing light to the millions of blind people.
Arun: Perhaps it is for this reason he named his hospital after Sri
Aurobindo.
Kalam: Dr Venkataswamy was not working to make a hospital for
himself. He was doing a service. He surrendered his service at the feet of
his guru Sri Aurobindo.
Arun: Sir, what can I put at your feet? You are my guru.
Kalam: I am not your guru. I am not anybody’s guru. Another point that
I want to tell you today is that Sri Aurobindo always placed India’s
freedom in the larger context of the destiny of the human race. This fact
is very remarkable, because all over the world revolutionaries talk only
about their own country.
Arun: But wasn’t Sri Aurobindo a nationalist? He wanted India to be
free.
Kalam: Sri Aurobindo had a deeper vision of what India should do for
humanity. It is for this reason that India has to be free. Only a free India

can play its role in the emancipation of the human race.
Arun: Did it happen?
Kalam: No. And that is my pain. That is what is not allowing me to
sleep. The more I see the problems of my people the more I feel myself
small, helpless and good for nothing.
Then, he suddenly turned away and started walking towards the mansion. I
quietly followed his steps. He spoke no further. He did not turn even once and
retired for the night.