Before I narrate the struggle for the Indian settlers rights in the  Transvaal and their dealing with the Asiatic Department, I must turn  to some other aspects of my life.  Up to now there had been in me a mixed desire. The spirit of self-sacrifice was tempered by the desire to lay by something for the future.  About the time I took up chambers in Bombay, an American insurance  agent had come there – a man with a pleasing countenance and a sweet  tongue. As though we were old friends he discussed my future  welfare. 'All men of your status in America have their lives  insured. Should you not also insure yourself against the future?  Life is uncertain. We in America regard it as a religious obligation  to get insured. Can I not tempt you to take out a small policy?' Up to this time I had given the cold shoulder to all the agents I  had met in South Africa and India, for I had though that life  assurance implied fear and want of faith in God. But now I succumbed  to the temptation of the American agent. As he proceeded with his  argument, I had before my mind's eye a picture of my wife and  children. 'Man, you have sold almost all the ornaments of your  wife,' I said to myself. 'If something were to happen to you, the  burden of supporting her and the children would fall on your poor  brother, who has so nobly filled the place of father. How would that  become you?' With these and similar arguments I persuaded myself to  take out a policy for Rs. 10,000. But when my mode of life changed in South Africa, my outlook changed  too. All the steps I took at this time of trial were taken in the  name of God and for His service. I did not know how long I should  have to stay in South Africa. I had a fear that I might never be  able to get back to India: so I decided to keep my wife and children  with me and earn enough to support them. This plan made me deplore  the life policy and feel ashamed of having been caught in the net of  the insurance agent. If, I said to myself, my brother is really in  the position of my father, surely he would not consider it too much  of a burden to support my widow, if it came to that. And what reason  had I to assume that death would claim me earlier than the others?  After all the real protector was neither I nor my brother, but the  Almighty. In getting my life insured I had robbed my wife and  children of their self-reliance. Why should they not be expected to  take care of themselves? What happened to the families of the  numberless poor in the world? Why should I not count myself as one  of them?  A multitude of such thoughts passed though my mind, but I did not  immediately act upon them. I recollect having paid at least one  insurance premium in South Africa.  Outward circumstances too  supported this train of thought. During my first sojourn in South  Africa it was Christian influence that had kept alive in me the  religious sense. Now it was theosophical influence that added  strength to it. Mr. Ritch was a theosophist and put me in touch with  the society at Johannesburg. I never became a member, as I had my  differences, but I came in close contact with almost every  theosophist. I had religious discussions with them every day. There  used to be readings from theosophical books, and sometimes I had  occasion to address their meetings. The chief thing about theosophy  is to cultivate and promote the idea of brotherhood. We had  considerable discussion over this, and I criticized the members  where their conduct did not appear to me to square with their ideal.  The criticism was not without its wholesome effect on me. It led to  introspection.