Some of the classes which render us the greatest social service, but  which we Hindus have chosen to regard as 'untouchables,' are relegated to remote quarters of a town or a village,  called in Gujarati dhedvado, and the name has acquired a bad odour. Even so in Christian Europe  the Jews were once 'untouchables,' and the quarters that were  assigned to them had the offensive name of 'ghettoes'. In a similar  way today we have become the untouchables of South Africa. It  remains to be seen how far the sacrifice of Andrews and the magic  wand of Sastri succeed in rehabilitating us.  The ancient Jews regarded themselves as the chosen people of God, to  the exclusion of all others, with the result that their descendants  were visited with a strange and even unjust retribution. Almost in a  similar way the Hindus have considered themselves Aryas  or civilized, and a section of their own kith and kin as Anaryas  or untouchables, with the result that a strange, if unjust nemesis  is being visited not only upon the Hindus in South Africa, but the Musalmans and Parsis as well, inasmuch as they belong to the same country and have the same colour as their Hindu brethren. The reader will have now realized to some extent the meaning of the  word 'locations' with which I have headed this chapter. In South  Africa we have acquired the odious name of 'coolies'. The word  'coolie' in India means only a porter or hired workman, but in South  Africa it has a contemptuous connotation. It means what a pariah or  an untouchable means to us, and the quarters assigned to the  'coolies' are known as 'coolie locations'. Johannesburg had one such  location, but unlike other places with locations where the Indians  had tenancy rights, here they acquired their plots on a lease of ninety-nine years. People were densely  packed in the location, the area of which never increased with the  increase in population. Beyond arranging to clean the latrines in  the location in a haphazard way, the Municipality did nothing to  provide any sanitary facilities, much less good roads or lights. It  was hardly likely that it would safeguard its sanitation, when it  was indifferent to the welfare of the residents. These were too  ignorant of the rules of municipal sanitation and hygiene to do  without the help or supervision of the Municipality. If those who  went there had all been Robinson Crusoes, theirs would have been a  different story. But we do not know of a single emigrant colony of  Robinson Crusoes in the world. Usually people migrate abroad in  search of wealth and trade, but the bulk of the Indians who went to  South Africa were ignorant, pauper agriculturists, who needed all  the care and protection that could be given them. The traders and  educated Indians who followed them were very few.  The criminal negligence of the Municipality and the ignorance of the  Indian settlers thus conspired to render the location thoroughly  insanitary. The Municipality, far from doing anything to improve the  condition of the location, used the insanitation, caused by their  own neglect, as a pretext for destroying the location, and for that  purpose obtained from the local legislature authority to dispossess  the settlers. This was the condition of things when I settled in  Johannesburg.  The settlers, having proprietary rights in their land, were  naturally entitled to compensation. A special tribunal was appointed  to try the land acquisition cases. If the tenant was not prepared to  accept the offer of the Municipality, he had a right to appeal to  the tribunal, and if the latter's award exceeded the Municipality's  offer, the Municipality had to bear the costs.  Most of the tenants engaged me as their legal adviser. I had no  desire to make money out of these cases, so I told the tenants that  I should be satisfied with whatever costs the tribunal awarded, in  case they won, and a fee of £10 on every lease, irrespective of the  result of the case. I also told them that I proposed to set apart  half of the money paid by them for the building of a hospital or  similar institution for the poor. This naturally pleased them all.  Out of about seventy cases only one was lost. So the fees amounted to a  fairly big figure. But Indian Opinion was there with its persistent claim and devoured, so far as I can  recollect, a sum of £1,600. I had worked hard for these cases. The  clients always surrounded me. Most of them were originally  indentured labourers from South India. For the redress of their peculiar grievances they had formed  an association of their own, separate from that of the free Indian  merchants and traders. Some of them were open- hearted, liberal men  and had high character. Their leaders were Sjt. Jairamsing, the  president, and Sjt. Badri, who was as good as the president. Both of  them are now no more. They were exceedingly helpful to me. Sjt.  Badri came in very close contact with me and took a prominent part  in Satyagraha. Through these and other friends I came in intimate  contact with numerous Indian settlers from North and South India. I  became more their brother than a mere legal adviser, and shared in  all their private and public sorrows and hardships.  It may be of some interest to know how the Indians used to name me.  Abdulla Sheth refused to address me as Gandhi. None, fortunately,  ever insulted me by calling or regarding me as 'saheb'. Abdulla  Sheth hit upon a fine appellation-'bhai', i.e., brother. Others  followed him and continued to address me as 'bhai' until the moment  I left South Africa. There was a sweet flavour about the name when  it was used by the ex-indentured Indians.  