Events were so shaping themselves in Johannesburg as to make this self-purfication  on my part a preliminary as it were to Satyagraha. I can now see  that all the principal events of my life, culminating in the vow of brahmacharya,  were secretly preparing me for it. The principle called Satyagraha  came into being before that name was invented. Indeed when it was  born, I myself could not say what it was. In Gujarati also we used  the English phrase 'passive resistance' to describe it. When in a  meeting of Europeans I found that the term 'passive resistance' was  too narrowly construed, that it was supposed to be a weapon of the  weak, that it could be characterized by hatred, and that it could  finally manifest itself as violence, I had to demur to all these  statements and explain the real nature of the Indian movement. It  was clear that a new word must be coined by the Indians to designate  their struggle.  But I could not for the life of me find out a new  name, and therefore offered a nominal prize through Indian Opinion  to the reader who made the best suggestion on the subject. As a  result Maganlal Gandhi coined the word Sadagraha (Sat: truth, Agraha:  firmness) and won the prize. But in order to make it clearer  I changed the word to Satyagraha which has since become current in  Gujarati as a designation for the struggle.  The history of this struggle is for all practical purposes a history  of the remainder of my life in South Africa and especially of my  experiments with truth in that sub-continent. I wrote the major  portion of this history in Yeravda jail and finished it after I was  released. It was published in Navajivan and subsequently issued in book form. Sjt. Valji Govindji Desai has  been translating it into English for Current Thought,  but I am now arranging to have the English translation1 published in  book form at an early date, so that those who will may be able to  familiarize themselves with my most important experiments in South  Africa. I would recommend a perusal of my history of Satyagraha in  South Africa to such readers as have not seen it already. I will not  repeat what I have put down there, but in the next few chapters will  deal only with a few personal incidents of my life in South Africa  which have not been covered by that history. And when I have done  with these, I will at once proceed to give the reader some idea of  my experiments in India. Therefore, anyone who wishes to consider  these experiments in their strict chronological order will now do  well to keep the history of Satyagraha in South Africa before him.