  ha ter   II.
A CIVILIAN, IGNORANT of the art of war, can only judge a
military man by what he accomplishes in the long run by
his policy and action; and it is diﬀicult for such a judge to
perceive what General McClellan accomplished, With his
magniﬁcent army of a hundred and sixty thousand as good
soldiers as ever the sun shone upon — well drilled, well fed,
well clothed and well armed — but to scatter and wear out
that army, volunteer general advice to a government that
was presumed to be competent to the management of its
own aﬀairs, and win the doubtful honor of becoming the
favorite of men who, from the ﬁrst, opposed the war, and
threw all possible obstacles in the way of its successful
prosecution. The whole history of McClellan’s operations is
a history of magniﬁcent preparations and promises, of fatal
hesitations and procrastinations, of clamoring for more
preparations, 
and 
justiﬁcations 
of 
hesitations 
and
procrastinations, 
of 
government 
indulgence 
and
forbearance, of military intrigues within the camp, of
popular impatience and alarms, and of the waste of great
means and golden opportunities. Even the opportunity of
becoming “the hero of Antietam” came to General
McClellan through his culpable remissness in permitting
the enemy to cross the Potomac; and this victory lost all its
value by his failure to gather its fruits.
 When General McClellan assumed command, he found
waiting for him ﬁfty thousand men, more or less, in and
around Washington. He assumed command during the last
days of July; and, within a period of less than three months,
that army was raised to a force of more than a hundred and
ﬁfty thousand men, with ﬁve hundred pieces of artillery.
The people gave him more men than any one commander
was ever known to handle eﬀectively in the ﬁeld; and the
government lavishly bestowed upon his army all the
material of war. The unfortunate matter of Ball’s Bluﬀ,
which occurred on the twenty-second of October, has
already found record. This was the ﬁrst return for the fresh
means that the government had placed at the commanding
General’s disposal. The Potomac was blockaded by a small
force of rebels, and both the President and Secretary of
War felt that there was no necessity for permitting this
vexatious and humiliating blockade to continue. They tried
to induce McClellan to aid in this business; and, at one time
in October, he agreed to send four thousand men to co-
operate with a naval force for this purpose; but he falsiﬁed
his promise, on the ground that his engineers told him that
so large a force could not be landed. It did not matter that
the department assumed the responsibility of landing the
troops. It did not matter, even, that he made another
promise to send the troops. They were never sent, the
second refusal being based upon his fear of bringing on a
general engagement, which was exactly what ought to have
been brought on. Captain Craven of the navy, with whom
these troops were to co-operate, threw up his command in
 disgust, and the rebels never were driven away from the
Potomac. They kept this grand highway closed until the
following spring, and then retired of their own accord, and
at leisure.
The conﬁdence in General McClellan on the part of the
government and the country generally was at this time
unbounded; and he could not appear among his soldiers
without such demonstrations of enthusiastic aﬀection as
few commanders have ever received. On the ﬁrst of
November he succeeded General Scott in the command of
all the armies of the Union, still retaining personal
command of the Army of the Potomac; but he seemed to be
unable to move. Cautious, hesitating, always ﬁnding fresh
obstacles to a movement, he permitted the golden days of
autumn to pass away. In the meantime, the government was
urging him to do something, as the rebel forces were
massing in his front, and the country was clamorous for
action. Instead of holding the commanding General
responsible for these delays, the country blamed the
government, and manifested its dissatisfaction by its votes
in the fall elections.
All that autumn passed away, and not a blow was struck.
The Potomac was closed to government war vessels and
transports, by a few batteries which the over-cautious
General was afraid to touch.
Mr. Lincoln was determined to break the spell which
seemed to hold the General’s mind; and, on the twenty-
seventh of January, he issued an order that on the twenty-
second day of February, 1862, there should be a general
 movement of the land and naval forces of the United States,
against the insurgent armies — especially the army at and
about Fortress Monroe, the army of the Potomac, the army
of 
Western 
Virginia, 
the 
army 
near 
Mumfordsville,
Kentucky, the army and ﬂotilla at Cairo, and a naval force
in the gulf of Mexico. He further declared “that the heads
of departments, and especially the Secretaries of War and
of the Navy, with all their subordinates, and the General-in-
Chief with all other commanders and subordinates of land
and naval forces, will severally be held to their strict and
full responsibilities for prompt execution of this order.” On
the thirty-ﬁrst of January — four days afterward — he
issued another order, specially to the anny of the Potomac,
to engage, on or before the twenty-second of February, in
the attempt to seize upon and occupy a point upon the
railroad south-west of Manassas Junction, the details of the
movement to be in the hands of the Commander-in-Chief.
To this last order of the President, General McClellan
replied in a long letter to the Secretary of War. He objected
to the President’s plan, that the roads would be bad at the
season proposed; and wished to substitute a plan of his
own, which had in its favor a better soil for the moving of
troops. He wished to move by the Lower Rappahannock,
making Urbana his base. He would throw upon the new line
from one hundred and ten thousand to one hundred and
forty thousand troops, according to circumstances, hoping
to use the latter number, by bringing such fresh troops into
Washington as would protect the capital. He “respectfully
but ﬁrmly” advised that he might be permitted to make this
 substitution of his own for the President’s plan. So ﬁrm was
he that he was willing to say: “I will stake my life, my
reputation, on the result, — more than that, I will stake on
it the success of our cause.” His judgment, he declared,
was against the movement on Manassas. On the third of
February, Mr. Lincoln addressed a note to the General on
this diﬀerence of opinion; which ought to have shown him
that his superior was a competent adviser and a keen critic:
“My dear Sir: — You and I have distinct and diﬀerent
plans for a movement of the army of the Potomac; yours to
be done by the Chesapeake, up the Rappahannock, to
Urbana, and across land to the terminus of the railroad on
the York River; mine to move directly to a point on the
railroad 
south-west 
of 
Manassas. 
If 
you 
will 
give
satisfactory answers to the following questions, I shall
gladly yield my plans to yours:
“1. Does not your plan involve a greatly larger
expenditure of time and money than mine?
“2. Wherein is a victory more certain by your plan than
mine?
“3. Wherein is a victory more valuable by your plan than
mine?
“4. In fact, would it not be less valuable in this: that it
would break no great line of the enemy’s communications,
while mine would?
“5. In case of disaster, would not a retreat be more
diﬀicult by your plan than mine?”
General McClellan replied to this through the Secretary
of War, after his fashion; but the President was not
 convinced, and ﬁnally agreed to submit the two plans to a
council of twelve oﬀicers. This council, eight to four,
decided in favor of the General’s plan. The President
acquiesced; but the rebels rendered both plans useless by
withdrawing from Manassas on the ninth of March to the
other side of the Rappahannock — which date will be seen
to be two weeks later than the date ﬁxed for the advance of
all the armies by the President.
On the eighth of March, the President ordered General
McClellan to organize that part of his army which he
proposed to engage in active operations, into four Army
Corps, 
to 
be 
commanded 
respectively 
by 
General
McDowell, General Sumner, General Heintzelman and
General Keyes; and directed the order to be executed with
such 
dispatch 
as 
not 
to 
delay 
operations 
already
determined on — alluding to the movement by the
Chesapeake and Rappahannock. On the same day, he
issued another order: that no change of base should take
place without leaving in and about Washington such an
army as should make the city secure; that no more than two
army corps should move before the Potomac should be
cleared of rebel batteries; and that the movement should
begin as early as the eighteenth of March.
On the next day, as has already been stated, the enemy
retired unsuspected and undisturbed from his defenses;
and then General McClellan moved forward, not to pursue,
according to his own authority, but to give his troops some
exercise, and a taste of the march and bivouac, before more
 active operations. On the ﬁfteenth, the army moved back to
Alexandria.
On the eleventh of March, General McClellan was
relieved from the command of other military departments,
because he had personally taken the ﬁeld. Major-General
Halleck received the command of the department of the
Mississippi, and General Fremont that of the mountain
department. On the thirteenth, a council of war decided
that, 
as 
the 
enemy 
had 
retreated 
behind 
the
Rappahannock, the new base of operations should be
Fortress Monroe, on certain conditions which touched the
neutralization of the power of the Merrimac, (an iron plated
rebel vessel which had already destroyed the frigates
Cumberland and Congress, and been beaten back by the
Monitor,) means of transportation, and naval auxiliaries
suﬀicient to silence the batteries on York River. On the
same day, Mr. Stanton wrote to General McClellan, stating
that the President saw no objection to the plan, but
directing that such a force should be left at Manassas
Junction as would make it entirely certain that the enemy
should not repossess it, that Washington should be left
secure, and that, whatever place might be chosen as the
new base, the army should move at once in pursuit of the
enemy, by some route.
The President was impatient for action. Not a blow had
been struck. Back from the Potomac blockade, and back
from Manassas, the enemy had been permitted to retire
without the loss of a man or a gun.
 On the thirty-ﬁrst of March, Mr. Lincoln ordered
Blenker’s division from the army of the Potomac to join
General Fremont, who had importuned him for a larger
force, and who was supported in his request by exacting
friends. In a note to General McClellan, he said,— “I write
this to assure you that I did so with great pain,
understanding that you would wish it otherwise. If you
could know the full pressure of the case, I am conﬁdent
that you would justify it.” General Banks, who had been
ordered to cover Washington by occupying Manassas, was
ordered on the ﬁrst of April to force General Jackson back
from Winchester.
Transportation had already been provided by the War
Department for moving the troops to any new base that
might be determined on, and General McClellan was not
obliged to wait. On the ﬁrst of April, there were under his
command, by the oﬀicial report of the Adjutant-general,
146,255 men in the four corps, with regular infantry and
cavalry and other troops to raise the number to 158,419. In
all the orders given by the President concerning the
movements of this army, there was one condition that he
insisted upon, viz, that troops should be left suﬀicient to
protect Washington; and by General McClellan’s order only
twenty thousand eﬀective men were to be left with General
Wadsworth, the military governor of the District. The force
was much smaller than was necessary, according to
General McClellan’s previous calculations; and General
Wadsworth was so much impressed with its inadequacy
that he called the attention of the war department to the
 subject. The letter was referred to Adjutant-general
Thomas and General E.A. Hitchcock, whose decision was
embodied in the words: “In view of the opinion expressed
by the council of the commanders of army corps, of the
force necessary for the capital, though not numerically
stated, and of the force represented by General McClellan
as left for that purpose, we are of opinion that the
requirement of the President that this city shall be left
entirely secure, not only in the opinion of the General-in-
Chief, but that of the commanders of all the army corps
also, has not been fully complied with.” In the meantime,
General McClellan had gone forward to Fortress Monroe,
and all but two corps of the troops had left for the new
base. When, therefore, Generals Thomas and Hitchcock
made their report, and the President saw that Washington
was about to be left without suﬀicient defense, he directed
the Secretary of War to order that one of the two corps not
then embarked should remain in front of Washington, and
that the other corps should go forward as speedily as
possible. This was under date of April third. The ﬁrst corps,
under 
General 
McDowell, 
was 
designated 
for 
this
protective service, numbering 38,454 men. Two new
military departments were at once erected — the
Department 
of 
the 
Rappahannock, 
under 
General
McDowell, and the Department of the Shenandoah, lying
between the mountain department and the Blue Ridge,
under General Banks.
General McClellan pushed a portion of his troops toward
Yorktown at once — toward a line of intrenchments held by
 the enemy, stretching across the Peninsula. On the ﬁfth of
April he wrote to the President, dating his letter “Near
Yorktown,” and stating that the enemy were in large force
in his front, and that they apparently intended to make a
determined resistance. At that time, the rebel force at that
point, according to subsequent reports by the rebels
themselves, did not exceed ten thousand men. No one
doubts now that General McClellan’s cautiousness betrayed
his judgment, and that a strong and well-directed attack
would have swept the rebels out or their works.
In this letter, he began his long-continued complaint of
inadequate force. He begged the President to reconsider
his order detaching the ﬁrst corps from his command, as it
was his opinion that he should have to ﬁght all the available
force of the rebels, not far from the place where he was
writing. If he could not have the whole corps, he begged for
Franklin and his division. On the sixth, Mr. Stanton replied
that Sumner’s troops were on the way to him, that
Franklin’s division was on the advance to Manassas, and
that there were no means of transportation to send it
forward in time for service in his operations. “All in the
power of the government,” added the Secretary, “shall be
done to sustain you, as occasion may require.”
Another day passed away; and, on the date of Mr.
Stanton’s 
dispatch, 
General 
McClellan 
wrote 
again,
begging for Franklin’s division, complaining that he had no
suﬀicient transportation, and stating that the order forming
new departments deprived him of the power of ordering up
wagons and troops, absolutely necessary for his advance on
 Richmond. He requested that the material he had prepared
and necessarily left behind, with wagon trains, ammunition,
and Woodbury’s brigade, might be subject to his order. Mr.
Lincoln immediately telegraphed him that his order for
forwarding what he had demanded, including Woodbury’s
brigade, was not, and would not be interfered with,
informing him at the same time that he had then more than
one hundred thousand troops with him, independent of
those under General Wool’s command. Mr. Lincoln closed
his dispatch with the words: “I think you had better break
the enemy’s line from Yorktown to Warwick River at once.
They will probably use time as advantageously as you can.”
Mr. Lincoln, like the whole country, was convinced that
there was no such force behind those works as the fears of
the General had counted there; and it is now humiliating to
learn from the oﬀicial report of the rebel commander
Magruder, that, “with ﬁve thousand men, exclusive of the
garrisons, we (they) stopped and held in check over one
hundred thousand of the enemy.” At Gloucester, Yorktown
and Mulberry Island, he was obliged to put garrisons
amounting to six thousand men, and he had only ﬁve
thousand men left to defend a line of thirteen miles. With a
hundred thousand men at his back, General McClellan went
to work with shovels to begin a regular siege. On the ninth
of April, Mr. Lincoln wrote him a letter which is so full of
wise counsel, kind criticism, and personal good-will, that it
deserves record here:
“My Dear Sir — Your dispatches, complaining that you
are not properly sustained, while they do not oﬀend me, do
 pain me very much.
“Blenker’s division was withdrawn from you before you
left here; and you know the pressure under which I did it,
and, as I thought, acquiesced in it — certainly not without
reluctance.
“After you left, I ascertained that less than twenty
thousand unorganized men, without a single ﬁeld battery,
were all you designed to be left for the defence of
Washington and Manassas Junction; and part of this even
was to go to General Hooker’s old position. General Banks’
corps, once designed for Manassas Junction, was diverted
and tied up on the line of Winchester and Strasburg, and
could not leave it without again exposing the upper
Potomac and the Baltimore and Ohio Railroad. This
presented, or would present, when McDowell and Sumner
should be gone, a great temptation to the enemy to turn
back from the Rappahannock and sack Washington. My
implicit order that Washington should, by the judgment of
all the commanders of army corps, be left entirely secure,
had been neglected. It was precisely this that drove me to
detain McDowell.
“I do not forget that I was satisﬁed with your
arrangement to leave Banks at Manassas Junction: but,
when that arrangement was broken up, and nothing was
substituted for it, of course I was constrained to substitute
something for it myself. And allow me to ask, do you really
think I should permit the line from Richmond, via Manassas
Junction, to this city, to be entirely open, except what
resistance could be presented by less than twenty thousand
 unorganized troops? This is a question which the country
will not allow me to evade.
“There is a curious mystery about the number of troops
now with you. When I telegraphed you on the sixth, saying
you had over a hundred thousand with you, I had just
obtained from the Secretary of War a statement taken, as
he said, from your own returns, making one hundred and
eight thousand then with you and en route to you. You now
say you will have but eighty-ﬁve thousand when all en route
to you shall have reached you. How can the discrepancy of
twenty-three thousand be accounted for?
“As to General Wool’s command, I understand it is doing
for you precisely what a like number of your own would
have to do if that command was away.
“I suppose the whole force which has gone forward for
you is with you by this time. And, if so, I think it is the
precise time for you to strike a blow. By delay, the enemy
will relatively gain upon you — that is, he will gain faster by
fortiﬁcations 
and 
reinforcements 
than 
you 
can 
by
reinforcements alone. And once more let me tell you, it is
indispensable to you that you strike a blow. I am powerless
to help this. You will do me the justice to remember I
always insisted that going down the bay in search of a ﬁeld,
instead of ﬁghting at or near Manassas, was only shifting,
and not surmounting, a diﬀiculty; that we would ﬁnd the
same enemy, and the same or equal intrenchments, at
either place. The country will not fail to note-is now noting-
that the present hesitation to move upon an intrenched
enemy is but the story of Manassas repeated.
 “I beg to assure you that I have never written to you or
spoken to you in greater kindness of feeling than now, nor
with a fuller purpose to sustain you, so far as, in my most
anxious judgment, I consistently can. But you must act.
Yours, very truly, A. LINCOLN.
The President yielded to McClellan, and sent General
Franklin to him, with his division; and General McClellan
thanked him for his kindness and consideration, adding, “I
now understand the matter which I did not before.”
Certainly his misunderstanding of the matter had not been
the result of any lack of eﬀort on the part of the President
to make him understand it. Through the whole month in
which the great army lay before Yorktown, the President
and War Department were fed with dispatches of the most
encouraging character. General McClellan was leaving
nothing undone to enable him to attack without delay; after
receiving reinforcements, he was “conﬁdent of results;” he
was soon to be “at them;” there was to be “not a moment’s
unnecessary delay;” he was “getting up the heavy guns,
mortars and ammunition quite rapidly;” there were heavy
rains, and horrid roads, but he was “making progress all
the time.” He was making progress in the concentration of
troops, certainly, for, on the thirtieth of April, he had, by
Adjutant-general Townsend’s report, 130,878 men, of whom
112,392 were reckoned eﬀective. At this time, he called
upon the department for Parrott guns; and, on the ﬁrst of
May, the President wrote him: “Your call for Parrott guns
from Washington alarms me — chieﬂy because it argues
indeﬁnite procrastination. Is anything to be done?”
 There was something to be done, but the enemy did it.
After the absolute waste of a month’s time, opportunities,
and resources of strength and material, the rebels quietly
evacuated their position, and retired up the Peninsula. It
was the old story of great preparations to ﬁght, and no
ﬁghting — no weakening of the enemy. General McClellan
thought the success brilliant, if we may judge by his
dispatches. It was the costly victory of an engineer. He
telegraphed to Mr. Stanton, on the fourth, that he held the
entire line of the enemy’s works; that he had thrown all his
cavalry and horse artillery, supported by infantry, in
pursuit; that no time should be lost, and that he should
“push the enemy to the wall.” The enemy retired to his
second line of works at Williamsburgh without pushing, and
took his position behind the wall. Here was fought the
battle of Williamsburgh, which McClellan designated in his
ﬁnal report as “one of the most brilliant engagements of
the war.” He bestows the highest praise upon General
Hancock, though Hooker had fought with equal gallantry,
and encountered greater losses. All did their duty; and
when, between four and ﬁve o’clock in the afternoon,
General McClellan arrived upon the ground (the battle
having commenced early in the morning,) he did his duty,
and helped materially toward a favorable result of the
action. On the next morning, there was no enemy; and,
owing to the bad roads, the lack of food, and the exhaustion
of the troops, there could be no immediate pursuit.
On the seventh of May, General Franklin landed at West
Point with his division, further up the peninsula, supported
 by the divisions of Sedgwick, Porter and Richardson. The
rebels were obliged to attack, to give the retreating
columns from Williamsburgh time and opportunity to pass;
but, after a battle of six hours they were repulsed, though
not until they had accomplished their object.
General McClellan did not like the organization of the
army into corps. The measure did not originate with him,
and the men appointed to their command were not men of
his choosing. He did not believe in ﬁghting the battle of
Williamsburgh. The three corps-commanders, Sumner,
Heintzelman and Keyes, were all on the ground; and were
regarded by the commanding General as indiscreet in
commencing the attack, and incompetent in its conduct.
At this time, Mr. Lincoln, Mr. Stanton and Mr. Chase
were all on a visit to Fortress Monroe; and, on the ninth of
May, General McClellan took occasion to write to the
Secretary of War, asking permission to re-organize the
army corps. He wished to return to the organization by
divisions, or to be authorized to relieve incompetent
commanders of army corps. To give force to his request, he
declared in his note that, had he been half an hour later on
the ﬁeld, the army would have been routed, and would have
lost everything. He declared that he found on the ﬁeld “the
utmost confusion and incompetency,” and added that “at
least a thousand lives were really sacriﬁced by the
organization into corps.” Mr. Stanton replied that the
President, who would write him privately, would give him
liberty to suspend the corps organization temporarily, or
until further orders. Mr. Lincoln wrote privately, and wrote
 a very frank and honest letter, dated at Fortress Monroe, of
which these were the essential paragraphs:
“I have just assisted the Secretary of War in forming the
part of a dispatch to you, relating to army corps, which
dispatch, of course, will have reached you long before this
will. I wish to say a few words to you privately on this
subject. I ordered the army corps organization not only on
the unanimous opinion of the twelve Generals of division,
but also on the unanimous opinion of every military man I
could get an opinion from, and every modern military book,
yourself only excepted. Of course I did not on my own
judgment pretend to understand the subject. I now think it
indispensable for you to know how your struggle against it
is received in quarters which we cannot entirely disregard.
It is looked upon as merely an eﬀort to pamper one or two
pets, and to persecute and degrade their supposed rivals. I
have had no word from Sumner, Heintzelman and Keyes.
The commanders of these corps are of course the three
highest oﬀicers with you, but I am constantly told that you
have no consultation or communication with them, that you
consult and communicate with nobody but Fitz John Porter,
and perhaps General Franklin. I do not say these
complaints are true or just, but, at all events, it is proper
you should know of their existence. Do the commanders of
corps disobey your orders in anything?
“Are you strong enough, even with my help, to set your foot
upon the neck of Sumner, Heintzelman and Keyes, all at
once? This is a practical and very serious question to you.
 After the receipt of this private letter, General McClellan
concluded not to make the change which seemed so
essential; but he created two new corps, or “provisional
corps,” which he placed respectively under the command of
Fitz John Porter and General Franklin, the men whom Mr.
Lincoln had mentioned as his favorites.
Leaving the army to make its way toward Richmond,
events take us back to Fortress Monroe for a brief space,
where the Washington dignitaries were consulting and
watching the progress of aﬀairs. Nothing could be done on
the James River, on account of the presence of the
formidable Merrimac; and, in the meantime, Norfolk was
held by the rebels. It was desirable to take Norfolk; and an
expedition was ﬁtted out at Fortress Monroe, under
command of General Wool, for that purpose. To show how
this was done, and, at the same time, to illustrate the free
and easy manner in which the President dealt with his
oﬀicers, we shall let Mr. Lincoln tell his own “little story.”
In a subsequent conversation with Major General Garﬁeld,
he said: “By the way, Garﬁeld, do you know that Chase,
Stanton, General Wool and I had a campaign of our own?
We went down to Fortress Monroe in Chase’s revenue
cutter, and consulted with Admiral Goldsborough on the
feasibility of taking Norfolk by landing on the North shore
and making a march of eight miles. The Admiral said there
was no landing on that shore, and we should have to double
the cape, and approach the place from the south side,
which would be a long journey, and a diﬀicult one. I asked
him if he had ever tried to ﬁnd a landing, and he replied
 that he had not. I then told him a story of a fellow in Illinois
who had studied law, but had never tried a case. He was
sued, and, not having conﬁdence in his ability to manage
his own case, employed a lawyer to manage it for him. He
had only a confused idea of the meaning of law terms, but
was anxious to make a display of learning, and, on the trial,
constantly made suggestions to his lawyer, who paid but
little attention to him. At last, fearing that his lawyer was
not handling the opposing counsel very well, he lost all his
patience; and, springing to his feet, cried out, ‘Why don’t
you go at him with a capias or a surre-butter or something,
and not stand there like a confounded old nudum-pactum?’
‘Now, Admiral,’ said I, ‘if you don’t know that there is no
landing on the North shore, I want you to ﬁnd out.’”
Continuing his narrative, Mr. Lincoln said: “The Admiral
took the hint; and, taking Chase and Wool along, with a
company or two of marines, he went on a voyage of
discovery, and Stanton and I remained at Fortress Monroe.
That night we went to bed, but not to sleep, for we were
very anxious for the fate of the expedition. About two
o’clock the next morning, I heard the heavy tread of Wool
ascending the stairs. I went out into the parlor and found
Stanton hugging Wool in the most enthusiastic manner, as
he announced that he had found a landing, and had
captured Norfolk.”
Thus Norfolk came into our possession on the ninth of
May; and on the eleventh the Merrimac was blown up by
command of her own oﬀicers, releasing our navy from its
 long durance, though its passage up the James was
repulsed by a heavy battery at Drury’s Bluﬀ.
General McClellan was still busy with his dispatches. Of
the nature of these dispatches, we can judge by the replies
of the President. Under date of May ﬁfteenth, the latter
writes: “I have done all I could, and can, to sustain you. I
hoped that the opening of James River, and putting Wool
and Burnside in communications with an open road to
Richmond, or to you, had eﬀected something in that
direction.” For ﬁve days our army lay at Williamsburgh, on
account of bad roads, which roads the rebel army found it
convenient to pass with suﬀicient rapidity to place
themselves within the outer defenses of Richmond, a
distance of nearly forty miles. They were, at least, all
across the Chickahominy River.
Head-quarters reached White House on the sixteenth.
Two days previously, the General had written the President
that he could bring only eighty thousand men into the ﬁeld,
and that he wanted every man the government could send
him. Mr. Stanton wrote him on the eighteenth that the
President was unwilling to uncover the capital entirely, but
desired that he would extend his right wing to the north of
Richmond, so that McDowell could communicate with him
by his left wing. “At your earnest call for reinforcements,”
said Mr. Stanton, “he is sent forward to co-operate in the
reduction of Richmond, but charged, in attempting this, not
to uncover the city of Washington.” General McClellan
seemed to have no idea that the capital was in danger, and
replied to this that he wished McDowell to join him by
 water. He feared that he could not join him overland in
season for the coming battle, and complained that
McDowell was not put more directly under his command.
On the twenty-fourth of May, the President wrote, saying
that McDowell and Shields would move for him on the
following Monday, Shields’ troops being too much worn to
march earlier; and that they had so weakened their line
already that Banks, in the Shenandoah valley, was in peril,
and had met with a serious loss. On the same day, Mr.
Lincoln was obliged, in order to save the capital, to
suspend McDowell’s movement toward McClellan; for the
rebel General Jackson had begun a desperate push for
Harper’s Ferry. Against this action of the President,
McClellan protested; and, on the twenty-ﬁfth, the former
wrote him a note, giving a full statement of the situation:
“Your dispatch received. General Banks was at Strasburg
with about six thousand men, Shields having been taken
from him to swell a column for McDowell to aid you at
Richmond, and the rest of his force scattered at various
places. On the twenty-third, a force of seven thousand to
ten thousand fell upon one regiment and two companies
guarding the bridge at Front Royal, destroying it entirely;
crossed the Shenandoah, and on the twenty-fourth,
yesterday, pushed on to get north of Banks on the road to
Winchester. General Banks ran a race with them, beating
them into Winchester yesterday evening. This morning a
battle ensued between the two forces, in which General
Banks 
was 
beaten 
back 
into 
full 
retreat 
toward
Martinsburg, and probably is broken up into a total rout.
 Geary, on the Manassas Gap Railroad, just now reports that
Jackson is now near Front Royal with ten thousand troops,
following up and supporting, as I understand, the force now
pursuing Banks. Also, that another force of ten thousand is
near Orleans, following on in the same direction. Stripped
bare, as we are here, I will do all we can to prevent them
crossing the Potomac at Harper’s Ferry or above. McDowell
has about twenty thousand of his forces moving back to the
vicinity of Front Royal; and Fremont, who was at Franklin,
is moving to Harrisonburg: both these movements intended
to get in the enemy’s rear.
“One more of McDowell’s brigades is ordered through
here to Harper’s Ferry; the rest of his forces remain for the
present at Fredericksburg. We are sending such regiments
and dribs from here and Baltimore as we can spare to
Harper’s Ferry, supplying their places in some sort, calling
in militia from the adjacent states. We also have eighteen
cannon on the road to Harper’s Ferry, of which arm there is
not one at that point. This is now our situation.
“If McDowell’s force was now beyond our reach, we
should be entirely helpless. Apprehension of something like
this, and no unwillingness to sustain you, has always been
my reason for withholding McDowell’s forces from you.
“Please understand this, and do the best you can with the
forces you have.”
A few hours after this dispatch was sent, the President
sent another, stating that the enemy was driving General
Banks before him, and was threatening Leesburgh and
Geary on the Manassas Gap Railroad; that the movement
 looked like a general and concerted one — such an one as
he would not make if he were acting on the purpose of a
very desperate defense of Richmond; and that, if McClellan
did not at once attack that capital, he would probably have
to give up the job, and come to the defense of Washington.
This dispatch moved the General. General Fitz John
Porter was sent to attack a rebel force near Hanover Court-
House, which he did with favorable results. General
McClellan described it as a perfect rout of the enemy, at
which 
the 
President 
wrote 
a 
dispatch, 
stating 
his
gratiﬁcation, but expressing his surprise that the Richmond
and Fredericksburg Railroad was not seized again. On the
twenty-sixth, Mr. Lincoln informed General McClellan that
Banks was safe at Williamsport. Still the General wanted
troops sent to him by water, still he wanted more troops,
and still the President assured him, again and again, that
he was doing and would do for him everything he could do,
consistently with the safety of Washington.
A movement was commenced on the twenty-ﬁfth to cross
the Chickahominy; and, on the thirtieth and thirty-ﬁrst, a
battle was fought, which resulted in such a repulse of the
rebels, and such heavy losses to them as greatly to alarm
Richmond, and impress upon the city the belief that an
immediate and fatal pursuit would be made by the federal
forces. After the engagement, General McClellan crossed
the river, but found the roads so bad that artillery could not
be handled, and that pursuit was impossible; although the
rebels had found it convenient to get back, and expected to
be pursued. The following day, General Heintzelman sent a
 reconnoitering party within four miles of Richmond,
without ﬁnding an enemy. Informed of this, General
McClellan ordered the force to fall back to its old position:
and on the same day wrote to Washington that he only
waited for the river to fall, to cross over the rest of his
army, and make a general attack; and that the morale of his
army was such that be could venture much, not fearing the
odds against him.
McClellan had met great losses by battle and disease;
and the government did what it could for him, by placing
under his command the troops at Fortress Monroe, and by
sending to him McCall’s division of McDowell’s corps. On
the seventh of June, the General wrote to the Secretary of
War that he should be ready to move as soon as McCall
should reach him, and McCall reached him on the tenth. On
that day, he had caught a rumor that Beauregard had
reinforced the rebels in Richmond; and then he wanted
some of Halleck’s army in Tennessee sent to him. The
Secretary assured him that Beauregard and his army were
not in Richmond, but that Halleck would be urged to
comply with the request, so far as he could do so with
safety. The particular friends of McClellan were busy at this
time with suspicions and reports that the President and
Secretary of War were trying to sacriﬁce him; and, to put
an extinguisher on this, Mr. Stanton wrote: “Be assured,
General, that there never has been a moment when my
desire has been otherwise than to aid you with my whole
heart, mind and strength, since the hour we ﬁrst met; and,
whatever others may say, for their own purposes, you have
 never had, and never can have, anyone more truly your
friend, or more anxious to support you, or more joyful than
I shall be at the success which I have no doubt will soon be
achieved by your arms.”
With a long series of dispatches in which General
McClellan quarrels with the relations which General
McDowell’s troops held to his command, it is not necessary
to burden these pages. The President wished to hold on to
McDowell’s troops, and still have them assist McClellan. He
had sent McCall’s division by water; but these were
directed to be posted so that they could unite with the
corps coming by land, and to be kept under McDowell.
McClellan saw in this arrangement only ambition on the
part of McDowell; and, in one of his dispatches, wrote the
government: “If I cannot fully control all his troops, I want
none of them, but would prefer to ﬁght the battle with what
I have, and let others be responsible for the results,” which
was equivalent to saying that he would rather be whipped
without McDowell’s troops, under the circumstances, than
be victorious with them.
On the twenty-ﬁrst, the General sent a dispatch to the
President, saying that ten thousand men had been sent
from Richmond to reinforce Jackson. Mr. Lincoln informed
him of the conﬁrmation of the news, and told him that it
was as good to him as a reinforcement of an equal number.
Thus the time passed away, while his army was wasting
with disease in the Chickahominy swamps, and he, with
every fresh dispatch, was just “about to move.” He had lain
there a month; and the rebels thought it was time for him
 to move in the other direction. He saw the preparations,
and, anticipating a defeat, he wrote to inform the
government that the rebel force before him was two
hundred thousand strong, and that, in case of a disaster,
the responsibility could not be thrown on his shoulders.
This kind of talk troubled Mr. Lincoln. “I give you all I can,”
said he, “and act on the presumption that you will do the
best you can with what you have; while you continue,
ungenerously, I think, to assume that I could give you more
if I would.” At this very moment as it appears by
McClellan’s report, he had ordered supplies to a point on
the James River, to which he expected to retreat. On the
afternoon of the twenty-sixth, the extreme right of the army
was attacked; and, from that time until the army had
wheeled back to the James River, there was no rest. They
fell back, ﬁghting every day, inﬂicting terrible losses on the
enemy, and receiving sad punishment themselves. The
General’s pen was busy still, as it might be, for he took no
part in the engagements. If he had ten thousand fresh
troops, he could take Richmond, he thought; but, as it was,
he could only cover his retreat. He was not responsible for
the result; he must have more troops. “If I save this army
now,” said he to the Secretary of War, “I tell you plainly that
I owe no thanks to you, or to any persons in Washington;
you have done your best to sacriﬁce this army.” Was ever
such petulance, such insolence, borne with such patience
before? The President wrote him: “Save your army at all
events.” The President would not blame him. “We protected
Washington,” said he, “and the enemy concentrated on you.
 Had we stripped Washington, he would have been upon us
before the troops sent could have got to you. Less than a
week ago, you notiﬁed us that reinforcements were leaving
Richmond to come in front of us. It is the nature of the
case, and neither you nor the government is to blame.”
General McClellan called upon the President for a
reinforcement of ﬁfty thousand troops, to which Mr. Lincoln
replied: “When you ask for ﬁfty thousand men to be
promptly sent to you, you surely labor under some gross
mistake of fact. Recently, you sent papers showing your
disposal of forces made last spring, for the defense of
Washington, and advising a return to that plan. I ﬁnd it
included, in and about Washington, seventy-ﬁve thousand
men. Now, please be assured that I have not men enough to
ﬁll that very plan by ﬁfteen thousand.” Further on he says:
“I have not, outside of your army, seventy-ﬁve thousand
men east of the mountains. Thus the idea of sending you
ﬁfty thousand men, or any other considerable forces
promptly, is simply absurd.” He closed by assuring him that
he did not blame him for his disasters, asking that he would
be equally generous toward the government, and adjuring
him to save his army. It was absolutely impossible for the
government to send reinforcements at once, to enable
McClellan to assume the oﬀensive. On the seventh of July,
the General, who seems to have had a penchant for giving
general advice to the government, found time to write a
long letter to Mr. Lincoln, telling him that he thought the
war should not look to the “subjugation of the people of any
state, in any event.” He would have no political execution of
 persons, no conﬁscation, and no forcible abolition of
slavery; though it appears that he did not object to the
practical abolition of slavery upon military necessity, and by
military means. “A declaration of radical views, especially
upon slavery, will rapidly disintegrate our present armies,”
said the General: but he did not seem to produce a
profound impression upon the mind of the Executive.
The President determined to ascertain, by personal
inspection, the condition of the army; and, on the eighth,
visited General McClellan at Harrison’s Landing. At this
time it was understood that the enemy was organizing his
forces for an advance on Washington. It was the opinion of
Mr. Lincoln, and of the corps commanders, that the army
should repair to Washington, but General McClellan was
against it. The army, he declared, ought not to be
withdrawn. It ought to be promptly reinforced, and thrown
again upon Richmond. He wanted the whole of General
Burnside’s command in North Carolina to help him. He
dreaded the eﬀects of a retreat upon the morale of his
army, although he had just tried it, and declared, in a
dispatch of the eleventh, that the army was in “ﬁne spirits.”
On the thirteenth, the President wrote him that one
hundred and sixty thousand men had gone with his army to
the Peninsula, and that, when he was with him, a few days
before, he was informed that only eighty-six thousand
remained, leaving seventy-three thousand ﬁve hundred to
be accounted for. After making all allowances for deaths,
wounds and sickness, ﬁfty thousand men were still absent.
General McClellan replied that 38,250 men were absent by
 authority. Here was a reinforcement at command worth
having. Why did the General let them go? Why did he not
call them back?
It was determined at last to withdraw the army from the
Peninsula, and the order found McClellan still protesting.
“The true defense of Washington” was just where he was.
He received the order to remove his sick on the second of
August; but it was not until the twenty-third that General
Franklin’s corps started from Fortress Monroe, and not
until the twenty-sixth that McClellan himself arrived at
Alexandria. On the following day, he was ordered to take
the entire direction of the forwarding of the troops from
Alexandria to assist General Pope, who, two months before,
had taken the consolidated commands of McDowell and
Fremont, the latter retiring at his own request, and being
replaced by Sigel. That portion of the army of the Potomac
which arrived before McClellan, pushed oﬀ at once to
reinforce Pope; but not a man that came afterwards took
any part in those battles by which that General was driven
back upon Washington. The dispatches by which he was
urged, ordered, almost besought, to forward troops to the
assistance of Pope, would ﬁll severa1 pages of this volume;
and, when we know how promptly troops went forward
before his arrival, it is impossible to ﬁnd in his miserable
excuses for inaction anything but a disposition to
embarrass Pope, and deprive him of success. It is a hard
judgment, and a sad one to render; but it must be
rendered, or the conclusion is inevitable that the General
was either incompetent to comprehend the emergency or
 afraid to meet it. It is impossible to ﬁnd as apology for his
failure to act in this great necessity, that would not damage
his reputation as a military man.
The triumphant rebels moved up the Potomac with the
evident intention of crossing and invading Maryland. No
time was to be lost. Under the representation that the army
of the Potomac would serve under no commander but
McClellan, General Pope was relieved, and the former
placed in command of all the troops. On the fourth of
September, he commenced moving into Maryland for the
purpose of expelling the rebel forces. Washington was in a
panic, and the whole country was in a condition of the most
feverish excitement. Still he called for reinforcements. He
wanted to uncover Washington again, and said that, “even
if Washington should be taken,” it “would not bear
comparison with the ruin and disaster that would follow a
single defeat of this army.” When that same army was
ﬁghting Under Pope, it did not, apparently, impress him in
that way at all.
The battle of South Mountain was fought on the
fourteenth, and, on the seventeenth, the battle of Antietam.
The rebels were whipped, and recrossed the Potomac,
broken and disheartened. General McClellan did not
pursue, owing to the condition of his army, one whole corps
of which (Fitz John Porter’s) had not been in the action at
all; and, as if the habit of calling for reinforcements had
become chronic, renewed his application for more troops.
There he remained, with no eﬀort to follow up his victory.
The President was impatient, but, to be sure that he did no
 injustice to the General, he Visited the army in person, to
ascertain what its real condition was. The result was an
order, issued on the sixth, for the army to move across the
Potomac, and give battle to the enemy, or drive him south.
The President promised him thirty thousand new men, if he
would move across the river between the enemy and
Washington. If he would prefer to move up the Shenandoah
valley, he could only spare him ﬁfteen thousand. Then
General McClellan began to make inquiries, and call for
shoes and other supplies; but he did not begin to move. A
few days afterward, the rebel General Stuart made a raid
into Pennsylvania, with a large cavalry force, keeping
General McClellan busy, and calling forth from him the
conﬁdent statement that the daring raiders would be
bagged; but they went completely around the army, and
escaped in safety. A note written to the General by Mr.
Lincoln, on the thirteenth, so well illustrates the situation
at the moment, and, at the same time, betrays so fully his
knowledge of aﬀairs and the intelligence of his military
criticisms, that it must be given entire:
“My Dear Sir — You remember my speaking to you of
what I called your over-cautiousness. Are you not over-
cautious when you assume that you can not do what the
enemy is constantly doing? Should you not claim to be at
least his equal in prowess, and act upon the claim?
“As I understand, you telegraphed General Halleck that
you can not subsist your army at Winchester, unless the
railroad from Harper’s Ferry to that point be put in working
order. But the enemy does now subsist his army at
 Winchester, at a distance nearly twice as great from
railroad transportation as you would have to do, without
the railroad last named. He now wagons from Culpepper
Court-House, which is just about twice as far as you would
have to do from Harper’s Ferry. He is certainly not more
than half as well provided with wagons as you are. I
certainly should be pleased for you to have the advantage
of the railroad from Harper’s Ferry to Winchester; but it
wastes all the remainder of autumn to give it to you, and, in
fact, ignores the question of time, which can not and must
not be ignored.
“Again, one of the standard maxims of war, as you know,
is, “to operate upon the enemy’s communications as much
as possible without exposing your own.” You seem to act as
if this applies against you, but can not apply in your favor.
Change positions with the enemy, and think you not he
would break your communication with Richmond within the
next 
twenty-four 
hours? 
You 
dread 
his 
going 
into
Pennsylvania. But, if he does so in full force, he gives up his
communications to you absolutely, and you have nothing to
do but to follow and ruin him; it he does so with less than
full force, fall upon and beat what is left behind all the
easier.
“Exclusive of the water line, you are now nearer
Richmond than the enemy is by the route that you can and
he must take. Why can you not reach there before him,
unless you admit that he is more than your equal on a
march? His route is the arc of a circle, while yours is the
chord. The roads are as good on yours as on his.
 “You know I desired, but did not order you, to cross the
Potomac below, instead of above, the Shenandoah and Blue
Ridge. My idea was, that this would at once menace the
enemy’s communications, which I would seize if he would
permit. If he should move northward, I would follow him
closely, holding his communications. If he should prevent
our 
seizing 
his 
communications, 
and 
move 
toward
Richmond, I would press closely to him, ﬁght him if a
favorable opportunity should present, and at least try to
beat him to Richmond on the inside track. I say ‘try;’ if we
never try, we shall never succeed. If he make a stand at
Winchester, moving neither north nor south, I would ﬁght
him there, on the idea that, if we cannot beat him when he
bears the wastage of coming to us, we never can when we
bear the wastage of going to him. This proposition is a
simple truth, and is too important to be lost sight of for a
moment. In coming to us he tenders us an advantage which
we should not waive. We should not so operate as to merely
drive him away. As we must beat him somewhere, or fail
ﬁnally, we can do it, if at all, easier near to us than far
away. If we cannot beat the enemy where he now is, we
never can, he again being within the intrenchments of
Richmond. Recurring to the idea of going to Richmond on
the inside track, the facility of supplying from the side away
from the enemy is remarkable; as it were, by the diﬀerent
spokes of a wheel, extending from the hub toward the rim;
— and this whether you move directly by the chord, or on
the inside arc, hugging the Blue Ridge more closely. The
chord-line, as you see, carries you by Aldie, Haymarket,
 and Fredericksburg; and you see how turnpikes, railroads,
and ﬁnally the Potomac by Acquia Creek, meet you at all
points from Washington. The same, only the lines
lengthened a little, if you press closer to the Blue Ridge
part of the way. The gaps through the Blue Ridge I
understand to be about the following distances from
Harper’s Ferry, to wit: Vestal’s, ﬁve miles; Gregory’s,
thirteen; 
Snicker’s, 
eighteen; 
Ashby’s, 
twenty-eight;
Manassas, thirty-eight; Chester, forty-ﬁve; and Thornton’s,
ﬁfty-three. I should think it preferable to take the route
nearest the enemy, disabling him to make an important
move without your knowledge, and compelling him to keep
his forces together for dread of you. The gaps would enable
you to attack if you should wish. For a great part of the way
you would be practically between the enemy and both
Washington and Richmond, enabling us to spare you the
greatest number of troops from here. When, at length,
running to Richmond ahead of him enables him to move
this way, if he does so, turn and attack him in the rear. But I
think he should be engaged long before such point is
reached. It is all easy if our troops march as well as the
enemy, and it is unmanly to say they cannot do it. This
letter is in no sense an order.”
Still the government urged the General forward, and still
he had excuses for not going forward. His horses were
fatigued, and had the sore tongue, he said; and the
President could not forbear asking him what his horses had
done since Antietam that would fatigue anything. The
General did not like what the President said about his
 cavalry, and called out another note from Mr. Lincoln, who,
under date of October twenty-sixth, wrote him that if he
had done any injustice he deeply regretted it. He added:
“To be told, after ﬁve weeks’ total inactivity of the army,
and during which period we had sent to that army every
fresh horse we possibly could, amounting in the whole to
7,918, that the cavalry horses were too much fatigued to
move, presented a very cheerless, almost hopeless prospect
for the future.” On the ﬁfth of November, the army had
crossed — just a month after the order to cross was given;
— and, of course, the rebels had made all the needful
preparations, either for battle or retreat.
But patience at Washington, tried long, and terribly tried,
had become exhausted; and, on the same day on which the
General announced the army all across the Potomac, an
order arrived relieving him of his command.
Military men will judge this remarkable campaign in the
light of their own science; but the civilian will read its
history by the light of its results, and by the light of those
later magniﬁcent operations of Thomas in Tennessee, — of
Sheridan in the Shenandoah valley and near Richmond, —
of Sherman’s march from Chattanooga through the heart of
the rebellion and up the Atlantic coast, with cities falling
before and on either side of him as if swept by a tornado, —
and of Grant before Vicksburg, or in the Wilderness and at
Richmond, capturing whole armies, and ﬁnishing up a was
so weakly begun. In the light of these operations, the
campaign of McClellan looks like the work of a boy or the
play of a man.
 With General McClellan’s motives, the writer has no
desire to deal. That he became the favorite of men whose
heart was not in the war, may well be considered his
misfortune. That he became the representative of the party
opposed to the administration in its general policy, on all
subjects, was not inconsistent with his desire and
determination to do his whole military duty. That he
entertained and acted upon the determination to injure the
administration for political purposes, there is very little
evidence; and there is absolutely no evidence that the
administration, through any jealousy of him, withheld its
support from him, that he might be ruined and put out of
its way. Such a supposition cannot live a moment in the
light of Mr. Lincoln’s life. If there is one fact in McClellan’s
campaign that stands out with peculiar prominence, it is
that both Mr. Lincoln and Mr. Stanton sent him every man
they could spare, consistently with the safety of the capital,
by the General’s own showing at ﬁrst, and by the showing
of events at last. On one side, we see the presumptuous
volunteering of general political and military advice, the
unreasonable call for reinforcements when assured again
and again that he had every man that could be given him,
expostulations against government orders, quarreling with
government arrangements, absolute criminations of the
government, 
unaccountable 
hesitations 
and 
boyish
ineﬀiciency; while, on the other, there were almost
unbroken respectfulness, patience and toleration, ardent
desire for the best results, constant urgency to action,
constant sacriﬁce of personal feeling and opinion, and a
 patent wish to do everything practicable or possible to give
the commanding General everything he wanted.
That General McClellan loved power, is evident; and it is
just as evident that it was not pleasant to him to share it
with any one; but, on the whole, there is no evidence that
he was not a good, well-meaning, and patriotic man. The
diﬀiculty was that he was great mainly in his inﬁrmities. He
was not a great man, nor a great general. He was a good
organizer of military force, and a good engineer; he was a
good theorizer, and wrote good English; he had that quality
of personal magnetism which drew the hearts of his
soldiers to him; but he was not a man of action, of
expedients, of quick judgment, of dash and daring, of great,
heroic deeds. He was never ready. There were many
evidences that he held a theory of his own as to the mode
of conducting the war, and that, independently of the
government, he endeavored to pursue it; but, even if he
did, his failure must always be regarded as mainly due to
constitutional 
peculiarities 
for 
which 
he 
was 
not
responsible.
This chapter should be concluded here, but space must
be taken for a very brief record of the immediately
succeeding fortunes of the army of the Potomac, and a
hurried chronicle of the other military events of the year.
On the retirement of General McClellan, General Burnside
was placed in command of the army of the Potomac; and, at
the same time, the rebel army commenced falling back
upon Richmond. On the fourteenth, the army left its camps,
and marched for Fredericksburg, arriving there at about
 the same time with the rebel army. Burnside was obliged to
wait for his pontoons, and it was not until the twelfth of
December that he was ready to cross. Only a feeble
resistance was made to his passage, but it was a worse
than fruitless procedure. The attempt to carry the hills was
a failure, and he was obliged to withdraw his army, with a
loss of from ten thousand to twelve thousand men. This
gave a sad ﬁnishing up to the year’s sad business, with this
ill-starred army.
The opening of the campaign of 1862 found the
government with a newly created navy at its command. Mr.
Welles, though reputed ineﬀicient, had accomplished what
no other man had ever done in an equal space of time. Not
only were the southern ports eﬀiciently blockaded, but
materials for formidable naval expeditions were prepared.
General Burnside, at the head of an expedition, captured
Roanoke Island on the eighth of February, with three
thousand prisoners; and subsequently engaged in other
successful movements on the coast and up the rivers of
North Carolina. On the nineteenth of June, Charleston was
attacked, without success. In the latter part of April, Forts
Jackson and St. Philip, below New Orleans, were assailed
by the ﬂeet under Commodore Farragut, and so far
disabled that they were passed. As a consequence, New
Orleans tell into our hands, all the rebel troops ﬂeeing the
city. This aﬀair was equally brilliant in its execution and
important in its results, and encouraged the government as
much as it distressed and discouraged its foes. Fort Pulaski,
 guarding the entrance to Savannah, was also taken, and
that port eﬀectually shut up.
While these much desired, though hardly expected,
successes attended the operations at the mouth of the
Mississippi, events of equal importance were in progress on
its tributaries. At the West movements were on a gigantic
scale. The capture of Forts Henry and Donelson on the
Cumberland River drew the enemy out of Bowling Green
and Nashville, and gave us Columbus. General Price was
driven out of Missouri. Island Number Ten and Forts Pillow
and Randolph all fell into our hands, and then our forces
occupied Memphis. A combination of all the rebel armies at
Corinth surprised our troops at Pittsburg Landing, under
General Grant, on the morning of April sixth, with
overwhelming numbers, and drove them back to the
protection of our gunboats; but on the following day,
through the opportune arrival of General Buell, with his
forces, the rebels were pushed back into retreat, with
terrible losses, leaving our victorious army almost as badly
punished as themselves. The victory was so decided that
Mr. Lincoln was moved to issue a Proclamation of
Thanksgiving, in which he also recognized the other
victories that have been chronicled. The people were called
upon to “render thanks to our Heavenly Father for these
inestimable blessings,” and were also desired to “implore
spiritual consolation in behalf of all those who have been
brought into aﬄiction by the casualties and calamities of
civil war.”
 The rebels fell back to Corinth, and, remaining there a
few days, retired to Grenada. A powerful eﬀort of General
Bragg to invade Kentucky, made later in the season, for the
purpose mainly of gathering reinforcements, encouraging
the secession spirit, and collecting supplies, was a failure,
in nearly every point; and, after a battle at Terryville, he
retreated. General Rosecrans was attacked at Corinth by a
powerful confederate force, but he repulsed the rebels with
great loss. At the very last of the year, there was a severe
ﬁght at Murfreesboro which resulted favorably to our arms;
and the new year of 1863 found a great advance made
toward the entire redemption of Kentucky, Tennessee and
Missouri, from the presence of rebel armies and the
prevalence of rebel inﬂuence.
