  ha ter  III.
MR. LINCOLN WANTED closer work than Mr. Douglas had
given him. He desired to address the same audiences with
his antagonist, and to show to those whom he addressed
the fallacy of his reasoning and the groundlessness of his
charges. Accordingly, on the twenty-fourth of July, he
dispatched the following note: —
“Hon. B. A. Douglas — My Dear Sir: Will it be agreeable
to you to make an arrangement for you and myself to divide
time, and address the same audiences the present canvass?
Mr. Judd, who will hand you this, is authorized to receive
your answer; and, if agreeable to you, to enter into the
terms of such arrangement.
“Your obedient servant, A. Lincoln.”
To this Mr. Douglas replied, stating that recent events
had interposed diﬀiculties in the way of such an
arrangement. In connection with the State Central
Committee at Springﬁeld, he had made a series of
appointments extending over nearly the whole period that
remained before the election, and the people of the various
localities had been notiﬁed of the times and places of the
meetings. The candidates for Congress, the legislature and
other oﬀices would desire to speak at these meetings, and
thus all the time would be occupied. Then he proceeded to
give, as a further reason for his refusal, that it was
 intended to bring out another candidate for United States
senator, to divide the democratic vote for the beneﬁt of Mr.
Lincoln, and that he (the third candidate) would also claim
a chance in the joint debates, so that he (said third
candidate) and Mr. Lincoln would have the opening and
closing speech in every instance. While, therefore, he
declined the general invitation, he declared himself ready
to make an arrangement for seven joint debates in the
congressional districts respectively where they had not
already spoken, and at the following places, viz: Freeport,
Ottawa, 
Galesburg, 
Quincy, 
Alton, 
Jonesboro 
and
Charleston. This letter was published in the Chicago Times,
and read there by Mr. Lincoln before he received the
autograph by mail.
To this letter Mr. Lincoln responded, denying, of course,
the foolish charge of intended unfairness in bringing in a
third candidate to divide the time to the disadvantage of
Mr. Douglas, and agreeing to speak in the seven places
mentioned. There is other matter in these letters which
thoroughly discovers the characteristics of the two writers,
but it must be left behind.
Mr. Douglas replied to this second letter of Mr. Lincoln,
designating the time and places of the debate as they
follow:
Ottawa, LaSalle County, August 21st, 1858; Freeport,
Stephenson County, August 27th; Jonesboro, Union County,
September 15th; Charleston, Coles County, September
18th; Galesburg, Knox County, October 7th; Quincy, Adams
 County, October 13th; Alton, Madison County, October
15th.
The terms proposed in this letter and accepted in a
subsequent note by Mr. Lincoln, were, that at Ottawa, Mr.
Douglas should speak an hour, then Mr. Lincoln an hour
and a half; Mr. Douglas having the closing speech of half an
hour. At the next place, Mr. Lincoln should open and close
in the same way, and so on, alternately, to the conclusion of
the arrangement.
As about three weeks intervened between the date of this
agreement for joint debates and the ﬁrst appointment, both
parties engaged zealously in their independent work. Mr.
Lincoln began his canvass at Beardstown, the spot where,
twenty-ﬁve years before, he had taken his military company
for rendezvous before starting out for the Black Hawk war.
After making a speech here, he went up the Illinois River to
Havana and Bath in Mason County, to Lewistown and
Canton in Fulton County, and to Peoria and Henry in
Marshall County, making speeches at each place, and
attracting immense audiences. Mr. Douglas was equally
busy, and equally fortunate in attracting the people to listen
to his utterances upon the great questions of the day. At
Clinton, in DeWitt County, he found it no longer possible to
pass in silence the charge of Mr. Lincoln that he had “left a
niche in the Nebraska bill to receive the Dred Scott
decision,” which declared in eﬀect, that a territorial
legislature could not abolish slavery. Mr. Douglas here
stated that his self-respect alone prevented him from
calling 
this 
charge 
a 
falsehood. 
Subsequently, 
at
 Beardstown, he broke over his restraints, and called it “an
infamous lie.” To this Mr. Lincoln responded on a
subsequent occasion as follows:
“I say to you, gentlemen, that it would be more to the
purpose for Judge Douglas to say that he did not repeal the
Missouri compromise; that he did not make slavery possible
where it was impossible before; that he did not leave a
niche in the Nebraska bill for the Dred Scott decision to
rest in; that he did not vote down a clause giving the people
the right to exclude slavery if they wanted to; that he did
not refuse to give his individual opinion whether a
territorial legislature could exclude slavery; that he did not
make a report to the senate in which he said that the rights
of the people in this regard were held in abeyance, and
could not be immediately exercised; that he did not make a
hasty indorsement of the Dred Scott decision over at
Springﬁeld; that he does not now indorse that decision;
that that decision does not take away from the territorial
legislature the power to exclude slavery; and that he did
not in the original Nebraska bill so couple the words ‘state’
and ‘territory’ together that what the Supreme Court has
done in forcing open all the territories for slavery, it may
yet do in forcing open all the state; — I say it would be
vastly more to the point, for Judge Douglas to say he did
not do some of these things, did not forge some of the links
of overwhelming testimony, than to go to vociferating about
the country that possibly he may be obliged to hint that
somebody is a liar.”
 The ﬁrst meeting of the series agreed upon was held at
Ottawa according to appointment. A concourse of citizens
estimated at twelve thousand had assembled. Mr. Douglas
had the opening speech, and in this speech he resorted to
an expedient for placing Mr. Lincoln on the defensive which
was either very weak, or very wicked. He made a charge
against Mr. Lincoln which, if he knew it to be false, was
foul, and which, if he did not know to be true, was most
impolitic. He charged that Mr. Lincoln, on the part of the
whigs, and Mr. Trumbull, on the part of the democrats,
entered into an arrangement in 1854, for the dissolution of
the two parties, and the fusing of both in the republican
party, for the purpose of giving Lincoln Shields’ place in the
Senate, and Trumbull, his (Douglas’) own. Furthermore,
that the parties met at Springﬁeld in October of that year,
and, in convention of their friends, laid down a platform of
the principles upon which the new party was constructed.
He then proceeded to read what he called “the most
important and material resolutions of the abolition
platform.” What these resolutions were, will appear in Mr.
Lincoln’s replies to the questions which Mr. Douglas based
upon them. His object in asking these questions was, as he
said, in order that when he should “trot him (Lincoln)
down” to lower Egypt (southern Illinois) he might put the
same questions to him there.
The hearty reception which the audience gave to the
principles of this platform as he pronounced them, did not
please Mr. Douglas. He wished to see whether they would
“bear transplanting from Ottawa to Jonesboro.” “I have a
 right,” said Mr. Douglas, “to an answer, for I quote from the
platform of the republican party, made by himself (Lincoln)
and others at the time that party was formed, and the
bargain made by Mr. Lincoln to dissolve and kill the old
whig party, and transfer its members, bound hand and foot,
to the abolition party, under the direction of Giddings and
Fred Douglass.”
Mr. Douglas went on then to comment on Mr. Lincoln’s
Springﬁeld speech, which had come to be known as “the
house-divided-against-itself speech,” and slid, as usual, into
his talk about the inferiority of the negro. Speaking of Mr.
Lincoln and the “abolition orators,” he said, “he and they
maintain that negro equality is guaranteed by the laws of
God, and that it is asserted in the Declaration of
Independence. If they think so, of course they have a right
to say so, and so vote. I do not question Mr. Lincoln’s
conscientious belief that the negro was made his equal,
and, hence, his brother; but for my own part, I do not
regard the negro as my equal, and positively deny that he is
my brother, or any kin to me whatever.”
And here it may be said, because it will be impossible to
describe with particularity all the speeches of the
campaign, that the staple of the speeches of Mr. Douglas,
as well as those of Mr. Lincoln, related to a very few points,
which may be summed up in a brace of paragraphs.
Mr. Douglas did not believe in natural negro equality, and
did believe that every state had the right to say just what
rights she would confer upon the negro; that the people of
every territory had a right to decide as to what their
 institutions should be, while he bowed, at the same time, to
the Dred Scott decision, which declared that they had no
right to abolish slavery; and that the country could endure
half slave and half free as well for all coming time as it had
for the previous eighty years, while slavery itself, to him,
was a matter of indiﬀerence — an institution which might
be “voted up or voted down,” without any appeal to his
preferences.
On the other hand, Mr. Lincoln placed himself on the
broad ground of the Declaration of Independence, that all
men are created equal, and are by heaven endowed with
certain inalienable rights, such as life, liberty and the
pursuit of happiness. He recognized the negro as a man,
coming within the broad sweep of this Declaration. He
believed thoroughly in Mr. Douglas’ doctrine of popular
sovereignty, without the Dred Scott qualiﬁcation, which
was a direct denial of the sovereignty; but he believed the
abrogation of the Missouri compromise, which Mr. Douglas
himself had eﬀected, an unspeakable wrong, a foul breach
of faith, by which it was rendered possible for the people of
a territory to choose slavery, and by which the forcing of
slavery upon them was rendered practicable. Furthermore,
he saw in that “piece of machinery,” made up of
congressional legislation, Supreme Court decisions and
executive and party connivance, an attempt to nationalize
and perpetuate slavery, which he felt must logically
ultimate in that result, or end in universal emancipation.
Slavery, he believed, had lived by the side of freedom, and
in partnership with it, simply because freedom had
 regarded itself as eternal, while it had regarded slavery as
ephemeral. Thus the fathers regarded and treated slavery.
They had curtailed its territory. They had forbidden the
importation of slaves. All their arrangements looked to an
early end of slavery; and Mr. Lincoln quoted the champions
of slavery to sustain his views on this point. When the
policy of the government changed, and it was proposed to
nationalize slavery and make it perpetual — to confer upon
it the same rights with freedom — nay, to make it
impossible for freedom to abolish it — then he foresaw a
conﬂict which could only end by its utter overthrow, or its
universal prevalence. He did not believe the house would
fall; he did believe that it would cease to be divided.
The seven joint debates rang their changes on these
points, as they were held and maintained by the debaters.
Mr. Douglas did not seem to be as fertile in thought and
expression as his antagonist. He was more given to
diversions, to the ordinary clap-trap of campaign speaking,
to appeals to prejudices, to the springing of false issues, to
quibbles and tricks. Mr. Lincoln, on the contrary, was in
thorough earnest, and stuck with manly tenacity to the
great questions he had in hand. He stripped every
objectionable proposition and every specious argument of
the disguises in which the ingenious language of Mr.
Douglas had clothed them, and refused to be led away, by a
hair’s breadth, from the real, naked issues of the campaign.
In replying to Judge Douglas at Ottawa, he simply said
that the story of his bargain with Mr. Trumbull was not
true, and that he was so far from having had anything to do
 with the convention to which the Senator had alluded that
he was attending court, oﬀ in Tazewell County, when it was
held. That was all there was of Mr. Douglas’ charges. They
had not an inch of truth to stand upon; and it was
discovered 
immediately 
after 
the 
debate 
that 
the
resolutions which Mr. Douglas had quoted had not been
passed in Springﬁeld at all, by any convention, and that,
although they had been uttered by a local convention in the
town of Aurora, they were, for the purposes used, and
under the circumstances, essentially a forgery, for which
Mr. Douglas or his friends were guiltily responsible. The
charge that Mr. Lincoln was in the convention, that he
made a bargain with Mr. Trumbull, that he was responsible
for a certain set of anti-slavery resolutions, and that the
resolutions which he read were passed by the convention
that was held at Springﬁeld, was false in every particular.
Did Mr. Douglas know it to be so? Perhaps the only reply
that it is proper to make to this question is that he ought to
have known it to be so.
In Mr. Lincoln’s reply, he quoted from his Peoria speech
made in 1854, to which allusion has been made in this
history, to show his exact position on the subject of slavery
in the states where it existed. He said in that speech that
he had no prejudice against the southern people. They were
just what we should be under their circumstances. “If
slavery did not now exist among them, they would not
introduce it. If it did now exist among us, we should not
instantly give it up.” He understood how diﬀicult it was to
get rid of slavery, and he did not blame them for not doing
 what he should not know how to do himself. He
acknowledged his constitutional obligations, and went so
far as to say that he would be willing to give them a law for
reclaiming fugitives, provided a law could be made which
would not be more likely to carry a free man into slavery
than our ordinary criminal laws are to hang an innocent
one. This, notwithstanding he hated slavery for the
monstrous injustice of slavery itself, and for its disgrace to
democratic institutions. But all these facts had no eﬀect
upon his mind when he came to consider the question of
extending slavery over territory now free. There was no
more excuse, in his opinion, for permitting slavery to go
into free territory, than for reviving the African slave-trade
by law. “The law which forbids the bringing a slave from
Africa,” said Mr. Lincoln, “and that which has so long
forbidden the taking of them to Nebraska, can hardly be
distinguished, on any moral principle.” The principal point
urged against Judge Douglas in this speech touched his
devotion to Supreme Court decisions. A decision of this
Court was to him a “Thus saith the Lord.” There was no
appeal from it; and the next decision of this same Court,
whatever it might be, was indorsed in advance. It is simply
for the Supreme Court to say that no state under the
Constitution can exclude slavery, and he must bow to the
decision, just as when it says no territory can thus exclude
it. Mr. Lincoln closed his remarks on this point by an
argumentum ad hominem, equally characteristic and
clever:
 “The next decision, as much as this, will be a Thus saith
the Lord. There is nothing that can divert or turn him away
from this decision. It is nothing that I point out to him that
his great prototype, General Jackson, did not believe in the
binding force of decisions. It is nothing to him that
Jeﬀerson did not so believe. I have said that I have often
heard him approve of Jackson’s course in disregarding the
decision of the Supreme Court pronouncing a national bank
constitutional. He says I did not hear him say so. He denies
the accuracy of my recollection. I say he ought to know
better than I, but I will make no question about this thing,
though it still seems to me that I heard him say it twenty
times. I will tell him though, that he now claims to stand on
the Cincinnati platform, which aﬀirms that Congress
cannot charter a national bank, in the teeth of that old
standing decision that Congress can charter a bank. And I
remind him of another piece of history on the question of
respect for judicial decisions, and it is a piece of Illinois
history, belonging to a time when the large party to which
Judge Douglas belonged were displeased with a decision of
the Supreme Court of Illinois, because they had decided
that a Governor could not remove a Secretary of State. You
will ﬁnd the whole story in Ford’s History of Illinois; and I
know that Judge Douglas will not deny that he was then in
favor of overslaughing that decision by the mode of adding
ﬁve new Judges, so as to vote down the four old ones. Not
only so, but it ended in the Judge’s sitting down on that
very bench as one of the ﬁve new Judges to break down the
four old ones. It was in this way precisely that he got his
 title of Judge. Now, when the Judge tells me that men
appointed conditionally to sit as members of a court, will
have to be catechised beforehand upon some subject, I say,
‘You know, Judge; you have tried it.’ When he says a court
of this kind will lose the conﬁdence of all men, will be
prostituted and disgraced by such a proceeding, I say, ‘You
knoW best, Judge; you have been through the mill.’ But I
cannot shake Judge Douglas’ teeth loose from the Dred
Scott decision. Like some obstinate animal (I mean no
disrespect,) that will hang on when he has once got his
teeth ﬁxed; you may cut oﬀ a leg, or you may tear away an
arm, still he will not relax his hold. And so I may point out
to the Judge, and say that he is bespattered all over, from
the beginning of his political life to the present time, with
attacks upon judicial decisions — I may cut oﬀ limb after
limb of his public record, and strive to wrench him from a
single dictum of the court — yet I cannot divert him from it.
He hangs, to the last, to the Dred Scott decision. These
things show there is a purpose strong as death and eternity
for which he adheres to this decision, and for which he will
adhere to all other decisions of the same court.”
At the close of the half hour which Mr. Douglas employed
in his reply to Mr. Lincoln, the latter was literally borne
away upon the shoulders of his friends, in a frenzy of
enthusiasm, a fact to which Mr. Douglas made playful
allusion a few days afterwards, in the statement that Mr.
Lincoln was so much frightened that he had to be taken
from the stand, and was laid up for seven days. Mr. Lincoln
was too simple, too much in earnest, and too sensitive, to
 take this badinage gracefully. He really supposed there
might be persons who would believe it, as appeared in a
subsequent speech, in which he made it a matter of
complaint.
At the Freeport meeting, Mr. Lincoln had the opening
speech, and commenced by answering the interrogatories
which Mr. Douglas had addressed to him at Ottawa, based
upon the declarations of the Aurora resolutions. Mr.
Douglas asked him if he stood pledged now to the same
details of policy that he did in 1854 — details which he
drew from the resolutions he had read; and to his questions
Mr. Lincoln made these replies, seriatim: that he was not
then, and never had been pledged to the unconditional
repeal of the fugitive slave law; that he was not then, and
had never been, pledged against the admission of any more
slave states; that he did not stand pledged against the
admission of a new state into the Union with such a
constitution as the people of that state may see ﬁt to make;
that he did not stand pledged to the abolition of slavery in
the District of Columbia; that he did not stand pledged to
the prohibition of the slave trade between the diﬀerent
states; and that he was pledged to a belief in the right and
duty of Congress to prohibit slavery in all the United States
territories. After saying that he had replied in terms to the
Judge, and that he was not “pledged” to any of these
principles or measures, he further said that he would not
hang upon the form of the questions, but utter what he did
think on all the subjects involved in them. He believed the
southern people were entitled, under the Constitution, to a
 congressional fugitive slave law; said that he should be
very sorry to see any more slave states applying for
admission to the Union, and declared that he would not
only be glad to see slavery abolished in the District of
Columbia, 
but 
he 
believed 
that 
Congress 
had 
the
constitutional power to abolish it there. Having answered
Mr. Douglas’ questions — these and the remainder — in
accordance with opinions with which the reader is already
familiar, he was ready to turn questioner, and give the
Judge something to do, in the same line of eﬀort. He had
already consulted with his friends concerning the matter,
and, in his conversation on the subject, had dropped an
expression which showed that he was looking beyond the
senatorial contest for the grand results of the discussion. In
Mr. Lincoln’s view the principal point of debate was Mr.
Douglas’ doctrine of popular sovereignty, in connection
with the Dred Scott decision — the two things in his
judgment being in direct antagonism, and being, in reality,
a shameful fraud. This antagonism Mr. Lincoln proposed to
present in the form of interrogatories, but his friends
remonstrated. “If you put that question to him,” they said,
“he will perceive that an answer, giving practical force and
eﬀect to the Dred Scott decision in the territories,
inevitably loses him the battle; and he will therefore reply
by oﬀering the decision as an abstract principle, but
denying its practical application.” “But,” said Mr. Lincoln,
“if he does that, he can never be President.” His friends
replied, “that is not your lookout; you are after the
 senatorship.” “No, gentlemen,” said he, “I am killing larger
game. The battle of 1860 is worth a hundred of this.”
Whether Mr. Lincoln then expected to be the republican
candidate for the presidency in 1860, there are no means of
judging; but that he intended the discussion to damage Mr.
Douglas’ presidential prospects there is no doubt. So Mr.
Lincoln put his questions, which, in their order, were as
they follow:
“1. If the people of Kansas shall, by means entirely
unobjectionable in all other respects, adopt a state
constitution, and ask admission into the Union under it,
before they have the requisite number of inhabitants
according to the English bill — some ninety-three thousand
— will you vote to admit them?
“2. Can the people of a United States territory, in any
lawful way, against the wish of any citizen of the United
States, exclude slavery from its limits prior to the formation
of a state constitution?
“3. If the Supreme Court of the United States shall
decide that states cannot exclude slavery from their limits,
are you in favor of acquiescing in, adopting and following
such decision, as a rule of political action?
“4. Are you in favor of acquiring additional territory, in
disregard of how such acquisition may aﬀect the nation on
the slavery question?”
To the ﬁrst question Mr. Douglas replied that he held it a
sound role, of universal application, to require a territory to
contain the requisite population for a member of Congress,
before it is admitted as a state into the Union; but it having
 been decided by Congress that Kansas had population
enough for a slave state, he held that she had enough for a
free state. His answer to the second question was in brief
this: “It matters not what way the Supreme Court may
hereafter decide, as to the abstract question whether
slavery may or may not go into a territory under the
Constitution, the people have the lawful means to introduce
it, or exclude it as they please, for the reason that slavery
cannot exist a day, or an hour, anywhere, unless it is
supported by local police regulations. Those police
regulations can only be established by the local legislature;
and if the people are opposed to slavery, they will elect
representatives to that body who will, by unfriendly
legislation, eﬀectually prevent the introduction of it into
their midst.” The third question he answered by stating
that a decision of the Supreme Court that states could not
exclude slavery from their limits, would “be an act of moral
treason that no man on the bench would ever descend to.”
The thing in his view was simply impossible. This left the
real question unanswered. Mr. Lincoln had not asked him
whether the Supreme Court would or could make such a
decision, but had inquired what he would do in the event
that it should. To the fourth interrogatory he replied,
“Whenever it becomes necessary, in our growth and
progress, to acquire more territory, I am in favor of it,
without reference to the question of slavery; and when we
have acquired it I will leave the people free to do as they
please — either to make it slave or free territory as they
prefer.”
 To the answer to the second question Mr. Lincoln
responded by charging Mr. Douglas with changing his
ground; and referred to the record to prove his charge. He
referred to the inquiry made by Judge Trumbull of Judge
Douglas in the United States Senate, on this very point,
when the former asked the latter whether the people of a
territory had the lawful power to exclude slavery, prior to
the formation of a constitution. The Judge’s reply then was
that it was a question to be decided by the Supreme Court.
The question has been decided by the Supreme Court, and
now the Judge, by saying that the people can exclude
slavery if they choose, virtually says that it is not a question
for the Supreme Court but a question for the people. The
proposition that “slavery cannot exist a day or an hour
without local police regulations” is historically false, even
in the case of Dred Scott himself, who was held in
Minnesota territory not only without police regulations, but
in the teeth of Congressional legislation, supposed to be
valid at the time. The absurdity of adhering to the Dred
Scott decision and maintaining popular sovereignty at the
same time, he put into a single sentence in a subsequent
speech, made in Ohio — a sentence which contained the
whole argument. It was declaring, he said, “no less than
that a thing may lawfully be driven away from a place
where it has a lawful right to be.”
It is impossible to follow to their conclusion this series of
debates in the pages of this volume. Enough has been
written to reveal the ground of the two antagonists, the
merits of the questions they discussed and their modes of
 conducting debate. Into the side questions which sprang up
on every fresh occasion, and which were connected with
persons and local politics, it is not possible, and, perhaps,
not desirable, to follow the debaters. They kept their
appointments, and fulﬁlled the terms of their arrangement.
They attracted to them immense crowds, wherever they
appeared; and the whole nation looked on with an intense
interest. There has never been a local canvass since the
formation of the government which so attracted the
attention of the politicians of other states as this. It was the
key note of the coming presidential campaign. It was a
thorough presentation of the issues upon which the next
national battle was to be fought. The eyes of all the eastern
states were turned to the west where young republicanism
and old democracy were establishing the dividing lines of
the two parties, and preparing the ground for the great
struggle soon to be begun.
To say that Mr. Lincoln was the victor in this contest,
morally and intellectually, is simply to record the judgment
of the world. To say that he was victor in every way before
the people of Illinois it needs only to be recorded that he
received a majority in the popular vote over Mr. Douglas of
four thousand eighty-ﬁve. There is this to be said, however,
in connection with these statements. Whatever the
advantages of Mr. Douglas may have been, Mr. Lincoln had
the great advantage of belonging to a new and aggressive
party, which had started freshly in the strife for power, and
had not been corrupted by power. It had not lived long
enough to depart from the principles of truth and justice in
 which it had its birth. Standing on the ground that slavery
was wrong and that its perpetuation would be a calamity,
and its diﬀusion through new territory a crime, Mr. Lincoln
not only felt, but knew, that he was right. This made him
strong. Mr. Douglas was looking for the presidency, and
knew that if he should ever reach and grasp the prize
before him, he must do it through the aid of the
slaveholding states. He knew that he could only secure this
support by a certain degree of friendliness, or an entire
indiﬀerence, to slavery. He intended to ride into power on
the back of popular sovereignty, giving at least nominal
equality to slavery and freedom in the territories, while, at
the same time, endorsing the decision of the Supreme
Court as to what the exact rights of slavery were, under the
Constitution. His policy was not only that of the democratic
party of Illinois, but essentially that of the whole North. He
boasted of this on one occasion, upon which Mr. Lincoln
retorted the charge of sectionalism. Mr. Douglas had been
obliged to defer so much to the spirit of freedom and to the
rights of free labor in the territories — had been obliged for
fear of defeat to go so far from the original path he had
marked out for himself — that Mr. Lincoln called his
attention to the fact that his speeches would not pass
current south of the Ohio so readily as they had formerly
done. “Whatever may be the result of this ephemeral
contest between Judge Douglas and myself,” said he, “I see
the day rapidly approaching when his pill of ‘sectionalism,’
which he has been thrusting down the throats of
republicans for years past, will be crowded down his own
 throat.” It was undoubtedly the grand aim of Mr. Lincoln,
throughout the whole series of debates, to drive Mr.
Douglas into such an open declaration for slavery as to
secure his defeat for the senatorial oﬀice, or, failing in that,
to compel him to such declarations on behalf of freedom as
would spoil him as a southern candidate for the presidency.
“The battle of 1860 is worth a hundred of this,” Mr. Lincoln
had said to his friends before the Freeport debate. He saw
further than they. He was “killing larger game” than the
senatorship, and he certainly did kill, or assist in killing,
Judge Douglas, as a southern candidate for the presidency.
These debates of these two champions, respectively of
the principles of the Declaration of Independence and of
party policy, were published entire as a campaign
document in the republican interest, when Mr. Lincoln was
nominated for the presidency, without a word of comment,
the people being left to form their own conclusions as to
the merits of the controversy, and the relative ability of the
men whom it represented.
It is in vain to look for any better presentation of the
principles of the republican party, or a better deﬁnition of
the issues which divided it from the democratic party of the
time, than are to be found in these speeches of Mr. Lincoln.
They cover the whole ground. They are clear, sound,
logical, powerful and exhaustive; and, in connection with
two or three speeches made afterwards in Ohio and New
York, form the chief material on which his reputation as an
orator and a debater must rest. The man who shall write
the story of the great rebellion on behalf of human slavery
 must go back to these masterly speeches of an Illinois
lawyer to ﬁnd the clearest and most complete statement of
those diﬀerences between the power of slavery, and the
spirit of freedom — the policy of slavery and the policy of
freedom — which ended, after expenditures of uncounted
treasure and unmeasured blood, in the ﬁnal overthrow of
the accursed institution.
Mr. Lincoln was beaten in his contest for the seat of Mr.
Douglas in the Senate, in consequence of the unfair
apportionment of the legislative districts. When it came to a
ballot in the legislature, it was found that there were
fourteen democrats to eleven republicans in the Senate,
and forty democrats to thirty-ﬁve republicans in the House.
This re-instated Mr. Douglas; and the champion of the
republican party was defeated after a contest fought by him
with wonderful power and persistence, with unfailing
fairness, good nature and magnanimity, and with a skill
rarely if ever surpassed. He had visited every part of the
state, made about sixty speeches, been received by the
people everywhere with unbounded enthusiasm, had grown
strong with every day’s exercise, was conscious that he had
worsted his antagonist in the intellectual struggle, and,
when defeat came, he could not have been otherwise than
disappointed. On being asked by a friend how he felt when
the returns came in that insured his defeat, he replied that
he felt, he supposed, very much like the stripling who had
bruised his toe— “too badly to laugh and too big to cry.”
But the battle of 1860 was indeed worth a hundred of that,
and to it, events will swiftly lead us.
