  ha ter I.
THE EARLY LIFE of Abraham Lincoln was a hard and humble
backwoods and border life. As a boy and as a young man,
he was not fond of wild sports and exciting adventures. It is
doubtless true that the earlier years of many of his
neighbors and companions would be more engaging to the
pen of the biographer and the imagination of the reader,
than his. His later career, his noble character, his
association with the grandest and most important events of
American history, have alone, or mainly, given signiﬁcance
and interest to his youthful experiences of hardship, the
humble processes of his education, and his early struggles
with the rough forces of nature among which he was born.
The tree which rose so high, and spread its leaves so
broadly, and bore such golden fruit, and then fell before the
blast because it was so heavy and so high, has left its roots
upturned into the same light that gloriﬁes its branches, and
discovered and made divine the soil from which it drew its
nutriment.
When Mr. Lincoln was nominated for the presidency of
the United States in 1860, it became desirable that a
sketch of his life should be prepared and widely
distributed; but, upon being applied to for materials for this
sketch, by the gentleman who had undertaken to produce
it, he seemed oppressed with a sense of their tameness and
 lowliness, and the conviction that they could not be of the
slightest interest to the American people. “My early
history,” said he, “is perfectly characterized by a single line
of Gray’s Elegy:
‘The short and simple annals of the poor.’”
His judgment then was measurably just; but events have
set it aside, and endowed the humble details that seemed
to him as so common-place and mean, with a profound and
tender interest.
Abraham Lincoln was born in that part of Hardin County,
Kentucky, now embraced by the lines of the recently formed
county of Larue, on the 12th of February, 1809. A region
more remarkably picturesque was at that time hardly to be
found in all the newly-opened country of the West.
Variegated and rolling in its surface, about two-thirds of it
timbered and fertile, the remainder composed of barrens,
supporting only black-jacks and post-oaks, and spreading
into plains, or rising into knolls or knobs, and watered by
beautiful and abundant streams, it was as attractive to the
eye of the lover of nature as to the enterprise of the
agriculturist and the passion of the hunter. Some of the
knobs rising out of the barrens reach a considerable
elevation, and are digniﬁed by the name of mountains.
“Shiny Mountain” is one of the most lovely of these, giving
a view of the whole valley of the Nolin. A still larger knob is
the “Blue Ball,” from whose summit one may see, on a fair
morning, the fog rising from the Ohio River, twenty miles
away.
 In a rude log cabin, planted among these scenes, the
subject of this biography opened his eyes. The cabin was
situated on or near Nolin Creek, about a mile and a half
from Hodgenville, the present county seat of Larue County.
Here he spent the ﬁrst year or two of his childhood, when
he removed to a cabin on Knob Creek, on the road from
Bardstown, Kentucky, to Nashville, Tennessee; at a point
three and a half miles south or southwest of Atherton’s
Ferry, (on the Rolling Fork,) and six miles from Hodgenville.
It was in these two homes that he spent the ﬁrst seven
years of his life; but before saying anything of those years,
it will be best to tell how his parents found their way into
the wilderness, and to record what is known of his family
history.
In 1769, Daniel Boone, at the head of a small and hardy
party of adventurers, set out from his home on the Yadkin
River, in South Carolina, to explore that part of Virginia
which he then knew as “The Country of Kentucky.” After
participating in the most daring and dangerous adventures,
and suﬀering almost incredible hardships, he returned,
abundantly rewarded with peltry, in 1771. Two years after
this, he undertook to remove his family to the region which
had entirely captivated his imagination; but it was not until
1775 that his purpose was accomplished. This brave and
widely-renowned pioneer, with those who accompanied him
and those who were attracted to the region by the reports
which he had carried back to the Eastern settlements, lived
a life of constant exposure to Indian warfare; but danger
 seemed only to sharpen the spirit of adventure, and to
attract rather than repel immigration.
Among those for whom “The Country of Kentucky” had
its savage charms was Abraham Lincoln, the grandfather of
the President, then living in Rockingham County, Virginia.
Why he should have left the beautiful and fertile valley of
the Shenandoah for the savage wilds West of him cannot be
known, but he only repeated the mystery of pioneer life —
the greed for something newer and wilder and more
dangerous than that which surrounded him. His removal to
Kentucky took place about 1780. Of the journey, we have no
record; but we know that at that date it must have been
one of great hardship, as he was accompanied by a young
and tender family. The spot upon which he built is not
known, though it is believed to have been somewhere on
Floyd’s Creek, in what is now Bullitt County. Hardly more
of his history is preserved than that which relates to his
death. In 1784, while at work in the ﬁeld, at a distance
from his cabin, he was stealthily approached by an Indian,
and shot dead.
The care of ﬁve helpless children was, by this murder,
thrown upon his widow. She subsequently removed to a
place now embraced within the limits of Washington
County, and there she reared, in such rude ways as
necessity prescribed, her little brood. Three of these
children, sons, were named in the order of their birth,
Mordecai, Josiah and Thomas. The two daughters were
named respectively Mary and Nancy. Mordecai remained in
Kentucky until late in life, but a short time before his death,
 removed to Hancock County, Illinois, where several of his
descendants still reside. Josiah, the second son, removed
while a young man to what is now Harrison County,
Indiana. Thomas, the third son, was the father of Abraham
Lincoln, the illustrious subject of this biography. Mary
Lincoln was married to Ralph Crume, and Nancy to William
Brumﬁeld. The descendants of these women still reside in
Kentucky. All these children were probably born in Virginia,
— Thomas, in 1778, — so that he was only about two years
old when his father emigrated.
Tracing the family still further, we ﬁnd that Abraham, the
emigrant, had four brothers: Isaac, Jacob, John and
Thomas. The descendants of Jacob and John are supposed
to be still in Virginia. Isaac emigrated to the region where
Virginia, North Carolina and Tennessee unite, and his
descendants are there. Thomas went to Kentucky, probably
later than his brother Abraham, where he lived many years,
and where he died. His descendants went to Missouri.
Further back than this it is diﬀicult to go. The most that
is known, is, that the Lincolns of Rockingham County,
Virginia, came, previous to 1752, from Berks County,
Pennsylvania. Where the Lincolns of Berks County came
from, no record has disclosed. They are believed to have
been Quakers, but whether they were an original
importation from Old England, under the auspices of
William Penn, or a pioneer oﬀshoot from the Lincolns of
New England, does not appear. There is the strongest
presumptive evidence that the Pennsylvania and New
England Lincolns were identical in their family blood. The
 argument 
for 
this 
identity 
rests 
mainly 
upon 
the
coincidences which the Christian names of the two families
present. Three Lincolns who came from Hingham, in
England, and settled in Hingham, Massachusetts, between
1633 and 1637, bore the Christian name of Thomas.
Another bore the name of Samuel, and he had three sons:
Daniel, Mordecai and Thomas. Mordecai was the father of
Mordecai, who was born in 1686. He was also the father of
Abraham, born in 1689. About 1750, there were two
Mordecai Lincolns in the town of Taunton. Here we have
the three names: Mordecai, Thomas and Abraham, in
frequent 
and 
familiar 
family 
use. 
Passing 
to 
the
Pennsylvania family, we ﬁnd that among the taxable
inhabitants of Exeter, Berks County, Pennsylvania, there
were, soon after 1752, Mordecai and Abraham Lincoln; that
Thomas Lincoln was living in Reading as early as 1757, and
that Abraham Lincoln, of Berks County, was in various
public oﬀices in the state from 1782 to 1790.
It has already been seen that these names have been
perpetuated 
among 
the 
later 
generations 
of 
the
Pennsylvania Lincolns, and that the three names —
Abraham, Mordecai and Thomas — were all embraced in
the family out of which the President sprang. The argument
thus based upon the identity of favorite family names (and
one of those quite an unusual name,) is very strong in
establishing identity of blood, though, of course, it is not
entirely conclusive. It is suﬀicient, certainly, in the absence
of a reliable record, to make the theory plausible which
transfers 
a 
Quaker 
from 
the 
unfriendly 
soil 
of
 Massachusetts to the paradise of Quakers in Pennsylvania.
It is highly probable that an exceptional Quaker among the
Massachusetts Puritan family went, with other New
Englanders, to Berks County in Pennsylvania, and that the
blood which has given to New England a considerable
number of most honorable names, has given to the nation
one of the noblest that adorn its annals.
Thomas Lincoln, the father of the President, was made,
by the early death of his father and the straitened
circumstances of his mother, a wandering, laboring,
ignorant boy. He grew up without any education. He really
never learned anything of letters except those which
composed his own name. This he could write clumsily, but
legibly, and this he did write without any knowledge of the
names and powers of the letters which composed it. While
a lad not fully grown, he passed a year as a hired ﬁeld hand
on Wataga, a branch of the Holston River, in the employ of
his Uncle Isaac. Without money or the opportunity to
acquire it, all the early years of his life were passed in labor
for others, at such wages as he could command, or in
hunting the game with which the region abounded. It was
not until he had reached his twenty-eighth year that he
found it practicable to settle in life, and make for himself a
home. He married Nancy Hanks, in 1806. She was born in
Virginia, and was probably a relative of one of the early
immigrants into Kentucky. He took her to the humble cabin
he had prepared for her, already alluded to as the birth-
place of the President, and within the ﬁrst few years of her
married life, she bore him three children. The ﬁrst was a
 daughter named Sarah, who married when a child, and
died many years ago, leaving no issue. The third was a son,
(Thomas,) who died in infancy. The second was Abraham,
who, born into the humblest abode, under the humblest
circumstances, raised himself by the force of native gifts of
heart and brain, and by the culture and power achieved by
his own will and industry, under the blessing of a
Providence which he always recognized, to sit in the
highest place in the land, and to preside over the destinies
of thirty millions of people.
From such materials as are readily accessible, let us
paint a picture of the little family. Thomas Lincoln, the
father, was a well built, sinewy man, about ﬁve feet ten and
a half inches high, dressed in the humble garb which his
poverty compelled and the rude art of the time and locality
produced. Though a rover by habit and native tastes, he
was not a man of enterprise. He was a good-natured man, a
man of undoubted integrity, but ineﬀicient in making his
way in the world, and improvident of the slender means at
his command. He was a man, however, whom everybody
loved, and who held the warm aﬀection of his eminent son
throughout his life. He attributed much of his hard fortune
to his lack of education, and in one thing, at least, showed
himself more wisely provident than the majority of his
neighbors. He determined, at any possible sacriﬁce, to give
his children the best education that the schools of the
locality aﬀorded.
Mrs. Lincoln, the mother, was evidently a woman out of
place among those primitive surroundings. She was ﬁve
 feet, ﬁve inches high, a slender, pale, sad and sensitive
woman, with much in her nature that was truly heroic, and
much that shrank from the rude life around her. A great
man never drew his infant life from a purer or more
womanly bosom than her own; and Mr. Lincoln always
looked back to her with an unspeakable aﬀection. Long
after her sensitive heart and weary hands had crumbled
into dust, and had climbed to life again in forest ﬂowers, he
said to a friend, with tears in his eyes: “All that I am, or
hope to be, I owe to my angel mother — blessings on her
memory!”
Here was the home and here were its occupants, all
humble, all miserably poor; yet it was a home of love and of
virtue. Both father and mother were religious persons, and
sought at the earliest moment to impress the minds of their
children with religious truth. The mother, though not a
ready 
writer, 
could 
read. 
Books 
were 
scarce, 
but
occasionally an estray was caught and eagerly devoured.
Abraham and his sister often sat at her feet to hear of
scenes and deeds that roused their young imaginations,
and fed their hungry minds.
Schools in Kentucky were, in those days, scarce and very
poor. Nothing more than instruction in the rudiments of
education was attempted. Zachariah Riney was Abraham’s
ﬁrst teacher. Riney was a Catholic, and though the
Protestant children in his charge were commanded, or
permitted, to retire when any of his peculiar religious
ceremonies or exercises were in progress, Mr. Lincoln
always entertained a pleasant and grateful memory of him.
 He began his attendance upon Mr. Riney’s school when he
was in his seventh year, but could hardly have continued it
beyond a period of two or three months. His next teacher
was Caleb Hazel, a ﬁne young man, whose school he
attended for about three months. The boy was diligent, and
actually learned to write an intelligible letter during this
period.
If the schools of the region were rude and irregular, its
religious institutions were still more so. Public religious
worship was observed in the neighborhood only at long
intervals, and then under the charge of roving preachers,
who, ranging over immense tracts of territory, and living on
their horses and in the huts of the settlers, called the
people together under trees or cabin-roofs, and spoke to
them simply of the great truths of Christianity. The
preachers themselves were peculiar persons, made so by
the peculiarity of their circumstances and pursuits. For
many years, Abraham Lincoln never saw a church; but he
heard Parson Elkin preach. At intervals of several months,
the good parson held meetings in the neighborhood. He
was a Baptist, and Thomas and Nancy Lincoln were
members of that communion. Abraham’s ﬁrst ideas of
public speech were gathered from the simple addresses of
this humble and devoted itinerant, and the boy gave
evidence afterwards, as we shall see, that he remembered
him with interest and aﬀection.
When ineﬀicient men become very uncomfortable, they
are quite likely to try emigration as a remedy. A good deal
of what is called “the pioneer spirit” is simply a spirit of
 shiftless discontent. Possibly there was something of this
spirit in Thomas Lincoln. It is true, at least, that when
Abraham was about seven years old, his father became
possessed with the desire to sell his little home, and
remove to another, in some fairer wilderness. It is probable,
also, that he did not like to rear his children in Kentucky.
He had been wise enough to appreciate the advantages of
education to his children, and it is quite likely that he
shrank from seeing them grow up in a community cursed
with slavery. The state having outgrown, with marvelous
rapidity, its ruder conditions, and become populous and
powerful, was already the home of an institution which
branded labor with disgrace, and made the position of the
poor whites a hopeless one. He could see nothing in the
future, for himself or his boy, but labor by the side of the
negro, and degradation in his presence and companionship.
Mr. Lincoln himself never attributed his father’s desire to
remove from Kentucky to his dislike of slavery, as a
principal motive. Kentucky, more than most of the new
states, was cursed with defective land-titles. Daniel Boone
himself, with hundreds of others who had shared with him
the dangers of pioneer life, was dispossessed of nearly all
his lands, after having lived upon them for years, and
rendered them very valuable by improvements. It was
mainly to this diﬀiculty, of getting a valid title to land, that
Abraham Lincoln attributed his father’s desire and
determination to remove to another state.
Thomas Lincoln found a purchaser, at last, for his home.
He bartered it away for ten barrels of whisky and twenty
 dollars in money, the whole representing the sum of three
hundred dollars, his price for the place. After building a
ﬂat-bout and launching it upon the Rolling Fork, he loaded
it with his stock of whisky, and all the heavier household
wares of which he was possessed, pushed oﬀ alone, and
ﬂoated safely down to the Ohio River. Here he met with an
accident — a wreck, indeed. The ﬂat-boat was upset, and
two-thirds of his whisky and many of his housekeeping
utensils and farming and other tools were lost. Meeting
with assistance, his boat was righted, and everything saved
that it was found practicable to gather from the bottom of
the river. Landing at Thompson’s Ferry, he procured
carriage for his goods about eighteen miles into Spencer
County, Indiana, where, in almost an unbroken wilderness,
he determined to settle. Leaving his goods in the care of a
settler, he returned to Thompson’s Ferry, and then, on foot,
took as nearly as possible a bee-line for home, where he
arrived in due time. It was probably during the absence of
the father on his preliminary trip that the mother paid her
last tribute of aﬀection to the little one she had buried, by
visiting its grave, in company with her living boy — an
incident which he remembered with tender interest.
This voyage was made in the autumn of 1816, when
Abraham was in his eighth year, and it was followed by the
immediate removal of the whole family. The journey to the
new home was made overland, upon three horses which
carried in packs the bedding, wardrobe and all the lighter
eﬀects of the family. The humble cavalcade occupied seven
days in the journey. At the end of it, the emigrants met with
 neighborly assistance in the erection of a dwelling, and
were soon housed and ready to begin life anew.
It must not be inferred from the character of the material
which Mr. Lincoln received, in principal, as the payment for
his little homestead in Kentucky, and transferred to his new
home in Indiana, that he was addicted to the vice of strong
drink. In those days, alcoholic liquors were in general use
among the settlers, not only as a beverage, but as a
remedial agent in the treatment of the diseases peculiar to
the new settlements of the West. The same liquors were
used with the same freedom among all classes at the East,
at that date, without a thought of evil. Mr. Lincoln supposed
he was receiving a commodity which would be of great
value to him in the new regions of Indiana, where
distillation had not been attempted; and he doubtless found
a ready market for the fraction of the cargo which he had
saved from the river.
