  ha ter  .
ON RETURNING TO his home, Mr. Lincoln entered upon the
duties of his profession, and devoted himself to them
through a series of years, less disturbed by diversions into
state and national politics than he had been during any
previous period of his business life. It was to him a time of
rest, of reading, of social happiness and of professional
prosperity. He was already a father, and took an almost
unbounded pleasure in his children. Their sweet young
natures were to him a perpetual source of delight. He was
never impatient with their petulance and restlessness,
loved always to be with them, and took them into his heart
with a fondness which was unspeakable. It was a fondness
so tender and profound as to blind him to their
imperfections, and to expel from him every particle of
sternness in his management of them. It must be said that
he had very little of what is called parental government.
The most that he could say to any little rebel in his
household was, “you break my heart, when you act like
this;” and the loving eyes and aﬀectionate voice and
sincere expression of pain were usually enough to bring the
culprit to his senses and his obedience. A young man bred
in Springﬁeld speaks of a vision that has clung to his
memory very vividly, of Mr. Lincoln as he appeared in those
days. His way to school led by the lawyer’s door. On almost
 any fair summer morning, he could ﬁnd Mr. Lincoln on the
sidewalk, in front of his house, drawing a child backward
and forward, in a child’s gig. Without hat or coat, and
wearing a pair of rough shoes, his hands behind him
holding to the tongue of the gig, and his tall form bent
forward to accommodate himself to the service, he paced
up and down the walk, forgetful of everything around him,
and intent only on some subject that absorbed his mind.
The young man says he remembers wondering, in his
boyish way, how so rough and plain a man should happen to
live in so respectable a house.
The habit of mental absorption — absent-mindedness, as
it is called — was common with him always, but particularly
during the formative periods of his life. The New Salem
people, it will be remembered, thought him crazy, because
he passed his best friends in the street without seeing
them. At the table, in his own family, he often sat down
without knowing or realizing where he was, and ate his
food mechanically. When he “came to himself,” it was a
trick with him to break the silence by the quotation of some
verse of poetry from a favorite author. It relieved the
awkwardness of “the situation,” served as a blind to the
thoughts 
which 
had 
possessed 
him, 
and 
started
conversation in a channel that led as far as possible from
the subject that he had set aside.
Mr. Lincoln’s lack of early advantages and the limited
character of his education were constant subjects of regret
with him. His intercourse with members of Congress and
with the cultivated society of Washington had, without
 doubt, made him feel his deﬁciencies more keenly than
ever before. There is no doubt that his successes were a
constant surprise to him. He felt that his acquisitions were
very humble, and that the estimate which the public placed
upon him was, in some respects, a blind and mistaken one.
It was at this period that be undertook to improve himself
somewhat by attention to mathematics, and actually
mastered the ﬁrst six books of Euclid. In speaking of this
new acquisition to a friend, he said that, in debates, he had
frequently heard the word “demonstration” used, and he
determined to ascertain for himself what it meant. After his
mastery of geometry, he had no further uncertainty on the
subject.
Allusion has been made to Mr. Lincoln’s mechanical
genius. That he had enough of this to make him a good
mechanic, there is no doubt. With such rude tools as were
at his command he had made cabins and ﬂat-boats; and
after his mind had become absorbed in public and
professional aﬀairs he often recurred to his mechanical
dreams for amusement. One of his dreams took form, and
he endeavored to make a practical matter of it. He had had
experience in the early navigation of the Western rivers.
One of the most serious hinderances to this navigation was
low water, and the lodgment of the various craft on the
shifting shoals and bars with which these rivers abound. He
undertook to contrive an apparatus which, folded to the
hull of a boat like a bellows, might be inﬂated on occasion,
and, by its levity, lift it over any obstruction upon which it
might rest. On this contrivance, illustrated by a model
 whittled out by himself, and now preserved in the patent
oﬀice at Washington, he secured letters patent; but it is
certain that the navigation of the Western rivers was not
revolutionized by it.
Mr. Lincoln never made his profession lucrative to
himself. It was very diﬀicult for him to charge a heavy fee
to anybody, and still more diﬀicult for him to charge his
friends anything at all for professional services. To a poor
client, he was quite as apt to give money as to take it from
him. He never encouraged the spirit of litigation. Henry
McHenry, one of his old clients, says that he went to Mr.
Lincoln with a case to prosecute, and that Mr. Lincoln
refused to have anything to do with it, because he was not
strictly in the right. “You can give the other party a great
deal of trouble,” said the lawyer, “and perhaps beat him,
but you had better let the suit alone.” Mr. Lincoln had on
hand a case for this same gentleman for three years, and
took it through three courts to the Supreme Court, and
charged him for his services only seventy-ﬁve dollars. His
wants were not large. He had no expensive vices, took no
delight in ﬁne clothing, and had no strong desire to
accumulate money. Indeed, after all his years of practice,
which closed only with his election to the presidency, he
had accumulated, as the sum total of all his gold and goods,
only the estimated value of sixteen thousand dollars.
Some incidents illustrating his practice, and the motives
which controlled him in it, may with propriety be stated
here, although they are not all of them associated with this
period of his life. An old woman of seventy-ﬁve years, the
 widow of a revolutionary pensioner, came tottering into his
oﬀice one day, and, taking a seat, told him that a certain
pension agent had charged her the exorbitant fee of two
hundred dollars for collecting her claim. Mr. Lincoln was
satisﬁed by her representations that she had been
swindled, and ﬁnding that she was not a resident or the
town, and that she was poor, gave her money, and set about
the work of procuring restitution. He immediately entered
suit against the agent to recover a portion of his ill-gotten
money. The suit was entirely successful, and Mr. Lincoln’s
address to the jury before which the case was tried is
remembered to have been peculiarly touching in its
allusions to the poverty of the widow, and the patriotism of
the husband she had sacriﬁced to secure the nation’s
independence. He had the gratiﬁcation of paying back to
her a hundred dollars, and sending her home rejoicing. One
afternoon an old negro woman came into the oﬀice of
Lincoln 
 Herndon, and told the story of her trouble, to
which both lawyers listened. It appeared that she and her
oﬀspring were born slaves in Kentucky, and that her owner,
one Hinkle, had brought the whole family into Illinois, and
given them their freedom. Her son had gone down the
Mississippi as a waiter or deck hand, on a steamboat.
Arriving at New Orleans, he had imprudently gone ashore,
and had been snatched up by the police, in accordance with
the law then in force concerning free negroes from other
states, and thrown into conﬁnement. Subsequently he was
brought out and tried. Of course he was ﬁned, and, the boat
having left, he was sold, or was in immediate danger of
 being sold, to pay his ﬁne and the expenses. Mr. Lincoln
was very much moved, and requested Mr. Herndon to go
over to the State House, and inquire of Governor Bissell if
there was not something that he could do to obtain
possession of the negro. Mr. Herndon made the inquiry, and
returned with the report that the Governor regretted to say
that he had no legal or constitutional right to do anything
in the premises. Mr. Lincoln rose to his feet in great
excitement, and exclaimed, “By the Almighty, I’ll have that
negro back soon, or I’ll have a twenty years’ agitation in
Illinois, until the Governor does have a legal and
constitutional right to do something in the premises.” He
was saved from the latter alternative — at least in the
direct form which he proposed. The lawyers sent money to
a New Orleans correspondent — money of their own — who
procured the negro, and returned him to his mother.
Mr. Lincoln’s early athletic struggle with Jack Armstrong,
the representative man of the “Clary’s Grove Boys,” will be
remembered. From the moment of this struggle, which Jack
agreed to call “a drawn battle,” in consequence of his own
foul play, they became strong friends. Jack would ﬁght for
Mr. Lincoln at any time, and would never bear him spoken
against. Indeed, there were times when young Lincoln
made Jack’s cabin his home, and here Mrs. Armstrong, a
most womanly person, learned to respect the rising man.
There was no service to which she did not make her guest
abundantly welcome, and he never ceased to feel the
tenderest gratitude for her kindness. At length, her
husband died, and she became dependent upon her sons.
 The oldest of these, while in attendance upon a camp-
meeting, found himself involved in a melee, which resulted
in the death of a young man; and young Armstrong was
charged by one of his associates with striking the fatal
blow. He was arrested, examined, and imprisoned to await
his trial. The public mind was in a blaze of excitement, and
interested parties fed the ﬂame. Mr. Lincoln knew nothing
of the merits of this case, that is certain. He only knew that
his old friend Mrs. Armstrong was in sore trouble; and he
sat down at once, and volunteered by letter to defend her
son. His ﬁrst act was to procure the postponement and a
change of the place of the trial. There was too much fever
in the minds of the immediate public to permit of fair
treatment. When the trial came on, the case looked very
hopeless to all but Mr. Lincoln, who had assured himself
that the young man was not guilty. The evidence on behalf
of the state being all in, and looking like a solid and
consistent mass of testimony against the prisoner, Mr.
Lincoln undertook the task of analyzing and destroying it,
which he did in a manner that surprised every one. The
principal witness testiﬁed that “by the aid of the brightly
shining moon, he saw the prisoner inﬂict the death blow
with a slung shot.” Mr. Lincoln proved by the almanac that
there was no moon shining at the time. The mass of
testimony against the prisoner melted away, until “not
guilty” was the verdict of every man present in the crowded
court-room. There is, of course, no record of the plea made
on this occasion, but it is remembered as one in which Mr.
Lincoln made an appeal to the sympathies of the jury which
 quite surpassed his usual eﬀorts of the kind, and melted all
to tears. The jury were out but half an hour, when they
returned with their verdict of “not guilty.” The widow
fainted in the arms of her son, who divided his attention
between his services to her and his thanks to his deliverer.
And thus the kind woman who cared for the poor young
man, and showed herself a mother to him in his need,
received the life of a son, saved from a cruel conspiracy, as
her reward, from the hand of her grateful beneﬁciary.
The lawyers of Springﬁeld, particularly those who had
political aspirations, were afraid to undertake the defense
of anyone who had been engaged in helping oﬀ fugitive
slaves. It was a very unpopular business in those days and
in that loca1ity; and few felt that they could aﬀord to
engage in it. One who needed such aid went to Edward D.
Baker, and was refused defense distinctly and frankly, on
the ground that, as a political man, he could not aﬀord it.
The man applied to an ardent anti-slavery friend for advice.
He spoke of Mr. Lincoln, and said, “He’s not afraid of an
unpopular case. When I go for a lawyer to defend an
arrested fugitive slave, other lawyers will refuse me, but if
Mr. Lincoln is at home, he will always take my case.”
A sheep-grower sold a number of sheep at a stipulated
average price. When he delivered the animals, he delivered
many lambs, or sheep too young to come fairly within the
terms of the contract. He was sued for damages by the
injured party, and Mr. Lincoln was his attorney. At the trial,
the facts as to the character of the sheep delivered were
proved, and several witnesses testiﬁed as to the usage by
 which all under a certain age were regarded as lambs, and
of inferior value. Mr. Lincoln, on comprehending the facts,
at once changed his line of eﬀort, and conﬁned himself to
ascertaining the real number of inferior sheep delivered.
On addressing the jury, he said that from the facts proved
they must give a verdict against his client, and he only
asked their scrutiny as to the actual damage suﬀered.
In another case, Mr. Lincoln was conducting a suit
against a railroad company. Judgment having been given in
his favor, and the court being about to allow the amount
claimed by him, deducting a proved and allowed oﬀset, he
rose and stated that his opponents had not proved all that
was justly due them in oﬀset; and proceeded to state and
allow a further sum against his client, which the court
allowed in its judgment. His desire for the establishment of
exact justice always overcame his own selﬁsh love of
victory, as well as his partiality for his clients’ feelings and
interests.
These 
incidents 
suﬀiciently 
illustrate 
the 
humane
feelings and thorough honesty which Mr. Lincoln carried
into the practice of his profession, and, as allusion has
already been made to the high estimate placed by the
people upon his ability as a lawyer, it will be proper to
record here the high opinion of his professional merits
entertained by the most eminent representatives of the bar
of Illinois. His death in 1865 was, in accordance with
usage, made the subject of notice by the various courts of
the state. The Supreme Court in session at Ottawa,
received a series of resolutions from the bar, which were
 placed upon its records. Ex-Judge Caton, in presenting
them, said, “He (Mr. Lincoln) understood the relations of
things, and hence his deductions were rarely wrong, from
any given state of facts. So he applied the principles of law
to the transactions of men with great clearness and
precision. He was a close reasoner. He reasoned by
analogy, and enforced his views by apt illustration. His
mode 
of 
speaking 
was 
generally 
of 
a 
plain 
and
unimpassioned character, and yet, he was the author of
some of the most beautiful and eloquent passages in our
language, which, if collected, would form a valuable
contribution to American literature. The most punctilious
honor ever marked his professional and private life.”
Judge Breese, in responding to the resolutions and the
remarks of Judge Caton, was still more outspoken in his
high opinion of Mr. Lincoln, as a lawyer. “For my single
self,” he said, “I have for a quarter of a century regarded
Mr. Lincoln as the ﬁnest lawyer I ever knew, and of a
professional bearing so high-toned and honorable as justly,
and without derogating from the claims of others, entitling
him to be presented to the profession as a model well
worthy of the closest imitation.” Judge Thomas Drummond
of Chicago, representing the bar of that city, said, “I have
no hesitation in saying that he was one of the ablest
lawyers I have ever known.” In addition, he said, “no
intelligent man who ever watched Mr. Lincoln through a
hard-contested case at the bar, questioned his great
ability.” Judge Drummond’s picture of Mr. Lincoln at the
 bar, and his mode of speech and action is so graphic and so
just that it deserves to be quoted:
“With a voice by no means pleasant, and, indeed, when
excited, in its shrill tones, sometimes almost disagreeable;
without any of the personal graces of the orator; without
much in the outward man indicating superiority of intellect;
without great quickness of perception — still, his mind was
so vigorous, his comprehension so exact and clear, and his
judgment so sure, that he easily mastered the intricacies of
his profession, and became one of the ablest reasoners and
most impressive speakers at our bar. With a probity of
character known to all, with an intuitive insight into the
human heart, with a clearness of statement which was
itself an argument, with uncommon power and felicity of
illustration, — often, it is true, of a plain and homely kind,
— and with that sincerity and earnestness of manner which
carried conviction, he was, perhaps, one of the most
successful jury lawyers we have ever had in the state. He
always tried a case fairly and honestly. He never
intentionally misrepresented the evidence of a witness or
the argument of an opponent. He met both squarely, and, if
he could not explain the one or answer the other,
substantially admitted it. He never misstated the law
according to his own intelligent view of it.”
These tributes to the professional excellence of Mr.
Lincoln, by those best qualiﬁed to judge it, is all the more
signiﬁcant from the fact that it was rendered by those who,
throughout his whole career, were opposed to him
politically — by democrats and conservatives. Judge David
 Davis, of Bloomington, Illinois, a strong personal friend of
Mr. Lincoln , in responding to resolutions presented by the
bar of Indianapolis, said that “in all the elements that
constitute the great lawyer, he (Mr. Lincoln) had few
equals. He was great both at Nisi Prius and before an
appellate tribunal. He seized the strong points of a case,
and presented them with clearness and great compactness.
A vein of humor never deserted him, and he was always
able to chain the attention of court and jury when the cause
was the most uninteresting, by the appropriateness of his
anecdotes.”
It was during this period of Mr. Lincoln’s life that he was
called upon to pronounce a . The death of this eminent
statesman occurred in 1852, and the citizens of Springﬁeld
thought of no man so competent to do his memory justice
as he who had through so many years been devoted to his
interests and his political principles. The eulogy was
pronounced in the State House, and was listened to by a
large audience. The discourse, as it was printed in the city
newspapers of the day, was by no means a remarkable one.
It is remembered as a very dull one at its delivery, and was
so regarded by Mr. Lincoln himself, who complained that he
lacked the imagination necessary for a performance of that
character. It is possible that the eﬀect upon his mind of the
old visit to Ashland was not entirely obliterated; for Mr.
Lincoln was quite accustomed to ﬁnd expression for any
admiration that was really within him. The closing words of
the eulogy, though hortatory in form, were prophetic in
fact, and, in the light of subsequent events, have a touching
 interest. “Such a man,” said he, “the times have demanded,
and such in the Providence of God was given us. But he is
gone. Let us strive to deserve, as far as mortals may, the
continued care of Divine Providence, trusting that in future
national emergencies he will not fail to provide us the
instruments of safety and security.” That Divine Providence
which he so conﬁdently trusted then, trusted him as the
instrument for executing its own designs, in the greatest of
national emergencies.
It is not to be supposed that during these years of quiet
professional Mr. Lincoln was entirely indiﬀerent to the
course of political aﬀairs. Great national events were in
progress, which must have impressed him profoundly. The
slave states, conscious that power was departing from
them, were desperate in their eﬀorts and fruitful in their
expedients to retain it. On the 9th of September, 1850, the
free state of California was admitted to the Union. There
was a double bitterness in this measure to those interested
in the perpetuation of the inﬂuence of slavery in national
aﬀairs. The state was formed from territory on which the
South had hoped to extend the area of their institution —
which had been won from Mexico for that special purpose;
and there was no slave state in readiness to be admitted
with 
it, 
in 
accordance 
with 
southern 
policy 
and
congressional usage. As an oﬀset to this accession to the
power of the free states, a series of concessions were
exacted of them which excited great discontent among the
people. The compromise measures of 1850, as they were
called, did not satisfy either section. The South did not see
 in them the security they desired, and the North felt itself
humiliated and wronged by them. Yet there was among the
people of both sections a strong desire for peace. They had
become weary with agitation, and readily fell in with the
action of the two national conventions, which, in 1852,
accepted these measures as a ﬁnal settlement of the points
of diﬀerence between the two sections of the country. It is
easy, in looking back, to see how wretched a basis these
measures furnished for peace between freedom and
slavery; but the best men and the most patriotic men of the
time found nothing better.
How far Mr. Lincoln shared in the desire that these
measures should be the ﬁnal settlement of the slavery
question in the country, or believed it possible that they
could be, is not known. Although he consented to stand on
the Scott electoral ticket in 1852, he does not seem to have
gone into the canvass with his characteristic earnestness.
His party had committed him, in advance, to silence on the
subject of slavery; and it was quite possible that he was
willing to see how much could be done towards stiﬂing
what seemed to be a fruitless agitation. He made but few
speeches, and these few made little impression. The defeat
of General Scott and the election of General Pierce was in
accordance with the popular expectation. Mr. Lincoln had
not been diverted from his professional pursuits by the
campaign, and for two years thereafter he found nothing in
politics to call him from his business.
In 1854, a new political era opened. Events occurred of
immeasurable inﬂuence upon the country; and an agitation
 of the slavery question was begun which was destined not
to 
cease 
until 
slavery 
itself 
should 
be 
destroyed.
Disregarding the pledges of peace and harmony, the party
in the interest of slavery eﬀected in Congress the
abrogation of the Missouri Compromise of 1820 — a
compromise which was intended to shut slavery forever out
of the north-west; and a bill organizing the territories of
Kansas and Nebraska was enacted, which left them free to
choose whether they would have slavery as an institution or
not. The intention, without doubt, was to force slavery upon
those territories — to make it impossible for them ever to
become free states — as the subsequent exhibitions of
“border ruﬀianism” in Kansas suﬀiciently testiﬁed. This
great political iniquity aroused Mr. Lincoln as he had never
before been aroused. It was at this time that he fully
comprehended the fact that there was to be no peace on
the slavery question until either freedom or slavery should
triumph. He knew slavery to be wrong. He had always
known and felt it to be so. He knew that he regarded the
institution as the fathers of the republic had regarded it;
but a new doctrine had been put forward. Slavery was
right. Slavery was entitled to equal consideration with
freedom. Slavery claimed the privilege of going wherever,
into the national domain, it might choose to go. Slavery
claimed 
national 
protection 
everywhere. 
Instead 
of
remaining contentedly within the territory it occupied
under the protection of the Constitution, it sought to extend
itself indeﬁnitely — to nationalize itself.
 Judge Douglas of Illinois was the responsible author of
what was called the Kansas-Nebraska bill — a bill which he
based upon what he was pleased to denominate as “popular
sovereignty” — the right of the people of a territory to
choose their own institutions; and between Judge Douglas
and Mr. Lincoln was destined to be fought “the battle of the
giants” on the questions that grew out of this great political
crime. Mr. Lincoln’s indignation was an index to the
popular feeling all over the North. The men who, in good
faith, had acquiesced in the compromise measures, though
with great reluctance and only for the sake of peace — who
had compelled themselves to silence by biting their lips —
who had been forced into silence by their love of the Union
whose existence the slave power had threatened — saw
that they had been over-reached and foully wronged.
Mr. Douglas, on his return to his constituents, was met
by a storm of indignation, so that when he ﬁrst undertook
to speak in vindication of himself he was not permitted to
do so. He found that he had committed a great political
blunder, even if he failed to comprehend the fact that he
had been guilty of a criminal breach of faith. The ﬁrst
exhibitions of popular rage naturally passed away, so that
the city which refused to hear him speak, now honors his
dust as that of a great and powerful and famous man; but
the city and the state have discarded his political
principles; and the party which once honored him with so
much conﬁdence, remembers with regret — possibly with
bitterness — that he was mainly responsible for its
overthrow. Mr. Douglas, without doubt, foresaw what was
 coming, as the result of his political misdeeds, but he tried
to avert the popular judgment. He spoke in various places
in the state, but with little eﬀect. Congress had adjourned
early in August. His attempt to speak in Chicago was made
on the ﬁrst of September, and early in October, on the
occasion of the State Fair, he found himself at Springﬁeld.
The Fair had brought together a large number of
representative men, from all parts of the state, many of
whom had come for the purposes of political reunion and
consultation. There was a great deal of political speaking,
but the chief interest of the occasion centered in a
discussion between Mr. Lincoln and Mr. Douglas. It had
been many years since these two men had found
themselves pitted against each other in debate, and during
nearly all these years, Mr. Douglas had been in public life.
He was a man known to the whole nation. He was the
recognized leader of his party in Illinois, notwithstanding
the fact that his course had driven many from his support.
His experience in debate, his easy audacity and assurance,
his great ability, his strong will, his unconquerable
ambition, and his untiring industry, made him a most
formidable antagonist. To say that his unlimited self-
conﬁdence, which not unfrequently made him arrogant and
overbearing — at least, in appearance — assisted him in
the work which he had before him, would be to insult the
independent common sense of the people he addressed. Mr.
Douglas entered into an exposition and defense of his
principles and policy with the bearing of a man who had
already conquered. His long and uninterrupted success had
 made him restive under inquisition, impatient of dispute,
and deﬁant of opposition.
On the day following the speech of Mr. Douglas, Mr.
Lincoln, who had listened to him, replied, and Mr. Douglas
was among his auditors. The speech delivered on this
occasion was one of the most powerful and eloquent eﬀorts
of his life. Mr. Lincoln began by saying that he wished to
present nothing to the people but the truth, to which they
were certainly entitled, and that, if Judge Douglas should
detect him in saying anything untrue, he (Judge Douglas)
would correct him. Mr. Douglas took license from this
remark to interrupt him constantly, with the most
unimportant questions, and in such a way as to show Mr.
Lincoln that his only motive was to break him down. Finally,
the speaker lost his patience, and said, “Gentlemen, I
cannot aﬀord to spend my time in quibbles. I take the
responsibility of asserting the truth myself, relieving Judge
Douglas from the necessity of his impertinent corrections.”
From 
this 
point, 
he 
was 
permitted 
to 
proceed
uninterruptedly, until a speech occupying three hours and
ten minutes was concluded. No report of this speech was
made, and no judgment can be formed of it, except such as
can be made up from the cotemporary newspaper accounts,
the recollections of those who heard it, and its eﬀect upon
the politics of the state. The enthusiasm of the party press
was unbounded, and was manifestly genuine. The Kansas-
Nebraska bill was the subject of debate; and his exposure
of 
its 
fallacies 
and 
iniquities 
was 
declared 
to 
be
overwhelming. His whole heart was in his words. The
 Springﬁeld Journal, in describing the speech and the
occasion, says: “He quivered with feeling and emotion. The
whole house was as still as death. He attacked the bill with
unusual warmth and energy, and all felt that a man of
strength was its enemy, and that he intended to blast it if
he could by strong and manly eﬀorts. He was most
successful; and the house approved the glorious triumph of
truth by loud and long-continued huzzas. Women waved
their white handkerchiefs in token of woman’s silent but
heartfelt consent... Mr. Lincoln exhibited Douglas in all the
attitudes he could be placed in in a friendly debate. He
exhibited the bill in all its aspects, to show its humbuggery
and falsehoods, and when thus torn to rags, cut into slips,
held up to the gaze of the vast crowd, a kind of scorn was
visible upon the face of the crowd and upon the lips of the
most eloquent speaker.” The editor, in concluding his
account, says: “At the conclusion of the speech, every man
felt that it was unanswerable — that no human power could
overthrow it, or trample it under foot. The long and
repeated applause evinced the feelings of the crowd, and
gave token of universal assent to Lincoln’s whole
argument; and every mind present did homage to the man
who took captive the heart, and broke like a sun over the
understanding.”
The account of this speech in the Chicago Press and
Tribune was not less enthusiastic in its praise, than the
journal just quoted: After stating that, within the limit of a
newspaper article, it would be impossible to give an idea of
the strength of Mr. Lincoln’s argument, and that it was by
 far the ablest eﬀort of the campaign, he quotes the
following passage directly from the speech, as remarkable
in its power upon the audience: “My distinguished friend
says it is an insult to the emigrants to Kansas and Nebraska
to suppose they are not able to govern themselves. We
must not slur over an argument of this kind because it
happens to tickle the ear. It must be met and answered. I
admit that the emigrant to Kansas and Nebraska is
competent to govern himself, but (the speaker rising to his
full hight,) I deny his right to govern any other person
without that person’s consent.” That touched the very
marrow of the matter, and revealed the whole diﬀerence
between him and Douglas. The crowd understood it. They
saw through the iniquity of “popular sovereignty” and the
Kansas-Nebraska bill, and the applause which followed
showed 
their 
appreciation 
of 
the 
clearness 
and
thoroughness with which the speaker had exposed it.
When Mr. Lincoln concluded his speech, Mr. Douglas
hastily took the stand, and said that he had been abused,
“though in a perfectly courteous manner.” He spoke until
the adjournment Of the meeting for supper, but touched
only slightly upon the great questions which Mr. Lincoln
had handled with so much power. That he felt his eﬀort to
be a failure, is evident from subsequent events soon to be
recounted. Before closing, he insisted on his right to
resume his speech in the evening, but when evening came
he did not resume, and did not choose to resume. The
speech was never concluded.
 The next meeting between the two party champions took
place at Peoria, though not by pre-arrangement. Mr.
Lincoln followed Mr. Douglas to Peoria, and challenged him
there, as he had done at Springﬁeld. At Peoria, Mr.
Lincoln’s triumph was even more marked than at
Springﬁeld, for his antagonist had lost something of his
assurance. He was a wounded and weakened man, indeed.
He had become conscious that he was not invulnerable. He
had been a witness of Mr. Lincoln’s power over the people;
and it is quite possible that his faith in his own position had
been shaken. It was noticed at Peoria that his manner was
much modiﬁed, and that he betrayed a lack of conﬁdence in
himself, not at all usual with him. Here, as at Springﬁeld,
Mr. Lincoln occupied more than three hours in the delivery
of his speech, and it came down upon Mr. Douglas so
crushingly that the doughty debater did not even undertake
to reply to it.
It is to be remembered that Mr. Lincoln, in his political
speeches, resorted to none of the tricks common among
what are called stump speakers. He was thoroughly in
earnest and always closely argumentative. If he told
stories, it was not to amuse a crowd, but to illustrate a
point. The real questions at issue engaged his entire
attention, and he never undertook to raise a false issue or
to dodge a real one. Indeed, he seemed incapable of the
tricks so often resorted to for the discomﬁture of an
opponent. Fortunately, the Peoria speech was reported, and
we have an opportunity of forming an intelligent judgment
of its character and its power. One passage will suﬀice to
 illustrate both. Mr. Douglas had urged that the people of
Illinois had no interest in the question of slavery in the
territories — that it concerned only the people of the
territories. This was in accordance with his own feeling,
when he declared that he did not care whether slavery was
“voted up or voted down” in Kansas. Mr. Lincoln opposed
this on the broad ground of humanity and the terms of the
declaration of independence; but to bring the matter more
directly home, and to show that the people of Illinois had a
practical interest in the question of slavery in the
territories, he said:
“By the Constitution, each state has two senators — each
has a number of representatives in proportion to the
number of its people, and each has a number of
presidential electors, equal to the whole number of its
representatives and senators together. But in ascertaining
the number of the people for the purpose, ﬁve slaves are
counted as being equal to three whites. The slaves do not
vote; they are only counted, and so used as to swell the
inﬂuence of the white people’s votes. The practical eﬀect of
this is more aptly shown by a comparison of the states of
South Carolina and Maine. South Carolina has six
representatives and so has Maine; South Carolina has eight
presidential electors and so has Maine. This is precise
equality so far; and of course they are equal in senators,
each having two. Thus, in the control of the government,
they are equals precisely. But how are they in the number
of their white people? Maine has 581,813, while South
Carolina has 274,567. Maine has twice as many as South
 Carolina, and 32,679 over. Thus each white man in South
Carolina is more than the double of any man in Maine. This
is all because South Carolina, besides her free people, has
387,984 slaves. The South Carolinian has precisely the
same advantage over the white man in every other free
state as well as in Maine. He is more than the double of any
one of us. The same advantage, but not to the same extent,
is held by all the citizens of the slave states over those of
the free; and it is an absolute truth, without an exception,
that there is no voter in any slave state but who has more
legal power in the government than any voter in any free
state. There is no instance of exact equality; and the
disadvantage is against us the whole chapter through. This
principle, in the aggregate, gives the slave states in the
present Congress twenty additional representatives —
being seven more than the whole majority by which they
passed the Nebraska bill.
“Now all this is manifestly unfair; yet I do not mention it
to complain of it, in so far as it is already settled. It is in the
Constitution, and I do not for that cause, or any other
cause, propose to destroy, or alter, or disregard the
Constitution. I stand to it fairly, fully and ﬁrmly. But when I
am told that I must leave it altogether to other people to
say whether new partners are to be bred up and brought
into the ﬁrm, on the same degrading terms against me, I
respectfully demur. I insist that whether I shall be a whole
man or only the half of one in comparison with others is a
question in which I am somewhat concerned; and one
which no other man can have a sacred right of deciding for
 me. If I am wrong in this — if it really be a sacred right of
self-government in the man who shall go to Nebraska to
decide whether he will be the equal of me or the double of
me, then, after he shall have exercised that right, and
thereby shall have reduced me to a still smaller fraction of
a man than I already am, I should like for some gentleman
deeply skilled in the mystery of ‘sacred rights,’ to provide
himself with a microscope, and peep about and ﬁnd out it
he can what has become of my ‘sacred rights.’ They will
surely be too small for detection by the naked eye.
“Finally, I insist that if there is anything that it is the duty
of the whole people to never intrust to any hands but their
own, that thing is the preservation and perpetuity of their
own liberties and institutions. And if they shall think, as I
do, that the extension of slavery endangers them more than
any or all other causes, how recreant to themselves if they
submit the question, and with it, the fate of their country, to
a mere handful of men bent only on temporary self-
interest!”
Mr. Douglas might well excuse himself from any attempt
to answer this argument, or escape from its inevitable
logic, for it was unanswerable.
It was naturally the wish of Mr. Lincoln to continue these
discussions in other parts of the state. He felt that a
revolution of public opinion was in progress — that parties
were breaking up, and that he had his opponent at a
disadvantage. But Mr. Douglas had had enough for this
time. He wished to withdraw his forces before they were
destroyed. He had had a heavy skirmish, and been worsted.
 He shrank from a continuance of the ﬁght. The great and
decisive battle was to come.
At the close of the debate, the two combatants held a
conference, the result of which has been variously
reported. One authority states that Mr. Douglas sent for Mr.
Lincoln, and told him that if he would speak no more during
the campaign, he (Douglas) would go home and remain
silent during the same period, and that this arrangement
was agreed upon and its terms fulﬁlled. That there was a
conference on the subject sought by Mr. Douglas, there is
no doubt; and there is no doubt that Mr. Lincoln promised
not to challenge him again to debate during the canvass,
but abundant evidence exists that Mr. Lincoln did not leave
the ﬁeld at all, but spoke in various parts of the state.
Owing very materially to Mr. Lincoln’s eﬀorts, a political
revolution swept the state. The old stronghold of the
democratic party fell before the onslaughts made upon it,
and, for the ﬁrst time since the democratic party was
organized, the legislature of Illinois was in the hands of the
opposition. Politics were in a transitional, not to say chaotic
state. The opposition was made up of whigs, Americans,
and anti-Nebraska democrats. Among the men elected was
Mr. Lincoln himself, who had been put in nomination while
absent, by his friends in the county. As has already been
stated, he resigned before taking his seat. His election was
eﬀected without consultation with him, and entirely against
his wishes.
The excitement attending the election of this legislature
did not die out with the election, for the new body had the
 responsibility of electing a United States senator. The old
whigs elected had not relinquished the hope that, by some
means, their party, which had in reality been broken up by
the southern whigs in Congress going over to the
democrats on the vote for the repeal of the Missouri
Compromise, would again be united, while the anti-
Nebraska democrats declined to go over to the whigs,
supposing that, by clinging together, they could force the
regular democracy of the state to come upon their ground.
Here were two strongly antagonistic interests that were in
some way to be harmonized, in order to beat the nominee
of the great body of the democrats who still acknowledged
the lead of Judge Douglas. The anti-Nebraska democrats
refused to go into a nominating caucus with the whigs, and
three candidates were placed in the ﬁeld. Mr. Lincoln was
the nominee of the whigs, Lyman Trumbull of the anti-
Nebraska democrats, and General James Shields of the
democrats of the Douglas school. After a number of
undecisive ballots in the legislature, the democrats having
dropped their candidate and adopted Governor Joel A.
Matteson — a gentleman who had not committed himself to
either side of the great question — it became possible for
the supporters of Mr. Lincoln and Mr. Trumbull to elect one
of those gentlemen, by a union of their forces. That Mr.
Lincoln was ambitious for the honors of this high oﬀice
there is no question, but he had seen Governor Matteson
come within three votes of an election, and perceived that
there was actual danger of his triumph. At this juncture, he
begged his friends to leave him, and go for Mr. Trumbull.
 They yielded to his urgent entreaties, though it is said that
strong men among them actually wept when they
consented to do so. The consequence was the election of
Mr. Trumbull, to the great astonishment of the democrats,
who did not believe it possible for the opposition to unite.
Their triumph was due simply to the magnanimity of Mr.
Lincoln and his devotion to principle. He had no reproaches
for those anti-Nebraska democrats who had refused to go
for him, although his arguments had done more than those
of any other man to give them their power, and he cared far
more for the triumph of political truth and honor than for
his own elevation. Mr. Lincoln never had reason to regret
his self-sacriﬁce, for, upon the organization of the
republican 
party, 
all 
the 
opposition 
parties 
found
themselves together, and Mr. Lincoln became their
foremost man.
