  ha ter   I .
THE AFFAIRS OF the rebellion were hurrying to a crisis. In
January, General Sherman started northward with his
hosts; and the borders of South Carolina were reached on
the thirtieth. They swept through the state, a very besom of
destruction — tearing up railroads, burning bridges, living
on the country, and attracting large numbers of negroes to
them, to learn that they were free. Columbia was occupied
on the seventeenth of February, and the public property
destroyed. The arteries that fed the life of Charleston were
cut, and the proud city was evacuated without the cost of a
life. Though threatened often, the army marched with
scarcely more diﬀiculty than they experienced in their
march across Georgia. Fayetteville, North Carolina, was
reached and occupied on the twelfth of March; and then
communication was established with Generals Terry and
Schoﬁeld at Wilmington, and the army received such
supplies as were needed. Battles occurred at Averysboro
and Bentonville; but still the march was resistless, and the
forces gathered in front, under command of General
Johnston, were driven northward as the forest leaves are
driven by the wind. On the twenty-second of March,
Goldsboro was occupied; and there the army remained for
some days, while General Sherman visited City Point, for
consultation with General Grant.
 The army of Sherman was aiming at Richmond. There
was no doubt of that; but Lee was held to the rebel capital
by Grant, and could not get away. The grand campaign was
culminating; and, on the day that Sherman entered
Goldsboro, Mr. Lincoln arrived at City Point, partly to
relieve himself of oﬀicial cares that had made him sick, and
partly to be near operations which involved momentous
consequences to the country. On the twenty-ﬁfth of March,
Lee attacked and captured Fort Stedman, but was driven
out of it with terrible losses; and Mr. Lincoln visited the
scene on the same day, cheered by the soldiers wherever he
appeared. The day had been ﬁxed upon for a grand review,
in honor of the President; but Mr. Lincoln said: “This is
better than a review.” On the twenty-eighth of March, a
council of war was held on the steamer River Queen, at
City Point, attended by the President and Generals Grant,
Sherman, Sheridan, Meade, and Ord; and, soon afterwards,
Sherman left to rejoin his army.
New dispositions of troops had been in progress for
several days; and, on the day following the council of war,
the grand movement of the army of the Potomac began.
Before the morning was passed, a new line of battle had
been formed, whose right was on the extreme left of the
former 
position; 
and 
here 
the 
army 
commenced
entrenching. A sharp little ﬁght occurred in the afternoon,
without material results. On the following day, it rained; but
on Friday, Saturday, and Sunday, Grant’s whole line was
engaged in a series of heavy battles; and, while these were
in progress, the President remained at City Point, receiving
 dispatches from the ﬁeld, and forwarding the substance of
them to the country. His ﬁrst dispatch, on Saturday,
reported that there had been much hard ﬁghting that
morning, in which our forces had been driven back. Later
in the day, he announced that the ground had all been
retaken, and that our troops were occupying the position
which the rebels held in the morning. On Saturday,
Sheridan and Warren met with great successes. On Sunday,
the President announced “the triumphant success of our
armies, after three days of hard ﬁghting, during which the
forces on both sides displayed unsurpassed valor.” At half-
past eight in the evening, Mr. Lincoln telegraphed to Mr.
Stanton that, at half-past four in the afternoon, General
Grant reported that he had taken twelve thousand
prisoners, and ﬁfty pieces of artillery. In the smoke of this
great day of battle, the rebellion was overthrown. Lee, with
his shattered army reduced to half of its original numbers,
by the three days of ﬁghting, evacuated Richmond. The
rebel rams and wooden ﬂeet were blown up during the
night, with terriﬁc explosions. On the north side of the
James, lay General Weitzel’s corps, waiting to occupy
Richmond, whenever the signs should indicate the safety of
an advance. On Monday morning, April third, Weitzel
pushed out the Fifth Massachusetts Cavalry to reconnoiter;
and they reported that no enemy was to be found. At eleven
in the morning, he announced by telegraph that he entered
Richmond at a quarter past eight; that the enemy had left
in great haste; that he had many guns; that the city was on
ﬁre; and that the people received him with enthusiastic
 expressions of joy. His dispatch closed with the statement
that Grant had started to cut oﬀ Lee’s retreat, and that
President Lincoln had gone to the front.
The day on which Richmond fell will long be remembered
by the people of America, in both sections of the country.
When the news was made public on Monday, the whole
North was thrown into a frenzy of joyous excitement. Every
bell on every public building, from the Atlantic to the
Paciﬁc, was rung for hours. Cannon answered to cannon,
from mountain to mountain, and from valley to valley. Men
grasped one another’s hands in the streets, and wept, or
embraced each other in the stress of their joyous
enthusiasm. Public meetings were called, at which the
deeds of the gallant heroes who had won the decisive
victories were praised and cheered, and the public
exultation found expression in speech and music. Nothing
like it was ever seen upon the continent. The war was over.
Richmond, that had so long deﬁed the national authority
and resisted the national arms, was ours. The rebel
President and his associates were fugitives. Lee’s army was
running away, and Grant was pursuing them. The sun of
peace had fairly risen. The incubus of war that had pressed
upon the nation’s heart for four long, weary years, was
lifted; and the nation sprang to its feet, with all possible
demonstrations of joyous exultation.
The pursuit of Lee was relentlessly prosecuted by our
victorious forces; and, after two or three battles, the rebel
General was obliged to surrender his whole army, which
had been reduced by his losses to less than twenty
 thousand men. Within a period of less than two weeks, the
city of Richmond was taken, and the proud army of Virginia
passed out of existence. The capture of Lee was made the
occasion of another day of popular rejoicing; and the
scenes and sounds that followed the capture of Richmond
were repeated.
Of the feelings of Mr. Lincoln, as he sat in his tent at City
Point, receiving the dispatches which informed him of the
momentous movements in progress at the front, no
imagination can form an exaggerated estimate. But he
could not sustain the excitement of those days without
relief; and he found it in a way which none but he would
have adopted. Just before he arrived at City Point, a pet cat,
belonging to General Grant, had presented the General
with a little family of kittens. On their owner’s departure,
the President took them into his care; and, during all those
days of battle, in the intervals while he waited for
dispatches, he relieved the pressure upon his heart and
brain by playing with these kittens. When Richmond had
fallen, and he was about to start for the front, he took up
one of the kittens, and said: “Little kitten, I must perform a
last act of kindness for you, before I go. I must open your
eyes.” He then manipulated the closed lids as tenderly as a
mother would handle her child, until he had accomplished
his purpose. Then he put her down, and, as he stood
enjoying her surprise at being able to see, he said sadly:
“Oh that I could open the eyes of my blinded fellow-
countrymen, as easily as I have those of that little
 creature!” The eyes of his blinded fellow-countrymen were
soon opened, but alas! it involved the closing of his own!
Mr. Lincoln belied his own estimate of his physical
courage by going directly into the fallen capital, so lately
swarming with armed enemies, and so crowded still with
sullen rebels. He did this apparently without a thought of
danger, although the whole loyal North trembled with
apprehension. He went up in a man-of-war, on the
afternoon of Monday, landed at the Rocketts below the city,
and with his boy “Tad” rode up the remaining mile in a
boat. He entered the city in no triumphal car. No brilliant
cavalcade accompanied him; but on foot, with no guard
except the sailors who had rowed him up the James, he
entered and passed through the streets of the fallen
capital. But his presence soon became known to the
grateful blacks, who pressed upon him with their thankful
ejaculations and tearful blessings on every side. Better and
more expressive were the hats and handkerchiefs, tossed in
the air by these happy and humble people, than ﬂags and
streamers, ﬂoating from masts and house-tops. “Glory to
God! Glory! Glory!” shouted the black multitude of
liberated slaves. “I thank you dear Jesus, that I behold
President Linkum,” exclaimed a woman standing in her
humble doorway, weeping in the fullness of her joy.
Another, wild with delight, could do nothing but jump, and
strike her hands, and shout with wild reiteration: “Bless de
Lord! Bless de Lord! Bless de Lord!” At last, the streets
became choked with the multitude, and soldiers were
called to clear the way. A writer in the Atlantic Monthly, to
 whom the author is indebted for the most of these
particulars, says that one old negro exclaimed: “May de
good Lord bless you, President Linkum!” while he removed
his hat, and the tears of joy rolled down his cheeks. “The
President,” the account proceeds, “removed his own hat,
and bowed in silence; but it was a bow which upset the
forms, laws, customs, and ceremonies of centuries. It was a
death-shock to chivalry, and a mortal wound to caste.”
After a visit to General Weitzel’s headquarters, and a
drive around the city, he returned to City Point. On
Thursday, he visited the city again, accompanied by Mrs.
Lincoln and the Vice-president, with others. While he was
in Richmond on this occasion, he held important interviews
with leading citizens, prominent among whom was Judge
Campbell, one of the parties in the Hampton Roads
conference. The Judge urged him to issue a proclamation,
permitting the Virginia Legislature to assemble, under the
representation 
that 
that 
body 
would 
recognize 
the
situation, and withdraw the Virginia troops from the
support of Lee. After his return to City Point, he addressed
a note to General Weitzel, directing him to permit the
legislature to assemble, and to protect them until they
should attempt some action hostile to the United States. He
was also directed to show the note to Judge Campbell, but
not to make it public. The Judge sent an account of his
interview and its results to the Richmond Whig; and, this
having been copied into the Washington Chronicle, after
Mr. Lincoln’s return to the federal capital, the President
was very indignant. The breach of conﬁdence on the part of
 Judge 
Campbell, 
and 
the 
misrepresentations 
which
accompanied it, quite exhausted his patience. As Lee’s
army had surrendered, and there was no further apology
for the desire to have the legislature assemble, he revoked
his permission for its convocation. It was evident, in a
cabinet meeting that was held a few days afterward, that
Judge Campbell’s course had much embittered him. He had
been inclined to trust in the personal honor of rebels with
whom he had been brought in contact; but he evidently felt
that his conﬁdence had been practiced upon by Campbell;
and the fact stung him to indignation, if not anger.
The order produced an unpleasant eﬀect upon the public
mind, and its revocation was received with gratiﬁcation all
over the North. The revocation did not come early enough,
however, to save serious diﬀiculty in other quarters; for
Sherman, negotiating with Johnston, patterned his policy
upon that of the President, and brought down upon himself
the reprobation of the loyal press of the country —
reprobation which, in extreme instances, assumed the form
of direct charges of disloyalty against this gallant and most
loyal soldier. But Johnston surrendered; and soon there was
not an army of the rebellion that had not given itself up to
our forces, or been disbanded and scattered.
The great rebellion was ended. General Grant reached
Washington on the thirteenth of April, and held an
interview with the President and Mr. Stanton, the result of
which was the issue of an order from the War Department
on the same day, or, rather, of a statement that orders
would immediately be issued, to stop drafting and
 recruiting, to curtail purchases for arms, ammunition and
supplies, to reduce the number of general and staﬀ oﬀicers
to the necessities of the service, and to remove military
restrictions on trade and commerce.
The American people were ﬂoating on the high tide of
joy. All were glad and happy; and, as they returned their
thanks to the Giver of all good for victory and peace, they
did not forget the instrument he had used in the execution
of his plans. Mr. Lincoln’s name was on every tongue. The
patient man who had suﬀered the pain of a thousand
deaths during the war — who had been misconstrued,
maligned, and condemned by personal and party enemies,
and questioned and criticised by captious friends, — was
the man above all others who stood in the full sunshine of
the popular aﬀection. His motives were vindicated, his
policy had been sanctioned by success, and his power had
been proved. He was the acknowledged savior of his
country, and the liberator of a race. He had solved the great
problem of popular government; he had settled the great
question of African slavery on the continent. He had won a
glorious place in history; and his name had been committed
to the aﬀectionate safe-keeping of mankind.
On the evening of the eleventh of April, the White House
was brilliantly illuminated; and to the immense crowd
gathered around it, to express their joyous congratulations,
Lincoln delivered his last public address. He said little
about 
victory, 
further 
than 
brieﬂy 
to 
express 
his
acknowledgments to the soldiers who had fought, and the
God who had prospered their arms; but turning his eyes
 from the past, he regarded the future, and the new duties
and 
perplexities 
which 
it 
was 
certain 
to 
bring.
“Reconstruction” was the burden of his speech; and he
explained, at length, his connection with the eﬀorts at
reconstruction which had taken place in Louisiana. The
question as to whether the rebel states were out of the
Union, or in it, he regarded as a “pernicious abstraction.”
“We all agree,” said he, “that the seceded states, so called,
are out of their proper practical relation with the Union;
and that the sole object of the government, civil and
military, in regard to those states, is to again get them into
their proper practical relation.” He believed the state
government of Louisiana oﬀered for that state a practicable
plan of return, but he was not committed to that plan alone.
The quickest way back to the old relations with the
government was the best way, without any regard to any
ﬁnely spun theories.
The Louisiana Legislature had ratiﬁed the Constitutional
amendment abolishing slavery, and Mr. Lincoln said: “These
twelve thousand persons (the loyal element of the state) are
thus fully committed to the Union, and the perpetuation of
freedom in the state — committed to the very things, and
nearly all the things, the nation wants; and they ask the
nation’s recognition, and its assistance to make good this
committal. Now, if we reject and spurn them, we do our
utmost to disorganize and disperse them. We, in fact, say to
the white man: ‘You are worthless, or worse: we will
neither help you nor be helped by you.’ To the blacks we
say: ‘This cup of liberty which these, your old masters, held
 to your lips, we will dash from you, and leave you to the
chances of gathering the spilled and scattered contents in
some vague and undeﬁned when, where, and how.’”
All the President’s plans considered the welfare of the
black man as well as the white; and there will be no better
opportunity to give his views of negro suﬀrage than this
page will furnish. This great question, which promises to be
a stone of stumbling and a rock of oﬀence to the party
which placed Mr. Lincoln in power — a stone which is
certain, in the administration of God’s providence, to
become the head of the corner — was one which he had
carefully considered, and upon which, with his respect for
human rights, he could have but one opinion. In a letter to
the late General Wadsworth, he once said: “You desire to
know, in the event of our complete success in the ﬁeld, the
same being followed by loyal and cheerful submission on
the part of the South, if universal amnesty should not be
accompanied with universal suﬀrage. Since you know my
private inclinations as to what terms should be granted to
the South, in the contingency mentioned, I will here add
that, if our success should thus be realized, followed by
such desired results, I cannot see, if universal amnesty is
granted, how, under the circumstances, I can avoid
exacting in return universal suﬀrage, or at least suﬀrage on
the basis of intelligence and military service.”
Thus stands Mr. Lincoln’s record on this question, and
thus must stand the record of every man whose love of men
and whose regard for human rights are as genuine as those
which moved the heart of the good President. The party
 which loved and supported Mr. Lincoln cannot deny the
principle of universal suﬀrage, without denying both Mr.
Lincoln and the everlasting principles of right upon which
he based his action — upon which they have won all their
successes. And if, for immediate advantage, in the strife for
power, they so far turn their backs upon their record as to
deny manhood to the African, and refuse to recognize his
service in the salvation of the republic, they are sure to be
defeated, as they will be certain to deserve defeat.
