  ha ter   .
THE FREQUENT ALLUSIONS in Mr. Lincoln’s speeches to
threats of secession on the part of the South, in the event of
the success of the republican party, have already shown the
reader that secession had become a matter of consideration
and discussion among those interested in the perpetuation
and nationalization of slavery. It was evident that the
southern leaders were preparing the minds of their people
for some desperate step, and that many of them desired,
rather than deprecated, the election of a republican
president. Many of them openly said that they should
prefer the election of Mr. Seward or Mr. Lincoln to the
election of Mr. Douglas, because then they should know
exactly what they were to meet. The reason thus given was
undoubtedly a fraud. They found themselves in desperate
circumstances. All their schemes for the extension of
slavery and the reinforcement of the slave power had
miscarried. Kansas and California were lost to them. There
was no hope for them in Nebraska or any of the new
territories. The hope of acquiring Cuba was gone, and the
ﬁllibustering 
operations 
of 
Walker 
which 
they 
had
patronized were failures. They knew of but one remedy —
that which the great mischief-maker of South Carolina had
pointed out to them many years before, viz: secession. It is
doubtful whether they preferred secession to predominance
 in the nation, but, basing their policy on the doctrine of
“state rights,” their aim was to secede, and either to insist
on a permanent separation, or by secession to coerce the
government into the practical acknowledgment of their
claims. There is no doubt that it was the policy of the
shrewdest of the slavery propagandists so to manage their
party as to secure the election of a republican president.
Overpowered in the nation, and hopeless of the future, they
looked only for a plausible pretext for precipitating the
execution of their scheme; and this could only be found in
the election of a president professedly a foe to the
extension of slavery.
“The Knights of the Golden Circle” were a band of secret
conspirators organized in the interest of treason. The
popular political leaders rose to the highest degrees in this
order, and knew the whole plot, while the masses, many of
whom had no real sympathy with secession, were kept in
the dark, ready to be forced into measures that were in
cunning and careful preparation. The Christian church of
the whole South was the willing slave of this cabal.
Preachers proclaimed the divine right of slavery and the
doctrines of sedition from the pulpit. The press was an
obedient instrument in their hands. There were traitors and
plotters 
in 
the 
national 
government, 
industriously
preparing the way for secession, and sapping the power of
the government to prevent it. Mr. Cobb was squandering
the national ﬁnances. Mr. Floyd, the secretary of war, was
ﬁlling all the southern arsenals with arms at the expense of
the government, and sending loyal oﬀicers to distant posts;
 and, although a northern man was at the head of the navy
department, it was subsequently found, when ships were
wanted, that they were very far from where they were
wanted. These southern men, thus plotting, only waited for
a pretext for springing their plot upon the people, and of
course were not reluctant to make a pretext when
opportunity oﬀered.
This was the condition of aﬀairs in the spring of 1860, a
year which was to see a new president elected. Everybody
felt that a severe political storm was ahead, though
comparatively few, either at the North or the South, knew
what its character would be. The South blindly followed its
leaders, without perfectly knowing whither it was to be led.
The North had become accustomed to threats of dissolution
of the Union, and did not believe that those then rife would
be better fulﬁlled than those which had preceded them. No
one at the North, unless it may have been a few
sympathetic politicians, had any faith in the earnestness of
the pro-slavery schemers. The disruption of the government
was regarded as an impossibility; and the Union-loving
Yankee would not believe that there were any who would
push their professed enmity to any practical exhibition.
Mr. Lincoln had scarcely returned to his home before the
Democratic National Convention assembled at Charleston.
This convention occurred on the twenty-third of April, and
collected to itself all the plotters against the Union. That
they met the northern members of the democratic party
with any expectation to unite with them in a platform and
the selection of a candidate, is not probable. Mr. Douglas,
 with his popular sovereignty, and Dred Scott decision, and
“don’t care” policy, oﬀered them the only ground of Union.
All saw this, and all were for or against Douglas. Douglas
was the pivot of the convention. Everything turned on him.
The northern men felt that nothing less than Douglas, who
had fought the Lecompton fraud and the administration,
and had been compelled to some concessions to freedom in
order to win his seat in the senate, would do for them,
while the South was determined to take no man who was
not fairly and squarely a pro-slavery man, with a clean
record, and to subscribe to no platform that did not accord
to them fully the rights they claimed. The South would have
only a “sound man,” and would ﬁght this time only “on
principle.” If it could not have honest victory, it wanted
defeat. No “unfriendly legislation” should exclude slavery
from the territories. They must have their property
protected. Mr. Yancey was present as the leader of the
“ﬁre-eaters,” 
and 
could 
probably 
have 
foretold 
the
explosion of the convention. There is no doubt that he
intended nothing else than this, and the convention did
explode, and the old democratic party that had proved
invincible on so many battle-ﬁelds was rent in twain. The
southern members, by a large majority, withdrew and
formed 
a 
“Constitutional 
Convention.” 
The 
regular
convention remained in session, and after ﬁfty-seven
unsuccessful ballotings, in which Mr. Douglas came near a
nomination, they gave it up, and adjourned to meet in
Baltimore on the eighteenth day of June, or two days after
the appointed date of the Republican Convention at
 Chicago. The Constitutional Convention transacted no
important 
business, 
and 
made 
no 
nomination, 
but
adjourned to meet in Richmond on the second Monday in
June.
The Charleston people were delighted with the results of
the quarrel. The ladies, only a dozen of whom had been in
attendance upon the regular convention, turned out and
ﬁlled the hall of the seceders. All the smiles of all the
beauty of Charleston were bestowed upon Mr. Yancey and
his followers. They undoubtedly regarded this disruption of
the party as insuring the pretext for disunion for which
they so ardently wished.
The democratic host, as they retired in broken columns
from Charleston, were jostled on the road by the members
of another convention, on their way to Baltimore — the
“National Constitutional Union Convention” — made up
largely of old whigs who still dreamed that the party of
their early love was in existence — that it was not dead, but
sleeping. They met on the ninth of May — delegates from
ten free states and eleven slave states. There is this to be
said of this body of men — that they were in the main really
anxious to save the Union, and that they had a juster
appreciation of the dangers of the Union than the
republicans, who were fond of ridiculing their fears. They
passed a “conservative” resolution, declaring that they had
no principles except “The Constitution of the country, the
Union of the states, and the enforcement of the laws.” The
convention nominated John Bell of Tennessee for president,
and Edward Everett of Massachusetts for vice-president,
 the former of whom, when secession came, went over to
the disunionists, and the latter or whom devoted all his
great inﬂuence and powers to the maintenance of the
government, becoming at last a member of the republican
party and the recipient of its honors.
Before entering upon an account of the Chicago
Convention, it will be best to state, in brief, the result of the
democratic split at Charleston. The Richmond Convention
met and adjourned to await the doings of the Baltimore
Convention, the members generally going to Baltimore.
There they joined in an independent convention, making all
the mischief possible, and nominating for president John C.
Breckinridge, then vice-president of the United States, and
since a Major General in the rebel army. The regular
convention nominated Mr. Douglas, though he had begged
them to sacriﬁce him rather than the party. The party,
however, was already sacriﬁced; and he had had no small
hand in the slaughter. The antagonism between the
southern and northern sections of the democracy was
irreconcilable. It was impossible for the two to agree upon
a platform or a man who would carry either section of the
country. Mr. Lincoln had his joke and his “little story” over
the disruption of the democracy. He once knew, he said, a
sound churchman of the name of Brown, who was the
member of a very sober and pious committee having in
charge the erection of a bridge over a dangerous and rapid
river. Several architects failed, and at last Brown said he
had a friend named Jones who had built several bridges,
and could undoubtedly build that one. So Mr. Jones was
 called in. “Can you build this bridge?” inquired the
committee. “Yes,” replied Jones, “or any other. I could build
a bridge to h — l if necessary.” The committee were
shocked, and Brown felt called upon to defend his friend. “I
know Jones so well,” said he, “and he is so honest a man,
and so good an architect, that if he states soberly and
positively that he can build a bridge to — to — the infernal
regions, why, I believe it; but I feel bound to say that I have
my doubts about the abutment on the other side.” “So,”
said Mr. Lincoln, “when politicians told me that the
northern and southern wings of the democracy could be
harmonized, why, I believed them, of course, but I always
had my doubts about the abutment on the other side.”
Though the result of the Baltimore Convention was
unknown at Chicago, it was foreseen, and it was believed
that victory would come to the republican party with any
respectable nominee. When the friends of Douglas left
Baltimore, they left it with none but bitter feelings for those
who had destroyed their party, and brought certain defeat
to the man to whom they were strongly devoted. They felt
that Mr. Douglas had deserved better treatment at the
hands of the South than he had received, and saw, in the
disruption of their party, the defeat of all their hopes.
The Republican Convention at Chicago assembled on the
sixteenth of June. There was an immense crowd in
attendance, casting into the shade entirely the assemblages
at Charleston and Baltimore. Every hotel was crammed
from basement to attic, even in that city of multitudinous
and capacious hotels. It was calculated that ﬁfteen hundred
 persons slept in the Tremont House alone. A huge building
was erected for the sessions of the convention, which was
called “The Wigwam;” and even this could not contain more
than a fraction of the twenty-ﬁve thousand strangers who
had assembled in the city, as delegates and interested
observers.
Edward Bates, Judge McLean, Benjamin F. Wade, N.P.
Banks, Abraham Lincoln, Simon Cameron, and William H.
Seward, all had their partisans among outsiders and
insiders; but it became evident very early that the contest
was really between Mr. Seward and Mr. Lincoln. The chiefs
of the party were all present, excepting, perhaps, those
who imagined that they might possibly be made the
recipients of the convention’s favors.
Hon. George Ashmun of Massachusetts was elected to
preside over the deliberations of the occasion. Canvassing,
talking, prophesying, betting, declaiming, were actively in
progress everywhere. On the morning of the seventeenth,
Mr. Seward’s friends made a demonstration in his favor, in
the form of a procession, following a band of music and
wearing badges. As they passed the Tremont House, they
were greeted with tremendous cheers, the band playing “O,
isn’t he a darling?” Antagonisms were developed in every
quarter. Pennsylvania, New Jersey and Indiana declared
that if Mr. Seward should be nominated they could do
nothing; Douglas would beat them ten to one. Illinois,
devoted to Mr. Lincoln, joined in the cry, but the New
Yorkers scouted the idea that Mr. Seward could not sweep
with victory every northern state. The Lincoln men were
 quite as busy as the friends of Mr. Seward, and less noisy.
Mr. Greeley telegraphed to the New York Tribune, on the
evening of the seventeenth: “My conclusion, from all that I
can gather, is, that the opposition to Governor Seward
cannot concentrate on any candidate, and that he will be
nominated;” and this, it must be remembered, was not in
accordance with Mr. Greeley’s wishes.
The platform upon which the party proposed to conduct
the campaign was adopted on the second day. The action
upon this showed that the party had not quite come to the
standard of Mr. Lincoln, moderate as he had been. Hon.
Joshua R. Giddings, one of the old enemies of slavery and
the slave power, wished to introduce into the platform that
part of the Declaration of Independence which asserts, as
self-evident truths, “that all men are endowed by their
Creator with certain inalienable rights, among which are
those of life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness,” and that
governments are instituted among men to secure the
enjoyment of these rights; but objections were made. The
old man walked grieved and disgusted out of the wigwam,
amid the protestations of the crowd. Mr. George W. Curtis,
a New York delegate, made an appeal to the convention
that was irresistible, and the declaration went in, and all
felt the stronger and better for it. The utterances of Mr.
Lincoln have already given us the substance of this
platform. It contravened no right of slavery in the states,
under the Constitution, denounced the subserviency of Mr.
Buchanan’s administration to a sectional interest and the
dogma that the Constitution carried slavery into the
 territories and protected it there, declared that the normal
condition of all the territory of the United States is that of
freedom, and that a sound policy requires a protective
tariﬀ, 
c., 
c. It was the platform of the old whig party,
repeated in most particulars, except that, in the matter of
slavery, it introduced, not widely modiﬁed, the old platform
of the “free soilers.” The platform was adopted amid
demonstrations of the wildest enthusiasm. An eye witness
of the scene says: “all the thousands of men in that
enormous wigwam commenced swinging their hats, amd
cheering with intense enthusiasm; and the other thousands
of ladies waved their handkerchiefs and clapped their
hands. The roar that went up from that mass of ten
thousand human beings is indescribable. Such a spectacle
as was presented for some minutes has never before been
witnessed at a convention. A herd of buﬀaloes or lions
could not have made a more tremendous roaring.”
The Seward men still carried a conﬁdent air on the third
day. They had reason to do so. Their candidate was in many
respects the greatest man in the party. He was a statesman
of acknowledged eminence, and had been for many years
the leading representative of the principles upon which the
republican party stood. They were strong, too, in the
convention; and they were sure to secure upon the ﬁrst
ballot more votes for their candidate than could be
summoned to the support of any other man.
On the assembling of the convention, everybody was
anxious to get at the decisive work, and, as a preliminary,
the various candidates in the ﬁeld were formally nominated
 by their friends. Mr. Evarts of New York nominated Mr.
Seward, and Mr. Judd of Illinois named Abraham Lincoln.
Afterwards, Mr. Dayton of New Jersey, Mr. Cameron of
Pennsylvania, Mr. Chase of Ohio, Edward Bates of Missouri,
and John McLean of Ohio, were formally nominated; but no
enthusiasm was awakened by the mention of any names
except those of Mr. Seward and Mr. Lincoln. Caleb B. Smith
of Indiana seconded the nomination of Mr. Lincoln, as did
also Mr. Delano of Ohio, while Carl Schurz of Wisconsin and
Mr. Blair of Michigan seconded the nomination of Mr.
Seward. It was certain that one of these two men would be
nominated. On every pronunciation of their names, their
respective partisans raised their shouts, vieing with each
other in the strength of their applause. The excitement of
this mass of men at that time cannot be measured by those
not there, or by men in their sober senses.
The ballot came. Maine gave nearly half her vote for
Lincoln; New Hampshire, seven of her ten for Lincoln.
Massachusetts was divided. New York voted solid for Mr.
Seward, giving him her seventy votes. Virginia, which was
expected also to vote solid for Mr. Seward, gave fourteen of
her twenty-two votes for Lincoln. Indiana gave her twenty-
six votes for Lincoln without a break. Thus the balloting
went on, amid the most intense excitement, until the whole
number of four hundred and sixty-ﬁve votes was cast. It
was necessary to a choice that one candidate should have
two hundred and thirty-three. William H. Seward had one
hundred and seventy-three and a half, Abraham Lincoln one
hundred and two, Edward Bates forty-eight, Simon
 Cameron ﬁfty and a half, Salmon P. Chase forty-nine. The
remaining forty-two votes were divided among John
McLean, Benjamin F. Wade, William L. Dayton, John M.
Reed, Jacob Collamer, Charles Sumner and John C.
Fremont, — Reed, Sumner and Fremont having one each.
On the second ballot, the ﬁrst gain for Lincoln was from
New Hampshire. Then Vermont followed with her vote,
which she had previously given to her senator, Mr.
Collamer, as compliment. Pennsylvania came next to his
support, with the votes she had given to Cameron. On the
whole ballot, he gained seventy-nine votes, and received
one hundred and eighty-one; while Mr. Seward received
one hundred and eighty-four and a half votes, having
gained eleven. The announcement of the votes given to Mr.
Seward and Mr. Lincoln was received by deafening
applause by their respective partisans. Then came the third
ballot. All felt that it was likely to be the decisive one, and
the friends of Mr. Seward trembled for the result.
Hundreds of pencils were in operation, and before the
result was announced it was whispered through the
immense and excited mass of people that Abraham Lincoln
had received two hundred and thirty-one and a half votes,
only lacking one vote and a half of an election. Mr. Cartter
of Ohio was up in an instant, to announce the change of
four votes of Ohio from Mr. Chase to Mr. Lincoln. That
ﬁnished the work. The excitement had culminated. After a
moment’s pause, like the sudden and breathless stillness
that 
precedes 
the 
hurricane, 
the 
storm 
of 
wild,
uncontrollable and almost insane enthusiasm descended.
 The scene surpassed description. During all the ballotings,
a man had been standing upon the roof, communicating the
results to the outsiders, who, in surging masses, far
outnumbered those who were packed into the wigwam. To
this man one of the secretaries shouted: “Fire the salute!
Abe Lincoln is nominated!” Then, as the cheering inside
died away, the roar began on the outside, and swelled up
from the excited masses like the noise of many waters. This
the insiders heard, and to it they replied. Thus deep called
to deep with such a frenzy of sympathetic enthusiasm that
even the thundering salute of cannon was unheard by many
upon the platform.
When the multitudes became too tired to cheer more, the
business of the convention proceeded. Half a dozen men
were on their feet announcing the change of votes of their
states, swelling Mr. Lincoln’s majority. Missouri, Iowa,
Kentucky, Minnesota, Virginia, California, Texas, District of
Columbia, Kansas, Nebraska and Oregon insisted on
casting unanimous votes for Mr. Lincoln, before the vote
was declared. While these changes were going on, a
photograph of the nominee was brought in and exhibited to
the convention. When the vote was declared, Mr. Evarts, on
behalf of the New York delegation, expressed his grief that
Mr. Seward had not been nominated, and then moved that
the nomination of Mr. Lincoln should be made unanimous.
John A. Andrew of Massachusetts and Carl Schurz of
Wisconsin seconded the motion, and it was carried. Before
the 
nomination 
of 
a 
vice-president, 
the 
convention
adjourned for dinner. It is reported that such had been the
 excitement during the morning session that men who never
tasted intoxicating liquors staggered like drunken men, on
coming into the open air. The nervous tension had been so
great that, when it subsided, they were as ﬂaccid and
feeble as if they had but recently risen from a fever.
The excitement in the city only began as it subsided in
the convention. Mr. Lincoln was the favorite of Chicago and
of Illinois — he was the people’s idol. Men shouted and
sang, and did all sorts of foolish things in the incontinence
of their joy. After dinner the convention met again, and for
the last time. The simple business was the completion of
the ticket by the nomination of a candidate for vice-
president; and the result was the selection of Hannibal
Hamlin of Maine.
The defeat of Mr. Seward was a sad blow to his friends.
They had presented to the convention one of the prominent
statesmen of the nation; and he had undoubtedly been
slaughtered to satisfy the clamor for “availability.” The
country at large did not know Mr. Lincoln in any capacity
except that of a political debater; and many sections had no
familiarity with his reputation, even in this character. Mr.
Seward, on the contrary, had been in public life for thirty
years; and his name and fame were as common and as well
established in the regard of the nation, as the name and
fame of Henry Clay and Daniel Webster had been. He was a
man of great accomplishments, of wide experience, of large
inﬂuence and surpassing ability — recognized as such
abroad as well as at home. Their disappointment is not to
be wondered at, or blamed. Mr. Lincoln had not been
 proved. His capacity for public aﬀairs had yet to be
demonstrated; and he had been nominated over the head of
Mr. Seward partly for this reason — the reason that he was
a new man, and had no public record. If events have proved
that the choice between these two men was a fortunate
one, they can hardly have proved that it was a wise one —
that it was the result of an intelligent and honest choice
between the two men. It is pleasant to remember that Mr.
Lincoln, when elected to the presidency, called to the ﬁrst
place in his cabinet the man whom the convention had set
aside, and that the country had the advantage of his wise
counsels throughout the darkest period and most diﬀicult
passage of its history.
As has been stated, the city of Chicago was wild with
delight. One hundred guns were ﬁred from the top of the
Tremont House. Decorated and illuminated rails were
around the newspaper oﬀices. All the bars and drinking
halls were crowded with men who were either worn out
with excitement or mad with delight. From Chicago the
news spread over the country, and the cannon’s throat
responded to the click of the telegraph from Maine to the
Mississippi. The outgoing trains that night found bonﬁres
blazing at every village, and excited crowds assembled to
cheer the retiring delegates, most of whom were either too
weak or too hoarse to respond.
In the little city of Springﬁeld, in the heart of Illinois, two
hundred miles from where those exciting events were in
progress, sat Abraham Lincoln, in close and constant
telegraphic communication with his friends in Chicago. He
 was apprised of the results of every ballot, and, with his
home friends, sat in the Journal oﬀice receiving and
commenting upon the dispatches. It was one of the decisive
moments of his life — a moment on which hung his fate as a
public man — his place in history. He fully appreciated the
momentous results of the convention to himself and the
nation, and foresaw the nature of the great struggle which
his nomination and election would inaugurate. A moment,
and he knew that he would either become the central man
of a nation, or a cast-oﬀ politician whose ambition for the
nation’s highest honors would be forever blasted. At last, in
the midst of intense and painful excitement, a messenger
from the telegraph oﬀice entered with the decisive dispatch
in his hand. Without handing it to any one, he took his way
solemnly to the side of Mr. Lincoln, and said: “the
convention has made a nomination, and Mr. Seward is —
the second man on the list.” Then he jumped upon the
editorial table and shouted, “gentlemen, I propose three
cheers for Abraham Lincoln, the next President of the
United States;” and the call was boisterously responded to.
He then handed the dispatch to Mr. Lincoln who read in
silence, and then aloud, its contents. After the excitement
had in a measure passed away from the little assembly, Mr.
Lincoln rose, and remarking that there was “a little
woman” on Eighth street who had some interest in the
matter, pocketed the telegram and walked home.
As soon as the news reached Springﬁeld, the citizens
who had a personal aﬀection for Mr. Lincoln which
amounted almost to idolatry, responded with a hundred
 guns, and during the afternoon thronged his house to
tender their congratulations and express their joy. In the
evening, the State House was thrown open, and a most
enthusiastic meeting held by the republicans. At its close,
they marched in a body to the Lincoln mansion, and called
for the nominee. Mr. Lincoln appeared, and after a brief,
modest and hearty speech, invited as many as could get
into the house to enter, the crowd responding that after the
fourth of March they would give him a larger house. The
people did not retire until a late hour, and then moved oﬀ
reluctantly, leaving the excited household to their rest.
On the following day, which was Saturday, Mr. Ashmun,
the president of the convention, at the head of a committee,
visited Springﬁeld to apprise Mr. Lincoln oﬀicially of his
nomination. In order that the ceremony might be smoothly
performed, the committee had an interview with Mr.
Lincoln before the hour appointed for the formal call. They
found him at a loss to know how to treat a present he had
just received at the hands of some of his considerate
Springﬁeld friends. Knowing Mr. Lincoln’s temperate or
rather abstinent habits, and laboring under the impression
that the visitors from Chicago would have wants beyond
the power of cold water to satisfy, these friends had sent in
sundry hampers of wines and liquors. These strange ﬂuids
troubled Mr. Lincoln; and he frankly confessed as much to
the members of the committee. The chairman at once
advised him to return the gift, and to oﬀer no stimulants to
his guests, as many would be present besides the
committee. Thus relieved, he made ready for the reception
 of the company, according to his own ideas of hospitality.
The evening came, and with it Mr. Ashmun and the
committee and many others. Mr. Ashmun on being
presented said:
“I have, sir, the honor, on behalf of the gentlemen who
are present — a committee appointed by the republican
convention recently assembled at Chicago — to discharge a
most pleasant duty. We have come, sir, under a vote of
instructions to that committee, to notify you that you have
been selected by the convention of the republicans at
Chicago for President of the United States. They instruct
us, sir, to notify you of that selection; and that committee
deem it not only respectful to yourself, but appropriate to
the important matter which they have in hand, that they
should come in person, and present to you the authentic
evidence of the action of that convention; and, sir, without
any phrase which shall either be personally plauditory to
yourself, or which shall have any reference to the principles
involved in the questions which are connected with your
nomination, I desire to present to you the letter which has
been prepared, and which informs you of your nomination,
and with it the platform, resolutions and sentiments which
the convention adopted. Sir, at your convenience, we shall
be glad to receive from you such a response as it may be
your pleasure to give us.”
Mr. Lincoln listened to the address with sad gravity.
There was in his heart no exultation — no elation0-only the
pressure of a new and great responsibility. He paused
thoughtfully for a moment, and then replied:
 “Mr. Chairman and Gentlemen of the Committee: I
tender to you, and through you to the republican national
convention, and all the people represented in it, my
profoundest thanks for the high honor done me, which you
now formally announce. Deeply and even painfully sensible
of the great responsibility which is inseparable from this
high honor — a responsibility which I could almost wish
had fallen upon some one of the far more eminent and
experienced statesmen Whose distinguished names were
before the convention — I shall, by your leave, consider
more fully the resolutions of the convention denominated
the 
platform, 
and, 
without 
any 
unnecessary 
or
unreasonable delay, respond to you, Mr. Chairman, in
writing, not doubting that the platform will be found
satisfactory, and the nomination gratefully accepted. And
now I will no longer defer the pleasure of taking you, and
each of you, by the hand.”
Judge Kelly of Pennsylvania, one of the committee, and a
very tall man, looked at Mr. Lincoln, up and down, before it
came his turn to take his hand, a scrutiny that had not
escaped Mr. Lincoln’s quick eye. So, when he took the hand
of the Judge, he inquired: “what is your hight?” “six feet
three,” replied the Judge. “What is yours, Mr. Lincoln?”
“Six feet four,” responded Mr. Lincoln. “Then, sir,” said the
Judge, “Pennsylvania bows to Illinois. My dear man,” he
continued, “for years my heart has been aching for a
president that I could look up to; and I’ve found him at last,
in the land where we thought there were none but little
giants.”
 The evening passed quickly away, and the committee
retired with a very pleasant impression of the man in whose
hands they had placed the standard of the party for a great
and decisive campaign. Mr. Ashmun met the nominee as an
old friend, with whom he had acted in Congress, when both
were members of the old whig party; and the interview
between them was one of peculiar interest. It is a strange
coincidence that the man who received Mr. Lincoln’s ﬁrst
spoken and written utterance as the standard bearer of the
republican party, received the last word he ever wrote as
President of the United States.
On the twenty-third of June, which occurred on the
following week, Mr. Lincoln responded to the letter which
Mr. Ashmun presented him as follows:
“Sir: I accept the nomination tendered me by the
convention over which you presided, of which I am formally
apprised in a letter of yourself and others, acting as a
committee of the convention for that purpose. The
declaration 
of 
principles 
and 
sentiments 
which
accompanies your letter meets my approval, and it shall be
my care not to violate it, or disregard it in any part.
Imploring the assistance of Divine Providence, and with
due regard to the views and feelings of all who were
represented in the convention, to the rights of all the states
and territories and people of the nation, to the inviolability
of the Constitution and the perpetual union, harmony and
prosperity of all, I am most happy to co-operate for the
practical success of the principles declared by the
convention. Your obliged friend and fellow-citizen,
 “Abraham Lincoln.
“Hon. George Ashmun.”
Thus was Abraham Lincoln placed before the nation as a
candidate for the highest honor in its power to bestow. It
had been a long and tedious passage to this point in his
history. He was in the ﬁfty-second year of his age. He had
spent half of his years in what was litera11y a wilderness.
Born in the humblest and remotest obscurity, subjected to
the rudest toil in the meanest oﬀices, gathering his
acquisitions from the scantiest sources, achieving the
development of his powers by means of his own institution,
he had, with none of the tricks of the demagogue, with
none of the aids of wealth and social inﬂuence, with none of
the opportunities for exhibiting his powers which high
oﬀicial position bestows, against all the combinations of
genius and eminence and interest, raised himself by force
of manly excellence of heart and brain into national
recognition, and had become the focal center of the
aﬀectionate interest and curious inquisition of thirty
millions of people at home, and of multitudes throughout
the civilized world.
