  ha ter   II.
TO APPRECIATE THE enormity of the rebellion of which Mr.
Lincoln’s election was made the pretext, by the southern
leaders, it is never to be forgotten that the whole South, by
becoming a party in the election, committed itself to the
result. They were in all honor bound to abide by that result,
whatever it might be. If the foes of Mr. Lincoln had refused
to vote at all, they would have gone into the rebellion with
a much cleaner record; but the ﬁrst item of that record was
a breach of personal honor on the part of every man who
engaged in insurrection. Every member of both houses of
Congress, every member of the cabinet, and every federal
oﬀice-holder who turned against the government, was
obliged, beyond this breach of personal honor to become a
perjurer — to trample upon the solemn oath by virtue of
which he held his oﬀice.
Allusion has already been made to the operations of the
plotters in Mr. Buchanan’s cabinet. Before the election,
Floyd had, as has already been stated, sent one hundred
and ﬁfteen thousand muskets from northern armories to
southern arsenals. General Scott had warned him of the
danger to which the federal forts at the South were liable,
and had advised that, as a precautionary measure, they
should be garrisoned. To this warning the secret traitor
paid no attention. Attorney General Black had given his
 oﬀicial opinion that Congress had no right to carry on a war
against any state. The President himself was only a weak
instrument in the hands of the intriguers. He consented to
have his hands tied; and if he made any protests they were
weak and childish. More than anything else he longed to
have them delay the execution of their schemes until he
should be released from oﬀice.
South Carolina, the breeding bed of secession and the
birthplace of the fatal State Rights Heresy, took the lead in
the secession movement, and called a state convention to
meet at Columbia on the seventeenth of December. On the
tenth of November, four days after the election, a bill was
introduced in the legislature of the state calling out ten
thousand 
volunteers. 
The 
two 
senators 
from 
South
Carolina, Chesnut and Hammond, resigned their seats, one
on the tenth and the other on the eleventh of the same
month. Robert Toombs, a Georgia senator, made a violent
secession speech at Milledgeville in his own state, and this,
notwithstanding the fact that he continued to hold his seat.
Howell Cobb, the Secretary of the Treasury, resigned on
the tenth of December, declaring his inability to relieve the
treasury from the embarrassments into which he had
purposely led it; and two days before the secession
convention met in South Carolina the Secretary of War,
Floyd, accepted the requisition of that state for her quota of
United States arms for 1861. Meetings were held all over
the 
South 
where 
treason 
was 
boldly 
plotted 
and
promulgated, and the people were goaded to the adoption
of the desperate expedients determined upon by the
 leaders. The South Carolina Secession Convention met at
Columbia on the seventeenth of December, but, on account
of the prevalence of the small pox there, adjourned to
Charleston, where, on the twentieth, they formally issued
an ordinance of separation, and declared “that the Union
now (then) subsisting between South Carolina and other
states under the name of the United States of America is
hereby (was thereby) dissolved.”
The passage of this ordinance ﬁlled the Charlestonians
with delight, and, in the evening, in the presence of an
immense crowd, the fatal instrument was signed and
sealed; and Governor Pickens immediately issued a
proclamation, declaring South Carolina to be “a separate,
free, sovereign and independent state.” This was followed
by the withdrawal of Messrs. McQueen, Boyd, Bonham and
Ashmore from Congress, although their resignation was not
recognized by the speaker, on the ground that such an act
would be a recognition of the legitimacy of the action of the
state.
Before 
the 
adjournment 
of 
the 
South 
Carolina
Convention, 
resolutions 
were 
passed 
calling 
for 
a
convention 
of 
the 
seceding 
states 
to 
be 
held 
at
Montgomery, Alabama, for the purpose of forming a
southern confederacy, and providing or suggesting a plan
of 
operations 
and 
organization. 
The 
Congressional
conspirators were active in Washington, and in constant
communication with their respective states, urging on the
work of national disintegration. On the eighth of January a
caucus of southern senators at Washington counseled
 immediate secession; and at the national capital there was
no inﬂuence that could, or would, withstand this reckless
and rampant treason. As quickly as it could be done
consistently with the safety of the cause of treason,
Mississippi, Florida, Alabama, Georgia, Louisiana and
Texas, followed the lead of South Carolina in to secession.
Forts and arsenals were seized in all the seceded states,
the steamer Star of the West, sent to Charleston with
reinforcements and supplies for Major Anderson, was
driven out of the harbor, a southern confederacy was
formed, with Jeﬀerson Davis as president, and thus, by
every necessary preliminary act, was the most terrible
rebellion inaugurated that has ever reddened the pages of
history. In cabinet meeting, the southern secretaries, still
occupying places, were boldly demanding that the forts at
Charleston should be evacuated; and Mr. Buchanan was too
weak to take a position against them. But he had one man
in his cabinet who was not afraid to speak the truth. Edwin
M. Stanton who had been called to ﬁll the oﬀice of attorney
general on the retirement of Mr. Black, rose and said: “Mr.
President, it is my duty, as your legal adviser, to say that
you have no right to give up the property of the
government, or abandon the soldiers of the United States
to its enemies; and the course proposed by the Secretary of
the Interior, if followed, is treason, and will involve you and
all concerned in treason.” For the ﬁrst time in the cabinet
treason had been called by its true name, and the men who
were leading the President and the country to ruin were
told to their faces the nature of their foul business. Floyd
 and Thompson, who had had everything their own way,
sprang ﬁercely to their feet, while Mr. Holt, the Postmaster
General, took his position by the side of Mr. Stanton; and
Mr. Buchanan besought them with a senile whine to take
their seats. Thus bolstered by Mr. Stanton the President
determined not to withdraw Major Anderson. This act of
Mr. Stanton was the ﬁrst in Mr. Buchanan’s administration
that seemed to be based on a full comprehension of the
nature of the situation. and it was a noble introduction to
the great work he was destined to accomplish in the
suppression of the rebellion.
These events occurring in rapid succession produced a
profound impression at the North. The whole country was
ﬁlled with feverish apprehension. A peace congress took up
its abode in Washington, with the notorious John Tyler for
president. Measures of compromise were introduced into
Congress and urged with great vigor. Those northern states
that had passed “personal liberty bills,” and other
measures oﬀensive to the South made haste to repeal them,
that all possible pretexts for rebellion might be put out of
the way. Every practicable attempt was made by the fearful
and the faithless to compel such concessions to the slave
power as would calm its ire, and obviate the necessity of
armed collision. There were not wanting men in the North
whose sympathies were with the traitors, and who would
willingly and gladly have joined them in the attempt to
revolutionize the government, by preventing Mr. Lincoln
from taking his seat, and delivering over Washington and
the government to the plotters. Indeed, many of the traitors
 openly declared that by secession they did not mean
secession 
at 
all, 
but 
revolution. 
Commerce 
and
manufactures begged for peace at the slaveholder’s price,
whatever it might be.
Washington itself was full of treason. It was the
prevailing spirit of all the fashionable life of the national
capital. All the governmental departments were crowded
with it. It was the talk of the hotels. Loyalty was snubbed
and dishonored. Maryland, though she had passed no
ordinance of secession, was disloyal. The sympathies of the
higher classes of Baltimore were all with the traitors. Thus
secession was an accomplished fact, the forts and arsenals
of the United States at the South were in the hands of the
traitors, the northern arsenals were stripped, every
available ship with the exception of two was beyond call,
the confederate government was organized, the United
States treasury was bankrupt, the whole South was
seething with the excitement of treason, disloyalty reigned
in 
every 
department 
of 
the 
government, 
southern
sympathizers were scattered over the whole North,
business was depressed, and a fearful looking-for of
terrible days and terrible events had taken possession of
those who still loved the Union, when Mr. Lincoln started
on his journey to Washington, to assume the oﬀice to which
he had been elected.
Silently, and with sad forebodings, had he waited in
Springﬁeld the opening of the storm. With an intense
interest he had followed the development of the disunion
scheme, and knowing the character of the southern leaders
 he appreciated the desperate nature of the struggle upon
which he was entering.
On the 11th of February, 1861, Mr. Lincoln reluctantly
bade adieu to the peaceful scenes of home and the grateful
presence of his best personal friends, for the untried ﬁeld
of high oﬀicial life. That he dreaded the change, and
committed himself to it with the gravest forebodings, there
is no question. Already had the threats of assassination
reached his ears. It had been widely hinted by his enemies
that his inauguration would never be permitted; and even if
it should be, he knew that the most oppressive duties
awaited him.
On his departure for the railroad station, he was
accompanied by a large concourse of his neighbors and
friends, the most of whom insisted on a parting shake of
the hand. After passing through this trial, he appealed upon
the platform of the car set apart for himself and his family
and friends, and with the deepest feeling delivered to them
his parting words.
“My friends,” said he, “no one not in my position can
appreciate the sadness I feel at this parting. To this people
I owe all that I am. Here I have lived more than a quarter of
a century. Here my children were born, and here one of
them lies buried. I know not how soon I shall see you again.
A duty devolves upon me which is greater, perhaps, than
that which has devolved upon any other man since the days
of Washington. He never would have succeeded except for
the aid of Divine Providence, upon which he at all times
relied. I feel that I cannot succeed without the same divine
 aid which sustained him, and on the same Almighty Being I
place my reliance for support; and I hope you, my friends,
will pray that I may receive that divine assistance without
which I cannot succeed, but with which success is certain.
Again, I bid you all an aﬀectionate farewell.”
This parting address was telegraphed to every part of the
country, and was strangely misinterpreted. So little was the
man’s character understood that his simple and earnest
request that his neighbors should pray for him was
received by many as an evidence both of his weakness and
his hypocrisy. No President had ever before asked the
people, in a public address, to pray for him. It sounded like
the cant of the conventicle to ears unaccustomed to the
language of piety from the lips of politicians. The request
was tossed about as a joke— “old Abe’s last” — but it came
from a heart surcharged with a sense of need, and strong in
its belief that the Almighty listens to the prayers of men.
Mr. Lincoln had before him, on this journey, one of the
most diﬀicult tasks of his life. The country was very anxious
to get some hint as to his policy. This hint he did not intend
to give, until he should be obliged to give it oﬀicially. His
task, then, of talking without saying anything, was not only
a new one, but it was one for which he had no talent. He
had never acquired, and could never acquire, the faculty of
uttering graceful and acceptable nothings. Give him
something to talk about, and he could talk. Give him a
knotty point to argue, and he could argue; but to talk for
the mere purpose of talk was beyond his power. To talk
when it was his impulse and his policy to say nothing, was
 the hardest task of his life. Hence, there had never been a
passage in his life in which he appeared to such a
disadvantage as he did in the speeches made during this
journey. He could win the profoundest admiration of the
gifted and the learned at the Cooper Institute, but on the
platform of a railroad car, or before an august committee of
city magnates, he was as much at a loss as a school-boy
would have been.
Mrs. Lincoln and her three boys were in the car as it
rolled out of Springﬁeld; and with them a number of Mr.
Lincoln’s old friends, Governor Yates, Ex-Governor Moore,
Dr. W.M. Wallace, Hon. N.P. Judd, Hon. O.H. Browning,
Judge David Davis and Colonel E.E. Ellsworth were of the
number, as were also John M. Hay and J.G. Nicolay,
afterwards Mr. Lincoln’s private secretaries. The ﬁrst point
of destination was Indianapolis, but Mr. Lincoln was called
out at various places on the route, to respond to the
greetings of the crowds that had assembled at the way
stations.
On arriving at Indianapolis, the party found the city
entirely devoted for the time to the pleasant task of giving
their elected chief magistrate a ﬁtting reception. Business
was suspended, ﬂags were ﬂoating everywhere, and when,
at ﬁve o’clock, the train rolled into the Union depot, a
salute of thirty-four guns announced them and gave them
greeting. Governor Morton addressed to Mr. Lincoln an
earnest and hearty speech of welcome, and then the
presidential party were escorted through the principal
streets by a procession composed of both houses of the
 legislature, the municipal authorities, and the military and
ﬁremen. Arriving at the Bates House, Mr. Lincoln was
called for, when he appeared, and made the following brief
address:
“Fellow citizens of the State of Indiana: I am here to
thank you much for this magniﬁcent welcome, and still
more for the very generous support given by your state to
that political cause, which I think is the true and just cause
of the whole country and the whole world. Solomon says
‘there is a time to keep silence;’ and when men wrangle by
the mouth, with no certainty that they mean the same thing
while using the same words, it perhaps were as well if they
would keep silence. The words ‘coercion’ and ‘invasion’ are
much used in these days, and often with some temper and
hot blood. Let us make sure, if we can, that we do not
misunderstand the meaning of those who use them. Let us
get the exact deﬁnitions of these words, not from
dictionaries, but from the men themselves, who certainly
deprecate the things they would represent by the use of the
words. What, then, is ‘coercion?’ What is ‘invasion?’ Would
the marching of an army into South Carolina, without the
consent of her people, and with hostile intent towards
them, be invasion? I certainly think it would, and it would
be ‘coercion’ also if the South Carolinians were forced to
submit. But if the United States should merely hold and
retake its own forts and other property, and collect the
duties on foreign importations, or even withhold the mails
from places where they were habitually violated, would any
or all of these things be ‘invasion’ or ‘coercion?’ Do our
 professed lovers of the Union, who spitefully resolve that
they will resist coercion and invasion, understand that such
things as these, on the part of the United States, would be
coercion or invasion of a state? If so, their idea of means to
preserve the object of their great aﬀection would seem to
be exceedingly thin and airy. If sick, the little pills of the
homoeopathist would be much too large for it to swallow. In
their view, the Union, as a family relation, would seem to be
no regular marriage, but rather a sort of ‘free-love’
arrangement, to be maintained on passional attraction. By
the way, in what consists the special sacredness of a state?
I speak not of the position assigned to a state in the Union
by the Constitution, for that is the bond we all recognize.
That position, however, a state cannot carry out of the
Union with it. I speak of that assumed primary right of a
state to rule all which is less than itself, and to ruin all
which is larger than itself. If a state and a county, in a given
case, should be equal in extent of territory and equal in
number of inhabitants, in what, as a matter of principle, is
the state better than the county? Would an exchange of
name be an exchange of rights? Upon what principle, upon
what rightful principle, may a state, being no more than
one-ﬁftieth part of the nation in soil and population, break
up the nation, and then coerce a proportionably larger
subdivision of itself in the most arbitrary way? What
mysterious right to play tyrant is conferred on a district or
country with its people, by merely calling it a state? Fellow-
citizens, I am not asserting any thing. I am merely asking
 questions for you to consider. And now allow me to bid you
farewell.”
The unwillingness of Mr. Lincoln to speak on public
questions at this time is evident enough from these
remarks; but he could not resist the inclination to expose
some of his ideas, touching certain words which were then
in circulation, and they undoubtedly conveyed hints
concerning his policy.
On the following day, Mr. Lincoln and his party started by
a 
special 
train 
for 
Cincinnati. 
An 
immense 
crowd
assembled, and cheered them as they moved oﬀ. The train
was composed of four passenger cars, the third and fourth
of which were occupied by the Cincinnati committee of
reception, who greeted Mr. Lincoln at once — Judge Este
on behalf of the citizens, and Major Dennis J. Yoohey on
behalf of the Board of Common Council. Mr. Lincoln
responded brieﬂy. The ﬁrst stop was at Shelbyville, where
Mr. Lincoln was obliged to show himself to the enthusiastic
assemblage, though, from the brevity of the stop, he could
say nothing. At Greensburgh and Lawrenceburgh Mr.
Lincoln made brief remarks to the crowds that had
assembled. The wisest and most characteristic thing that
he uttered at the latter place was in these words: “Let me
tell you that if the people remain right, your public men can
never betray you. If, in my brief term of oﬀice, I shall be
wicked or foolish, if you remain right and true and honest
you cannot be betrayed. My power is temporary and
ﬂeeting — yours as eternal as the principles of liberty.
 Cultivate and protect that sentiment, and your ambitious
leaders will be reduced to the position of servants.”
The train passed by the burial place of General Harrison
who had occupied brieﬂy the presidential chair, and here
the family of the deceased patriot were assembled. Mr.
Lincoln bowed his respects to the group and to the memory
of his predecessor.
The twelfth day of February was remarkably sunny and
cheerful, and a large concourse of citizens had assembled
to give Mr. Lincoln greeting and to catch a glimpse of his
face. All the streets leading to the railroad depot were
thronged with people; and the windows and roofs and every
perch from which a lookout could be obtained were
occupied. It took a large force of military and police to keep
the way clear. A distant cannon announced the approach of
the train, and then there went up from the multitude such a
cheer as such a multitude alone can give. After some
diﬀiculty the party reached their carriages, and then the
crowd went wild with enthusiasm, cheering the President
and the Union, Mr. Lincoln rising in the carriage with
uncovered head, and acknowledging the greetings that met
him at every crossing. Mr. Lincoln’s carriage was drawn by
six white horses, and was surrounded by a detachment of
police to keep oﬀ the crowd. Mayor Bishop occupied a seat
by his side. All along the route of the procession houses
were decorated with the national colors, and various
devices for expressing personal and patriotic feeling. The
Court House, Custom House, Catholic Institute, city
buildings, newspaper oﬀices, hotels, 
c., were all gaily
 decorated. Banners, transparencies and patriotic emblems
and mottoes were everywhere. At the Orphan Asylum, all
the children came out and sang “Hail Columbia.” Some
incidents occurred that created special and peculiar
interest, and some that excited no little amusement. A
brawny German took a little girl in his arms, and carried
her to the carriage, when she modestly presented to the
President 
a 
single 
ﬂower, 
which 
compliment 
he
acknowledged by stooping and kissing the child. It was a
small incident — a very pretty incident — but incidents like
these depend for their eﬀect upon the susceptibilities of the
observers; and many of the excited multitude were touched
to tears. One German devised a characteristic compliment.
He took a seat upon a huge beer barrel, and, with a glass of
its contents in his hand, addressed the President thus: “God
be with you! Enforce the laws and save our country! Here’s
your health!” From the depot to the Burnet House, he rode
through a dense mass of men, women and children, who
took every mode of expressing their enthusiastic good will.
It would have been impossible for Cincinnati to do more to
receive an emperor or reward a conqueror.
The Burnet House was reached at ﬁve o’clock, and soon
afterwards Mr. Lincoln appeared upon the balcony. Mayor
Bishop introduced him to the people and gave him a formal
welcome “in the name of the people of all classes.” Mr.
Lincoln then replied:
“Mr. Mayor, Ladies and Gentlemen: Twenty-four hours
ago, at the Capital of Indiana, I said to myself, ‘I have never
seen so many people assembled together in winter
 weather.’ I am no longer able to say that. But it is what
might reasonably have been expected — that this great city
of Cincinnati would thus acquit herself on such an occasion.
My friends, I am entirely overwhelmed by the magniﬁcence
of the reception which has been given, I will not say to me,
but to the President elect of the United States of America.
Most heartily do I thank you one and all for it. I am
reminded by the address of your worthy Mayor, that this
reception is given not by one political party; and even if I
had not been so reminded by His Honor, I could not have
failed to know the fact by the extent of the multitude I see
before me now. I could not look upon this vast assemblage
without being made aware that all parties were united in
this reception. This is as it should be. It is as it should have
been if Senator Douglas had been elected; it is as it should
have been if Mr. Bell had been elected, as it should have
been it Mr. Breckinridge had been elected; as it should ever
be when any citizen of the United States is constitutionally
elected President of the United States. Allow me to say that
I think what has occurred here to-day could not have
occurred in any other country on the face of the globe,
without the inﬂuence of the free institutions which we have
unceasingly enjoyed for three-quarters of a century. There
is no country where the people can turn out and enjoy this
day precisely as they please, save under the benign
inﬂuence of the free institutions of our land. I hope that,
although we have some threatening national diﬀiculties
now, while these free institutions shall continue to be in the
enjoyment of millions of free people of the United States,
 we will see repeated every four years what we now witness.
In a few short years I and every other individual man who
is now living will pass away. I hope that our national
diﬀiculties will also pass away, and I hope we shall see in
the streets of Cincinnati — good old Cincinnati — for
centuries to come, once every four years, the people give
such a reception as this to the constitutionally elected
President of the whole United States. I hope you will all join
in that reception, and that you shall also welcome your
brethren across the river to participate in it. We will
welcome them in every state in the Union, no matter where
they are from. From away South, we shall extend to them a
cordial good will, when our present diﬀerences shall have
been forgotten and blown to the winds forever.
“I have spoken but once before this in Cincinnati. That
was a year previous to the late presidential election. On
that occasion, in a playful manner but with sincere words, I
addressed much of what I said to the Kentuckians. I gave
my opinion that we as republicans would ultimately beat
them as democrats, but that they could postpone that result
longer by nominating Senator Douglas for the presidency
than they could in any other way. They did not in the true
sense of the word nominate Douglas, and the result has
come certainly as soon as I expected. I also told them how I
expected they would be treated after they should have been
beaten; and I now wish to call or recall their attention to
what I then said upon that subject. I then said: ‘When we
do, as we say, beat you, you perhaps will want to know
what we will do with you. We mean to treat you as near as
 we possibly can as Washington, Jeﬀerson and Madison
treated you. We mean to leave you alone and in no way to
interfere with your institutions, to abide by all and every
compromise of the Constitution; and, in a word, coming
back to the original proposition to treat you as far as
degenerate men, if we have degenerated, may, according to
the examples of those noble fathers Washington, Jeﬀerson
and Madison. We mean to remember that you are as good
as we — that there is no diﬀerence us — other than the
diﬀerence of circumstances. We mean to recognize and
bear in mind always that you have as good hearts in your
bosoms as other people, or as good as we claim to have,
and treat you accordingly.’
“Fellow-citizens of Kentucky, Friends, Brethren: May I
call you such? In my new position I see no occasion and feel
no inclination to retract a word of this. If it shall not be
made good, be assured that the fault shall not be mine.”
This little speech, remarkable for nothing so much as its
thoroughly friendly feeling toward all classes and men of all
opinions, was received with warm approval. Subsequently
he was called upon by a procession of two thousand
Germans, who, in their formal address, indicated a desire
for some utterance touching his public policy. In his
response, Mr. Lincoln begged to be excused from entering
upon such an exposition. “I deem it due to myself and the
whole 
country,” 
said 
Mr. 
Lincoln, 
“in 
the 
present
extraordinary condition of the country and of public
opinion, that I should wait and see the last development of
public opinion before I give my views, or express myself at
 the time of the inauguration. I hope at that time to be false
to nothing you have been taught to expect of me.”
On the morning of the thirteenth, the party started for
Columbus, the capital of Ohio. The scenes of the previous
day were repeated on the route, in the gathering of large
crowds at all the intermediate stations. The reception in
Columbus had been a fortnight in preparation, the
legislature taking the initiative. At noon, on the thirteenth,
it was calculated that ﬁve thousand strangers were in the
city. As the time approached for the arrival of the train, the
crowd around the depot became almost overwhelming. A
thirty-four-gun salute announced the coming train, and as it
drove slowly into the depot, the crowd called upon the
President elect to show himself. He stepped out upon the
platform of the rear car, and with head uncovered bowed
his acknowledgments to the hearty greeting he received.
On alighting and entering a carriage for the passage to the
State House, the scenes at Cincinnati were re-enacted.
Streets were full of people, the air was ringing with shouts
and huzzas, and the same kind sun smiled upon all. He was
received in the hall of the House of Representatives, and
Governor Dennison introduced him to the Legislature. The
President of the Senate responded in a speech of welcome
which so concisely and happily conveyed the feelings of the
people at that time, and so justly measured the nature and
importance of the crisis, that it deserves record. He
addressed Mr. Lincoln in the following words:
“Sir: On this day, and probably this very hour, the
Congress of the United States will declare the verdict of
 the people, making you their President. It is my pleasurable
duty, in behalf or the people of Ohio, speaking through this
General Assembly, to welcome you to their Capital. Never
in the history of this Government has such fearful
responsibility rested upon the Chief Executive of the nation
as will now devolve upon you. Never since the memorable
time our patriotic fathers gave existence to the American
Republic, have the people looked with such intensity of
feeling to the inauguration and future policy of a President,
as they do to yours. I need not assure you that the people of
Ohio have full conﬁdence in your ability and patriotism, and
will respond to you in their loyalty to the Union and the
Constitution. It would seem, sir, that the great problem of
self-government is to be solved under your administration.
All nations are deeply interested in its solution, and they
wait with breathless anxiety to know whether this form of
government, which has been the admiration of the world, is
to be a failure or not. It is the earnest and united prayer of
our people, that the same kind Providence which protected
us in our colonial struggles, and has attended us thus far in
our prosperity and greatness, will so imbue your mind with
wisdom, that you may dispel the dark clouds that hang over
our political horizon, and thereby secure the return of
harmony and fraternal feeling to our now distracted and
unhappy country. Again I bid you a cordial welcome to our
Capital.”
To this noble greeting Mr. Lincoln responded as follows:
“Gentlemen of the Senate and Citizens of Ohio: It is true,
as has been said by the President of the Senate, that very
 great responsibility rests upon me in the position to which
the votes of the American people have called me. I am
deeply sensible of that weighty responsibility. I cannot but
know, what you all know, that without a name-perhaps
without a reason why I should have a name — there has
fallen upon me a task such as did not rest upon the Father
of his Country. And so feeling I cannot but turn and look for
the support without which it will be impossible for me to
perform that great task. I turn, then, and look to the
American people, and to that God who has never forsaken
them.
“Allusion has been made to the interest felt in relation to
the policy of the new administration. In this I have received
from some a degree of credit for having kept silence, from
others some depreciation. I still think I was right. In the
varying and repeatedly shifting scenes of the present,
without a precedent which could enable me to judge from
the past, it has seemed ﬁtting that before speaking upon
the diﬀiculties of the country I should have gained a view of
the whole ﬁeld. To be sure, after all, I would be at liberty to
modify and change the course of policy, as future events
might make a change necessary.
“I have not maintained silence from any want of real
anxiety. It is a good thing that there is no more than
anxiety, for there is nothing going wrong. It is a consoling
circumstance that when we look out there is nothing that
really hurts anybody. We entertain diﬀerent views upon
political questions, but nobody is suﬀering anything. This is
a most consoling circumstance, and from it I judge that all
 we want is time and patience, and a reliance on that God
who has never forsaken this people.”
The reporter for the Ohio State Journal, describing the
incidents of the day, says that the impression produced by
the President elect was most agreeable. “His great hight,”
he continues, “was conspicuous, even in that crowd of
goodly men, and lifted him fully in view as he walked up the
aisle. When he took the speaker’s stand, a better
opportunity was aﬀorded to look at the man upon whom
more hopes hang than upon any other living. At ﬁrst, the
kindness and amiability of his face strikes you; but as he
speaks, the greatness and determination of his nature are
apparent. Something in his manner, even more than in his
words, told how deeply he was aﬀected by the enthusiasm
of the people; and when he appealed to them for
encouragement and support, every heart responded with
mute assurance of both. There was the simplicity of
greatness in his unassuming and conﬁding manner, that
won its way to instant admiration. He looked somewhat
worn with travel and the fatigues of popularity, but warmed
to the cordiality of his reception.”
After the conclusion of the formalities in the hall, Mr.
Lincoln went to the western steps of the Capitol, to say a
word to the people. The address he made here consisted
simply of commonplaces and phrases that had already
become hackneyed. The hand-shaking that succeeded was
something fearful. Every man in the crowd was anxious to
wrench the hand of Abraham Lincoln. He ﬁnally gave both
hands to the work, with great good nature. To quote one of
 the reports of the occasion: “people plunged at his arms
with frantic enthusiasm, and all the inﬁnite variety of
shakes, from the wild and irrepressible pump-handle
movement, to the dead grip, was executed upon the
devoted dexter and sinister of the president. Some glanced
at his face as they grasped his hand; others invoked the
blessings of Heaven upon him; others aﬀectionately gave
him their last gasping assurance of devotion; others,
bewildered and furious, with hats crushed over their eyes,
seized his hands in a convulsive grasp, and passed on as if
they had not the remotest idea who, what, or where they
were.” The President at last escaped, and took refuge in
the Governor’s residence, although he held a levee at the
State House in the evening, where, in a more quiet way, he
met many prominent citizens.
On the fourteenth, the presidential party left Columbus,
for Pittsburgh. The morning was rainy, but large numbers
witnessed the departure of the train, and assembled at the
stations along the route. At Steubenville, about ﬁve
thousand people had assembled, and these Mr. Lincoln
brieﬂy addressed. The rain interfered very materially with
the proposed reception at Pittsburgh, as did also the
darkness, for it was night when the party arrived. At the
Monongahela House, Mr. Lincoln addressed a large
concourse of people in a few words of acknowledgment,
and deferred his more formal remarks until the morning of
the ﬁfteenth. These latter were not charged with particular
interest. They were rather an apology for not speaking at
all, upon the great subject of which all wished to hear, than
 any exposition of opinion or policy upon any subject. A
single paragraph showed that he still deemed a peaceful
solution of the national diﬀiculties possible:
“Notwithstanding the troubles across the river, there is
really no crisis springing from anything in the Government
itself. In plain words, there is really no crisis except an
artiﬁcial one. What is there now to warrant the condition of
aﬀairs presented by our friends over the river? Take even
their own view of the questions involved, and there is
nothing to justify the course which they are pursuing. I
repeat it, then, there is no crisis, except such a one as may
be gotten up at any time by turbulent men, aided by
designing 
politicians. 
My 
advice, 
then, 
under 
such
circumstances, is to keep cool. If the great American people
will only keep their temper on both sides of the line, the
trouble will come to an end, and the question which now
distracts the country will be settled just as surely as all
other diﬀiculties of like character which have originated in
this Government have been adjusted. Let the people on
both sides keep their self-possession, and just as other
clouds have cleared away in due time, so will this, and this
great nation shall continue to prosper as heretofore.”
The next place at which he was to be received was
Cleveland, Ohio; and the party set out for this beautiful city
in a hard shower of rain, that had not the power to dampen
the enthusiasm of the Pittsburgh people who cheered their
departing guests with great heartiness. There were the
usual incidents along the road, and at four o’clock the train
arrived at the Euclid Street Station of the Cleveland and
 Pittsburgh Railroad, where a very large escort waited to
conduct Mr. Lincoln to the Weddell House. The President
took his seat in a carriage drawn by four white horses.
Notwithstanding the unpleasantness of the weather, Euclid
Street was crowded from one end to the other, with persons
who acted almost like wild men, in their anxiety to catch a
glimpse of the President. Mr. I.U. Masters, the President of
the City Council, made a formal speech of welcome, and
was followed by Hon. Sherlock G. Andrews, who welcomed
the guest of the occasion on behalf of the citizens’
committee. Here, in his response, Mr. Lincoln repeated the
substance of the remarks he made at Pittsburgh about the
artiﬁcial nature of the crisis that was upon the country. “It
was not argued up,” he said, “and cannot, therefore, be
argued down. Let it alone and it will go down of itself.” In
these remarks, and in all like these, he must have taken
counsel of his hopes rather than his convictions; for in the
same speech, while alluding to the grateful fact that his
reception was by the citizens generally, without distinction
of party, he said: “If all don’t join now to save the good old
ship of the Union this voyage, nobody will have a chance to
pilot her on another voyage.” There was a general
reception and hand-shaking in the evening, and after the
distinguished guest had become too tired for further
honors, he was permitted to retire for the night.
Early the next morning the party took their leave, but
they found many up and ready to get a parting glance of
Mr. Lincoln, who, taking his seat in the rear car, appeared
upon the platform as the train moved out of the depot, and
 bowed his farewell to the people who had so generously
and cordially received him. His next public reception was at
Buﬀalo, where he arrived late in the afternoon of the
sixteenth, having received all along the route those
testimonials of interest which had come to be as wearisome
at last, as they were grateful at the ﬁrst. On the arrival of
the train at Buﬀalo, Mr. Lincoln was met by a very large
concourse of citizens, with Ex-President Fillmore at their
head. After being conducted to his hotel, the acting mayor
gave him a formal welcome, to which Mr. Lincoln
responded with hearty thanks, and such phrases of apology
for not saying anything as had already become threadbare,
and with his often repeated promise to say what the people
wished to hear, when he should be called upon to do it
oﬀicially.
From Buﬀalo, Mr. Lincoln and his party proceeded to
Albany, receiving many demonstrations of respect from the
beautiful cities along the route of three hundred miles. At
Albany he was welcomed by Governor Morgan, to whom he
made a brief response; and then he was conducted into the
presence of the legislature, where he had another formal
reception. To the speech addressed to him here, he made
an unusually graceful and feeling response. He said:
“It is with feelings of great diﬀidence, and, I may say,
feelings even of awe, perhaps greater than I have recently
experienced, that I meet you here in this place. The history
of this great state, the renown of its great men, who have
stood in this chamber, and have spoken their thoughts, all
crowd around my fancy, and incline me to shrink from an
 attempt to address you. Yet I have some conﬁdence given
me by the generous manner in which you have invited me,
and the still more generous manner in which you have
received me. You have invited me and received me without
distinction of party. I could not for a moment suppose that
this has been done in any considerable degree with any
reference to my personal self. It is very much more grateful
to me that this reception and the invitation preceding it
were given to me as the representative of a free people
than it could possibly have been were they but the evidence
of devotion to me or to any one man.
“It is true that, while I hold myself, without mock-modesty,
the humblest of all the individuals who have ever been
elected President of the United States, I yet have a more
diﬀicult task to perform than any one of them has ever
encountered. You have here generously tendered me the
support, the united support, of the great Empire State. For
this, in behalf of the nation — in behalf of the present and
of the future of the nation — in behalf of the cause of civil
liberty in all time to come — I most gratefully thank you. I
do not propose now to enter upon any expressions as to the
particular line of policy to be adopted with reference to the
diﬀiculties that stand before us, in the opening of the
incoming administration. I deem that it is just to the
country, to myself, to you, that I should see everything, hear
everything, and have every light that can possibly be
brought within my reach to aid me before I shall speak
oﬀicially, in order that, when I do speak, I may have the
best possible means of taking correct and true grounds. For
 this reason, I do not now announce anything in the way of
policy for the new administration. When the time comes,
according to the custom of the government, I shall speak,
and speak as well as I am able for the good of the present
and of the future of this country — for the good of the
North and of the South — for the good of one and of the
other, and of all sections of it. In the meantime, if we have
patience, it we maintain our equanimity, though some may
allow themselves to run oﬀ in a burst of passion, I still have
conﬁdence that the Almighty Ruler of the universe, through
the instrumentality of this great and intelligent people, can
and will bring us through this diﬀiculty, as he has
heretofore brought us through all preceding diﬀiculties of
the country. Relying upon this, and again thanking you, as I
forever shall, in my heart, for this generous reception you
have given me, I bid you farewell.”
Mr. Lincoln was met at Albany by a delegation of the city
government of New York, and started on the nineteenth for
the great metropolis. He was not permitted to pass by
Poughkeepsie without a formal welcome from the mayor of
that city, to which he made a formal response. In this little
speech there is a manifest improvement upon the earlier
eﬀorts of the route. Mr. Lincoln had found that there were
things to talk about besides policy, and that it was better to
yield himself up to the impulse of the moment than to be
under the constant fear of saying some imprudent thing,
concerning the character of the crisis and the policy of the
incoming administration.
 The reception at the city of New York was such as only
New York can give. Places of business were generally
closed, and the streets presented such crowds as only a city
numbering a million of people can produce. Here he was
formally received by Fernando Wood, then mayor of the
city, to whose welcome he made the following response:
“Mr. Mayor: — It is with feelings of deep gratitude that I
make my acknowledgments for the reception given me in
the great commercial city of New York. I cannot but
remember that this is done by a people who do not, by a
majority, agree with me in political sentiment. It is the more
grateful, because in this I see that, for the great principles
of our Government, the people are almost unanimous. In
regard to the diﬀiculties that confront us at this time, and
of which your Honor has thought ﬁt to speak so becomingly
and so justly, as I suppose, I can only say that I agree in the
sentiments expressed. In my devotion to the Union, I hope I
am behind no man in the nation. In the wisdom with which
to conduct the aﬀairs tending to the preservation of the
Union, I fear that too great conﬁdence may have been
reposed in me; but I am sure that I bring a heart devoted to
the work. There is nothing that could ever bring me to
willingly consent to the destruction of this Union, under
which not only the great commercial city of New York, but
the whole country, acquired its greatness, except it be the
purpose for which the Union itself was formed. I
understand the ship to be made for the carrying and the
preservation of the cargo, and so long as the ship can be
saved with the cargo, it should never be abandoned, unless
 there appears no possibility of its preservation, and it must
cease to exist, except at the risk of throwing overboard
both freight and passengers. So long, then, as it is possible
that the prosperity and the liberties of the people be
preserved in this Union, it shall be my purpose at all times
to use all my powers to aid in its perpetuation.”
On the twentieth, Mr. Lincoln left New York for
Philadelphia, visiting on the way both Houses of the New
Jersey Legislature at Trenton. From the speech made
before the Senate on this occasion, a quotation has been
made in this volume, and the entire passage is worthy of
record:
“I cannot but remember the place that New Jersey holds
in our early history. In the early Revolutionary struggle, few
of the states among the old thirteen had more of the battle-
ﬁelds of the country within its limits than old New Jersey.
May I be pardoned, if, upon this occasion, I mention, that
away back in my childhood, the earliest days of my being
able to read, I got hold of a small book, such a one as few of
the younger members have ever seen, ‘Weems’ Life of
Washington.’ I remember all the accounts there given of
the battle-ﬁelds and struggles for the liberties of the
country, and none ﬁxed themselves upon my imagination so
deeply as the struggle here at Trenton, New Jersey. The
crossing of the river — the contest with the Hessians — the
great hardships endured at that time — all ﬁxed themselves
on my memory more than any single revolutionary event;
and you all know, for you have all been boys, how these
early impressions last longer than any others. I recollect
 thinking then, boy even though I was, that there must have
been something more than common that those men
struggled for. I am exceedingly anxious that that thing
which they struggled for — that something even more than
National Independence — that something that held out a
great promise to all the people of the world to all time to
come — I am exceedingly anxious that this Union, the
Constitution, and the liberties of the people, shall be
perpetuated in accordance with the original idea for which
that struggle was made, and I shall be most happy indeed if
I shall be an humble instrument in the hands of the
Almighty, and of this, his almost chosen people, for
perpetuating the object of that great struggle.”
At Philadelphia Mr. Lincoln was received with great
enthusiasm, and many demonstrations of popular regard.
His formal welcome was given by the mayor of the city, but
there 
was 
nothing 
in 
his 
response 
that 
calls 
for
reproduction, except a single passage in which he hints at
the possibility that he may never be permitted to take the
presidential chair. Alluding to the popular desire to learn
something deﬁnite concerning his policy, he said, “It were
useless for me to speak of details of plans now; I shall
speak oﬀicially next Monday week, if ever. If I should not
speak then, it were useless for me to do so now.”
He had been aware, ever since he left Springﬁeld, that
men were seeking for his life. An attempt was made to
throw the train oﬀ the track that bore him out of
Springﬁeld; and at Cincinnati a hand grenade was found
concealed upon the train. The fear excited by these hostile
 demonstrations was an indeﬁnite one, but on his arrival at
Philadelphia the plot was all unfolded to him.
Before Mr. Lincoln left home it was whispered about that
he would never be permitted to pass through Baltimore
alive; and a detective of great experience and skill was put
to the task of ferreting out the conspiracy. He employed
both men and women to assist him, and found that a
conspiracy was indeed in existence, with an Italian refugee,
a barber, at the head of it, who, assuming the name of
“Orsini,” indicated the part he expected to play in the plot.
It was arranged, in case Mr. Lincoln should reach
Baltimore safely, that, on a given signal, he should be shot
by those who should gather in the guise of friends around
his carriage, and that hand grenades should complete the
work of destruction which the pistol had commenced. In
the confusion thus produced, the guilty parties proposed to
escape to a vessel in waiting, which would convey them to
Mobile.
The detective and Mr. Lincoln reached Philadelphia
nearly at the same time, and there the former submitted to
a few of the President’s friends the information he had
secured. An interview between Mr. Lincoln and the
detective was immediately arranged, which took place in
the apartments of the former at the Continental Hotel. Mr.
Lincoln having heard the oﬀicer’s statement in detail, then
informed him that he had promised to raise the American
ﬂag on Independence Hall the following morning — the
morning of the anniversary of Washington’s birthday — and
that he had accepted an invitation to a reception by the
 Pennsylvania legislature in the afternoon of the same day.
“Both of these engagements I will keep,” said Mr. Lincoln,
“if it costs me my life.” For the rest, he authorized the
detective to make such arrangements as he thought proper
for his safe conduct to Washington.
In the meantime, General Scott and Senator Seward,
both 
of 
whom 
were 
in 
Washington, 
learned 
from
independent sources that Mr. Lincoln’s life was in danger,
and concurred in sending Mr. Frederick W. Seward to
Philadelphia, to urge upon him the necessity of proceeding
immediately to Washington in a quiet way. The messenger
arrived late on Thursday night, after Mr. Lincoln had
retired, and requested an audience. Mr. Lincoln’s fears had
already been aroused, and he was cautious, of course, in
the matter of receiving a stranger. But satisﬁed that the
messenger was indeed the son of Mr. Seward, he gave him
audience. Nothing needed to be done, but to inform him of
the plan entered into with the detective by which the
President was to arrive in Washington early on Saturday
morning, in advance of his family and party. This
information was conveyed to Mr. Washburne of Illinois,
among others, on Mr. Seward’s return to Washington; and
he was deputed to receive Mr. Lincoln at the depot on his
arrival.
Such were the exciting events and disclosures of the day
and 
night 
preceding 
Mr. 
Lincoln’s 
appearance 
at
Independence Hall, where he was formally received, and
where he made the following address, one passage of
which bears the burden of his apprehension:
 “I am ﬁlled with deep emotion at ﬁnding myself standing
here, in this place, where were collected the wisdom, the
patriotism, the devotion to principle, from which sprang the
institutions under which we live. You have kindly suggested
to me that in my hands is the task of restoring peace to the
present distracted condition of the country. I can say in
return, sir, that all the political sentiments I entertain have
been drawn, so far as I have been able to draw them, from
the sentiments which originated were given to the world
from this hall. I have never had a feeling, politically, that
did not spring from the sentiments embodied in the
Declaration of Independence. I have often pondered over
the dangers which were incurred by the men who
assembled here, and framed and adopted that Declaration
of Independence. I have pondered over the toils that were
endured by the oﬀicers and soldiers of the army who
achieved that independence. I have often inquired of myself
what great principle or idea it was that kept this
Confederacy so long together. It was not the mere matter of
the separation of the colonies from the mother-land, but
that sentiment in the Declaration of Independence which
gave liberty, not alone to the people of this country, but, I
hope, to the world for all future time. It was that which
gave promise that in due time the weight would be lifted
from the shoulders of all men. This is a sentiment embodied
in the Declaration of Independence. Now, my friends, can
this country be saved upon this basis? If it can, I will
consider myself one of the happiest men in the world if I
can help to save it. If it cannot be saved upon that
 principle, it will be truly awful. But if this country cannot be
saved without giving up that principle, I was about to say I
would rather be assassinated on this spot than surrender it.
Now, in my view of the present aspect of aﬀairs, there need
be no bloodshed or war. There is no necessity for it. I am
not in favor of such a course; and I may say, in advance,
that there will be no bloodshed unless it be forced upon the
Government, and then it will be compelled to act in self-
defense.”
At the conclusion of this speech, Mr. Lincoln was
conducted to a platform outside, where he was publicly
invited to raise the new ﬂag. In responding to this
invitation, he addressed a few words to the people, and
then ran the ﬂag up to the top of the staﬀ, amid the cheers
of a vast concourse of people. The ceremony was alike
impressive to the principal actor and the multitude of
observers. The great battles of Mr. Lincoln’s life had been
done for the principles of the Declaration of Independence.
It 
was 
because 
he 
represented 
those 
principles,
distinctively, that he had been elected to the presidency,
that the slave-power was in active revolt, and that the
friends of slavery were seeking for his life. It was certainly
a remarkable occasion when he stood within the room
where the Declaration was framed and signed, and pledged
himself anew to its truths and principles, and then walked
out into the presence of the people and ran up to its home
the beautiful national ensign prepared for his hands.
At the conclusion of these ceremonies, Mr. Lincoln and
his party left the city for Harrisburg, the capital of the
 state, where, in accordance with his promise, he visited
both 
branches 
of 
the 
Pennsylvania 
legislature. 
The
following were the more important passages in his
response to the address of welcome:
“I thank you most sincerely for this reception, and the
generous words in which support has been promised me
upon this occasion. I thank your great Commonwealth for
the overwhelming support it recently gave, not to me
personally, but the cause, which I think a just one, in the
late election. Allusion has been made to the fact — the
interesting fact, perhaps we should say — that I, for the
ﬁrst time, appear at the capital of the great Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania upon the birthday of the Father of his
Country, in connection with that beloved anniversary
connected with the history of this country. I have already
gone through one exceedingly interesting scene this
morning in the ceremonies at Philadelphia. Under the high
conduct of gentlemen there, I was, for the ﬁrst time,
allowed the privilege of standing in Old Independence Hall,
to have a few words addressed to me there, and opening up
an opportunity of saying, with much regret, that I had not
more time to express something of my own feelings, excited
by the occasion — somewhat to harmonize and give shape
to the feelings that had been really the feelings of my whole
life.
“Besides this, our friends there had provided a
magniﬁcent ﬂag of the country. They had arranged it so
that I was given the honor of raising it to the head of its
staﬀ. And when it went up I was pleased that it went to its
 place by the strength of my own feeble arm; when,
according to the arrangement, the cord was pulled, and it
ﬂaunted gloriously to the wind without an accident, in the
bright glowing sunshine of the morning, I could not help
hoping that there was in the entire success of that beautiful
ceremony at least something of an omen of what is to come.
Nor could I help feeling then, as I often have felt, that in
the whole of that proceeding I was a very humble
instrument. I had not provided the ﬂag; I had not made the
arrangements for elevating it to its place. I had applied but
a very small portion of my feeble strength in raising it. In
the whole transaction I was in the hands of the people who
had arranged it; and if I can have the same generous co-
operation of the people of the nation, I think the ﬂag of our
country may yet be kept ﬂaunting gloriously.
“I recur for a moment to some words uttered at the hotel
in regard to what has been said about the military support
which the general government may expect from the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania in a proper emergency. To
guard against any possible mistake do I recur to this. It is
not with any pleasure that I contemplate the possibility that
a necessity may arise in this country for the use of the
military arm. While I am exceedingly gratiﬁed to see the
manifestation upon your streets of your military force here,
and exceedingly gratiﬁed at your promise here to use that
force upon a proper emergency — while I make these
acknowledgments, I desire to repeat, in order to preclude
any possible misconstruction, that I do most sincerely hope
that we shall have no use for them; that it will never
 become their duty to shed blood, and most especially never
to shed fraternal blood. I promise that, so far as I may have
wisdom to direct, if so painful a result shall in any wise be
brought about, it shall be through no fault of mine.”
It is proper to call renewed attention here to Mr.
Lincoln’s strong and ever present conviction that he was
only a humble instrument in the hands of a higher power.
He recognized the people as one of the higher powers
which held him in service, and his illustration of his
position, drawn from his oﬀice in raising the ﬂag over
Independence Hall, was extremely beautiful. We shall ﬁnd
this conviction deepening throughout the remainder of his
life — the conviction that he was nothing — that he was of
no consequence — save as an instrument, and that he had
no rights and no mission except those which were deputed
to him.
At the conclusion of the exercises of the day, Mr. Lincoln,
who was known to be very weary, was permitted to pass
undisturbed to his apartments in the Jones House. It was
popularly understood that he was to start for Washington
the next morning; and the people of Harrisburg supposed
they had taken only a temporary leave of him. He remained
in his rooms until nearly six o’clock, when he passed into
the street, entered a carriage unobserved, in company with
Colonel Lamon, and was driven to a special train on the
Pennsylvania Railroad, in waiting for him. As a measure of
precaution, the telegraph wires were cut the moment he
left Harrisburgh, so that, if his departure should be
discovered, intelligence of it could not be communicated at
 a distance. At half past ten, the train arrived at
Philadelphia, and here Mr. Lincoln was met by the
detective, who had a carriage in readiness, in which the
party were driven to the depot of the Philadelphia,
Wilmington and Baltimore Railroad. At a quarter past
eleven they arrived, and, very fortunately, found the regular
train, which should have left at eleven, delayed. The party
took berths in the sleeping car, and, without change of cars,
passed directly through Baltimore to Washington, where
Mr. Lincoln arrived at half past six o’clock in the morning,
and found Mr. Washburne anxiously awaiting him. He was
taken into a carriage, and in a few minutes he was talking
over his adventures, with Senator Seward at Willard’s
Hotel.
Mr. Lincoln’s family left Harrisburgh on the special train
that had been intended for him; and as news of his safe
arrival in Washington was already telegraphed over the
country, no disturbance was made by the passage of the
party through Baltimore. It was found that the number of
original conspirators was about twenty, all of whose names
were in possession of responsible parties. It was a bold
plot, ingeniously foiled; but the detective through whose
means the President’s life had been saved, was not
considered safe in Washington, and after a day or two was
sent away. It should be added that the current story that
Mr. Lincoln passed through Baltimore disguised in a “long
military cloak and Scotch cap,” is a pure fabrication,
written by a man who hated Mr. Lincoln, and knew
 absolutely nothing of the event of which he wrote. Mr.
Lincoln did not ﬁnd it necessary to adopt any disguise.
It is a curious coincidence that Mr. Seward and his son
who both were very active in the discovery of this plot, and
in the measures for avoiding its consequences, were the
only sharers in that violence which, at a later period,
destroyed Mr. Lincoln’s life. It is also a very suggestive fact,
touching the responsibility of the southern leaders for Mr.
Lincoln’s assassination, that when a man of the name of
Byrne was arrested in Richmond a year afterwards, for
keeping a gambling house and for disloyalty to the
confederate government, he was released on the testimony
of Mr. Wigfall, who, to prove the man’s truth to treason,
swore that he was captain of the band that plotted to
assassinate President Lincoln in Baltimore.
The city of Washington was thrown into a ﬂutter of
excitement by this unexpected arrival. Mr. Lincoln’s foes —
and there were multitudes of them in Washington —
ridiculed his fears, and his friends were equally angry and
ashamed that the chosen chief of the nation should consent
to sneak into his capital; but the latter, sooner or later,
learned that he had taken the wiser course. It was, indeed,
a very shameful thing that the President elect should have
been obliged to do what he did, but so long as he was not
responsible for it, the shame in no way attaches to him.
Mr. Lincoln went immediately into free conferences with
his friends, visited both houses of Congress, and after a day
he was waited upon by the Mayor and the municipal
authorities, who gave him formal welcome to the city. In his
 brief reply, he took occasion to say that he thought much of
the ill feeling existing between those living in free and
slave states was owing to their failure to understand one
another, and then assured the Mayor and his party that he
did not then entertain, and had never entertained, any
other than kindly feelings toward the South, that he had no
disposition to treat the people of the South otherwise than
as his own neighbors, and that he had no wish to withhold
from them any of the beneﬁts of the Constitution. On the
second evening after his arrival, the Republican Association
tendered him the courtesy of a serenade, which attracted a
large crowd of friends and curious spectators. On being
called out, he made much such an address as he had
already made to the Mayor, closing with an expression of
the conviction that when they should come to know each
other better they would be better friends.
The days that preceded the inauguration were rapidly
passing away. In the meantime, although General Scott had
been busy and eﬀicient in his military preparations for the
occasion, many were fearful that scenes of violence would
be enacted on that day, even should Mr. Lincoln be
permitted to escape assassination in the meantime. It was a
time of fearful uncertainty. The leading society of
Washington hated Mr. Lincoln and the principles he
represented. If it would be uncharitable to say that they
would have rejoiced in his death, it is certainly true that
they were in perfect sympathy with those who were
plotting his destruction. His coming and remaining would
be death to the social dominance of slavery in the national
 capital. This they felt; and nothing would have pleased
them better than a revolution which would send Mr. Lincoln
back to Illinois, and install Jeﬀerson Davis in the White
House. There was probably not one man in ﬁve in
Washington at the time Mr. Lincoln entered the city who, in
his heart, gave him welcome. It is not to be wondered at
that his friends all over the country looked nervously
forward to the fourth of March.
