  ha ter  II.
THE TIME HAD come with Mr. Lincoln for translation to a
new sphere of life. By the scantiest means he had wrested
from the hardest circumstances a development of his
characteristic powers. He had acquired the rudiments of an
English education. He had read several text books of the
natural sciences, with special attention to geology, in the
facts and laws of which he had become particularly
intelligent. He had read law as well as he could without the
assistance of preceptors. He had attended a few sessions of
the courts held near him, and had become somewhat
familiar with the practical application of legal processes.
He had, from the most discouraging beginnings, grown to
be a notable political debater. He had had experience in
legislation, had received public recognition as a man of
mark and power, had been accepted as one of the leaders
of an intelligent and morally inﬂuential political party, and
had fairly outgrown the humble conditions by which his life
hall hitherto been surrounded.
At this time he received from his Springﬁeld friend,
Major Stuart, a proposition to become his partner in the
practice of the law. Mr. Lincoln’s inﬂuence in securing the
transfer of the capital from Vandalia to Springﬁeld had
already given him a favorable introduction to the people of
the city; and on the 15th of April, 1837, he took up his
 abode there. He went to his new home with great self-
distrust and with many misgivings concerning his future;
but Springﬁeld became his permanent home. He had been
admitted to the bar during the autumn of 1836, and went to
his work with the ambition to be something, and the
determination to do something.
It must have been with something of regret that he
turned his back upon New Salem, for he left behind him a
town full of friends, who had watched his progress with the
friendliest interest, aided him when he needed aid, and
appreciated him. He left behind him all the stepping-stones
by which he had mounted to the elevation he bad reached
— the old store-house where he had been a successful
clerk, the old store-house where he had been an
unsuccessful principal, the scenes of his wrestling-matches
and foot-races, the lounging-places where he had sat and
told stories with a post-oﬀice in his hat, the rough
audience-rooms in which he had “practiced polemics,” the
places where he had had his rough encounters with the
Clary’s Grove Boys, and, last, the old oak tree whose
shadow he had followed to keep his law text out of the sun.
But these things could have touched him but little when
placed by the side of a few cabin homes, presided over by
noble women who, with womanly instinct, had detected the
manliness of his nature, and had given him a home “for his
company,” as they kindly said, when he needed one in
charity. He never forgot these women, and occasion
afterward came to show the constancy of his gratitude and
the faithfulness of his friendship. Arriving in Springﬁeld he
 became a member of the family of Hon. William Butler,
afterward treasurer of the state, and here came under
inﬂuences which, to a man bred as he had been, were of
the most desirable character.
Mr. Lincoln’s business connection with Mr. Stuart must
have been broken and brief, for he was still a member of
the legislature, which was summoned to a special session
on the July following his removal to Springﬁeld, and Mr.
Stuart, himself, was soon afterwards elected to, and took
his seat in, Congress. Still, the connection was one of
advantage to the young lawyer. Mr. Stuart’s willingness to
receive him as a partner was an indorsement of his powers
and acquisitions that must have helped him to make a start
in professional life. This life the people of Springﬁeld, who
gratefully remembered his services to them in the
legislature, would not permit him to pursue without
interruption. They kept him upon the legislative ticket in
1838, and he was re-elected. On the assembling of this
legislature, Mr. Lincoln was at once recognized to be the
foremost man on the whig side of the house, and was
brought forward, without any dissent, as their candidate for
speaker. The strength of this legislature was pretty evenly
divided between the two parties. A great change, indeed,
had occurred in the state. The ﬁnancial crash of 1837 had
prostrated industry and trade, and the people had, either
justly or unjustly, held the dominant party responsible for
the disasters from which they had suﬀered. Anti-slavery
agitation had been voted down in Congress by the friends
of Mr. Van Buren, who came into the presidential oﬀice
 during the previous year. All papers relating to slavery
were, by solemn resolution of Congress, laid on the table
without being debated, read, printed or referred. With
ﬁnancial ruin in the country, and a gag-law in Congress, the
democratic party had a heavier load than it could carry.
This was felt in Illinois, where the old democratic majority
was very nearly destroyed. Colonel W.L.D. Ewing was the
candidate of the democrats for speaker, in opposition to Mr.
Lincoln, and was at last elected by a majority of one vote.
Mr. Lincoln took a prominent part in all the debates of the
session. Some of them were political, and were intended to
have a bearing upon the next presidential election, and
especially upon the politics of the state; but the most of
them related to local and ephemeral aﬀairs which will be of
no interest to the general reader.
Allusion has already been made to Mr. Lincoln’s
ingenuity — his quickness, at expedients. One of his modes
of 
getting 
rid 
of 
troublesome 
friends, 
as 
well 
as
troublesome enemies, was by telling a story. He began
these tactics early in life, and he grew to be wonderfully
adept in them. If a man broached a subject which he did
not wish to discuss, he told a story which changed the
direction of the conversation. If he was called upon to
answer a question, he answered it by telling a story. He had
a story for everything — something had occurred at some
place where he used to live, that illustrated every possible
phase of every possible subject with which he might have
connection. His faculty of ﬁnding or making a story to
match every event in his history, and every event to which
 he bore any relation, was really marvelous. That he made,
or adapted, some of his stories, there is no question. It is
beyond belief that those which entered his mind left it no
richer than they came. It is not to be supposed that he
spent any time in elaborating them, but by some law of
association every event that occurred suggested some
story, and, almost by an involuntary process, his mind
harmonized their discordant points, and the story was
pronounced “pat,” because it was made so before it was
uttered. Every truth, or combination of truths, seemed
immediately to clothe itself in a form of life, where he kept
it for reference. His mind was full of stories; and the great
facts of his life and history on entering his mind seemed to
take up their abode in these stories, and if the garment did
not ﬁt them it was so modiﬁed that it did.
A good instance of the execution which he sometimes
eﬀected with a story occurred in the legislature. There was
a troublesome member from Wabash County, who gloried
particularly in being a “strict constructionist.” He found
something “unconstitutional” in every measure that was
brought forward for discussion. He was a member of the
Judiciary Committee, and was quite apt, after giving every
measure a heavy pounding, to advocate its reference to this
committee. No amount of sober argument could ﬂoor the
member from Wabash. At last, he came to be considered a
man to be silenced, and Mr. Lincoln was resorted to for an
expedient by which this object might be accomplished. He
soon afterwards honored the draft thus made upon him. A
measure was brought forward in which Mr. Lincoln’s
 constituents were interested, when the member from
Wabash rose and discharged all his batteries upon its
unconstitutional points. Mr. Lincoln then took the ﬂoor,
and, with the quizzical expression of features which he
could assume at will, and a mirthful twinkle in his gray
eyes, said: “Mr. Speaker, the attack of the member from
Wabash on the constitutionality of this measure reminds me
of an old friend of mine. He’s a peculiar looking old fellow,
with shaggy, overhanging eyebrows, and a pair of
spectacles under them. (Everybody turned to the member
from Wabash, and recognized a personal description.) One
morning just after the old man got up, he imagined, on
looking out of his door, that he saw rather a lively squirrel
on a tree near his house. So he took down his riﬂe, and
ﬁred at the squirrel, but the squirrel paid no attention to
the shot. He loaded and ﬁred again, and again, until, at the
thirteenth shot, he set down his gun impatiently, and said to
his boy, who was looking on, ‘Boy, there’s something wrong
about this riﬂe.’ ‘Riﬂe’s all right, I know ’tis,’ responded the
boy, ‘but where’s your squirrel?’ ‘Don’t you see him,
humped up about half way up the tree?’ inquired the old
man, peering over his spectacles, and getting mystiﬁed.
‘No, I don’t,’ responded the boy; an then turning and
looking into his father’s face, he exclaimed, ‘I see your
squirrel! You’ve been ﬁring at a louse on your eyebrow!’”
The story needed neither application nor explanation.
The House was in convulsions of laughter; for Mr. Lincoln’s
skill in telling a story was not inferior to his appreciation of
its points and his power of adapting them to the case in
 hand. It killed oﬀ the member from Wabash, who was very
careful afterwards not to provoke any allusion to his
“eyebrows.”
A man who practiced law in Illinois in the earlier years of
the state “rode the circuit,” a proceeding of which the older
communities of the East know nothing. The state of Illinois,
for instance, is divided into a number of districts, each
composed of a number of counties, of which a single judge,
appointed or elected, as the case may be, for that purpose,
makes the circuit, holding courts at each county seat.
Railroads being scarce, the earlier circuit judges made
their trips from county to county on horseback, or in a gig;
and, as lawyers were not located in each county, all the
prominent lawyers living within the limits of the circuit
made the tour of the circuit with the judge. After the
business of one county was ﬁnished, the judge and all the
lawyers mounted their horses or their gigs and pushed on
to the next county-seat, and so repeated the process until
the whole circuit was compassed; and this is what is known
in the western states as “riding the circuit.”
Mr. Lincoln rode the circuit; and it was upon these long
and tedious trips that he established his reputation as one
of the best lawyers in Illinois, and, in some respects, the
superior of any lawyer in the state. It is doubtful whether
he was ever regarded by his professional brethren as a
well-read lawyer. Toward the latter part of his life, he had,
by his own powers of generalization and deduction, become
versed ia the principles of law, and was coming to be
recognized by the best lawyers as their peer; but his
 education was too defective at the ﬁrst to make him
anything better than what is called “a case lawyer.” He
studied his cases with great thoroughness, and was so
uniformly successful in them that the people regarded him
as having no equal. He had been engaged in practice but a
short time when he was found habitually on one side or the
other of every important case in the Circuit. The writer
remembers an instance in which many years ago, before he
had risen to political eminence, he was pointed out to a
stranger, by a citizen of Springﬁeld, as “Abe Lincoln, the
ﬁrst lawyer of Illinois.” He certainly enjoyed great
reputation among the people.
Mr. Lincoln was a very weak lawyer when engaged by
the weak side. This side he never took, if, by careful
investigation of the case, he could avoid it. If a man went to
him with the proposal to institute a suit, he examined
carefully the man’s grounds for the action. If these were
good, he entered upon the case, and prosecuted it faithfully
to the end. If the grounds were not good he would have
nothing to do with the case. He invariably advised the
applicant to dismiss the matter, telling him frankly that he
had no case, and ought not to prosecute. Sometimes he was
deceived. Sometimes he discovered, in the middle of a trial,
by the revelation of a witness, that his client had lied to
him. After the moment that he was convinced that justice
was opposed to him and his client, he lost all his
enthusiasm and all his courage. Indeed, he lost all interest
in the case. His eﬀorts for his client after that moment
were simply mechanical, for he would not lie for any man,
 or strive to make the worse appear the better reason for
any man. He had a genuine interest in the establishment of
justice between man and man. As a citizen, as a lover of
good order, as a man who believed in truth and justice, he
was, by every instinct of his nature, opposed to the success
of villainy and the triumph of wrong, and he would not sell
himself to purposes of injustice and immorality. He
repeatedly refused to take fees on the wrong side of a case.
When his clients had practiced gross deception upon him,
he forsook their cases in mid-passage; and he always
refused to accept fees of those whom he advised not to
prosecute. On one occasion, while engaged upon an
important case, he discovered that he was on the wrong
side. His associate in the case was immediately informed
that he (Lincoln) would not make the plea. The associate
made it, and the case, much to the surprise of Lincoln, was
decided for his client. Perfectly convinced that his client
was wrong, he would not receive one cent of the fee of nine
hundred dollars which he paid. It is not wonderful that one
who knew him well spoke of him as “perversely honest.”
This “riding the circuit” was, in those early days, a
peculiar business, and tended to develop peculiar traits of
character. The long passages from court-house to court-
house, the stopping at cabins by the way to eat, or sleep, or
feed the horse, the evenings at the country taverns, the
expedients resorted to to secure amusement, the petty,
mean and shameful cases that abounded, must have tended
to make it a strange business, and not altogether a pleasant
one. These long passages while riding the circuit were
 seasons of reﬂection with Mr. Lincoln. An amusing incident
occurred in connection with one of these journeys, which
gives a pleasant glimpse into the good lawyer’s heart. He
was riding by a deep slough, in which, to his exceeding
pain, he saw a pig struggling, and with such faint eﬀorts
that it was evident that he could not extricate himself from
the mud. Mr. Lincoln looked at the pig and the mud which
enveloped him, and then looked at some new clothes with
which he had but a short time before enveloped himself.
Deciding against the claims of the pig, he rode on, but he
could not get rid of the vision of the poor brute, and, at last,
after riding two miles, he turned back, determined to
rescue the animal at the expense of his new clothes.
Arrived at the spot, he tied his horse, and coolly went to
work to build of old rails a passage to the bottom of the
hole. Descending on these rails, he seized the pig and
dragged him out, but not without serious damage to the
clothes he wore. Washing his hands in the nearest brook,
and wiping them on the grass, he mounted his gig and rode
along. He then fell to examining the motive that sent him
back to the release of the pig. At the ﬁrst thought, it
seemed to be pure benevolence, but, at length, he came to
the conclusion that it was selﬁshness, for he certainly went
to the pig’s relief in order (as he said to the friend to whom
he related the incident,) to “take a pain out of his own
mind.” This is certainly a new view of the nature of
sympathy, and one which it will be well for the casuist to
examine.
 While Mr. Lincoln was not regarded by his professional
associates as profoundly versed in the principles of law, he
was looked upon by them as a very remarkable advocate.
No man in Illinois had such power before a jury as he. This
was a fact universally admitted. The elements of his power
as an advocate were perfect lucidity of statement, great
fairness in the treatment of both sides of a case, and the
skill to conduct a common mind along the chain of his logic
to his own conclusion. In presenting a case to a jury, he
invariably presented both sides of it. After he had done this,
there was really little more to be said, for he could state the
points of his opponent better generally than his opponent
could state them for himself. The man who followed him
usually found himself handling that which Mr. Lincoln had
already reduced to chaﬀ. There was really no trick about
this. In the ﬁrst place he would not take a case in which he
did not believe he was on the side of justice. Believing that
the right was with him, he felt that he could aﬀord to give
to the opposing counsel everything that he could claim, and
still have material enough left for carrying his verdicts. His
fairness was not only apparent but real, and the juries he
addressed knew it to be so. He would stand before a jury
and yield point after point that nearly every other lawyer
would dispute under the same circumstances, so that,
sometimes, his clients trembled with apprehension; and
then, after he had given his opponent all he claimed, and
more than he had dared to claim, he would state his own
side of the case with such power and clearness that that
which had seemed strong against him was reduced to
 weakness, that which had seemed to be sound was proved
to be specious, and that which had the appearance of being
conclusive against him was plainly seen to be corroborative
of his own positions on the question to be decided. Every
juror was made to feel that Mr. Lincoln was an absolute aid
to him in arriving at an intelligent and impartial verdict.
The cunning lawyers thought that Mr. Lincoln was very
cunning in all this — thought that his fairness was only
apparent and assumed for a purpose — but it has already
been stated that cunning was not an element of his nature.
He had no interest in the establishment of anything but
justice, and injustice, even if it favored him, could give him
no satisfaction. The testimony of the lawyers who were
obliged to try cases with him is that he was “a hard man to
meet.”
Coming from the people, and being perfectly familiar
with the modes of thought and mental capacity of the men
who generally composed his juries, he knew all their
diﬀiculties, knew just what language to address to them,
what illustrations to use, and how to bring his arguments to
bear upon their minds. This point is well illustrated by the
details of a case in the Coles Circuit Court.
The controversy was about a colt, in which thirty-four
witnesses swore that they had known the colt from its
falling, and that it was the property of the plaintiﬀ; while
thirty swore that they had known the colt from its falling,
and that it was the property of the defendant. It may be
stated, at starting, that these witnesses were all honest,
and that the mistake grew out of the exact resemblances
 which two colts bore to each other. One circumstance was
proven by all the witnesses, or nearly all of them, viz: that
the two claimants of the colt agreed to meet on a certain
day with the two mares which were respectively claimed to
be the dams of the colt, and permit the colt to decide which
of the two he belonged to. The meeting occurred according
to agreement, and, as it was a singular case and excited a
good deal of popular interest, there were probably a
hundred men assembled on their horses and mares, from
far and near. Now the colt really belonged to the defendant
in the case. It had strayed away and fallen into company
with the plaintiﬀ’s horses. The plaintiﬀ’s colt had, at the
same time, strayed away and had not returned, and was not
to be found. The moment the two mares were brought upon
the ground, the defendant’s mare and the colt gave signs of
recognition. The colt went to its dam, and would not leave
her. They fondled each other; and, although the plaintiﬀ
brought his mare between them, and tried in various ways
to divert the colt’s attention, the colt would not be
separated from its dam. It then followed her home, a
distance of eight or ten miles, and, when within a mile or
two of the stables, took a short cut to them in advance of its
dam. The plaintiﬀ had sued to recover the colt thus gone
back to its owner.
In the presentation of this case to the jury, there were
thirty-four witnesses on the side of the plaintiﬀ; while the
defendant had, on his side, only thirty witnesses; but he
had on his side the colt itself and its dam — thirty-four men
against thirty men and two brutes. Here was a case that
 was to be decided by the preponderance of evidence. All
the witnesses were equally positive, and equally credible.
Mr. Lincoln was on the side of the defendant, and
contended that the voice of nature in the mare and colt
ought to outweigh the testimony of a hundred men. The
jury were all farmers, and all illiterate men, and he took
great pains to make them understand what was meant by
the “preponderance of evidence.” He said that in a civil
suit, absolute certainty, or such certainty as would be
required to convict a man of crime, was not essential. They
must decide the case according to the impression which the
evidence had produced upon their minds, and, if they felt
puzzled at all, he would give them a test by which they
could bring themselves to a just conclusion. “Now,” said he,
“if you were going to bet on this case, on which side would
you be willing to risk a picayune? That side on which you
would be willing to bet a picayune, is the side on which
rests the preponderance of evidence in your minds. It is
possible that you may not be right, but that is not the
question. The question is as to where the preponderance of
evidence lies, and you can judge exactly where it lies in
your minds, by deciding as to which side you would be
willing to bet on.”
The jury understood this. There was no mystiﬁcation
about it. They had got hold of a test by which they could
render an intelligent verdict. Mr. Lincoln saw into their
minds, and knew exactly what they needed; and the
moment they received it, he knew that his case was safe, as
a quick verdict for the defendant proved it to be. In nothing
 connected with this case was the ingenuity of Mr. Lincoln
more evident, perhaps, than in the insigniﬁcance of the
sum which he placed in risk by the hypothetical wager. It
was not a hundred dollars, or a thousand dollars, or even a
dollar, but the smallest silver coin, to show to them that the
verdict should go with the preponderance of evidence, even
if the preponderance should be only a hair’s weight.
If it was the habit of Mr. Lincoln to present both sides of
his cases to the jury, it was, of course, his habit to study
both sides with equal thoroughness. He was called slow in
arriving at the points of a case. It is probably true that his
mind was not one of the quickest in the processes of
investigation. He certainly exercised great care in coming
to his conclusions. It was then, in the days of his legal
practice, his habit to argue against himself, and it always
remained the habit of his life. He took special interest in
the investigation of every point that could be made against
him and his positions. This habit made his processes of
investigation slower than those of other men, while the
limited range of his legal education rendered it necessary
that he should bestow more study upon his cases than
better educated lawyers found it necessary to bestow.
One of the most even-tempered men that ever lived, Mr.
Lincoln was the subject of great varieties of mood, and
extremes of feeling. His constitution embraced remarkable
contradictions. Oppressed with a deep melancholy at times,
weighed down by the great problems of his own life and of
humanity at large, assuming and carrying patiently the
most important public burdens, he was as simple as a boy,
 took delight in the most trivial things, and with the subtlest
and quickest sense of the ludicrous, laughed incontinently
over incidents and stories that would hardly move any
other man in his position to a smile. At one time, while
riding the circuit with a friend, he entered into an
exposition of his feelings touching what seemed to him the
growing corruption of the world, in politics and morals. “Oh
how hard it is,” he exclaimed, “to die, and not to be able to
leave the world any better for one’s little life in it!” Here
was a key to one cause of his depression, and an index to
his aspirations. After this conversation and the ride were
over, he probably arrived at a country tavern, and there
spent the evening in telling stories to his brother lawyers,
and in laughing over the most triﬂing incidents.
It will perhaps be as well, at this point of his history as
elsewhere, to allude to his habit of telling stories that it
would not be proper to repeat in the presence of women. It
is useless for Mr. Lincoln’s biographers to ignore this habit,
for it was notorious. The whole West, if not the whole
country, is full of these stories; and there is no doubt at all
that he indulged in them with the same freedom that he did
in those of a less exceptionable character. Good people are
at a loss to account for this apparent love of impurity, in a
man of such exalted aims, such deep truthfulness, such
high aspirations. The matter is easily explained.
Those who have heard these stories will readily admit
that they are the wittiest and most amusing of their kind,
and, when they have admitted that, they have in their
minds the only reason of Mr. Lincoln’s indulgence in them.
 It was always the elements of wit and humor that
captivated him. He was not an impure man in his life, or in
his imaginations. For impurity’s sake, he never uttered an
impure word, or made an impure allusion, but, whenever
he found anything humorous, ludicrous or witty, he could
not resist the inclination to use it, whatever the incidents
might be with which it was associated. Anything that was
morally beautiful touched him to tears. He was equally
sensitive to all that was heroic, beautiful, grand, sweet,
ludicrous and grotesque in human life. He wept as readily
over a tale of heroic self-devotion, as he laughed over a
humorous story.
It is also to be said that the habit of telling these
exceptionable stories was the habit of his profession, in his
region of country, at the time he was engaged in practice
there. He indulged in them no more than his brother
lawyers, and he excelled them in his stories no more than
he did in everything else. It is to be said, further, that there
is something in the practice of the law that makes these
stories more tolerable in the legal profession, even when
the members of it are Christian men — men of pure morals
and pure instincts — than in any other profession in the
world. The legal profession brings men into constant
association with impurity, with the details or cases of
shame, with all the smut and dirt that can be raked from
the haunts of vice, with all the particulars of prurient
dalliance and bestial licentiousness. With this habitual —
this professional — familiarity with impurity, it is not
strange that the sense of propriety in language becomes
 deadened; and none know better than lawyers that there is
in their profession, in the older parts of the country as well
as in the newer, great laxity of speech, touching subjects
which they would blush to introduce — which would cost
them their self-respect and the respect of the community to
introduce — among women. Mr. Lincoln was not a sinner in
this thing above other men, equally pure and good in his
profession. It is not a habit to be justiﬁed in any man. It is
not a habit to be tolerated in any man who indulges in it to
gratify simply his love of that which is beastly. In Mr.
Lincoln’s case, it is a habit to be explained and regretted.
His whole life had been spent with people without
reﬁnement. His legal study and practice had rendered this
class of subjects familiar. It was the habit of his
professional brethren to tell these objectionable stories,
and, even if his pure sensibilities sometimes rebelled — for
he possessed and always maintained the profoundest
respect for women — the wit and humor they contained
overtempted him.
One of the most beautiful traits of Mr. Lincoln was his
considerate regard for the poor and obscure relatives he
had left, plodding along in their humble way of life.
Wherever upon his circuit he found them, he always went
to their dwellings, ate with them, and, when convenient,
made their houses his home. He never assumed in their
presence the slightest superiority to them, in the facts and
conditions of his life. He gave them money when they
needed and he possessed it. Countless times he was known
to leave his companions at the village hotel, after a hard
 day’s work in the court room, and spend the evening with
these old friends and companions of his humbler days. On
one occasion, when urged not to go, he replied, “Why,
aunt’s heart would be broken if I should leave town without
calling upon her;” yet he was obliged to walk several miles
to make the call.
A little fact in this connection will illustrate his ever-
present desire to deal honestly and justly with men. He had
always a partner in his professional life, and, when he went
out upon the circuit, this partner was usually at home.
While out, he frequently took up and disposed of cases that
were never entered at the oﬀice. In these cases, after
receiving his fees, he divided the money in his pocket book,
labeling each sum (wrapped in a piece of paper,) that
belonged to his partner, stating his name, and the case on
which it was received. He could not be content to keep an
account. He divided the money, so that if he, by any
casualty, should fail of an opportunity to pay it over, there
could be no dispute as to the exact amount that was his
partner’s due. This may seem trivial, nay, boyish, but it was
like Mr. Lincoln. But we must set aside the professional
man for a while, to notice other aﬀairs which mingled in his
life.
