  ha ter I .
DURING THE YEAR that Lincoln was in the employ of Oﬀutt,
a series of Indian diﬀiculties were in progress in the state.
Black Hawk, a celebrated chief of the Sacs, a tribe that by
the terms of a treaty entered into near the beginning of the
century, were permanently removed to the western bank of
the Mississippi, came down the river with three hundred of
his own warriors, and a few allies from the Kickapoos and
Pottawatomies, accompanied also by his women and
children, and crossed to the eastern side with the avowed
intention of taking possession of the old hunting grounds of
the nation on the Rock River. As he was committing
numerous 
outrages 
on 
the 
way, 
General 
Gaines,
commanding the United States forces in that quarter,
immediately marched a few companies of regulars to Rock
Island, where he took up his position. Governor Reynolds
seconded his eﬀorts by sending to him several hundred
volunteers, recruited in the northern and central portions
of the state. Black Hawk, not being able to meet the force
thus assembled, retreated, and, on receiving from General
Gaines a threat to cross the river and chastise him on his
own ground, sued for peace, and reaﬀirmed all the terms of
the old treaty which conﬁned him to the western shore of
the Mississippi.
 The old chief proved treacherous again, and showed in
the spring of 1832 that his treaty was simply an expedient
for gaining time, and raising a larger force. He gathered his
warriors in large numbers, and crossed the river with the
intention, as he openly declared, of ascending the Rock
River to the territory of the Winnebagoes, among whom he
doubtless hoped to receive reinforcements. Warned back by
General Atkinson, then commanding the United States
troops on Rock Island, he returned a deﬁant message, and
kept on. In this threatening aspect of aﬀairs, Governor
Reynolds issued a call for volunteers, and among the
companies that immediately responded was one from
Menard County. Many of the volunteers were from New
Salem and Clary’s Grove, and Lincoln, being out of
business, was the ﬁrst to enlist. The company being full,
they held a meeting at Richland for the election of oﬀicers;
and now the inﬂuence of the Clary’s Grove Boys was felt.
Lincoln had completely won their hearts, and they told him
that he must be their captain. It was an oﬀice that he did
not aspire to, and one for which he felt that he had no
special ﬁtness; but he consented to be a candidate. There
was but one other candidate for the oﬀice, (a Mr.
Kirkpatrick,) and he was one of the most inﬂuential men in
the county. Previously, Kirkpatrick had been an employer of
Lincoln, and was so overbearing in his treatment of the
young man that the latter left him.
The simple mode of electing their captain, adopted by
the company, was by placing the candidates apart, and
telling the men to go and stand with the one they preferred.
 Lincoln and his competitor took their positions, and then
the word was given. At least three out of every four went to
Lincoln at once. When it was seen by those who had ranged
themselves with the other candidate that Lincoln was the
choice of the majority of the company, they left their places,
one by one, and came over to the successful side, until
Lincoln’s opponent in the friendly strife was left standing
almost alone. “I felt badly to see him cut so,” says a witness
of the scene. Here was an opportunity for revenge. The
humble laborer was his employer’s captain, but the
opportunity was never improved. Mr. Lincoln frequently
confessed that no subsequent success of his life had given
him half the satisfaction that this election did. He had
achieved public recognition; and to one so humbly bred the
distinction was inexpressibly delightful.
Captain Lincoln’s company and several others formed in
the vicinity, were ordered to rendezvous at Beardstown, on
the Illinois River, and here for the ﬁrst time he met the
Hon. John T. Stuart, a gentleman who was destined to have
an important inﬂuence upon his life. Stuart was a lawyer by
profession, and commanded one of the Sangamon County
companies. Captain Stuart was soon afterwards elected
Major of a spy battalion, formed from some of these
companies, and had the best opportunities to observe the
merits of Captain Lincoln. He testiﬁes that Lincoln was
exceedingly popular among the soldiers, in consequence of
his excellent care of the men in his command, his never-
failing good nature, and his ability to tell more stories and
better ones than any man in the service. He was popular
 also among these hardy men on account of his great
physical strength. Wrestling was an every-day amusement,
in which athletic game Lincoln had but one superior in the
army. One Thompson was Lincoln’s superior in “science,”
and vanquished everybody rather by superior skill than by
superior muscular power.
On the 27th of April, the force at Beardstown moved. A
few days of severe marching took the troops to the mouth
of Rock River. It was there arranged with General Atkinson
that they should proceed up the river to Prophetstown,
where they were to await the arrival of the regulars.
General 
Whiteside, 
in 
command 
of 
the 
volunteers,
disregarding the arrangement for some reason, burnt the
Prophet’s Village, and advanced up the stream forty miles
further, to Dixon’s Ferry. These marches were severe; but
to men bred as Captain Lincoln had been, they were but
the repetition of every-day hardships, under more exciting
motives.
Before arriving at Dixon’s Ferry, the army halted, and
leaving behind their baggage-wagons, made a forced march
upon the place. Arriving there, scouting parties were sent
out to ascertain the position of the enemy. At this time they
were joined by two battalions of mounted volunteers from
the region of Peoria, who, having a taste for a little ﬁghting
on their own responsibility, had rashly engaged Black
Hawk, and had been chased in disorder from the ﬁeld of
their boyish adventure, leaving eleven of their number
behind them dead. — an event which has passed into
history with the title of “Stillman’s Defeat.” They came to
 General Whiteside panic-stricken, and a council of war was
immediately held which resulted in the determination to
march at once to the scene of the disaster. A battle seemed
imminent, but the wily savages had anticipated the
movement, and not one was found. They had pushed
farther up the river, and broken up into predatory and
foraging bands, one of which pounced upon a settlement
near Ottowa, murdered ﬁfteen persons, and carried two
young women away captive.
General Whiteside, ﬁnding the enemy escaped, buried
the dead of the day before, returned to camp, and was soon
joined by General Atkinson with his troops and supplies.
The twenty-four hundred men thus brought together made
a force suﬀiciently large to annihilate Black Hawk’s army, if
they could have brought the cunning warrior to a ﬁght, but
this was impossible. Here a new trouble arose. The troops
had volunteered for a limited period, and, as their time had
nearly expired, and they were surfeited with hardship
without glory, they clamored to be discharged, and
Governor Reynolds yielded to their demands. The danger
still continuing, he issued another call for volunteers.
Captain Lincoln was among those who had not had enough
of the war. He had volunteered for a purpose, and he did
not intend to leave the service until the purpose was
accomplished. The Governor, in addition to his general call
for volunteers, asked for the formation of a volunteer
regiment from those just discharged. General Whiteside
himself immediately re-enlisted as a private, as did also
Captain Lincoln. Then followed a whole month of marching
 and maneuvering, without satisfactory results. There was
some ﬁghting near Galena, and a skirmish at Burr-Oak
Grove, but there was not enough of excitement and success
to keep the restless spirits of the volunteers contented, and
many of them deserted. Indeed, the force became reduced
to one-half of its original numbers. Lincoln, however,
remained true to his obligations, although it was not his
good fortune to participate in the engagements which
brought the war to a speedy close. The Indians were
overtaken at last by a force under General Henry. The
pursuit had led them to the Wisconsin River, and here the
Indians were found in full retreat. They were charged upon,
and driven in great confusion. Sixty-eight Indians were
killed, a large number wounded, and at last, just as the
savages were crossing the Mississippi, the battle of Bad-Ax
was fought, which resulted in the capture of Black Hawk
himself, with nearly all his warriors.
The Black Hawk war was not a very remarkable aﬀair. It
made no military reputations, but it was noteworthy in the
single fact that the two simplest, homeliest and truest men
engaged in it afterward became Presidents of the United
States, viz: General (then Colonel) Zachary Taylor, and
Abraham Lincoln. Mr. Lincoln never spoke of it as anything
more than an interesting episode in his life, except upon
one occasion when he used it as an instrument for turning
the military pretensions of another into ridicule. The
friends of General Cass, when that gentleman was a
candidate for the presidency, endeavored to endow him
with a military reputation. Mr. Lincoln, at that time a
 representative in Congress, delivered a speech before the
House, which, in its allusions to General Cass, was
exquisitely sarcastic and irresistibly humorous. “By the
way, Mr. Speaker,” said Mr. Lincoln, “do you know I am a
military hero? Yes, sir, in the days of the Black Hawk war, I
fought, bled and came away. Speaking of General Cass’s
career reminds me of my own. I was not at Stillman’s
Defeat, but I was about as near it as Cass to Hull’s
surrender; and like him I saw the place very soon
afterward. It is quite certain I did not break my sword, for I
had none to break; but I bent my musket pretty badly on
one occasion... If General Cass went in advance of me in
picking whortleberries, I guess I surpassed him in charges
upon the wild onions. If he saw any 1ive, ﬁghting Indians, it
was more than I did, but I had a good many bloody
struggles with the mosquitoes; and although I never fainted
from loss of blood, I can truly say I was often very hungry.”
Mr. Lincoln then went on to say that if he should ever turn
democrat, and be taken up as a candidate for the
presidency by the democratic party, he hoped they would
not make fun of him by attempting to make of him a
military hero. He lived to see himself the candidate of
another party, and witnessed a decided disposition on the
part of his campaign biographers to make a little political
capital for him out of his connection with the Black Hawk
war — an attempt which must have appealed to his quick
sense of the ludicrous, as well as recalled the speech from
which an extract has been quoted.
 The soldiers from Sangamon County arrived home just
ten days before the state election, and Mr. Lincoln was
immediately applied to for permission to place his name
among the candidates for the legislature. He was then but
twenty-three years old, had but just emerged from
obscurity, and had been but a short time a resident of the
county. The application was a great surprise to him. Indeed,
aside from the evidence of personal and neighborhood
friendship which it aﬀorded him, the surprise could hardly
have been a pleasant one, for his political convictions had
placed him among those who were in almost a hopeless
minority. Party feeling ran high between the friends of
General Jackson and Henry Clay, but the friends of Mr. Clay
had little power. Illinois was strongly democratic and for
many years remained so. His opponents in the canvass
were well known men, and had shown themselves and
made their speeches throughout the county; yet in Mr.
Lincoln’s own precinct he was voted for alike by political
friend and foe. The oﬀicial vote of the New Salem precinct,
as shown by the poll-book in the clerk’s oﬀice at
Springﬁeld, was, at this time, for Congress: Jonathan H.
Pugh 179, Joseph Duncan 97; while the vote for Abraham
Lincoln for the legislature was 277, or one more than the
aggregate for both the candidates for Congress. This vote
was undoubtedly the result of the personal popularity
acquired by Lincoln during his brief military campaign. All
his soldiers voted for him, and worked for his election
wherever they had inﬂuence. But he was defeated on the
 general vote, and immediately looked about to ﬁnd what
there was for him to do.
It is interesting to recall the fact that at this time he
seriously took into consideration the project of learning the
blacksmith’s trade. He was without means, and felt the
immediate necessity of undertaking some business that
would give him bread. It was while he was entertaining this
project that an event occurred which, in his undetermined
state of mind, seemed to open a way to success in another
quarter. A man named Reuben Radford, the keeper of a
small store in the village of New Salem, had somehow
incurred the displeasure of the Clary’s Grove Boys, who
had exercised their “regulating” prerogatives by irregularly
breaking in his windows. William G. Greene, a friend of
young Lincoln, riding by Radford’s store soon afterward,
was hailed by him, and told that he intended to sell out. Mr.
Greene went into the store, and, looking around, oﬀered
him at random four hundred dollars for his stock. The oﬀer
was immediately accepted. Lincoln happening in the next
day, and being familiar with the value of the goods, Mr.
Greene proposed to him to take an inventory of the stock,
and see what sort of a bargain he had made. This he did,
and it was found that the goods were worth six hundred
dollars. Lincoln then made him an oﬀer of a hundred and
twenty-ﬁve dollars for his bargain, with the proposition that
he and a man named Berry, as his partner, should take his
(Greene’s) place in the notes given to Radford. Mr. Greene
agreed to the arrangement, but Radford declined it, except
 on condition that Greene would be their security, and this
he at last assented to.
Berry proved to be a dissipated, triﬂing man, and the
business soon became a wreck. Mr. Greene was obliged to
go in and help Lincoln close it up, and not only do this but
pay Radford’s notes. All that young Lincoln won from the
store was some very valuable experience, and the burden
of a debt to Greene which, in his conversations with the
latter, he always spoke of as “the national debt.” But this
national debt, unlike the majority of those which bear the
title, was paid to the utmost farthing in after years. Six
years afterwards, Mr. Greene, who knew nothing of the law
in such cases, and had not troubled himself to inquire about
it, and who had, in the meantime, removed to Tennessee.
received notice from Mr. Lincoln that he was ready to pay
him what he had paid for Berry — he, Lincoln, being legally
bound to pay the liabilities of his partner.
About this time Mr. Lincoln was appointed postmaster by
President Jackson. The oﬀice was too insigniﬁcant to be
considered politically, and it was given to the young man
because everybody liked him, and because he was the only
man willing to take it who could make out the returns. He
was exceedingly pleased with the appointment, because it
gave him a chance to read every newspaper that was taken
in the vicinity. He had never been able to get half the
newspapers he wanted before, and the oﬀice gave him the
prospect of a constant feast. Not wishing to be tied to the
oﬀice, as it yielded him no revenue that would reward him
for the conﬁnement, he made a post-oﬀice of his hat.
 Whenever he went out, the letters were placed in his hat.
When an anxious looker for a letter found the postmaster,
he had found his oﬀice; and the public oﬀicer, taking oﬀ his
hat, looked over his mail wherever the public might ﬁnd
him. He kept the oﬀice until it was discontinued, or
removed to Petersburgh.
One of the most beautiful exhibitions of Mr. Lincoln’s
rigid honesty occurred in connection with the settlement of
his accounts with the post-oﬀice department, several years
afterwards. It was after he had become a lawyer, and had
been a legislator. He had passed through a period of great
poverty, had acquired his education in the law in the midst
of many perplexities, inconveniences and hardships, and
had met with temptations, such as few men could resist, to
make a temporary use of any money he might have in his
hands. One day, seated in the law oﬀice of his partner, the
agent of the post-oﬀice department entered, and inquired if
Abraham Lincoln was within. Mr. Lincoln responded to his
name, and was informed that the agent had called to collect
a balance due the department since the discontinuance of
the New Salem oﬀice. A shade of perplexity passed over
Mr. Lincoln’s face, which did not escape the notice of
friends who were present. One of them said at once:
“Lincoln, if you are in want of money, let us help you.” He
made no reply, but suddenly rose, and pulled out from a
pile of books a little old trunk, and, returning to the table,
asked the agent how much the amount of his debt was. The
sum was named, and then Mr. Lincoln opened the trunk,
pulled out a little package of coin wrapped in a cotton rag,
 and counted out the exact sum, amounting to something
more than seventeen dollars. After the agent had left the
room, he remarked quietly that he never used any man’s
money but his own. Although this sum had been in his
hands during all these years, he had never regarded it as
available, even for any temporary purpose of his own.
The store having “winked out,” to use his own
expression, he was ready for something else, and it came
from an unexpected quarter. John Calhoun, a resident of
Springﬁeld, and since notorious as President of the
Lecompton Constitutional Convention, in Kansas, was the
surveyor of Sangamon County. The constant inﬂux of
immigrants made his oﬀice a busy one, and, looking around
for assistance, he ﬁxed upon Lincoln, and deputed to him
all his work in the immediate vicinity of New Salem.
Lincoln had not the slightest knowledge of surveying, and
but the slenderest acquaintance with the science upon
which it was based. He would be obliged to ﬁt himself for
his work in the shortest possible time, and he did. Mr.
Calhoun lent him a copy of Flint and Gibson, and after a
brief period of study, he procured a compass and chain (the
old settlers say that his ﬁrst chain was a grape-vine,) and
went at his work. The work procured bread, and, what
seemed quite as essential to him, books; for during all
these months he was a close student, and a constant
reader. 
Mr. 
Lincoln 
surveyed 
the 
present 
town 
of
Petersburgh, and much of the adjacent territory. He
pursued this business steadily for a year or more, and with
such success that the accuracy of his surveys has never
 been called in question. One interruption must have
occurred in his work, though it was brief. His compass and
chain were attached and sold to pay a debt of Berry’s, for
which he was surety, but they were bought by a man named
James Short, who immediately gave them back to him.
