  ha ter  I.
THE LEGITIMATE FRUIT of the Kansas-Nebraska bill had
already begun to manifest itself in Kansas. Emigrants from
the eastern states and from the north-west began to pour
into the territory; and those who had intended that it
should become a slave state saw that their scheme was in
danger. Mr. Douglas may not have cared whether slavery
was “voted up or voted down” in Kansas, but slaveholders
themselves showed a strong preference for voting it up,
and not only for voting it up, but of backing up their votes
by any requisite amount of violence. An organization in
Platte County, Missouri, declared its readiness, when called
upon by the citizens of Kansas, to assist in removing any
and all emigrants who go there under the auspices of any
of the “Emigrant Aid Societies;” which societies, by the
way, were supposed to be organizations operating in the
free state interest. This was in July, 1854, the Kansas-
Nebraska bill having been passed during the previous May.
One B.F. Stringfellow was the secretary of the organization,
and a fortnight later he introduced, at a meeting of the
society, resolutions declaring in favor of extending slavery
into Kansas. Almon H. Reeder was appointed Governor, and
arrived in the territory during the following October. At two
elections, held within the succeeding six months, the polls
were entirely controlled by ruﬀians from the Missouri side
 of 
the 
border, 
and 
those 
disturbances 
were 
fully
inaugurated which illustrated the desperate desire of
slavery to extend its territory and its power, the hypocrisy
of Mr. Douglas and his friends in the declaration that the
people of the territory should be perfectly free to choose
and form their institutions, and the shameful subserviency
of the government at Washington to the interests of the
barbarous institution.
This much of the history of Kansas, in order to a perfect
appreciation of a private letter of Mr. Lincoln to his
Kentucky friend, Mr. Speed:
Springﬁeld, August 24, 1855.
“Dear Speed: — You know what a poor correspondent I am.
Ever since I received your very agreeable letter of the
twenty-second of May, I have been intending to write you in
answer to it. You suggest that in political action now, you
and I would diﬀer. You know I dislike slavery, and you fully
admit the abstract wrong of it. So far, there is no cause of
diﬀerence. But you say that sooner than yield your legal
right to the slave, especially at the bidding of those who are
not themselves interested, you would see the Union
dissolved. I am not aware that any one is bidding you yield
that right — very certainly I am not. I leave that matter
entirely to yourself. I also acknowledge your rights and my
obligations under the Constitution, in regard to your slaves.
I confess I hate to see the poor creatures hunted down, and
caught and carried back to their stripes and unrequited
toil; but I bite my lip, and keep quiet. In 1841, you and I
had together a tedious, low-water trip on a steamboat from
 Louisville to St. Louis. You may remember, as I well do, that
from Louisville to the mouth of the Ohio, there were on
board ten or a dozen slaves, shackled together with irons.
That sight was a continual torment to me, and I see
something like it every time I touch the Ohio, or any other
slave border. It is not fair for you to assume that I have no
interest in a thing which has, and continually exercises, the
power of making me miserable. You ought rather to
appreciate how much the great body of the people of the
North do crucify their feelings, in order to maintain their
loyalty to the Constitution and the Union.
“I do oppose the extension of slavery, because my judgment
and feelings so prompt me; and I am under no obligations
to the contrary. It, for this, you and I must diﬀer, diﬀer we
must. You say if you were President you would send an
army, and hang the leaders of the Missouri outrages upon
the Kansas elections; still, if Kansas fairly votes herself a
slave state, she must be admitted, or the Union must be
dissolved. But how if she votes herself a slave state unfairly
— that is, by the very means for which you would hang
men? Must she still be admitted, or the Union dissolved?
That will be the phase of the question when it ﬁrst becomes
a practical one.
“In your assumption that there may be a fair decision on
the slavery question in Kansas, I plainly see you and I
would diﬀer about the Nebraska law. I look upon that
enactment not as a law, but as a violence, from the
beginning. It was conceived in violence, passed in violence,
 is maintained in violence, and is being executed in violence.
I say it was conceived in violence, because the destruction
of the Missouri Compromise under the Constitution was
nothing less than violence. It was passed in violence,
because it could not have passed at all but for the votes of
many members in violent disregard of the known will of
their constituents. It is maintained in violence, because the
elections since clearly demand its repeal, and the demand
is openly disregarded.
“You say men ought to be hung for the way they are
executing that law; and I say the way it is being executed is
quite as good as any of its antecedents. It is being executed
in the precise way which was intended from the ﬁrst, else,
why does no Nebraska man express astonishment or
condemnation? Poor Reeder has been the only man who
has been silly enough to believe that anything like fairness
was ever intended, and he has been bravely undeceived.
“That Kansas will form a slave constitution, and with it, will
ask to be admitted into the Union, I take to be an already
settled question, and so settled by the very means you so
pointedly condemn. By every principle of law ever held by
any court, North or South, every negro taken to Kansas is
free; and in utter disregard of this — in the spirit of
violence merely — that beautiful legislature gravely passes
a law to hang men who shall venture to inform a negro of
his legal rights. This is the substance and real object of the
law. If, like Haman, they should hang upon the gallows of
 their own building, I shall not be among the mourners for
their fate.
“In my humble sphere, I shall advocate the restoration of
the Missouri Compromise so long as Kansas remains a
territory; and when, by all these foul means it seeks to
come into the Union as a slave state, I shall oppose it. I am
very loth, in any case, to withhold my assent to the
enjoyment of property acquired or located in good faith;
but I do not admit that good faith in taking a negro to
Kansas, to be held in slavery, is a possibility with any man.
Any man who has sense enough to be the controller of his
own property, has too much sense to misunderstand the
outrageous character of the whole Nebraska business.
“But I digress. In my opposition to the admission of Kansas,
I shall have some company; but we may be beaten. If we
are, I shall not, on that account, attempt to dissolve the
Union. I think it probable, however, that we shall be beaten.
Standing as a unit among yourselves, you can, directly, and
indirectly, bribe enough of our men to carry the day — as
you could on an open proposition to establish monarchy.
Get hold of some man in the North whose position and
ability are such that he can make the support of your
measure — whatever it may be — a democratic party
necessity, and the thing is done.
“Apropos of this, let me tell you an anecdote. Douglas
introduced the Nebraska bill in January. In February,
afterwards, there was a called session of the Illinois
 legislature. Of the one hundred members comprising the
two branches of that body, about seventy were democrats.
The latter held a caucus in which the Nebraska bill was
talked of, if not formally discussed. It was thereby
discovered that just three, and no more, were in favor of
the measure. In a day or two, Douglas’ orders came on to
have resolutions passed, approving the bill, and they were
passed by large majorities!!! The truth of this is vouched
for by a bolting democratic member. The masses, too,
democratic as well as whig, were even more unanimous
against it, but as soon as the party necessity of supporting
it became apparent, the way the democracy began to see
the wisdom and justice of it was perfectly astonishing.
“You say if Kansas fairly votes herself a free state, as a
Christian you will rather rejoice at it. All decent
slaveholders talk that way, and I do not doubt their candor.
But they never vote that way. Although, in a private letter
or conversation you will express your preference that
Kansas shall be free, you would vote for no man for
Congress who would say the same thing publicly. No such
man could be elected, from any district, or any slave state.
You think Stringfellow 
 Co. ought to be hung; and yet you
will vote for the exact type and representation of
Stringfellow. The slave-breeders and slave-traders are a
small and detested class among you, and yet in politics they
dictate the course of all or you, and are as completely your
masters as you are the masters of your own negroes.
 “You inquire where I now stand. That is a disputed point. I
think I am a whig: but others say there are no whigs, and
that I am an abolitionist. When I was in Washington, I voted
for the Wilmot Proviso as good as forty times, and I never
heard of any attempt to unwhig me for that. I now do no
more than oppose the extension of slavery. I am not a
Know-Nothing — that is certain. How could I be? How can
any one who abhors the oppression of the negroes be in
favor of degrading classes of white people? Our progress in
degeneracy appears to me to be pretty rapid. As a nation,
we began by declaring that ‘all men are created equal.’ We
now practically read it ‘all men are created equal except
negroes.’ When the Know-Nothings get control, it will read,
‘all men are created equal except negroes and foreigners
and Catholics.’ When it comes to that, I should prefer
emigrating to some country where they make no pretense
of loving liberty — to Russia for instance, where despotism
can be taken pure, and without the base alloy of hypocrisy.
“Your friend forever,
“A. Lincoln.”
This letter, written with perfect freedom to an old
personal friend attached to the interests of slavery in a
slave state, gives with wonderful clearness the state of the
slavery question at the time, and Mr. Lincoln’s own views
and feelings. Events justiﬁed the writer’s judgment, and
veriﬁed his predictions. Mr. Lincoln still considered himself
a whig. The name was one he loved, and the old party
associations were very precious to him. But he was passing
through the weaning process, and was realizing more and
 more, with the passage of every month, that there could no
resuscitation of the dead or dying organization. The
interests of slavery had severed from it forever that portion
that had made it a powerful national party. It could not
extend itself an inch south of Mason’s and Dixon’s line. The
slavery question was the great question. Opposition to the
extension and encroachments of slavery was sectional, and
any party which exercised this opposition, however broad
its views might be, was necessarily sectional. Mr. Lincoln’s
logical mind soon discovered this, and accordingly we ﬁnd
him, 
May 
29th, 
1856, 
attending 
a 
convention 
at
Bloomington, of those who were opposed to the democratic
party. Here, and with Mr. Lincoln’s powerful assistance, the
republican party of Illinois was organized, a platform
adopted, a state ticket nominated, and delegates were
appointed to the National Republican Convention in
Philadelphia, which was to be held on the seventeenth of
the following month.
There is no doubt that, from the date of this meeting, he
felt himself more a free man in politics than ever before.
His hatred of slavery had been constantly growing, and
now he was the member of a party whose avowed purpose
it was to resist the extension of slavery, and to shut it up in
the territory where it held its only rights under the
Constitution. The speech which he made on this occasion
was one of distinguished power and eloquence. Mr.
Scripps, in the little sketch of his life to which an allusion
has already been made in this volume, says: “Never was an
audience more comp1etely electriﬁed by human eloquence.
 Again and again during the progress of its delivery, they
sprang to their feet and upon the benches, and testiﬁed by
long continued shouts and the waving of hats, how deeply
the speaker had wrought upon their minds and hearts. It
fused the mass of hitherto incongruous elements into
perfect homogeneity, and from that day to the present they
have worked together in harmonious and fraternal Union.”
Mr. Lincoln was now regarded, not only by the
republicans of Illinois, but by all the western states, as
their ﬁrst man. Accordingly they presented his name to the
national convention as their candidate for the vice-
presidency. On the informal ballot, he received one hundred
and ten votes to two hundred and ﬁfty-nine for Mr. Dayton.
This, of course, decided the matter against him, but the
vote was a complimentary one, and was Mr. Lincoln’s
formal introduction to the nation. Mr. Lincoln labored with
his accustomed zeal during the campaign for Fremont and
Dayton, the republican nominees, and had the pleasure, at
the end of the canvass, of ﬁnding the state revolutionized.
Colonel William H. Bissell, the opposition candidate for
Governor, was elected by a notable majority, although there
were men enough who were not aware that the whig party
was dead to give the electoral vote to Mr. Buchanan,
through their support of Mr. Fillmore.
A little incident occurred during the campaign that
illustrated Mr. Lincoln’s readiness in turning a political
point. He was making a speech at Charleston, Coles
County, when a voice called out, “Mr. Lincoln, is it true that
you entered this state barefoot, driving a yoke of oxen?”
 Mr. Lincoln paused for full half a minute, as if considering
whether he should notice such cruel impertinence, and
then said that he thought he could prove the fact by at least
a dozen men in the crowd, any one of whom was more
respectable than his questioner. But the question seemed to
inspire him, and he went on to show what free institutions
had done for himself; and to exhibit the evils of slavery to
the white man wherever it existed, and asked if it was not
natural that he should hate slavery, and agitate against it.
“Yes,” said he, “we will speak for freedom and against
slavery, as long as the Constitution of our country
guarantees free speech, until everywhere on this wide land,
the sun shall shine and the rain shall fall and the wind shall
blow upon no man who goes forth to unrequited toil.”
From this time to the close of his life, he was almost
entirely absorbed by political aﬀairs. He still took charge of
important cases in court, and practiced his profession at
intervals; but he was regarded as a political man, and had
many responsibilities thrown upon him by the new
organization. 
During 
the 
summer 
succeeding 
the
presidential canvass, and after Mr. Buchanan had taken his
seat, Mr. Douglas was invited by the grand jury of the
United States District Court for Southern Illinois, to deliver
a speech at Springﬁeld when the court was in session. In
that speech, the senator showed the progress he had made
in his departure from the doctrines of the fathers, by
announcing that the framers of the Declaration of
Independence, when they asserted that “all men are
created equal,” only meant to say that “British subjects on
 this continent were equal to British subjects born and
residing in Great Britain.” Mr. Lincoln was invited by a
large number of citizens to reply to this speech, and did so.
After showing in his own quiet and ingenious way the
absurdity of this assumption of Judge Douglas, telling his
auditors that, as they were preparing to celebrate the
Fourth of July, and would read the Declaration, he would
like to have them read it in Judge Douglas’ way, viz: “We
hold these truths to be self-evident, that all British subjects
who were on this continent eighty-one years ago, were
created equal to all British subjects born and then residing
in Great Britain,” — he said: “And now I appeal to all — to
democrats as well as others: are you really willing that the
Declaration shall thus be frittered away? — thus left no
more, at most, than an interesting memorial of the dead
past? — thus shorn of its vitality and its practical value, and
left without the germ or even the suggestion of the
inalienable rights of man in it?” Then Mr. Lincoln added his
opinion as to what the authors of the Declaration intended;
and it has probably never been stated with a more catholic
spirit, or in choicer terms:
“I think the authors of that notable instrument intended
to include all men; but they did not intend to declare all
men equal in all respects. They did not mean to say all were
equal in color, size, intellect, moral developments, or social
capacity. They deﬁned with tolerable distinctness in what
respects they did consider all men equal — equal in certain
inalienable rights, among which are life, liberty and the
pursuit of happiness. This they said and this they meant.
 They did not mean to assert the obvious untruth that all
were then actually enjoying that equality, nor yet that they
were about to confer it upon them. In fact, they had no
power to confer such a boon. They meant simply to declare
the right, so that the enforcement of it might follow as fast
as circumstances should permit. They meant to set up a
standard maxim for free society, which should be familiar to
all and revered by all; constantly looked to, constantly
labored for, and, even though never perfectly attained,
constantly approximated, and thereby constantly spreading
and deepening its inﬂuence, and augmenting the happiness
and value of life to all people of all colors everywhere.”
The project of making Kansas a slave state was in full
progress. The event which Mr. Lincoln had so distinctly
prophesied — the formation of a pro-slavery constitution by
unfair means and alien agents — was in full view; and those
who were interested in it did their best to prepare the
minds of the people for it. Political morality seemed at its
lowest ebb. A whole party was bowing to the behests of
slavery, and those who were opposed to the institution and
the power born of it had become stupeﬁed in the presence
of its bold assumptions and rapid advances. People had
ceased to be surprised at any of its claims, and any
exhibition of its spirit and policy. If Mr. Buchanan had any
conscientious scruples, they were easily overborne, and he
lent himself to the schemes of the plotters. A pro-slavery
legislature was elected mainly by non-residents, at an
election in which the free state men, who numbered three-
fourths of the entire population, refused to participate, on
 account 
of 
illegality. 
This 
legislature, 
meeting 
at
Lecompton, passed an act providing for the election of a
convention to form a state constitution, preparatory to
asking an admission into the Union. In the election of the
convention, the free state men took no part, on the ground
that the legislature which ordered it had no legal authority.
About two thousand votes were cast, while the legal voters
in the territory numbered more than ten thousand. The
Lecompton Convention framed, of course, a pro-slavery
constitution. It is not necessary to recount the means by
which this constitution was subsequently overthrown, and
one prohibiting slavery substituted in its place. It is
suﬀicient for the present purpose to state that upon the
promulgation of the constitution formed at Lecompton,
Robert 
J. 
Walker, 
then 
Governor 
of 
Kansas, 
went
immediately to Washington to remonstrate against its
adoption by Congress, and that before he could reach the
capitol it had received the approval of the President.
These facts have place here to give the basis of the
political relations between Mr. Lincoln and Mr. Douglas; for
they were approaching their great struggle. The senatorial
term of Mr. Douglas was drawing to a close, and he wished
to be indorsed by the people of Illinois, and returned to the
Senate. The events of the previous year had shown him that
a great political revolution was in progress, and that his
seat was actually in danger. He saw what was going on in
Kansas, and knew that the iniquities in progress there
would be laid at his door. It was he who, in a time of peace,
had opened the ﬂood-gates of agitation. It was he who had
 given to the slave-power what it had not asked for, but
could not consistently refuse. It was he who had
gratuitously oﬀered the slave-power the privilege of making
territory forever set apart to freedom its own, if it could. He
had divided his own party in his own state, and was losing
his conﬁdence as to his own political future. That he knew
just what was coming in Kansas, and knew what the eﬀect
would be upon himself, is evident in the speech he made at
Springﬁeld, from Mr. Lincoln’s reply to which a passage
has already been quoted. In this he undertook to shift to
the shoulders of the republican party the burden he felt to
be pressing upon his own. Speaking of Kansas, he said:
“The law under which her delegates are about to be elected
is believed to be just and fair in all its objects and
provisions... If any portion of the inhabitants, acting under
the advice of political leaders in distant states, shall choose
to absent themselves from the polls, and withhold their
votes with the view of leaving the free state democrats in
the minority, and thus securing a pro-slavery constitution in
opposition to the wishes of a majority of the people living
under it, let the responsibility rest on those who, for
partisan purposes, will sacriﬁce the principles they profess
to cherish and promote. Upon them and upon the political
party for whose beneﬁt and under the direction of whose
leaders they act, let the blame be visited of fastening upon
the people of a new state institutions repugnant to their
feelings and in violation of their wishes.”
In a subsequent passage of this same speech, he
ampliﬁes these points, and both passages show that he
 knew the nature of the constitution that would be framed,
knew that the free state men would not vote at all because
they believed the movement was an illegal one, and knew
that he and his party would be held responsible for the
outrage. It is further to be said that, by his words on this
occasion, he fully committed himself in advance, to
whatever the Lecompton Convention might do. “The
present election law in Kansas is acknowledged to be fair
and just,” he says. “Kansas is about to speak for herself,”
he declares. By these words alone, be was morally
committed to whatever might be the conclusions of the
convention. This is to be remembered, for Mr. Douglas soon
found that he could not shift the burden of the Kansas
iniquity upon the opposition, and that his only hope of a re-
election to the senate depended upon his taking issue with
the administration on this very case, and becoming the
champion of the anti-Lecompton men.
