  ha ter  I .
THE WINTER OF 1858 and 1859 found Mr. Lincoln at
leisure. His absorption in political pursuits had materially
interfered with his professional business, although he
retained all that he had the disposition to attend to. At this
point occurred one of those strange diversions that were so
characteristic of the man. He eat down and wrote, in the
form of a lecture, a comprehensive history of inventions,
beginning with the handiwork in brass and iron of Tubal
Cain, and ending with the latest products of inventive art.
This lecture he delivered at Springﬁeld, and, in a single
instance, in another city, but there the public delivery of it
ceased. Whether he undertook this to detach his mind from
subjects which had held it so long, or whether he did it to
be able to meet the invitations that came to him from many
quarters to address the winter lyceums, does not appear.
The eﬀort does not seem to have been a satisfactory one to
himself; and it is easy to see that it was not likely to be
particularly attractive to the lecture-going public. Reading
lectures and delivering stump speeches are very diﬀerent
styles of eﬀort; and the most eﬀective political orators often
surprise themselves as much as they do their audiences by
their dryness and dreariness upon the platform of the
lecturer. The facts of the matter are principally interesting
 as showing the natural drift of Mr. Lincoln’s mind when
diverted from professional and political pursuits.
This diversion was only temporary. Mr. Lincoln had
become a political man. Whatever may have been his
inclinations at this time, he felt that he was in the hands of
the party to which he had just given the ripest and best
eﬀorts of his life. He was a representative man, and was
already regarded by the great masses of the new party at
the West as their best man for the next presidential
campaign. His senatorial contest had done much to make
his name known to the politicians of the nation. Political
men everywhere had read his masterly debates with
Senator Douglas, and had given him his position among the
best politicians and most notable political orators of the
time. While this is true, it is also true that east of the
Alleghanies he was not much known among the people. He
had not been much in public oﬀice; and his ﬁeld of action
and inﬂuence was so distant that they had heard but little
about him. If they had been told that within two years
Abraham Lincoln would be elected president of the United
States, three out of every four would have inquired who
Abraham Lincoln was. At the West all was diﬀerent.
Everybody knew “Old Abe.” He was the people’s friend —
the man of the people — the champion of freedom and free
labor — the man who had beaten the “little giant” in the
popular vote of the democratic state of Illinois. His
peculiarities were as well known to the people of the West
as if he had been the member of every man’s family. To look
upon him was to look upon a lion. To shake hands with him
 or to hear him speak, was a great privilege — a subject of
self-gratulation or neighborly boasting.
On the 17th of May, 1859, we ﬁnd Mr. Lincoln answering
a letter addressed to him by Dr. Theodor Canisius, a
German citizen of Illinois, who, with an eye to the future,
inquired 
concerning 
Mr. 
Lincoln’s 
views 
of 
the
constitutional provision recently adopted in Massachusetts,
in relation to naturalized citizens, and whether he opposed
or favored a fusion of the republicans and other opposition
elements in the approaching campaign of 1860. Mr. Lincoln
replied that, while he had no right to advise the sovereign
and independent state of Massachusetts, concerning her
policy, he would say that so far as he understood the
provision she had consummated, he was against its
adoption in Illinois, and in every other place where he had
a right to oppose it. “As I understand the spirit of our
institutions,” said Mr. Lincoln, “it is designed to promote
the elevation of men. I am, therefore, hostile to anything
that tends to their debasement. It is well known that I
deplore the depressed condition of the blacks, and it would,
therefore, be very inconsistent for me to look with approval
upon any measure that infringes upon the inalienable rights
of white men, whether or not they are born in another land,
or speak a diﬀerent language from our own.” As to the
inquiry touching the fusion of all the opposition elements,
he was in favor of it, if it could be done on republican
principles; and upon no other condition. “A fusion upon any
other platform,” the letter proceeds, “would be as insane as
unprincipled. It would thereby lose the whole North, while
 the common enemy would still have the support of the
entire South. The question in relation to men is diﬀerent.
There are good and patriotic men and able statesmen in the
South whom I would willingly support, if they would place
themselves on republican ground; but I shall oppose the
lowering of the republican standard even by a hair’s
breadth.”
It is to be remembered in this connection that
Massachusetts was a representative republican state, and,
regarding the ignorant foreign population, particularly of
the eastern states, as holding the balance of power
between the democratic and republican parties, which it
never failed to exercise in the interest of the former and in
the support of African slavery, had instituted measures
which rendered naturalization a more diﬀicult process. This
embarrassed the republicans of the West, who were
associated with a large and generally intelligent German
population, with leanings toward the republican party
rather than to the democratic. Hence this letter to Mr.
Lincoln and his reply, which latter undoubtedly had its
oﬀice in shaping public opinion, and in bringing the foreign
population of the West into hearty sympathy with Mr.
Lincoln himself.
It was during this year that the movement for making Mr.
Lincoln the republican candidate for the presidency took
form. He was present as a spectator at the Illinois state
republican convention held at Decatur on the tenth of May.
When he entered the hall, he was greeted with such
enthusiasm as few defeated men are favored with. There
 was no mistaking the high honor and warm aﬀection in
which the audience held him, and no doubting the fact that
they regarded that which was nominally his defeat as a
great triumph, whose fruits would not long be delayed. He
had hardly taken his seat when Governor Oglesby of
Decatur announced that an old democrat of Macon County
desired to make a contribution to the convention. The oﬀer
being at once accepted, two old fence-rails were borne into
the convention, gaudily decorated, and bearing the
inscription: “Abraham Lincoln, the rail candidate for the
presidency in 1860. Two rails from a lot of three thousand,
made in 1830, by Thomas Hanks and Abe Lincoln — whose
father was the ﬁrst pioneer of Macon County.”
The eﬀect of this upon an audience already excited can
be imagined by those only who have been familiar with the
eﬀect of similar melo dramatic incidents under similar
circumstances. The cheers were prolonged for ﬁfteen
minutes, or until the strength of the enthusiastic assembly
was exhausted. Mr. Lincoln was called upon to explain the
matter of the rails, which he did, repeating the story
already in the reader’s possession — the story of his ﬁrst
work in Illinois, when he helped to build a cabin for his
father, and to fence in a ﬁeld of corn.
It is the misfortune of great men who are candidates for
oﬀice, that appeals must be made by them, or on their
behalf, to the groundlings. It was a great misfortune to Mr.
Lincoln that he was introduced to the nation as pre-
eminently a rail-splitter, and that it was deemed necessary
to his political fortunes that he should be called such. There
 is no question that the designation belittled him in the eyes
of all people of education and culture, at home and abroad.
And this, not because there was any prejudice among these
people against labor, and not because they attached the
slightest dishonor to Mr. Lincoln on account of his early
poverty and humble pursuits. Splitting rails was in no way
allied to the duties of the presidency. The ability to split
rails did not add to moral or intellectual power. The fact
that Mr. Lincoln had split rails did not increase his
qualiﬁcations for oﬀice. Mr. Lincoln himself regretted that,
while he was splitting these rails, he had not been in school
or college. He felt that he should have been very much
better ﬁtted for the great duties that had been devolved
upon him if, instead having devoted the best of his youth to
splitting rails and other manual labor, he had enjoyed the
advantages of a thorough education. The country took Mr.
Lincoln at the estimate of his friends; and those friends
thrust him before the country as a man whose grand
achievement was the splitting of many rails. It took years
for the country to learn that Mr. Lincoln was not a boor. It
took years for them to unlearn what an unwise and boyish
introduction of a great man to the public had taught them.
It took years for them to comprehend the fact that in Mr.
Lincoln the country had the wisest, truest, gentlest,
noblest, most sagacious president who had occupied the
chair of state since Washington retired from it. At this very
period he said to Judge Drummond of Chicago, who had
remarked to him that people were talking of him for the
presidency: “It seems as if they ought to ﬁnd somebody
 who knows more than I do.” The rails and that which they
symbolized were what troubled him, and, in his own
judgment, detracted from his qualiﬁcations for the high
oﬀice.
The latter part of 1859 and the ﬁrst months of 1860 were
broken by travel through various portions of the country,
during which he delivered some of the best and most
elaborate speeches of his life. He visited Kansas, and was
received by her people with the honor due to one who had
done 
brave 
battle 
for 
her 
freedom. 
On 
entering
Leavenworth, although the weather was most inclement, he
was met by a large procession of people, and escorted to
his hotel, while a dense crowd gathered upon the sidewalks
that lined the passage. All the doors, windows, balconies
and porticos were ﬁlled with men, women and children,
anxious to catch a glimpse of the man whose speeches they
had read, and of whom they had heard so much. The
Leavenworth Register, in its notice of the occasion, said:—
“never did man receive such honors at the hands of our
people, and never did our people pay honors to a better
man, or one who has been a truer friend of Kansas.” Here
he made a speech, and the following paragraph, selected
from it, will show the state of political feeling at the time,
and Mr. Lincoln’s relation to it:
“But you democrats are for the Union; and you greatly
fear the success of the republicans would destroy the
Union. Why? Do the republicans declare against the Union?
Nothing like it. Your own statement of it is that if the black
republicans elect a president, you ‘wont stand it.’ You will
 break up the Union. That will be your act, not ours. To
justify it, you must show that our policy gives you just
cause for such desperate action. Can you do that? When
you attempt it, you will ﬁnd that our policy is exactly the
policy of the men who made the Union — nothing more,
nothing less. Do you really think you are justiﬁed to break
up the government rather than have it administered as it
was by Washington? If you do, you are very unreasonable,
and more reasonable men cannot and will not submit to
you. While you elect presidents, we submit, neither
breaking nor attempting to break up the Union. If we shall
constitutionally elect a president, it will be our duty to see
that you also submit. Old John Brown has been executed for
treason against a state. We cannot object, even though he
agreed with us in thinking slavery wrong. That cannot
excuse violence, bloodshed and treason. It could avail him
nothing that he might think himself right. So, if we
constitutionally elect a president, and, therefore, you
undertake to destroy the Union, it will be our duty to deal
with you as old John Brown has been dealt with. We shall
try to do our duty. We hope and believe that in no section
will a majority so act as to render such extreme measures
necessary.”
In September, Mr. Lincoln paid a visit to Ohio, following
Mr. Douglas, and made two speeches, one at Columbus and
another at Cincinnati. These were the ﬁrst occasions on
which he had ever had the privilege of speaking to Ohio
audiences, and the introductions to these speeches
betrayed his diﬀidence. In Illinois the people knew and
 understood him. He had won a reputation there, but, as he
traveled eastward, he felt himself away from home. The
names of Chase, Corwin and Wade were in his mind —
eminent speakers, with whose voices the people of Ohio
were familiar — and he felt that it would be diﬀicult for him
to establish his position as a political orator when brought
in close comparison with them. His style of speech and
mode of reasoning he knew to be his own; and he had
misgivings touching their reception among those whose
ideas of oratory were derived from other models. But these
misgivings were groundless. His plainness, clearness,
earnestness and thorough comprehension of the merits of
his subject secured for him the honest admiration and
esteem of all who heard him.
At Columbus, he devoted himself mainly to the discussion
of a few points of an elaborate article that had previously
appeared in Harper’s Magazine, from the pen of Judge
Douglas. In this article, the Senator had contrived to
spread throughout the country his views touching the
relations of slavery to the Constitution. It was the old talk
of the senatorial campaign repeated with unimportant
variations, though with some new illustrations. It was
familiar ground with Mr. Lincoln; and, while his speech was
a new one, it would convey but few new ideas to those who
had read his speeches of the previous autumn. Mr. Douglas
had preceded him at Cincinnati, and had alluded to him
there. It was the battle of Illinois repeated upon the soil of
Ohio. The contestants were the same — the questions upon
which they took issue were the same. Popular sovereignty,
 the Dred Scott decision, the right and wrong of slavery,
negro equality, the nationalization of slavery — these
subjects, presented and illustrated in every possible way
already, were again made the themes of discussion by these
two men; and the people of Ohio gave them abundant
audience. One of Mr. Lincoln’s most eﬀective points at
Cincinnati was made upon the assumption that, being near
the Kentucky border, some Kentuckians were present, to
whom he addressed himself in an attempt to prove that
they ought to nominate Judge Douglas at Charleston, as
peculiarly the southern candidate for the presidency. He
told them that Judge Douglas was the only man in the
whole nation who gave them any hold of the free states;
and then he proceeded to show that Mr. Douglas was as
sincerely, and quite as wisely, for them, as they were for
themselves. The points made in this part of the speech
against his old antagonist were very ingenious and very
damaging, so far as they related to his standing in Ohio,
whatever eﬀect they may have had upon the possible
Kentuckians in the audience. After telling them that they
must take Douglas under any circumstance. or be defeated,
and that it was possible, if they did take him, that they
might be beaten, he told them what the opposition
proposed to do with them in case it should be successful in
the approaching presidential contest. The passage is worth
quoting, as it is an embodiment of the policy he
subsequently 
pursued 
when, 
the 
opposition 
having
succeeded, 
he 
found 
himself 
endowed 
with 
the
 responsibilities of oﬀice, as well as a prophecy of the result
of a collision then conditionally proposed.
“I will tell you, so far as I am authorized to speak for the
opposition, what we mean to do with you. We mean to treat
you, as near as we possibly can, as Washington, Jeﬀerson
and Madison treated you. We mean to leave you alone, and
in no way to interfere with your institution; to abide by all
and every compromise of the Constitution, and, in a word,
coming back to the original proposition, to treat you, so far
as degenerated men (if we have degenerated) may,
according to the examples of those noble fathers —
Washington, Jeﬀerson and Madison. We mean to remember
that you are as good as we; that there is no diﬀerence
between us other than the diﬀerence of circumstances. We
mean to recognize and bear in mind always that you have
as good hearts in your bosoms as other people, or as we
claim to have, and treat you accordingly. We mean to marry
your girls when we have a chance — the white ones I mean
— and I have the honor to inform you that I once did have a
chance in that way.
“I have told you what we mean to do. I want to know, now,
when that thing takes place, what you mean to do. I often
hear it intimated that you mean to divide the Union
whenever a republican or anything like it is elected
president of the United States. [A voice— ‘That is so.’] ‘That
is so,’ one of them says; I wonder if he is a Kentuckian? [A
voice— ‘He is a Douglas man.’] Well, then, I want to know
what you are going to do with your half of it? Are you going
 to split the Ohio down through, and push your half oﬀ a
piece? Or are you going to keep it right alongside of us
outrageous fellows? Or are you going to build up a wall
some way between your country and ours, by which that
movable property of yours can’t come over here any more,
to the danger of your losing it? Do you think you can better
yourselves on that subject, by leaving us here under no
obligation whatever to return those specimens of your
movable property that come hither? You have divided the
Union because we would not do right with you, as you
think, upon that subject; when we cease to be under
obligations to do anything for you, how much better oﬀ do
you think you will be? Will you make war upon us and kill
us all? Why, gentlemen, I think you are as gallant and as
brave men as live; that you can ﬁght as bravely in a good
cause, man for man, as any other people living; that you
have shown yourselves capable of this upon various
occasions; but man for man, you are not better than we are,
and there are not so many of you as there are of us. You
will never make much of a hand at whipping us. If we were
fewer in numbers than you, I think that you could whip us;
if we were equal it would likely be a drawn battle; but
being inferior in numbers, you will make nothing by
attempting to master us.”
It is proper to say of Mr. Lincoln and Judge Douglas that
no two men in the nation better apprehended the real
nature of the struggle between the North and South than
they. Mr. Douglas, so far back as the date of the abrogation
of the Missouri Compromise, foresaw the coming conﬂict,
 and by that measure attempted to avert it. His bringing
forward that measure at a time when the South did not
demand it, could have been from no motive other than his
wish to provide ground upon which the northern and
southern 
democracy 
could 
stand 
together, 
in 
the
presidential contest of 1860, when it was his expectation to
be their candidate. Slavery was becoming discontented
under the conviction that it was about to lose its power. It
found itself either legally or practically shut out of the
national domain. It is not at all improbable that the Senator
knew something of the intrigues of those who were bent on
disunion. 
It 
was 
then 
that 
he 
invented 
“popular
sovereignty” — what he was accustomed to call his “great
principle” — and there was indeed nothing foolish in the
tenacity with which he clung to it. It was his only ground of
hope for election to the presidency. He had no personal
responsibility for the Dred Scott decision. It was not for
him to say what the rights of slavery were among the
people of a territory; but he was willing to take the
responsibility of giving slavery and freedom the same
rights. There was great plausibility in his view, and he had
little diﬀiculty in carrying his party with him. It was a sort
of neutral ground — speciously it was catholic ground. His
intention was to give slavery a chance to enter territory
then free, — territory forever set apart to freedom. If he did
not intend to give this chance, his movement was without
motive. On this chance, he intended, without doubt, to
build up a claim upon southern support; but he had a heavy
load to carry, as events proved. Mr. Lincoln was a thorn in
 his side. If he spoke in Illinois, Mr. Lincoln challenged him
to debate, and exposed his fallacies. If he went to Ohio, Mr.
Lincoln followed close upon his heels. If he betook himself
to a New York publication, Mr. Lincoln took measures
practically to meet him there.
Mr. Lincoln’s opportunity to meet his antagonist in the
press of New York came through an invitation to speak in
Brooklyn, at Mr. Beecher’s church. This speech, which it
was ﬁnally concluded should be delivered at the Cooper
Institute, in New York, was by many regarded as the best
he ever made. It was the last elaborate speech of his life,
and was spread broadcast over the country by the press of
the city.
Mr. Lincoln arrived in the great metropolis on the 25th of
February, 1860. He expected, as has been stated, to speak
at Mr. Beecher’s church in Brooklyn, and had prepared his
address with some reference to the place. On learning that
he was expected to speak in New York, he said he must
review his speech. He reached the Astor House on
Saturday, and spent the whole day in making such
modiﬁcations of his manuscript as seemed necessary, under
the change of circumstances. On Sunday, he attended upon
Mr. Beecher’s preaching, and seemed to take great
satisfaction in the services. When waited upon on Monday,
by representative members of the Republican Club, under
whose auspices he was to appear, he was found encased in
a new and badly wrinkled suit of black, which had evidently
spent too much time in a small valise. He talked freely of
the unbecoming dress, and, like a boy, expressed his
 surprise at ﬁnding himself in the great city. On being
applied to for slips containing the speech of the evening, he
showed that he was not familiar with the habit of eastern
speakers of supplying such slips to the press in advance,
and even expressed the doubt whether any of the papers
would care to publish it entire. During the interview, he
referred frequently to Mr. Douglas, and in so kind and
cordial a manner that it was impossible to regard him as
that gentleman’s personal enemy in any sense.
Being at leisure during the day, he accepted an invitation
to ride about the city. Some of the more important streets
were 
passed 
through, 
and 
a 
number 
of 
large
establishments visited. At one place, he met an old
acquaintance from Illinois, whom he addressed with an
inquiry as to how he had fared since leaving the West. “I
have made a hundred thousand dollars, and lost all,” was
his reply. Then turning questioner he said: “How is it with
you, Mr. Lincoln?” “Oh very well,” said he; “I have the
cottage at Springﬁeld, and about eight thousand dollars in
money. If they make me vice-president with Seward, as
some say they will, I hope I shall be able to increase it to
twenty thousand; and that is as much as any man ought to
want.”
In a photographic establishment on Broadway, he met
and was introduced to George Bancroft, the historian. The
contrast which he presented in his person and manner to
this gentleman was certainly not to his advantage; but his
bluﬀ, hearty way carried all before it. He informed Mr.
Bancroft that he was on his way to Massachusetts where he
 had a son in college, who, if report were true, already knew
much more than his father.
He was to speak at Cooper Institute that night, and
having caught a glimpse of the great capital and of its
gigantic interests and aﬀairs, it is not strange that he
should have been oppressed with a sense of his own
insigniﬁcance. It was one of his peculiarities that, while he
was the subject of the most exalted aspirations and
ambitions, and the ready undertaker of the highest and
most diﬀicult tasks, he always bore about with him a sense
of his imperfections, and experienced a sort of surprise at
every success. Indeed, his triumphs became the subjects of
his 
study. 
They 
really 
puzzled 
him; 
and 
frequent
conversations with others betrayed his desire to ﬁnd the
secrets of his own power.
But Mr. Lincoln was not more curious concerning
himself, or concerning the new scenes among which he
found himself, than the people of New York were
concerning him. There was a great and general curiosity to
see and hear him; and when he entered the hall he found
the platform covered with the republican leaders of the city,
and of Brooklyn, and, in his audience, many ladies. The
venerable 
William 
Cullen 
Bryant 
presided, 
and 
in
introducing the speaker said: “It is a grateful oﬀice that I
perform, in introducing to you an eminent citizen of the
West, hitherto known to you only by reputation.” There was
nothing in the introduction, however, which pleased Mr.
Lincoln so much as Mr. Bryant’s statement in the next day’s
Evening Post, (of which he was the editor) that for the
 publication of such words of weight and wisdom as those of
Mr. Lincoln, the pages of that journal were “indeﬁnitely
elastic.”
Mr. Lincoln began his address in a low, monotonous tone,
but gaining conﬁdence in the respectful stillness, his tones,
that had long been keyed to out-of-door eﬀorts, rose in
strength and gained in clearness, until every ear heard
every word. His style of speech was so fresh, his mode of
statement was so simple, his illustrations were so quaint
and peculiar, that the audience eagerly drank in every
sentence. The backwoods orator had found one of the most
appreciative audiences he had ever addressed, and the
audience gave abundant testimony that they were listening
to the utterances of a master.
The speech which Mr. Lincoln made on this occasion
must have cost him much labor in the preparation. The
historical study which it involved — study that led into
unexplored ﬁelds, and ﬁelds very diﬀicult of exploration —
must have been very great; but it was intimate and
complete. Gentlemen who afterward engaged in preparing
the speech for circulation as a campaign document were
much surprised by the amount of research that it required
to be able to make the speech, and were very much
wearied with the work of verifying its historical statements
in detail. They were weeks in ﬁnding the works consulted
by him.
As a text for the subject of his discourse, he took the
words of Senator Douglas, uttered in a speech at
Columbus, Ohio, the previous autumn, viz: “Our fathers
 when they framed the government under which we live,
understood this question (the question of slavery) just as
well, and even better, than we do now.” To this statement
the speaker agreed, so that he and the senator had a
common starting point for discussion. The inquiry was,
simply: what was the understanding those then had of the
question mentioned? As questions preliminary to this
inquiry he gave these: “what is the frame of government
under which we live?” and “who were our fathers who
framed the Constitution?” The frame of government is the
Constitution itself, consisting of the original, framed in
1787, and twelve subsequent amendments, ten of which
were framed in 1789. The thirty-nine men who framed the
original Constitution are legitimately to be called the
fathers, and these he took as “our fathers who framed the
government under which We live.” The question fully
written out, which Senator Douglas thought these men
understood better than we do, was: “Does the proper
division of local from federal authority, or anything in the
Constitution, forbid the federal government control as to
slavery in our federal territories?”
From this point Mr. Lincoln went on to draw from the
history of Congress every recorded act of these thirty-nine
men on the question of slavery. Question after question
upon which these men acted was stated in brief; and it was
found that, of the thirty-nine fathers, twenty-one, a clear
majority, so acted that they would be guilty of perjury if
they did not believe that the federal government had power
to control slavery in the territories. Two voted against
 special measures, but in such a way as not to show whether
they believed the government possessed this power or not.
Of the remaining sixteen, there is no record, but it is fair to
conclude they had the same understanding with the
majority, particularly as they included some of the most
noted anti-slavery men of the time, among whom were
Benjamin Franklin, Alexander Hamilton and Gouverneur
Morris.
The historical argument was entirely unanswerable. It
was a solid and logical statement of facts and conclusions
that no sane man would undertake to controvert. The ﬁrst
third of the speech was devoted to this historical argument,
and the remainder in about equal proportions to addresses
to the southern people, and to the republicans. His remarks
addressed particularly to the South were in the kindest
spirit, but they were charged with a force of argument and
statement that is wonderful. It is well that Mr. Lincoln be
permitted. to state his own attitude toward those to whom
he was destined to come into such strange and momentous
relations. He said:
“You say we are sectional. We deny it. That makes an
issue; and the burden of proof is upon you. You produce
your proof; and what is it? Why, that our party has no
existence in your section — gets no votes in your section.
The fact is substantially true; but does it prove the issue? If
it does, then, in case we should, without change of
principle, begin to get votes in your section, we should
thereby cease to be sectional. You cannot escape this
conclusion; and yet, are you willing to abide by it? If you
 are, you will probably soon ﬁnd that we have ceased to be
sectional, for we shall get votes in your section this very
year. You will then begin to discover, as the truth plainly is,
that your proof does not touch the issue. The fact that we
get no votes in your section is a fact of your making, and
not of ours. And if there be fault in that fact, that fault is
primarily yours, and remains so until you show that we
repel you by some wrong principle or practice. If we do
repel you by any wrong principle or practice, the fault is
ours; but this brings us to where you ought to have started
— to a discussion of the right or wrong of our principle. If
our principle, put in practice, would wrong your section for
the beneﬁt of ours, or for any other object, then our
principle, and we with it, are sectional, and are justly
opposed and denounced as such. Meet us, then, on the
question of whether our principle, put in practice, would
wrong your section; and so meet it as if it were possible
that something may be said on our side. Do you accept the
challenge? No? Then you really believe that the principle
which our fathers, who framed the government under
which we live, thought so clearly right as to adopt it, and
indorse it again and again upon their oﬀicial oaths, is, in
fact, so clearly wrong as to demand your condemnation
without a moment’s consideration.
“Some of you delight to ﬂaunt in our faces the warning
against sectional parties given by Washington in his
Farewell Address. Less than eight years before Washington
gave that warning, he had, as President of the United
States, approved and signed an act of Congress enforcing
 the prohibition of slavery in the Northwestern Territory,
which act embodied the policy of the government upon that
subject, up to and at the very moment he penned that
warning; and about one year after he penned it he wrote
Lafayette that he considered that prohibition a wise
measure, expressing, in the same connection, his hope that
we should some time have a confederacy of free states.
“Bearing this in mind, and seeing that sectionalism has
since arisen upon this same subject, is that warning a
weapon in your hands against us, or in our hands against
you? Could Washington himself speak, would he cast the
blame of that sectionalism upon us, who sustain his policy,
or upon you, who repudiate it? We respect that warning of
Washington, and we commend it to you, together with his
example pointing to the right application of it.
“But you say you are conservative — eminently
conservative — while we are revolutionary, destructive, or
something of the sort. What is conservatism? Is it not
adherence to the old and tried against the new and
untried? We stick to, contend for, the identical old policy on
the point in controversy which was adopted by our fathers
who framed the government under which we live; while
you, with one accord, reject, and scout, and spit upon that
old policy, and insist upon substituting something new.
True, you disagree among yourselves as to what that
substitute shall be. You have considerable variety of new
propositions and plans, but you are unanimous in rejecting
and denouncing the old policy of the fathers. Some of you
are for reviving the foreign slave-trade; some for a
 congressional slave-code for the territories; some for
Congress forbidding the territories to prohibit slavery
within their limits; some for maintaining slavery in the
territories through the Judiciary; some for the ‘gur-reat
pur-rinciple’ that, ‘if one man would enslave another, no
third man should object,’ fantastically called ‘popular
sovereignty;’ but never a man among you in favor of federal
prohibition of slavery in federal territories, according to the
practice of our fathers who framed the government under
which we live. Not one of all your various plans can show a
precedent or an advocate in the century within which our
government originated. Consider, then, whether your claim
of conservatism for yourselves, and your charge of
destructiveness against us, are based on the most clear and
stable foundations.
“Again, you say we have made the slavery question more
prominent than it formerly was. We deny it. We admit that
it is more prominent, but we deny that we made it so. It
was not we, but you, who discarded the old policy of the
fathers. We resisted, and still resist, your innovation; and
thence comes the greater prominence of the question.
Would you have that question reduced to its former
proportions? Go back to that old policy. What has been will
be again, under the same conditions. If you would have the
peace of the old times, re-adopt the precepts and policy of
the old times.”
Alluding to their threats to break up the Union if slavery
should be shut out of the territories, he said:
 “In that supposed event, you say you will destroy the
Union; and then you say the great crime of having
destroyed it will be upon us! That is cool. A highwayman
holds a pistol to my ear, and mutters through his teeth:
‘Stand and deliver, or I shall kill you, and then you will be a
murderer!’ To be sure, what the robber demanded of me —
my money — was my own; and I had a clear right to keep it;
but it was no more my own than my vote is my own; and
threat of death to me to extort my money, and threat of
destruction to the Union to extort my vote, can scarcely be
distinguished in principle.”
Certainly this illustration disposed of the whole question
as to who would be responsible for the destruction of the
Union, under the circumstances stated.
His words to the republicans were words of profoundest
wisdom. He told them that nothing would satisfy the South
but to cease calling slavery wrong, and to join with them in
calling it right, and to do it thoroughly by acts as well as
words. “We must arrest and return their slaves with greedy
pleasure. We must pull down our free state constitutions.
The whole atmosphere must be disinfected from all taint of
opposition to slavery, before they will cease to believe that
all their troubles proceed from us.” He continued: “I am
quite aware they do not state their case precisely in this
way. Most of them would probably say to us, ‘let us alone,
do nothing to us, and say what you please about slavery.’
But we do let them alone — have never disturbed them —
so that, after all, it is what we say that dissatisﬁes them.
They will continue to accuse us of doing until we cease
 saying.” After saying that we could not consistently deny
the South in its most extreme demands, on any ground
except the wrong of slavery, he put the case forcibly, as
follows: “If slavery is right, all words, acts, laws, and
constitutions against it are themselves wrong, and should
be silenced and swept away. If it is right, we cannot justly
object to its nationality — its universality; if it is wrong,
they 
cannot 
justly 
insist 
upon 
its 
extension, 
its
enlargement. All they ask, we could readily grant if we
thought slavery right; all we ask, they could as readily
grant if they thought slavery wrong. Their thinking it right
and our thinking it wrong is the precise fact upon which
depends the whole controversy.” The closing paragraph is
equally remarkable for its wit and wisdom — its pith and
patriotism:
“Wrong as we think slavery is, we can yet aﬀord to let it
alone where is is, because that much is due to the necessity
arising from its actual presence in the nation; but can we,
while our votes will prevent it, allow it to spread into the
national territories, and to overrun us here in these free
states? If our sense of duty forbids this, then let us stand by
our duty, fearlessly and eﬀectively. Let us be diverted by
none of those sophistical contrivances wherewith we are so
industriously plied and belabored — contrivances such as
groping for some middle ground between the right and the
wrong, vain as the search for a man who should be neither
a living man nor a dead man — such a policy of ‘don’t care’
on a question about which all true men do care — such as
Union appeals beseeching true Union men to yield to
 disunionists, reversing the divine rule, and calling not the
sinners, 
but 
the 
righteous 
to 
repentance-such 
as
invocations to Washington, imploring men to unsay what
Washington said, and undo what Washington did. Neither
let us be slandered from our duty by false accusations
against us, nor frightened from it by menaces of
destruction to the Government, nor of dungeons to
ourselves. Let us have faith that right makes might, and in
that faith, let us, to the end, dare to do our duty, as we
understand it.”
The speech was, in the popular acceptation of the
phrase, a great success. Through all his passages of close
and crowded reasoning, his audience followed him with an
interest that produced the profoundest silence, and at
every triumphant establishment of a point broke out into
sudden and hearty applause. Those who came from motives
of curiosity went away thoughtful. Many who had entered
the hall in doubt as to their duty, went away with their path
bright before them. Most of all were the New York
politicians aﬀected; and it is not to be doubted that the
impressions of that evening left them convinced that if Mr.
Seward, the man of their choice, should be set aside, as the
republican candidate for the presidency, Mr. Lincoln, the
favorite of the West, would be abundantly worthy of their
support.
At the conclusion of the speech, a few friends took the
speaker to the rooms of the Atheneum Club for supper. Mr.
Lincoln appreciated his success, and was in good humor
over it. He was as happy at the table as he was upon the
 platform — full of good humor, and abounding with jokes
and pleasant stories. Throwing oﬀ all reserve, and opening
his heart like a boy, he talked long and late; and when he
parted with his friends for the night they were as much
charmed with the man as they had been instructed by his
speech and entertained by his conversation.
The papers of the city were full of his address and with
comments upon it the next day. The Illinois lawyer was a
lion. Critics read the speech, and marveled at its pure and
compact English, its felicity of statement and its faultless
logic. It was read during the day not only by New York but
by nearly all New England.
After the speech, he spent several days in New York,
familiarizing himself with its wonders. Some of his
explorations he made alone, and on one occasion found his
way into the Sunday School of the Five Points Mission. The
superintendent noticing his look of interest in the
proceedings, invited him to speak to the children. His
remarks interested his young audience so much that on
every attempt to stop they cried out “go on, oh! do go on!”
None knew who he was, and as he turned to depart, the
superintendent inquired his name. “Abraham Lincoln of
Illinois,” was the answer.
Invitations were received by Mr. Lincoln from many
places in New England, to speak on political questions. On
the ﬁfth of March, he spoke at Hartford, in the city hall,
and was escorted to the hall by the ﬁrst company of “Wide-
Awakes” ever organized in the country. This organization
became universal throughout the free states, but was
 intended only for campaign service. He had an immense
audience in Hartford, and produced a powerful impression.
On the following day he was waited upon by a number of
prominent citizens, and visited several objects of interest in
the city, among which were the armories of Colt and Sharp.
On the sixth of March, he spoke at New Haven, at Meriden
on the seventh, at Woonsocket, Rhode Island, on the eighth,
at Norwich, Connecticut, on the ninth, and at Bridgeport on
the tenth. His speaking was always to immense audiences.
Connecticut was that year carried by the republicans by
about ﬁve hundred majority, against the most powerful
eﬀorts of the democrats — a fact which was due more to
the speeches of Mr. Lincoln than to any other cause.
Some very interesting reminiscences of this trip were
communicated to the public in 1864, by Rev. John P.
Gulliver of Norwich, who listened to his address in that city.
On the morning following the speech, he met Mr. Lincoln
upon a train of cars, and entered into conversation with
him. In speaking of his speech, Mr. Gulliver remarked to
Mr. Lincoln that he thought it the most remarkable one he
ever heard. “Are you sincere in what you say?” inquired Mr.
Lincoln. “I mean every word of it,” replied the minister.
“Indeed, sir,” he continued, “I learned more of the art of
public speaking last evening than I could from a whole
course of lectures on rhetoric.” Then Mr. Lincoln informed
him of “a most extraordinary circumstance” that occurred
at New Haven a few days previously. A professor of rhetoric
in Yale College, he had been told, came to hear him, took
notes of his speech, and gave a lecture on it to his class the
 following day; and, not satisﬁed with that, followed him to
Meriden the next evening, and heard him again for the
same purpose. All this seemed to Mr. Lincoln to be “very
extraordinary.” He had been suﬀiciently astonished by his
success at the West, but he had no expectation of any
marked success at the East, particularly among literary and
learned men. “Now,” said Mr. Lincoln, “I should like very
much to know what it was in my speech which you thought
so remarkable, and which interested my friend the
professor so much?” Mr. Gulliver’s answer was: “The
clearness of your statements, the unanswerable style of
your reasoning, and, especially, your illustrations, which
were romance and pathos and fun and logic all welded
together.”
After Mr. Gulliver had fully satisﬁed his curiosity by a
further exposition of the politician’s peculiar power, Mr.
Lincoln said, “I am much obliged to you for this. I have
been wishing for a long time to ﬁnd some one who would
make this analysis for me. It throws light on a subject
which has been dark to me. I can understand very readily
how such a power as you have ascribed to me will account
for the eﬀect which seems to be produced by my speeches.
I hope you have not been too ﬂattering in your estimate.
Certainly I have had a most wonderful success for a man of
my limited education.” Then Mr. Gulliver inquired into the
processes by which he had acquired his education, and was
rewarded with many interesting details. When they were
about to part, the minister said: “Mr. Lincoln, may I say one
thing to you before we separate?” “Certainly; anything you
 please,” was the response. “You have just spoken,” said Mr.
Gulliver, “of the tendency of political life in Washington to
debase the moral convictions of our representatives there,
by the admixture of considerations of mere political
expediency. You have become, by the controversy with Mr.
Douglas, one of our leaders in this great struggle with
slavery, which is undoubtedly the struggle of the nation and
the age. What I would like to say is this, and I say it with a
full heart: Be true to your principles, and we will be true to
you, and God will be true to us all.” Mr. Lincoln, touched by
the earnestness of his interlocutor, took his hand in both of
his own, and, with his face full of sympathetic light,
exclaimed: “I say amen to that! amen to that!”
After visiting his son at Harvard College, making many
acquaintances among the prominent men of New England,
and looking with curious eyes upon New England scenes,
and 
observing 
with 
his 
native 
shrewdness 
the
characteristics of New England habits and manners, he
turned his face homewards, spending a Sabbath in New
York while on the way, and again attending Mr. Beecher’s
church.
One thing, at least, he had learned by this visit: that the
people of the older states judge a man by the same rule
that prevails on an Illinois prairie — by what he is, and
what he can do, and not by the cloth he wears, the
knowledge he has acquired, the wealth he possesses, or the
blood that ﬂows in his veins. He had been accepted as an
honest, fresh, original and powerful man; and he went
home gratiﬁed. Could he have made his visit longer, and
 been seen more generally by the people, it would not have
been necessary for them to wait so long before knowing
how great and good a man the providence of God had given
to be their ruler.
