  ha ter III.
THOMAS LINCOLN HAD raised his little family; and the
children of his wife were also grown to woman’s and man’s
estate. There had indeed been three weddings in the family.
Sarah Lincoln, the daughter, was married to Aaron Grigsby,
a young man living in the vicinity, and two of Mrs. Lincoln’s
daughters had left the Lincoln cabin for new homes. The
sister of Abraham had been married but a year, however,
when she died, and thus a new grief was inﬂicted upon the
sensitive heart of her brother. Her marriage occurred in
1822; and as she was born in 1808, she could have been
only fourteen years old when she became a wife. It is not
remarkable that the child found an early grave.
During the last two years of their residence in Indiana, a
general discontent had seized upon the family concerning
their location. The region at that day was an unhealthy one,
and there could be no progress in agricultural pursuits
without a great outlay of labor in clearing away the heavy
timber which burdened all the fertile soil. At the same time,
reports were rife of the superior qualities of the prairie
lands of Illinois. There, by the sides of the water-courses,
and in the edges of the timber, were almost illimitable
farms that called for nothing but the plough and hoe to
make them immediately productive. Dennis Hanks, a
relative of the ﬁrst Mrs. Lincoln, was sent to the new
 region to reconnoiter, and returned with a glowing account
of the new country. It is probable that if Thomas Lincoln
had been alone he would have remained at the old home,
but there was young life to be taken into the account. The
new sons-in-law of Mrs. Lincoln, as well as Abraham, were
doubtless averse to repeating the severe experiences of the
father, and with fresh life and enterprise desired a new and
more inviting ﬁeld of operations.
Mr. Lincoln sold out his squatter’s claim in Indiana, and,
on the ﬁrst of March, 1830, less than a month after
Abraham had completed his twenty-ﬁrst year, he started for
the land of promise in company with his family and the
sons-in-law and two daughters of his wife. Their journey
was diﬀicult and tedious in the extreme. They found the
riven swollen by the spring rains, and through such mud as
only the rich soil of the West can produce, the ox-teams
dragged the wagons, loaded with the entire personal
eﬀects of the emigrants. One of these teams was driven by
Abraham. Taking a northwesterly course, they struck
diagonally across the southern part of Indiana, making
toward the central portion of Illinois. After a journey of two
hundred miles, which they made in ﬁfteen days, they
entered Macon County in that state, and there halted. The
elder Lincoln selected a spot on the north side of the
Sangamon River, at the junction of the timber land and
prairie, about ten miles westerly of Decatur. Here, Abraham
assisted his father in building a log cabin, and in getting
the family into a condition for comfortable life. The cabin,
which still stands, was made of hewed timber, and near it
 were built a smoke-house and stable. All the tools they had
to work with were a common ax, a broad ax, a hand-saw,
and a “drawer knife.” The doors and ﬂoor were made of
puncheons and the gable ends of the structure boarded up
with plank “rived” by Abraham’s hand out of oak timber.
The nails used — and they were very few — were all
brought from their old home in Indiana. When the cabin
and outbuildings were completed, Abraham set to work and
helped to split rails enough to fence in a lot of ten acres,
and built the fence. After breaking up the piece of inclosed
prairie, and seeing it planted with corn, he turned over the
new home to his father, and announced his intention to
seek or make his own fortune. He did not leave the region
immediately, however, but worked for hire among the
neighboring farmers, picking up enough to keep himself
clothed, and looking for better chances. It is remembered
that during this time he broke up ﬁfty acres of prairie with
four yoke of oxen, and that he spent most of the winter
following in splitting rai1s and chopping wood. No one
seems to know who Mr. Lincoln worked for during this ﬁrst
summer, but a little incident in the pastoral labors of Rev.
A. Hale of Springﬁeld, Illinois, will perhaps indicate his
employer. There seems to be no room for the incident
afterwards in his life, and it is undoubtedly associated with
his ﬁrst summer in Illinois. Mr. Hale, in May, 1861, went
out about seven miles from his home to visit a sick lady, and
found there a Mrs. Brown who had come in as a neighbor.
Mr. Lincoln’s name having been mentioned, Mrs. Brown
said: “Well, I remember Mr. Linken. He worked with my old
 man thirty-four year ago, and made a crap. We lived on the
same farm where we live now, and he worked all the
season, and made a crap of corn, and the next winter they
hauled the crap all the way to Galena, and sold it for two
dollars and a half a bushel. At that time there was no public
houses, and travelers were obliged to stay at any house
along the road that could take them in. One evening a right
smart looking man rode up to the fence, and asked my old
man if he could get to stay over night. ‘Well,’ said Mr.
Brown, ‘we can feed your crittur, and give you something to
eat, but we can’t lodge you unless you can sleep on the
same bed with the hired man.’ The man hesitated, and
asked ‘Where is he?’ ‘Well,’ said Mr. Brown, ‘you can come
and see him.’ So the man got down from his crittur, and Mr.
Brown took him around to where, in the shade of the house,
Mr. Lincoln lay his full length on the ground, with an open
book before him. ‘There,’ said Mr. Brown, pointing at him,
‘he is.’ The stranger looked at him a minute, and said,
‘Well, I think he’ll do,’ and he staid and slept with the
President of the United States.”
There are some mistakes in this story. Mr. Lincoln
worked for Mr. Taylor, who owned the farm, and boarded
with Mr. Brown. There is an evident mistake in the date of
the incident, for it puts Mr. Lincoln into Illinois three years
or more before he removed from Indiana. Of the fact that
he worked a summer, or part of a summer, on this farm,
there is no doubt; and it is strongly probable that it was the
ﬁrst summer he spent in Illinois.
 The expectation of the family to ﬁnd a more healthy
location than the one they had left was sadly disappointed.
In the autumn of that year, all were aﬄicted with fever and
ague. This was a new enemy, and they were much
discouraged; but no steps for relief or removal could be
taken then. They determined, however, to leave the county
at the ﬁrst opportunity. In the meantime, the winter
descended, and it proved to be the severest season that had
been known in the new state. It is still remembered for the
enormous amount of snow that fell. In the following spring,
the father left the Sangamon for a better locality in Coles
County, where he lived long enough to see his son one of
the foremost men of the new state, to receive from him
many testimonials of ﬁlial aﬀection, and to complete his
seventy-third year. He died on the 17th day of January,
1851.
A man who used to work with Abraham occasionally
during his ﬁrst year in Illinois, says that at that time he was
the roughest looking person be ever saw. He was tall,
angular and ungainly, and wore trousers made of ﬂax and
tow, cut tight at the ankle, and out at both knees. He was
known to be very poor, but he was a welcome guest in
every house in the neighborhood. This informant speaks of
splitting rails with Abraham, and reveals some interesting
facts concerning wages. Money was a commodity never
reckoned upon. Abraham split rails to get clothing, and he
made a bargain with Mrs. Nancy Miller to split four
hundred rails for every yard of brown jeans, dyed with
white walnut bark, that would be necessary to make him a
 pair of trousers. In these days he used to walk ﬁve, six and
seven miles to his work.
He left home before his father removed to Coles County,
but he did not cut entirely loose from the family until this
removal. Then he was ready for any opening to business,
and it soon came. During the winter of the deep snow, one
Denton Oﬀutt, a trader, who belonged in Lexington,
Kentucky, 
applied 
to 
him, 
John 
D. 
Johnston, 
his
stepmother’s son, and John Hanks, a relative of his own
mother, to take a ﬂat-boat to New Orleans. Abraham had
already made the trip, and was regarded as a desirable
man for the service. A bargain was made, and the three
men agreed to join Oﬀutt at Springﬁeld, the present capital
of the state, as soon as the snow should be gone. The snow
melted about the ﬁrst of March, but the accumulation had
been so great that the low country was heavily ﬂooded.
Finding they could not make the journey on foot, they
purchased a large canoe, and proceeded along the
Sangamon River in it. They found Oﬀutt at Springﬁeld, but
learned that he had failed to buy a boat at Beardstown, as
he had expected. As all were disappointed, they ﬁnally
settled upon an arrangement by which young Lincoln,
Hanks and Johnston were to build a boat on Sangamon
River, at Sangamon town, about seven miles north-west of
Springﬁeld. For this work they were to receive twelve
dollars a month each. When the boat was ﬁnished, (and
every plank of it was sawed by hand with a whip-saw,) it
was launched on the Sangamon, and ﬂoated to a point
below New Salem, in Menard (then Sangamon) County,
 where a drove of hogs was to be taken on board. At this
time, the hogs of the region ran wild, as they do now in
portions of the border states. Some of them were savage,
and all, after the manner of swine, were diﬀicult to
manage. They had, however, been gathered and penned,
but not an inch could they be made to move toward the
boat. All the ordinary resources were exhausted in the
attempts to get them on board. There was but one
alternative, and this Abraham adopted. He actually carried
them on board, one by one. His long arms and great
strength enabled him to grasp them as in a vise, and to
transfer them rapidly from the shore to the boat. They then
took the boat to New Orleans substantially on the original
contract, though Hanks, ﬁnding that he would be obliged to
be absent from his family longer than he expected, left the
boat at St. Louis, and came back.
The voyage was successfully accomplished, and so great
was the satisfaction of Lincoln’s employer, that he
immediately proposed to him a diﬀerent and higher grade
of employment. Oﬀutt had a store at New Salem, and a
mill. These he proposed to place in Abraham’s care. His
previous clerks, during his long absences, had not only
cheated him, but, by their insolence and dissipated habits,
had driven away his customers. Oﬀutt met Lincoln on the
previous winter an entire stranger, but, during a brief
intercourse, he had become impressed with his capacity
and honesty. So Abraham became a clerk in a pioneer
“store.” He had not many personal graces to exhibit there,
but he at once became a center of attraction. Oﬀutt’s old
 customers came back, new ones were acquired, and all the
business of the store was well performed.
It was while performing the duties of this new position
that several incidents occurred which illustrated the young
man’s characteristics. He could not rest for an instant
under the consciousness that he had, even unwittingly,
defrauded anybody. On one occasion he sold a woman a
little bill of goods amounting in value, by the reckoning, to
two dollars and six and a quarter cents. He received the
money, and the woman went away. On adding the items of
the bill again, to make himself sure of correctness, he
found that he had taken six and a quarter cents too much.
It was night, and closing and locking the store, he started
out on foot, a distance of two or three miles, for the house
of his defrauded customer, and delivering over to her the
sum whose possession had so much troubled him, went
home satisﬁed. On another occasion, just as he was closing
the store for the night, a woman entered, and asked for half
a pound of tea. The tea was weighed out and paid for, and
the store was left for the night. The next morning, Abraham
entered to begin the duties of the day, when he discovered
a four-ounce weight on the scales. He saw at once that he
had made a mistake, and, shutting the store, he took a long
walk before breakfast to deliver the remainder of the tea.
These are very humble incidents, but they illustrate the
man’s perfect conscientiousness — his sensitive honesty —
better perhaps than they would if they were of greater
moment.
 Another incident occurred in this store which illustrates
other traits of his character. While showing goods to two or
three women, a bully came up and began to talk in an
oﬀensive manner, using much profanity, and evidently
wishing to provoke a quarrel. Lincoln leaned over the
counter, and begged him, as ladies were present, not to
indulge in such talk. The bully retorted that the opportunity
had come for which he had long sought, and he would like
to see the man who could hinder him from saying anything
he might choose to say. Lincoln, still cool, told him that if
he would wait until the ladies retired, he would hear what
he had to say, and give him any satisfaction he desired. As
soon as the women were gone, the man became furious.
Lincoln heard his boasts and his abuse for a time, and
ﬁnding that he was not to be put oﬀ without a ﬁght, said—
“Well, if you must be whipped, I suppose I may as well whip
you as any other man.” This was just what the bully had
been seeking, he said, so out of doors they went, and
Lincoln made short work with him. He threw him upon the
ground, held him there as if he had been a child, and
gathering some “smart-weed” which grew upon the spot,
rubbed it into his face and eyes, until the fellow bellowed
with pain. Lincoln did all this without a particle of anger,
and when the job was ﬁnished, went immediately for water,
washed his victim’s face, and did everything he could to
alleviate his distress. The upshot of the matter was that the
man became his fast and life-long friend, and was a better
man from that day. It was impossible then, and it always
 remained impossible, for Lincoln to cherish resentment or
revenge.
There lived at this time, in and around New Salem, a
band of rollicking fellows or, more properly, roystering
rowdies, known as “The Clary’s Grove Boys.” The special
tie that united them was physical courage and prowess.
These fellows, although they embraced in their number
many men who have since become respectable and
inﬂuential, were wild and rough beyond toleration in any
community not made up like that which produced them.
They pretended to be “regulators,” and were the terror of
all who did not acknowledge their rule; and their mode of
securing allegiance was by ﬂogging every man who failed
to acknowledge it. They took it upon themselves to try the
mettle of every new comer, and to learn the sort of stuﬀ he
was made of. Some one of their number was appointed to
ﬁght, wrestle, or run a foot-race, with each incoming
stranger. Of course, Abraham Lincoln was obliged to pass
the ordeal.
Perceiving that be was a man who would not easily be
ﬂoored, they selected their champion, Jack Armstrong, and
imposed upon him the task of laying Lincoln upon his back.
There is no evidence that Lincoln was an unwilling party in
the sport, for it was what he had always been accustomed
to. The bout was entered upon, but Armstrong soon
discovered that he had met with more than his match. The
“Boys” were looking on, and, seeing that their champion
was likely to get the worst of it, did after the manner of
such irresponsible bands. They gathered around Lincoln,
 struck and disabled him, and then Armstrong, by “legging”
him, got him down.
Most men would have been indignant, not to say
furiously angry, under such foul treatment as this; but if
Lincoln was either, he did not show it. Getting up in perfect
good humor, he fell to laughing over his discomﬁture, and
joking about it. They had all calculated upon making him
angry, and then they intended, with the amiable spirit
which characterized the “Clary’s Grove Boys,” to give him a
terrible drubbing. They were disappointed, and, in their
admiration of him, immediately invited him to become one
of the company. Strange as it may seem, this was the
turning point, apparently, in Lincoln’s life, a fact which will
appear as our narrative progresses.
It was while young Lincoln was engaged in the duties of
Oﬀutt’s store that he commenced the study of English
grammar. There was not a text-book to be obtained in the
neighborhood, but hearing that there was a copy of
Kirkham’s grammar in the possession of a person seven or
eight miles distant, he walked to his house and succeeded
in borrowing it. L.M. Green, a lawyer of Petersburg, in
Menard County, says that every time he visited New Salem,
at this period, Lincoln took him out upon a hill, and asked
him to explain some point in Kirkham that had given him
trouble. After having mastered the book, he remarked to a
friend, that if that was what they called a science, he
thought he could “subdue another.” Mr. Green says that Mr.
Lincoln’s talk at this time showed that he was beginning to
think of a great life, and a great destiny. Lincoln said to
 him, on one occasion, that all his family seemed to have
good sense, but, somehow, none had ever become
distinguished. He thought that perhaps he might become
so. He had talked, he said, with men who had the
reputation of being great men, but he could not see that
they diﬀered much from others. During this year, he was
also much engaged with debating clubs, often walking six
or seven miles to attend them. One of these clubs held its
meetings at an old store-house in New Salem, and the ﬁrst
speech young Lincoln ever made was made here. He used
to call the exercise “practicing polemics.” As these clubs
were composed principally of men of no education
whatever, some of their “polemics” are remembered as the
most laughable of farces. His favorite newspaper, at the
time, was the Louisville Journal, a paper which he received
regularly by mail, and paid for during a number of years
when he had not money enough to dress decently. He liked
its politics, and was particularly delighted with its wit and
humor, of which he had the keenest appreciation. When out
of the store, he was always busy in the pursuit of
knowledge. One gentleman who met him during this
period, says that the ﬁrst time he saw him he was lying on a
trundle-bed, covered with books and papers, and rocking a
cradle with his foot. Of the amount of uncovered space
between the extremities of his trousers and the top of his
socks which this informant observed, there shall be no
mention. 
The 
whole 
scene, 
however, 
was 
entirely
characteristic — Lincoln reading and studying, and at the
same time helping his landlady by quieting her child.
 During the year that Lincoln was in Denton Oﬀutt’s
store, that gentleman, whose business was somewhat
widely and unwisely spread about the country, ceased to
prosper in his ﬁnances, and ﬁnally failed. The store was
shut up, the mill was closed, and Abraham Lincoln was out
of business. The year had been one of great advances, in
many 
respects. 
He 
had 
made 
new 
and 
valuable
acquaintances, read many books, mastered the grammar of
his own tongue, won multitudes of friends, and become
ready for a step still further in advance. Those who could
appreciate brains respected him, and those whose highest
ideas of a man related to his muscles were devoted to him.
Every one trusted him. It was while he was performing the
duties of the store that he acquired the soubriquet “Honest
Abe” — a characterization that he never dishonored, and an
abbreviation that he never outgrew. He was judge,
arbitrator, referee, umpire, authority, in all disputes, games
and matches of man-ﬂesh and horse-ﬂesh; a paciﬁcator in
all quarrels; every body’s friend; the best natured, the most
sensible, the best informed, the most modest and
unassuming, the kindest, gentlest, roughest, strongest, best
young fellow in all New Salem and the region round about.
