  ha ter    .
MR. LINCOLN HAD reached the pinnacle of his life. By
careful and painful steps he had mounted from the foot of
the ladder of American society to its topmost round. He had
done this by the forces of his nature and character, without
adventitious aids, or favoring circumstances. He had
accomplished the greatest work for his country and for
mankind that had ever been committed to a mortal to
perform. A great nation had been saved from wreck by his
hands; a race had been disenthralled by his word and his
policy; and a popular government had been established in
the faith and aﬀections of its subjects, and in the respect of
the governments of the world. His enemies had been
silenced, his friends had been reassured, his motives and
his policy had been vindicated, and his person had come to
be regarded with tender aﬀection by tens of millions of
men. Up to him were wafted the acclamations of millions of
freemen. 
Across 
the 
ocean 
came 
appreciative 
and
plauditory words from other continents. Benedictions were
breathed upon him by multitudes of humble people whom
he had enfranchised. Is it strange that the instincts of his
own logical mind should forecast death as the next logical
step in such a course?
Throughout all the later months and years of the war, he
had freely said that he did not expect to outlast the
 rebellion; but in the ﬂush of triumph, — in his large, loving,
and liberal plans for the good of the people whom the
fortunes of war had left at his feet, — in his dreams of the
future Union and harmony of the states, — he forgot this,
and was hopeful and happy. He talked to his friends, his
cabinet, and his family cheerfully of the future, and
gratefully of the past. He had no resentment to gratify, no
revenge to inﬂict, no malicious passion that clamored for
indulgence. The thought of being able to prove to the
people of the South that he owed them no ill-will, and the
determination to deal with them as gently as would be for
the public safety, ﬁlled his magnanimous spirit with the
sweetest satisfaction.
It is hardly to be supposed that the possibility of
assassination was ever long absent from his mind, during
the four years of his presidency. The threats began before
he left Springﬁeld for Washington. The attempt to
assassinate him was made upon the train that bore him
from his home. It was repeated upon that which bore him
from Cincinnati. He ran through the meshes of a conspiracy
against his life at Baltimore. He was in the constant receipt
of threatening letters; and these were kept in a package by
themselves, appropriately labeled. He did not permit these,
however, to trouble him, regarding them as only the
malicious missives of bullies and cowards. He undoubtedly
regarded himself as always in a dangerous position, though
the fact had no tendency to make him careful of himself. He
reasoned upon this, as upon other subjects, and could
never see that anything would be gained by his death. He
 had no comprehension of the malice that would delight in
his assassination, as a measure of revenge. He supposed
that every man would require some rational purpose to be
answered by so terrible a crime. “If they kill me,” said he,
on one occasion, “the next man will be just as bad for them;
and, in a country like this, where our habits are simple, and
must be, assassination is always possible, and will come if
they are determined upon it.” He went to and from the War
Department with perfect freedom; drove out to the
Soldiers’ Home, his summer residence, and back at night,
often in an open carriage, alone. He walked the streets of
Washington at night, with only an unarmed companion,
who trembled with the apprehension of the possible
consequences of such an exposure. Mr. Seward, in reply to
a letter from Hon. John Bigelow, the American consul in
Paris, wrote under date of July 15th, 1864: “There is no
doubt that, from a period anterior to the breaking out of
the insurrection, plots and conspiracies for the purposes of
assassination have been frequently formed and organized.”
Mr. Bigelow had reported to Mr. Seward a plot which had
become known abroad. Mr. Seward added: “Assassination is
not an American practice or habit; and one so vicious and
so desperate cannot be engrafted into our political system.
This conviction of mine has steadily gained strength since
the civil war began. Every day’s experience conﬁrms it.”
Notwithstanding Mr. Seward’s theory, plots were formed
against his own life, as well as that of Mr. Lincoln — plots,
indeed, embracing more than these two persons, and
extending to nearly all the prominent men in the
 government and in its military service. General Grant and
General Sherman were both the unconscious objects of
deadly conspiracies. It is now known that, not only in the
States, but in Canada and Europe, plots of this character
were concocted; and it is believed that, on one occasion,
the President actually took poison, in the drugs that were
prescribed for him by his physician, and prepared in one of
the shops of the city.
Secretary Seward, even before he came so near to death
through one of these conspiracies, was compelled to give
up his theory, and to acknowledge that he and the
President were in positive danger.
The morning of the fourteenth of April was spent by Mr.
Lincoln mainly in interviews with his friends. Among those
who called was Speaker Colfax, who was about setting out
upon an overland journey to the Paciﬁc coast, a journey
which has since been satisfactorily accomplished; and to
him the President entrusted a verbal message to the
miners, assuring them of his friendliness to their interests,
and telling them that their prosperity was identiﬁed with
the prosperity of the nation. General Grant, it will be
remembered, was in the city; and he was invited to be
present at the cabinet meeting held during the day. In
public and social duties the day passed away; and in the
evening Mr. Colfax came again. George Ashmun of
Massachusetts also came in, and to him Mr. Lincoln gave
the following little note in pencil — the last words he ever
wrote:
 “Allow Mr. Ashmun and friend to come in at 9 A.M. to-
morrow.
“A Lincoln.”
Mr. Lincoln and General Grant were the lions of the day;
and the manager of Ford’s theater, with a keen eye to
business, had not only invited them to witness that night
the 
representation 
of 
“Our 
American 
Cousin,” 
but
announced them both as positively to be present. The
Washington papers of the fourteenth contained the
following “personal notice:”
“Lieutenant-general Grant, President and Mrs. Lincoln,
and ladies, will occupy the state box at Ford’s theater to-
night, to witness Miss Laura Keene’s company in Tom
Taylor’s ‘American Cousin.’”
General Grant did not desire to attend, and so left the
city. 
The 
President 
was 
equally 
disinclined 
to 
the
entertainment; but, as his presence and that of General
Grant also had been pledged to the people, he saw that
there would be great disappointment if he should fail them;
and, when Mrs. Lincoln entered the President’s room to
inquire what decision he had arrived at, he said that he had
concluded to go. He invited both Mr. Ashmun and Mr.
Colfax to accompany him, but both declined, pleading other
engagements; and Mr. and Mrs. Lincoln, attended to the
carriage by Mr. Ashmun, left without other company, and
drove directly to the house of Senator Harris, where they
took in Miss Harrill, a daughter of the Senator, and Major
Rathbone, a son of the Senator’s wife, who happened to be
in at the time. The party reached the theater at twenty
 minutes before nine o’clock, to ﬁnd the house ﬁlled in every
part; and, as they passed to their seats in the private box
reserved for them, the whole assembly rose and cheered
them, 
with 
the 
most 
cordial 
enthusiasm. 
This
demonstration was intended as an expression of good-will,
and as a popular congratulation on the victories that had
brought the rebellion to a close. The President bowed to
the audience, took his seat, and was soon afterwards
absorbed in the scenes of mimic life upon the stage. Here
let us leave him, to trace the movements of another person.
At half-past eleven o’clock, on the morning of the
fourteenth, John Wilkes Booth, a young actor who had been
openly disloyal throughout the war, visited Ford’s theater,
where he was informed that a box had been taken for the
President and General Grant. Then he went to a stable, and
engaged a high-strung mare for a saddle-ride, which he
proposed to take in the middle of the afternoon. From the
stable he proceeded to the Kirkwood Hotel, where he sent
up to Vice-president Johnson a card, bearing the words: “I
don’t wish to disturb you; are you at home?” To this, his
signature was appended; and it drew from Mr. Johnson only
the response that he was very busily engaged. At four
o’clock, he called for the mare, and rode away, leaving her
at last at a point convenient for his further purposes. In the
evening, he took her from her hiding-place, and rode to the
theater. Summoning one Spangler, a scene-shifter, he left
the animal in his charge, to be held until he should return.
Then he ascended to the dress-circle, looked in upon the
stage and the audience, and gradually worked his way
 through the crowd packed in the rear of the dress-circle,
toward the box occupied by the Presidential party. This box
was at the end of the dress-circle, next the stage; and was
reached by passing in the rear of the dress-circle, to a door
opening ﬁrst into a dark, narrow passage, and then by two
doors opening from the passage. This passage was
contrived so that the box might be made a double one,
when occasion required, by securing facilities for a double
entrance, an inside sliding partition completing the
arrangement. To the entrance of this passage, Booth forced
himself; and, after showing a card to the President’s
servant, and saying that Mr. Lincoln had sent for him, he
passed into the passage, and fastened the door behind him.
Presenting himself at the door of the box, he took a quick
survey of the interior. He found everything favorable to his
purpose; and, taking a small Derringer pistol in one hand,
and a double-edged dagger in the other, he thrust his arm
into the entrance, where the President, sitting in an arm-
chair, presented to his full view the back and side of his
head. A ﬂash, a sharp report, a puﬀ of smoke, and the fatal
bullet had entered the President’s brain. Mr. Lincoln did
not stir. People thought that the report of the pistol had
some connection with the play; but the awful truth was
soon apparent. There was no escape for the murderer by
the way through which he had reached the box; for the
crowd was too great. Major Rathbone, the instant he
comprehended what was done, sprang upon Booth, who,
throwing him oﬀ, dropped his pistol, and struck him with
his dagger, inﬂicting a ﬂesh wound upon the oﬀicer’s arm.
 Then the murderer rushed to the front of the box, parted
the folds of the ﬂag with which it was draped for the
occasion, and leaped to the stage, half falling as he
descended, his spurs having caught in the drapery. Then
springing to his feet, he uttered with theatrical emphasis
the words of the state motto of Virginia: “Sic semper
tyrannis!” and added: “The South is avenged.” Quickly
turning, he rushed from the stage, striking from his path all
whom he met, and, escaping at the rear of the theater, was
in his saddle and away before the party around the
President and the audience fully comprehended what had
been done. Only a single man in the audience took in at
once the meaning of the scene; and, although he undertook
to follow Booth, the assassin had disappeared before he
reached the door.
Mrs. Lincoln screamed, and Miss Harris called for water.
The scene among the audience deﬁes all description.
Women shrieked and fainted. Men called for vengeance.
The most terrible uproar prevailed. Laura Keene, the
actress, begged the audience to be calm, abd entered the
box from the stage, bearing water and cordials. The
President was entirely unconscious; and, as soon as the
surgeons, 
who 
had 
gathered 
quickly 
yo 
him, 
had
ascertained the position and nature of the wound, the
helpless form was borne across Tenth street to the house of
a Mr. Peterson. Surgeon-general Barnes, after examination,
pronounced the wound a mortal one. The words fell upon
the ears of Secretary Stanton, who, bursting into tears,
responded: “Oh, no! General, no, no!” Attorney-general
 Speed, Secretary Welles, Postmaster-general Dennison,
General Meigs, Mr. McCulloch, the new Secretary of the
Treasury, and Senator Sumner were gathered around the
bed, the last holding one of the President’s hands, and
sobbing like a child. In an adjoining room, supported by her
son Robert and Mrs. Senator Dixon, sat Mrs. Lincoln,
bewildered and crushed by her great grief. Around the
unconscious form of the President the great men of the
nation bowed, and wept, watching the heaving of his
breast, until, at twenty-two minutes past seven in the
morning, he breathed his last.
In another part of the city, at the moment of the murder
and alarm at the theater, another scene of terrible violence
was enacted, which showed that one of the many
conspiracies that had been organized to destroy the heads
of the government was in process of execution.
A few days previously, Mr. Seward had been thrown from
his carriage, and severely injured. He was still very low,
and under the most careful medical and surgical treatment.
A little after ten, on this fatal evening, the door-bell of his
residence was rung by a man who said he came with
medicine from Dr. Verdi, Mr. Seward’s physician, which it
was necessary for him to deliver in person. The servant
who admitted him protested that no one was permitted to
see Mr. Seward. The man pushed him aside, and mounted
the stairs. When he was about to enter the Secretary’s
room, 
Mr. 
Frederick 
Seward, 
the 
Secretary’s 
son,
appeared, and inquired his business. He gave the same
reply that he had given to the servant, when the gentleman
 told him that he could not enter. In return for this refusal,
Mr. Frederick Seward received a stunning blow upon his
forehead, with the butt of a pistol; and the man pushed on
to the bedside of the Secretary, mounted the bed, and,
aiming at Mr. Seward’s throat, stabbed him three times. He
would undoubtedly have killed him, had he not been seized
around the body by the nurse of Mr. Seward, a soldier
named Robinson. While the assassin was struggling with
Robinson, Mr. Seward summoned suﬀicient strength to roll
himself oﬀ the bed. The murderer, inﬂicting severe wounds
upon Robinson, burst away from him, rushed to the door,
forced his way down stairs, stabbing Major Augustus
Seward and one of his father’s attendants on the way, and
escaped into the street. He had stabbed no less than ﬁve
persons. This conspirator, known afterward to the public by
the name of Payne, was Lewis Payne Powell.
The eﬀect of these two tragedies upon the popular
feeling in the city of Washington may possibly be imagined,
but it cannot be described. Some cried for retaliation upon
the leaders of a rebellion that could inspire such deeds, and
for revenge even upon the helpless prisoners in our hands.
Others were possessed by a sense of horror; others by
emotions of terror; others by an overwhelming grief; and all
by a feeling of uncertainty and insecurity. How wide was
the conspiracy? How comprehensive was the plot? Who
were the designated victims? What would be the next
development? There was no sleep in Washington that night.
A terrible solemnity took possession of the noisy capital.
Only the military were busy. All the drinking shops of the
 city were closed, the outlets of the city were guarded, and
every necessary step was taken for the protection of the
persons of the other members of the government.
The eﬀect of these terrible events upon the popular heart
throughout the country was touching in the extreme. From
the sunniest hills of joy, the people went down weeping into
the darkest valleys of aﬄiction. The long, sad morning of
the President’s death was full of the sound of tolling bells.
It was everywhere the same. By a common impulse the
bells from every tower in the land gave voice to the popular
grief; and from every dwelling and store and shop, from
every church and public building, the insignia of sorrow
were displayed. The markets were literally cleared of every
fabric that could be used for the drapery of mourning. Men
met in the streets, and pressed each other’s hands in
silence, or burst into tears. The whole nation, which, the
previous day, was jubilant and hopeful, was precipitated
into the depths of a profound and tender woe. Millions felt
that they had lost a brother, or a father, or a dear personal
friend. It was a grief that brought the nation more into
family sympathy than it had been since the days of the
Revolution. Men came together in public meetings, to give
expression to their grief. The day on which the murder was
announced to the country was Saturday; and on Sunday all
the churches were draped with mourning; and from every
pulpit in the land came the voice of lamentation over the
national loss, and of eulogy to the virtues of the good
President who had been so cruelly murdered. There were
men engaged in the rebellion who turned from the deed
 with horror. Many of these had learned something of the
magnanimity of Mr. Lincoln’s character; and they felt that
the time would come when the South would need his
friendship. These regarded his death as a great calamity;
but it must seem doubtful whether those who could starve
helpless prisoners, and massacre black soldiers after they
had surrendered, and murder in cool blood hundreds of
Union men, for no crime but aﬀection for the government
which Mr. Lincoln represented, could have been greatly
shocked by his assassination. They made haste, however, to
disown and denounce the deed; and pretended to regard it,
not as an act of the rebellion, but as the irresponsible act of
a crazed desperado.
After the death of the President, his body was removed to
the White House, from which he had gone on the previous
evening, under such happy circumstances. A room had
been prepared for its reception; and there it was placed in
a coﬀin, which rested upon a grand catafalque. The
aﬀection and grief of the people were manifested by
oﬀerings of ﬂowers, with which the room was kept
constantly supplied. On Monday, the seventeenth, a
meeting of congressmen and others was held at the
Capitol, presided over by Hon. Lafayette S. Foster of
Connecticut. A committee, of which Senator Sumner of
Massachusetts was chairman, was appointed to make
arrangements for the funeral; and this committee reported
at an adjourned meeting, held at four o’clock in the
afternoon, that they had selected as pall-bearers Messrs.
Foster, Morgan, Johnson, Yates, Wade, and Conness, on the
 part of the Senate, and Messrs. Dawes, Coﬀroth, Smith,
Colfax, Worthington, and Washburne, on the part of the
House. They also presented the names of gentlemen, one
from each state and territory of the Union, to act as a
congressional committee, to accompany the remains to
their ﬁnal resting-place in Illinois.
Meantime, 
the 
body 
of 
the 
President 
had 
been
embalmed; and, at ten o’clock, on Tuesday morning, the
White House was thrown open to give the people an
opportunity to take their farewell of the familiar face,
whose kind smile death had forever quenched. At least
twenty-ﬁve thousand persons availed themselves of this
liberty; and thousands more, seeing the crowd, turned back
unsatisﬁed. Hundreds of those who pressed around the
sacred dust, uttered some aﬀectionate word, or phrase, or
sentence. The rich and the poor, the white and the black,
mingled their tokens of aﬀectionate regard, and dropped
side by side their tears upon the coﬀin. It was humanity
weeping over the dust of its benefactor.
On 
Wednesday, 
the 
day 
of 
the 
funeral, 
all 
the
departments were closed, all public work was suspended,
ﬂags were placed at half-mast, and the public buildings
were draped with mourning. The funeral services were held
in the East Room, which was occupied by the relatives of
the deceased (with the exception of Mrs. Lincoln, who was
too 
much 
prostrated 
to 
leave 
her 
room,) 
and 
by
governmental and judicial dignitaries, and such high
oﬀicials from the states as had gathered to the capital to
pay their last tribute of respect to the illustrious dead. The
 ceremonies were conducted with great solemnity and
dignity. The scriptures were read by Rev. Dr. Hale, of the
Episcopal church; the opening prayer was made by Bishop
Simpson, of the Methodist church; the funeral address was
delivered by Rev. Dr. Gurley, of the Presbyterian church
which Mr. Lincoln and his family had attended; and the
closing prayer was oﬀered by Rev. Dr. Gray, the chaplain of
the Senate, and the pastor of a Baptist church. Among
those present from the states were Governors Fenton of
New York, Andrew of Massachusetts, Parker of New Jersey,
Brough of Ohio, Oglesby of Illinois, and Buckingham of
Connecticut. Dr. Gurley’s tribute was a noble one —
entirely worthy of the occasion. “Probably no man since the
days of Washington,” said he, “was ever so deeply and
ﬁrmly imbedded and enshrined in the hearts of the people
as Abraham Lincoln. Nor was it a mistaken conﬁdence and
love. He deserved it; deserved it well; deserved it all. He
merited it by his character, by his acts, and by the tenor
and tone and spirit of his life... His integrity was thorough,
all-pervading, all-controlling and incorruptible.” Speaking
of the great national emergency in which Mr. Lincoln was
called to power, he said: “He rose to the dignity and
momentousness of the occasion; saw his duty as the chief
magistrate of a great and imperiled people; and he
determined to do his duty and his whole duty, seeking the
guidance, and leaning upon the arm, of Him of whom it is
written— ‘He giveth power to the faint, and to them that
have no might he increaseth strength.’ Yes, he leaned upon
 His arm. He recognized and received the truth that the
kingdom is the Lord’s.”
At the close of the ceremonies in the White House, the
august personages present, and various bodies of civil and
military 
oﬀicials, 
joined 
in 
the 
procession 
which
accompanied the sacred remains to the Capitol. It was the
most impressive procession that ever passed through the
grand avenue which leads from the presidential mansion to
the Capitol. The avenue was cleared; and every piazza,
window, veranda, and house-top, was ﬁlled with eager but
mournful faces. Funereal music ﬁlled the sweet spring air;
and this was the only sound, except the measured tread of
feet, and the slow roll of wheels upon the pavement. This
procession was so long that the head of it had begun to
disperse at the Capitol, before the rear had passed the
Treasury Department. As the hearse, drawn by six gray
horses, reached the Capitol grounds, the bands burst forth
in a requiem, and were answered by minute-guns from the
fortiﬁcations. The body of the President was borne into the
rotunda, 
where 
Dr. 
Gurley 
completed 
the 
religious
exercises of the occasion. Here the remains rested, exposed
to public view, but guarded by soldiery, until the next day.
Thousands who had had no other opportunity to take their
farewell of the beloved dust thronged the Capitol all night.
The pageant of the day, in many of its aspects, was never
paralleled upon this continent. Nothing like it — nothing
approaching it — had ever occurred in this country, if
indeed, in the world.
 While these funeral services and ceremonies were in
progress in Washington, similar ceremonies were observed
in every part of the country. Churches were thrown open,
where prayer and sermon and music united in the
expression of aﬀection for the dead, and lamentation for
the national loss. Great public gatherings were held, in
which the memory of the good President was celebrated in
impulsive speech or studied eulogy. The whole nation
suspended its business, and gave itself up to the mournful
services and associations of the day. Never had such a
funeral been given to a national ruler. Never had died a
man who received such testimonials of universal aﬀection
and grief. A whole nation mourned its dead. One thought
enthralled every heart — the thought of a great, good man
— the father of his people — cruelly murdered; and all
animosities were overwhelmed in the general grief. All
detraction was hushed; and every heart that had done him
wrong, made its amends to his memory, and won peace for
itself, by awarding to him his just meed of praise.
As there was never such a funeral as this, so there was
never such a procession. That which moved from the White
House, on the nineteenth, was but the beginning of a
pageant that displayed its marvelous numbers and its ever-
varying forms, through country, and village, and city,
winding across the territories of vast states, along a track
of more than ﬁfteen hundred miles. The President was to
be borne back to his own people, and to be buried among
the scenes of his early life. He had told the people of
Springﬁeld, Illinois, when he parted with them, more than
 four years before, that he owed to them all that he was. It
was but right that they should have his dust.
On the twenty-ﬁrst, the funeral train left Washington,
amid the silent grief of thousands who had gathered to
witness its departure. With the coﬀin which contained the
remains of the President, went back to the western home
the coﬀin which contained the dust of his beloved Willie,
whose death has already been mentioned; and father and
son, in the touching companionship of death, traveled
together the long journey. At ten o’clock, the train reached
Baltimore. The immense crowd that had assembled here to
pay their last tribute of respect to the departed President,
was full of its suggestions of the change which four years
had wrought upon the city. It seemed incredible that this
was the city through which the living President had so
lately passed, in fear of the fate which had at last overtaken
him. Nothing that the ingenuity of grief could devise was
left undone to make the return passage an imposing
testimonial to his memory. The display of military was
large; and all the ceremonies of the occasion were such as
did honor, alike to the people of the city, and to the man
they mourned. In the afternoon, the train moved for
Harrisburg, but not until a multitude had improved the
opportunity to obtain a view of the pale, dead face of their
friend. On the way, new mourners were taken on; and at
every considerable station people had gathered to see the
solemn pageant sweep by. At York, six ladies came into the
car, and deposited upon the coﬀin an exquisite wreath of
ﬂowers, while all who witnessed the aﬀectionate tribute
 were moved to tears. Bells were tolled, and bands breathed
forth their plaintive music, at every village. The funeral
obsequies at Harrisburg were observed in the evening.
Until midnight, the people crowded into the State Capitol,
to obtain a view of the remains; and, from seven to nine on
the following morning, the catafalque was surrounded by
the anxious throngs that had come in from all the country
round, for the purpose. At this place, as at all the places on
the route, there were new pall-bearers, new processions,
and new expressions of the popular grief. A very large
procession accompanied the remains to the cars; and from
Harrisburg to Philadelphia the funeral train moved through
crowds of people, assembled at every convenient point. For
several miles before the train reached Philadelphia, both
sides of the railway were occupied by almost continuous
lines of men, women, and children, who stood with
uncovered heads as the train passed them.
Philadelphia was draped with mourning, to give a ﬁtting
reception to the honored dead. The streets were ﬁlled with
people, long before the funeral train arrived; and cannon
thundered forth the announcement of its coming. All that
ingenuity, aided by abundant means, could do, to make the
fresh pageant a worthy one, was done. A new hearse had
been built, and this was drawn by eight splendid black
horses, in silver-mounted harnesses. The procession itself
was composed of eleven divisions, and was one of the most
remarkable, in every respect, with which the remains of the
President were honored during their long passage to their
resting-place. What place more ﬁt for the brief sojourn of
 these 
remains 
than 
Independence 
Hall, 
intimately
associated, as it was, with the principles which the sleeping
patriot had faithfully defended, and still echoing to the ear
of sorrowing aﬀection with the sound of his living voice? To
this hall he was borne, amid the tears of a vast multitude.
The hall was literally ﬁlled with the most exquisite ﬂowers.
From ten o’clock until midnight, the people had the
opportunity to view the remains of their beloved chief
magistrate. Then the doors were closed; but hundreds
remained around the building all night, that they might be
ﬁrst in the morning. The following day was Sunday, and
from six o’clock in the morning until one o’clock on Monday
morning, during which the remains were exposed to view, a
dense, unbroken stream of men, women, and children,
pressed into and out of the building. The Philadelphia
Inquirer, in its report of the occasion, said: “Never before in
the history of our city was such a dense mass of humanity
huddled together. Hundreds of persons were seriously
injured, from being pressed in the mob; and many fainting
females were extricated by the police and military, and
conveyed to places of security.” After a person was once in
the line, it took from four to ﬁve hours to reach the hall. At
one 
o’clock, 
on 
Monday 
morning, 
the 
procession
recommenced its march, bearing the body to Kensington
Station, which was left at four, for the passage to New York.
Bells were tolled, mottoes were displayed, minute-guns
were ﬁred, and the people were gathered at the various
stations along the entire passage through New Jersey. It
 seemed as if the whole state had come to the railroad line,
simply to witness the passage of the funeral train.
It is bewildering to read the accounts of the ceremonies
at New York, and impracticable to reproduce them. The
passage of the beloved remains into and through the great
city, and the interval of their brief rest while they lay in
state in the City Hall, were marked at every stage by some
new and impressive expression of the public grief. Minute-
guns, tolling bells, requiems by choirs of singers, dirges by
bands of musicians, military and civic displays, suspended
business, draped ﬂags, and shrouded private and public
buildings, all mingled their testimony to the universal
sorrow, and the common wish to do justice and honor to a
hallowed memory. Every street and avenue around the City
Hall was ﬁlled with people. The ﬁrst line formed for
viewing the remains was three quarters of a mile long, and
reached far up the Bowery. From the moment when the
coﬀin-lid was removed, until nearly noon on the following
day, through all the long night, the people pressed into the
hall, caught a hasty glimpse of the beloved features, and
then retired; until it was estimated that one hundred and
ﬁfty thousand persons had gained their object, while it was
evident that twice that number had failed to win the
patiently awaited vision. The military procession which
accompanied the remains to the depot of the Hudson River
Railroad was the most remarkable ever witnessed in the
city, numbering fully ﬁfteen thousand troops. The carriages
in the procession were ﬁlled with federal and state
dignitaries, and representatives of foreign governments in
 full court costume; and the line of the procession was
thronged from the beginning to the end by crowding
multitudes of spectators. The New York Herald’s report
says: “The people, with tearful eyes, under the shadow of
the great aﬄiction, watched patiently and unmurmuringly
the moving of the honored dead and the mournful
procession, and silently breathed over them the most
heartfelt and fervent prayers... Such an occasion, such a
crowd, and such a day, New York may never see again.”
At a quarter past four, on the afternoon of the twenty-
ﬁfth, the train which bore the funeral party from New York
left the station, drawn by the “Union,” the same locomotive
that brought Mr. Lincoln to New York, on his passage to
Washington, more than four years previously. The train
passed to Albany without stopping, except at Poughkeepsie,
where a delegation from the city government of Albany was
taken on board; but the people were gathered at every
point to witness the passage. Mottoes were displayed,
draped ﬂags ﬂoated everywhere, and all along the route
stood the silent crowds, with heads uncovered, as the train
which bore the martyred President swept by. It was nearly
midnight when Albany was reached; and it was not until
one o’clock, on the morning of the twenty-sixth, that the
removal of the coﬀin-lid exposed, in the State Capitol, the
white face that so many were anxious to see. From that
time until two o’clock in the afternoon, there was a
constant throng, the line reaching four deep from the State
House to the foot of State street. It was estimated that
there were sixty thousand people in the streets of Albany.
 Here was another great procession; and, at four o’clock in
the afternoon, the train started for Buﬀalo. Throughout the
entire range of large and beautiful towns which the Central
Railroad threads in its passage from Albany to Buﬀalo, the
same demonstrations of grief and respect were witnessed
which had thus far distinguished the homeward journey of
the dead President. The reporter of the New York Tribune
wrote that “a funeral in each house in Central New York
would hardly have added solemnity to the day.”
At seven o’clock on the morning of the twenty-seventh,
the funeral train reached Buﬀalo; and the sacred remains
were taken to St. James’ Hall, where, from half-past nine
until eight o’clock in the evening of the next day, they were
visited by an immense throng of persons. Buﬀalo had
already paid its tribute to Mr. Lincoln’s memory by a large
procession on the day of the funeral ceremonies at
Washington, and omitted the usual pageant on this
occasion; but a ﬁne military escort, accompanied by a
crowd of citizens, conducted the remains to the depot in
the evening, which was left by the funeral train at ten
o’clock, for the pursuit of the journey to Cleveland. The
demonstrations of the popular grief which had been
witnessed throughout the journey, were repeated at every
station along the route. Not only men, but women and
children were up and wakeful all night, to catch a glimpse
of the car which bore the precious dust of the beloved
ruler; and, whenever the train stopped, ﬂowers were
brought in and deposited upon the coﬀin. At Cleveland,
great preparations were made to receive the President’s
 remains and the funeral party, with beﬁtting honors. A
building for the deposit of the coﬀin was erected in the
park, that the people might have easy access to it. The city
was crowded at an early hour, on Friday morning; and on
every hand were displayed the symbols of mourning. At
seven o’clock, the train arrived at the Union depot, amid a
salute of artillery; and from this point it was taken back to
the Euclid Street station of the Cleveland and Pittsburg
Railroad, whence the procession moved — the most
imposing pageant that this beautiful city on the lake had
ever created or witnessed. Bishop McIlvaine, of the diocese
of Ohio, read the Episcopal burial service on the opening of
the coﬀin, and oﬀered prayer; after which the long
procession ﬁled through the pavilion, and caught a last
glimpse of the honored dead. All day long, through falling
rain, the crowd, unabated in numbers, pressed through the
little building. At ten o’clock at night, one hundred
thousand people had viewed the remains; and then the
gates were shut. Soon afterwards, the coﬀin was taken
from its beautiful resting-place; and, at twelve o’clock, the
funeral party was again in progress, on the way to
Columbus, the capital of the state.
But why repeat the same story again, and again? Why
say more than that at Columbus and Indianapolis and
Chicago, as well as at all the intermediate places, men did
what they could, and all that they could, to honor him who
had died in their service — who had been murdered for his
truth to them and to freedom? It was a most remarkable
exhibition of the popular feeling, and is unparalleled in
 history. There was nothing empty, nothing ﬁctitious about
it. There was never a sincerer tribute of aﬀection rendered
to a man than this. It was a costly one, but men rendered it
gladly, and hesitated no more at the cost than if they were
expressing their grief over the lost members of their own
homes.
It seemed almost like profanation of the sleeping
President’s rest, to bear him so far, and expose him so
much; but the people demanded it, and would take no
denial. All parties, all sects — friends and foes alike —
mingled in their aﬀectionate tributes of honor and sorrow.
When the remains of the President reached Chicago,
they were at home. They were in the State in which he had
spent the most of his life; and the people grasped him with
almost a selﬁsh sense of ownership. He was theirs. Only a
short distance from the spot, lay his old antagonist,
Douglas, in his last sleep. The party champions were once
more near each other, upon their favorite soil; but their
eloquent lips were silent — silent with an eloquence
surpassing sound, in the proclamation of mighty changes in
the nation, and the suggestions of mutability and mortality
among men. One more journey, and the weary form would
rest. The people of Chicago honored the dead President
with emotions that few thus far had experienced. Mr.
Lincoln had been loved and admired by the people of
Illinois, long before the rest of the nation knew anything
about him. His face and voice had been familiar to them for
many years; and they had introduced him to the country
and to immortality. He had walked through the portals of
 the new city into a fame as wide as the world. “He comes
back to us,” said the Chicago Tribune, “his work ﬁnished,
the republic vindicated, its enemies overthrown and suing
for peace... He left us, asking that the prayers of the people
might be oﬀered to Almighty God for wisdom and help to
see the right path and pursue it. Those prayers were
answered. He accomplished his work, and now the prayers
of the people ascend for help, to bear the great aﬄiction
which has fallen upon them. Slain as no other man has
been slain, cut down while interposing his great charity and
mercy between the wrath of the people and guilty traitors,
the people of Chicago tenderly receive the sacred ashes,
with bowed heads and streaming eyes.”
The remains reached Springﬁeld on the morning of May
third. Throughout the long ride of two hundred miles, over
the continuous prairie that lies between Chicago and
Springﬁeld, there had transpired the most aﬀecting
demonstrations of the popular grief. Mottoes, ﬂags, minute-
guns, immense gatherings of the people, music, ﬂowers,
and copious tears, testiﬁed the universal sorrow. But in
Springﬁeld lived the heartiest mourners. Here were his
intimate and life-long personal friends; and they received
the dust of their murdered neighbor and fellow-citizen with
a tenderness of which the people of no other community
were capable. The President was forgotten in the
companion and friend, endeared to them by a thousand
ties. The State House, the Lincoln residence, and every
store, public building, and dwelling, were draped heavily
with mourning — a manifestation of the public sorrow
 which remained for weeks and months after it had
disappeared from all other places that had been passed in
the long procession. For twenty-four hours, or until ten
o’clock on the morning of May fourth, the people pressed
into the State House, to gain a last glimpse of their
departed friend. Through all the long night of the third, the
steady tramp of thousands was heard, winding up the stair-
case that led to the Representatives’ Chamber, and passing
out again. Silently, patiently, sorrowfully, the unfailing
procession moved; and it did not stop until the coﬀin-lid
was shut down, no more to be opened. The procession
which conducted the remains to their ﬁnal resting-place, in
a tomb prepared for them at Oak Ridge Cemetery, a
beautiful spot about two miles from the city, was under the
immediate charge of Major-general Joseph Hooker. The
town was thronged; and every train that arrived augmented
the crowd. A large choir of two hundred and ﬁfty singers
sang the familiar hymn, beginning with the words,
“Children of the Heavenly King,”
as the coﬀin was borne out to the hearse; and amid the
sound of solemn dirges and minute-guns the mournful
procession moved. The cemetery was occupied by a vast
multitude, before the procession arrived; and from hill and
tree they looked tearfully on, while the coﬀin which
contained the dust of their friend was consigned to its
sepulcher. By the side of it was placed the coﬀin of “little
Willie;” while the living sons, Robert and Thomas, standing
by the tomb, were objects of an aﬀectionate interest only
equaled by the deep sorrow for their own and their
 country’s loss. Rev. A. Hale of Springﬁeld opened the
religious exercises with prayer; a hymn written for the
occasion was sung; selections from Scripture, and Mr.
Lincoln’s last Inaugural were read; and Bishop Simpson, a
favorite of Mr. Lincoln while living, delivered an eloquent
address. Requiems and dirges, sung and played, completed
the exercises of the occasion, closing with a benediction by
Rev. Dr. Gurley of Washington.
The address of Bishop Simpson, able, aﬀectionate, and
excellent as it was, contained nothing more notable than
the quotation that the speaker made from one of Mr.
Lincoln’s speeches, uttered in 1859, in which, speaking of
the slave power, he said: “Broken by it I, too, may be, bow
to it, I never will. The probability that we may fail in the
struggle, ought not to deter us from the support of a cause
which I deem to be just; and it shall not deter me. If ever I
feel the soul within me elevate and expand to those
dimensions not wholly unworthy of its Almighty Architect, it
is when I contemplate the cause of my country, deserted by
all the world besides, and I, standing up boldly and alone,
and hurling deﬁance at her victorious oppressors. Here,
without contemplating consequences, before high Heaven
and in the face of the world, I swear eternal ﬁdelity to the
just cause, as I deem it, of the land of my life, my liberty
and my love.” No inspiration ﬁner than this breathes in any
of Mr. Lincoln’s utterances. It almost seems as if an
intimation of his life and death were given to him at the
moment — as if a glimpse into his own and his country’s
future had been vouchsafed to his excited vision.
 The crowd slowly separated; the citizens moved back to
their homes; those who had accompanied the precious
remains — at last resting, and in safe and aﬀectionate
keeping — from Washington and points along the route,
took their departure by the out-going trains; the guard
paced their little round before the tomb, where through the
grate the large and the little coﬀin lay in the dim light; and
the people of Springﬁeld were left to their grief and their
glory.
There, surrounded by the sweetest scenes of nature, his
tomb a shrine, his name the watchword of liberty, his fame
in the aﬀectionate keeping of mankind, his memory
hallowed by martyrdom for the humane and Christian
principles to which his life was devoted, the weary patriot
rests. His sun went down suddenly, and whelmed the
country in a darkness which was felt by every heart; but far
up the clouds sprang soon the golden twilight, ﬂooding the
heavens with radiance, and illuminating every uncovered
brow with the hope of a fair to-morrow. The aching head,
the shattered nerves, the anxious heart, the weary frame,
are all at rest; and the noble spirit that informed them,
bows reverently and humbly in the presence of Him in
whom it trusted, and to whose work it devoted the troubled
years of its earthly life.
The death of Mr. Lincoln wrought great change in the
feelings of all the representatives of foreign opinion, not
only toward him, but toward the country and its cause; and
many were the testimonials that came in every ship, of
foreign sympathy with the nation in its bereavement and
 with those whose family life had been so cruelly dissolved
by the deed of the assassin. The British Queen wrote to
Mrs. Lincoln a letter of condolence, with her own hand. All
the foreign governments took occasion to express their
horror at the crime which had deprived the nation of its
head, and their sympathy with the people thus suddenly
and violently bereft. The London Times, which had always
been unjust to Mr. Lincoln, said: “It would be unjust not to
acknowledge that Mr. Lincoln was a man who could not,
under any circumstances, have been easily replaced.”
Further on in its article, it confessed that “Englishmen
learned 
to 
respect 
a 
man 
who 
showed 
the 
best
characteristics of their race, in his respect for what is good
in the past, acting in unison with a recognition of what was
made necessary by the events of passing history.” The
London Star said: “It can never be forgotten, while history
is read, that the hands of southern partisans have been
reddened by the foulest assassin-plot the world has ever
known; that they have been treacherously dipped in the
blood of one of the best citizens and purest patriots to
whom the land of Washington gave birth.” The London
Spectator spoke of Mr. Lincoln as “the noblest President
whom America has had since the time of Washington;” and
“certainly the best, if not the ablest, man ruling over any
country in the civilized world.” The London Saturday
Review said: “During the arduous experience of four years,
Mr. Lincoln constantly rose in general estimation, by
calmness of temper, by an intuitively logical appreciation of
the character of the conﬂict, and by undisputed sincerity.”
 The Economist said, “The murder of Mr. Lincoln is a very
great and very lamentable event — perhaps the greatest
and most lamentable which has occurred since the Coup
d’etat, if not since Waterloo. It aﬀects directly and
immensely the welfare of the three most powerful countries
in the world, — America, France and England, — and it
aﬀects them all for evil.” Goldwin Smith, in Macmillan’s
Magazine, said: “He (Mr. Lincoln) professed to wait on
events, or, rather, on the manifestations of the moral forces
around him, wherein, with a mind sobered by responsibility
and unclouded by selﬁshness, he earnestly endeavored to
read the will of God, which, having read it, he patiently
followed to the best of his power. In him, his nation has
lost, not a king, or a prophet, — not a creative moulder of
its destinies, or an inspired unfolder of its future, — but
simply a sensible interpreter, and a wise, temperate, honest
executor of its own better mind.”
Even these expressions of the British press do not
indicate the popular feeling with which the English people
received the announcement of Mr. Lincoln’s assassination.
The excitement which ﬁlled the public mind, on the
reception of the startling tidings, in all the great cities and
considerable towns of England, was only equaled by that
which swept over those of our own country. It was hard to
tell whether horror at the crime or grief for its victim was
the predominant emotion of the British people. Men who
applauded the deed, were kicked out of assemblies in
London, as they were in New York. The digniﬁed Mr.
Mason, the rebel commissioner, was boldly condemned for
 an attempt to extenuate the crime on the ground that it was
a natural incident of civil war.
At home, the change of feeling was hardly less marked
and gratifying. Presses that had done Mr. Lincoln injustice
throughout his whole career, made haste to lay their tribute
of respectful praise upon his bier. Men who had cursed him,
joined tearfully in the processions which attended his long
journey homeward. Even from the depths of the dead
rebellion, there came honest lamentations, and sincere
praises. The eyes of his “blinded fellow countrymen,” which
he so ardently desired to open, were unsealed at last, to
behold, in the man they had so long regarded with hatred
or contempt, the friend they had always possessed, and the
benefactor they sorely needed, but had lost forever.
Andrew Johnson, the Vice-president, became, under the
provisions of the Constitution, the President of the United
States, by taking the oath of oﬀice, on the morning of the
murder. The people who had battled for the Constitution
and the laws so long, did not dream of a resort to any other
course. The speculations of a portion of the foreign press,
concerning 
this 
event, 
showed 
how 
unworthy 
and
inadequate still was the estimate of the American people
and their institutions. There was not a hand lifted, or a
word uttered, to question or dispute the step which
installed a new President over the republic; and there was
not, in a single American heart, a doubt as to the result.
There was no panic, no excitement, no danger, no disaster;
but the country kept to its groove, and felt no jar as it slid
into the new administration.
 The world could not conceal Mr. Lincoln’s murderer. It
had no waste so wide, no cavern so deep, as to give him a
safe hiding-place. That was evident to everybody; and
would have been foreseen by himself, had he not been
stultiﬁed by his greed for blood. Large rewards were
oﬀered for his apprehension, and military and police were
quickly on the alert. After a few days of doubt, it became
evident that Booth, with a companion, had passed over the
Navy Yard Bridge, which crosses the eastern branch of the
Potomac. It was known that the assassin had been in the
habit of spending much time in Charles County, Maryland,
and had been in correspondence with the disloyal people
there. It afterwards appeared that Booth, accompanied by
David C. Harold, rode all night after the commission of the
murder; and that near Bogantown he called on one Dr.
Mudd, to have his leg dressed, which had been fractured by
his leap upon the stage, at the time he committed the
murder. The detectives, reaching this region, and hearing
that Dr. Mudd had received the visit of two suspicious
strangers, arrested him and all his family. From this point,
Booth and his accomplice were tracked toward the
Potomac. The ruﬀians were undoubtedly aided in their
progress by disloyal citizens, for the oﬀicers were
frequently not more than an hour behind them. Although
gunboats were patrolling the river, the murderer and his
accomplice crossed the Potomac under cover of darkness.
It was soon afterwards ascertained where they had
crossed, and the cavalry started in pursuit. The men were
found at last in a barn belonging to William Garratt. The
 building was surrounded, and Booth was called upon to
surrender himself. He ﬂatly refused to do so. Harold was
ready to surrender, but Booth cursed him for a coward; and
declared to Colonel Baker, at the head of the force, that he
would not be taken alive. The barn was ﬁred, and Booth
attempted to extinguish the ﬂame, but failed. Harold then
gave himself up, while the murderer remained, displaying
all the qualities of the hardened desperado. Sergeant
Boston Corbett, moved by a sudden impulse, drew up his
pistol, and ﬁred upon Booth, who was seen standing in the
barn, with a revolver in each hand; and planted a ball in his
neck, which passed entirely through his head. He died
within less than three hours, sending to his mother a
message to the eﬀect that he had died for his country, and
exhibiting no penitence whatever for the terrible deed he
had committed. He was shot on the twenty-sixth of April,
twelve days after the murder. His body was taken back to
Washington, and was buried, no one save those to whom
the task of sepulture was assigned having any knowledge of
its place of burial. Harold was committed to prison to await
his trial.
John Wilkes Booth was the son of the famous actor,
Junius Brutus Booth, and had attained some celebrity in his
father’s profession. He was an exceedingly handsome man;
but he had been notoriously and grossly proﬂigate and
immoral in his habits. Still, his gifts and his beauty had
made him a favorite in certain nominally respectable social
circles. 
His 
sympathy 
with 
the 
rebellion 
was 
well
understood in Washington, but he was never regarded as a
 dangerous man. That he committed the crime which cost
him his life from any romantic love of the South, or from
any desire to avenge the South for fancied wrongs, is not
probable. The deed seems to have been the oﬀspring of a
morbid desire for immortality. He had given frequent hints,
in his conversation, of the miserable passion which
possessed him; and there is no doubt that he had worked
himself into a belief that he should rid the world of a tyrant
by murdering the President, and thus link his name with a
startling deed which, in the future, would be admired as a
glorious act of heroism. Certainly his deed was one of
wonderful boldness; and the bravery which he exhibited at
his capture was worthy of a better cause and a better man.
Fortunately, no fatal wounds were inﬂicted upon Mr.
Seward in Payne’s attempt upon his life, or upon any of
those who were subjects of violence at that ruﬀian’s hands.
The Secretary and his son, Mr. Frederick Seward, were
desperately wounded; but, under skillful surgical care, they
entirely recovered. Payne was arrested, and, with his fellow
conspirators — David E. Harold (who was captured with
Booth,) George A. Atzerodt, Michael O’Laughlin, Edward
Spangler (who held Booth’s horse at the theater, and aided
his escape,) Samuel Arnold, Mary E. Surratt and Dr.
Samuel Mudd — was tried by a military commission. The
conspiracy contemplated not only the murder of Mr.
Lincoln and Mr. Seward, but that of Vice-president Johnson
and Lieutenant-general Grant. Booth alone accomplished
his task. Payne made a desperate eﬀort, — such as only a
man of his great physical strength could make; but failed.
 Atzerodt, to whose hands the murder of the Vice-president
was committed, was not competent, morally or physically,
to the task he undertook; while General Grant escaped the
projected attempt upon his life by leaving the city. Harold,
Atzerodt, Payne and Mrs. Surratt, the latter of whom aided
and abetted the plot, were sentenced to be hanged; and
they suﬀered the penalty of their crimes on the seventh day
of July. Dr. Mudd, Samuel Arnold, and Michael O’Laughlin
were sentenced to hard labor for life, and were consigned
to the Dry Tortugas. Edward Spangler accompanied them,
sentenced to hard labor for six years.
The writer cannot bid farewell to the reader, and to the
illustrious subject of this biography, without a closing
tribute 
to 
a 
character 
unique 
in 
history, 
and 
an
administration that stands alone in the annals of the nation.
We have seen one of the humblest of American citizens
struggling through personal trials and national turmoils,
into the light of universal fame, and an assured immortality
of renown. We have seen him become the object of warm
and devoted aﬀection to a whole nation. We have witnessed
such manifestations of grief at his loss as the death of no
ruler has called forth, within the memory of man. We have
seen a great popular government, poisoned in every
department by the virus of treason, and blindly and feebly
tottering to its death, restored to health and soundness
through the beneﬁcent ministry of this true man, who left it
with vigor in its veins, irresistible strength in its arms, the
ﬁre of exultation and hope in its eyes, and with such power
and majesty in its step, that the earth shook beneath its
 stately goings. We have seen four millions of African
bondmen who, groaning in helpless slavery when he
received the crown of power, became freemen by his word
before death struck that crown from his brow. We have
seen the enemies of his country vanquished and suing for
pardon; and the sneering nations of the world, whose
incontinent contempt and spite were poured in upon him
during the ﬁrst years of his administration, becoming ﬁrst
silent, then respectful, and then unstinted in their
admiration and approbation.
These marvelous changes in public feeling, and the
revolutions imbodied in these wonderful results, were not
the work of a mighty genius, sitting above the nation, and
ordering its aﬀairs. That Mr. Lincoln was much more than
an ordinary man, in intellectual power, is suﬀiciently
evident; but it was not by intellectual power that he
wrought out the grand results of his life. These were rather
the work of the heart, than the head. With no wish to
depreciate the motives or undervalue the names of Mr.
Lincoln’s predecessors in oﬀice, it may be declared that
never, in the history of the government, have the aﬀairs of
that oﬀice been administered with such direct reference to
the will of God, and the everlasting principles of
righteousness and justice, as they were during his
administration. It was eminently a Christian administration
— one which, in its policy and acts, expressed the
convictions of a Christian people. Standing above the loose
morality of party politics, standing above the maxims and
conventionalisms of statesmanship, leaving aside all the
 indirections and insincerities of diplomacy, trusting the
people, leaning upon the people, inspired by the people,
who in their Christian homes and Christian sanctuaries
gave it their conﬁdence, this administration of Abraham
Lincoln stands out in history as the ﬁnest exhibition of a
Christian democracy the world has ever seen. The power of
a true-hearted Christian man, in perfect sympathy with a
true-hearted Christian people, was Mr. Lincoln’s power.
Open on one side of his nature to all descending inﬂuences
from Him to whom he prayed, and open on the other to all
ascending inﬂuences from the people whom he served, he
aimed simply to do his duty, to God and men. Acting rightly,
he acted greatly. While he took care of deeds, fashioned by
a purely ideal standard, God took care of results. Moderate,
frank, truthful, gentle, forgiving, loving, just, Mr. Lincoln
will always be remembered as eminently a Christian
President; and the almost immeasurably great results
which he had the privilege of achieving, were due to the
fact that he was a Christian President.
Conscience, 
and 
not 
expediency, 
not 
temporary
advantage, not popular applause, not the love of power, was
the ruling and guiding motive of his life. He was
conscientious in his devotion to the Constitution and the
laws. In this he was in advance of his people, and in
advance of a multitude of his own friends. With every
constitutional right, he dealt tenderly and carefully, while
taunted by his own friends with subserviency to an
institution which, in his inmost soul, he hated. His respect
for law was as profound and sincere as his respect for God
 and his will. Uninﬂuenced by popular clamor, and unbent
by his own humane and Christian desire to see all men free,
he did not speak the word of emancipation until his duty to
the Constitution which he had sworn to protect and defend
demanded it. There is no doubt that, if he could have saved
the country without destroying slavery, he would have done
it, and done it against the most ardent wishes of his heart,
through his regard for the Constitution which protected the
inhuman institution, and the oath by which he had been
invested with power. It was not slowness, nor coldness, nor
indiﬀerence, that delayed the emancipation of the slaves. It
was loyal, devoted, self-denying virtue.
Mr. Lincoln was conscientious in his patience. He knew
and felt the weakness of human nature, and appreciated
the force of education in moulding character and opinion.
Hence, he was patient with his enemies, and equally
patient with equally unreasonable friends. No hasty act of
his administration can be traced to his impatience. When
such an act was performed, and was followed by its
inevitable consequences of evil, it originated in the
impatience of those whom he could not control. His steps
were taken with the deliberateness of destiny; and, as these
steps are retraced by the historian, he can compare them
to nothing but those leisurely and irresistible proceedings
by which the Great Father in whom the good President
trusted had wrought out his will in creation and
Providence. Step by step, hand in hand with events, he
worked and waited patiently, for the great consummation to
which all the eﬀorts of his life were devoted. Maligned,
 misunderstood, abused, cursed, his motives the foot-balls of
malice and envy and pride and foolishness, he waited
patiently for history to vindicate him, and permitted no
smarting sense of personal injustice to divert him from his
duty to his country.
He was conscientious in his regard for human rights. His
opposition to slavery, and his love of the African, were no
mere matters of policy, or means for winning power. He had
a tender, brotherly regard for every human being; and the
thought of oppression was a torment to him. There was
nothing that moved him to such indignation as a wrong
committed against the helpless ones of his own kind. He
believed that negroes were men, endowed by their Creator
with the rights of men; and, thus believing, there was no
manly privilege which he enjoyed, that he would not have
been glad to see conferred upon them. Hence, had he lived,
he would logically have numbered himself among those
who will agitate the right of universal loyal suﬀrage until
that right shall be secured to every loyal man living under
the American ﬂag.
In Mr. Lincoln’s life and character, the American people
have received a benefaction not less in permanent
importance and value, than in the revolution in opinion and
policy by which he introduced them to a new national life.
He has given them a statesman without a statesman’s
craftiness, a politician without a politician’s meannesses, a
great man without a great man’s vices, a philanthropist
without 
a 
philanthropist’s 
impracticable 
dreams; 
a
Christian without pretensions, a ruler without the pride of
 place and power, an ambitious man without selﬁshness, and
a successful man without vanity. On the basis of such a
manhood as this, all the coming generations of the nation
will not fail to build high and beautiful ideals of human
excellence, whose attractive power shall raise to a nobler
level the moral sense and moral character of the nation.
This true manhood — simple, unpretending, sympathetic
with all humanity, and reverent toward God — is among the
noblest of the nation’s treasures; and through it, God has
breathed, and will continue to breathe, into the nation, the
elevating and purifying power of his own divine life.
Humble child of the backwoods — boatman, ax-man,
hired laborer, clerk, surveyor, captain, legislator, lawyer,
debater, orator, politician, statesman, President, savior of
the republic, emancipator of a race, true Christian, true
man — we receive thy life and its immeasurably great
results, as the choicest gifts that a mortal has ever
bestowed upon us; grateful to thee for thy truth to thyself,
to us, and to God; and grateful to that ministry of
Providence and grace which endowed thee so richly, and
bestowed thee upon the nation and mankind.
