  ha ter II.
THE POINT AT which the Lincoln family settled in Indiana
was not far from the present town of Gentryville. The
campaign biographers of Abraham attribute to him some
valuable service with the ax, both in building the cabin and
in clearing the forest around it; but, at the age of seven, he
could hardly have rendered much assistance in these
oﬀices. We are told that he had an ax; and there is no doubt
that he learned at early age to use it eﬀectually. Indeed, his
muscles were formed and hardened by this exercise,
continued through all the years of his young manhood. It
has already been stated that he had no taste for the sports
of the forest; but he made an early shot, with a result that
must have surprised him and his family. While yet a child,
he saw through a crack in the cabin a ﬂock of wild turkeys,
feeding. He ventured to take down his father’s riﬂe, and,
ﬁring through the crack, killed one of them. This was the
largest game upon which he ever pulled trigger, his
brilliant success having no power to excite in him the
passion for hunting.
Among the most untoward circumstances, Thomas
Lincoln embraced every opportunity to give Abraham an
education. At diﬀerent periods, all of them brief, he
attended the neighborhood schools that were opened to
him. Andrew Crawford taught one of these, a Mr. Sweeney
 another, and Azel W. Dorsey another, the last of whom lived
to see his humble pupil a man of eminence, and to
congratulate him upon his elevation. One year, however,
would cover all the time spent by him with his two
Kentucky teachers, and the three whose schools he
attended in Indiana; and all the school education of his life
was embraced by the limits of this one year.
It is very diﬀicult for anyone bred in the older
communities of the country to appreciate the extreme
humility of border life, the meagerness and meanness of its
household appointments, and the paucity of its stimulants
to mental growth and social development. The bed in which
the elder Lincolns, and, on very cold nights, the little
Lincolns, slept, during their ﬁrst years in Indiana, was one
whose rudeness will give a key to the kind of life which
they lived there. The head and one side of the bedstead
were formed by an angle of the cabin itself. The bed-post
standing out into the room was a single crotch, cut from
the forest. Laid upon this crotch were the ends of two
hickory sticks, whose other extremities were morticed into
the logs, the two sides of the cabin and the two rails
embracing 
a 
quadrilateral 
space 
of 
the 
required
dimensions. This was bridged by slats “rived” from the
forest log, and on the slats was laid a sack ﬁlled with dried
leaves. This was, in reality, the bed of Thomas and Nancy
Lincoln; and into it, when the skins hung at the cabin
doorway did not keep out the cold, Abraham and his sister
crept for the warmth which their still ruder couch upon the
ground denied them.
 The lot of the little family, already sadly dark, was
rendered inexpressibly gloomy at an early day by an event
which made a profound impression upon the mind of the
boy — an impression that probably never wore away during
all the eventful years that followed. His delicate mother
bent to the dust under the burden of life which
circumstances had imposed upon her. A quick consumption
seized her, and her life went out in the ﬂashing fevers of
her disease. The boy and his sister were orphans, and the
humble home in the wilderness was desolate. Her death
occurred in 1818, scarcely two years after her removal to
Indiana, and when Abraham was in his tenth year. They laid
her to rest under the trees near the cabin, and, sitting on
her grave, the little boy wept his irreparable loss. There
were probably none but the simplest ceremonies at her
burial, and neither father nor son was content to part with
her without a formal Christian tribute to her worth and
memory. Both thought of the good Parson Elkin whom they
had left in Kentucky; and Abraham’s skill in writing was
brought into use in addressing to him a message. His
imperfect penmanship had been acquired partly in the
schools he had attended, and partly by practice in the sand
and on the barks of trees — on anything and with any
instrument by which letters might be formed.
Several months after Mrs. Lincoln died, Abraham wrote a
letter to Parson Elkin, informing him of his mother’s death,
and begging him to come to Indiana, and preach her
funeral sermon. It was a great favor that he thus asked of
the poor preacher. It would require him to ride on
 horseback nearly a hundred miles through the wilderness;
and it is something to be remembered to the humble
itinerant’s honor that he was willing to pay this tribute of
respect to the woman who had so thoroughly honored him
and his sacred oﬀice. He replied to Abraham’s invitation,
that he would preach the sermon on a certain future
Sunday, and gave him liberty to notify the neighbors of the
promised service.
As the appointed day approached, notice was given to
the whole neighborhood, embracing every family within
twenty miles. Neighbor carried the notice to neighbor. It
was scattered from every little school. There was probably
not a family that did not receive intelligence of the
anxiously anticipated event.
On a bright Sabbath morning, the settlers of the region
started for the cabin of the Lincolns; and, as they gathered
in, they presented a picture worthy the pencil of the
worthiest painter. Some came in carts of the rudest
construction, their wheels consisting of sections of the
huge boles of forest trees, and every other member the
product of the ax and auger; some came on horseback, two
or three upon a horse; others came in wagons drawn by
oxen, and still others came on foot. Two hundred persons in
all were assembled when Parson Elkin came out from the
Lincoln cabin, accompanied by the little family, and
proceeded to the tree under which the precious dust of a
wife and mother was buried. The congregation, seated
upon stumps and logs around the grave, received the
preacher and the mourning family in a silence broken only
 by the songs of birds, and the murmur of insects, or the
creaking cart of some late comer. Taking his stand at the
foot of the grave, Parson Elkin lifted his voice in prayer and
sacred song, and then preached a sermon. The occasion,
the eager faces around him, and all the sweet inﬂuences of
the morning, inspired him with an unusual ﬂuency and
fervor; and the ﬂickering sunlight, as it glanced through
the wind-parted leaves, caught many a tear upon the
bronzed cheeks of his auditors, while father and son were
overcome by the revival of their great grief. He spoke of the
precious Christian woman who had gone with the warm
praise which she deserved, and held her up as an example
of true womanhood.
Those who knew the tender and reverent spirit of
Abraham Lincoln later in life, will not doubt that he
returned to his cabin-home deeply impressed by all that he
had heard. It was the rounding up for him of the inﬂuences
of a Christian mother’s life and teachings. It recalled her
sweet and patient example, her assiduous eﬀorts to inspire
him with pure and noble motives, her simple instructions in
divine truth, her devoted love for him, and the motherly
oﬀices she had rendered him during all his tender years.
His character was planted in this Christian mother’s life. Its
roots were fed by this Christian mother’s love; and those
who have wondered at the truthfulness and earnestness of
his mature character, have only to remember that the tree
was true to the soil from which it sprang.
Abraham, at an early day, became a reader. Every book
upon which he could lay his hands he read. He became a
 writer also. The majority of the settlers around him were
entirely illiterate, and when it became known that Mr.
Lincoln’s boy could write, his services were in frequent
request by them in sending epistolary messages to their
friends. In the composition of these letters his early habits
of putting the thoughts of others as well as his own into
language were formed. The exercise was, indeed, as good
as a school to him; for there is no better discipline, for any
mind, than that of giving deﬁnite expression to thought in
language. Much of his subsequent power as a writer and
speaker was undoubtedly traceable to this early discipline.
The books which Abraham had the early privilege of
reading were the Bible, much of which he could repeat,
sop’s Fables, all of which he could repeat, Pilgrim’s
Progress, Weems’ Life of Washington, and a Life of Henry
Clay which his mother had managed to purchase for him.
Subsequently he read the Life of Franklin and Ramsay’s
Life of Washington. In these books, read and re-read, he
found meat for his hungry mind. The Holy Bible, 
sop and
John Bunyan: — could three better books have been chosen
for him from the richest library? For those who have
witnessed the dissipating eﬀects of many books upon the
minds of modern children it is not hard to believe that
Abraham’s poverty of books was the wealth of his life.
These three books did much to perfect that which his
mother’s teachings had begun, and to form a character
which for quaint simplicity, earnestness, truthfulness and
purity has never been surpassed among the historic
personages of the world. The Life of Washington, while it
 gave to him a lofty example of patriotism, incidentally
conveyed to his mind a general knowledge of American
history; and the Life of Henry Clay spoke to him of a living
man who had risen to political and professional eminence
from circumstances almost as humble as his own. The
latter book undoubtedly did much to excite his taste for
politics, to kindle his ambition, and to make him a warm
admirer and partizan of Henry Clay. Abraham must have
been very young when he read Weems’ Life of Washington,
and we catch a glimpse of his precocity in the thoughts
which it excited, as revealed by himself in a speech made to
the New Jersey Senate, while on his way to Washington to
assume the duties of the Presidency. Alluding to his early
reading of this book, he says: “I remember all the accounts
there given of the battle ﬁelds and struggles for the
liberties of the country, and none ﬁxed themselves upon my
imagination so deeply as the struggle here at Trenton, New
Jersey... I recollect thinking then, boy even though I was,
that there must have been something more than common
that those men struggled for.” Even at this age, he was not
only an interested reader of the story, but a student of
motives.
Ramsay’s Life of Washington was borrowed from his
teacher, Andrew Crawford, and an anecdote connected with
it 
illustrates 
Abraham’s 
conscientiousness 
and
characteristic honesty. The borrowed book was left
unguardedly in an open window. A shower coming on, it
was wet and nearly ruined. Abraham carried it to Mr.
Crawford in great grief and alarm, and, after explaining the
 accident, oﬀered to pay for the book in labor. Mr. Crawford
accepted the proposal, and the lad “pulled fodder” three
days to pay, not for the damages, but for the book itself,
which thus became one of his own literary treasures.
In the autumn or early winter of 1819, somewhat more
than a year after the death of Mrs. Lincoln, Abraham
passed into the care of a step-mother. His father married
and brought to his home in Indiana, Mrs. Sally Johnston, of
Elizabethtown, Kentucky, undoubtedly one of his old
acquaintances. She brought with her three children, the
fruit of her previous marriage; but she faithfully fulﬁlled
her assumed maternal duties to Thomas Lincoln’s children.
The two families grew up in harmony together, and the
many kind oﬀices which she performed for Abraham were
gratefully returned then and in after years by him. She still
survives, having seen her young charge rise to be her own
ruler, and the ruler of the nation, and to fall amid
expressions of grief from the whole civilized world.
As Abraham grew up, be became increasingly helpful in
all the work of the farm, often going out to labor by the day
for hire. Abundant evidence exists that he was regarded by
the neighbors as being remarkable, in many respects,
above the lads of his own age, with whom he associated. In
physical strength and sundry athletic feats, he was the
master of them all. Never quarrelsome or disposed to make
an unpleasant show of his prowess, he was ready to help all
who were in need of help, to do their errands, write their
letters, and lighten their burdens.
 An instance of his practical humanity at this early period
of his life may be recorded. One evening, while returning
from a “raising” in his wide neighborhood, with a number
of companions, he discovered a straying horse, with saddle
and bridle upon him. The horse was recognized as
belonging to a man who was accustomed to excess in drink,
and it was suspected at once that the owner was not far oﬀ.
A short search only was necessary to conﬁrm the
suspicions of the young men. The poor drunkard was found
in a perfectly helpless condition, upon the chilly ground.
Abraham’s companions urged the cowardly policy of
leaving him to his fate, but young Lincoln would not hear to
the preposition. At his request, the miserable sot was lifted
to his shoulders, and he actually carried him eighty rods to
the nearest house. Sending word to his father that he
should not be back that night, with the reason for his
absence, he attended and nursed the man until the
morning, and had the pleasure of believing that he had
saved his life.
That Abraham Lincoln was entirely content with the
humdrum life he was living, or the prospects which it
presented to him, is not probable. He had caught glimpses
of a life of greater dignity and signiﬁcance. Echoes from
the great centers of civilization had reached his ears. When
he was eighteen years old he conceived the project of
building a little boat, and taking the produce of the Lincoln
farm down the river to a market. He had learned the use of
tools, and possessed considerable mechanical talent, as will
appear in some other acts of his life. Of the voyage and its
 results we have no knowledge, but an incident occurred
before starting which he related in later life to his
Secretary of State, Mr. Seward, that made a very marked
and pleasant impression upon his memory. As he stood at
the landing, a steamer approached, coming down the river.
At the same time two passengers came to the river’s bank
who wished to be taken out to the packet with their
luggage. Looking among the boats at the landing, they
singled out Abraham’s, and asked him to scull them to the
steamer. This he did, and after seeing them and their
trunks on board, he had the pleasure of receiving upon the
bottom of his boat, before he shoved oﬀ, a silver half dollar
from each of his passengers. “I could scarcely believe my
eyes,” said Mr. Lincoln, in telling the story. “You may think
it was a very little thing,” continued he, “but it was a most
important incident in my life. I could scarcely believe that I,
a poor boy, had earned a dollar in less than a day. The
world seemed wider and fairer before me. I was a more
hopeful and conﬁdent being from that time.”
A little incident occurred during these hard years in
Indiana which illustrates the straits to which the settlers
were subjected. At one time Abraham was obliged to take
his grist upon the back of his father’s horse, and go ﬁfty
miles to get it ground. The mill itself was very rude, and
driven by horse-power. The customers were obliged to wait
their turn, without reference to their distance from home,
and then use their own horses to propel the machinery. On
one occasion, Abraham, having arrived at his turn, fastened
his mare to the lever, and was following her closely upon
 her rounds, when, urging her with a switch, and “clucking”
to her in the usual way, he received a kick from her which
prostrated him, and made him insensible. With the ﬁrst
instant of returning consciousness, he ﬁnished the cluck,
which he had commenced when he received the kick, (a
fact for the psychologist) and with the next he probably
thought about getting home, where he arrived at last,
battered, but ready for further service.
At the age of nineteen, Abraham made his second essay
in navigation, and this time caught something more than a
glimpse of the great world in which he was destined to play
so important a part. A trading neighbor applied to him to
take charge of a ﬂat-boat and its cargo, and, in company
with his own son, to take it to the sugar plantations near
New Orleans. The entire business of the trip was placed in
Abraham’s hands. The fact tells its own story touching the
young man’s reputation for capacity and integrity. He had
never made the trip, knew nothing of the journey, was
unaccustomed to business transactions, had never been
much upon the river; but his tact, ability and honesty were
so far trusted that the trader was willing to risk his cargo
and his son in his care.
The delight with which the youth swung loose from the
shore upon his clumsy craft, with the prospect of a ride of
eighteen hundred miles before him, and a vision of the
great world of which he had read and thought so much,
may be imagined. At this time, he had become a very tall
and powerful young man. He had reached the remarkable
height of six feet and four inches, a length of trunk and
 limb remarkable even among the tall race of pioneers to
which he belonged.
The incidents of a trip like this were not likely to be
exciting, but there were many social chats with settlers and
hunters along the banks ot the Ohio and Mississippi, and
there was much hailing of similar craft aﬂoat. Arriving at a
sugar plantation somewhere between Natchez and New
Orleans, the boat was pulled in, and tied to the shore for
purposes of trade; and here an incident occurred which
was suﬀiciently exciting, and one which, in the memory of
recent events, reads somewhat strangely. Here seven
negroes attacked the life of the future liberator of their
race, and it is not improbable that some of them have lived
to be emancipated by his proclamation. Night had fallen,
and the two tired voyagers had lain down upon their hard
bed for sleep. Hearing a noise on shore, Abraham shouted:
“Who’s there?” The noise continuing, and no voice replying,
he sprang to his feet, and saw seven negroes, evidently
bent on plunder. Abraham guessed the errand at once, and
seizing a hand-spike, rushed toward them, and knocked one
into the water the moment that he touched the boat. The
second, third and fourth who leaped on board were served
in the same rough way. Seeing that they were not likely to
make headway in their thieving enterprise, the remainder
turned to ﬂee. Abraham and his companion growing excited
and warm with their work, leaped on shore, and followed
them. Both were too swift of foot for the negroes, and all of
them received a severe pounding. They returned to their
boat just as the others escaped from the water, but the
 latter ﬂed into the darkness aa fast as their feet could carry
them. Abraham and his fellow in the ﬁght were both
injured, but not disabled. Not being armed, and unwilling
to wait until the negroes had received reinforcements, they
cut adrift, and ﬂoating down a mile or two, tied up to the
bank again, and watched and waited for the morning.
The trip was brought at length to a successful end. The
cargo, or “load,” as they called it, was all disposed of for
money, the boat itself sold for lumber, and the young men
retraced the passage, partly, at least, on shore and on foot,
occupying several weeks in the diﬀicult and tedious
journey.
Working thus for others, receiving only the humblest
wages in return, reading every book upon which he could
lay his hand, pursuing various studies in the intervals of toil
with special attention to arithmetic, discharging his ﬁlial
duties at home and upon his father’s farm, picking up bits
of information from neighbors and new-comers, growing in
wisdom and practical sagacity, and achieving a place in the
good will and respect of all with whom he came in contact,
the thirteen years of his life in Indiana wore away. With a
constitution as ﬁrm and ﬂexible as whip-cord, he had
arrived at his majority. The most that could be said of his
education was that he could “read, write and cipher.” He
knew nothing of English grammar. He could not read a
sentence in any tongue but his own; but all that he knew,
he knew thoroughly. It had all been assimilated, and was a
part not only of his inalienable possessions but of himself.
While acquiring, he had learned to construct, organize,
 express. There was no part of his knowledge that was not
an element of his practical power. He had not been made
by any artiﬁcial process; he had grown. Holding within
himself the germ of a great life, he had reached out his
roots like the trees among which he was reared, and drawn
into himself such nutriment as the soil aﬀorded. His
individuality was developed and nurtured by the process.
He had become a man after God’s pattern, and not a
machine after man’s pattern; he was a child of Nature and
not a thing of art. And this was the secret of all his
subsequent intellectual successes. He succeeded because
he had himself and all his resources completely in hand; for
he was not, and never became an educated man, in the
common meaning of that phrase. He could train all his
force upon any point, and it mattered little whether the
direction was an accustomed one or otherwise.
It was a happy thing for the young man that, living
among the roughest of rough men, many of whom were
addicted to coarse vices, he never acquired a vice. There
was no taint upon his moral character. No stimulant ever
entered his lips, no profanity ever came forth from them,
which deﬁled the man. Loving and telling a story better
than anyone around him, except his father, from whom he
inherited the taste and talent, a great talker and a warm
lover 
of 
social 
intercourse, 
good-natured 
under 
all
circumstances, his honesty and truthfulness well known
and thoroughly believed in, he was as popular throughout
all the region where he lived as he became afterward
throughout the nation.
