  ha ter    II.
THE 
YEAR 
1864 
was 
distinguished 
by 
two 
grand
campaigns: one, political; the other, military: and, as the
latter did not terminate with the year, it is well, perhaps, to
give the former the precedence in the record. After four
years, marked by mighty changes in the nation, the year of
the presidential election had come again. It came in with
doubt and darkness. The country was feeling the distresses
of the war, and was wincing under the drafts made upon its
vital and ﬁnancial resources. Call after call for men had
been made. Draft after draft had been enforced. Taxation
brought home the burden to every man’s door; and still no
end appeared. Still the rebel confederacy seemed full of
vitality; still it commanded immense resources of men and
material; still its spirit and its words were uncompromising
and deﬁant. During four years of administration, Mr.
Lincoln had made many enemies, among those who had
originally supported him; and the democratic party were
not scrupulous in the use of means to bring him into
disrepute with the people. Many republicans suﬀered under
private grievances. Their counsels had not been suﬀiciently
followed; their friends had not been properly served. Some
thought Mr. Lincoln had been too fast and too severe in his
measures; others thought that he had been too slow. All
this was to have been expected; and it may well be
 imagined that no decision as to the true policy of the
republican party, in its nominations, could have been made,
without an exhibition of all the elements of discord.
That this period had been anticipated by friends and
enemies abroad as one of the most terrible tests to which
the republican institutions of the country had been or could
be subjected, was evident. We were called upon in the very
heat of civil war — that war involving questions upon which
even the loyal portion of the country was almost evenly
divided — to elect a president for four years. With immense
armies in the ﬁeld and immense navies aﬂoat, — with fresh
drafts for troops threatened or in progress, — with discord
among the friends of the government and the foes of the
rebellion, — and with a watchful opposition, skilled in party
warfare, taking advantage of every mistake of the
government and every success of its enemies, to push its
own fortunes in the strife for power, — it is not strange that
cool observers looked doubtfully upon the result, as it
related to the power of a republican government to take
care of itself, and maintain its hold upon the nation and its
place among the governments of the world. How well the
people behaved in this startling emergency, the calm
discussions of the presidential campaign, the solemn and
conscientious manner of the people at the polls, the
triumph of the national arms, and the present peace and
stability of the country, bear witness.
Mr. Chase, the distinguished Secretary or the Treasury,
had his friends, and they were many and powerful. General
Fremont had also his friends, who felt that he had not been
 well treated by the administration, and who were anxious
for a diversion in his favor. Although both of these
gentlemen had strong adherents among the politicians, and
although either of them would have been cordially
supported by the people under favorable circumstances, it
was abundantly evident that the great masses of the people
were in favor of Mr. Lincoln. He had had experience, and
had grown wise under its inﬂuence. His unobtrusive
character and his unbending honesty had won their
conﬁdence; and, although the future looked dark, they were
conscious that progress had been made toward the
destruction of the rebellion, and that, if the policy of war
should be pursued, it would inevitably ultimate in the
national success. They were convinced, also, that the way
to a permanent peace was through war. Under these
circumstances, they were reluctant to change leaders and
rulers. The result was, that, at an early day, Mr. Chase
withdrew his name from the list of candidates, and left
much of the disaﬀected element aﬂoat.
Outside of the republican and democratic parties, there
was no organization; and, to institute one, an irresponsible
call was issued, for a convention to be held at Cleveland,
Ohio, on the thirty-ﬁrst of May. The call represented that
the public liberties were in danger, and declared for the
“one-term principle,” by which Mr. Lincoln should be set
aside, however eﬀiciently he might have served the
government. The regular convention of the republican
party, which was to be held at Baltimore on the eighth of
June, was denounced in the call, as failing to answer the
 conditions of a truly national convention, in consequence of
its proximity to “administrative inﬂuence.”
The people recognized this call to be simply what it, in
reality, was — an anti-Lincoln demonstration; and paid no
attention to it, except in one or two instances. The Germans
of Missouri did something by way of indorsement; as did
also a few radicals elsewhere, who had really never been
members of the republican party proper.
The convention was held at the appointed time; and it
brought together an insigniﬁcant number of politicians,
self-appointed to their seats in the convention. It was, in no
sense, the oﬀspring of the popular feeling or conviction;
and its action found no response in the popular heart.
Fremont’s 
name 
formed 
the 
rallying 
point 
of 
the
convention. Wendell Phillips and Frederick Douglass sent
letters to it. Mrs. E. Cady Stanton approved of the
convention in a letter. John Cochrane presided, and was
honored with the nomination for Vice-president, on the
ticket with General Fremont. The platform adopted dealt
brieﬂy with generalities, condemning no person save by
implication, and containing no vital element which had not
already been appropriated by the mass of republicans
throughout the nation. Although the convention was
organized and engineered to bring an inﬂuence to bear
upon the Baltimore Convention, it failed to have inﬂuence
anywhere.
The saddest feature of the whole movement was General
Fremont’s connivance with it, when he could not but see
that its only inﬂuence would be to divide the friends of the
 government; and the eagerness with which he accepted his
nomination. He opened his letter of acceptance by speaking
of the convention as an assemblage of the “representatives
of the people,” when he ought to have known that they
were nothing of the kind. General Fremont, it is to be
remembered here, was the republican candidate for the
presidency eight years before, receiving the honor of every
republican vote. The party had once been beaten with him
for its standard-bearer; and, if he had been thoroughly
magnanimous, he would have remembered it. At the
opening of the war, Mr. Lincoln had given him the highest
military commission he had it in his power to bestow; and,
after his Missouri failure, he had created a department for
him. In this, he had not won distinguished honor; and
when, at last, he was subordinated to another General, to
meet the conditions of a great emergency, he threw up his
position on a point of etiquette, and retired from his
command. Mr. Lincoln had found it very diﬀicult to please
the General, or to satisfy his friends. The President was
supposed to be jealous of him; and, if the readers of the life
of Mr. Lincoln are not already convinced that such jealousy
could have no place in him, no present attempt to vindicate
his motives will avail. The truth was that Mr. Lincoln
entertained none but the kindliest feelings toward him,
though it is doubtful whether he had great conﬁdence in his
administrative and military ability. General Fremont knew,
of course, that the little band of men gathered at Cleveland
did not represent the republican party; and he knew that
the republican party loved Mr. Lincoln. The party had been
 true 
to 
General 
Fremont, 
even 
if 
they 
had 
been
disappointed in him. When he undertook to stab the oﬀicial
reputation of the President, he was engaged in the attempt
to ruin the chosen man of the republican party. “Had Mr.
Lincoln remained faithful to the principles he was elected
to defend, no schism could have been created, and no
contest could have been possible,” said the General in his
letter. Had the people decided that Mr. Lincoln was
faithless to the principles he was chosen to defend? Had
the republican party so decided? “The ordinary rights
secured under the Constitution and laws of the country
have been violated,” continued the General. He charged the
administration with managing the war for personal ends,
with “incapacity and selﬁshness,” with “disregard of
constitutional rights,” with “violation of personal liberty
and the liberty of the press,” and with “feebleness and want
of principle.” Among the objects of the convention itself; he
recognized the eﬀort “to arouse the attention of the
people” to certain alleged facts, which he had enumerated;
“and to bring them to realize that, while we are saturating
southern soil with the best blood of the country, in the
name of liberty, we have really parted with it at home.” His
own preference, he declared, would be to aid in the
election of some one, other than Mr. Lincoln, who might be
nominated at Baltimore, “But if Mr. Lincoln should be
nominated,” said he, “as I believe it would be fatal to the
country to indorse a policy and renew a power which has
cost us the lives of thousands of men, and needlessly put
the country on the road to bankruptcy, there will be no
 other alternative but to organize against him every element
of conscientious opposition, with the view to prevent the
misfortune of his re-election.”
General Fremont, virtuous above his party, virtuous
above Mr. Lincoln, quick to see encroachments upon the
rights of the people in advance of the people themselves,
ready to ﬁnd personal motives in the management of the
war by the administration, and himself, of course, acting
solely upon principle, failed to be appreciated by those
whose good he so tenderly sought. The republican party
gave him no response, other than at once and forever to
count him out of its conﬁdence and aﬀections. Convention,
platform, and candidates were early counted among
political lumber; and whether the General at last withdrew
from the ﬁeld as a matter of principle, or from personal
considerations, does not appear. He withdrew his name
from the list of candidates before the people in September,
after it became evident to everybody that his position was a
damage to the national cause, administering a parting
thrust at Mr. Lincoln in the words: “In respect to Mr.
Lincoln, I continue to hold exactly the sentiments contained
in 
my 
letter 
of 
acceptance. 
I 
consider 
that 
his
administration has been politically and ﬁnancially a failure,
and that its necessary continuance is a cause of regret for
the country.” General Fremont, an old favorite of the
republican party, and a man who virtually claimed to be a
better republican than the majority of his party, said this,
and said it with a purpose, or, wantonly, without a purpose,
when he knew that the alternative of Mr. Lincoln’s election
 was the election of General McClellan, on a peace platform,
supported by such patriots as Fernando Wood and Clement
L. Vallandigham.
Four days before the date appointed for the assembling
of the Baltimore Convention, a meeting was held in New
York to do honor to General Grant. The General had not
then concluded the war, and had not, in fact, met with
decisive successes with the army of the Potomac. There
was no special occasion for the meeting, except to
inﬂuence the Baltimore Convention in the selection of a
candidate. To cover their real intent, they invited Mr.
Lincoln to attend; and he sent the following letter in
response:
“Gentlemen — Your letter inviting me to be present at a
mass meeting of the loyal citizens, to be held at New York
on the fourth inst., for the purpose of expressing gratitude
to Lieutenant-general Grant for his signal services, was
received yesterday. It is impossible for me to attend. I
approve, nevertheless, whatever may tend to strengthen
and sustain General Grant and the noble armies now under
his direction. My previous high estimate of General Grant
has been maintained and heightened by what has occurred
in the remarkable campaign he is now conducting; while
the magnitude and diﬀiculty of the task before him does not
prove less than I expected. He and his brave soldiers are
now in the midst of their great trial; and I trust that, at
your meeting, you will so shape your good words that they
may turn to men and guns moving to his and their support.
“Yours truly, A. Lincoln.”
 The cordial tone of the President toward the General,
eﬀectually neutralized the object of the meeting; and, when
the Baltimore Convention met, on the eighth of June, there
was no name but that of the President that found
adherents. Many of the delegates had come instructed to
vote for him, from the conventions which sent them. Rev.
Robert J. Breckinridge of Kentucky, a stern and eloquent
old Unionist, was chosen temporary chairman; and Hon.
William Dennison of Ohio was elected to be the permanent
president of the convention. On the following day, Mr.
Henry J. Raymond of New York, as chairman of the
committee on resolutions, presented the platform, which
was adopted with warm approval, and with entire
unanimity. It pledged the convention, and those it
represented, to aid the government in quelling by force of
arms the rebellion then raging against its authority;
approved the determination of the government not to
compromise with rebels in arms; indorsed the acts and
proclamations 
against 
slavery, 
and 
advocated 
a
constitutional amendment abolishing it; returned thanks to
the soldiers of the Union armies, and declared that the
nation owed a permanent provision for those disabled by
the war; approved of the administration of Mr. Lincoln and
the acts and measures which he had adopted for the
preservation of the nation against its open and secret foes;
declared that the government owed protection to all its
soldiers, without distinction of color; aﬀirmed that the
national faith, pledged for the redemption of the public
debt, must be kept inviolate; and expressed approval of the
 position taken by the government that the people of the
United States can never regard with indiﬀerence the
attempt of any European power to overthrow by force, or to
supplant by fraud, the institutions of any republican
government on the Western Continent.
After the adoption of the resolutions, came the ballot for
a presidential candidate. At the ﬁrst ballot, every vote was
given for Mr. Lincoln, except the twenty-two from Missouri
which, under instructions, were given for General Grant;
but the nomination was made unanimous on the motion of
one of the Missouri delegates. Mr. Hamlin, the incumbent
of the vice-presidential oﬀice, though an able and excellent
man, was, from motives of policy, not regarded by many as
the best candidate for that oﬀice; and Andrew Johnson of
Tennessee received the nomination.
A single resolution in the platform, to which no allusion
is made in the foregoing summary of its leading features,
covertly demanded a change in the cabinet. The words,
“We deem it essential to the general welfare that harmony
should prevail in our national councils, and we regard as
worthy of conﬁdence and oﬀicial trust those only who
cordially indorse the principles proclaimed in these
resolutions,” were intended as an intimation that the
convention would like to have the President dismiss the
Postmaster-general, Montgomery Blair. The resolution was
probably a concession to the Loyal Leagues, which,
originally friendly to the nomination of Mr. Chase, took up
the diﬀerences which were understood to exist between
these two members of the cabinet, and demanded that Mr.
 Blair should retire. A committee consisting of John M.
Ashley, John Covode and George S. Boutwell, waited upon
the President, on one occasion, to urge Mr. Blair’s
dismissal; and on that occasion Mr. Lincoln said that, if he
should be re-elected, he should probably make some
changes in his cabinet — a reply which they took as an
assent to their request, and so reported to the body that
sent them. When the resolution in question appeared in the
platform, Mr. Blair, understanding it, placed his resignation
in the hands of the President, who delayed his acceptance
of it until circumstances rendered the step desirable.
Washington was but a short distance from Baltimore; and
Governor Dennison, the president of the convention, waited
upon Mr. Lincoln, accompanied by a committee, to inform
him of his nomination. After receiving the formal address of
that gentleman, with a copy of the resolutions which had
been adopted, Mr. Lincoln said:
“Having served four years in the depths of a great and
yet unended national peril, I can view this call to a second
term in nowise more ﬂattering to myself than as an
expression of the public judgment that I may better ﬁnish a
diﬀicult work, in which I have labored from the ﬁrst, than
could any one less severely schooled to the task. In this
view, and with assured reliance on that Almighty Ruler who
has so graciously sustained us thus far, and with increased
gratitude to the generous people for their continued
conﬁdence, I accept the renewed trust, with its yet onerous
and perplexing duties and responsibilities.”
 During the same day, the President was waited upon by a
committee of the Union League, which came with a tender
of the congratulations, and a pledge of the conﬁdence and
support, of that organization; and, in the evening, by the
Ohio 
delegation 
in 
the 
convention. 
To 
both 
these
deputations he addressed brief remarks, in the spirit of
those quoted as addressed to the committee of the
convention. Some days subsequently, he received the
formal notiﬁcation, by letter, of his nomination, to which, on
the twenty-seventh of June, he replied as follows:
“Gentlemen: — Your letter of the fourteenth inst.,
formally notifying me that I have been nominated by the
convention you represent for the Presidency of the United
States, for four years from the fourth of March next, has
been received. The nomination is gratefully accepted, as
the resolutions of the convention, called the platform, are
heartily approved. While the resolution in regard to the
supplanting of republican governments upon the Western
Continent 
is 
fully 
concurred 
in, 
there 
might 
be
misunderstanding were I not to say that the position of the
government in relation to the action of France in Mexico, as
assumed through the State Department, and indorsed by
the convention among the measures and acts of the
Executive, will be faithfully maintained so long as the state
of facts shall leave that position pertinent and applicable. I
am especially gratiﬁed that the soldier and seaman were
not forgotten by the convention, as they forever must and
will be remembered by the grateful country, for whose
salvation they devote their lives.
 “Thanking you for the kind and complimentary terms in
which you have communicated the nomination and other
proceedings of the convention, I subscribe myself,
“Your obedient servant,
“Abraham Lincoln.”
It was still more than two months before the assembling
of the Democratic Convention, announced to be held at
Chicago on the twenty-ninth of August. This convention had
been deferred, with the conﬁdent expectation, if not the
hope, that the events of the war would prepare the people
to accept a peace policy, and leave the party free to take
direct issue with the administration. During this interval, a
peculiar change came over the spirit of the friends of Mr.
Lincoln. Opening the campaign with perfect conﬁdence
concerning the results, a feeling of distrust and doubt crept
over them; and, without any apparent cause, the thought
became prevalent that a mistake had been made in the
nomination. This arose partly from the consciousness that
the country was really tired of a war of which they saw
neither the end nor the signs of its approach; and partly
from the uncertainty which prevailed concerning the action
of the Democratic Convention, which was pretty sure to be
based upon the results of military movements in progress,
and of dubious issue. It was one of those strange and
unaccountable contagions of public feeling and opinion
which start, no man knows where; lead, no man knows
whither; and die, at last, by no man’s hand. Men did not
catch it from newspapers, did not contract it from
speeches, did not imbibe or absorb it in facts; but,
 simultaneously 
and 
universally, 
the 
friends 
of 
the
administration were aﬀected with a distrust of the future
and a doubt of the wisdom of their choice.
There were still divisions in their ranks, but these were
not formidable. Occasion was taken by the opposition press
to magnify every mistake of the President and to condemn
every doubtful measure. One Arguelles, convicted in Cuba
of selling part of a cargo of negroes, illicitly landed, which,
as an oﬀicer of the Spanish army, he had captured, was
permitted to be taken from New York, and carried back to
the island. This act — a thoroughly righteous one in the
light of humanity and justice — was regarded by the
opposition as a denial of the right of asylum; and a good
deal of disturbance was created by it.
Early in July, Congress completed its action upon a plan
of reconstruction, which it embodied in an elaborate bill. In
the preparation of this bill, Henry Winter Davis of Maryland
and Benjamin F. Wade of Ohio were prominently active. A
good deal of time and discussion had been expended upon
it, but it was passed and sent to the President less than one
hour before the close of the session. He failed to approve it,
and, on the eighth of July, issued a proclamation on the
subject. In this proclamation, the President declared that
he was unprepared, by a formal approval of the bill, to
commit himself to any single plan of reconstruction, or to
set aside the free state governments already formed in
Arkansas and Louisiana on other plans. At the same time,
he was willing that the plan embodied in the bill should be
recognized as one among others; and so promulgated the
 bill itself, as a part of his proclamation. To the people of any
rebel state who should adopt the plan provided by the bill,
he pledged the executive assistance. The action of the
President in this matter exceedingly oﬀended Messrs. Wade
and Davis, who joined in a bitter manifesto against him,
and published it in the New York Tribune of August ﬁfth.
“The President,” they declared, “by preventing this bill
from becoming a law, holds the electoral votes of the rebel
states 
at 
the 
dictation 
of 
his 
personal 
ambition.”
Furthermore: “A more studied outrage on the legislative
authority of the people, has never been perpetrated.” In its
attack upon Mr. Lincoln’s motives, it was an oﬀensive
paper, and pained the friends of the administration no less
than it rejoiced its enemies.
Mr. Lincoln, himself, never permitted attacks of this
character to trouble him. If they were very bitter, he did not
read them at all; and many men of mark who wrote things
for his particular eye, failed of their object utterly by his
refusal to read, or listen to, their fulminations. After the
Wade and Davis manifesto was issued, it was, on one
occasion, the subject of conversation between him and a
number of gentlemen who had called at the White House.
After all the gentlemen had retired, save one, who was an
intimate personal friend, Mr. Lincoln turned to him, and
said: “The Wade and Davis matter troubles me very little.
Indeed, I feel a good deal about it as the old man did about
his cheese, when his very smart boy found, by the aid of a
microscope, that it was full of maggots. ‘Oh father!’
exclaimed the boy, ‘how can you eat that stuﬀ? Just look in
 here, and see ’em wriggle!’ The old man took another
mouthful, and, putting his teeth into it, replied grimly: ‘let
’em wriggle!’”
The evident anxiety of the people for peace was a subject
of deep solicitude with the administration. Mr. Lincoln had
no faith in the desire of the Richmond government for any
peace which would be accepted by the loyal people of the
country. It was, however, for the interest of the rebels to
create a peace party in the northern states, in order to
weaken the administration; and it was their policy to
appear to be ready to make or receive propositions for
peace. There were two things to which the administration
was, in all good faith, irrevocably committed, viz: the
restoration of the Union, under the Constitution, and the
abolition of slavery. Without being false to his oath of oﬀice
and to the American people who had poured out life and
treasure to save the nation, and without being faithless to
an oppressed race to whom he had pledged emancipation,
Mr. Lincoln could entertain no propositions for peace, and
could make none, which were not based on the essential
conditions of national unity and freedom to the blacks. This
state of facts tied his hands; yet he was made by his
enemies to appear to be averse to peace; and some of his
friends, of the more timid sort, felt that, unless he could be
placed in a diﬀerent light before the people, his chances of
re-election were slender.
On the ﬁfth of July, one W.C. Jewett wrote a letter from
Niagara Falls to Horace Greeley of New York, stating that
there were, in Canada, two ambassadors of the rebel
 government, with full powers to negotiate a peace; and
requesting that Mr. Greeley proceed to Niagara for a
conference, or secure from the President a safe-conduct for
them to New York. Mr. Greeley inclosed the letter to Mr.
Lincoln, remarking that he thought the matter deserved
attention. He also wrote: “I venture to remind you that our
bleeding, bankrupt, almost dying country, longs for peace
— shudders at the prospect of fresh conscriptions, of
further wholesale devastations, and of new rivers of human
blood; and a wide-spread conviction that the government
and its supporters are not anxious for peace, and do not
improve proﬀered opportunities to achieve it, is doing great
harm now, and is morally certain, unless removed, to do far
greater 
in 
the 
approaching 
elections.” 
Mr. 
Greeley
subjoined to his letter a plan of adjustment which he
deemed proper and practicable, the ﬁrst two items of which
covered the restoration of the Union and the abolition of
slavery. Certainly, if these were leading and essential parts
of the plan, it could make no diﬀerence whether they were
made conditions precedent to negotiation, or essentials in
any adjustment to be procured by negotiation.
The President replied to this communication, on the
ninth: “If you can ﬁnd any person, anywhere, professing to
have any proposition of Jeﬀerson Davis, in writing,
embracing the restoration of the Union and abandonment
of slavery, whatever else it embraces, say to him that he
may come to me with you.” On the thirteenth of July, Mr.
Greeley wrote to the President, stating that he had
information upon which he could rely, that two persons,
 duly commissioned and empowered to negotiate for a
peace, were not far from Niagara Falls, and were desirous
to confer with the President, or such persons as he might
appoint. Their names were Clement C. Clay of Alabama and
Jacob Thompson of Mississippi. If these persons could be
permitted to see Mr. Lincoln, they wished a safe-conduct
for themselves and for George N. Saunders to Washington.
In the course of the letter, Mr. Greeley said: “I am, of
course, quite other than sanguine that a peace can now be
made; but I am quite sure that a frank, earnest, anxious
eﬀort to terminate the war on honorable terms, would
immensely strengthen the government in case of its failure,
and would help us in the eyes of the civilized world.”
George N. Saunders wrote to Mr. Greeley on the twelfth,
that he was authorized to say that Mr. Clay and Professor
Holcombe of Virginia were ready, with himself, to go to
Washington, provided they should have a safe-conduct. To
Mr. Greeley’s letter of the thirteenth, Mr. Lincoln replied on
the ﬁfteenth: “I am disappointed that you have not already
reached here with those commissioners. If they would
consent to come on being shown my letter to you of the
ninth inst., show that and this to them; and, if they will
consent to come on the terms stated in the former, bring
them. I not only intend a sincere eﬀort for peace, but I
intend that you shall be a personal witness that it is made.”
This note was taken to Mr. Greeley by Major Hay, who,
having been empowered by telegraph to write a safe-
conduct for the commissioners, embraced in his paper the
names 
of 
Messrs. 
Clay, 
Thompson, 
Holcombe, 
and
 Saunders. With this, Mr. Greeley started for Niagara Falls,
and, on arriving there on the seventeenth, addressed to the
ﬁrst three of these gentlemen, at the Clifton House, on the
Canada side of the river, a note, stating that he was
informed that they were duly accredited from Richmond as
the bearers of propositions looking to the establishment of
peace; that he understood, also, that they desired to visit
Washington in the fulﬁllment of their mission, and that they
wished George N. Saunders to accompany them. If these
were the facts, he declared himself authorized by the
President to oﬀer them a safe-conduct and to accompany
them.
On the following day, this note was replied to by Messrs.
Clay and Holcombe, who frankly acknowledged that the
safe-conduct of the President had been oﬀered under a
misapprehension of facts. They were not accredited from
Richmond at all, as the bearers of propositions looking to
the establishment of peace. They professed, however, to be
in the conﬁdential employ of their government, and to be
familiar with its wishes and opinions on the subject; and
they declared that, if the circumstances disclosed in the
correspondence were communicated to Richmond, they, or
others, would at once be invested with the requisite
authority to negotiate. It should be remembered, at this
point, that these men had not been made fully acquainted
with the conditions on which the President had oﬀered
them a safe-conduct. Mr. Greeley had evidently forgotten to
inform them concerning the terms of Mr. Lincoln’s letter of
the ninth, in which he promised a safe-conduct only to
 those who should be duly accredited with propositions for
peace, conditioned upon the restoration of the Union and
the abolition of slavery. These, it must be remembered,
were the original and unaltered conditions on which Mr.
Lincoln had consented to receive them.
Mr. Greeley replied to Messrs. Clay and Holcombe, on
the eighteenth, that the state of facts diﬀered materially
from Mr. Lincoln’s understanding of them, and that he
should telegraph for fresh instructions, which he did at
once. On receiving the dispatch, Mr. Lincoln sent Major
Hay to Niagara, with the following letter:
“Executive Mansion, Washington, July 18th, 1864.
“To Whom It May Concern:— “Any proposition which
embraces the restoration of peace, the integrity of the
whole Union, and the abandonment of slavery, and which
comes by and with an authority that can control the armies
now at war against the United States, will be received and
considered by the Executive government of the United
States, and will be met on liberal terms on substantial and
collateral points; and the bearer or bearers thereof shall
have safe-conduct both ways.
“Abraham Lincoln.”
Major Hay, on his arrival at Niagara, went with Mr.
Greeley to the Clifton House, and delivered the above
missive to Professor Holcombe. Then Mr. Greeley returned
to New York, where he soon afterwards received the
response of Messrs. Clay and Holcombe. Their letter was
exactly what might have been expected. They had supposed
that a safe-conduct had been oﬀered them on the ground
 that they were “duly accredited from Richmond, as bearers
of propositions looking to the establishment of peace;” and,
when they found conditions insisted on precedent to
negotiation, they could see only a “sudden and entire
change in the views of the President,” and a “rude
withdrawal of a courteous overture for negotiation, at the
moment it was likely to be accepted.” It will be noticed by
the reader that the President had made no change
whatever in his conditions from those ﬁrst oﬀered, and that
the letter of Clay and Holcombe left him in a false position.
Nothing appears in the correspondence, thus far published,
to show that Mr. Greeley ever communicated to the
commissioners the President’s original conditions for a
safe-conduct and an interview.
In order to place himself in a just position before the
country, Mr. Lincoln applied to Mr. Greeley for permission
to publish the entire correspondence, omitting certain
unessential passages in Mr. Greeley’s letters, which
represented the country as being on the verge of
destruction, 
intimated 
the 
possibility 
of 
a 
northern
insurrection, and alluded to the importance of aﬀecting
favorably the North Carolina election. Mr. Greeley refused
to have the correspondence published, unless these
passages, which Mr. Lincoln thought would have a
mischievous eﬀect upon the public mind, should be
retained. For the sake of the country and its cause, Mr.
Lincoln submitted; but, determined to stand right in history,
he sent a note to Henry J. Raymond, editor of the New York
Times, under date of August 15, 1864, as follows:
 My Dear Sir: — I have proposed to Mr. Greeley that the
Niagara correspondence be published, suppressing only the
parts of his letters over which the red pencil is drawn in the
copy which I herewith send. He declines giving his consent
to the publication of his letters, unless these parts be
published with the rest. I have concluded that it is better
for me to submit, for the time, to the consequences of the
false position in which I consider he has placed me, than to
subject the country to the consequences of publishing these
discouraging and injurious parts. I send you this, and the
accompanying copy, not for publication, but merely to
explain to you, and that you preserve them until their
proper time shall come.
“Yours truly,
“Abraham Lincoln.”
So Mr. Lincoln went through the canvass with the
imputation resting upon him of having pursued a vacillating
course 
with 
the 
unaccredited 
and 
irresponsible
commissioners, and of repelling negotiations for peace. All
the capital that could be made against him from the
materials furnished by the aﬀair, was assiduously used by
the opposition and by the rebels themselves.
The time for holding the National Democratic Convention
came at last. Still the fortunes of the military campaign
were undecided; and the country was groaning under
eﬀorts to furnish men for the reinforcement of the armies.
But the President found aid in unexpected quarters. By the
direction of that Providence in which he so implicitly
believed, every treasonable and personally inimical element
 in the nation became his ally. Mr. Vallandigham had
returned to the country before his time; and the President
permitted him to remain, unmolested. He became one of
the pets of his party; and, attending the Chicago
Convention as a delegate, was chosen chairman of the
committee on resolutions. Governor Seymour of New York,
his 
sympathizing 
friend, 
was 
the 
president 
of 
the
convention. Congressman Long of Ohio was also there, with
a full representation of all those who had, from the ﬁrst,
opposed the war, and sympathized with the rebellion. The
platform adopted was composed largely of negations,
touching the policy of the administration; but one thing it
distinctly demanded, viz: “a cessation of hostilities.” The
candidates nominated were General George B. McClellan
for President, and George H. Pendleton of Ohio for Vice-
President. 
General 
McClellan 
was 
nominally 
a 
war
democrat, and Mr. Pendleton really a peace democrat. Both
wings of the party were thus accommodated, while the
platform was all that the most extreme of peace men could
ask. But the convention did not dissolve; it adjourned,
“subject to be called at any time and place that the
executive national committee shall designate.” The act was
a threat, and betrayed the entertainment of possibilities
and incidental purposes not entirely creditable to the
patriotism of the convention. Mr. Vallandigham’s tongue
was busy, in and out of the convention. He was treated as a
man who had suﬀered persecution for the sake of
democratic truth. He moved that the nomination of
McClellan be made unanimous. He was active in all the
 aﬀairs of the occasion; and he did more than any other man
to destroy the prospects of the democratic party.
The spirit manifested by the demagogues who managed
this convention, was not the spirit of the people, and not
the spirit of the democratic masses. The majority of the
democratic party had supported the war. Many of the best
oﬀicers in the army were democrats, thoroughly devoted to
the destruction of the rebellion by military means. The
voice of the convention was, that all that had been
expended in the war, of life and treasure, should be
declared a waste. The best illustration of the spirit of the
convention was found in the fact that, when it was
announced that Fort Morgan had surrendered, the news
fell upon it like a pall. It awoke no cheers; and was so
evidently unwelcome intelligence, although a great national
success, that the masses of the party were disgusted.
Whatever may have been the acts, intentions and spirit of
the convention, this one thing was certain: that, from the
time of its adjournment, no sensible politician had any
doubt of the overwhelming triumph of the administration in
the election. The cloud was lifted from the republican party
at once; and the democratic leaders themselves, though
they relaxed no eﬀort, confessed that they were beaten,
almost from the start.
On the twenty-third of September, Mr. Blair retired from
the cabinet, in consequence of an intimation from the
President that his retirement would be a relief to him. It
will be remembered that the Baltimore platform contained
a resolution which was intended to indicate a desire on the
 part of the convention that Mr. Blair should leave the
cabinet; but Mr. Lincoln did not, probably, have any
reference to this resolution in his action. Mr. Blair had
made an excellent Postmaster-general — one of the very
best who had administered the aﬀairs of his department;
and it was Mr. Lincoln’s policy to adhere to his friends, and
especially to those who did their duty. But there was a
diﬀiculty between Mr. Blair and Henry Winter Davis of
Maryland, which, in Mr. Lincoln’s judgment, endangered
the adoption of the free state constitution in that
commonwealth. He could solve the diﬀiculty, and help the
cause, by permitting Mr. Blair, whose resignation had been
in his hands for months, to retire. The President and the
Secretary parted excellent friends; and Mr. Lincoln showed
his good will toward the retiring oﬀicer, by appointing to
his place ex-Governor William Dennison of Ohio, one of Mr.
Blair’s most intimate personal and family friends.
A few days before this change in the cabinet, Mr. Lincoln
wrote a letter to a convention of the friends of the new
constitution in Maryland, held in Baltimore on the
eighteenth of September, in which he expressed his earnest
solicitude for its adoption. “It needs not be a secret,” said
he, “and I presume it is no secret, that I wish success to
this provision.” (The provision extinguishing slavery). “I
desire it on every consideration. I wish to see all men free. I
wish the national prosperity of the already free, which I feel
sure the extinction of slavery would bring.” The event he so
much desired was consummated by a popular vote, on the
eighth and ninth of October; and the President was
 serenaded by the loyal Marylanders in Washington, as an
expression of their satisfaction and their congratulations.
Mr. Lincoln responded with a speech. An extract will show
something of the subjects of public discussion at the time,
as well as reveal the President’s relation to them:
“Something said by the Secretary of State, in his recent
speech at Auburn, has been construed by some into a
threat that, if I shall be beaten at the election, I will,
between then and the constitutional end of my term, do
what I may be able, to ruin the government. Others regard
the fact that the Chicago Convention adjourned not sine
die, but to meet again, if called to do so by a particular
individual, as the intimation of a purpose that, if their
nominee shall be elected, he will at once seize control of
the government. I hope the good people will permit
themselves to suﬀer no uneasiness on either point. I am
struggling to maintain the government, not to overthrow it.
I 
am 
struggling 
specially 
to 
prevent 
others 
from
overthrowing it. I, therefore, say that, if I live, I shall
remain President until the fourth of next March, and that
whoever shall be constitutionally elected in November shall
be duly installed as President on the fourth of March; and,
in the interval, I shall do my utmost that whoever is to hold
the helm for the next voyage, shall start with the best
possible chance of saving the ship.”
The October elections indicated the inevitable result of
the presidential canvass; and the successful movements of
the armies conﬁrmed the prospects of Mr. Lincoln’s signal
triumph. The eﬀorts of the rebels south of the Union lines,
 and over the Canada boundary, to assist the peace party,
and 
furnish 
capital 
for 
its 
operations, 
aided 
by
organizations of disloyal elements within the loyal states,
not only failed of their object, but helped to rally the
popular feeling to the side of the administration.
An unpleasant incident of the canvass was the result of
an interview between Mr. Lincoln and a committee of the
opposition party in Tennessee. Andrew Johnson, the present
President of the United States, was then military governor
of that state; and under his sanction a convention was
called, to reorganize the state, that it might take a part in
the presidential election. This convention prescribed the
form of an oath, that the body deemed proper for those to
take who desired to vote. Governor Johnson ordered the
election to be held, in accordance with the plan of the
convention; and adopted its oath. The oath was one which
no heartily loyal man would refuse to take, unless he should
object to the following clause: “I will cordially oppose all
armistices and negotiations for peace with rebels in arms,
until the Constitution of the United States, and all laws and
proclamations made in pursuance thereof, shall be
established over all the people of every state and territory,
embraced within the national Union.” No man, of course,
who heartily believed in the peace doctrine of the Chicago
platform could take the oath; and there were evidently
many men in Tennessee who would not subscribe to
another clause — men who could not heartily say: “I
sincerely rejoice in the triumph of the armies and navies of
the United States.”
 Against this oath, a committee of General McClellan’s
friends protested; and they bore their protest to the
President. Mr. Lincoln did not receive the paper good-
naturedly. He undoubtedly regarded it as an attempt to get
him into diﬀiculty, and to make political capital against him.
He had no faith in the genuine loyalty of the men who
would not take the oath. He furthermore felt that it was a
matter with which he had no right to interfere, and
believed it to be one which Mr. John Lellyett, the bearer of
the protest, knew he would not undertake to control. Under
these circumstances, and in the condition of nervous and
mental irritability, to which all the latter part of his life was
subject, he save a reply which was not at all in his usual
manner, and which pained his friends quite as much as it
rejoiced his foes. The answer, as reported by Mr. Lellyett,
was: “I expect to let the friends of George B. McClellan
manage their side of this contest in their own way, and I
will manage my side of it in my way.” The committee asked
for an answer in writing. “Not now,” replied Mr. Lincoln.
“Lay those papers down here. I will give no other answer
now. I may or may not write something about this hereafter.
I know you intend to make a point of this. But go ahead;
you have my answer.”
Now this was unquestionably an undigniﬁed and
injudicious reply — one which the people would not receive
with any consideration of the irritable mood in which it was
uttered, or the provocation, real or supposed, which
inspired it. Under date of October twenty-second, he made
a reply in writing. His conclusion was that he could have
 nothing to do with the matter. The action of the convention
and of Governor Johnson was nothing which had been
inspired by the national Executive. The Governor, he
believed, had the right to favor any plan he might choose to
favor, which had been adopted by the loyal citizens of
Tennessee; and the President could not see, in the plan
adopted, “any menace, or violence, or coercion towards
anyone.” If the people should vote for president, under this
plan, it would neither belong to the President, nor yet to
the military Governor of Tennessee, to say whether the vote
should be received and counted, but to a department of the
government to which, under the Constitution, it was given,
to decide. So, “except to give protection against violence,”
he declined to have anything to do with any presidential
election. The result was the withdrawal of the McClellan
ticket in that state, and renewed charges against the
President of interfering in elections, with which he had thus
refused to interfere.
No headway could be made, however, against Mr.
Lincoln. The issue was too plain. Yet it is but just to say that
it is doubtful whether the success of the McClellan ticket
would have produced an immediate armistice. Results in a
military point of view were too plainly in our hands, and the
country was too thoroughly committed to the war for the
re-establishment of the Union, to permit so disgraceful and
ruinous a proceeding. But the democratic party had
consented to place itself in the position it occupied, for the
sake of winning power; and, when the people saw such men
as Wood, and Long, and Pendleton, and Vallandigham, all
 pushing the fortunes of the democratic candidate, they lost
faith in the party, and determined to support the
administration, its policy, and its candidates. In the
meantime, Grant, Sherman and Sheridan were leading on
their victorious armies, and the political voice of these
armies was almost unanimous for the republican nominees.
Before taking leave of the canvass, to record its results,
it is simple justice to Mr. Lincoln to place by the side of the
Tennessee case, his call for ﬁve hundred thousand men,
made on the eighteenth of July, to be drafted after the ﬁfth
of September, if they should not be furnished previous to
that date. His friends urged that the measure would be
unpopular, and that it might cost him his election. His reply
to every representation of this kind was that the men were
needed, that it was his duty to call for them, and that he
should call for them, whatever the eﬀect might be upon
himself. Does any one believe that a man who could treat a
great question like this so nobly and patriotically, would
busy himself with small politics in Tennessee, or connive
with any small politicians there, in a scheme for cheating
patriotic men out of votes, for his own advantage?
The day of election came at last, and resulted in an
overwhelming majority of votes for Abraham Lincoln. Every
state that voted, except three, gave majorities for the
republican candidate, and two of these three were old slave
states — Kentucky and Delaware. Only New Jersey among
the northern states gave its vote for McClellan. West
Virginia, Tennessee, Arkansas, and Louisiana supported Mr.
Lincoln. The time had come, at last, of which he had spoken
 in Cooper Institute, more than four years before, when the
republican party had ceased to be sectional, by obtaining
support in the southern states. Mr. Lincoln’s clear popular
majority was 411,428, in a total vote of 4,015,902, which
secured 212 of the 233 votes in the electoral college.
The President might well feel gratiﬁed with this result.
His policy, motives, character and achievements had
received the emphatic approval of the American people. “I
am thankful to God for this approval of the people,” said he,
on the night of his election, to a band of Pennsylvanians
who had called upon him; and he added: “But, while deeply
grateful for this mark of their conﬁdence in me, if I know
my heart, my gratitude is free from any taint of personal
triumph. I do not impugn the motives of anyone opposed to
me. It is no pleasure to me to triumph over any one; but I
give thanks to the Almighty for this evidence of the
people’s resolution to stand by free government, and the
rights of humanity.”
The election proved more than Mr. Lincoln’s popularity;
and this he understood. In subsequent remarks to the
friendly political clubs of the District, he said: “It has
demonstrated that a people’s government can sustain a
national election in the midst of a great civil war. Until now,
it has not been known to the world that this was a
possibility. It shows, also, how strong and sound we still
are... It shows, also, to the extent yet known, that we have
more men now, than we had when the war began. Gold is
good in its place; but living, brave and patriotic men are
better than gold.” To a friend he said: “Being only mortal,
 after all, I should have been a little mortiﬁed if I had been
beaten in this canvass before the people; but that sting
would have been more than compensated by the thought
that the people had notiﬁed me that all my oﬀicial
responsibilities were soon to be lifted oﬀ my back.”
The election of Mr. Lincoln destroyed the last hope of the
rebellion. There was to be no change of policy; and none
could know better than the rebel leaders that that policy
could not be long resisted. These leaders were little
inclined to make peace; and it is doubtful whether their
people would have permitted them to do so. They had
promised their people independence; and the latter had
fought with wonderful bravery and persistency for it. There
was no way but to ﬁght on, until the inevitable defeat
should come.
For many days after the result of the election was known,
Mr. Lincoln was burdened with congratulations; and yet,
amid these disturbances, and the cares of oﬀice, which
were onerous in the extreme, he found time to write the
following letter:
“Executive Mansion, Washington, Nov. 21, 1864.
“Dear Madam: — I have been shown, in the ﬁles of the
War Department, a statement of the Adjutant-general of
Massachusetts, that you are the mother of ﬁve sons, who
have died gloriously on the ﬁeld of battle. I feel how weak
and fruitless must be any words of mine which should
attempt to beguile you from the grief of a loss so
overwhelming. But I cannot refrain from tendering to you
the consolation that may be found in the thanks of the
 republic they died to save. I pray that our Heavenly Father
may assuage the anguish of your bereavement, and leave
you only the cherished memory of the loved and lost, and
the solemn pride that must be yours to have laid so costly a
sacriﬁce upon the altar of freedom.
“Yours very sincerely and respectfully,
“Abraham Lincoln.
“To Mrs. Bixby, Boston, Massachusetts.”
From the day of the election to the close of the rebellion,
the discordant political elements of the northern states
subsided into silence and inaction. The election itself was
attended with great dignity — almost, indeed, with
solemnity. Men felt that they were deciding something
more than a party question, and acted with reference to
their responsibilities to God and their country. The masses
of the democratic party were more than satisﬁed with the
result; and such of their leaders as were thoroughly loyal
undoubtedly felt that a victory to them, under all the
circumstances, would have been, in many respects, a
misfortune. Among the subjects of national thanksgiving on
the last Thursday in November — the day of Mr. Lincoln’s
appointment — certainly the result of the election was not
least to be considered, or last to be remembered with
devout gratitude.
