  ha ter I .
THE POLITICAL BIOGRAPHERS of Mr. Lincoln have stated
that in 1846 he was “induced to accept” the nomination for
Congress from the Sangamon district. It has already been
seen that he had aspirations for this place; and it is quite as
well to adopt Mr. Lincoln’s own frankness and directness,
and say that the representatives of his wishes secured the
nomination for him. As a party man, he had well earned any
honor in the power of his party to bestow. As a man and a
politician, his character was so sound and so truly noble
that his nomination and election to Congress would be
quite as honorable to his district as to him.
Having received the nomination, Mr. Lincoln did after the
manner of Western nominees and “stumped” his district.
He had abundant material for discussion. During the winter
of 1845, Texas was admitted to the Union, and the war with
Mexico was commenced. The tariﬀ of 1842, constructed in
accordance with the policy of the whig party, had been
repealed. The country had a foreign war on its hands — a
war which the whigs believed to have been unnecessarily
begun, and unjustiﬁably carried on. It had received into the
Union a new member in the interest of slavery. It had been
greatly disturbed in its industrial interests by the
subversion of the protective policy. The issues between the
two parties then in the political ﬁeld were positive and well
 deﬁned. Mr. Lincoln’s position on all the principal points at
issue was that of the whig party, and the party had no
reason to be ashamed of its western champion.
The eminent popularity of Mr. Lincoln in his own district
was shown by the majority he received over that which it
had given to Mr. Clay. Although he had made Mr. Clay’s
cause his own, and had advocated his election with an
enthusiasm which no personal object could have excited in
him, he received in his district a majority of one thousand
ﬁve hundred and eleven votes to the nine hundred and
fourteen majority which the district had given Mr. Clay in
1844. He undoubtedly was supported by more than the
strength of his party, for his majority was unprecedented in
the district, and has since had no parallel. It was not
reached, on a much larger vote, by General Taylor in 1848.
There is no question that this remarkable majority was the
result of the popular faith in Mr. Lincoln’s earnestness,
conscientiousness and integrity.
He took his seat in the thirtieth Congress, December 6th,
1847, and was from the ﬁrst entirely at home. He was no
novice in politics or legislation. To the latter he had served
a thorough apprenticeship in the Illinois legislature. To the
study and discussion of the former, he had devoted perhaps
the severest eﬀorts of his life. He understood every phase
of the great questions which agitated Congress and divided
the people. Unlike many politicians who engage in the
harangues of a political canvass, he had made himself the
master of the subjects he discussed. He had been a debater,
and not a declaimer. He had entertained a deeper interest
 in questions of public concern than he had felt in his own
election; and he was at once recognized as the peer of his
associates 
in 
the 
House. 
He 
derived 
considerable
prominence from the fact that he was the only whig
member from Illinois, a fact almost entirely due to his own
presence and inﬂuence in the district which elected him.
It is noticeable here that Stephen A. Douglas took his
seat in the Senate of the United States during this same
session. They met ﬁrst as representatives in the Illinois
legislature. Mr. Douglas was the younger, the more adroit,
the swifter in a political race. He had had with him the
large democratic majority of the state, and had moulded it
to his purposes. He had taken a step — perhaps many steps
— in advance of Mr. Lincoln; but it seemed destined that
the tallest man in the House and the shortest man in the
Senate should keep in sight of each other, until the time
should come when they should stand out before their own
state and the country as the champions respectively of the
antagonistic principles and policies which divided the
American people.
It is interesting, at the close of a great rebellion,
undertaken on behalf of slavery, to look back to this
Congress, and see how, in the interests and associations of
the old whig party, those men worked in harmony who have
since been, or who, if they had lived, would have been, so
widely separated in feeling and action. John Quincy Adams
voted on most questions with Robert Toombs; George
Ashmun, afterwards president of the convention that
nominated Mr. Lincoln for the presidency, with Alexander
 H. Stephens, afterwards vice-president of the Southern
Confederacy; Jacob Collamer with Thomas Butler King, and
Samuel F. Vinton with Henry W. Hilliard. History must
record that the Mexican war was undertaken in the interest
of human slavery; yet, touching the questions arising out of
this war, and questions directly associated with or bearing
upon it, these men of the old whig party acted together. The
slaveholder then yielded to party what he has since denied
to patriotism, and patriotism abandoned a party which held
out to it a constant temptation to complicity with slavery.
Mr. Polk, at that time the President of the United States,
was evidently anxious to justify the war which he had
commenced against Mexico, and to vindicate his own action
before the American people, if not before his own judgment
and conscience. His messages to Congress were burdened
with this eﬀort; and Mr. Lincoln had hardly become wonted
to his seat when he made an unsuccessful eﬀort to bring
the President to a statement of facts, upon which Congress
and the country might either verify or falsify his broad and
general asseverations. On the twenty-second of December,
he introduced a series of resolutions which, had they been
adopted, would have given the President an opportunity to
furnish the grounds of his allegations, and set himself right
before the nation. These resolutions are remarkable for
their deﬁnite statement of the points actually at issue
between the administration and the whig party; but they
found no advocates among Mr. Polk’s friends. Laid over
under the rule, they were not called up again by Mr.
Lincoln himself, but they formed the thesis of a speech
 delivered by him on the following twelfth of January, in
which he fully expressed his views on the whole subject.
The opposition in this Congress were placed in a very
diﬀicult and perplexing position. They hated the war; they
believed it to have been unnecessarily begun by the act of
the United States, and not by the act of Mexico; they were
accused of being treacherous to the cause and honor of the
country because they opposed the war in which the country
was engaged; they felt obliged to vote supplies to the army
because it would have been inhuman to do otherwise, yet
this act was seized upon by the President to show that his
position touching the war was sustained by them; they felt
compelled to condemn the commander-in-chief of the
armies, sitting in the White House, and to vote thanks to
the generals who had successfully executed his orders in
the ﬁeld. Men picked their way through these diﬀiculties
according to the wisdom given to them. The opposition
usually voted together, though there was more or less of
division on minor points and matters of policy.
Mr. Hudson of Massachusetts introduced a resolution
which covered essentially the question of abandoning the
war — of restoring everything to the old status. Mr. Lincoln
voted to lay this resolution on the table, and, when it came
up for adoption, voted against it. The writer ﬁnds no record
of the reasons for these votes. Whatever they may have
been, they seemed good to him; and he took pains a few
days afterward to show that they could not have grown out
of any friendship to the war. Indeed, on the very day which
saw these votes recorded, he had an opportunity to vote
 that the war “was unnecessarily and unconstitutionally
begun by the President of the United States,” in company
with nearly all the whig members of the House, southern no
less than northern. The same men voted thanks to General
Taylor for his brilliant achievements in the war.
The speech of Mr. Lincoln on the twelfth of January, in
committee 
of 
the 
whole 
House, 
was 
thoroughly
characteristic of the author. Simple, direct, exact in its
comprehension of the points at issue, without a superﬂuous
word or sentence, as closely logical as if it were the work of
a professor of dialectics, it was the equal if not the superior
of any speech delivered during the session.
Mr. Lincoln spoke as follows:
“Mr. Chairman: Some, if not all, of the gentlemen on the
other side of the House, who have addressed the committee
within the last two days, have spoken rather complainingly,
if I have rightly understood them, of the vote given a week
or ten days ago, declaring that the war with Mexico was
unnecessarily and unconstitutionally commenced by the
President. I admit that such a vote should not be given in
mere party wantonness, and that the one given is justly
censurable, if it have no other or better foundation. I am
one of those who joined in that vote; and did so under my
best impression of the truth of the case. How I got this
impression, and how it may possibly be removed, I will now
try to show. When the war began, it was my opinion that all
those who, because of knowing too little, or because of
knowing too much, could not conscientiously approve the
conduct of the President (in the beginning of it), should,
 nevertheless, as good citizens and patriots, remain silent on
that point, at least till the war should be ended. Some
leading Democrats, including ex-President Van Buren, have
taken this same view, as I understand them; and I adhered
to it, and acted upon it, until since I took my seat here; and
I think I should still adhere to it, were it not that the
President and his friends will not allow it to be so. Besides
the continual eﬀort of the President to argue every silent
vote given for supplies into an indorsement of the justice
and wisdom of his conduct; besides that singularly candid
paragraph in his late message, in which he tells us that
Congress, with great unanimity (only two in the Senate and
fourteen in the House dissenting) had declared that ‘by the
act of the Republic of Mexico a state of war exists between
that Government and the United States,’ when the same
journals that informed him of this, also informed him that,
when that declaration stood disconnected from the
question of supplies, sixty-seven in the House, and not
fourteen, merely, voted against it; besides this open
attempt to prove by telling the truth, what he could not
prove by telling the whole truth, demanding of all who will
not submit to be misrepresented, in justice to themselves,
to speak out; besides all this, one of my colleagues  Mr.
Richardson], at a very early day in the session, brought in a
set of resolutions, expressly indorsing the original justice of
the war on the part of the President. Upon these
resolutions, when they shall be put on their passage, I shall
be compelled to vote; so that I can not be silent it I would.
Seeing this, I went about preparing myself to give the vote
 understandingly, when it should come. I carefully examined
the President’s messages, to ascertain what he himself had
said and proved upon the point. The result of this
examination was to make the impression, that, taking for
true all the President states as facts, he falls far short of
proving his justiﬁcation; and that the President would have
gone further with his proof; if it had not been for the small
matter that the truth would not permit him. Under the
impression thus made I gave the vote before mentioned. I
propose now to give, concisely, the process of the
examination I made, and how I reached the conclusion I
did.
“The President, in his ﬁrst message of May, 1846,
declares that the soil was ours on which hostilities were
commenced by Mexico; and he repeats that declaration,
almost in the same language, in each successive annual
message — thus showing that he esteems that point a
highly essential one. In the importance of that point I
entirely agree with the President. To my judgment, it is the
very point upon which he should be justiﬁed or condemned.
In his message of December, 1848, it seems to have
occurred to him, as is certainly true, that title, ownership to
soil, or anything else, is not a simple fact, but is a
conclusion following one or more simple facts; and that it
was incumbent upon him to present the facts from which
he concluded the soil was ours on which the ﬁrst blood of
the war was shed.
“Accordingly, a little below the middle of page twelve, in
the message last referred to, he enters upon that task;
 forming an issue and introducing testimony, extending the
whole to a little below the middle of page fourteen. Now, I
propose to try to show that the whole of this — issue and
evidence — is, from beginning to end, the sheerest
deception. The issue, as he presents it, is in these words:
‘But there are those who, conceding all this to be true,
assume the ground that the true western boundary of Texas
is the Nueces, instead of the Rio Grande; and that,
therefore, in marching our army to the east bank of the
later river, we passed the Texan line, and invaded the
territory of Mexico.’ Now, this issue is made up of two
aﬀirmatives and no negative. The main deception of it is,
that it assumes as true that one river or the other is
necessarily the boundary, and cheats the superﬁcial thinker
entirely out of the idea that possibly the boundary is
somewhere between the two, and not actually at either. A
further deception is, that it will let in evidence which a true
issue would exclude. A true issue, made by the President,
would be about as follows; ‘I say the soil was ours on which
the ﬁrst blood was shed; there are those who say it was
not.’
“I now proceed to examine the President’s evidence, as
applicable to such an issue. When that evidence is
analyzed, it is all included in the following propositions:
“1. That the Rio Grande was the western boundary of
Louisiana, as we purchased it of France in 1803.
“2. That the Republic of Texas always claimed the Rio
Grande as her western boundary.
“3. That by various acts, she had claimed it on paper.
 “4. That Santa Anna, in his treaty with Texas, recognized
the Rio Grande as her boundary.
“5. That Texas before, and the United States after,
annexation, had exercised jurisdiction beyond the Nueces,
between the two rivers.
“6. That our Congress understood the boundary of Texas
to extend beyond the Nueces.
“Now for each of these in its turn:
“His ﬁrst item is, that the Rio Grande was the western
boundary of Louisiana, as we purchased it of France in
1803; and, seeming to expect this to be disputed, he argues
over the amount of near1y a page to prove it true; at the
end of which, he lets us know that, by the treaty of 1819,
we sold to Spain the whole country, from the Rio Grande
eastward to the Sabine. Now, admitting for the present,
that the Rio Grande was the boundary of Louisiana, what,
under heaven, had that to do with the present boundary
between us and Mexico? How, Mr. Chairman, the line that
once divided your land from mine can still be the boundary
between us after I have sold my land to you, is, to me,
beyond all comprehension. And how any man, with an
honest purpose only of proving the truth, could ever have
thought of introducing such a fact to prove such an issue, is
equally incomprehensible. The outrage upon common right,
of seizing as our own what we have once sold, merely
because it was ours before we sold it, is only equaled by the
outrage on common sense of any attempt to justify it.
“The President’s next piece of evidence is, that ‘The
Republic of Texas always claimed this river (Rio Grande) as
 her western boundary.’ That is not true, in fact. Texas has
claimed it, but she has not always claimed it. There is, at
least, one distinguished exception. Her State Constitution
— the public’s most solemn and well-considered act — that
which may, without impropriety, be called her last will and
testament, revoking all others — makes no such claim. But
suppose she had always claimed it. Has not Mexico always
claimed the contrary? So that there is but claim against
claim, leaving nothing proved until we get back of the
claims, and ﬁnd which has the better foundation.
“Though not in order in which the President presents his
evidence, I now consider that class of his statements, which
are, in substance, nothing more than that Texas has by
various acts of her Convention and Congress, claimed the
Rio Grande as her boundary — on paper. I mean here what
he says about the ﬁxing of the Rio Grande as her boundary,
in her old Constitution (not her State Constitution,) about
forming congressional districts, counties, etc. Now, all this
is but naked claim; and what I have already said about
claims is strictly applicable to this. If I should claim your
land by word of mouth, that certainly would not make it
mine; and if I were to claim it by a deed which I had made
myself, and with which you had nothing to do, the claim
would be quite the same in substance, or rather in utter
nothingness.
“I next consider the President’s statement that Santa
Anna, in his treaty with Texas, recognized the Rio Grande
as the western boundary of Texas. Besides the position so
often taken that Santa Anna, while a prisoner of war — a
 captive — could not bind Mexico by a treaty, which I deem
conclusive; besides this, I wish to say something in relation
to this treaty, so called by the President, with Santa Anna.
If any man would like to be amused by a sight at that little
thing, which the President calls by that big name, he can
have it by turning to Niles’ Register, volume 50, page 336.
And if any one should suppose that Niles’ Register is a
curious repository of so mighty a document as a solemn
treaty between nations, I can only sat that I learned, to a
tolerable degree of certainty, by inquiry at the State
Department, that the President himself never saw it
anywhere else. By the way, I believe I should not err if I
were to declare, that during the ﬁrst ten years of the
existence of that document, it was never by anybody called
a treaty; that it was never so called till the President, in his
extremity, attempted, by so calling it, to wring something
from it in justiﬁcation of himself in connection with the
Mexican war. It has none of the distinguishing features of a
treaty. It does not call itself a treaty. Santa Anna does not
therein assume to bind Mexico; he assumes only to act as
President, Commander-in-Chief of the Mexican army and
navy; stipulates that the then present hostilities should
cease, and that he would not himself take up arms, nor
inﬂuence the Mexican people to take up arms against
Texas, during the existence of the war of independence. He
did not recognize the independence of Texas; he did not
assume to put an end to the war, but clearly indicated his
expectation of its continuance; he did not say one word
about boundary, and most probably never thought of it. It is
 stipulated therein that the Mexican forces should evacuate
the territory of Texas, passing to the other side of the Rio
Grande; and in another article it is stipulated, that to
prevent collisions between the armies, the Texan army
should not approach nearer than within ﬁve leagues — of
what is not said — but clearly, from the object stated, it is
of the Rio Grande. Now, if this is a treaty recognizing the
Rio Grande as the boundary of Texas, it contains the
singular feature of stipulating that Texas shall not go within
ﬁve leagues of her own boundary.
“Next comes the evidence of Texas before annexation,
and the United States afterward, exercising jurisdiction
beyond the Nueces, and between the two rivers. This actual
exercise of jurisdiction is the very class or quality of
evidence we want. It is excellent so far as it goes; but does
it go far enough? He tells us it went beyond the Nueces,
but he does not tell us it went to the Rio Grande. He tells us
jurisdiction was exercised between the two rivers, but he
does not tell us it was exercised over all the territory
between them. Some simple-minded people think it
possible to cross one river and go beyond it, without going
all the way to the next; that jurisdiction may be exercised
between two rivers without covering all the country
between them. I know a man, not very unlike myself who
exercises jurisdiction over a piece of land between the
Wabash and the Mississippi; and yet so far is this from
being all there is between those rivers, that it is just one
hundred and ﬁfty-two feet long by ﬁfty wide, and no part of
it much within a hundred miles of either. He has a neighbor
 between him and the Mississippi — that is, just across the
street, in that direction — whom, I am sure, he could
neither persuade nor force to give up his habitation; but
which, nevertheless, he could certainly annex, if it were to
be done, by merely standing on his own side of the street
and claiming it, or even sitting down and writing a deed for
it.
“But next, the President tells us, the Congress of the
United States understood the State of Texas they admitted
into the Union to extend beyond the Nueces. Well, I
suppose they did — I certainly so understand it — but how
far beyond? That Congress did not understand it to extend
clear to the Rio Grande, is quite certain by the fact of their
joint 
resolution 
for 
admission 
expressly 
leaving 
all
questions of boundary to future adjustment. And, it may be
added, that Texas herself is proved to have had the same
understanding of it that our Congress had, by the fact of
the exact conformity of her new Constitution to those
resolutions.
“I am now through the whole of the President’s evidence;
and it is a singular fact, that if any one should declare the
President sent the army into the midst of a settlement of
Mexican people, who had never submitted, by consent or
by force to the authority or Texas or of the United States,
and that there, and thereby, the ﬁrst blood of the war was
shed, there is not one word in all the President has said
which would either admit or deny the declaration. In this
strange omission chieﬂy consists the deception of the
President’s evidence — an omission which, it does seem to
 me, could scarcely have occurred but by design. My way of
living leads me to be about the courts of justice; and there I
have some times seen a good lawyer, struggling for his
client’s neck, in a desperate case, employing every artiﬁce
to work round, befog, and cover up with many words some
position pressed upon him by the prosecution, which he
dared not admit, and yet could not deny. Party bias may
help to make it appear so; but, with all the allowance I can
make for such bias, it still does appear to me that just such,
and from just such necessity, are the President’s struggles
in this case.
“Some 
time 
after 
my 
colleague 
(Mr. 
Richardson)
introduced the resolutions I have mentioned, I introduced a
preamble, resolution, and interrogatories, intended to draw
the President out, if possible, on this hitherto untrodden
ground. To show their relevancy, I propose to state my
understanding of the true rule for ascertaining the
boundary between Texas and Mexico. It is, that wherever
Texas was exercising jurisdiction was hers; and wherever
Mexico was exercising jurisdiction was hers; and that
whatever separated the actual exercise of jurisdiction of
the one from that of the other, was the true boundary
between them. If, as is probably true, Texas was exercising
jurisdiction along the western bank of the Nueces, and
Mexico was exercising it along the eastern bank of the Rio
Grande, then neither river was the boundary, but the
uninhabited country between the two was. The extent of
our territory in that region depended not on any treaty-
ﬁxed boundary (for no treaty had attempted it), but on
 revolution. Any people anywhere, being inclined and having
the power, have the right to rise up and shake oﬀ the
existing government, and form a new one that suits them
better. This is a most valuable, a most sacred right — a
right which, we hope and believe, is to liberate the world.
Nor is this right conﬁned to cases in which the whole
people of an existing government may choose to exercise it.
Any portion of such people that can may revolutionize, and
make their own so much of the territory as they inhabit.
More than this, a majority of any portion of such people
may revolutionize, putting down a minority, intermingled
with, or near about them, who may oppose their
movements. Such minority was precisely the case of the
Tories of our own revolution. It is a quality of revolutions
not to go by old lines, or old laws; but to break up both, and
make new ones. As to the country now in question, we
bought it of France in 1803, and sold it to Spain in 1819,
according to the President’s statement. After this, all
Mexico, including Texas, revolutionized against Spain; and
still later, Texas revolutionized against Mexico. In my view,
just so far as she carried her revolution, by obtaining the
actual, willing or unwilling submission of the people, so far
the country was hers, and no further.
“Now, sir, for the purpose of obtaining the very best
evidence as to whether Texas had actually carried her
revolution to the place where the hostilities of the present
war 
commenced, 
let 
the 
President 
answer 
the
interrogatories I proposed, as before mentioned, or some
other similar ones. Let him answer fully, fairly and candidly.
 Let him answer with facts, and not with arguments. Let him
remember 
he 
sits 
where 
Washington 
sat; 
and, 
so
remembering, let him answer as Washington would answer.
As a nation should not, and the Almighty will not, be
evaded, so let him attempt no evasion, no equivocation.
And if, so answering, he can show that the soil was ours
where the ﬁrst blood of the War was shed — that it was not
within an inhabited country, or, if within such, that the
inhabitants had submitted themselves to the civil authority
of Texas, or of the United States, and that the same is true
of the site of Fort Brown — then I am with him for his
justiﬁcation. In that case, I shall be most happy to reverse
the vote I gave the other day. I have a selﬁsh motive for
desiring that the President may do this; I expect to give
some votes, in connection with the war, which, without his
so doing, will be of doubtful propriety, in my own judgment,
but which will be free from the doubt, if he does so. But if
he can not or will not do this — if, on any pretense, or no
pretense, he shall refuse or omit it — then I shall be fully
convinced, of what I more than suspect already, that he is
deeply conscious of being in the wrong; that be feels the
blood of this war, like the blood of Abel, is crying to heaven
against him; that he ordered General Taylor into the midst
of a peaceful Mexican settlement, purposely to bring on a
war; that originally having some strong motive — what I
will not stop now to give my opinion concerning — to
involve the two countries in a war, and trusting to escape
scrutiny by ﬁxing the public gaze upon the exceeding
brightness of military glory — that attractive rainbow that
 rises in showers of blood — that serpent’s eye that charms
to destroy — he plunged into it, and has swept on and on,
till, disappointed in his calculation of the ease with which
Mexico might be subdued, he now ﬁnds himself he knows
not where. How like the half insane mumbling of a fever
dream is the whole war part of the late message! At one
time telling us that Mexico has nothing whatever we can
get but territory; at another, showing us how we can
support the war by levying contributions on Mexico. At one
time urging the national honor, the security of the future,
the prevention of foreign interference, and even the good of
Mexico herself, as among the objects of the war; at another,
telling us that, ‘to reject indemnity by refusing to accept a
cession of territory, would be to abandon all out just
demands, and to wage the war, bearing all its expenses,
without a purpose or deﬁnite object.’ So, then, the national
honor, security of the future, and everything but territorial
indemnity, may be considered the no purposes and
indeﬁnite objects of the war! But having it now settled that
territorial indemnity is the only object, we are urged to
seize, by legislation here, all that he was content to take a
few months ago, and the whole province of Lower
California to boot, and to still carry on the war — to take all
we are ﬁghting for, and still ﬁght on. Again, the President is
resolved, under all circumstances, to have full territorial
indemnity for the expenses of the war; but he forgets to tell
us how we are to get the excess after those expenses shall
have surpassed the value of the whole of the Mexican
territory. So, again, he insists that the separate national
 existence of Mexico shall be maintained; but he does not
tell us how this can be done after we shall have taken all
her territory. Lest the questions I here suggest be
considered speculative merely, let me be indulged a
moment in trying to show they are not.
“The war has gone on some twenty months, for the
expenses of which, together with an inconsiderable old
score, the President now claims about one half of the
Mexican territory, and that by far the better half, so far as
concerns our ability to make anything out of it. It is
comparatively uninhabited; so that we could establish land
oﬀices in it, and raise some money in that way. But the
other half is already inhabited, as I understand it, tolerably
densely for the nature of the country; and all its lands, or
all that are valuable, already appropriated as private
property. How, then, are we to make anything out of these
lands with this incumbrance on them, or how remove the
incumbrance? I suppose no one will say we should kill the
people, or drive them out, or make slaves of them, or even
conﬁscate their property? How, then, can we make much
out of this part of the territory? If the prosecution of the
war has, in expenses, already equaled the better half of the
country, how long its future prosecution will be in equaling
the less valuable half is not a speculative but a practical
question, pressing closely upon us; and yet is is a question
which the President seems never to have thought of.
“As to the mode of terminating the war and securing
peace, the President is equally wandering and indeﬁnite.
First, it is to be done by a more vigorous prosecution of the
 war in the vital parts of the enemy’s country; and, after
apparently talking himself tired on this point, the President
drops down into a half despairing tone, and tells us, that
‘with a people distracted and divided by contending
factions, and a government subject to constant changes, by
successive revolutions, the continued success of our arms
may fail to obtain a satisfactory peace.’ Then he suggests
the propriety of wheedling the Mexican people to desert
the counsels of their own leaders, and, trusting in our
protection, to set up a government from which we can
secure a satisfactory peace, telling us that ‘ this may
become the only mode of obtaining such a peace.’ But soon
he falls into doubt of this too, and then drops back on to the
already 
half-abandoned 
ground 
of 
‘more 
vigorous
prosecution.’ All this shows that the President is in no wise
satisﬁed with his own positions. First, he takes up one, and,
in attempting to argue us into it, he argues himself out of
it; then seizes another, and goes through the same process;
and then, confused at being able to think of nothing new, he
snatches up the old one again, which he has some time
before cast oﬀ. His mind, tasked beyond its power, is
running hither and thither, like some tortured creature on a
burning surface, ﬁnding no position on which it can settle
down and be at ease.
“Again, it is a singular omission in this message, that it
nowhere intimates when the President expects the war to
terminate. At its beginning, General Scott was, by this
same President, driven into disfavor, if not disgrace, for
intimating that peace could not be conquered in less than
 three or four months. But now at the end of about twenty
months, during which time our arms have given us the
most splendid successes — every department, and every
part, land and water, oﬀicers and privates, regulars and
volunteers, doing all that men could do, and hundreds of
things which it had ever before been thought that men
could not do; after all this, this same President gives us a
long message without showing us that, as to the end, he
has himself even an imaginary conception. As I have before
said, he knows not where he is. He is a bewildered,
confounded, and miserably-perplexed man. God grant he
may be able to show that there is not something about his
conscience more painful than all his mental perplexity.”
With this speech on record, it is strange that the genuine
literary abilities of the man were so long and so
persistently ignored by literary people. There were men
who voted for him for the presidency more than twelve
years 
afterwards 
— 
twelve 
years 
of 
culture 
and
development to him — who were surprised to ﬁnd his
messages grammatically constructed, and who suspected
the intervention of a secretary whenever any touch of
elegance appeared in his writings.
Mr. Lincoln had a position on the Committee on Post-
oﬀices and Post-roads, and, from the knowledge in his
possession, felt called upon a few days previous to the
speech on the war to expose a diﬀiculty between the
Postmaster-general and a transportation company, anxious
to get the “Great Southern Mail” contract, and to get a
better contract than the department had oﬀered. The
 matter had excited some interest in Congress, and Mr.
Lincoln showed a faithful study of the facts of the case in
his speech and his freedom from any party feeling in the
matter, by supporting the position of the Post-master-
general.
On the 1st of June, 1848, the National Whig Convention
met at Philadelphia to nominate a candidate for the
presidency, and Mr. Lincoln was among its members. Mr.
Polk, by his war with Mexico, had been engaged, much
against his inclinations, in manufacturing available if not
able candidates for his own place, two of whom afterwards
achieved it. General Taylor had become a hero. The
brilliancy of his victories and the modesty of his dispatches
had awakened in his behalf the enthusiastic admiration of
the American people, without distinction of party. He was
claimed by the whigs as a member of that party, and
regarded by them as the one man in the Union by whose
popularity they might hope to win the power they coveted.
The majority would doubtless have preferred Mr. Clay, but
Mr. Clay had been their candidate, and had been beaten.
Mr. Lincoln would have been glad to support Mr. Clay, it is
not doubted, but he shared in the feeling of the majority
concerning his “availability.” It is possible that his visit to
Mr. Clay, and its unsatisfactory results, already alluded to,
had somewhat blunted his devotion and subdued his
enthusiasm on behalf of the great chieftain. Certain it is
that he was among those who believed that General Taylor
and not Mr. Clay should be the nominee of his party.
 Congress had continued its session into the summer,
either for purposes of business, or with the design to
control the nominating conventions, and do something to
direct the campaign; and when the nominations were made
it did according to its custom, and immediately commenced
the campaign in a series of speeches. About two months
after General Taylor was nominated, (July twenty-seventh,)
Mr. Lincoln secured the ﬂoor, and made a speech
concerning the points at issue between the two parties, and
the merits of the respective candidates, General Cass
having received the nomination of the democratic party. It
was a telling, trenchant talk, rather than a speech — more
like one of his stump orations in Illinois than like his
previous eﬀorts in the House. As a campaign harangue,
touching the salient features of the principal questions in
debate, and revealing the weak points of one candidate and
the strong points of the other, it could not have been
improved. Considered as a part of the business which he
was sent to Washington to perform, it was execrable. He
did what others did, and what his partisan supporters
expected him to do; but his own sense of propriety must
have suggested to him, or ought to have suggested to him if
it did not, the indecency of the practice of president-making
in Congress.
In the light of subsequent events, the speech contains
some passages that are very curious and suggestive. In
revealing the position and policy of General Taylor in 1848,
he was unconsciously marking out his own in 1860 and
1864. General Taylor, in a letter to Mr. Allison, had said,
 “upon the subject of the tariﬀ, the currency, the
improvement of our great highways, rivers, lakes and
harbors, the will of the people, as expressed through their
representatives in Congress, ought to be respected and
carried out by the executive.” Mr. Lincoln, in remarking
upon this, said: “The people say to General Taylor, ‘if you
are elected, shall we have a national bank?’ He answers,
‘Your will, gentlemen, not mine.’ “What about the tariﬀ?’
‘Say yourselves.’ ‘Shall our rivers and harbors be
improved?’ ‘Just as you please. If you desire a bank, an
alteration of the tariﬀ; internal improvements, any or all, I
will not hinder you; if you do not desire them, I will not
attempt to force them on you. Send up your members of
Congress 
from 
the 
various 
districts, 
with 
opinions
according to your own, and if they are for these measures,
or any of them, I shall have nothing to oppose; if they are
not for them, I shall not, by any appliances whatever,
attempt to dragoon them into their adoption.’” From this
point Mr. Lincoln went on to show in what respect a
president is a representative of the people. He said: “In a
certain 
sense, 
and 
to 
a 
certain 
extent, 
he 
is 
a
representative of the people. He is elected by them as
Congress is. But can he, in the nature of things, know the
wants of the people as well as three hundred other men
coming from all the various localities of the nation? If so,
where is the propriety of having a Congress?”
There is much in this exposition of General Taylor’s
position to remind us of that upon which the speaker
 himself subsequently stood, when invested with the powers
of the chief magistracy.
Mr. Lincoln’s dissection of General Cass’ position upon
the 
questions 
of 
the 
canvass, 
was 
eﬀected 
with
characteristic neatness and thoroughness. Alluding to the
subject of internal improvements Mr. Lincoln said, “My
internal improvement colleague (Mr. Wentworth) stated on
this ﬂoor the other day that he was satisﬁed Cass was for
improvements because that he had voted for all the bills
that he (Wentworth) had. So far, so good. But Mr. Polk
vetoed some of these very bills; the Baltimore Convention
passed a set of resolutions among other things approving
these vetoes, and Cass declares in his letter accepting the
nomination that he has carefully read these resolutions,
and that he adheres to them as ﬁrmly as he approves them
cordially. In other words, General Cass voted for the bills,
and thinks the President did right to veto them; and his
friends here are amiable enough to consider him as being
one side or the other, just as one or the other may
correspond with their own respective inclinations. My
colleague admits that the platform declares against the
constitutionality of a general system of improvements, and
that General Cass indorses the platform, but he still thinks
General Cass is in favor of some sort of improvements.
Well, what are they? As he is against general objects, those
he is for must be particular and local. Now this is taking
the subject precisely by the wrong end. Particularity —
expending the money of the whole people for an object
which will beneﬁt a portion of them — is the greatest real
 objection to improvements, and has been so held by
General Jackson, Mr. Polk, and all others, I believe, till
now.” Certainly this was a very logical exposition of General
Cass on internal improvements; and the charge of double
dealing or gross inconsistency which it involved was
unanswerable.
Mr. Lincoln tried his powers of ridicule on General Cass
on this occasion. One of his palpable hits has already been
quoted in connection with the history of Mr. Lincoln’s
participation in the Black Hawk war, in which he draws a
parallel between his own bloodless experiences and those
of the democratic candidate. Quoting extracts to show how
General Cass had vacillated in his action on the Wilmot
Proviso, he added, “These extracts show that in 1846
General Cass was for the Proviso at once, that in March,
1847, he was still for it, but not just then; and that in
December he was against it altogether. This is a true index
to the whole man. When the question was raised in 1846,
he was in a blustering hurry to take ground for it, ...but
soon he began to see glimpses of the great democratic ox-
gad waving in his face, and to hear indistinctly, a voice
saying, ‘back! back, sir! back a little!’ He shakes his head,
and bats his eyes, and blunders back to his position of
March, 1847; but still the gad waves, and the voice grows
more distinct and sharper still— ‘back, sir! back, I say!
further back!’ and back he goes to the position of
December, 1847; at which the gad is still, and the voice
soothingly says— ‘so! stand still at that!’” The homely
 illustration, culled from his early experiences, was certainly
forcible, if not elegant.
In this political canvass, the whigs found themselves
nearly as much perplexed in the treatment of the Mexican
war as they had been in Congress. They had selected as
their candidate a man whose reputation had been made by
the successful prosecution of a war which they had
opposed. They were charged, of course, with inconsistency
by their opponents, and were placed in the awkward
position of being obliged to draw nice distinctions. It is
possible that they deserved the embarrassment from which
they suﬀered. General Taylor had, beyond dispute, been
nominated because be was a military hero, and not because
he had any natural or acquired ﬁtness for the presidency.
The war had made him; and the whigs had seized upon this
product of the war as an instrument by which they might
acquire power. Mr. Lincoln a1luded to this in his speech,
but showed that while the whigs had believed the war to be
unnecessarily and unconstitutionally begun, they had voted
supplies, and sent their men. “Through suﬀering and
death,” said he, “by disease and in battle, they have
endured, and fought, and fallen with you. Clay and Webster
each gave a son, never to be returned. From the state of my
own residence, besides other worthy but less known whig
names, we lent Marshall, Morrison, Baker and Hardin; they
all fought, and one fell, and in the fall of that one we lost
our best whig man. Nor were the whigs few in numbers, or
laggard in the day of danger. In that fearful, bloody,
breathless struggle at Buena Vista, when each man’s hard
 task was to beat back ﬁve foes, or die himself, of the ﬁve
high oﬀicers who perished, four were whigs.” With an
allusion to the distinction between the cause of the
President in beginning the war, and the cause of the
country after it was begun, Mr. Lincoln closed his speech.
During the time these presidential discussions were
going 
on 
in 
Congress, 
Mr. 
Lincoln 
was 
in 
close
communication with the whig leaders in Illinois, laying out
the work of the canvass, and trying to convert the active
men of the party to his own ideas of sound policy in the
conduct of the campaign. Indeed, he began this work
before General Taylor was nominated, under the evident
conviction that he would be the candidate, and the strong
desire that he should be. As early in the year as February
twentieth, he wrote a letter to U.F. Linder, a prominent
whig orator of Illinois, on this subject. It betrays the
perplexity to which more than one allusion has been made,
of the whigs at the time. Mr. Lincoln says, in this letter, “In
law, it is good policy to never plead what you need not, lest
you oblige yourself to prove what you cannot. Reﬂect on
this well before you proceed. The application I mean to
make of this rule is that you should simply go for General
Taylor, because you can take some democrats and lose no
whigs; but if you go also for Mr. Polk, on the origin and
mode of prosecuting the war, you will still take some
democrats, but you will lose more whigs, so that, in the
sum of the operation, you will be loser. This is, at least, my
opinion; and if you will look around, I doubt if you do not
discover such to be the fact among your own neighbors.
 Further than this: by justifying Mr. Polk’s mode of
prosecuting the war, you put yourself in opposition to
General Taylor himself, for we all know he has declared for,
and, in fact, originated, the defensive line policy.”
In this letter, Mr. Lincoln talks like a politician (and he
was one of the most acute that the country ever produced,)
to a politician. It looks as if he were handling grave
questions of state with reference only to party ends; but the
letter does not represent him wholly. In a subsequent note
to the same friend, in answer to the question whether “it
would not be just as easy to elect General Taylor without
opposing the war, as by opposing it,” he replies: “the
locofocos here will not let the whigs be silent, ...so that
they are compelled to speak, and their only option is
whether they will, when they speak, tell the truth; or tell a
foul, villainous and bloody falsehood.” In this declaration,
the politician sinks, and the man rises, and seems to be
what he really is — honest and conscientious.
On the fourteenth day of August, the ﬁrst session of the
Thirtieth Congress came to a close, and the members went
home to continue and complete the campaign which they
had inaugurated at Washington. The session had been one
of strong excitements, particular interest attaching to every
important debate in consequence of its bearing upon the
question of the presidency. Mr. Lincoln had discharged his
duties well — ably and conscientiously, at least. He found to
his regret that he had not entirely pleased his constituents
in his course on the questions connected with the war. It is
probable that he could have secured a renomination had he
 himself been Willing to risk the result. That a man with his
desire for public life would willingly retire from Congress at
the end of a single term of service is not probable; and
while it has been said that he peremptorily refused to be
again considered a candidate, on account of his desire to
engage more exclusively in the duties of his profession, it is
not credible that this was his only motive. Indeed, there is
evidence that he sought another oﬀice, in consequence of
the fact that his professional business had suﬀered so
severely by his absence that he would have been glad to
quit it altogether. He was in no hurry to return to it,
certainly, for at the close of the session, he visited New
England, and made a number of very eﬀective campaign
speeches, and then went home, and devoted his time to the
canvass for the election of General Taylor until he had the
satisfaction of witnessing the triumph of his candidate, and
the national success of the party to whose fortunes he had
been so long and so warmly devoted.
In his own district, Mr. Lincoln helped to give General
Taylor a majority nearly equal to that by which he had been
elected to Congress. The general result of the election
brought to him great satisfaction. It justiﬁed his own
judgment 
touching 
the 
candidate’s 
availability, 
and
promised a return to the policy which he believed essential
to the welfare of the country. But little time was left
between the close of the canvass and the commencement of
the second session, so that Mr. Lincoln had no more than
suﬀicient space for the transaction of his personal business
 at home, before he was obliged to take his departure again
for Washington.
The second session of this Congress was comparatively a
quiet one. Several months had elapsed since the treaty of
Guadalupe Hidalgo had ratiﬁed peace between the United
States 
and 
Mexico, 
the 
presidential 
campaign 
had
transpired, and the national political caldron had ceased to
boil. Mr. Lincoln carried into this session the anti-slavery
record of an anti-slavery whig. He had voted forty-two
times for the Wilmot Proviso, had stood ﬁrmly by John
Quincy Adams and Joshua R. Giddings on the right of
petition, and was recognized as a man who would do as
much in opposition to slavery as his constitutional
obligations would permit him to do. Early in the session,
Mr. Gott of New York introduced a resolution instructing
the Committee on the District of Columbia to report a bill
prohibiting the slave trade in the District. The language of
the preamble upon which the resolution was based was
very strong, and doubtless seemed to Mr. Lincoln
unnecessarily oﬀensive; and we ﬁnd him voting with the
pro-slavery men of the House to lay it on the table, and
subsequently voting against its adoption. He had probably
been maturing a measure which he intended should cover
the same ground, in another way, and on the sixteenth of
January he introduced a substitute for this resolution,
which had been carried along under a motion to reconsider.
It provided that no person not within the District, and no
person thereafter born within the District, should be held
to slavery within the District; or held to slavery without its
 limits, while it provided that those holding slaves in the
slave states might bring them in and take them out again,
when visiting the District on public business. It also
provided for the emancipation of all the slaves legally held
within the District, at the will of their masters, who could
claim their full value at the hands of the government, and
that the act itself should be subject to the approval of the
voters of the District. The bill had also a provision, “that
the municipal authorities of Washington and Georgetown,
within their respective jurisdictional limits,” should be
“empowered and required to provide active and eﬀicient
means to arrest and deliver up to their owners all fugitive
slaves escaping into said District.”
If any evidence were needed to establish the fact that Mr.
Lincoln regarded slaves as property under the Constitution,
this bill would seem to furnish all that is desired. If he did
not so regard them, this bill convicts him of friendliness
rather than enmity to slavery. If he did not so regard them,
his whole record relating to slavery was a record of
duplicity. Mr. Lincoln’s character as an anti-slavery man
can have no consistency on any basis except that of his ﬁrm
belief that slaves were recognized as property under the
Constitution of the United States; and those who impute to
him the opposite opinion, or action based upon the opposite
opinion, inﬂict a wrong upon his memory. He recognized
slaves as property not only in Congress, but on the stump
and even in his business. He was once employed by General
Matteson of Bourbon County, Kentucky, who had brought
ﬁve or six negroes into Coles County, Illinois, and worked
 them on a farm for two or three years, to get them out or
the hands of the civil authorities, which had interfered to
keep him from taking them back to Kentucky. Judge Wilson
and Judge Treat, both of the Supreme Court, sat on the
case, and decided against the claim of the slaveholder, as
presented by Mr. Lincoln. It is remembered that he made a
very poor plea, and exercised a good deal of research in
presenting the authorities for and against, and that all his
sympathies were on the side of the slaves, but such a man
as Mr. Lincoln would never have consented to act on this
case if he had not believed that slaves were recognized as
property by the Constitution. It is true that in a speech
delivered afterwards, during the famous Douglas campaign,
he denied the statement made by the Supreme Court in the
Dred Scott decision, that “the right of property in a slave is
distinctly and expressly aﬀirmed in the Constitution;” but
there was to him, and there is in fact, a great diﬀerence
between a distinct and express aﬀirmation, and a real
though it may be only a tacit recognition of property in a
slave. Slavery was to him legally right and morally wrong.
He was equally loyal to the Constitution and loving to his
kind; and when the time came which gave him the privilege
of striking oﬀ the fetters of the slave, in order to preserve
the country and its Constitution, he did it, and counted the
act the crowning one of his life.
Mr. Lincoln did not bring his bill forward without
consultation. Mr. Seaton, of the National Intelligencer, is
understood to have been most in his conﬁdence; and Mr.
Lincoln said, on presenting his bill to the House, that he
 was authorized to say that, of about ﬁfteen of the leading
citizens of the District to whom the proposition had been
submitted, there Was not one who did not give it his
approval. A substitute for the bill was moved, and ﬁnally
the whole subject was given up, and left to take its place
among the unﬁnished business of the Congress. The reason
for this is reported to have been Mr. Seaton’s withdrawal
from the support of the plan; and Mr. Seaton’s withdrawal
from the support of the plan is said to have been owing to
the visits and expostulations of members of Congress from
the slave states. Mr. Lincoln could hope to do nothing
without the approval of the voters of the District, and to
secure this approval he must secure the support of the
National Intelligencer. That taken from his scheme, he took
no further interest in pursuing it.
Mr. Lincoln had other occasions, during the session, to
record his votes against slavery, in his own moderate way
— always moved by his humanity and his love of that which
was morally right, and withheld and controlled by his
obligations to the Constitution and the law, as he
apprehended those obligations.
The fourth of March brought his Congressional career to
a close. While he had maintained a most respectable
position in the House, there is no reason to believe that he
made any great impression upon legislation, or upon the
mind of the country. His highest honors were to be won in
another ﬁeld, for which his two years in the House were in
part a preparation. After his return to Springﬁeld, he found
his practice dissipated. He saw that he should be obliged to
 begin again. Business, for the time, had taken new
channels, as it never fails to do in like cases. The charms of
the old life in Washington came back to him, and he was
ready to take an oﬀice. He had a fancy that he would like to
be Commissioner of the General Land Oﬀice, and Mr.
Defrees, now the superintendent of public printing at
Washington, and then the editor of the Indiana State
Journal, wrote an extended article, urging his appointment,
and published it in that newspaper. The eﬀort miscarried,
very much to Mr. Lincoln’s and the country’s advantage;
and Mr. Butterﬁeld of Illinois secured the coveted place.
The unsuccessful application for this appointment was
subsequently a theme of much merriment between Mr.
Lincoln and his friends.
