  ha ter   III.
WHILE THESE OPERATIONS, pursued upon a most gigantic
scale, for crushing the rebellion and defending the national
existence were in progress, Mr. Lincoln was taking every
opportunity, personally and through his generals, to assure
the people of the South that he meant them no ill. No father
ever dealt more considerately and carefully with erring
children than he did with those who had determined to
break up the government. On the twenty-ﬁfth of July, he
issued a proclamation, in pursuance of a section in the
conﬁscation act, passed by Congress a few days previously,
warning all persons to cease participating in the rebellion,
and adjuring them to return to their allegiance to the
government, on pain of the forfeitures and seizures
provided by the act.
There had been men — and there continued to be
throughout the war — who believed, or pretended to
believe, that peace and Union could be won without war —
that friendly negotiation would settle everything. There
never was any basis for these fancies, except in rebel
desires to embarrass the government, or in party policy
among those opposed to the administration, or in the
hearts of simple men who believed that reason and
common sense had a place in the counsels of the rebel
leaders. From the beginning of the rebellion to the end,
 there was not a time in which peace could have been
procured, short of an acknowledgment of the independence
of the confederate rebel states, as events have proved. Mr.
Lincoln understood this, and understood better than the
country generally the desperate men with whom he had to
deal; yet he never repelled those who thought they had
found some way to peace besides the bloody way. Late in
1862, a period which showed decided advantages won by
the Union forces, regarded as a whole, Fernando Wood, the
man who, as Mayor of New York, had advocated the
separate secession of that metropolis and its erection into a
free city, wrote Mr. Lincoln a letter, stating that, on the
twenty-ﬁfth of November, he was reliably advised that “The
southern states would send representatives to the next
Congress,” provided that a full and general amnesty should
permit them to do so. Mr. Wood urged his point with ardent
professions of loyalty, and with arguments drawn from Mr.
Lincoln’s inaugural; but Mr. Lincoln passed by his
arguments and exhortations, and, in a reply dated
December twelfth, said that the most important part of his
(Wood’s) letter related to the alleged fact that men from the
South were ready to appear in Congress, on the terms
stated. “I strongly suspect your information will prove to be
groundless,” said Mr. Lincoln; “nevertheless, I thank you
for communicating it to me. Understanding the phrase in
the paragraph above quoted, ‘the southern states would
send representatives to the next Congress,’ to be
substantially the same as that ‘the people of the southern
states would cease resistance, and would re-inaugurate,
 submit to, and maintain, the national authority, within the
limits of such states, under the Constitution of the United
States,’ I say that in such case the war would cease on the
part of the United States, and that if, within a reasonable
time, a full and general amnesty were necessary to such an
end, it would not be withheld.”
Mr. Wood thought the President ought to make an eﬀort
to 
verify 
his 
(Wood’s) 
statement, 
by 
permitting 
a
correspondence to take place between the rebels, and
gentlemen “whose former political and social relations with
the leaders of the southern revolt” would make them good
media for the purpose, the correspondence all to be
submitted to Mr. Lincoln. The latter, however, knew Mr.
Wood, and knew that he bore no good-will to him, or his
administration, or the country; and he told him that he did
not think it would do any good to communicate what he had
said to the South, either formally or informally, for they
already knew it. Neither did he think it the time to stop
military operations for negotiations. If Mr. Wood had any
positive information, he should be glad to get it; and such
information might be more valuable before the ﬁrst of
January than after it. At this, Mr. Wood was ﬁlled with
“profound regret;” and proceeded to read Mr. Lincoln a
solemn lecture on his Constitutional obligations, which,
doubtless, made a profound impression upon the mind of
the President, as he was not known, in a single instance, to
be unmindful of those obligations afterwards. The kernel of
this nut was in the words: “Your emancipation proclamation
told of punishment. Let another be issued, speaking the
 language of mercy, and breathing the spirit of conciliation.”
Mr. Wood was interposing on behalf of his southern friends,
to prevent a ﬁnal proclamation of emancipation; and he
knew this was to come on the ﬁrst of January, and that Mr.
Lincoln’s allusion to that date was a gentle hint to him that
the executive purposes were undisturbed and that he was
understood.
But we are getting ahead of great events which were
destined to have a radical inﬂuence upon the war, upon the
sentiments and sympathies of Christendom, upon the social
institutions of the country, and the destinies of a race. Mr.
Wood’s allusion to the emancipation proclamation touched
a document and an event of immeasurable importance; and
to these we now turn our attention.
Mr. Lincoln had tried faithfully, in accordance with his
oath of oﬀice and his repeated professions, to save the
Union without disturbing a single institution which lived
under it. He had warned the insurgent states of a measure
touching slavery that their contumacy would render
necessary. He had besought the border slave states to take
themselves out of the way of that impending measure. He
had braved the criminations and the impatience of his
friends for his tenderness toward an institution which the
Constitution protected. He had been accused of being
under the pro-slavery inﬂuence of the border states; yet,
during all this time, he had entertained the emancipation of
the slaves as a measure which would be almost sure to
come in time, and which he had determined should come
just so soon as it could be justiﬁed to his own conscience
 and to history, as a military necessity. In no other event
could he take this step, consistently with his oath.
Emancipation was a measure of ineﬀable moment, and
one which dwelt in Mr. Lincoln’s thoughts by day and by
night. By his own subsequent revelations, it was a measure
which, upon his knees, he had presented to his Maker. The
events of the Peninsular campaign were connected in his
mind with the tenacity with which he held to the
unchristian institution. He sought not only for the people’s
will upon the subject, but the will of God; and there is no
question that he regarded the misfortunes of the army of
the Potomac as providentially connected with the relations
of the government to the great curse which was the motive
of the rebellion.
Fortunately, we have the record of Mr. Lincoln’s
reasoning upon the subject, in a letter which he wrote to
Mr. A.G. Hodges of Frankfort, Kentucky, April 4th, 1864.
Mr. Hodges had previously had a conversation with him,
and had requested him to put into writing the substance of
his remarks. The President complied; and, to show that he
had acted in his emancipation policy purely upon military
necessity, stated that, although he was naturally anti-
slavery, and, could not remember when he did not think
and feel that slavery was wrong, he never understood that
the presidency conferred upon him any right to act upon
that judgment and feeling. He understood that his oath of
oﬀice forbade the practical indulgence of his abstract moral
hatred of slavery. He had declared that, many times, in
many ways. But he shall say the rest in his own language:
 “I did understand, however, that very oath to preserve
the Constitution to the best of my ability, imposed upon me
the duty of preserving, by every indispensable means, that
government — that nation of which that Constitution was
the organic law. Was it possible to lose the nation and yet
preserve the Constitution? By general law, life and limb
must be protected; yet often a limb must be amputated to
save a life, but a life is never wisely given to save a limb. I
felt that measures, otherwise unconstitutional, might
become 
lawful 
by 
becoming 
indispensable 
to 
the
preservation of the Constitution through the preservation
of the nation. Right or wrong, I assumed this ground, and
now avow it. I could not feel that, to the beat of my ability, I
had even tried to preserve the Constitution, if, to preserve
slavery, or any minor matter, I would permit the wreck of
government, country, and Constitution altogether. When,
early in the war, General Fremont attempted military
emancipation, I forbade it, because I did not then think it
an indispensable necessity. When, a little later, General
Cameron, then Secretary of War, suggested the arming of
the blacks, I objected, because I did not yet think it an
indispensable necessity. When, still later, General Hunter
attempted military emancipation, I again forbade it,
because I did not yet think the indispensable necessity had
come. When, in March and May and July, 1862, I made
earnest and successive appeals to the border states to favor
compensated emancipation, I believed the indispensable
necessity for military emancipation and arming the blacks
would come, unless averted by that measure. They declined
 the proposition; and I was, in my best judgment, driven to
the alternative of either surrendering the Union, and with it
the Constitution, or of laying strong hand upon the colored
element. I chose the latter.”
With Mr. Lincoln’s statement of the results of his action,
which completes the letter, we have nothing at present to
do.
We have thus the political and military reasons for
proclaiming emancipation in Mr. Lincoln’s own language;
and we are scarcely less fortunate in a record of his
personal struggles and feelings, made by Mr. F.B.
Carpenter, who had the privilege of frequent intimate
conversations with Mr. Lincoln, while he was employed at
the White House, upon his picture commemorative of a
scene in the event itself.
It was mid-summer in 1862, when, things having gone on
from bad to worse, he felt that he must “change his tactics
or lose his game.” So, without consulting his cabinet, or
giving them any knowledge of what he was doing, he
prepared the original draft of the Proclamation. Now it
should be remembered, in order to understand Mr.
Lincoln’s 
peculiarity 
of 
arguing 
against 
his 
own
conclusions, until his time should come for uttering them,
that this was before the date of his letter to Horace
Greeley, already given to the reader, in which he gives no
hint of his determination, but only lays out the ground upon
which he should make it. It was also previous to a visit
which he received from a body of Chicago clergymen, who
called to urge upon him the emancipation policy. The
 proclamation was all written; and it was a full month after
its utterance had been determined on in Cabinet meeting,
when he told these clergymen: “I do not want to issue a
document that the whole world will see must necessarily be
inoperative, like the Pope’s bull against the comet.” He
wished them, however, not to misunderstand him. He had
simply indicated some of the diﬀiculties that had stood in
his way; but he had not decided against a proclamation of
liberty to the slaves. “Whatever shall appear to be God’s
will,” said he, “I will do.” Throughout this aﬀair, and indeed
in all the great aﬀairs in which he took part, he followed
the old practice of his legal career, of arguing his
opponent’s side of the question — often for the simple
purpose, evidently, of winning support for his own
convictions.
Sometime during the last of July, or the ﬁrst part of
August, he called a cabinet meeting. None of the members
knew the occasion of the meeting, and for some time they
were unable to ascertain, for there was a delay. What was
its cause? Here was an august body of men. All the cabinet
were present excepting Mr. Blair, who came in afterwards.
Mr. Lincoln had before him a document which he knew was
to perpetuate his name to all futurity, — a document which
involved the liberty of four millions of human beings then
living, and of untold millions then unborn, — which
changed the policy of the government and the course and
character of the war, — which revolutionized the social
institutions of more than a third of the nation, — which
brought all the governments of Christendom into new
 relations to the rebellion, — and which involved Mr.
Lincoln’s recognition of the will of the Divine Ruler of the
universe. It was the supreme moment of his life. Did he feel
it to be so? He did; and he took his own way of showing it.
He took down from a shelf a copy of “Artemus Ward — His
Book,” and read an entire chapter of that literary
harlequin’s drollery, giving himself up to laughter the most
hearty, until some of the digniﬁed personages around him
were far more pained than amused. Little did those men
understand the pressure of the occasion upon Mr. Lincoln’s
mind, and the necessity of this diversion.
A member of this noble and notable group has said that,
on closing the triﬂing volume, the whole tone and manner
of the President changed instantaneously; and, rising to a
grandeur of demeanor that inspired in all a profound
respect, akin to awe, he announced to them the object of
the 
meeting. 
He 
had 
written 
a 
proclamation 
of
emancipation, and had determined to issue it. He had not
called them together to ask their advice on the general
question, because he had determined it for himself. He
wished to inform them of his purpose, and to receive such
suggestions upon minor points as they might be moved to
make. Mr. Chase wished the language stronger with
reference to arming the blacks. Mr. Blair deprecated the
policy, because it would cost the administration the fall
elections; but nothing was said which the President had not
anticipated, until Mr. Seward said: “Mr. President, I
approve of the proclamation, but I question the expediency
of its issue at this juncture. The depression of the public
 mind consequent upon our repeated reverses is so great
that I fear the eﬀect of so important a step. It may be
viewed as the last measure of an exhausted government —
a cry for help — the government stretching forth its hands
to Ethiopia, instead of Ethiopia stretching forth her hands
to the government — our last shriek on the retreat.” He
further advised Mr. Lincoln to postpone the measure until it
could be given to the country supported by military
success, rather than after the greatest disasters of the war.
Mr. Lincoln admitted the force of the suggestion, and so
the matter was suspended for a brief period. This was
before General Pope’s retreat upon Washington, and the
invasion of Maryland; and during all these disasters the
proclamation waited, though it was occasionally taken out
and retouched. At last came the battle of Antietam, and the
news of national success met Mr. Lincoln at the Soldier’s
Home. There he immediately wrote the second draft of the
preliminary proclamation, and came back to Washington on
Saturday of that week, and held a cabinet meeting, at
which he declared that the time for the enunciation of the
emancipation policy could no longer be delayed. Public
sentiment, he thought, would sustain it; many of his
warmest friends and supporters demanded it; “and,” said
Mr. Lincoln, in a low and reverent tone, “I have promised
my God that I will do it.” These last words were hardly
heard by any one but Mr. Chase, who sat nearest to him.
Mr. Chase inquired: “Did I understand you correctly, Mr.
President?” Mr. Lincoln replied: “I made a solemn vow
before God that, if General Lee should be driven back from
 Pennsylvania, I would crown the result by the declaration of
freedom to the slaves.”
This statement was made by Mr. Chase to Mr. Carpenter,
and does not diﬀer materially from one communicated to
the writer by Hon. George S. Boutwell of Massachusetts.
Mr. Boutwell, then in Washington, determined in October to
visit Massachusetts, and take a part in the state canvass;
and previous to his departure he called upon Mr. Lincoln.
In the course of the interview, he told the President that an
active leader of the People’s Party in Massachusetts had
asserted, in a public speech, that Mr. Lincoln was
frightened into issuing the emancipation proclamation, by
the meeting of loyal governors at Altoona, Pennsylvania,
which had occurred during the summer. “Now,” said the
President, dropping into a chair, as if he meant to be at
ease, “I can tell you just how that was. When Lee came
over the river, I made a resolve that when McClellan should
drive him back, — and I expected he would do it some time
or other, — I would send the proclamation after him. I
worked upon it, and got it pretty much prepared. The battle
of Antietam was fought on Wednesday, but I could not ﬁnd
out till Saturday whether we had really won a victory or
not. It was then too late to issue the proclamation that
week, and I dressed it over a little on Sunday, and Monday I
gave it to them. The fact is, I never thought of the meeting
of the governors at Altoona, and I can hardly remember
that I knew anything about it.”
On 
Monday, 
the 
22d 
of 
September, 
1862, 
the
proclamation was issued. Even from this sweeping measure
 he had left an opportunity to escape. It was only a
preliminary proclamation. It only declared free the slaves of
those states and those sections of states which should be in
rebellion on the 1st of January, 1863, leaving to every rebel
state an opportunity to save its pet institution by becoming
loyal, and doing what it could to save the Union:
“I, Abraham Lincoln, President of the United States of
America, and Commander-in-Chief of the army and navy
thereof, do hereby proclaim and declare that hereafter, as
heretofore, the war will be prosecuted for the object of
practically restoring the constitutional relation between the
United States and each of the states, and the people
thereof, in which states that relation is or may be
suspended or disturbed.
“That it is my purpose, upon the next meeting of
Congress, to again recommend the adoption of a practical
measure tendering pecuniary aid to the free acceptance or
rejection of all slave states so-called, the people whereof
may not then be in rebellion against the United States, and
which states may then have voluntarily adopted, or
thereafter may voluntarily adopt, immediate or gradual
abolishment of slavery within their respective limits; and
that the eﬀort to colonize persons of African descent, with
their consent, upon this continent or elsewhere, with the
previously obtained consent of the governments existing
there, will be continued.
“That on the ﬁrst day of January, in the year of our Lord
one thousand eight hundred and sixty-three; all persons
held as slaves within any state, or designated part of a
 state, the people whereof shall then be in rebellion against
the United States, shall be then, thenceforward, and
forever free; and the Executive Government of the United
States, including the military and naval authority thereof,
will recognize and maintain the freedom of such persons,
and will do no act or acts to repress such persons, or any of
them, in any eﬀorts they may make for their actual
freedom.
“That the Executive will, on the ﬁrst day of January
aforesaid, by proclamation, designate the states and parts
of states, if any, in which the people thereof respectively
shall then be in rebellion against the United States; and the
fact that any state, or the people thereof, shall on that day
be in good faith represented in the Congress of the United
States, by members chosen thereto at elections wherein a
majority of the qualiﬁed voters of such state shall have
participated, shall, in the absence of strong countervailing
testimony, be deemed conclusive evidence that such state,
and the people thereof, are not then in rebellion against the
United States.
“That attention is hereby called to an act of Congress
entitled ‘An Act to make an additional Article of War,’
approved March 13th, 1862, and which act is in the words
and ﬁgures following:
“‘ Be 
it 
enacted 
by 
the 
Senate 
and 
House 
of
Representatives of the United States of America in
Congress assembled, That hereafter the following shall be
promulgated as an additional article of war for the
 government of the army of the United States, and shall be
obeyed and observed as such:
“‘Article — All oﬀicers or persons in the military or naval
service of the United States are prohibited from employing
any of the forces under their respective commands for the
purpose of returning fugitives from service or labor who
may have escaped from any persons to whom such service
or labor is claimed to be due; and any oﬀicer who shall be
found guilty by a court-martial of violating this article shall
be dismissed from the service.’
“‘Sec. 2. And be it further enacted, That this act shall
take eﬀect from and after its passage.’
“Also, to the ninth and tenth sections of an act entitled
‘An Act to suppress Insurrection, to punish Treason and
Rebellion, to seize and conﬁscate Property of Rebels, and
for other purposes,’ approved July 16th, 1862, and which
sections are in the words and ﬁgures following:
“‘Sec. 9. And be it further enacted, That all slaves of
persons who shall hereafter be engaged in rebellion against
the government of the United States, or who shall in any
way give aid or comfort thereto, escaping from such
persons and taking refuge within the lines of the army; and
all slaves captured from such persons, or deserted by them,
and coming under the control of the government of the
United States; and all slaves of such persons found on [or]
being within any place occupied by rebel forces and
afterwards occupied by forces of the United States, shall be
deemed captives of war, and shall be forever free of their
servitude, and not again held as slaves.
 “‘Sec. 10. And be it further enacted, That no slave
escaping into any state, territory, or the District of
Columbia, from any other state, shall be delivered up, or in
any way impeded or hindered of his liberty, except for
crime, or some oﬀense against the laws, unless the person
claiming said fugitive shall ﬁrst make oath that the person
to whom the labor or service of such fugitive is alleged to
be due is his lawful owner, and has not borne arms against
the United States in the present rebellion, nor in any way
given aid and comfort thereto; and no person engaged in
the military or naval service of the United States shall,
under any pretense whatever, assume to decide on the
validity of the claim of any person to the service or labor of
any other person, or surrender up any such person to the
claimant, on pain of being dismissed from the service.’
“And I do hereby enjoin upon and order all persons
engaged in the military and naval service of the United
States to observe, obey, and enforce, within their respective
spheres of service, the act and sections above recited.
“And the Executive will in due time recommend that all
citizens of the United States who shall have remained loyal
thereto 
throughout 
the 
rebellion, 
shall 
(upon 
the
restoration of the constitutional relation between the
United States and their respective states and people, if that
relation shall have been suspended or disturbed) be
compensated for all losses by acts of the United States,
including the loss of slaves.
“In witness Whereof, I have hereunto set my hand, and
caused the seal of the United States to be aﬀixed.
 “Done at the city of Washington, this tenth day of April,
in the year of our Lord one thousand eight hundred and
sixty-two, and of [L.S.] the Independence of the United
States the eighty-seventh.
“Abraham Lincoln.
“By the President:
“Wm. H. Seward, Secretary of State.”
In the cabinet meeting held previous to the issue of the
proclamation, Mr. Lincoln had concluded the reading of the
third paragraph, when Mr. Seward interrupted him by
saying: “Mr. President, I think that you should insert after
the word, ‘recognize,’ the words, ‘and maintain.’” The
President replied that he had fully considered the import of
the expression, and that it was not his way to promise more
than he was sure he could perform; and he was not
prepared to say that he thought he was able to “maintain”
this. Mr. Seward insisted that the ground should be taken,
and the words ﬁnally went in.
The proclamation was received with profound interest by
the whole country. The radical anti-slavery men were
delighted, conservative politicians shrugged their shoulders
doubtfully, and the lovers of the peculiar institution
gnashed their teeth. It is very doubtful whether it aﬀected
the fall elections so much adversely to Mr. Lincoln, as the
fact that he was ignorantly or maliciously held responsible
for the blunders of McClellan’s campaign. If it aﬀected
them at all unfavorably, its inﬂuence in that direction soon
 ceased; and the proclamation became his tower of strength
in the sight of his own people and the peoples of the world.
Two days after the issue of the proclamation, a large
body of men assembled before the White House with music,
and called for the President. He appeared, and addressed
to them a few words of thanks for their courtesy, and, in
alluding to the proclamation, said: “What I did, I did after a
very full deliberation, and under a heavy and solemn sense
of responsibility. I can only trust in God I have made no
mistake” After two years of experience he was enabled to
say: “As aﬀairs have turned, it is the central act of my
administration, and the great event of the nineteenth
century.”
It will be remembered that General McClellan had
warned Mr. Lincoln against the eﬀect of a general policy of
emancipation upon his army. He thought that such a policy
would cause its disintegration. It certainly became a theme
of angry discussion; — so much so that, on the seventh of
October, the General felt called upon to issue an order
reminding oﬀicers and soldiers of their relations and their
duties to the civil authorities. It was an admirable order,
and evidently well intended. “Discussion by oﬀicers and
soldiers concerning public measures, determined upon and
declared by the government,” said he, “when carried
beyond the ordinary temperate and respectful expression of
opinion, tends greatly to impair and destroy the discipline
and eﬀiciency of the troops, by substituting the spirit of
political faction, for the ﬁrm, steady, and earnest support of
the authority of the government, which is the highest duty
 of the American soldier.” If there was any fault to be found
with the order, it was connected with the time of its
promulgation. It was issued the day after Mr. Lincoln left
the army, which, it will be remembered, he visited while it
rested from the battle of Antietam. General McClellan had
learned something during that visit. He had learned that,
notwithstanding Mr. Lincoln’s proclamation, he was held in
strong and enthusiastic aﬀection by the army. For nearly a
week, he mingled with the weary oﬀicers and soldiers,
meeting the heartiest reception everywhere. A general
oﬀicer who was with the President on the trip, said: “I
watched closely to if, in any division, or regiment, I could
ﬁnd symptoms of dissatisfaction, or could hear an allusion
to the proclamation. I found none. I heard only words of
praise.”
It was undoubtedly the aim of traitors outside of the
army, and of their sympathizers within, to alienate the army
from the President and the government; but they failed.
One Major Key came down from the army to Washington,
with the story that our Generals did not push the
advantages they had won, because it was not considered
desirable to crush the rebellion at once, if indeed, at all;
but so to manage aﬀairs as to secure a compromise as the
result of a prolonged war. It is quite probable that he had
heard this talk among the leading oﬀicers, as he declared
he had. One thing was evident — that he agreed with their
policy; and, telling Mr. Lincoln plainly so to his face, he was
at once removed from the service. The example served an
excellent purpose; and, with McClellan’s order, and the
 eﬀect of Mr. Lincoln’s personal visit, brought the disloyal
and factious elements of the army into their proper
relations to the government and its policy.
On the 1st of January, 1863, the ﬁnal proclamation of
emancipation was issued, and the great act was complete.
It was as follows:
“Whereas, on the twenty-second day of September, in the
year of our Lord one thousand eight hundred and sixty-two,
a proclamation was issued by the President of the United
States, containing, among other things, the following, to
wit:
“‘That on the ﬁrst day of January, in the year of our Lord
one thousand eight hundred and sixty-three, all persons
held as slaves within any state or designated part of a
state, the people whereof shall then be in rebellion against
the United States, shall be then, thenceforward, and
forever free; and the Executive government of the United
States, including the military and naval authority thereof,
will recognize and maintain the freedom of such persons,
and will do no act or acts to repress such persons, or any of
them, in any eﬀorts they may make for their actual
freedom.
“‘That the Executive will, on the ﬁrst day of January
aforesaid, by proclamation, designate the states and parts
of states, if any, in which the people thereof respectively
shall then be in rebellion against the United States; and the
fact that any state or the people thereof shall on that day
be in good faith represented in the Congress of the United
States, by members chosen thereto at elections wherein a
 majority of the qualiﬁed voters of such state shall have
participated, shall, in the absence of strong countervailing
testimony, be deemed conclusive evidence that such state,
and the people thereof; are not then in rebellion against the
United States.’
“Now, therefore, I, Abraham Lincoln, President of the
United States, by virtue of the power in me vested as
Commander-in-Chief of the army and navy of the United
States in time of actual armed rebellion against the
authority and government of the United States, and as a ﬁt
and necessary war measure for suppressing said rebellion,
do, on this ﬁrst day of January, in the year of our Lord one
thousand eight hundred and sixty-three, and in accordance
with my purpose so to do, publicly proclaimed for the full
period of one hundred days from the day ﬁrst above
mentioned, order and designate, as the states and parts of
states wherein the people thereof respectively are this day
in rebellion against the United States, the following, to wit:
“Arkansas, Texas, Louisiana (except the parishes of St.
Bernard. Plaquemine, Jeﬀerson, St. John, St. Charles, St.
James, Ascension, Assumption, Terre Bonne, Lafourche, St.
Marie, St. Martin and Orleans, including the city of New
Orleans), Mississippi, Alabama, Florida, Georgia, South
Carolina, North Carolina, and Virginia (except the forty-
eight counties designated as West Virginia, and also the
counties of Berkely, Accomac, Northampton, Elizabeth City,
York, Princess Anne, and Norfolk, including the cities of
Norfolk and Portsmouth), and which excepted parts are for
 the present left precisely as if this proclamation were not
issued.
“And, by virtue of the power and for the purpose
aforesaid, I do order and declare that all persons held as
slaves within said designated States and parts of States,
are, and henceforward shall be free; and that the Executive
Government of the United States, including the military
and naval authorities thereof, will recognize and maintain
the freedom of said persons.
“And I hereby enjoin upon the people so declared to be
free, to abstain from all violence, unless in necessary self-
defense; and I recommend to them, that in all cases, when
allowed, they labor faithfully for reasonable wages.
“And I further declare and make known that such
persons of suitable condition will be received into the
armed service of the United States, to garrison forts,
positions, stations and other places, and to man vessels of
all sorts in said service.
“And upon this act, sincerely believed to be an act of
justice, warranted by the Constitution, upon military
necessity, I invoke the considerate judgment of mankind,
and the gracious favor of Almighty God.
“In testimony whereof, I have hereunto set my name, and
caused the seal of the United States to be aﬀixed.
“Done at the city of Washington, this ﬁrst day of January,
in the year of our Lord one thousand eight hundred and
sixty-three, and of [L.S.] the Independence of the United
States the eighty-seventh.
“Abraham Lincoln.
 “By the President:
“Wm. H. Seward, Secretary of State.”
A single paragraph in this proclamation was written by
Secretary Chase. He had himself prepared a proclamation,
which embodied his views, and had submitted it to Mr.
Lincoln. Mr. Lincoln selected from it this sentence: “And
upon this act, believed to be an act of justice warranted by
the Constitution [upon military necessity,] I invoke the
considerate judgment of mankind and the gracious favor of
Almighty God;” and adopted it, interpolating only the words
between brackets. It is an illustration of Mr. Lincoln’s
freedom from vanity, ﬁrst that he adopted the words at all,
notwithstanding their dignity and beauty; and, second, that
he freely told of the circumstance, so that it found publicity
through his own revelations.
On the twenty-fourth of September, two days after the
issue of the preliminary proclamation, Mr. Lincoln gave
utterance to a proclamation suspending the writ of habeas
corpus. Proceeding from the fact that the ordinary
processes of law were not suﬀicient to restrain disloyal
persons from hindering the execution of a draft of militia
which had been ordered, discouraging enlistments, and
giving aid and comfort in various ways to the insurrection,
he declared the writ of habeas corpus suspended, touching
all persons who should be arrested, conﬁned, or sentenced
by court martial, for these oﬀenses. The measure created
great dissatisfaction, particularly among those who were
not in favor of the war, and those who were anxious to
make political headway against the administration. There
 was an outcry against “military despotism,” against the
“abridgment of the right of free speech,” against the
“suppression of the liberty of the press,” etc. etc.; the
freedom with which these strictures were made, without
attracting the slightest notice of the government, refuting
the charges as rapidly as they were uttered.
At the succeeding session of Congress, these complaints
had immediate expression; and the proclamation was
furiously attacked at once. Resolutions were introduced,
censuring the “arbitrary arrest” of persons in the loyal
states; and the suspension of the writ of habeas corpus was
vehemently 
denounced. 
It 
appeared 
by 
these
demonstrations that the public liberty was endangered, and
that the Constitution was subverted. It is possible that
some of those engaged in this outcry were honest in their
fears and denunciations; but some of them were notorious
sympathizers with the rebels, and were doing, and had
done everything in their power to aid the rebellion. Nothing
was more notorious than that the country abounded with
spies and informers, and men who discouraged enlistments,
and counseled resistance to a draft. Congress, however,
was on the side of the government, and passed a bill
sustaining the President, and indemnifying him and all who
acted under him in the execution of his policy. It is quite
possible that injustice was done in some of these “arbitrary
arrests” — it would be strange, indeed, if it were otherwise
— but the prophets of the degeneracy of the government
into a military despotism have their answer now, in the
peaceful and ready return to the old status.
 There was one vice of the army that gave Mr. Lincoln
great pain; and that was the unnecessary disregard of the
Sabbath. Armies, of course, cannot always be good
Sabbath-keepers; but he saw in them a disposition to do
work on that day not at all necessary, and to engage in
sports quite in dissonance with its spirit. So, on the
sixteenth of November, he issued a circular letter upon the
subject, in which he told the soldiers that “the importance
for man and beast of the prescribed weekly rest; the sacred
rights of Christian soldiers and sailors, a becoming
deference to the best sentiment of a Christian people, and a
due regard for the Divine Will, demand that Sunday labor
in the army and navy be reduced to the measure of strict
necessity.” He continued: “The discipline and character of
the national forces should not suﬀer, nor the cause they
defend be imperiled, by the profanation of the day, or the
name of the Most High.” The letter shows how closely he
had associated the will of the Most High with the national
cause, and how profound was his reverence for the
institutions of Christianity.
This chapter, and the record of the events of the year,
cannot be better closed, perhaps, than by an incident which
shows that, in Mr. Lincoln’s greatest necessity for popular
support, he disdained, with all the strength of his old sense
of justice and fairness, any trick for gaining that support.
After New Orleans was taken, and a certain portion of the
state reclaimed and held by military power, movements
were commenced for the representation of the state in
Congress. Mr. Lincoln was charged with conniving with this
 movement, and with intending to secure members of
Congress from Louisiana, elected under military pressure,
who would assist in maintaining his policy, and make a
show of the returning loyalty of the state. On the twenty-
ﬁrst of November, he wrote to G.F. Shepley, the military
governor of Louisiana, as follows:
“Dear Sir — Dr. Kennedy, bearer of this, has some
apprehension 
that 
Federal 
oﬀicers, 
not 
citizens 
of
Louisiana, may be set up as candidates for Congress in that
state. In my view, there could be no possible object in such
an election. We do not particularly need members of
Congress from those states to enable us to get along with
legislation here. What we do want is the conclusive
evidence that respectable citizens of Louisiana are willing
to be members of Congress, and to swear support to the
Constitution; and that other respectable citizens there are
willing to vote for them and send them. To send a parcel of
northern men here as representatives, elected as would be
understood (and perhaps really so), at the point of the
bayonet, would be disgraceful and outrageous; and were I a
member of Congress here, I would vote against admitting
any such man to a seat.”
