Sir Michael O'Dwyer held me responsible for all that had happened in the  Punjab, and some irate young Punjabis held me responsible for the  martial law. They asserted that, if only I had not suspended civil  disobedience, there would have been no Jalianwala Bagh massacre.  Some of them even went the length of threatening me with  assassination if I went to the Punjab. But I felt that my position was so correct and above question that  no intelligent person could misunderstand it. I was impatient to go to the Punjab. I had never been there before,  and that made me all the more anxious to see things for myself. Dr.  Satyapal, Dr. Kitchlu and Pandit Rambhaj Dutt Chowdhari, who had  invited me to the Punjab, were at this time in jail. But I felt sure  that the Government could not dare to keep them and the other  prisoners in prison for long. A large number of Punjabis used to  come and see me whenever I was in Bombay. I ministered to them a  word of cheer on these occasions, and that would comfort them. My  self-confidence of that time was infectious. But my going to the Punjab had to be postponed again and again. The  Viceroy would say, 'not yet,' every time I asked for permission to  go there, and so the thing dragged on. In the meantime the Hunter Committee was announced to hold an  inquiry in connection with the Punjab Government's doings under the  martial law. Mr. C. F. Andrews had now reached the Punjab. His  letters gave a heart-rending description of the state of things  there, and I formed the impression that the martial law  atrocities were in fact even worse than the press reports had  showed. He pressed me urgently to come and join him. At the same  time Malaviyaji sent telegrams asking me to proceed to the Punjab at  once. I once more telegraphed to the Viceroy asking whether I could  now go to the Punjab. He wired back in reply that I could go there  after a certain date. I cannot exactly recollect now, but I think it  was 17th of October. The scene that I witnessed on my arrival at Lahore can never be  effaced from my memory. The railway station was from end to end one  seething mass of humanity. The entire populace had turned out of  doors in eager expectation, as if to meet a dear relation after a  long separation, and was delirious with joy. I was put up at the  late Pandit Rambhaj Dutt's bungalow, and the burden of entertaining  me fell on the shoulders of Shrimati Sarala Devi. A burden it truly  was, for even then, as now, the place where I was accommodated  became a veritable caravanserai. Owing to the principal Punjab leaders being in jail, their place, I  found, had been properly taken up by Pandit Malaviyaji, Pandit  Motilalji and the late Swami Sharddhanandji. Malaviyaji and  Shraddhanandji I had known intimately before, but this was the first  occasion on which I came in close personal contact with Motilalji.  All these leaders, as also such local leaders as had escaped the  privilege of going to jail, at once made me feel perfectly at home  amongst them, so that I never felt like a stranger in their midst. How we unanimously decided not to lead evidence before the Hunter  Committee is now a matter of history. The reasons for that decision  were published at that time, and need not be recapitulated here.  Suffice it to say that looking back upon these events from this  distance of time, I still feel that our decision to boycott the  Committee was absolutely correct and proper. As a logical consequence of the boycott of the Hunter Committee, it  was decided to appoint a non-official Inquiry Committee, to hold  almost a parallel inquiry on behalf of the Congress. Pandit Motilal  Nehru, the late Deshbandhu C. R. Das, Sjt. Abbas Tyebji, Sjt.  M.R. Jayakar and myself were appointed to this Committee, virtually  by Pandit Malaviyaji. We distributed ourselves over various places  for purposes of inquiry. The responsibility for organizing the work  of the Committee devolved on me, and as the privilege of conducting  the inquiry in the largest number of places fell to my lot, I got a  rare opportunity of observing at close quarters the people of the  Punjab and the Punjab villages. In the course of my inquiry I made acquaintance with the women of  the Punjab also. It was as if we had known one another for ages.  Wherever I went they came flocking, and laid before me their heaps  of yarn. My work in connection with the inquiry brought home to me  the fact that the Punjab could become a great field for khadi work. As I proceeded further and further with my inquiry into the  atrocities that had been committed on the people, I came across  tales of Government's tyranny and the arbitrary despotism of its  officers such as I was hardly prepared for, and they filled me with  deep pain. What surprised me then, and what still continues to fill  me with surprise, was the fact that a province that had furnished  the largest number of soldiers to the British Government during the  war, should have taken all these brutal excesses lying down. The task of drafting the report of this Committee was also entrusted  to me. I would recommend a perusal of this report to anyone who  wants to have an idea of the kind of atrocities that were  perpetrated on the Punjab people. All that I wish to say here about  it is that there is not a single conscious exaggeration in it  anywhere, and every statement made in it is substantiated by  evidence. Moreover, the evidence published was only a fraction of  what was in the Committee's possession. Not a single statement,  regarding the validity of which there was the slightest room for  doubt, was permitted to appear in the report. This report,  prepared as it was solely with a view to bringing out the truth and  nothing but the truth, will enable the reader to see to what lengths  the British Government is capable of going, and what inhumanities  and barbarities it is capable of perpetrating in order to maintain  its power. So far as I am aware, not a single statement made in this  report has ever been disproved. 