From its very inception the khadi movement, Swadeshi movement as it was  then called, evoked much criticism from the mill-owners. The late  Umar Sobani, a capable mill-owner himself, not only gave me the  benefit of his own knowledge and experience, but kept me in touch  with the opinion of the other mill-owners as well. The argument  advanced by one of these deeply impressed him. He pressed me to meet  him. I agreed. Mr. Sobani arranged the interview. The mill-owner  opened the conversation.  'You know that there has been Swadeshi agitation before now?'  'Yes, I do,' I replied.  'You are also aware that in the days of the Partition we, the mill-owners, fully exploited the Swadeshi movement. When it was at its  height, we raised the prices of cloth, and did even worse things.'  'Yes, I have heard something about it, and it has grieved me.'  'I can understand your grief, but I can see no ground for it. We are  not conducting our business out of philanthropy. We do it for  profit, we have got to satisfy the shareholders. The price of an  article is governed by the demand for it. Who can check the law of  demand and supply? The Bengalis should have known that their  agitation was bound to send up the price of Swadeshi cloth by  stimulating the demand for it.'  I interrupted: 'The Bengalis like me  were trustful in their nature. They believed, in the fullness of  their faith, that the mill-owners would not be so utterly selfish  and unpatriotic as to betray their country in the hour of its need,  and even to go the length, as they did, of fraudulently passing off  foreign cloth as Swadeshi.'  'I knew your believing nature,' he rejoined; 'that is why I put you  to the trouble of coming to me, so that I might warn you against  falling into the same error as these simple-hearted Bengalis.'  With these words the mill-owner beckoned to his clerk who was  standing by to produce samples of the stuff that was being  manufactured in his mill. Pointing to it he said: 'Look at this  stuff. This is the latest variety turned out by our mill. It is  meeting with a widespread demand. We manufacture it from the waste.  Naturally, therefore, it is cheap. We send it as far North as the  valleys of the Himalayas. We have agencies all over the country,  even in places where your voice or your agents can never reach. You  can thus see that we do not stand in need of more agents. Besides,  you ought to know that India's production of cloth falls far short  of its requirements. The question of Swadeshi, therefore, largely  resolves itself into one of production. The moment we can increase  our production sufficiently, and improve its quality to the  necessary extent, the import of foreign cloth will automatically  cease. My advice to you, therefore, is not to carry on your agitation on  its present lines, but to turn your attention to the erection of  fresh mills. What we need is not propaganda to inflate demand for  our goods, but greater production.'  'Then, surely, you will bless my effort, if I am already engaged in  that very thing?' I asked.  'How can that be?' he exclaimed, a bit puzzled, 'but maybe, you  are thinking of promoting the establishment of new mills, in which  case you certainly deserve to be congratulated.'  ' I am not doing exactly that,' I explained, 'but I am engaged in  the revival of the spinning wheel.'  'What is that?' he asked, feeling still more at sea. I told him all  about the spinning wheel, and the story of my long quest after it,  and added, 'I am entirely of your opinion; it is no use my becoming  virtually an agent for the mills. That would do more harm than good  to the country. Our mills will not be in want of custom for a long  time to come. My work should be, and therefore is, to organize the  production of handspun cloth, and to find means for the disposal of  the khadi thus produced. I am, therefore, concentrating my attention  on the production of khadi. I swear by this form of Swadeshi,  because through it I can provide work to the semi-starved,  semi-employed women of India. My idea is to get these women to spin  yarn, and to clothe the people of India with khadi woven out of it.  I do not know how far this movement is going to succeed, at present  it is only in the incipient stage. But I have full faith in it. At  any rate it can do no harm. On the contrary to the extent that it  can add to the cloth production of the country, be it ever so small,  it will represent so much solid gain. You will thus perceive that my  movement is free from the evils mentioned by you.'  He replied, 'If you have additional production in view in organizing  your movement, I have nothing to say against it. Whether the  spinning wheel can make headway in this age of power machinery is  another question. But I for one wish you every success.  