To breathing time was, however, in store for me. Hardly was the  Ahmedabad mill-hands' strike over, when I had to plunge into the  Kheda Satyagraha struggle.  A condition approaching famine had arisen in the Kheda district  owing to a widespread failure of crops, and the Patidars of Kheda  were considering the question of getting the revenue assessment for  the year suspended.  Sjt. Amritlal Thakkar had already inquired into and reported on the  situation and personally discussed the question with the  Commissioner, before I gave definite advice to the cultivators. Sjts.  Mohanlal Pandya and Shankarlal Parikh had also thrown themselves  into the fight, and had set up an agitation in the Bombay  Legislative Council through Sjt. Vithalbhai Patel and the late Sir  Gokuldas Kahandas Parekh. More than one deputation had waited upon  the Governor in that connection.  I was at this President of the Gujarat Sabha. The Sabha sent  petitions and telegrams to the Government and even patiently  swallowed the insults and threats of the Commissioner. The conduct  of the officials on this occasion was so ridiculous and undignified  as to be almost incredible now.  The cultivators' demand was as clear as daylight, and so moderate as  to make out a strong case for its acceptance. Under the Land Revenue  Rules, if the crop was four annas or under, the cultivators could  claim full suspension of the revenue assessment for the year.  According to the official figures the crop was said to be over four  annas. The contention of the cultivators, on the other hand, was  that it was less than four annas. But the Government was in on mood  to listen, and regarded the popular demand for arbitration as lèse majesté.  At last all petitioning and prayer having failed, after  taking counsel with co-workers, I advised the Patidars ro resort to  Satyagraha.  Besides the volunteers of Kheda, my principal comrades in this  struggle were Sjts. Vallabhbhai Patel, Shankarlal Banker, Shrimati  Anasuyabehn, Sjts. Indulal Yajnik, Mahadev Desai and others. Sjt.  Vallabhbhai, in joining the struggle, had to suspend a splendid and  growing practice at the bar, which for all practical purposes he was  never able to resume.  We fixed up our headquarters at the  Nadiad Anathashram, no other place being available which would have  been large enough to accomodate all of us. The following pledge was signed by the Satyagrahis:  Knowing that the crops of our villages are less than four annas, we  requested the Government to suspend the collection of revenue  assessment till the ensuing year, but the Government has not acceded  to our prayer. Therefore, we, the undersigned, hereby solemnly  declare that we shall not, of our own accord, pay to the Government  the full or the remaining revenue for the year. We shall let the  Government take whatever legal steps it may think fit and gladly  suffer the consequences of our non-payment. We shall rather let our  lands be forfeited than that by voluntary payment we should allow  our case to be considered false or should compromise our  self-respect. Should the Government, however, agree to suspend  collection of the second installment of the assessment throughout the  district, such amongst us as are in a position to pay will pay up  the whole or the balance of the revenue that may be due. The reason  why those who are able to pay still withold payment is that, if they pay up, the poorer ryots may in a panic sell their  chattels or incur debts to pay their dues, and thereby bring  suffering upon themselves. In these circumstances we feel that, for  the sake of the poor, it is the duty even of those who can afford to  pay to withhold payment of their assessment. I cannot devote many chapters to this struggle. So a number of sweet  recollections in this connection will have to be crowded out. Those  who want to make a fuller and deeper study of this important fight  would do well to read the full and authentic history of the Kheda Satyagraha by Sjt. Shankarlal Parikh of Kathlal, Kheda 