I do not remember to have seen a handloom or a spinning wheel when in  1908 I described it in Hind Swaraj  as the panacea for the growing pauperism of India. In that book I  took it as understood that anything that helped India to get rid of  the grinding poverty of her masses would in the same process also  establish Swaraj. Even in 1915, when I returned to India from South  Africa, I had not actually seen a spinning wheel. When the  Satyagraha Ashram was founded at Sabarmati, we introduced a few  handlooms there. But no sooner had we done this than we found  ourselves up against a difficulty. All of us belonged either to the  liberal professions or to business; not one of us was an artisan. We  needed a weaving expert to teach us to weave before we could work  the looms. One was at last procured from Palanpur, but he did not  communicate to us the whole of his art. But Maganlal  Gandhi was not to be easily baffled. Possessed of a natural talent  for mechanics, he was able fully to master the art before long, and  one after another several new weavers were trained up in the Ashram. The object that we set before ourselves was to be able to clothe  ourselves entirely in cloth manufactured by our own hands. We  therefore forthwith discarded the use of mill-woven cloth, and all  the members of the Ashram resolved to wear hand-woven cloth made  from Indian yarn only. The adoption of this practice brought us a  world of experience. It enabled us to know, from direct contact, the  conditions of life among the weavers, the extent of their  production, the handicaps in the way of their obtaining their yarn  supply, the way in which they were being made victims of fraud, and,  lastly, their ever growing indebtedness. We were not in a position  immediately to manufacture all the cloth for our needs. The  alternative therefore was to get our cloth supply from handloom  weavers. But ready-made cloth from Indian mill-yarn was not easily  obtainable either from the cloth-dealers or from the weavers  themselves. All the fine cloth woven by the weavers was from foreign  yarn, since Indian mills did not spin fine counts. Even today the  out-turn of higher counts by Indian mills is very limited, whilst  highest counts they cannot spin at all. It was after the greatest  effort that we were at last able to find some weavers who  condescended to weave Swadeshi yarn for us, and only on condition  that the Ashram would take up all the cloth that they might produce.  By thus adopting cloth woven from mill-yarn as our wear, and  propagating it among our friends, we made ourselves voluntary agents  of the Indian spinning mills. This in its turn brought us into  contact with the mills, and enabled us to know something about their  management and their handicaps. We saw that the aim of the mills was  more and more to weave the yarn spun by them; their co-operation  with the handloom weaver was not willing, but unavoidable and  temporary. We became impatient to be able to spin our own yarn. It  was clear that, until we could do this ourselves, dependence on the  mills would remain. We did not feel that we could render any service  to the country by continuing as agents of Indian spinning mills. No end of difficulties again faced us. We could get neither spinning  wheel nor a spinner to teach us how to spin. We were employing some  wheels for filling pearns and bobbins for weaving in the Ashram. But  we had no idea that these could be used as spinning wheels. Once  Kalidas Jhaveri discovered a woman who, he said, would demonstrate  to us how spinning was done. We sent to her a member of the Ashram  who was known for his great versatility in learning new things. But  even he returned without wresting the secret of the art. So the time passed on, and my impatience grew with the time. I plied  every chance visitor to the Ashram who was likely to possess some  information about hand spinning with questions about the art. But the  art being confined to women and having been all but exterminated, if  there was some stray spinner still surviving in some obscure corner,  only a member of that sex was likely to find out her whereabouts. In the year 1917 I was taken by my Gujarati friends to preside at  the Broach Educational Conference. It was here that I discovered  that remarkable lady Gangabehn Majmundar. She was a widow, but her  enterprising spirit knew no bounds. Her education, in the accepted  sense of the term, was not much. But in courage and commonsense she  easily surpassed the general run of our educated women. She had  already got rid of the curse of untouchability, and fearlessly moved  among and served the suppressed classes. She had means of her own,  and her needs were few. She had a well seasoned constitution, and  went about everywhere without an escort. She felt quite at home on  horseback. I came to know her more intimately at the Godhra  Conference. To her I poured out my grief about the charkha, and she  lightened my burden by a promise to prosecute an earnest and  incessant search for the spinning wheel. 