I knew Maulana Mazharul Haq in London when he was studying for the  bar, and when I met him at the Bombay Congress in 1915 – the year in  which he was President of the Muslim League – he had renewed the  acquaintance, and extended me an invitation to stay with him  whenever I happened to go to Patna. I bethought myself of this  invitation and sent him a note indicating the purpose of my visit.  He immediately came in his car, and pressed me to accept his  hospitality. I thanked him and requested him to guide me to my  destination by the first available train, the railway guide being  useless to an utter stranger like me. He had a talk with Rajkumar  Shukla and suggested that I should first go to Muzaffarpur. There  was a train for that place the same evening, and he sent me off by  it.  Principal Kripalani was then in Muzaffarpur. I had known of him ever  since my visit to Hyderabad. Dr. Choithram had told me of his great  sacrifice, of his simple life, and of the Ashram that Dr. Choithram  was running out of funds provided by Professor Kripalani. He used to be  a professor in the Government College, Muzaffarpur, and had just  resigned the post when I went there. I had sent a telegram informing  him of my arrival, and he met me at the station with a crowd of  students, though the train reached there at midnight. He had no  rooms of his own, and was staying with Professor Malkani who  therefore virtually became my host. It was an extraordinary thing in  those days for a Government professor to harbour a man like me.  Professor Kripalani spoke to me about the desperate condition of  Bihar, particularly of the Tirhut division and gave me an idea of  the difficulty of my task. He had established very close contact  with the Biharis, and had already spoken to them about the mission  that took me to Bihar.  In the morning a small group of vakils called on me. I still  remember Ramnavmi Prasad among them, as his earnestness specially  appealed to me.  'It is not possible,' he said, 'for you to do the kind of work you  have come for, if you stay here (meaning Professor Malkani's quarters).  You must come and stay with one of us. Gaya Babu is a well-known  vakil here. I have come on his behalf in invite you to stay with  him. I confess we are all afraid of Government, but we shall render  what help we can. Most of the things Rajkumar Shukla has told you  are true. It is a pity our leaders are not here today. I have,  however, wired to them both, Bapu Brajkishore Prasad and Babu  Rajendra Prasad. I expect them to arrive shortly, and they are sure  to be able to give you all the information you want and to help you  considerably. Pray come over to Gaya Babu's place.'  This was a request that I could not resist, though I hesitated for  fear of embarrassing Gaya Babu. But he put me at ease, and so I went  over to stay with him. He and his people showered all their  affection on me.  Brajkishore Babu now arrived from Darbhanga and Rajendra Babu from  Puri. Brajkishore Babu was not the Babu Brajkishore Prasad I had met  in Lucknow. He impressed me this time with his humility, simplicity,  goodness and extraordinary faith, so characteristic of the Biharis,  and my heart was joyous over it. The Bihar vakils' regard for him  was an agreeable surprise to me.  Soon I felt myself becoming bound to this circle of friends in  life-long friendship. Brajkishore Babu acquainted me with the facts of  the case. He used to be in the habit of taking up the cases of the  poor tenants. There were two such cases pending when I went there.  When he won any such case, he consoled himself that he was doing  something good for these poor people. Not that he did not  charge fees from these simple peasants. Lawyers labour under the  belief that, if they do not charge fees, they will have no  wherewithal to run their households, and will not be able to render  effective help to the poor people. The figures of the fees they  charged and the standard of a barrister's fees in Bengal and Bihar  staggered me.  'We gave Rs. 10,000 to so and so for his opinion,' I was told.  Nothing less than four figures in any case.  The friends listened to my kindly reproach and did not misunderstand  me.  'Having studied these cases,' said I, 'I have come to the conclusion  that we should stop going to law courts. Taking such cases to the  courts does little good. Where the ryots are so crushed and fear-  stricken, law courts are useless. The real relief for them is to be  free from fear. We cannot sit still until we have driven tinkathia  out of Bihar. I had thought that I should be able to leave here in  two days, but I now realize that the work might take even two years.  I am prepared to give that time, if necessary. I am now feeling my  ground, but I want your help.'  I found Brajkishore Babu exceptionally coolheaded. 'We shall render  all the help we can,' he said quietly, 'but pray tell us what kind  of help you will need.'  And thus we sat talking until midnight.  'I shall have little use for your legal knowledge,' I said to them.  'I want clerical assistance and help in interpretation. It may be  necessary to face imprisonment, but, much as I would love you to run  that risk, you would go only so far as you feel  yourselves capable of going. Even turning yourselves into clerks and  giving up your profession for an indefinite period is no small  thing. I find it difficult to understand the local dialect of Hindi,  and I shall not be able to read papers written in Kaithi or Urdu. I  shall want you to translate them for me. We cannot afford to pay for  this work. It should all be done for love and out of a spirit of  service.'  Brajkishore Babu understood this immediately, and he now  cross-examined me and his companions by turns. He tried to ascertain  the implications of all that I had said – how long their service would  be required, how many of them would be needed, whether they might  serve by turns and so on. Then he asked the vakils the capacity of  their sacrifice.  Ultimately they gave me this assurance. 'Such and such a number of  us will do whatever you may ask. Some of us will be with you for so  much time as you may require. The idea of accommodating oneself to  imprisonment is a novel thing for us. We will try to assimilate it.' 