    
SPEECH AT THE COOPER INSTITUTE, NEW YORK
FEBRUARY 27, 1860
MR. PRESIDENT AND FELLOW-CITIZENS OF NEW
YORK: — The facts with which I shall deal this evening are
mainly old and familiar; nor is there anything new in the
general use I shall make of them. If there shall be any
novelty, it will be in the mode of presenting the facts, and
the 
inferences 
and 
observations 
following 
that
presentation.
In his speech last autumn at Columbus, Ohio, as reported
in the New York Times, Senator Douglas said:
“Our fathers, when they framed the Government under
which we live, understood this question just as well, and
even better than we do now.”
I fully indorse this, and I adopt it as a text for this
discourse. I so adopt it because it furnishes a precise and
an 
agreed 
starting-point 
for 
a 
discussion 
between
Republicans and that wing of the Democracy headed by
Senator Douglas. It simply leaves the inquiry: What was the
understanding 
those 
fathers 
had 
of 
the 
question
mentioned?
What is the frame of Government under which we live?
 The answer must be — the Constitution of the United
States. That Constitution consists of the original, framed in
1787 (and under which the present Government ﬁrst went
into 
operation), 
and 
twelve 
subsequently 
framed
amendments, the ﬁrst ten of which were framed in 1789.
Who were our fathers that framed the Constitution? I
suppose 
the 
“thirty-nine” 
who 
signed 
the 
original
instrument may be fairly called our fathers who framed that
part of the present Government. It is almost exactly true to
say they framed it, and it is altogether true to say they
fairly represented the opinion and sentiment of the whole
nation at that time.
Their names, being familiar to nearly all, and accessible
to quite all, need not now be repeated.
I take these “thirty-nine,” for the present, as being our
“fathers who framed the Government under which we live.”
What is the question which, according to the text, those
fathers understood “just as well, and even better than we
do now”?
It is this: Does the proper division of local from Federal
authority, or anything in the Constitution, forbid our
Federal Government to control as to slavery in our Federal
Territories?
Upon this Senator Douglas holds the aﬀirmative, and
Republicans the negative. This aﬀirmation and denial form
an issue, and this issue — this question is precisely what
the text declares our fathers understood “better than we.”
Let us now inquire whether the “thirty-nine,” or any of
them, acted upon this question; and if they did, how they
 acted upon it — how they expressed that better
understanding.
In 1784, three years before the Constitution — the
United States then owning the Northwestern Territory, and
no other — the Congress of the Confederation had before
them the question of prohibiting slavery in that Territory;
and four of the “thirty nine” who afterward framed the
Constitution were in that Congress and voted on that
question. Of these, Roger Sherman, Thomas Miﬄin, and
Hugh Williamson voted for the prohibition, thus showing
that, in their understanding, no line dividing local from
Federal authority, nor anything else, properly forbade the
Federal Government to control as to slavery in Federal
territory. The other of the four — James McHenry voted
against the prohibition, showing that, for some cause, he
thought it improper to vote for it.
In 1787, still before the Constitution, but while the
convention was in session framing it, and while the
Northwestern Territory still was the only Territory owned
by the United States, the same question of prohibiting
slavery in the Territory again came before the Congress of
the Confederation; and two more of the “thirty-nine” who
afterward signed the Constitution were in that Congress,
and voted on the question. They were William Blount and
William Few; and they both voted for the prohibition thus
showing that, in their understanding, no line dividing local
from Federal authority, nor anything else, properly forbade
the Federal Government to control as to slavery in Federal
 territory. This time the prohibition became a law, being part
of what is now well known as the Ordinance of ‘87.
The question of Federal control of slavery in the
Territories seems not to have been directly before the
convention which framed the original Constitution; and
hence it is not recorded that the “thirty-nine,” or any of
them, while engaged on that instrument, expressed any
opinion on that precise question.
In 1789, by the ﬁrst Congress which sat under the
Constitution, an act was passed to enforce the Ordinance of
‘87, 
including 
the 
prohibition 
of 
slavery 
in 
the
Northwestern Territory. The bill for this act was reported
by one of the “thirty-nine,” Thomas Fitzsimmons, then a
member 
of 
the 
House 
of 
Representatives 
from
Pennsylvania. It went through all its stages without a word
of opposition, and ﬁnally passed both branches without
yeas and nays, which is equivalent to a unanimous passage.
In this Congress there were sixteen of the thirty-nine
fathers who framed the original Constitution. They were
John Langdon, Nicholas Gilman, Wm. S. Johnnson, Roger
Sherman, Robert Morris, Thos. Fitzsimmons, William Few,
Abraham Baldwin, Rufus King, William Paterson, George
Claimer, Richard Bassett, George Read, Pierce Butler,
Daniel Carroll, James Madison.
This shows that, in their understanding, no line dividing
local 
from 
Federal 
authority, 
nor 
anything 
in 
the
Constitution, properly forbade Congress to prohibit slavery
in the Federal territory; else both their ﬁdelity to correct
 principles and their oath to support the Constitution would
have constrained them to oppose the prohibition.
Again: George Washington, another of the “thirty nine,”
was then President of the United States, and, as such,
approved and signed the bill; thus completing its validity as
a law, and thus showing that, in his understanding, no line
dividing local from Federal authority, nor anything in the
Constitution, forbade the Federal Government to control as
to slavery in Federal territory.
No great while after the adoption of the original
Constitution, 
North 
Carolina 
ceded 
to 
the 
Federal
Government the country now constituting the State of
Tennessee; and, a few years later, Georgia ceded that which
now constitutes the States of Mississippi and Alabama. In
both deeds of cession it was made a condition by the ceding
States that the Federal Government should not prohibit
slavery in the ceded country. Besides this, slavery was then
actually in the ceded country. Under these circumstances,
Congress, on taking charge of these countries, did not
absolutely prohibit slavery within them. But they did
interfere with it — take control of it — even there, to a
certain extent. In 1798, Congress organized the Territory of
Mississippi: In the act of organization they prohibited the
bringing of slaves into the Territory from any place without
the United States, by ﬁne and giving freedom to slaves so
brought. This act passed both branches of Congress
without yeas and nays. In that Congress were three of the
“thirty-nine” who framed the original Constitution. They
were John Langdon, George Read, and Abraham Baldwin.
 They all, probably, voted for it. Certainly they would have
placed their opposition to it upon record, if, in their
understanding, any line dividing local from Federal
authority, or anything in the Constitution, properly forbade
the Federal Government to control as to slavery in Federal
territory.
In 
1803, 
the 
Federal 
Government 
purchased 
the
Louisiana country. Our former territorial acquisitions came
from certain of our own States; but this Louisiana country
was acquired from a foreign nation. In 1804, Congress gave
a territorial organization to that part of it which now
constitutes the State of Lousiana. New Orleans, lying
within that part, was an old and comparatively large city.
There were other considerable towns and settlements, and
slavery was extensively and thoroughly intermingled with
the people. Congress did not, in the Territorial Act, prohibit
slavery; but they did interfere with it take control of it — in
a more marked and extensive way than they did in the case
of Mississippi. The substance of the provision therein made
in relation to slaves was:
First. That no slave should be imported into the Territory
from foreign parts.
Second. That no slave should be carried into it who had
been imported into the United States since the ﬁrst day of
May, 1798.
Third. That no slave should be carried into it except by
the owner, and for his own use as a settler; the penalty in
all the cases being a ﬁne upon the violator of the law, and
freedom to the slave.
 This act also was passed without yeas and nays. In the
Congress which passed it there were two of the “thirty-
nine.” They were Abraham Baldwin and Jonathan Dayton.
As stated in the case of Mississippi, it is probable they both
voted for it. They would not have allowed it to pass without
recording their opposition to it, if, in their understanding, it
violated either the line properly dividing local from Federal
authority, or any provision of the Constitution.
In 1819-20 came and passed the Missouri question. Many
votes were taken, by yeas and nays, in both branches of
Congress, upon the various phases of the general question.
Two of the “thirty-nine” — Rufus King and Charles
Pinckney were members of that Congress. Mr. King steadily
voted for slavery prohibition and against all compromises,
while Mr. Pinckney as steadily voted against slavery
prohibition, and against all compromises. By this, Mr. King
showed that, in his understanding, no line dividing local
from Federal authority, nor anything in the Constitution,
was violated by Congress prohibiting slavery in Federal
territory; while Mr. Pinckney, by his vote, showed that in his
understanding there was some suﬀicient reason for
opposing such prohibition in that case.
The cases I have mentioned are the only acts of the
“thirty-nine,” or of any of them, upon the direct issue,
which I have been able to discover.
To enumerate the persons who thus acted, as being four
in 1784, two in 1787, seventeen in 1789, three in 1798, two
in 1804, and two in 1819-20 — there would be thirty of
them. But this would be counting, John Langdon, Roger
 Sherman, William Few, Rufus King, and George Read, each
twice, and Abraham Baldwin three times. The true number
of those of the “thirty-nine” whom I have shown to have
acted upon the question which, by the text, they
understood better than we, is twenty-three, leaving sixteen
not shown to have acted upon it in any way.
Here, then, we have twenty-three out of our thirty-nine
fathers “who framed the Government under which we live,”
who have, upon their oﬀicial responsibility and their
corporal oaths, acted upon the very question which the text
aﬀirms they “understood just as well, and even better than
we do now”; and twenty-one of them — a clear majority of
the whole “thirty-nine” — so acting upon it as to make them
guilty of gross political impropriety and wilful perjury, if, in
their understanding, any proper division between local and
Federal authority, or anything in the Constitution they had
made themselves, and sworn to support, forbade the
Federal Government to control as to slavery in the Federal
Territories. Thus the twenty-one acted; and, as actions
speak 
louder 
than 
words, 
so 
actions 
under 
such
responsibilities speak still louder.
Two of the twenty-three voted against Congressional
prohibition of slavery in the Federal Territories, in the
instances in which they acted upon the question. But for
what reasons they so voted is not known. They may have
done so because they thought a proper division of local
from Federal authority, or some provision or principle of
the Constitution, stood in the way; or they may, without any
such question, have voted against the prohibition on what
 appeared to them to be suﬀicient grounds of expediency.
No one who has sworn to support the Constitution can
conscientiously vote for what he understands to be an
unconstitutional measure, however expedient he may think
it; but one may and ought to vote against a measure which
he deems constitutional, if, at the same time, he deems it
inexpedient. It therefore would be unsafe to set down even
the two who voted against the prohibition as having done
so because, in their understanding, any proper division of
local 
from 
Federal 
authority, 
or 
anything 
in 
the
Constitution, forbade the Federal Government to control as
to slavery in Federal territory.
The remaining sixteen of the “thirty-nine,” so far as I
have discovered, have left no record of their understanding
upon the direct question of Federal control on slavery in
the Federal Territories. But there is much reason to believe
that their understanding upon that question would not have
appeared 
diﬀerent 
from 
that 
of 
their 
twenty-three
compeers, had it been manifested at all.
For the purpose of adhering rigidly to the text, I have
purposely omitted whatever understanding may have been
manifested by any person, however distinguished, other
than the thirty-nine fathers who framed the original
Constitution; and, for the same reason, I have also omitted
whatever understanding may have been manifested by any
of the “thirty tine” even on any other phase of the general
question of slavery. If we should look into their acts and
declarations on those other phases, as the foreign slave
trade, and the morality and policy of slavery generally, it
 would appear to us that on the direct question of Federal
control of slavery in Federal Territories, the sixteen, if they
had acted at all, would probably have acted just as the
twenty-three did. Among that sixteen were several of the
most noted anti-slavery men of those times — as Dr.
Franklin, Alexander Hamilton, and Gouverneur Morris
while there was not one now known to have been
otherwise, unless it may be John Rutledge, of South
Carolina.
The sum of the whole is, that of our thirty-nine fathers
who framed the original Constitution, twenty-one — a clear
majority of the whole — certainly understood that no
proper division of local from Federal authority, nor any part
of the Constitution, forbade the Federal Government to
control slavery in the Federal Territories; whilst all the rest
probably 
had 
the 
same 
understanding. 
Such,
unquestionably, was the understanding of our fathers who
framed the original Constitution; and the text aﬀirms that
they understood the question “better than we.”
But, so far, I have been considering the understanding of
the question manifested by the framers of the original
Constitution. In and by the original instrument, a mode was
provided for amending it; and, as I have already stated, the
present frame of “the Government under which we live”
consists of that original, and twelve amendatory articles
framed and adopted since. Those who now insist that
Federal control of slavery in Federal Territories violates the
Constitution, point us to the provisions which they suppose
it thus violates; and, as I understand, they all ﬁx upon
 provisions in these amendatory articles, and not in the
original instrument. The Supreme Court, in the Dred Scott
case, plant themselves upon the ﬁfth amendment, which
provides that no person shall be deprived of “life, liberty, or
property without due process of law”; while Senator
Douglas and his peculiar adherents plant themselves upon
the tenth amendment, providing that “the powers not
delegated to the United States by the Constitution” “are
reserved to the States respectively, or to the people.”
Now, it so happens that these amendments were framed
by the ﬁrst Congress which sat under the Constitution —
the identical Congress which passed the act already
mentioned, enforcing the prohibition of slavery in the
Northwestern Territory. Not only was it the same Congress,
but they were the identical same individual men who, at the
same session, and at the same time within the session, had
under consideration, and in progress toward maturity,
these Constitutional amendments, and this act prohibiting
slavery in all the territory the nation then owned. The
Constitutional amendments were introduced before and
passed after the act enforcing the Ordinance of ‘87; so that,
during the whole pendency of the act to enforce the
Ordinance, the Constitutional amendments were also
pending.
The seventy-six members of that Congress, including
sixteen of the framers of the original Constitution, as
before stated, were pre-eminently our fathers who framed
that part of “the Government under which we live,” which
 is now claimed as forbidding the Federal Government to
control slavery in the Federal Territories.
Is it not a little presumptuous in any one at this day to
aﬀirm that the two things which that Congress deliberately
framed, and carried to maturity at the same time, are
absolutely inconsistent with each other? And does not such
aﬀirmation become impudently absurd when coupled with
the other aﬀirmation from the same mouth, that those who
did the two things alleged to be inconsistent understood
whether they really were inconsistent better than we —
better than he who aﬀirms that they are inconsistent?
It is surely safe to assume that the thirty-nine framers of
the original Constitution, and the seventy-six members of
the Congress which framed the amendments thereto, taken
together, do certainly include those who may be fairly
called “our fathers who framed the Government under
which we live.” And, so assuming, I defy any man to show
that any one of them ever, in his whole life, declared that,
in his understanding, any proper division of local from
Federal authority, or any part of the Constitution, forbade
the Federal Government to control as to slavery in the
Federal Territories. I go a step further. I defy any one to
show that any living man in the world ever did, prior to the
beginning of the present century (and I might almost say
prior to the beginning of the last half of the present
century), declare that, in his understanding, any proper
division of local from Federal authority, or any part of the
Constitution, forbade the Federal Government to control as
to slavery in the Federal Territories. To those who now so
 declare, I give not only “our fathers who framed the
Government under which we live,” but with them all other
living men within the century in which it was framed,
among whom to search, and they shall not be able to ﬁnd
the evidence of a single man agreeing with them.
Now and here let me guard a little against being
misunderstood. I do not mean to say we are bound to follow
implicitly in whatever our fathers did. To do so would be to
discard all the lights of current experience to reject all
progress, all improvement. What I do say is that, if we
would supplant the opinions and policy of our fathers in any
case, we should do so upon evidence so conclusive, and
argument so clear, that even their great authority, fairly
considered and weighed, cannot stand; and most surely not
in a case whereof we ourselves declare they understood the
question better than we.
If any man at this day sincerely believes that proper
division of local from Federal authority, or any part of the
Constitution, forbids the Federal Government to control as
to slavery in the Federal Territories, he is right to say so,
and to enforce his position by all truthful evidence and fair
argument which he can. But he has no right to mislead
others who have less access to history, and less leisure to
study it, into the false belief that “our fathers who framed
the Government under which we live” were of the same
opinion thus substituting falsehood and deception for
truthful evidence and fair argument. If any man at this day
sincerely 
believes 
“our 
fathers, 
who 
framed 
the
Government under which we live,” used and applied
 principles, in other cases, which ought to have led them to
understand that a proper division of local from Federal
authority, or some part of the Constitution, forbids the
Federal Government to control as to slavery in the Federal
Territories, he is right to say so. But he should, at the same
time, brave the responsibility of declaring that, in his
opinion, he understands their principles better than they
did themselves; and especially should he not shirk that
responsibility by asserting that they “understood the
question just as well, and even better than we do now.”
But enough! Let all who believe that “our fathers, who
framed the Government under which we live, understood
this question just as well, and even better than we do now,”
speak as they spoke, and act as they acted upon it. This is
all Republicans ask — all Republicans desire — in relation
to slavery. As those fathers marked it, so let it be again
marked, as an evil not to be extended, but to be tolerated
and protected only because of, and so far as, its actual
presence among us makes that toleration and protection a
necessity. Let all the guaranties those fathers gave it be not
grudgingly, but fully and fairly maintained. For this
Republicans contend, and with this, so far as I know or
believe, they will be content.
And now, if they would listen — as I suppose they will not
— I would address a few words to the Southern people.
I would say to them: You consider yourselves a
reasonable and a just people; and I consider that in the
general qualities of reason and justice you are not inferior
to any other people. Still, when you speak of us
 Republicans, you do so only to denounce us as reptiles, or,
at the best, as no better than outlaws. You will grant a
hearing to pirates or murderers, but nothing like it to
“Black Republicans.” In all your contentions with one
another, each of you deems an unconditional condemnation
of “Black Republicanism” as the ﬁrst thing to be attended
to. Indeed, such condemnation of us seems to be an
indispensable prerequisite license, so to speak among you,
to be admitted or permitted to speak at all: Now; can you,
or not, be prevailed upon to pause, and to consider whether
this is quite just to us, or even to yourselves? Bring forward
your charges and speciﬁcations, and then be patient long
enough to hear us deny or justify.
You say we are sectional. We deny it. That makes an
issue; and the burden of proof is upon you. You produce
your proof; and what is it? Why, that our party has no
existence in your section — gets no votes in your section.
The fact is substantially true; but does it prove the issue? If
it does, then in case we should, without change of principle,
begin to get votes in your section, we should thereby cease
to be sectional. You cannot escape this conclusion; and yet,
are you willing to abide by it? If you are, you will probably
soon ﬁnd that we have ceased to be sectional, for we shall
get votes in your section this very year. You will then begin
to discover, as the truth plainly is, that your proof, does not
touch the issue. The fact that we get no votes in your
section is a fact of your making, and not of ours. And if
there be fault in that fact, that fault is primarily yours, and
remains so until you show that we repel you by, some
 wrong principle or practice. If we do repel you by any
wrong principle or practice, the fault is ours; but this
brings you to where you ought to have started to a
discussion of the right or wrong of our principle. If our
principle, put in practice, would wrong your section for the
beneﬁt of ours, or for any other object, then our principle,
and we with it, are sectional, and are justly opposed and
denounced as such. Meet us, then, on the question of
whether our principle, put in practice, would wrong your
section; and so meet us as if it were possible that
something may be said on our side. Do you accept the
challenge? No! Then you really believe that the principle
which “our fathers who framed the Government under
which we live” thought so clearly right as to adopt it, and
indorse it again and again, upon their oﬀicial oaths, is in
fact so clearly wrong as to demand your condemnation
without a moment’s consideration.
Some of you delight to ﬂaunt in our faces the warning
against sectional parties given by Washington in his
Farewell Address. Less than eight years before Washington
gave that warning, he had, as President of the United
States, approved and signed an act of Congress enforcing
the prohibition of slavery in the Northwestern Territory,
which act embodied the policy of the Government upon that
subject up to, and at, the very moment he penned that
warning; and about one year after he penned it, he wrote
La Fayette that he considered that prohibition a wise
measure, expressing in the same connection his hope that
we should at some time have a confederacy of free States.
 Bearing this in mind, and seeing that sectionalism has
since arisen upon this same subject, is that warning a
weapon in your hands against us, or in our hands against
you? Could Washington himself speak, would he cast the
blame of that sectionalism upon us, who sustain his policy,
or upon you, who repudiate it? We respect that warning of
Washington, and we commend it to you, together with his
example pointing to the right application of it.
But 
you 
say 
you 
are 
conservative 
— 
eminently
conservative — while we are revolutionary, destructive, or
something, of the sort. What is conservatism? Is it not
adherence to the old and tried, against a new and untried?
We stick to, contend for, the identical old policy on the
point in controversy which was adopted by “our fathers
who framed the Government under which we live”; while
you with one accord reject, and scout, and spit upon that
old policy and insist upon substituting something new.
True, you disagree among yourselves as to what that
substitute shall be. You are divided on new propositions
and plans, but you are unanimous in rejecting and
denouncing the old policy of the fathers. Some of you are
for 
reviving 
the 
foreign 
slave 
trade; 
some 
for 
a
Congressional slave code for the Territories; some for
Congress forbidding the Territories to prohibit slavery
within their limits; some for maintaining slavery in the
Territories through the judiciary; some for the “gur-reat
pur-rinciple” that “if one man would enslave another, no
third man should object,” fantastically called “popular
sovereignty”; but never a man among you in favor of
 Federal prohibition of slavery in Federal Territories,
according to the practice of “our fathers who framed the
Government under which we live.” Not one of all your
various plans can show a precedent or an advocate in the
century within which our Government originated. Consider,
then, whether your claim of conservatism for yourselves,
and your charge of destructiveness against us, are based
on the most clear and stable foundations.
Again: You say we have made the slavery question more
prominent than it formerly was. We deny it. We admit that
it is more prominent, but we deny that we made it so. It
was not we, but you, who discarded the old policy of the
fathers. We resisted and still resist your innovation; and
thence comes the greater prominence of the question.
Would you have that question reduced to its former
proportions? Go back to that old policy. What has been will
be again, under the same conditions. If you would have the
peace of the old times, readopt the precepts and policy of
the old times.
You charge that we stir up insurrections among your
slaves. We deny it; and what is your proof’? Harper’s Ferry!
John Brown!! John Brown was no Republican; and you have
failed to implicate a single Republican in his Harper’s Ferry
enterprise. If any member of our party is guilty in that
matter you know it or you do not know it. If you do know it,
you are inexcusable for not designating the man and
proving the fact. If you do not know it, you are inexcusable
for asserting it, and especially for persisting in the
assertion after you have tried and failed to make the proof.
 You need not be told that persisting in a charge which one
does not know to be true is simply malicious slander.
Some of you admit that no Republican designedly aided
or encouraged the Harper’s Ferry aﬀair, but still insist that
our doctrines and declarations necessarily lead to such
results. We do not believe it. We know we hold to no
doctrine, and make no declaration, which were not held to
and made by our fathers who framed the Government
under which we live. You never dealt fairly by us in relation
to this aﬀair. When it occurred, some important State
elections were near at hand, and you were in evident glee
with the belief that, by charging the blame upon us, you
could get an advantage of us in those elections. The
elections came, and your expectations were not quite
fulﬁlled. Every Republican man knew that, as to himself at
least, your charge was a slander, and he was not much
inclined by it to cast his vote in your favor. Republican
doctrines and declarations are accompanied with a
continued protest against any interference whatever with
your slaves, or with you about your slaves. Surely, this does
not encourage them to revolt. True, we do, in common with
“our fathers, who framed the Government under which we
live,” declare our belief that slavery is wrong; but the
slaves do not hear us declare even this. For any thing we
say or do, the slaves would scarcely know there is a
Republican party. I believe they would not, in fact,
generally know it but for your misrepresentations of us in
their hearing. In your political contests among yourselves,
each faction charges the other with sympathy with Black
 Republicanism; and then, to give point to the charge,
deﬁnes Black Republicanism to simply be insurrection,
blood, and thunder among the slaves.
Slave insurrections are no more common now than they
were before the Republican party was organized. What
induced the Southampton insurrection, twenty-eight years
ago, in which, at least, three times as many lives were lost
as at Harper’s Ferry? You can scarcely stretch your very
elastic fancy to the conclusion that Southampton was “got
up by Black Republicanism.” In the present state of things
in the United States, I do not think a general or even a very
extensive slave insurrection is possible. The indispensable
concert of action cannot be attained. The slaves have no
means of rapid communication; nor can incendiary
freemen, black or white, supply it. The explosive materials
are everywhere in parcels; but there neither are, nor can
be supplied the indispensable connecting trains.
Much is said by Southern people about the aﬀection of
slaves for their masters and mistresses; and a part of it, at
least, is true. A plot for an uprising could scarcely be
devised and communicated to twenty individuals before
some one of them, to save the life of a favorite master or
mistress, would divulge it. This is the rule; and the slave
revolution in Hayti was not an exception to it, but a case
occurring under peculiar circumstances. The gunpowder
plot of British history, though not connected with slaves,
was more in point. In that case, only about twenty were
admitted to the secret; and yet one of them, in his anxiety
to save a friend, betrayed the plot to that friend, and, by
 consequence, averted the calamity. Occasional poisonings
from the kitchen, and open or stealthy assassinations in the
ﬁeld, and local revolts, extending to a score or so, will
continue to occur as the natural results of slavery; but no
general insurrection of slaves, as I think, can happen in this
country for a long time. Whoever much fears or much
hopes for such an event will be alike disappointed.
In the language of Mr. Jeﬀerson, uttered many years ago,
“It is still in our power to direct the process of
emancipation and deportation peaceably, and in such slow
degrees as that the evil will wear oﬀ insensibly, and their
places be, pari passu, ﬁlled up by free white laborers. If, on
the contrary, it is left to force itself on, human nature must
shudder at the prospect held up.”
Mr. Jeﬀerson did not mean to say, nor do I, that the
power of emancipation is in the Federal Government. He
spoke of Virginia; and, as to the power of emancipation, I
speak of the slave holding States only. The Federal
Government, however, as we insist, has the power of
restraining the extension of the institution — the power to
insure that a slave insurrection shall never occur on any
American soil which is now free from slavery.
John Brown’s eﬀort was peculiar. It was not a slave
insurrection. It was an attempt by white men to get up a
revolt among slaves, in which the slaves refused to
participate. In fact, it was so absurd that the slaves, with all
their ignorance, saw plainly enough it could not succeed.
That aﬀair, in its philosophy, corresponds with the many
attempts related in history at the assassination of kings and
 emperors. An enthusiast broods over the oppression of a
people till he fancies himself commissioned by Heaven to
liberate them. He ventures the attempt, which ends in little
else than his own execution. Orsini’s attempt on Louis
Napoleon and John Brown’s attempt at Harper’s Ferry
were, in their philosophy, precisely the same. The
eagerness to cast blame on old England in the one case,
and on New England in the other, does not disprove the
sameness of the two things.
And how much would it avail you, if you could, by the use
of John Brown, Helper’s Book, and the like, break up the
Republican organization? Human action can be modiﬁed to
some extent, but human nature cannot be changed. There
is a judgment and a feeling against slavery in this nation,
which cast at least a million and a half of votes. You cannot
destroy that judgment and feeling — that sentiment — by
breaking up the political organization which rallies around
it. You can scarcely scatter and disperse an army which has
been formed into order in the face of your heaviest ﬁre; but
if you could, how much would you gain by forcing the
sentiment which created it out of the peaceful channel of
the ballot-box, into some other channel? What would that
other channel probably be? Would the number of John
Browns be lessened or enlarged by the operation?
But you will break up the Union rather than submit to a
denial of your constitutional rights.
That has a somewhat reckless sound; but it would be
palliated, if not fully justiﬁed, were we proposing, by the
mere force of numbers, to deprive you of some right plainly
 written down in the Constitution. But we are proposing no
such thing.
When you make these declarations, you have a speciﬁc
and well-understood allusion to an assumed constitutional
right of yours to take slaves into the Federal Territories,
and to hold them there as property. But no such right is
speciﬁcally written in the Constitution. That instrument is
literally silent about any such right. We, on the contrary,
deny that such a right has any existence in the
Constitution, even by implication.
Your purpose, then, plainly stated, is that you will destroy
the Government unless you be allowed to construe and
enforce the Constitution as you please on all points in
dispute between you and us. You will rule or ruin, in all
events.
This, plainly stated, is your language. Perhaps you will
say 
the 
Supreme 
Court 
has 
decided 
the 
disputed
constitutional question in your favor. Not quite so. But,
waiving the lawyer’s distinction between dictum and
decision, the court have decided the question for you in a
sort of way. The court have substantially said it is your
constitutional right to take slaves into the Federal
Territories, and to hold them there as property. When I say,
the decision was made in a sort of way, I mean it was made
in a divided court, by a bare majority of the judges, and
they not quite agreeing with one another in the reasons for
making it; that it is so made as that its avowed supporters
disagree with one another about its meaning, and that it
was mainly based upon a mistaken statement of fact — the
 statement in the opinion that “the right of property in a
slave 
is 
distinctly 
and 
expressly 
aﬀirmed 
in 
the
Constitution.”
An inspection of the Constitution will show that the right
of property in a slave is not “distinctly and expressly
aﬀirmed” in it. Bear in mind, the judges do not pledge their
judicial opinion that such right is impliedly aﬀirmed in the
Constitution; but they pledge their veracity that it is
“distinctly and expressly” aﬀirmed there— “distinctly,” that
is, not mingled with anything else; “expressly,” that is, in
words meaning just that, without the aid of any inference,
and susceptible of no other meaning.
If they had only pledged their judicial opinion that such
right is aﬀirmed in the instrument by implication, it would
be open to others to show that neither the word “slave” nor
“slavery” is to be found in the Constitution, nor the word
“property” even, in any connection with language alluding
to the things slave or slavery; and that wherever in that
instrument the slave is alluded to, he is called a “person”;
and wherever his master’s legal right in relation to him is
alluded to, it is spoken of as “service or labor which may be
due,” as a debt payable in service or labor. Also, it would be
open to show, by contemporaneous history, that this mode
of alluding to slaves and slavery, instead of speaking of
them, was employed on purpose to exclude from the
Constitution the idea that there could be property in man.
To show all this, is easy and certain.
When this obvious mistake of the judges shall be brought
to their notice, is it not reasonable to expect that they will
 withdraw the mistaken statement, and reconsider the
conclusion based upon it?
And then it is to be remembered that “our fathers; who
framed the Government under which we live”, — the men
who 
made 
the 
Constitution 
— 
decided 
this 
same
constitutional question in our favor, long ago; decided it
without division among themselves, when making the
decision, without division among themselves about the
meaning of it after it was made, and, so far as any evidence
is left, without basing it upon any mistaken statement of
facts.
Under all these circumstances, do you really feel
yourselves justiﬁed to break up this Government unless
such a court decision as yours is shall be at once submitted
to as a conclusive and ﬁnal rule of political action? But you
will not abide the election of a Republican President! In
that supposed event, you say, you will destroy the Union;
and then, you say, the great crime of having destroyed it
will be upon us! That is cool. A highwayman holds a pistol
to my ear, and mutters through his teeth, “stand and
deliver, or I shall kill you, and then you’ll be a murderer!”
To be sure, what the robber demanded of me-my money
was my own, and I had a clear right to keep it; but it was no
more my own than my vote is my own; and the threat of
death to me, to extort my money, and the threat of
destruction to the Union, to extort my vote, can scarcely be
distinguished in principle.
A few words now to Republicans: It is exceedingly
desirable that all parts of this great confederacy shall be at
 peace and in harmony one with another. Let us Republicans
do our part to have it so. Even though much provoked, let
us do nothing through passion and ill temper. Even though
the Southern people will not so much as listen to us, let us
calmly consider their demands, and yield to them if, in our
deliberate view of our duty, we possibly can. Judging by all
they say and do, and by the subject and nature of their
controversy with us, let us determine, if we can, what will
satisfy them.
Will they be satisﬁed if the Territories be unconditionally
surrendered to them? We know they will not. In all their
present complaints against us, the Territories are scarcely
mentioned. Invasions and insurrections are the rage now.
Will it satisfy them if, in the future, we have nothing to do
with invasions and, insurrections? We know it will not. We
so know because we know we never had anything to do
with invasions and insurrections; and yet this total
abstaining does not exempt us from the charge and the
denunciation.
The question recurs, what will satisfy them? Simply this:
We must not only let them alone, but we must, somehow,
convince them that we do let them alone. This, we know by
experience, is no easy task. We have been so trying to
convince them from the very beginning of our organization,
but with no success. In all our platforms and speeches we
have constantly protested our purpose to let them alone;
but this has had no tendency to convince them. Alike
unavailing to convince them is the fact that they have never
detected a man of us in any attempt to disturb them.
 These natural and apparently adequate means all failing,
what will convince them? This, and this only: cease to call
slavery wrong, and join them in calling it right. And this
must be done thoroughly — done in acts as well as in
words. Silence will not be tolerated — we must place
ourselves avowedly with them. Senator Douglas’s new
sedition law must be enacted and enforced, suppressing all
declarations that slavery is wrong, whether made in
politics, in presses, in pulpits; or in private. We must arrest
and return their fugitive slaves with greedy pleasure. We
must pull down our free State constitutions. The whole
atmosphere must be disinfected from all taint of opposition
to slavery, before they will cease to believe that all their
troubles proceed from us.
I am quite aware they do not state their case precisely in
this way. Most of them would probably say to us, “Let us
alone, do nothing to us, and say what you please about
slavery.” But we do let them alone have never disturbed
them — so that after all it is what we say which dissatisﬁes
them. They will continue to accuse us of doing, until we
cease saying.
I am also aware they have not as yet, in terms, demanded
the overthrow of our free State constitutions. Yet those
constitutions declare the wrong of slavery, with more
solemn emphasis than do all other sayings against it; and
when all these other sayings shall have been silenced, the
overthrow of these constitutions will be demanded, and
nothing be left to resist the demand. It is nothing to the
contrary, that they do not demand the whole of this just
 now. Demanding what they do, and for the reason they do,
they 
can 
voluntarily 
stop 
nowhere 
short 
of 
this
consummation. Holding, as they do, that slavery is morally
right, and socially elevating, they cannot cease to demand a
full national recognition of it, as a legal right and a social
blessing.
Nor can we justiﬁably withhold this on any ground save
our conviction that slavery is wrong. If slavery is right, all
words, acts, laws, and constitutions against it are
themselves wrong, and should be silenced and swept away.
If it is right, we cannot justly object to its nationality its
universality; if it is wrong, they cannot justly insist upon its
extension — its enlargement. All they ask we could readily
grant if we thought slavery right; all we ask they could as
readily grant, if they thought it wrong. Their thinking it
right and our thinking it wrong is the precise fact upon
which depends the whole controversy. Thinking it right, as
they do, they are not to blame for desiring its full
recognition, as being right; but thinking it wrong, as we do,
can we yield to them? Can we cast our votes with their
view, and against our own? In view of our moral, social, and
political responsibilities, can we do this? Wrong as we think
slavery is, we can yet aﬀord to let it alone where it is,
because that much is due to the necessity arising from its
actual presence in the nation; but can we, while our votes
will prevent it, allow it to spread into the national
Territories, and to overrun us here in these free States? If
our sense of duty forbids this, then let us stand by our duty,
fearlessly and eﬀectively. Let us be diverted by none of
 those sophistical contrivances wherewith we are so
industriously plied and belabored-contrivances such as
groping for some middle ground between the right and the
wrong, vain as the search for a man who should be neither
a living man nor a dead man-such as a policy of “don’t
care” on a question about which all true men do care —
such as Union appeals beseeching true Union men to yield
to Disunionists, reversing the divine rule, and calling, not
the sinners, but the righteous to repentance — such as
invocations to Washington, imploring men to unsay what
Washington said, and undo what Washington did.
Neither let us be slandered from our duty by false
accusations against us, nor frightened from it by menaces
of destruction to the Government nor of dungeons to
ourselves. LET US HAVE FAITH THAT RIGHT MAKES
MIGHT, AND IN THAT FAITH LET US, TO THE END, DARE
TO DO OUR DUTY AS WE UNDERSTAND IT.
      H A  
 
 HA  
   
   I 
   
A  H
      
MR. PRESIDENT, AND FELLOW-CITIZENS OF NEW
HAVEN: — If the Republican party of this nation shall ever
have the national House entrusted to its keeping, it will be
the duty of that party to attend to all the aﬀairs of national
housekeeping. Whatever matters of importance may come
up, 
whatever 
diﬀiculties 
may 
arise 
in 
its 
way 
of
administration of the Government, that party will then have
to attend to. It will then be compelled to attend to other
questions, besides this question which now assumes an
overwhelming importance — the question of slavery. It is
true that in the organization of the Republican party this
question of slavery was more important than any other:
indeed, so much more important has it become that no
more national question can even get a hearing just at
present. The old question of tariﬀ — a matter that will
remain one of the chief aﬀairs of national house-keeping to
all time; the question of the management of ﬁnancial
aﬀairs; the question of the disposition of the public domain
how shall it be managed for the purpose of getting it well
settled, and of making there the homes of a free and happy
people? these will remain open and require attention for a
great while yet, and these questions will have to be
attended to by whatever party has the control of the
 Government. Yet, just now, they cannot even obtain a
hearing, and I do not propose to detain you upon these
topics or what sort of hearing they should have when
opportunity shall come.
For, whether we will or not, the question of slavery is the
question, the all-absorbing topic of the day. It is true that
all of us — and by that I mean, not the Republican party
alone, but the whole American people, here and elsewhere
— all of us wish this question settled, wish it out of the way.
It stands in the way, and prevents the adjustment, and the
giving of necessary attention to other questions of national
house-keeping. The people of the whole nation agree that
this question ought to be settled, and yet it is not settled.
And the reason is that they are not yet agreed how it shall
be settled. All wish it done, but some wish one way and
some another, and some a third, or fourth, or ﬁfth; diﬀerent
bodies are pulling in diﬀerent directions, and none of them,
having a decided majority, are able to accomplish the
common object.
In the beginning of the year 1854, a new policy was
inaugurated with the avowed object and conﬁdent promise
that it would entirely and forever put an end to the slavery
agitation. It was again and again declared that under this
policy, when once successfully established, the country
would be forever rid of this whole question. Yet under the
operation of that policy this agitation has not only not
ceased, but it has been constantly augmented. And this too,
although, from the day of its introduction, its friends, who
promised that it would wholly end all agitation, constantly
 insisted, down to the time that the Lecompton Bill was
introduced, that it was working admirably, and that its
inevitable tendency was to remove the question forever
from the politics of the country. Can you call to mind any
Democratic speech, made after the repeal of the Missouri
Compromise, down to the time of the Lecompton Bill, in
which it was not predicted that the slavery agitation was
just at an end, that “the abolition excitement was played
out,” “the Kansas question was dead,” “they have made the
most they can out of this question and it is now forever
settled”? But since the Lecompton Bill no Democrat, within
my experience, has ever pretended that he could see the
end. That cry has been dropped. They themselves do not
pretend, now, that the agitation of this subject has come to
an end yet.
The truth is that this question is one of national
importance, and we cannot help dealing with it; we must do
something about it, whether we will or not. We cannot
avoid it; the subject is one we cannot avoid considering; we
can no more avoid it than a man can live without eating. It
is upon us; it attaches to the body politic as much and
closely as the natural wants attach to our natural bodies.
Now I think it important that this matter should be taken
up in earnest, and really settled: And one way to bring
about a true settlement of the question is to understand its
true magnitude.
There have been many eﬀorts made to settle it. Again
and again it has been fondly hoped that it was settled; but
every time it breaks out afresh, and more violently than
 ever. It was settled, our fathers hoped, by the Missouri
Compromise, but it did not stay settled. Then the
compromises of 1850 were declared to be a full and ﬁnal
settlement of the question. The two great parties, each in
national convention, adopted resolutions declaring that the
settlement made by the Compromise of 1850 was a ﬁnality
that it would last forever. Yet how long before it was
unsettled again? It broke out again in 1854, and blazed
higher and raged more furiously than ever before, and the
agitation has not rested since.
These repeated settlements must have some faults about
them. There must be some inadequacy in their very nature
to the purpose to which they were designed. We can only
speculate as to where that fault, that inadequacy, is, but we
may perhaps proﬁt by past experiences.
I think that one of the causes of these repeated failures is
that 
our 
best 
and 
greatest 
men 
have 
greatly
underestimated the size of this question. They have
constantly brought forward small cures for great sores —
plasters too small to cover the wound. That is one reason
that 
all 
settlements 
have 
proved 
temporary 
— 
so
evanescent.
Look at the magnitude of this subject: One sixth of our
population, in round numbers — not quite one sixth, and
yet more than a seventh, — about one sixth of the whole
population of the United States are slaves. The owners of
these slaves consider them property. The eﬀect upon the
minds of the owners is that of property, and nothing else it
induces them to insist upon all that will favorably aﬀect its
 value as property, to demand laws and institutions and a
public policy that shall increase and secure its value, and
make it durable, lasting, and universal. The eﬀect on the
minds of the owners is to persuade them that there is no
wrong in it. The slaveholder does not like to be considered
a mean fellow for holding that species of property, and
hence, he has to struggle within himself and sets about
arguing himself into the belief that slavery is right. The
property inﬂuences his mind. The dissenting minister who
argued some theological point with one of the established
church was always met with the reply, “I can’t see it so.”
He opened a Bible and pointed him a passage, but the
orthodox minister replied, “I can’t see it so.” Then he
showed him a single word— “Can you see that?” “Yes, I see
it,” was the reply. The dissenter laid a guinea over the word
and asked, “Do you see it now?” So here. Whether the
owners of this species of property do really see it as it is, it
is not for me to say, but if they do, they see it as it is
through two thousand millions of dollars, and that is a
pretty thick coating. Certain it is that they do not see it as
we see it. Certain it is that this two thousand millions of
dollars, invested in this species of property, all so
concentrated that the mind can grasp it at once — this
immense pecuniary interest — has its inﬂuence upon their
minds.
But here in Connecticut and at the North slavery does
not exist, and we see it through no such medium.
To us it appears natural to think that slaves are human
beings; men, not property; that some of the things, at least,
 stated about men in the Declaration of Independence apply
to them as well as to us. I say we think, most of us, that this
charter of freedom applies to the slaves as well as to
ourselves; that the class of arguments put forward to batter
down that idea are also calculated to break down the very
idea of a free government, even for white men, and to
undermine the very foundations of free society. We think
slavery a great moral wrong, and, while we do not claim
the right to touch it where it exists, we wish to treat it as a
wrong in the Territories, where our votes will reach it. We
think that a respect for ourselves, a regard for future
generations and for the God that made us, require that we
put down this wrong where our votes will properly reach it.
We think that species of labor an injury to free white men
— in short, we think slavery a great moral, social, and
political evil, tolerable only because, and so far as, its
actual existence makes it necessary to tolerate it, and that
beyond that it ought to be treated as a wrong.
Now these two ideas, the property idea that slavery is
right, and the idea that it is wrong, come into collision, and
do actually produce that irrepressible conﬂict which Mr.
Seward has been so roundly abused for mentioning. The
two ideas conﬂict, and must conﬂict.
Again, in its political aspect, does anything in any way
endanger the perpetuity of this Union but that single thing,
slavery? Many of our adversaries are anxious to claim that
they are specially devoted to the Union, and take pains to
charge upon us hostility to the Union. Now we claim that
we are the only true Union men, and we put to them this
 one proposition: Whatever endangers this Union, save and
except slavery? Did any other thing ever cause a moment’s
fear? All men must agree that this thing alone has ever
endangered the perpetuity of the Union. But if it was
threatened by any other inﬂuence, would not all men say
that the best thing that could be done, if we could not or
ought not to destroy it, would be at least to keep it from
growing any larger? Can any man believe, that the way to
save the Union is to extend and increase the only thing that
threatens the Union, and to suﬀer it to grow bigger and
bigger?
Whenever this question shall be settled, it must be
settled on some philosophical basis. No policy that does not
rest upon some philosophical opinion can be permanently
maintained. And hence there are but two policies in regard
to slavery that can be at all maintained. The ﬁrst, based on
the property view that slavery is right, conforms to that
idea throughout, and demands that we shall do everything
for it that we ought to do if it were right. We must sweep
away all opposition, for opposition to the right is wrong; we
must agree that slavery is right, and we must adopt the
idea that property has persuaded the owner to believe that
slavery is morally right and socially elevating. This gives a
philosophical 
basis 
for 
a 
permanent 
policy 
of
encouragement.
The other policy is one that squares with the idea that
slavery is wrong, and it consists in doing everything that
we ought to do if it is wrong. Now, I don’t wish to be
misunderstood, 
nor 
to 
leave 
a 
gap 
down 
to 
be
 misrepresented, even. I don’t mean that we ought to attack
it where it exists. To me it seems that if we were to form a
government anew, in view of the actual presence of slavery
we should ﬁnd it necessary to frame just such a
government as our fathers did — giving to the slaveholder
the entire control where the system was established, while
we possessed the power to restrain it from going outside
those limits. From the necessities of the case we should be
compelled to form just such a government as our blessed
fathers gave us; and, surely, if they have so made it, that
adds another reason why we should let slavery alone where
it exists.
If I saw a venomous snake crawling in the road, any man
would say I might seize the nearest stick and kill it; but if I
found that snake in bed with my children, that would be
another question. I might hurt the children more than the
snake, and it might bite them. Much more if I found it in
bed with my neighbor’s children, and I had bound myself by
a solemn compact not to meddle with his children under
any circumstances, it would become me to let that
particular mode of getting rid of the gentleman alone. But
if there was a bed newly made up, to which the children
were to be taken, and it was proposed to take a batch of
young snakes and put them there with them, I take it no
man would say there was any question how I ought to
decide!
That is just the case. The new Territories are the newly
made bed to which our children are to go, and it lies with
the nation to say whether they shall have snakes mixed up
 with them or not. It does not seem as if there could be
much hesitation what our policy should be!
Now I have spoken of a policy based on the idea that
slavery is wrong, and a policy based on the idea that it is
right. But an eﬀort has been made for a policy that shall
treat it as neither right nor wrong. It is based upon utter
indiﬀerence. Its leading advocate [Douglas] has said, “I
don’t care whether it be voted up or down.” “It is merely a
matter of dollars and cents.” “The Almighty has drawn a
line across this continent, on one side of which all soil must
forever be cultivated by slave labor, and on the other by
free.” “When the struggle is between the white man and
the negro, I am for the white man; when it is between the
negro and the crocodile, I am for the negro.” Its central
idea is indiﬀerence. It holds that it makes no more
diﬀerence to us whether the Territories become free or
slave States than whether my neighbor stocks his farm with
horned cattle or puts in tobacco. All recognize this policy,
the plausible sugar-coated name of which is “popular
sovereignty.”
This policy chieﬂy stands in the way of a permanent
settlement of the question. I believe there is no danger of
its becoming the permanent policy of the country, for it is
based on a public indiﬀerence. There is nobody that “don’t
care.” All the people do care one way or the other! I do not
charge that its author, when he says he “don’t care,” states
his individual opinion; he only expresses his policy for the
government. I understand that he has never said as an
individual whether he thought slavery right or wrong —
 and he is the only man in the nation that has not! Now such
a policy may have a temporary run; it may spring up as
necessary to the political prospects of some gentleman; but
it is utterly baseless: the people are not indiﬀerent, and it
can therefore have no durability or permanence.
But suppose it could: Then it could be maintained only by
a public opinion that shall say, “We don’t care.” There must
be a change in public opinion; the public mind must be so
far debauched as to square with this policy of caring not at
all. The people must come to consider this as “merely a
question of dollars and cents,” and to believe that in some
places the Almighty has made slavery necessarily eternal.
This policy can be brought to prevail if the people can be
brought round to say honestly, “We don’t care”; if not, it
can never be maintained. It is for you to say whether that
can be done.
You are ready to say it cannot, but be not too fast!
Remember what a long stride has been taken since the
repeal of the Missouri Compromise! Do you know of any
Democrat, of either branch of the party — do you know one
who declares that he believes that the Declaration of
Independence has any application to the negro? Judge
Taney declares that it has not, and Judge Douglas even
viliﬁes me personally and scolds me roundly for saying that
the Declaration applies to all men, and that negroes are
men. Is there a Democrat here who does not deny that the
Declaration applies to the negro? Do any of you know of
one? Well, I have tried before perhaps ﬁfty audiences, some
larger and some smaller than this, to ﬁnd one such
 Democrat, and never yet have I found one who said I did
not place him right in that. I must assume that Democrats
hold that, and now, not one of these Democrats can show
that he said that ﬁve years ago! I venture to defy the whole
party to produce one man that ever uttered the belief that
the Declaration did not apply to negroes, before the repeal
of the Missouri Compromise! Four or ﬁve years ago we all
thought negroes were men, and that when “all men” were
named, negroes were included. But the whole Democratic
party has deliberately taken negroes from the class of men
and put them in the class of brutes. Turn it as you will it is
simply the truth! Don’t be too hasty, then, in saying that the
people cannot be brought to this new doctrine, but note
that long stride. One more as long completes the journey
from where negroes are estimated as men to where they
are estimated as mere brutes — as rightful property!
That saying “In the struggle between white men and the
negro,” etc., which I know came from the same source as
this policy — that saying marks another step. There is a
falsehood wrapped up in that statement. “In the struggle
between the white man and the negro” assumes that there
is a struggle, in which either the white man must enslave
the negro or the negro must enslave the white. There is no
such struggle! It is merely the ingenious falsehood to
degrade and brutalize the negro. Let each let the other
alone, and there is no struggle about it. If it was like two
wrecked seamen on a narrow plank, when each must push
the other oﬀ or drown himself, I would push the negro oﬀ
or a white man either, but it is not; the plank is large
 enough for both. This good earth is plenty broad enough for
white man and negro both, and there is no need of either
pushing the other oﬀ.
So that saying, “In the struggle between the negro and
the crocodile,” etc., is made up from the idea that down
where the crocodile inhabits, a white man can’t labor; it
must be nothing else but crocodile or negro; if the negro
does not the crocodile must possess the earth; in that case
he declares for the negro. The meaning of the whole is just
this: As a white man is to a negro, so is a negro to a
crocodile; and as the negro may rightfully treat the
crocodile, so may the white man rightfully treat the negro.
This very dear phrase coined by its author, and so dear that
he deliberately repeats it in many speeches, has a tendency
to still further brutalize the negro, and to bring public
opinion to the point of utter indiﬀerence whether men so
brutalized are enslaved or not. When that time shall come,
if ever, I think that policy to which I refer may prevail. But I
hope the good freemen of this country will never allow it to
come, and until then the policy can never be maintained.
Now consider the eﬀect of this policy. We in the States
are not to care whether freedom or slavery gets the better,
but the people in the Territories may care. They are to
decide, and they may think what they please; it is a matter
of dollars and cents! But are not the people of the
Territories detailed from the States? If this feeling of
indiﬀerence this absence of moral sense about the question
prevails in the States, will it not be carried into the
Territories? Will not every man say, “I don’t care, it is
 nothing to me”? If any one comes that wants slavery, must
they not say, “I don’t care whether freedom or slavery be
voted up or voted down”? It results at last in nationalizing
the institution of slavery. Even if fairly carried out, that
policy is just as certain to nationalize slavery as the
doctrine of Jeﬀ Davis himself. These are only two roads to
the same goal, and “popular sovereignty” is just as sure
and almost as short as the other.
What we want, and all we want, is to have with us the
men who think slavery wrong. But those who say they hate
slavery, and are opposed to it, but yet act with the
Democratic party — where are they? Let us apply a few
tests. You say that you think slavery is wrong, but you
denounce all attempts to restrain it. Is there anything else
that you think wrong that you are not willing to deal with
as wrong? Why are you so careful, so tender, of this one
wrong and no other? You will not let us do a single thing as
if it was wrong; there is no place where you will even allow
it to be called wrong! We must not call it wrong in the free
States, because it is not there, and we must not call it
wrong in the slave States, because it is there; we must not
call it wrong in politics because that is bringing morality
into politics, and we must not call it wrong in the pulpit
because that is bringing politics into religion; we must not
bring it into the Tract Society or the other societies,
because those are such unsuitable places — and there is no
single place, according to you, where this wrong thing can
properly be called wrong!
 Perhaps you will plead that if the people of the slave
States should themselves set on foot an eﬀort for
emancipation, you would wish them success, and bid them
God-speed. Let us test that: In 1858 the emancipation party
of Missouri, with Frank Blair at their head, tried to get up a
movement for that purpose, and having started a party
contested the State. Blair was beaten, apparently if not
truly, and when the news came to Connecticut, you, who
knew that Frank Blair was taking hold of this thing by the
right end, and doing the only thing that you say can
properly be done to remove this wrong — did you bow your
heads in sorrow because of that defeat? Do you, any of you,
know one single Democrat that showed sorrow over that
result? Not one! On the contrary every man threw up his
hat, and hallooed at the top of his lungs, “Hooray for
Democracy!”
Now, gentlemen, the Republicans desire to place this
great question of slavery on the very basis on which our
fathers placed it, and no other. It is easy to demonstrate
that “our fathers, who framed this Government under
which we live,” looked on slavery as wrong, and so framed
it and everything about it as to square with the idea that it
was wrong, so far as the necessities arising from its
existence permitted. In forming the Constitution they found
the slave trade existing, capital invested in it, ﬁelds
depending upon it for labor, and the whole system resting
upon the importation of slave labor. They therefore did not
prohibit the slave trade at once, but they gave the power to
prohibit it after twenty years. Why was this? What other
 foreign trade did they treat in that way? Would they have
done this if they had not thought slavery wrong?
Another thing was done by some of the same men who
framed the Constitution, and afterwards adopted as their
own the act by the ﬁrst Congress held under that
Constitution, of which many of the framers were members,
that prohibited the spread of slavery into Territories. Thus
the same men, the framers of the Constitution, cut oﬀ the
supply and prohibited the spread of slavery, and both acts
show conclusively that they considered that the thing was
wrong.
If additional proof is wanted it can be found in the
phraseology of the Constitution. When men are framing a
supreme law and chart of government, to secure blessings
and prosperity to untold generations yet to come, they use
language as short and direct and plain as can be found, to
express their meaning In all matters but this of slavery the
framers of the Constitution used the very clearest, shortest,
and most direct language. But the Constitution alludes to
slavery three times without mentioning it once The
language used becomes ambiguous, roundabout, and
mystical. They speak of the “immigration of persons,” and
mean the importation of slaves, but do not say so. In
establishing a basis of representation they say “all other
persons,” when they mean to say slaves — why did they not
use the shortest phrase? In providing for the return of
fugitives they say “persons held to service or labor.” If they
had said slaves it would have been plainer, and less liable
to misconstruction. Why did n’t they do it? We cannot doubt
 that it was done on purpose. Only one reason is possible,
and that is supplied us by one of the framers of the
Constitution — and it is not possible for man to conceive of
any other — they expected and desired that the system
would come to an end, and meant that when it did, the
Constitution should not show that there ever had been a
slave in this good free country of ours.
I will dwell on that no longer. I see the signs of
approaching triumph of the Republicans in the bearing of
their political adversaries. A great deal of their war with us
nowadays is mere bushwhacking. At the battle of Waterloo,
when Napoleon’s cavalry had charged again and again
upon the unbroken squares of British infantry, at last they
were giving up the attempt, and going oﬀ in disorder, when
some of the oﬀicers in mere vexation and complete despair
ﬁred their pistols at those solid squares. The Democrats are
in that sort of extreme desperation; it is nothing else. I will
take up a few of these arguments.
There is “the irrepressible conﬂict.” How they rail at
Seward for that saying! They repeat it constantly; and,
although the proof has been thrust under their noses again
and again that almost every good man since the formation
of our Government has uttered that same sentiment, from
General Washington, who “trusted that we should yet have
a confederacy of free States,” with Jeﬀerson, Jay, Monroe,
down to the latest days, yet they refuse to notice that at all,
and persist in railing at Seward for saying it. Even Roger A.
Pryor, editor of the Richmond Enquirer, uttered the same
sentiment in almost the same language, and yet so little
 oﬀence did it give the Democrats that he was sent for to
Washington to edit the States — the Douglas organ there —
while Douglas goes into hydrophobia and spasms of rage
because Seward dared to repeat it. This is what I call
bushwhacking, a sort of argument that they must know any
child can see through.
Another is John Brown: “You stir up insurrections, you
invade the South; John Brown! Harper’s Ferry!” Why, John
Brown was not a Republican! You have never implicated a
single Republican in that Harper’s Ferry enterprise. We tell
you that if any member of the Republican party is guilty in
that matter, you know it or you do not know it. If you do
know it, you are inexcusable not to designate the man and
prove the fact. If you do not know it, you are inexcusable to
assert it, and especially to persist in the assertion after you
have tried and failed to make the proof. You need not be
told that persisting in a charge which one does not know to
be true is simply malicious slander. Some of you admit that
no Republican designedly aided or encouraged the
Harper’s Ferry aﬀair, but still insist that our doctrines and
declarations necessarily lead to such results. We do not
believe it. We know we hold to no doctrines, and make no
declarations, which were not held to and made by our
fathers who framed the Government ‘under which we live,
and we cannot see how declarations that were patriotic
when they made them are villainous when we make them.
You never dealt fairly by us in relation to that aﬀair — and I
will say frankly that I know of nothing in your character
that should lead us to suppose that you would. You had just
 been soundly thrashed in elections in several States, and
others were soon to come. You rejoiced at the occasion, and
only were troubled that there were not three times as many
killed in the aﬀair. You were in evident glee; there was no
sorrow for the killed nor for the peace of Virginia
disturbed; you were rejoicing that by charging Republicans
with this thing you might get an advantage of us in New
York, and the other States. You pulled that string as tightly
as you could, but your very generous and worthy
expectations were not quite fulﬁlled. Each Republican knew
that the charge was a slander as to himself at least, and
was not inclined by it to cast his vote in your favor. It was
mere bushwhacking, because you had nothing else to do.
You are still on that track, and I say, go on! If you think you
can slander a woman into loving you or a man into voting
for you, try it till you are satisﬁed!
Another specimen of this bushwhacking, that “shoe
strike.” Now be it understood that I do not pretend to know
all about the matter. I am merely going to speculate a little
about some of its phases. And at the outset, I am glad to
see that a system of labor prevails in New England under
which laborers can strike when they want to, where they
are not obliged to work under all circumstances, and are
not tied down and obliged to labor whether you pay them
or not! I like the system which lets a man quit when he
wants to, and wish it might prevail everywhere. One of the
reasons why I am opposed to slavery is just here. What is
the true condition of the laborer? I take it that it is best for
all to leave each man free to acquire property as fast as he
 can. Some will get wealthy. I don’t believe in a law to
prevent a man from getting rich; it would do more harm
than good. So, while we do not propose any war upon
capital, we do wish to allow the humblest man an equal
chance to get rich with everybody else. When one starts
poor, as most do in the race of life, free society is such that
he knows he can better his condition; he knows that there
is no ﬁxed condition of labor for his whole life. I am not
ashamed to confess that twenty-ﬁve years ago I was a hired
laborer, mauling rails, at work on a ﬂatboat — just what
might happen to any poor man’s son! I want every man to
have a chance — and I believe a Black man is entitled to it
— in which he can better his condition; when he may look
forward and hope to be a hired laborer this year and the
next, work for himself afterward, and ﬁnally to hire men to
work for him! That is the system. Up here in New England,
you have a soil that scarcely sprouts black-eyed beans, and
yet where will you ﬁnd wealthy men so wealthy, and
poverty so rarely in extremity? There is not another such
place on earth! I desire that if you get too thick here, and
ﬁnd it hard to better your condition on this soil, you may
have a chance to strike and go somewhere else, where you
may not be degraded, nor have your families corrupted, by
forced rivalry with negro slaves. I want you to have a clean
bed and no snakes in it! Then you can better your
condition, and so it may go on and on in one endless round
so long as man exists on the face of the earth!
Now, to come back to this shoe strike, — if, as the
senator from Illinois asserts, this is caused by withdrawal
 of Southern votes, consider brieﬂy how you will meet the
diﬀiculty. You have done nothing, and have protested that
you have done nothing, to injure the South. And yet, to get
back the shoe trade, you must leave oﬀ doing something
which you are now doing. What is it? You must stop
thinking slavery wrong! Let your institutions be wholly
changed; let your State constitutions be subverted; glorify
slavery, and so you will get back the shoe trade — for what?
You have brought owned labor with it, to compete with your
own labor, to underwork you, and to degrade you! Are you
ready to get back the trade on those terms?
But the statement is not correct. You have not lost that
trade; orders were never better than now! Senator Mason,
a Democrat, comes into the Senate in homespun, a proof
that the dissolution of the Union has actually begun! but
orders are the same. Your factories have not struck work,
neither those where they make anything for coats, nor for
pants nor for shirts, nor for ladies’ dresses. Mr. Mason has
not reached the manufacturers who ought to have made
him a coat and pants! To make his proof good for anything
he should have come into the Senate barefoot!
Another bushwhacking contrivance; simply that, nothing
else! I ﬁnd a good many people who are very much
concerned about the loss of Southern trade. Now either
these people are sincere or they are not. I will speculate a
little about that. If they are sincere, and are moved by any
real danger of the loss of Southern trade, they will simply
get their names on the white list, and then, instead of
persuading Republicans to do likewise, they will be glad to
 keep you away! Don’t you see that they cut oﬀ competition?
They would not be whispering around to Republicans to
come in and share the proﬁts with them. But if they are not
sincere, and are merely trying to fool Republicans out of
their votes, they will grow very anxious about your
pecuniary prospects; they are afraid you are going to get
broken up and ruined; they do not care about Democratic
votes, oh, no, no, no! You must judge which class those
belong to whom you meet: I leave it to you to determine
from the facts.
Let us notice some more of the stale charges against
Republicans. You say
we are sectional. We deny it. That makes an issue; and
the burden of proof
is upon you. You produce your proof; and what is it? Why,
that our party
has no existence in your section — gets no votes in your
section. The fact
is substantially true; but does it prove the issue? If it
does, then in
case we should, without change of principle, begin to get
votes in your
section, we should thereby cease to be sectional. You
cannot escape this
conclusion; and yet, are you willing to abide by it? If you
are, you will
probably soon ﬁnd that we have ceased to be sectional,
for we shall get
 votes in your section this very year. The fact that we get
no votes in
your section is a fact of your making and not of ours. And
if there be
fault in that fact, that fault is primarily yours, and
remains so until
you show that we repel you by some wrong principle or
practice. If we
ours; but this brings you to where you ought to have
started — to a
discussion of the right or wrong of our principle. If our
principle, put
in practice, would wrong your section for the beneﬁt of
ours, or for any
other object, then our principle, and we with it, are
sectional, and are
justly opposed and denounced as such. Meet us, then, on
the question of
whether our principle put in practice would wrong your
section; and so
meet it as if it were possible that something may be said
on our side. Do
you accept the challenge? No? Then you really believe
that the principle
which our fathers who framed the Government under
which we live thought so
clearly right as to adopt it, and indorse it again and
again, upon their
 oﬀicial oaths, is in fact so clearly wrong as to demand
our condemnation
without a moment’s consideration. Some of you delight to
ﬂaunt in our
faces the warning against sectional parties given by
Washington in his
Farewell 
Address. 
Less 
than 
eight 
years 
before
Washington gave that
warning, he had, as President of the United States,
approved and signed an
act of Congress enforcing the prohibition of slavery in
the Northwestern
Territory, which act embodied the policy of government
upon that subject,
up to and at the very moment he penned that warning;
and about one year
after he penned it he wrote La Fayette that he
considered that prohibition
a wise measure, expressing in the same connection his
hope that we should
sometime have a confederacy of free States.
Bearing this in mind, and seeing that sectionalism has
since arisen upon this same subject, is that warning a
weapon in your hands against us, or in our hands against
you? Could Washington himself speak, would he cast the
blame of that sectionalism upon us, who sustain his policy,
or upon you, who repudiate it? We respect that warning of
Washington, and we commend it to you, together with his
example pointing to the right application of it.
 But 
you 
say 
you 
are 
conservative 
— 
eminently
conservative — while we are revolutionary, destructive, or
something of the sort. What is conservatism? Is it not
adherence to the old and tried, against the new and
untried? We stick to, contend for, the identical old policy on
the point in controversy which was adopted by our fathers
who framed the Government under which we live; while
you with one accord reject and scout and spit upon that old
policy, and insist upon substituting something new.
True, you disagree among yourselves as to what that
substitute shall be. You have considerable variety of new
propositions and plans, but you are unanimous in rejecting
and denouncing the old policy of the fathers. Some of you
are for reviving the foreign slave-trade; some for a
congressional slave code for the Territories; some for
Congress forbidding the Territories to prohibit slavery
within their limits; some for maintaining slavery in the
Territories through the judiciary; some for the “gur-reat
pur-rinciple” that if one man would enslave another, no
third man should object — fantastically called “popular
sovereignty.” But never a man among you in favor of
prohibition of slavery in Federal Territories, according to
the practice of our fathers who framed the Government
under which we live. Not one of all your various plans can
show a precedent or an advocate in the century within
which our Government originated. And yet you draw
yourselves up and say, “We are eminently conservative.”
It is exceedingly desirable that all parts of this great
confederacy shall be at peace, and in harmony one with
 another. Let us Republicans do our part to have it so. Even
though much provoked, let us do nothing through passion
and ill-temper. Even though the Southern people will not so
much as listen to us, let us calmly consider their demands,
and yield to them if, in our deliberate view of our duty, we
possibly can. Judging by all they say and do, and by the
subject and nature of their controversy with us, let us
determine, if we can, what will satisfy them.
Will they be satisﬁed if the Territories be unconditionally
surrendered to them? We know they will not. In all their
present complaints against us, the Territories are scarcely
mentioned. Invasions and insurrections are the rage now.
Will it satisfy them, in the future, if we have nothing to do
with invasions and insurrections? We know it will not. We
so know because we know we never had anything to do
with invasions and insurrections; and yet this total
abstaining does not exempt us from the charge and the
denunciation.
The question recurs, what will satisfy them? Simply this:
we must not only let them alone, but we must, somehow,
convince them that we do let them alone. This, we know by
experience, is no easy task. We have been so trying to
convince 
them, 
from 
the 
very 
beginning 
of 
our
organization, but with no success. In all our platforms and
speeches, we have constantly protested our purpose to let
them alone; but this had no tendency to convince them.
Alike unavailing to convince them is the fact that they have
never detected a man of us in any attempt to disturb them.
 These natural and apparently adequate means all failing,
what will convince them? This, and this only: cease to call
slavery wrong, and join them in calling it right. And this
must be done thoroughly — done in acts as well as in
words. Silence will not be tolerated — we must place
ourselves avowedly with them. Douglas’s new sedition law
must be enacted and enforced, suppressing all declarations
that slavery is wrong, whether made in politics, in presses,
in pulpits, or in private. We must arrest and return their
fugitive slaves with greedy pleasure. We must pull down
our free State constitutions. The whole atmosphere must be
disinfected of all taint of opposition to slavery, before they
will cease to believe that all their troubles proceed from us.
So long as we call slavery wrong, whenever a slave runs
away they will overlook the obvious fact that he ran away
because he was oppressed, and declare he was stolen oﬀ.
Whenever a master cuts his slaves with a lash, and they cry
out under it, he will overlook the obvious fact that the
negroes cry out because they are hurt, and insist that they
were put up to it by some rascally abolitionist.
I am quite aware that they do not state their case
precisely in this way. Most of them would probably say to
us, “Let us alone, do nothing to us, and say what you please
about slavery.” But we do let them alone — have never
disturbed them — so that, after all, it is what we say which
dissatisﬁes them. They will continue to accuse us of doing,
until we cease saying.
I am also aware that they have not as yet in terms
demanded the overthrow of our free-State constitutions.
 Yet those constitutions declare the wrong of slavery with
more solemn emphasis than do all other sayings against it;
and when all these other sayings shall have been silenced,
the overthrow of these constitutions will be demanded. It is
nothing to the contrary that they do not demand the whole
of this just now. Demanding what they do, and for the
reason they do, they can voluntarily stop nowhere short of
this consummation. Holding as they do that slavery is
morally right, and socially elevating, they cannot cease to
demand a full national recognition of it, as a legal right,
and a social blessing.
Nor can we justiﬁably withhold this on any ground save
our conviction that slavery is wrong. If slavery is right, all
words, acts, laws, and constitutions against it are
themselves wrong and should be silenced and swept away.
If it is right, we cannot justly object to its nationality — its
universality: if it is wrong, they cannot justly insist upon its
extension — its enlargement. All they ask, we could readily
grant, if we thought slavery right; all we ask, they could as
readily grant, if they thought it wrong. Their thinking it
right and our thinking it wrong is the precise fact on which
depends the whole controversy. Thinking it right as they do,
they are not to blame for desiring its full recognition, as
being right; but, thinking it wrong, as we do, can we yield
to them? Can we cast our votes with their view, and against
our own? In view of our moral, social, and political
responsibilities, can we do this?
Wrong as we think slavery is, we can yet aﬀord to let it
alone where it is because that much is due to the necessity
 arising from its actual presence in the nation; but can we,
while our votes will prevent it, allow it to spread into the
national Territories, and to overrun us here in these free
States?
If our sense of duty forbids this, then let us stand by our
duty, fearlessly and eﬀectively. Let us be diverted by none
of those sophistical contrivances wherewith we are so
industriously plied and belabored — contrivances such as
groping for some middle ground between the right and the
wrong, vain as the search for a man who would be neither a
living man nor a dead man — such as a policy of “don’t
care” on a question about which all free men do care —
such as Union appeals beseeching true Union men to yield
to Disunionists, reversing the divine rule, and caning, not
the sinners, but the righteous to repentance — such as
invocations of Washington, imploring men to unsay what
Washington did.
Neither let us be slandered from our duty by false
accusations against us, nor frightened from it by menaces
of destruction to the Government, nor of dungeons to
ourselves. Let us have faith that right makes might; and in
that faith, let us, to the end, dare to do our duty as we
understand it.
[As Mr. Lincoln concluded his address, there was
witnessed the wildest scene of enthusiasm and excitement
that has been in New Haven for years. The Palladium
editorially says: “We give up most of our space to-day to a
very full report of the eloquent speech of the HON.
 Abraham Lincoln, of Illinois, delivered last night at Union
Hall.”]
     
    
 A
      
      
     
 
TO —— —— —— March 16, 1860
AS TO YOUR kind wishes for myself, allow me to say I
cannot enter the ring on the money basis — ﬁrst, because
in the main it is wrong; and secondly, I have not and cannot
get the money.
I say, in the main, the use of money is wrong; but for
certain objects in a political contest, the use of some is both
right and indispensable. With me, as with yourself, the long
struggle has been one of great pecuniary loss.
I now distinctly say this — if you shall be appointed a
delegate to Chicago, I will furnish one hundred dollars to
bear the expenses of the trip.
Your friend as ever, A. LINCOLN.
[Extract from a letter to a Kansas delegate.]
  
  . 
.  
   .
SPRINGFIELD, March 17, 1860
JAMES W. SOMERS, Esq.
DEAR SIR: — Reaching home three days ago, I found
your letter of February 26th. Considering your diﬀiculty of
hearing, I think you had better settle in Chicago, if, as you
say, a good man already in fair practice there will take you
into partnership. If you had not that diﬀiculty, I still should
think it an even balance whether you would not better
remain in Chicago, with such a chance for copartnership.
If I went west, I think I would go to Kansas, to
Leavenworth or Atchison. Both of them are and will
continue to be ﬁne growing places.
I believe I have said all I can, and I have said it with the
deepest interest for your welfare.
Yours truly, A. LINCOLN.
 A  
 A I
 
  HA I
    
  AI
  
  A
 
 I I A       H
TO C. F. McNEIL.
SPRINGFIELD, APRIL 6, 1860
C. F. MCNEIL, Esq.
DEAR SIR: — Reaching home yesterday, I found yours of
the 23d March, inclosing a slip from The Middleport Press.
It is not true that I ever charged anything for a political
speech in my life; but this much is true: Last October I was
requested by letter to deliver some sort of speech in Mr.
Beecher’s church, in Brooklyn — two hundred dollars being
oﬀered in the ﬁrst letter. I wrote that I could do it in
February, provided they would take a political speech if I
could ﬁnd time to get up no other. They agreed; and
subsequently I informed them the speech would have to be
a political one. When I reached New York, I for the ﬁrst
time learned that the place was changed to “Cooper
Institute.” I made the speech, and left for New Hampshire,
where I have a son at school, neither asking for pay nor
having any oﬀered me. Three days after a check for two
hundred dollars was sent to me at New Hampshire; and I
took it, and did not know it was wrong. My understanding
now is — though I knew nothing of it at the time — that
 they did charge for admittance to the Cooper Institute, and
that they took in more than twice two hundred dollars.
I have made this explanation to you as a friend; but I
wish no explanation made to our enemies. What they want
is a squabble and a fuss, and that they can have if we
explain; and they cannot have it if we don’t.
When I returned through New York from New England, I
was told by the gentlemen who sent me the Check that a
drunken vagabond in the club, having learned something
about the two hundred dollars, made the exhibition out of
which The Herald manufactured the article quoted by The
Press of your town.
My judgment is, and therefore my request is, that you
give no denial and no explanation.
Thanking you for your kind interest in the matter, I
remain, Yours truly, A. LINCOLN.
  
 H.  A  
 .
SPRINGFIELD, ILL., April 21, 1860.
HAWKINS TAYLOR, ESQ.
DEAR SIR: — Yours of the 15th is just received. It
surprises me that you have written twice, without receiving
an answer. I have answered all I ever received from you;
and certainly one since my return from the East.
Opinions here, as to the prospect of Douglas being
nominated, are quite conﬂicting — some very conﬁdent he
will, and others that he will not be. I think his nomination
possible, but that the chances are against him.
I am glad there is a prospect of your party passing this
way to Chicago. Wishing to make your visit here as
pleasant as we can, we wish you to notify us as soon as
possible whether you come this way, how many, and when
you will arrive.
Yours very truly,
A. LINCOLN
     
 A
  
 A 
 
    
   H  I  I
I
   
A I
AT THE CHICAGO CONVENTION. SPRINGFIELD, May 17?
1860.
I AUTHORIZE NO bargains and will be bound by none.
A. LINCOLN.
        
  H   
I       
      H
 HI A
  
  
 I
  
 I
 
 
LINCOLN OF HIS NOMINATION, 
MAY 19, 1860.
Mr. 
CHAIRMAN 
AND 
GENTLEMEN 
OF 
THE
COMMITTEE: — I tender to you, and through you to the
Republican National Convention, and all the people
represented in it, my profoundest thanks for the high honor
done me, which you now formally announce. Deeply and
even painfully sensible of the great responsibility which is
inseparable from this high honor — a responsibility which I
could almost wish had fallen upon some one of the far more
eminent 
men 
and 
experienced 
statesmen 
whose
distinguished names were before the convention — I shall,
by your leave, consider more fully the resolutions of the
convention, denominated their platform, and without any
unnecessary or unreasonable delay respond to you, Mr.
Chairman, in writing — not doubting that the platform will
be found satisfactory, and the nomination gratefully
accepted.
And now I will not longer defer the pleasure of taking
you, and each of you, by the hand.
 A     A
   
  
I
A I
 A     
  I A
 A
I
A    
      I
 
OF THE UNITED STATES
TO GEORGE ASHMUN AND OTHERS.
SPRINGFIELD ILLINOIS, May 23, 1860
HON. GEORGE ASHMUN, President of Republican
National Convention.
SIR: — I accept the nomination tendered me by the
convention over which you presided, and of which I am
formally apprised in the letter of yourself and others, acting
as a committee of the convention for that purpose.
The declaration of principles and sentiments which
accompanies your letter meets my approval; and it shall be
my care not to violate or disregard it in any part.
Imploring the assistance of Divine Providence, and with
due regard to the views and feelings of all who were
represented in the convention, to the rights of all the States
and Territories and people of the nation, to the inviolability
of the Constitution, and the perpetual union, harmony, and
prosperity of all — I am most happy to co-operate for the
practical success of the principles declared by the
convention.
Your obliged friend and fellow-citizen, A. LINCOLN.
  o  .  .  
I H.
SPRINGFIELD, ILL., May 26, 1860.
HON. C. B. SMITH.
MY DEAR SIR:-Yours of the 21st was duly received, but
have found no time until now to say a word in the way of
answer. I am indeed much indebted to Indiana; and, as my
home friends tell me, much to you personally. Your saying,
you no longer consider it a doubtful State is very gratifying.
The thing starts well everywhere — too well, I almost fear,
to last. But we are in, and stick or go through must be the
word.
Let me hear from Indiana occasionally.
Your friend, as ever, A. LINCOLN.
  
 
 
            A  
    
 .  I
 
 
WITH 
WHICH 
HIS 
PRIVATE 
SECRETARY 
WAS
INSTRUCTED TO ANSWER A NUMEROUS CLASS OF
LETTERS IN THE CAMPAIGN OF 1860.
(Doctrine.) SPRINGFIELD, ILLINOIS, —— — , 1860
DEAR SIR: — Your letter to Mr. Lincoln of and by which
you seek to obtain his opinions on certain political points,
has been received by him. He has received others of a
similar character, but he also has a greater number of the
exactly opposite character. The latter class beseech him to
write nothing whatever upon any point of political doctrine.
They say his positions were well known when he was
nominated, and that he must not now embarrass the
canvass by undertaking to shift or modify them. He regrets
that he cannot oblige all, but you perceive it is impossible
for him to do so.
Yours, etc., JNO. J. NICOLAY.
  
  .  . 
A H 
 
 .
SPRINGFIELD, ILLINOIS, MAY 26, 1860
HON. E. B. WASHBURNE.
MY DEAR SIR: — I have several letters from you written
since the nomination, but till now have found no moment to
say a word by way of answer. Of course I am glad that the
nomination is well received by our friends, and I sincerely
thank you for so informing me. So far as I can learn, the
nominations start well everywhere; and, if they get no back-
set, it would seem as if they are going through. I hope you
will write often; and as you write more rapidly than I do,
don’t make your letters so short as mine.
Yours very truly, A. LINCOLN.
  
  . HA   A  .
SPRINGFIELD, ILL., June 4, 1860.
HON. SAMUEL HAYCRAFT.
MY DEAR SIR: — Like yourself I belonged to the old
Whig party from its origin to its close. I never belonged to
the American party organization, nor ever to a party called
a Union party; though I hope I neither am or ever have
been less devoted to the Union than yourself or any other
patriotic man.
Yours very truly, A. LINCOLN.
 A  AHA
 
   A  A
TO G. ASHMUN.
SPRINGFIELD, ILL. JUNE 4, 1860
HON. GEORGE ASHMUN.
MY DEAR SIR: — It seems as if the question whether my
ﬁrst name is “Abraham” or “Abram” will never be settled. It
is “Abraham,” and if the letter of acceptance is not yet in
print, you may, if you think ﬁt, have my signature thereto
printed “Abraham Lincoln.” Exercise your judgment about
this.
Yours as ever, A. LINCOLN.
 A
 H
 I  
  I
 A H
TO S. GALLOWAY.
SPRINGFIELD, ILL., JUNE 19, 1860
HON. SAM’L GALLOWAY.
MY DEAR SIR: — Your very kind letter of the 15th is
received. Messrs. Follett, Foster, 
 Co.’s Life of me is not
by my authority; and I have scarcely been so much
astounded by anything, as by their public announcement
that it is authorized by me. They have fallen into some
strange 
misunderstanding. 
I 
certainly 
knew 
they
contemplated publishing a biography, and I certainly did
not object to their doing so, upon their own responsibility. I
even took pains to facilitate them. But, at the same time, I
made myself tiresome, if not hoarse, with repeating to Mr.
Howard, their only agent seen by me, my protest that I
authorized nothing — would be responsible for nothing.
How 
they 
could 
so 
misunderstand 
me, 
passes
comprehension. As a matter wholly my own, I would
authorize no biography, without time and opportunity [sic]
to carefully examine and consider every word of it and, in
this case, in the nature of things, I can have no such time
and Opportunity [sic]. But, in my present position, when, by
the lessons of the past, and the united voice of all discreet
friends, I can neither write nor speak a word for the public,
 how dare I to send forth, by my authority, a volume of
hundreds of pages, for adversaries to make points upon
without end? Were I to do so, the convention would have a
right to re-assemble and substitute another name for mine.
For these reasons, I would not look at the proof sheets —
I am determined to maintain the position of [sic] truly
saying I never saw the proof sheets, or any part of their
work, before its publication.
Now, do not mistake me — I feel great kindness for
Messrs. F., F., 
 Co. — do not think they have intentionally
done wrong. There may be nothing wrong in their proposed
book — I sincerely hope there will not. I barely suggest that
you, or any of the friends there, on the party account, look
it over, and exclude what you may think would embarrass
the party bearing in mind, at all times, that I authorize
nothing — will be responsible for nothing.
Your friend, as ever, A. LINCOLN.
[The custom then, and it may have been a good one, was
for the Presidential candidate to do no personal canvassing
or speaking — or as we have it now “running for election.”
He stayed at home and kept his mouth shut. Ed.]
  
 HA
I A  HA
 I
.
SPRINGFIELD, ILLINOIS, July 18, 1860.
HON. HANNIBAL HAMLIN. MY DEAR SIR: — It
appears to me that you and I ought to be acquainted, and
accordingly I write this as a sort of introduction of myself to
you. You ﬁrst entered the Senate during the single term I
was a member of the House of Representatives, but I have
no recollection that we were introduced. I shall be pleased
to receive a line from you.
The prospect of Republican success now appears very
ﬂattering, so far as I can perceive. Do you see anything to
the contrary?
Yours truly, A. LINCOLN.
  
 A.  
A .
(Conﬁdential.) SPRINGFIELD, ILLINOIS, JULY 21, 1860.
HON. A. JONAS.
MY DEAR SIR: — Yours of the 20th is received. I suppose
as good or even better men than I may have been in
American or Know-Nothing lodges; but in point of fact, I
never was in one at Quincy or elsewhere. I was never in
Quincy but one day and two nights while Know-Nothing
lodges were in existence, and you were with me that day
and both those nights. I had never been there before in my
life, and never afterward, till the joint debate with Douglas
in 1858. It was in 1854 when I spoke in some hall there,
and after the speaking, you, with others, took me to an
oyster-saloon, passed an hour there, and you walked with
me to, and parted with me at, the Quincy House, quite late
at night. I left by stage for Naples before daylight in the
morning, having come in by the same route after dark the
evening, previous to the speaking, when I found you
waiting at the Quincy House to meet me. A few days after I
was there, Richardson, as I understood, started this same
story about my having been in a Know-Nothing lodge.
When I heard of the charge, as I did soon after; I taxed my
recollection for some incident which could have suggested
it; and I remembered that on parting with you the last night
 I went to the oﬀice of the hotel to take my stage-passage
for the morning, was told that no stage-oﬀice for that line
was kept there, and that I must see the driver before
retiring, to insure his calling for me in the morning; and a
servant was sent with me to ﬁnd the driver, who, after
taking me a square or two, stopped me, and stepped
perhaps a dozen steps farther, and in my hearing called to
some one, who answered him, apparently from the upper
part of a building, and promised to call with the stage for
me at the Quincy House. I returned, and went to bed, and
before day the stage called and took me. This is all.
That I never was in a Know-Nothing lodge in Quincy, I
should expect could be easily proved by respectable men
who were always in the lodges and never saw me there. An
aﬀidavit of one or two such would put the matter at rest.
And now a word of caution. Our adversaries think they
can gain a point if they could force me to openly deny the
charge, by which some degree of oﬀence would be given to
the Americans. For this reason it must not publicly appear
that I am paying any attention to the charge.
Yours truly, A. LINCOLN.
  
  
H
  .    .
SPRINGFIELD, ILLINOIS, August 15, 1860.
MY DEAR SIR: — Yours of the 9th, inclosing the letter of
HON. John Minor Botts, was duly received. The latter is
herewith returned according to your request. It contains
one of the many assurances I receive from the South, that
in no probable event will there be any very formidable
eﬀort to break up the Union. The people of the South have
too much of good sense and good temper to attempt the
ruin of the government rather than see it administered as it
was administered by the men who made it. At least so I
hope and believe. I thank you both for your own letter and
a sight of that of Mr. Botts.
Yours very truly, A. LINCOLN.
  
  H
  
 
  
SPRINGFIELD, ILL. August 17 1860.
MY DEAR SIR: — Yours of the 13th was received this
morning. Douglas is managing the Bell element with great
adroitness. He had his men in Kentucky to vote for the Bell
candidate, producing a result which has badly alarmed and
damaged Breckenridge, and at the same time has induced
the Bell men to suppose that Bell will certainly be
President, if they can keep a few of the Northern States
away from us by throwing them to Douglas. But you, better
than I, understand all this.
I think there will be the most extraordinary eﬀort ever
made to carry New York for Douglas. You and all others
who write me from your State think the eﬀort cannot
succeed, and I hope you are right. Still, it will require close
watching and great eﬀorts on the other side.
Herewith I send you a copy of a letter written at New
York, which suﬀiciently explains itself, and which may or
may not give you a valuable hint. You have seen that Bell
tickets have been put on the track both here and in Indiana.
In both cases the object has been, I think, the same as the
Hunt movement in New York — to throw States to Douglas.
In our State, we know the thing is engineered by Douglas
 men, and we do not believe they can make a great deal out
of it.
Yours very truly, A. LINCOLN.
   
  
  I   
  
   I
I
A I
TO HON. JOHN —— —— —— 
(PRIVATE.) SPRINGFIELD, ILL., Aug. 31, 1860
MY DEAR SIR: — Yours of the 27th is duly received. It
consists almost exclusively of a historical detail of some
local troubles, among some of our friends in Pennsylvania;
and I suppose its object is to guard me against forming a
prejudice against Mr. McC —— — , I have not heard near so
much upon that subject as you probably suppose; and I am
slow to listen to criminations among friends, and never
expose their quarrels on either side. My sincere wish is that
both sides will allow bygones to be bygones, and look to the
present and future only.
Yours very truly, A. LINCOLN.
  
 HA
I A  HA
 I
SPRINGFIELD, ILLINOIS, September 4, 1860
HON. HANNIBAL HAMLIN.
MY DEAR SIR: — I am annoyed some by a letter from a
friend in Chicago, in which the following passage occurs:
“Hamlin has written Colfax that two members of Congress
will, he fears, be lost in Maine, the ﬁrst and sixth districts;
and that Washburne’s majority for governor will not exceed
six thousand.”
I had heard something like this six weeks ago, but had
been assured since that it was not so. Your secretary of
state, — Mr. Smith, I think, — whom you introduced to me
by 
letter, 
gave 
this 
assurance; 
more 
recently, 
Mr.
Fessenden, our candidate for Congress in one of those
districts, wrote a relative here that his election was sure by
at least ﬁve thousand, and that Washburne’s majority would
be from 14,000 to 17,000; and still later, Mr. Fogg, of New
Hampshire, now at New York serving on a national
committee, wrote me that we were having a desperate ﬁght
in Maine, which would end in a splendid victory for us.
Such a result as you seem to have predicted in Maine, in
your letter to Colfax, would, I fear, put us on the down-hill
track, lose us the State elections in Pennsylvania and
 Indiana, and probably ruin us on the main turn in
November.
You must not allow it.
Yours very truly,
A. LINCOLN.
  
  .  . 
A H 
 
 .
SPRINGFIELD, ILLINOIS, September 9, 1860
HON. E. B. WASHBURNE.
MY DEAR SIR: Yours of the 5th was received last
evening. I was right glad to see it. It contains the freshest
“posting” which I now have. It relieved me some from a
little anxiety I had about Maine. Jo Medill, on August 30th,
wrote me that Colfax had a letter from Mr. Hamlin saying
we were in great danger of losing two members of
Congress in Maine, and that your brother would not have
exceeding six thousand majority for Governor. I addressed
you at once, at Galena, asking for your latest information.
As you are at Washington, that letter you will receive some
time after the Maine election.
Yours very truly, A. LINCOLN.
  
 
. H. H  
.
SPRINGFIELD, ILL., OCTOBER 10, 1860
DEAR WILLIAM: — I cannot give you details, but it is
entirely certain that Pennsylvania and Indiana have gone
Republican very largely. Pennsylvania 25,000, and Indiana
5000 to 10,000. Ohio of course is safe.
Yours as ever,
A. LINCOLN.
  
  . 
.  
.
SPRINGFIELD, ILL., October 15, 1860
L. MONTGOMERY BOND, Esq.
MY DEAR SIR: I certainly am in no temper and have no
purpose to embitter the feelings of the South, but whether I
am inclined to such a course as would in fact embitter their
feelings you can better judge by my published speeches
than by anything I would say in a short letter if I were
inclined now, as I am not, to deﬁne my position anew.
Yours truly, A. LINCOLN.
         
   I
 A   A 
TO MISS GRACE BEDELL, RIPLEY N.Y.
SPRINGFIELD, ILL., OCTOBER 19, 1860
MISS GRACE BEDELL.
MY DEAR LITTLE MISS: — Your very agreeable letter of
the 15th is received. I regret the necessity of saying I have
no daughter. I have three sons — one seventeen, one nine,
and one seven. They with their mother constitute my whole
family. As to the whiskers, as I have never worn any, do you
not think that people would call it a piece of silly aﬀectation
were I to begin wearing them now?
I am your true friend and sincere well-wisher, A.
LINCOLN.
  A    I
 
 
A I
 
 A 
  
     I
 I
 
 H
TO D. HUNTER.
(PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL.) SPRINGFIELD, ILLINOIS,
October 26, 1860
MAJOR DAVID HUNTER
MY DEAR SIR: — Your very kind letter of the 20th was
duly received, for which please accept my thanks. I have
another letter, from a writer unknown to me, saying the
oﬀicers of the army at Fort Kearny have determined in case
of Republican success at the approaching Presidential
election, to take themselves, and the arms at that point,
south, for the purpose of resistance to the government.
While I think there are many chances to one that this is a
humbug, it occurs to me that any real movement of this
sort in the Army would leak out and become known to you.
In such case, if it would not be unprofessional or
dishonorable (of which you are to be judge), I shall be much
obliged if you will apprise me of it.
Yours very truly, A. LINCOLN.
  
 HA
I A  HA
 I
(Conﬁdential.) SPRINGFIELD. ILLINOIS, November 8,
1860
HON. HANNIBAL HAMLIN.
MY DEAR SIR: — I am anxious for a personal interview
with you at as early a day as possible. Can you, without
much inconvenience, meet me at Chicago? If you can,
please name as early a day as you conveniently can, and
telegraph me, unless there be suﬀicient time before the day
named to communicate by mail.
Yours very truly, A. LINCOLN.
  
  A
   HA   A  .
(Private and Conﬁdential.) 
SPRINGFIELD, ILL., NOV.13, 1860
HON. SAMUEL HAYCRAFT.
MY DEAR SIR: — Yours of the 9th is just received. I can
only answer brieﬂy. Rest fully assured that the good people
of the South who will put themselves in the same temper
and mood towards me which you do will ﬁnd no cause to
complain of me.
Yours very truly,
A. LINCOLN. CELEBRATION OF LINCOLN’S ELECTION,
REMARKS AT THE MEETING AT SPRINGFIELD, ILLINOIS
NOVEMBER 20, 1860
FRIENDS AND FELLOW-CITIZENS: — Please excuse me
on this occasion from making a speech. I thank you in
common with all those who have thought ﬁt by their votes
to indorse the Republican cause. I rejoice with you in the
success which has thus far attended that cause. Yet in all
our rejoicings let us neither express nor cherish any hard
feelings toward any citizen who by his vote has diﬀered
with us. Let us at all times remember that all American
citizens are brothers of a common country, and should
dwell together in the bonds of fraternal feeling. Let me
again beg you to accept my thanks, and to excuse me from
further speaking at this time.
  
 A   A
   H.     H 
SPRINGFIELD, ILL. NOV. 30, 1860
HON. A. H. STEPHENS.
MY DEAR SIR: — I have read in the newspapers your
speech recently delivered (I think) before the Georgia
Legislature, or its assembled members. If you have revised
it, as is probable, I shall be much obliged if you will send
me a copy.
Yours very truly, A. LINCOLN.
  
 HA
I A  HA
 I
(Private)
SPRINGFIELD, ILLINOIS, DECEMBER 8, 1860
HON. HANNIBAL HAMLIN.
DEAR SIR: — Yours of the 4th was duly received. The
inclosed to Governor Seward covers two notes to him,
copies of which you ﬁnd open for your inspection. Consult
with Judge Trumbull; and if you and he see no reason to the
contrary, deliver the letter to Governor Seward at once. If
you see reason to the contrary write me at once.
I have an intimation that Governor Banks would yet
accept a place in the Cabinet. Please ascertain and write
me how this is, Yours very truly, A. LINCOLN.
   
  I
   
  
I    
   A     I  
TO E. B. WASHBURNE
(Private 
and 
Conﬁdential.) 
SPRINGFIELD, 
ILL.,
December 13, 1860
HON. E. B. WASHBURNE.
MY DEAR SIR: — Your long letter received. Prevent, as
far as possible, any of our friends from demoralizing
themselves and our cause by entertaining propositions for
compromise of any sort on “slavery extension.” There is no
possible compromise upon it but which puts us under
again, and leaves all our work to do over again. Whether it
be a Missouri line or Eli Thayer’s popular sovereignty, it is
all the same. Let either be done, and immediately
ﬁlibustering and extending slavery recommences. On that
point hold ﬁrm, as with a chain of steel.
Yours as ever, A. LINCOLN.
  I
I
 
       I
TO THURLOW WEED
SPRINGFIELD, ILLINOIS, DECEMBER 17, 1860
MY DEAR SIR: — Yours of the 11th was received two
days ago. Should the convocation of governors of which you
speak seem desirous to know my views on the present
aspect of things, tell them you judge from my speeches that
I will be inﬂexible on the territorial question; but I probably
think either the Missouri line extended, or Douglas’s and
Eli Thayer’s popular sovereignty would lose us everything
we gain by the election; that ﬁlibustering for all south of us
and making slave States of it would follow in spite of us, in
either case; also that I probably think all opposition, real
and apparent, to the fugitive slave clause of the
Constitution ought to be withdrawn.
I believe you can pretend to ﬁnd but little, if anything, in
my speeches, about secession. But my opinion is that no
State can in any way lawfully get out of the Union without
the consent of the others; and that it is the duty of the
President and other government functionaries to run the
machine as it is.
Truly yours, A. LINCOLN.
  
   
     
   
   
  
  H   
 H
TO E. B. WASHBURNE
(Conﬁdential) SPRINGFIELD, ILLINOIS, December 21,
1860
HON. E. B. WASHBURNE.
MY DEAR SIR: — Last night I received your letter giving
an account of your interview with General Scott, and for
which I thank you. Please present my respects to the
General, and tell him, conﬁdentially, I shall be obliged to
him to be as well prepared as he can to either hold or
retake the forts, as the case may require, at and after the
inauguration.
Yours as ever, A. LINCOLN.
  
 A. H.     H 
 .
(For your own eye only) SPRINGFIELD, ILLINOIS,
DECEMBER 22, 1860
HON. ALE ANDER STEVENS
MY DEAR SIR: — Your obliging answer to my short note
is just received, and for which please accept my thanks. I
fully appreciate the present peril the country is in, and the
weight of responsibility on me. Do the people of the South
really entertain fear that a Republican administration
would, directly or indirectly, interfere with the slaves, or
with them about the slaves? If they do, I wish to assure you,
as once a friend, and still, I hope, not an enemy, that there
is no cause for such fears. The South would be in no more
danger in this respect than it was in the days of
Washington. I suppose, however, this does not meet the
case. You think slavery is right and ought to be extended,
while we think it is wrong and ought to be restricted. That,
I suppose, is the rub. It certainly is the only substantial
diﬀerence between us.
Yours very truly, A. LINCOLN.
  
  
   
   H   
I I     A     A
 
MEMORANDUM
DECEMBER , 1860
Resolved: 
That 
the 
fugitive 
slave 
clause 
of 
the
Constitution ought to be enforced by a law of Congress,
with eﬀicient provisions for that object, not obliging private
persons to assist in its execution, but punishing all who
resist it, and with the usual safeguards to liberty, securing
free men against being surrendered as slaves.
That all State laws, if there be such, really or apparently
in conﬂict with such law of Congress, ought to be repealed;
and no opposition to the execution of such law of Congress
ought to be made.
That the Federal Union must be preserved.
Prepared for the consideration of the Republican
members of the Senate Committee of Thirteen.
  
 
. H
   .
(Conﬁdential.) 
SPRINGFIELD, ILLINOIS DECEMBER 22, 1860
MAJOR DAVID HUNTER.
MY DEAR SIR: — I am much obliged by the receipt of
yours of the 18th. The most we can do now is to watch
events, and be as well prepared as possible for any turn
things may take. If the forts fall, my judgment is that they
are to be retaken. When I shall determine deﬁnitely my
time of starting to Washington, I will notify you.
Yours truly, A. LINCOLN.
  
 I. 
. 
  I
(Conﬁdential.) 
SPRINGFIELD, ILL., DEC 24, 1860
HON. I. N. MORRIS.
MY DEAR SIR: — Without supposing that you and I are
any nearer together, politically, than heretofore, allow me
to tender you my sincere thanks for your Union resolution,
expressive of views upon which we never were, and, I trust,
never will be at variance.
Yours very truly, A. LINCOLN.
 A   
    
  
 
 A  
A I I
  A I
 
TO HANNIBAL HAMLIN
SPRINGFIELD, ILLINOIS, DECEMBER 14, 1860.
HON. HANNIBAL HAMLIN.
MY DEAR SIR: — I need a man of Democratic
antecedents from New England. I cannot get a fair share of
that element in without. This stands in the way of Mr.
Adams. I think of Governor Banks, Mr. Welles, and Mr.
Tuck. Which of them do the New England delegation
prefer? Or shall I decide for myself?
Yours as ever, A. LINCOLN.
