    
  
   
      I
  
 A  I     I  .
SPRINGFIELD, June 19, 1858.
SYDNEY SPRING, ESQ.
MY DEAR SIR: — Your letter introducing Mr. Faree was
duly received. There was no opening to nominate him for
Superintendent of Public Instruction, but through him
Egypt made a most valuable contribution to the convention.
I think it may be fairly said that he came oﬀ the lion of the
day — or rather of the night. Can you not elect him to the
Legislature? It seems to me he would be hard to beat. What
objection could be made to him? What is your Senator
Martin saying and doing? What is Webb about?
Please write me. Yours truly, A. LINCOLN.
  
 H.  . 
HI 
  .
SPRINGFIELD, June 24, 1858
H. C. WHITNEY, ESQ.
DEAR SIR: — Your letter enclosing the attack of the
Times upon me was received this morning. Give yourself no
concern about my voting against the supplies. Unless you
are without faith that a lie can be successfully contradicted,
there is not a word of truth in the charge, and I am just
considering a little as to the best shape to put a
contradiction in. Show this to whomever you please, but do
not publish it in the paper.
Your friend as ever, A. LINCOLN.
  
  . 
.  
   .
SPRINGFIELD, June 25, 1858.
JAMES W. SOMERS, Esq.
MY DEAR SIR: — Yours of the 22nd, inclosing a draft of
two hundred dollars, was duly received. I have paid it on
the judgment, and herewith you have the receipt. I do not
wish to say anything as to who shall be the Republican
candidate for the Legislature in your district, further than
that I have full conﬁdence in Dr. Hull. Have you ever got in
the way of consulting with McKinley in political matters?
He is true as steel, and his judgment is very good. The last I
heard from him, he rather thought Weldon, of De Witt, was
our best timber for representative, all things considered.
But you there must settle it among yourselves. It may well
puzzle older heads than yours to understand how, as the
Dred Scott decision holds, Congress can authorize a
Territorial Legislature to do everything else, and cannot
authorize them to prohibit slavery. That is one of the things
the court can decide, but can never give an intelligible
reason for.
Yours very truly, A. LINCOLN.
  
 A.  A
     .
SPRINGFIELD, June 28, 1858.
A. CAMPBELL, ESQ.
MY DEAR SIR: — In 1856 you gave me authority to draw
on you for any sum not exceeding ﬁve hundred dollars. I
see clearly that such a privilege would be more available
now than it was then. I am aware that times are tighter
now than they were then. Please write me at all events, and
whether you can now do anything or not I shall continue
grateful for the past.
Yours very truly, A. LINCOLN.
  
  . 
I     I .
SPRINGFIELD, July 16, 1858.
HON. JOSEPH GILLESPIE.
MY DEAR SIR: — I write this to say that from the
specimens of Douglas Democracy we occasionally see here
from Madison, we learn that they are making very
conﬁdent calculation of beating you and your friends for
the lower house, in that county. They oﬀer to bet upon it.
Billings and Job, respectively, have been up here, and were
each as I learn, talking largely about it. If they do so, it can
only be done by carrying the Fillmore men of 1856 very
diﬀerently from what they seem to [be] going in the other
party. Below is the vote of 1856, in your district: Counties.
Counties. Buchanan. Fremont. Fillmore.
Bond............ 607 153 659
Madison......... 1451 1111 1658
Montgomery...... 992 162 686
—— —— ——
3050 1426 3003
By this you will see, if you go through the calculation,
that if they get one quarter of the Fillmore votes, and you
three quarters, they will beat you 125 votes. If they get one
ﬁfth, and you four ﬁfths, you beat them 179. In Madison,
alone, if our friends get 1000 of the Fillmore votes, and
 their opponents the remainder, 658, we win by just two
votes.
This shows the whole ﬁeld, on the basis of the election of
1856.
Whether, since then, any Buchanan, or Fremonters, have
shifted ground, and how the majority of new votes will go,
you can judge better than I.
Of course you, on the ground, can better determine your
line of tactics than any one oﬀ the ground; but it behooves
you to be wide awake and actively working.
Don’t neglect it; and write me at your ﬁrst leisure. Yours
as ever, A. LINCOLN.
  
  
H
 
A H      A   
 I     I  .
SPRINGFIELD, JULY 20, 1858.
JNO. MATHERS, ESQ.
MY DEAR SIR: — Your kind and interesting letter of the
19th was duly received. Your suggestions as to placing
one’s self on the oﬀensive rather than the defensive are
certainly correct. That is a point which I shall not
disregard. I spoke here on Saturday night. The speech, not
very well reported, appears in the State journal of this
morning. You doubtless will see it; and I hope that you will
perceive in it that I am already improving. I would mail you
a copy now, but have not one [at] hand. I thank you for your
letter and shall be pleased to hear from you again.
Yours very truly, A. LINCOLN.
  
  
   H 
I     I .
SPRINGFIELD, JULY 25, 1858.
HON. J. GILLESPIE.
MY DEAR SIR: — Your doleful letter of the 8th was
received on my return from Chicago last night. I do hope
you are worse scared than hurt, though you ought to know
best. We must not lose the district. We must make a job of
it, and save it. Lay hold of the proper agencies, and secure
all the Americans you can, at once. I do hope, on closer
inspection, you will ﬁnd they are not half gone. Make a
little test. Run down one of the poll-books of the
Edwardsville precinct, and take the ﬁrst hundred known
American names. Then quietly ascertain how many of them
are actually going for Douglas. I think you will ﬁnd less
than ﬁfty. But even if you ﬁnd ﬁfty, make sure of the other
ﬁfty, that is, make sure of all you can, at all events. We will
set other agencies to work which shall compensate for the
loss of a good many Americans. Don’t fail to check the
stampede at once. Trumbull, I think, will be with you before
long.
There is much he cannot do, and some he can. I have
reason to hope there will be other help of an appropriate
kind. Write me again.
Yours as ever, A. LINCOLN.
  
  .  .  
 .
SPRINGFIELD, Aug. 2, 1858.
HON. B. C. COOK.
MY DEAR SIR: — I have a letter from a very true and
intelligent man insisting that there is a plan on foot in La
Salle and Bureau to run Douglas Republicans for Congress
and for the Legislature in those counties, if they can only
get the encouragement of our folks nominating pretty
extreme abolitionists.
It is thought they will do nothing if our folks nominate
men who are not very obnoxious to the charge of
abolitionism. Please have your eye upon this. Signs are
looking pretty fair.
Yours very truly, A. LINCOLN.
  
 H
.  . 
.  A 
  .
SPRINGFIELD, Aug. 5, 1858.
HON. J. M. PALMER.
DEAR SIR: — Since we parted last evening no new
thought has occurred to [me] on the subject of which we
talked most yesterday.
I have concluded, however, to speak at your town on
Tuesday, August 31st, and have promised to have it so
appear in the papers of to-morrow. Judge Trumbull has not
yet reached here.
Yours as ever, A. LINCOLN.
  
 A   A
     
  
.
SPRINGFIELD, Aug. 11, 1858.
ALE ANDER SYMPSON, ESQ.
DEAR SIR: — Yours of the 6th received. If life and health
continue I shall pretty likely be at Augusta on the 25th.
Things look reasonably well. Will tell you more fully when
I see you.
Yours truly, A. LINCOLN.
  
  . 
.  
I
HA
.
OTTAWA, August 22, 1858.
J. O. CUNNINGHAM, Esq.
MY DEAR SIR: — Yours of the 18th, signed as secretary
of the Republican club, is received. In the matter of making
speeches I am a good deal pressed by invitations from
almost all quarters, and while I hope to be at Urbana some
time during the canvass, I cannot yet say when. Can you
not see me at Monticello on the 6th of September?
Douglas and I, for the ﬁrst time this canvass, crossed
swords here yesterday; the ﬁre ﬂew some, and I am glad to
know I am yet alive. There was a vast concourse of people
— more than could get near enough to hear.
Yours as ever, A. LINCOLN.
    A     I
 A 
 
  A  .
August??, 1858
AS I WOULD not be a slave, so I would not be a master. This
expresses my idea of democracy. Whatever diﬀers from
this, to the extent of the diﬀerence, is no democracy.
A. LINCOLN.
  
  .  .  
 .
SPRINGFIELD, August 2, 1858
HON. B. C. COOK.
MY DEAR SIR: — I have a letter from a very true friend,
and intelligent man, writing that there is a plan on foot in
La Salle and Bureau, to run Douglas Republican for
Congress and for the Legislature in those counties, if they
can only get the encouragement of our folks nominating
pretty extreme abolitionists. It is thought they will do
nothing if our folks nominate men who are not very
[undecipherable word looks like “obnoxious”] to the charge
of abolitionism. Please have your eye upon this. Signs are
looking pretty fair.
Yours very truly, A. LINCOLN.
  
 
 . 
I  IA
  I HIA
  
A
 I     I  .
BLOOMINGTON, Sept. 3, 1858
DEAR DOCTOR: — Yours of the 1st was received this
morning, as also one from Mr. Harmon, and one from
Hiram Beckwith on the same subject. You will see by the
Journal that I have been appointed to speak at Danville on
the 22d of Sept., — the day after Douglas speaks there. My
recent experience shows that speaking at the same place
the next day after D. is the very thing, — it is, in fact, a
concluding speech on him. Please show this to Messrs.
Harmon and Beckwith; and tell them they must excuse me
from writing separate letters to them.
Yours as ever, A. LINCOLN
P. S. — Give full notice to all surrounding country. A.L.
   A
 
  
       H A   A I   I  .
SEPT. 8, 1858.
LET US INQUIRE what Judge Douglas really invented when
he introduced the Nebraska Bill? He called it Popular
Sovereignty. 
What 
does 
that 
mean? 
It 
means 
the
sovereignty of the people over their own aﬀairs — in other
words, the right of the people to govern themselves. Did
Judge Douglas invent this? Not quite. The idea of popular
sovereignty was ﬂoating about several ages before the
author of the Nebraska Bill was born — indeed, before
Columbus set foot on this continent. In the year 1776 it
took form in the noble words which you are all familiar
with: “We hold these truths to be self-evident, that all men
are created equal,” etc. Was not this the origin of popular
sovereignty as applied to the American people? Here we
are told that governments are instituted among men
deriving their just powers from the consent of the
governed. If that is not popular sovereignty, then I have no
conception of the meaning of words. If Judge Douglas did
not invent this kind of popular sovereignty, let us pursue
the inquiry and ﬁnd out what kind he did invent. Was it the
right of emigrants to Kansas and Nebraska to govern
themselves, and a lot of “niggers,” too, if they wanted
them? Clearly this was no invention of his because General
 Cass put forth the same doctrine in 1848 in his so called
Nicholson letter, six years before Douglas thought of such a
thing. Then what was it that the “Little Giant” invented? It
never occurred to General Cass to call his discovery by the
odd name of popular sovereignty. He had not the face to
say that the right of the people to govern “niggers” was the
right of the people to govern themselves. His notions of the
ﬁtness of things were not moulded to the brazenness of
calling the right to put a hundred “niggers” through under
the lash in Nebraska a “sacred” right of self-government.
And here I submit to you was Judge Douglas’s discovery,
and the whole of it: He discovered that the right to breed
and ﬂog negroes in Nebraska was popular sovereignty.
      H A    I
 
  I  I
I 
SEPTEMBER 8, 1858.
THE QUESTIONS ARE sometimes asked “What is all this fuss
that is being made about negroes? What does it amount to?
And where will it end?” These questions imply that those
who ask them consider the slavery question a very
insigniﬁcant matter they think that it amounts to little or
nothing and that those who agitate it are extremely foolish.
Now it must be admitted that if the great question which
has caused so much trouble is insigniﬁcant, we are very
foolish to have anything to do with it — if it is of no
importance we had better throw it aside and busy ourselves
with something else. But let us inquire a little into this
insigniﬁcant matter, as it is called by some, and see if it is
not important enough to demand the close attention of
every well-wisher of the Union. In one of Douglas’s recent
speeches, I ﬁnd a reference to one which was made by me
in Springﬁeld some time ago. The judge makes one
quotation from that speech that requires some little notice
from me at this time. I regret that I have not my Springﬁeld
speech before me, but the judge has quoted one particular
part of it so often that I think I can recollect it. It runs I
think as follows:
 “We are now far into the ﬁfth year since a policy was
initiated with the avowed object and conﬁdent promise of
putting an end to slavery agitation. Under the operation of
that policy that agitation has not only not ceased but has
constantly augmented. In my opinion it will not cease until
a crisis shall have been reached and passed.
“A house divided against itself cannot stand. I believe this
government cannot endure permanently half slave and half
free. I do not expect the Union to be dissolved. I do not
expect the house to fall, but I do expect it will cease to be
divided. It will become all one thing or all the other. Either
the opponents of slavery will arrest the further spread of it
and place it where the public mind shall rest in the belief
that it is in the course of ultimate extinction; or its
advocates will push it forward till it shall become alike
lawful in all the States, old as well as new, North as well as
South.”
Judge Douglas makes use of the above quotation, and
ﬁnds a great deal of fault with it. He deals unfairly with me,
and tries to make the people of this State believe that I
advocated dangerous doctrines in my Springﬁeld speech.
Let us see if that portion of my Springﬁeld speech of which
Judge Douglas complains so bitterly, is as objectionable to
others as it is to him. We are, certainly, far into the ﬁfth
year since a policy was initiated with the avowed object and
conﬁdent promise of putting an end to slavery agitation. On
the fourth day of January, 1854, Judge Douglas introduced
the Kansas-Nebraska bill. He initiated a new policy, and
that policy, so he says, was to put an end to the agitation of
 the slavery question. Whether that was his object or not I
will not stop to discuss, but at all events some kind of a
policy was initiated; and what has been the result? Instead
of the quiet and good feeling which were promised us by
the self-styled author of Popular Sovereignty, we have had
nothing but ill-feeling and agitation. According to Judge
Douglas, the passage of the Nebraska bill would tranquilize
the whole country — there would be no more slavery
agitation in or out of Congress, and the vexed question
would be left entirely to the people of the Territories. Such
was the opinion of Judge Douglas, and such were the
opinions of the leading men of the Democratic Party. Even
as late as the spring of 1856 Mr. Buchanan said, a short
time subsequent to his nomination by the Cincinnati
convention, that the territory of Kansas would be tranquil
in less than six weeks. Perhaps he thought so, but Kansas
has not been and is not tranquil, and it may be a long time
before she may be so.
We all know how ﬁerce the agitation was in Congress last
winter, and what a narrow escape Kansas had from being
admitted into the Union with a constitution that was
detested by ninety-nine hundredths of her citizens. Did the
angry debates which took place at Washington during the
last season of Congress lead you to suppose that the
slavery agitation was settled?
An election was held in Kansas in the month of August,
and the constitution which was submitted to the people was
voted down by a large majority. So Kansas is still out of the
Union, and there is a probability that she will remain out
 for some time. But Judge Douglas says the slavery question
is settled. He says the bill he introduced into the Senate of
the United States on the 4th day of January, 1854, settled
the slavery question forever! Perhaps he can tell us how
that bill settled the slavery question, for if he is able to
settle a question of such great magnitude he ought to be
able to explain the manner in which he does it. He knows
and you know that the question is not settled, and that his
ill-timed experiment to settle it has made it worse than it
ever was before.
And now let me say a few words in regard to Douglas’s
great hobby of negro equality. He thinks — he says at least
— that the Republican party is in favor of allowing whites
and blacks to intermarry, and that a man can’t be a good
Republican unless he is willing to elevate black men to
oﬀice and to associate with them on terms of perfect
equality. He knows that we advocate no such doctrines as
these, but he cares not how much he misrepresents us if he
can gain a few votes by so doing. To show you what my
opinion of negro equality was in times past, and to prove to
you that I stand on that question where I always stood, I
will read you a few extracts from a speech that was made
by me in Peoria in 1854. It was made in reply to one of
Judge Douglas’s speeches.
(Mr. Lincoln then read a number of extracts which had
the ring of the true metal. We have rarely heard anything
with which we have been more pleased. And the audience
after hearing the extracts read, and comparing their
conservative sentiments with those now advocated by Mr.
 Lincoln, testiﬁed their approval by loud applause. How any
reasonable man can hear one of Mr. Lincoln’s speeches
without being converted to Republicanism is something
that we can’t account for. Ed.)
Slavery, continued Mr. Lincoln, is not a matter of little
importance, it overshadows every other question in which
we are interested. It has divided the Methodist and
Presbyterian churches, and has sown discord in the
American Tract Society. The churches have split and the
society will follow their example before long. So it will be
seen that slavery is agitated in the religious as well as in
the political world. Judge Douglas is very much afraid in
the triumph that the Republican party will lead to a general
mixture of the white and black races. Perhaps I am wrong
in saying that he is afraid, so I will correct myself by saying
that he pretends to fear that the success of our party will
result in the amalgamation of the blacks and whites. I think
I can show plainly, from documents now before me, that
Judge Douglas’s fears are groundless. The census of 1800
tells us that in that year there were over four hundred
thousand mulattoes in the United States. Now let us take
what is called an Abolition State — the Republican, slavery-
hating State of New Hampshire — and see how many
mulattoes we can ﬁnd within her borders. The number
amounts to just one hundred and eighty-four. In the Old
Dominion — in the Democratic and aristocratic State of
Virginia — there were a few more mulattoes than the
Census-takers found in New Hampshire. How many do you
suppose 
there 
were? 
Seventy-nine 
thousand, 
seven
 hundred and seventy-ﬁve — twenty-three thousand more
than there were in all the free States! In the slave States
there were in 1800, three hundred and forty-eight thousand
mulattoes all of home production; and in the free States
there were less than sixty thousand mulattoes — and a
large number of them were imported from the South.
   A
 
  
       H A   
A 
  I     I  .
SEPT. 13, 1858.
I HAVE BEEN requested to give a concise statement of the
diﬀerence, as I understand it, between the Democratic and
Republican parties, on the leading issues of the campaign.
This question has been put to me by a gentleman whom I
do not know. I do not even know whether he is a friend of
mine or a supporter of Judge Douglas in this contest, nor
does that make any diﬀerence. His question is a proper
one. Lest I should forget it, I will give you my answer
before proceeding with the line of argument I have marked
out for this discussion.
The 
diﬀerence 
between 
the 
Republican 
and 
the
Democratic parties on the leading issues of this contest, as
I understand it, is that the former consider slavery a moral,
social and political wrong, while the latter do not consider
it either a moral, a social or a political wrong; and the
action of each, as respects the growth of the country and
the expansion of our population, is squared to meet these
views. I will not aﬀirm that the Democratic party consider
slavery morally, socially and politically right, though their
tendency to that view has, in my opinion, been constant and
unmistakable for the past ﬁve years. I prefer to take, as the
accepted maxim of the party, the idea put forth by Judge
 Douglas, that he “don’t care whether slavery is voted down
or voted up.” I am quite willing to believe that many
Democrats would prefer that slavery should be always
voted down, and I know that some prefer that it be always
voted up; but I have a right to insist that their action,
especially if it be their constant action, shall determine
their ideas and preferences on this subject. Every measure
of the Democratic party of late years, bearing directly or
indirectly on the slavery question, has corresponded with
this notion of utter indiﬀerence whether slavery or freedom
shall outrun in the race of empire across to the Paciﬁc —
every measure, I say, up to the Dred Scott decision, where,
it seems to me, the idea is boldly suggested that slavery is
better than freedom. The Republican party, on the contrary,
hold that this government was instituted to secure the
blessings of freedom, and that slavery is an unqualiﬁed evil
to the negro, to the white man, to the soil, and to the State.
Regarding it as an evil, they will not molest it in the States
where it exists, they will not overlook the constitutional
guards which our fathers placed around it; they will do
nothing that can give proper oﬀence to those who hold
slaves by legal sanction; but they will use every
constitutional method to prevent the evil from becoming
larger and involving more negroes, more white men, more
soil, and more States in its deplorable consequences. They
will, if possible, place it where the public mind shall rest in
the belief that it is in course of ultimate peaceable
extinction in God’s own good time. And to this end they
will, if possible, restore the government to the policy of the
 fathers, the policy of preserving the new Territories from
the 
baneful 
inﬂuence 
of 
human 
bondage, 
as 
the
Northwestern Territories were sought to be preserved by
the Ordinance of 1787, and the Compromise Act of 1820.
They will oppose, in all its length and breadth, the modern
Democratic idea, that slavery is as good as freedom, and
ought to have room for expansion all over the continent, if
people can be found to carry it. All, or nearly all, of Judge
Douglas’s arguments are logical, if you admit that slavery is
as good and as right as freedom, and not one of them is
worth a rush if you deny it. This is the diﬀerence, as I
understand it, between the Republican and Democratic
parties.
My friends, I have endeavored to show you the logical
consequences of the Dred Scott decision, which holds that
the people of a Territory cannot prevent the establishment
of slavery in their midst. I have stated what cannot be
gainsaid, that the grounds upon which this decision is made
are equally applicable to the free States as to the free
Territories, and that the peculiar reasons put forth by Judge
Douglas for indorsing this decision commit him, in advance,
to the next decision and to all other decisions corning from
the same source. And when, by all these means, you have
succeeded in dehumanizing the negro; when you have put
him down and made it impossible for him to be but as the
beasts of the ﬁeld; when you have extinguished his soul in
this world and placed him where the ray of hope is blown
out as in the darkness of the damned, are you quite sure
that the demon you have roused will not turn and rend you?
 What constitutes the bulwark of our own liberty and
independence? It is not our frowning battlements, our
bristling sea coasts, our army and our navy. These are not
our reliance against tyranny All of those may be turned
against us without making us weaker for the struggle. Our
reliance is in the love of liberty which God has planted in
us. Our defense is in the spirit which prizes liberty as the
heritage of all men, in all lands everywhere. Destroy this
spirit and you have planted the seeds of despotism at your
own doors. Familiarize yourselves with the chains of
bondage and you prepare your own limbs to wear them.
Accustomed to trample on the rights of others, you have
lost the genius of your own independence and become the
ﬁt subjects of the ﬁrst cunning tyrant who rises among you.
And let me tell you, that all these things are prepared for
you by the teachings of history, if the elections shall
promise that the next Dred Scott decision and all future
decisions will be quietly acquiesced in by the people.
        
   I
I 
September 30,? 1858.
TO “LINNIE”:
    A sweet plaintive song did I hear
    And I fancied that she was the singer.
    May emotions as pure as that song set astir
    Be the wont that the future shall bring her.
  
 
   A   
 
TO J. U. BROWN.
SPRINGFIELD, OCT 18, 1858 HON. J. U. BROWN.
MY DEAR SIR: — I do not perceive how I can express
myself more plainly than I have in the fore-going extracts.
In four of them I have expressly disclaimed all intention to
bring about social and political equality between the white
and black races and in all the rest I have done the same
thing by clear implication.
I have made it equally plain that I think the negro is
included in the word “men” used in the Declaration of
Independence.
I believe the declaration that “all men are created equal”
is the great fundamental principle upon which our free
institutions rest; that negro slavery is violative of that
principle; but that, by our frame of government, that
principle has not been made one of legal obligation; that by
our frame of government, States which have slavery are to
retain it, or surrender it at their own pleasure; and that all
others — individuals, free States and national Government
— are constitutionally bound to leave them alone about it.
I believe our Government was thus framed because of
the necessity springing from the actual presence of slavery,
when it was framed.
 That such necessity does not exist in the Territories when
slavery is not present.
In his Mendenhall speech Mr. Clay says: “Now as an
abstract principle there is no doubt of the truth of that
declaration (all men created equal), and it is desirable, in
the original construction of society, to keep it in view as a
great fundamental principle.”
Again, in the same speech Mr. Clay says: “If a state of
nature existed and we were about to lay the foundations of
society, no man would be more strongly opposed than I
should to incorporate the institution of slavery among its
elements.”
Exactly so. In our new free Territories, a state of nature
does exist. In them Congress lays the foundations of
society; and in laying those foundations, I say, with Mr.
Clay, it is desirable that the declaration of the equality of all
men shall be kept in view as a great fundamental principle,
and that Congress, which lays the foundations of society,
should, like Mr. Clay, be strongly opposed to the
incorporation of slavery and its elements.
But it does not follow that social and political equality
between whites and blacks must be incorporated because
slavery must not. The declaration does not so require.
Yours as ever,
A. LINCOLN
[Newspaper cuttings of Lincoln’s speeches at Peoria, in
1854, at Springﬁeld, Ottawa, Chicago, and Charleston, in
1858. They were pasted in a little book in which the above
letter was also written.]
  
 A.   
  
.
BLANDINSVILLE, Oct 26, 1858
A. SYMPSON, ESQ.
DEAR SIR: — Since parting with you this morning I
heard some things which make me believe that Edmunds
and Morrill will spend this week among the National
Democrats, trying to induce them to content themselves by
voting for Jake Davis, and then to vote for the Douglas
candidates for senator and representative. Have this
headed oﬀ, if you can. Call Wagley’s attention to it and have
him and the National Democrat for Rep. to counteract it as
far as they can.
Yours as ever, A. LINCOLN.
   
A 
 IA       I
  
   A
 
  
 
TO N. B. JUDD.
SPRINGFIELD, NOVEMBER 16, 1858 HON. N. B.
JUDD
DEAR SIR: — Yours of the 15th is just received. I wrote
you the same day. As to the pecuniary matter, I am willing
to pay according to my ability; but I am the poorest hand
living to get others to pay. I have been on expenses so long
without earning anything that I am absolutely without
money now for even household purposes. Still, if you can
put in two hundred and ﬁfty dollars for me toward
discharging the debt of the committee, I will allow it when
you and I settle the private matter between us. This, with
what I have already paid, and with an outstanding note of
mine, will exceed my subscription of ﬁve hundred dollars.
This, too, is exclusive of my ordinary expenses during the
campaign, all of which, being added to my loss of time and
business, bears pretty heavily upon one no better oﬀ in
[this] world’s goods than I; but as I had the post of honor, it
is not for me to be over nice. You are feeling badly,— “And
this too shall pass away,” never fear.
Yours as ever, A. LINCOLN.
  H   I
H  
   
 
TO H. ASBURY.
SPRINGFIELD, NOVEMBER 19, 1858.
HENRY ASBURY, Esq.
DEAR SIR: — Yours of the 13th was received some days
ago. The ﬁght must go on. The cause of civil liberty must
not be surrendered at the end of one or even one hundred
defeats. Douglas had the ingenuity to be supported in the
late contest both as the best means to break down and to
uphold the slave interest. No ingenuity can keep these
antagonistic elements in harmony long. Another explosion
will soon come.
Yours truly, A. LINCOLN.
   A I A I
  HA  
  A    
       A  
TO C. H. RAY.
SPRINGFIELD, NOV.20, 1858
DR. C. H. RAY
MY DEAR SIR: — I wish to preserve a set of the late
debates (if they may be called so), between Douglas and
myself. To enable me to do so, please get two copies of each
number of your paper containing the whole, and send them
to me by express; and I will pay you for the papers and for
your trouble. I wish the two sets in order to lay one away in
the [undecipherable word] and to put the other in a
scrapbook. Remember, if part of any debate is on both sides
of the sheet it will take two sets to make one scrap-book.
I believe, according to a letter of yours to Hatch, you are
“feeling like h-ll yet.” Quit that — you will soon feel better.
Another “blow up” is coming; and we shall have fun again.
Douglas managed to be supported both as the best
instrument to down and to uphold the slave power; but no
ingenuity can long keep the antagonism in harmony.
Yours as ever, A. LINCOLN
  
 H.  . 
HI 
  .
SPRINGFIELD, November 30, 1858
H. C. WHITNEY, ESQ.
MY DEAR SIR: — Being desirous of preserving in some
permanent form the late joint discussion between Douglas
and myself, ten days ago I wrote to Dr. Ray, requesting him
to forward to me by express two sets of the numbers of the
Tribune which contain the reports of those discussions. Up
to date I have no word from him on the subject. Will you, if
in your power, procure them and forward them to me by
express? If you will, I will pay all charges, and be greatly
obliged, to boot. Hoping to visit you before long, I remain
As ever your friend, A. LINCOLN.
  
 H. 
.  HA   .
SPRINGFIELD, Dec. 8, 1858.
H. D. SHARPE, Esq.
DEAR SIR: — Your very kind letter of Nov. 9th was duly
received. I do not know that you expected or desired an
answer; but glancing over the contents of yours again, I am
prompted to say that, while I desired the result of the late
canvass to have been diﬀerent, I still regard it as an
exceeding small matter. I think we have fairly entered upon
a durable struggle as to whether this nation is to ultimately
become all slave or all free, and though I fall early in the
contest, it is nothing if I shall have contributed, in the least
degree, to the ﬁnal rightful result.
Respectfully yours, A. LINCOLN.
  
 A.   
  
.
SPRINGFIELD, Dec.12, 1858.
ALE ANDER SYMPSON, ESQ.
MY DEAR SIR: — I expect the result of the election went
hard with you. So it did with me, too, perhaps not quite so
hard as you may have supposed. I have an abiding faith
that we shall beat them in the long run. Step by step the
objects of the leaders will become too plain for the people
to stand them. I write merely to let you know that I am
neither dead nor dying. Please give my respects to your
good family, and all inquiring friends.
Yours as ever, A. LINCOLN.
   A
  
    . 
    
  A
 A 
 
 .
December [?], 1858.
LEGISLATION AND ADJUDICATION must follow and conform
to the progress of society.
The progress of society now begins to produce cases of
the transfer for debts of the entire property of railroad
corporations; and to enable transferees to use and enjoy
the transferred property, legislation and adjudication begin
to be necessary.
Shall this class of legislation just now beginning with us
be general or special?
Section Ten of our Constitution re uires that it
should  e general
if possible. (Read the section.)
Special legislation always trenches upon the judicial
department; and in so far violates Section Two of the
Constitution. (Read it.)
Just reasoning — policy — is in favor of general
legislation — else the Legislature will be loaded down with
the investigation of smaller cases — a work which the
courts ought to perform, and can perform much more
 perfectly. How can the Legislature rightly decide the facts
between P. 
 B. and S.C.
It is said that under a general law, whenever a R. R. Co.
gets tired of its debts, it may transfer fraudulently to get
rid of them. So they may — so may individuals; and which
— the Legislature or the courts — is best suited to try the
question of fraud in either case?
It is said, if a purchaser have acquired legal rights, let
him not be robbed of them, but if he needs legislation let
him submit to just terms to obtain it.
Let him, say we, have general law in advance (guarded in
every possible way against fraud), so that, when he
acquires a legal right, he will have no occasion to wait for
additional legislation; and if he has practiced fraud let the
courts so decide.
 A   
A  
 I
I
    A  AHA
  I
 
 
.
THE 11TH SECTION of the Act of Congress, approved Feb.
11, 1805, prescribing rules for the subdivision of sections
of land within the United States system of surveys,
standing unrepealed, in my opinion, is binding on the
respective purchasers of diﬀerent parts of the same
section, and furnishes the true rule for surveyors in
establishing lines between them. That law, being in force at
the time each became a purchaser, becomes a condition of
the purchase.
And, by that law, I think the true rule for dividing into
quarters any interior section or sections, which is not
fractional, is to run straight lines through the section from
the opposite quarter section corners, ﬁxing the point where
such straight lines cross, or intersect each other, as the
middle or centre of the section.
Nearly, perhaps quite, all the original surveys are to
some extent erroneous, and in some of the sections, greatly
so. In each of the latter, it is obvious that a more equitable
mode of division than the above might be adopted; but as
error is inﬁnitely various perhaps no better single rules can
be prescribed.
At all events I think the above has been prescribed by the
competent authority.
 SPRINGFIELD, Jany. 6, 1859.
A. LINCOLN.
  
 
. 
. 
  AHA .
SPRINGFIELD, March 4, 1859.
M. W. DELAHAY, Esq.
MY DEAR SIR: Your second letter in relation to my being
with you at your Republican convention was duly received.
It is not at hand just now, but I have the impression from it
that the convention was to be at Leavenworth; but day
before yesterday a friend handed me a letter from Judge M.
F. Caraway, in which he also expresses a wish for me to
come, and he ﬁxes the place at Ossawatomie. This I believe
is oﬀ of the river, and will require more time and labor to
get to it. It will push me hard to get there without injury to
my own business; but I shall try to do it, though I am not
yet quite certain I shall succeed.
I should like to know before coming, that while some of
you wish me to come, there may not be others who would
quite as lief I would stay away. Write me again.
Yours as ever, A. LINCOLN.
  
 
. 
. 
  I .
SPRINGFIELD, March 28, 1859.
W. M. MORRIS, Esq.
DEAR SIR: — Your kind note inviting me to deliver a
lecture at Galesburg is received. I regret to say I cannot do
so now; I must stick to the courts awhile. I read a sort of
lecture to three diﬀerent audiences during the last month
and this; but I did so under circumstances which made it a
waste of no time whatever.
Yours very truly,
  
 H.  .  I     A
 
 H   .
SPRINGFIELD, ILLINOIS, April 6, 1859.
GENTLEMEN: — YOUR kind note inviting me to attend a
festival in Boston, on the 28th instant, in honor of the
birthday of Thomas Jeﬀerson, was duly received. My
engagements are such that I cannot attend.
Bearing in mind that about seventy years ago two great
political parties were ﬁrst formed in this country, that
Thomas Jeﬀerson was the head of one of them and Boston
the headquarters of the other, it is both curious and
interesting that those supposed to descend politically from
the party opposed to Jeﬀerson should now be celebrating
his birthday in their own original seat of empire, while
those claiming political descent from him have nearly
ceased to breathe his name everywhere.
Remembering, too, that the Jeﬀerson party was formed
upon its supposed superior devotion to the personal rights
of men, holding the rights of property to be secondary only,
and greatly inferior, and assuming that the so-called
Democracy of to-day are the Jeﬀerson, and their opponents
the anti-Jeﬀerson, party, it will be equally interesting to
note how completely the two have changed hands as to the
principle upon which they were originally supposed to be
divided. The Democracy of to-day hold the liberty of one
 man to be absolutely nothing, when in conﬂict with another
man’s right of property; Republicans, on the contrary, are
for both the man and the dollar, but in case of conﬂict the
man before the dollar.
I remember being once much amused at seeing two
partially intoxicated men engaged in a ﬁght with their
great-coats on, which ﬁght, after a long and rather
harmless contest, ended in each having fought himself out
of his own coat and into that of the other. If the two leading
parties of this day are really identical with the two in the
days of Jeﬀerson and Adams, they have performed the same
feat as the two drunken men.
But soberly, it is now no child’s play to save the
principles of Jeﬀerson from total overthrow in this nation.
One would state with great conﬁdence that he could
convince any sane child that the simpler propositions of
Euclid are true; but nevertheless he would fail, utterly, with
one who should deny the deﬁnitions and axioms. The
principles of Jeﬀerson are the deﬁnitions and axioms of free
society. And yet they are denied and evaded, with no small
show of success. One dashingly calls them “glittering
generalities.” Another bluntly calls them “self-evident lies.”
And others insidiously argue that they apply to “superior
races.” These expressions, diﬀering in form, are identical in
object and eﬀect — the supplanting the principles of free
government, and restoring those of classiﬁcation, caste,
and legitimacy. They would delight a convocation of
crowned heads plotting against the people. They are the
vanguard, the miners and sappers, of returning despotism.
 We must repulse them, or they will subjugate us. This is a
world of compensation; and he who would be no slave must
consent to have no slave. Those who deny freedom to
others deserve it not for themselves, and, under a just God,
cannot long retain it. All honor to Jeﬀerson to the man who,
in the concrete pressure of a struggle for national
independence by a single people, had the coolness,
forecast, 
and 
capacity 
to 
introduce 
into 
a 
mere
revolutionary document an abstract truth, applicable to all
men and all times, and so to embalm it there that to-day
and in all coming days it shall be a rebuke and a stumbling-
block to the very harbingers of reappearing tyranny and
oppression.
Your obedient servant,
A. LINCOLN.
  
  .  A
I I
 .
SPRINGFIELD, May 17, 1859.
DR. THEODORE CANISIUS.
DEAR SIR: — Your note asking, in behalf of yourself and
other German citizens, whether I am for or against the
constitutional provision in regard to naturalized citizens,
lately adopted by Massachusetts, and whether I am for or
against a fusion of the Republicans and other opposition
elements for the canvass of 1860, is received.
Massachusetts is a sovereign and independent State; and
it is no privilege of mine to scold her for what she does.
Still, if from what she has done an inference is sought to be
drawn as to what I would do, I may without impropriety
speak out. I say, then, that, as I understand the
Massachusetts provision, I am against its adoption in
Illinois, or in any other place where I have a right to oppose
it. Understanding the spirit of our institutions to aim at the
elevation of men, I am opposed to whatever tends to
degrade 
them. 
I 
have 
some 
little 
notoriety 
for
commiserating the oppressed negro; and I should be
strangely inconsistent if I could favor any project for
curtailing the existing rights of white men, even though
born in diﬀerent lands, and speaking diﬀerent languages
from myself. As to the matter of fusion, I am for it if it can
 be had on Republican grounds; and I am not for it on any
other terms. A fusion on any other terms would be as
foolish as unprincipled. It would lose the whole North,
while the common enemy would still carry the whole South.
The question of men is a diﬀerent one. There are good,
patriotic men and able statesmen in the South whom I
would cheerfully support, if they would now place
themselves on Republican ground, but I am against letting
down the Republican standard a hairsbreadth.
I have written this hastily, but I believe it answers your
questions substantially.
Yours truly, A. LINCOLN.
  
  H  
   
   A
I 
   A
    A 
  
   H    A   
  I  I
I .
GENTLEMEN: 
IN REPLY TO your inquiry; requesting our written opinion as
to what your duty requires you to do in executing the latter
clause of the Seventh Section of “An Act in relation to the
payment of the principal and interest of the State debt,”
approved Feb’y 22, 1859, we reply that said last clause of
said section is certainly indeﬁnite, general, and ambiguous
in its description of the bonds to be issued by you; giving no
time at which the bonds are to be made payable, no place
at which either principal or interest are to be paid, and no
rate of interest which the bonds are to bear; nor any other
description except that they are to be coupon bonds, which
in commercial usage means interest-paying bonds with
obligations or orders attached to them for the payment of
annual or semiannual interest; there is we suppose no
diﬀiculty in ascertaining, if this act stood alone, what ought
to be the construction of the terms “coupon bonds” and
that it, would mean bonds bearing interest from the time of
issuing the same. And under this act considered by itself
the creditors would have a right to require such bonds. But
your inquiry in regard to a class of bonds on which no
interest is to be paid or shall begin to run until January 1,
1860, is whether the Act of February 18, 1857, would not
 authorize you to refuse to give bonds with any coupons
attached payable before the ﬁrst day of July, 1860. We have
very maturely considered this question and have arrived at
the conclusion that you have a right to use such measures
as will secure the State against the loss of six months’
interest on these bonds by the indeﬁniteness of the Act of
1859. While it cannot be denied that the letter of the laws
favor the construction claimed by some of the creditors that
interest-bearing bonds were required to be issued to them,
inasmuch as the restriction that no interest is to run on
said bonds until 1st January, 1860, relates solely to the
bonds issued under the Act of 1857. And the Act of 1859
directing you to issue new bonds does not contain this
restriction, but directs you to issue coupon bonds.
Nevertheless the very indeﬁniteness and generality of the
Act of 1859, giving no rate of interest, no time due, no
place of payment, no postponement of the time when
interest 
commences, 
necessarily 
implies 
that 
the
Legislature intended to invest you with a discretion to
impose such terms and restrictions as would protect the
interest of the State; and we think you have a right and that
it is your duty to see that the State Bonds are so issued that
the State shall not lose six months’ interest. Two plans
present themselves either of which will secure the State.
1st. If in literal compliance with the law you issue bonds
bearing interest from 1st July, 1859, you may deduct from
the bonds presented three thousand from every  100,000
of bonds and issue  97,000 of coupon bonds; by this plan
 3000 out of  100,000 of principal would be extinguished
 in consideration of paying  2910 interest on the ﬁrst of
January, 1860 — and the interest on the  3000 would
forever cease; this would be no doubt most advantageous
to the State. But if the Auditor will not consent to this,
then, 2nd. Cut oﬀ of each bond all the coupons payable
before 1st July, 1860.
One of these plans would undoubtedly have been
prescribed by the Legislature if its attention had been
directed to this question.
May 28, 1859.
   I
 
 
      A   
TO H. C. WHITNEY.
SPRINGFIELD, DECEMBER 25, 1858.
H. C. WHITNEY, ESQ.
MY DEAR SIR: — I have just received yours of the 23rd
inquiring whether I received the newspapers you sent me
by express. I did receive them, and am very much obliged.
There is some probability that my scrap-book will be
reprinted, and if it shall, I will save you a copy.
Your friend as ever, A. LINCOLN.
