    
TO WILLIAM H. SEWARD.
(Private.) SPRINGFIELD. ILL., January 3, 1861.
HON. W. H. SEWARD.
DEAR SIR: — Yours without signature was received last
night. I have been considering your suggestions as to my
reaching Washington somewhat earlier than is usual. It
seems to me the inauguration is not the most dangerous
point for us. Our adversaries have us now clearly at
disadvantage on the second Wednesday of February, when
the votes should be oﬀicially counted. If the two houses
refuse to meet at all, or meet without a quorum of each,
where shall we be? I do not think that this counting is
constitutionally essential to the election, but how are we to
proceed in the absence of it? In view of this, I think it is
best for me not to attempt appearing in Washington till the
result of that ceremony is known.
It certainly would be of some advantage if you could
know who are to be at the heads of the War and Navy
departments, but until I can ascertain deﬁnitely whether I
can get any suitable men from the South, and who, and
how many, I can not well decide. As yet, I have no word
from Mr. Gilmer in answer to my request for an interview
 with him. I look for something on the subject, through you,
before long.
Yours very truly, A. LINCOLN.
  
 
. H.   
A 
.
(Private.)
SPRINGFIELD, ILL., JANUARY 12, 1861
HON. W. H. SEWARD.
MY DEAR SIR: — Yours of the 8th received. I still hope
Mr. Gilmer will, on a fair understanding with us, consent to
take a place in the Cabinet. The preference for him over
Mr. Hunt or Mr. Gentry is that, up to date — he has a living
position in the South, while they have not. He is only better
than Winter Davis in that he is farther south. I fear, if we
could get, we could not safely take more than one such man
— that is, not more than one who opposed us in the election
— the danger being to lose the conﬁdence of our own
friends. Your selection for the State Department having
become public, I am happy to ﬁnd scarcely any objection to
it. I shall have trouble with every other Northern Cabinet
appointment — so much so that I shall have to defer them
as long as possible to avoid being teased into insanity, to
make changes.
Your obedient servant, A. LINCOLN
  
  . 
. 
 
A
SPRINGFIELD, ILL. FEB. 4, 1861
SIR: — YOUR letter of the 30th ult. inviting me, on behalf
of the Legislature of New York, to pass through that State
on my way to Washington, and tendering me the
hospitalities of her authorities and people, has been duly
received. With the feelings of deep gratitude to you and
them for this testimonial of regard and esteem I beg you to
notify them that I accept the invitation so kindly tendered.
Your obedient servant, A. LINCOLN
P.S. — Please let the ceremonies be only such as to take
the least time possible. A. L.
  A  
A
    AI
TO THURLOW WEED
SPRINGFIELD, ILL., FEBRUARY 4, 1861
DEAR SIR: — I have both your letter to myself and that
to Judge Davis, in relation to a certain gentleman in your
State claiming to dispense patronage in my name, and also
to be authorized to use my name to advance the chances of
Mr. Greeley for an election to the United States Senate.
It is very strange that such things should be said by any
one. The gentleman you mention did speak to me of Mr.
Greeley in connection with the senatorial election, and I
replied in terms of kindness toward Mr. Greeley, which I
really feel, but always with an expressed protest that my
name must not be used in the senatorial election in favor of
or against any one. Any other representation of me is a
misrepresentation.
As to the matter of dispensing patronage, it perhaps will
surprise you to learn that I have information that you claim
to have my authority to arrange that matter in New York. I
do not believe you have so claimed; but still so some men
say. On that subject you know all I have said to you is
“justice to all,” and I have said nothing more particular to
any one. I say this to reassure you that I have not changed
my position.
 In the hope, however, that you will not use my name in
the matter, I am, Yours truly, A. LINCOLN.
  A  
    A
     A     I
 I  
  I  I
I 
FEBRUARY 11, 1861
MY FRIENDS: — One who has never been placed in a
like position cannot understand my feelings at this hour,
nor the oppressive sadness I feel at this parting. For more
than twenty-ﬁve years I have lived among you, and during
all that time I have received nothing but kindness at your
hands. Here the most cherished ties of earth were
assumed. Here my children were born, and here one of
them lies buried. To you, my friends, I owe all that I have,
all that I am. All the strange checkered past seems to
crowd upon my mind. To-day I leave you. I go to assume a
task more diﬀicult than that which devolved upon General
Washington. Unless the great God who assisted him shall
be with and aid me I cannot prevail; but if the same
almighty arm that directed and protected him shall guide
and support me I shall not fail; I shall succeed. Let us pray
that the God of our fathers may not forsake us now. To Him
I commend you all. Permit me to ask that with equal
sincerity and faith you will all invoke His wisdom and
goodness for me.
With these words I must leave you; for how long I know
not. Friends, one and all, I must now wish you an
aﬀectionate farewell.
   
A    A   
 
  I  I
I        A     
   
I AM LEAVING you on an errand of national importance,
attended, as you are aware, with considerable diﬀiculties.
Let us believe, as some poet has expressed it, “Behind the
cloud the sun is still shining.” I bid you an aﬀectionate
farewell.
        
 A
     
  
   
 
I
IA
A 
 I 
INDIANA, FEBRUARY 11, 1861
GOVERNOR MORTON AND FELLOW CITIZENS OF
THE STATE OF INDIANA:
Most heartily do I thank you for this magniﬁcent
reception, and while I cannot take to myself any share of
the compliment thus paid, more than that which pertains to
a mere instrument, an accidental instrument, perhaps I
should say, of a great cause, I yet must look upon it as a
most magniﬁcent reception, and as such most heartily do
thank you for it. You have been pleased to address yourself
to me chieﬂy in behalf of this glorious Union in which we
live, in all of which you have my hearty sympathy, and, as
far as may be within my power, will have, one and
inseparable, my hearty consideration. While I do not
expect, upon this occasion, or until I get to Washington, to
attempt any lengthy speech, I will only say to the salvation
of the Union there needs but one single thing — the hearts
of a people like yours.
The people — when they rise in mass in behalf of the
Union and the liberties of their country, truly may it be
said, “The gates of hell cannot prevail against them.” In all
trying positions in which I shall be placed — and, doubtless,
 I shall be placed in many such — my reliance will be placed
upon you and the people of the United States; and I wish
you to remember, now and forever, that it is your business,
and not mine; that if the union of these States and the
liberties of this people shall be lost, it is but little to any
one man of ﬁfty-two years of age, but a great deal to the
thirty millions of people who inhabit these United States,
and to their posterity in all coming time. It is your business
to rise up and preserve the Union and liberty for
yourselves, and not for me.
I desire they should be constitutionally performed. I, as
already intimated, am but an accidental instrument,
temporary, and to serve but for a limited time; and I appeal
to you again to constantly bear in mind that with you, and
not with politicians, not with Presidents, not with oﬀice-
seekers, but with you is the question, Shall the Union and
shall the liberties of this country be preserved to the latest
generations?
 A
      
  H    
I  A 
   
  I
IA
A  A
I
IA
A 
 I 
FEBRUARY 12, 1861
FELLOW-CITIZENS OF THE STATE OF INDIANA: — I
am here to thank you much for this magniﬁcent welcome,
and still more for the generous support given by your State
to that political cause which I think is the true and just
cause of the whole country and the whole world.
Solomon says there is “a time to keep silence,” and when
men wrangle by the mouth with no certainty that they
mean the same thing while using the same word, it perhaps
were as well if they would keep silence.
The words “coercion” and “invasion” are much used in
these days, and often with some temper and hot blood. Let
us make sure, if we can, the meaning of those who use
them. Let us get the exact deﬁnitions of these words, not
from dictionaries, but from the men themselves, who
certainly deprecate the things they would represent by the
use of the words.
What, then, is coercion? What is invasion? Would the
marching of an army into South Carolina, without the
consent of her people, and with hostile intent toward them,
be invasion? I certainly think it would, and it would be
coercion also, if the South Carolinians were forced to
 submit. But if the United States should merely hold and
retake its own forts and other property, and collect the
duties on foreign importations, or even withhold the mails
from places where they were habitually violated, would any
or all of these things be invasion or coercion? Do our
professed lovers of the Union, who spitefully resolve that
they will resist coercion and invasion, understand that such
things as these, on the part of the United States, would be
coercion or invasion of a State? If so, their idea of means to
preserve the object of their great aﬀection would seem to
be exceedingly thin and airy. If sick, the little pills of the
homoeopathist would be much too large for it to swallow. In
their view, the Union, as a family relation, would seem to be
no regular marriage, but rather a sort of “free-love”
arrangement, to be maintained on passional attraction.
By the way, in what consists the special sacredness of a
State? I speak not of the position assigned to a State in the
Union by the Constitution, for that is a bond we all
recognize. That position, however, a State cannot carry out
of the Union with it. I speak of that assumed primary right
of a State to rule all which is less than itself, and to ruin all
which is larger than itself. If a State and a county, in a
given case, should be equal in number of inhabitants, in
what, as a matter of principle, is the State better than the
county? Would an exchange of name be an exchange of
rights? Upon what principle, upon what rightful principle,
may a State, being no more than one ﬁftieth part of the
nation in soil and population, break up the nation, and then
coerce a proportionably large subdivision of itself in the
 most arbitrary way? What mysterious right to play tyrant is
conferred on a district of country, with its people, by merely
calling it a State? Fellow-citizens, I am not asserting
anything. I am merely asking questions for you to consider.
And now allow me to bid you farewell.
 I
  
 I
   
A 
  H   
 H
ADDRESS TO THE MAYOR AND CITIZENS OF
CINCINNATI, OHIO, FEBRUARY 12, 1861
Mr. MAYOR, AND GENTLEMEN: — Twenty-four hours
ago, at the capital of Indiana, I said to myself, “I have never
seen so many people assembled together in winter
weather.” I am no longer able to say that. But it is what
might reasonably have been expected — that this great city
of Cincinnati would thus acquit herself on such an occasion.
My friends, I am entirely overwhelmed by the magniﬁcence
of the reception which has been given, I will not say to me,
but to the President-elect of the United States of America.
Most heartily do I thank you, one and all, for it.
I have spoken but once before this in Cincinnati. That
was a year previous to the late Presidential election. On
that occasion, in a playful manner, but with sincere words, I
addressed much of what I said to the Kentuckians. I gave
my opinion that we, as Republicans, would ultimately beat
them as Democrats, but that they could postpone that
result longer by nominating Senator Douglas for the
Presidency than they could by any other way. They did not,
in any true sense of the word, nominate Mr. Douglas, and
the result has come certainly as soon as ever I expected. I
also told them how I expected they would be treated after
 they should have been beaten, and I now wish to call their
attention to what I then said upon that subject. I then said:
“When we do as we say, beat you, you perhaps want to
know what we will do with you. I will tell you, as far as I am
authorized to speak for the Opposition, what we mean to do
with you. We mean to treat you, as near as we possibly can,
as Washington, Jeﬀerson, and Madison treated you. We
mean to leave you alone, and in no way to interfere with
your institutions; to abide by all and every compromise of
the Constitution, and, in a word, coming back to the
original proposition, to treat you so far as degenerate men,
if we have degenerated, may, according to the example of
those noble fathers, Washington, Jeﬀerson, and Madison.
“We mean to remember that you are as good as we; that
there is no diﬀerence between us other than the diﬀerence
of circumstances. We mean to recognize and bear in mind
always that you have as good hearts in your bosoms as
other people, or as we claim to have, and treat you
accordingly.”
Fellow-citizens of Kentucky — friends and brethren, may
I call you in my new position? — I see no occasion and feel
no inclination to retract a word of this. If it shall not be
made good, be assured the fault shall not be mine.
 A
      
  H  
  
A
   
  
 I
 I
A I  
HI
FEBRUARY 12, 1861
MR. CHAIRMAN: — I thank you and those whom you
represent for the compliment you have paid me by
tendering me this address. In so far as there is an allusion
to our present national diﬀiculties, which expresses, as you
have said, the views of the gentlemen present, I shall have
to beg pardon for not entering fully upon the questions
which the address you have now read suggests.
I deem it my duty — a duty which I owe to my
constituents — to you, gentlemen, that I should wait until
the last moment for a development of the present national
diﬀiculties before I express myself decidedly as to what
course I shall pursue. I hope, then, not to be false to
anything that you have expected of me.
I agree with you, Mr. Chairman, that the working men
are the basis of all governments, for the plain reason that
they are all the more numerous, and as you added that
those were the sentiments of the gentlemen present,
representing not only the working class, but citizens of
other callings than those of the mechanic, I am happy to
concur with you in these sentiments, not only of the native-
 born citizens, but also of the Germans and foreigners from
other countries.
Mr. Chairman, I hold that while man exists it is his duty
to improve not only his own condition, but to assist in
ameliorating the condition of mankind; and therefore,
without entering upon the details of the question, I will
simply say that I am for those means which will give the
greatest good to the greatest number.
In regard to the Homestead law, I have to say that, in so
far as the government lands can be disposed of, I am in
favor of cutting up the wild lands into parcels, so that every
poor man may have a home.
In regard to the Germans and foreigners, I esteem them
no better than other people, nor any worse. It is not my
nature, when I see a people borne down by the weight of
their shackles — the oppression of tyranny — to make their
life more bitter by heaping upon them greater burdens; but
rather would I do all in my power to raise the yoke than to
add anything that would tend to crush them.
Inasmuch as our own country is extensive and new, and
the countries of Europe are densely populated, if there are
any abroad who desire to make this the land of their
adoption, it is not in my heart to throw aught in their way
to prevent them from coming to the United States.
Mr. Chairman and gentlemen, I will bid you an
aﬀectionate farewell.
 A
      
  H    
I  A 
   
  
HI
 A
 
 
 
FEBRUARY 13, 1861
MR. 
PRESIDENT 
AND 
Mr. 
SPEAKER, 
AND
GENTLEMEN OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF OHIO: —
It is true, as has been said by the president of the Senate,
that very great responsibility rests upon me in the position
to which the votes of the American people have called me. I
am deeply sensible of that weighty responsibility. I cannot
but know what you all know, that without a name, perhaps
without a reason why I should have a name, there has
fallen upon me a task such as did not rest even upon the
Father of his Country; and so feeling, I can turn and look
for that support without which it will be impossible for me
to perform that great task. I turn, then, and look to the
American people and to that God who has never forsaken
them. Allusion has been made to the interest felt in relation
to the policy of the new administration. In this I have
received from some a degree of credit for having kept
silence, and from others some deprecation. I still think that
I was right.
In the varying and repeatedly shifting scenes of the
present, and without a precedent which could enable me to
judge by the past, it has seemed ﬁtting that before
 speaking upon the diﬀiculties of the country I should have
gained a view of the whole ﬁeld, being at liberty to modify
and change the course of policy as future events may make
a change necessary.
I have not maintained silence from any want of real
anxiety. It is a good thing that there is no more than
anxiety, for there is nothing going wrong. It is a consoling
circumstance that when we look out there is nothing that
really hurts anybody. We entertain diﬀerent views upon
political questions, but nobody is suﬀering anything. This is
a most consoling circumstance, and from it we may
conclude that all we want is time, patience, and a reliance
on that God who has never forsaken this people.
Fellow-citizens, what I have said I have said altogether
extemporaneously, and I will now come to a close.
 A
     A     
  
 I     
HI
FEBRUARY 14, 1861
I FEAR THAT the great conﬁdence placed in my ability is
unfounded. Indeed, I am sure it is. Encompassed by vast
diﬀiculties as I am, nothing shall be wanting on my part, if
sustained by God and the American people. I believe the
devotion to the Constitution is equally great on both sides
of the river. It is only the diﬀerent understanding of that
instrument that causes diﬀiculty. The only dispute on both
sides is, “What are their rights?” If the majority should not
rule, who would be the judge? Where is such a judge to be
found? We should all be bound by the majority of the
American people; if not, then the minority must control.
Would that be right? Would it be just or generous?
Assuredly not. I reiterate that the majority should rule. If I
adopt a wrong policy, the opportunity for condemnation will
occur in four years’ time. Then I can be turned out, and a
better man with better views put in my place.
 A
     A   I    
 
H    
    A
IA
FEBRUARY 15, 1861
I MOST CORDIALLY thank his Honor Mayor Wilson, and the
citizens of Pittsburg generally, for their ﬂattering reception.
I am the more grateful because I know that it is not given
to me alone, but to the cause I represent, which clearly
proves to me their good-will, and that sincere feeling is at
the bottom of it. And here I may remark that in every short
address I have made to the people, in every crowd through
which I have passed of late, some allusion has been made
to the present distracted condition of the country. It is
natural to expect that I should say something on this
subject; but to touch upon it at all would involve an
elaborate discussion of a great many questions and
circumstances, requiring more time than I can at present
command, and would, perhaps, unnecessarily commit me
upon 
matters 
which 
have 
not 
yet 
fully 
developed
themselves. 
The 
condition 
of 
the 
country 
is 
an
extraordinary one, and ﬁlls the mind of every patriot with
anxiety. It is my intention to give this subject all the
consideration I possibly can before specially deciding in
regard to it, so that when I do speak it may be as nearly
right as possible. When I do speak I hope I may say nothing
in opposition to the spirit of the Constitution, contrary to
 the integrity of the Union, or which will prove inimical to
the liberties of the people, or to the peace of the whole
country. And furthermore, when the time arrives for me to
speak on this great subject, I hope I may say nothing to
disappoint the people generally throughout the country,
especially if the expectation has been based upon anything
which I may have heretofore said. Notwithstanding the
troubles across the river [the speaker pointing southwardly
across the Monongahela, and smiling], there is no crisis but
an artiﬁcial one. What is there now to warrant the
condition of aﬀairs presented by our friends over the river?
Take even their own view of the questions involved, and
there is nothing to justify the course they are pursuing. I
repeat, then, there is no crisis, excepting such a one as may
be gotten up at any time by turbulent men aided by
designing politicians, My advice to them, under such
circumstances, is to keep cool. If the great American people
only keep their temper on both sides of the line, the
troubles will come to an end, and the question which now
distracts the country will be settled, just as surely as all
other diﬀiculties of a like character which have originated
in this government have been adjusted. Let the people on
both sides keep their self-possession, and just as other
clouds have cleared away in due time, so will this great
nation continue to prosper as heretofore. But, fellow-
citizens, I have spoken longer on this subject than I
intended at the outset.
It is often said that the tariﬀ is the specialty of
Pennsylvania. Assuming that direct taxation is not to be
 adopted, the tariﬀ question must be as durable as the
government itself. It is a question of national housekeeping.
It is to the government what replenishing the meal-tub is to
the family. Every varying circumstances will require
frequent modiﬁcations as to the amount needed and the
sources of supply. So far there is little diﬀerence of opinion
among the people. It is as to whether, and how far, duties
on imports shall be adjusted to favor home production in
the home market, that controversy begins. One party
insists that such adjustment oppresses one class for the
advantage of another; while the other party argues that,
with all its incidents, in the long run all classes are
beneﬁted. In the Chicago platform there is a plank upon
this subject which should be a general law to the incoming
administration. We should do neither more nor less than we
gave the people reason to believe we would when they gave
us their votes. Permit me, fellow-citizens, to read the tariﬀ
plank of the Chicago platform, or rather have it read in
your hearing by one who has younger eyes.
[Mr. Lincoln’s private secretary then read Section 12 of
the Chicago platform, as follows:]
“That, while providing revenue for the support of the
General Government by duties upon imports, sound policy
requires such an adjustment of these imposts as will
encourage the development of the industrial interest of the
whole country; and we commend that policy of national
exchanges which secures to working-men liberal wages, to
agriculture 
remunerating 
prices, 
to 
mechanics 
and
manufacturers adequate return for their skill, labor, and
 enterprise, and to the nation commercial prosperity and
independence.”
As with all general propositions, doubtless, there will be
shades of diﬀerence in construing this. I have by no means
a 
thoroughly 
matured 
judgment 
upon 
this 
subject,
especially as to details; some general ideas are about all. I
have long thought it would be to our advantage to produce
any necessary article at home which can be made of as
good quality and with as little labor at home as abroad, at
least by the diﬀerence of the carrying from abroad. In such
case the carrying is demonstrably a dead loss of labor. For
instance, labor being the true standard of value, is it not
plain that if equal labor get a bar of railroad iron out of a
mine in England and another out of a mine in Pennsylvania,
each can be laid down in a track at home cheaper than they
could exchange countries, at least by the carriage? If there
be a present cause why one can be both made and carried
cheaper in money price than the other can be made without
carrying, that cause is an unnatural and injurious one, and
ought gradually, if not rapidly, to be removed. The condition
of the treasury at this time would seem to render an early
revision of the tariﬀ indispensable. The Morrill [tariﬀ] bill,
now pending before Congress, may or may not become a
law. I am not posted as to its particular provisions, but if
they are generally satisfactory, and the bill shall now pass,
there will be an end for the present. If, however, it shall not
pass, I suppose the whole subject will be one of the most
pressing and important for the next Congress. By the
Constitution, the executive may recommend measures
 which he may think proper, and he may veto those he
thinks improper, and it is supposed that he may add to
these certain indirect inﬂuences to aﬀect the action of
Congress. My political education strongly inclines me
against a very free use of any of these means by the
executive to control the legislation of the country. As a rule,
I think it better that Congress should originate as well as
perfect its measures without external bias. I therefore
would rather recommend to every gentleman who knows he
is to be a member of the next Congress to take an enlarged
view, and post himself thoroughly, so as to contribute his
part to such an adjustment of the tariﬀ as shall produce a
suﬀicient revenue, and in its other bearings, so far as
possible, be just and equal to all sections of the country and
classes of the people.
 A
     A        A
  
HI
FEBRUARY 15, 1861
MR. 
CHAIRMAN 
AND 
FELLOW-CITIZENS 
OF
CLEVELAND: — We have been marching about two miles
through snow, rain, and deep mud. The large numbers that
have turned out under these circumstances testify that you
are in earnest about something or other. But do I think so
meanly of you as to suppose that that earnestness is about
me personally? I would be doing you an injustice to
suppose you did. You have assembled to testify your respect
for the Union, the Constitution, and the laws; and here let
me say that it is with you, the people, to advance the great
cause of the Union and the Constitution, and not with any
one man. It rests with you alone. This fact is strongly
impressed upon my mind at present. In a community like
this, whose appearance testiﬁes to their intelligence, I am
convinced that the cause of liberty and the Union can never
be in danger. Frequent allusion is made to the excitement
at present existing in our national politics, and it is as well
that I should also allude to it here. I think that there is no
occasion for any excitement. ‘The crisis, as it is called, is
altogether an artiﬁcial crisis. In all parts of the nation there
are diﬀerences of opinion on politics. There are diﬀerences
of opinion even here. You did not all vote for the person
 who now addresses you. What is happening now will not
hurt those who are farther away from here. Have they not
all their rights now as they ever have had? Do they not
have their fugitive slaves returned now as ever? Have they
not the same Constitution that they have lived under for
seventy-odd years? Have they not a position as citizens of
this common country, and have we any power to change
that position? What, then, is the matter with them? Why all
this excitement? Why all these complaints?
As I said before, this crisis is all artiﬁcial! It has no
foundation in facts. It is not argued up, as the saying is, and
cannot, therefore, be argued down. Let it alone and it will
go down of itself.
[Mr. Lincoln then said that they must be content with a
few words from him, as he was tired, etc. Having been
given to understand that the crowd was not all Republican,
but consisted of men of all parties, he continued:]
This is as it should be. If Judge Douglas had been elected
and had been here on his way to Washington, as I am to-
night, the Republicans should have joined his supporters in
welcoming him, just as his friends have joined with mine
tonight. If all do not join now to save the good old ship of
the Union this voyage, nobody will have a chance to pilot
her on another voyage.
 A
     A   
  A 
  
 
  
  
FEBRUARY 16, 1861
MR. MAYOR AND FELLOW-CITIZENS OF BUFFALO AND
THE STATE OF NEW YORK: — I am here to thank you
brieﬂy for this grand reception given to me, not personally,
but as the representative of our great and beloved country.
Your worthy mayor has been pleased to mention, in his
address to me, the fortunate and agreeable journey which I
have had from home, on my rather circuitous route to the
Federal capital. I am very happy that he was enabled in
truth to congratulate myself and company on that fact. It is
true we have had nothing thus far to mar the pleasure of
the trip. We have not been met alone by those who assisted
in giving the election to me — I say not alone by them, but
by the whole population of the country through which we
have passed. This is as it should be. Had the election fallen
to any other of the distinguished candidates instead of
myself, under the peculiar circumstances, to say the least,
it would have been proper for all citizens to have greeted
him as you now greet me. It is an evidence of the devotion
of the whole people to the Constitution, the Union, and the
perpetuity of the liberties of this country. I am unwilling on
any occasion that I should be so meanly thought of as to
have it supposed for a moment that these demonstrations
 are tendered to me personally. They are tendered to the
country, to the institutions of the country, and to the
perpetuity of the liberties of the country, for which these
institutions were made and created.
Your worthy mayor has thought ﬁt to express the hope
that I may be able to relieve the country from the present,
or, I should say, the threatened diﬀiculties. I am sure I
bring a heart true to the work. For the ability to perform it,
I must trust in that Supreme Being who has never forsaken
this favored land, through the instrumentality of this great
and intelligent people. Without that assistance I shall surely
fail; with it, I cannot fail. When we speak of threatened
diﬀiculties to the Country, it is natural that it should be
expected that something should be said by myself with
regard 
to 
particular 
measures. 
Upon 
more 
mature
reﬂection, however, others will agree with me that, when it
is considered that these diﬀiculties are without precedent,
and have never been acted upon by any individual situated
as I am, it is most proper I should wait and see the
developments, and get all the light possible, so that when I
do speak authoritatively, I may be as near right as possible.
When I shall speak authoritatively, I hope to say nothing
inconsistent with the Constitution, the Union, the rights of
all the States, of each State, and of each section of the
country, and not to disappoint the reasonable expectations
of those who have conﬁded to me their votes. In this
connection allow me to say that you, as a portion of the
great American people, need only to maintain your
composure, stand up to your sober convictions of right, to
 your obligations to the Constitution, and act in accordance
with those sober convictions, and the clouds now on the
horizon will be dispelled, and we shall have a bright and
glorious future; and when this generation has passed away,
tens of thousands will inhabit this country where only
thousands inhabit it now. I do not propose to address you at
length; I have no voice for it. Allow me again to thank you
for this magniﬁcent reception, and bid you farewell.
 A
     A   
 H       
 
  
  
FEBRUARY 18, 1861
I CONFESS MYSELF, after having seen many large audiences
since leaving home, overwhelmed with this vast number of
faces at this hour of the morning. I am not vain enough to
believe that you are here from any wish to see me as an
individual, but because I am for the time being the
representative of the American people. I could not, if I
would, address you at any length. I have not the strength,
even if I had the time, for a speech at each of these many
interviews that are aﬀorded me on my way to Washington. I
appear merely to see you, and to let you see me, and to bid
you farewell. I hope it will be understood that it is from no
disinclination to oblige anybody that I do not address you at
greater length.
 A
     A     A 
    
 
  
  
FEBRUARY 18, 1861.
LADIES AND GENTLEMEN: — I See you have erected a
very ﬁne and handsome platform here for me, and I
presume you expected me to speak from it. If I should go
upon it, you would imagine that I was about to deliver you a
much longer speech than I am. I wish you to understand
that I mean no discourtesy to you by thus declining. I
intend discourtesy to no one. But I wish you to understand
that, though I am unwilling to go upon this platform, you
are not at liberty to draw inferences concerning any other
platform with which my name has been or is connected. I
wish you long life and prosperity individually, and pray that
with the perpetuity of those institutions under which we
have all so long lived and prospered, our happiness may be
secured, our future made brilliant, and the glorious destiny
of our country established forever. I bid you a kind farewell.
 A
     A  
 I A  
 
  
  
FEBRUARY 18, 1860
LADIES AND GENTLEMEN: — I have no speech to
make to you; and no time to speak in. I appear before you
that I may see you, and that you may see me; and I am
willing to admit that so far as the ladies are concerned I
have the best of the bargain, though I wish it to be
understood that I do not make the same acknowledgment
concerning the men.
        
  H  
A 
  
  A  A
   
 
  
 
FEBRUARY 18, 1861.
MR. MAYOR: — I can hardly appropriate to myself the
ﬂattering terms in which you communicate the tender of
this reception, as personal to myself. I most gratefully
accept the hospitalities tendered to me, and will not detain
you or the audience with any extended remarks at this
time. I presume that in the two or three courses through
which I shall have to go, I shall have to repeat somewhat,
and I will therefore only express to you my thanks for this
kind reception.
        
 
   
  
 
A
 
  
 
  
  
A  A  A
 
FEBRUARY 18, 1861.
GOVERNOR MORGAN: — I was pleased to receive an
invitation to visit the capital of the great Empire State of
this nation while on my way to the Federal capital. I now
thank you, Mr. Governor, and you, the people of the capital
of the State of New York, for this most hearty and
magniﬁcent welcome. If I am not at fault, the great Empire
State at this time contains a larger population than did the
whole of the United States of America at the time they
achieved their national independence, and I was proud —
to be invited to visit its capital, to meet its citizens, as I now
have the honor to do. I am notiﬁed by your governor that
this reception is tendered by citizens without distinction of
party. Because of this I accept it the more gladly. In this
country, and in any country where freedom of thought is
tolerated, citizens attach themselves to political parties. It
is but an ordinary degree of charity to attribute this act to
the supposition that, in thus attaching themselves to the
various parties, each man in his own judgment supposes he
thereby best advances the interests of the whole country.
And when an election is past it is altogether beﬁtting a free
people, as I suppose, that, until the next election, they
 should be one people. The reception you have extended me
to-day is not given to me personally, — it should not be so,
— but as the representative, for the time being, of the
majority of the nation. If the election had fallen to any of
the more distinguished citizens who received the support of
the people, this same honor should have greeted him that
greets me this day, in testimony of the universal,
unanimous 
devotion 
of 
the 
whole 
people 
to 
the
Constitution, the Union, and to the perpetual liberties of
succeeding generations in this country.
I have neither the voice nor the strength to address you
at any greater length. I beg you will therefore accept my
most grateful thanks for this manifest devotion — not to
me, but the institutions of this great and glorious country.
 A
      
  H    
I  A 
   
  
 
  
  
A  A  A
 
FEBRUARY 18, 1861.
MR. PRESIDENT AND GENTLEMEN OF THE GENERAL
ASSEMBLY OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK: — It is with
feelings of great diﬀidence, and, I may say, with feelings of
awe, perhaps greater than I have recently experienced,
that I meet you here in this place. The history of this great
State, the renown of those great men who have stood here,
and have spoken here, and have been heard here, all crowd
around my fancy, and incline me to shrink from any attempt
to address you. Yet I have some conﬁdence given me by the
generous manner in which you have invited me, and by the
still more generous manner in which you have received me,
to speak further. You have invited and received me without
distinction of party. I cannot for a moment suppose that this
has been done in any considerable degree with reference to
my personal services, but that it is done in so far as I am
regarded, at this time, as the representative of the majesty
of this great nation. I doubt not this is the truth, and the
whole truth of the case, and this is as it should be. It is
much more gratifying to me that this reception has been
given to me as the elected representative of a free people,
 than it could possibly be if tendered merely as an evidence
of devotion to me, or to any one man personally.
And now I think it were more ﬁtting that I should close
these hasty remarks. It is true that, while I hold myself,
without mock modesty, the humblest of all individuals that
have ever been elevated to the Presidency, I have a more
diﬀicult task to perform than any one of them.
You have generously tendered me the support — the
united support — of the great Empire State. For this, in
behalf of the nation — in behalf of the present and future of
the nation — in behalf of civil and religious liberty for all
time to come, most gratefully do I thank you. I do not
propose to enter into an explanation of any particular line
of policy, as to our present diﬀiculties, to be adopted by the
incoming administration. I deem it just to you, to myself, to
all, that I should see everything, that I should hear
everything, that I should have every light that can be
brought within my reach, in order that, when I do so speak,
I shall have enjoyed every opportunity to take correct and
true ground; and for this reason I do not propose to speak
at this time of the policy of the Government. But when the
time comes, I shall speak, as well as I am able, for the good
of the present and future of this country for the good both
of the North and of the South — for the good of the one and
the other, and of all sections of the country. In the
meantime, if we have patience, if we restrain ourselves, if
we allow ourselves not to run oﬀ in a passion, I still have
conﬁdence that the Almighty, the Maker of the universe,
will, through the instrumentality of this great and
 intelligent people, bring us through this as He has through
all the other diﬀiculties of our country. Relying on this, I
again thank you for this generous reception.
 A
     A    
   
 
  
  
FEBRUARY 19, 1861
MR. MAYOR AND CITIZENS OF TROY: — I thank you
very kindly for this great reception. Since I left my home it
has not been my fortune to meet an assemblage more
numerous and more orderly than this. I am the more
gratiﬁed at this mark of your regard since you assure me it
is tendered, not to the individual but to the high oﬀice you
have called me to ﬁll. I have neither strength nor time to
make any extended remarks on this occasion, and I can
only repeat to you my sincere thanks for the kind reception
you have thought proper to extend to me.
 A
     A   
H     I   
 
  
  
FEBRUARY 19, 1861
FELLOW-CITIZENS: — IT is altogether impossible I
should make myself heard by any considerable portion of
this vast assemblage; but, although I appear before you
mainly for the purpose of seeing you, and to let you see
rather than hear me, I cannot refrain from saying that I am
highly gratiﬁed — as much here, indeed, under the
circumstances, as I have been anywhere on my route — to
witness this noble demonstration — made, not in honor of
an individual, but of the man who at this time humbly, but
earnestly, represents the majesty of the nation.
This reception, like all the others that have been
tendered to me, doubtless emanates from all the political
parties, and not from one alone. As such I accept it the
more gratefully, since it indicates an earnest desire on the
part of the whole people, with out regard to political
diﬀerences, to save — not the country, because the country
will save itself but to save the institutions of the country,
those institutions under which, in the last three quarters of
a century, we have grown to a great, and intelligent, and a
happy people — the greatest, the most intelligent, and the
happiest people in the world. These noble manifestations
indicate, with unerring certainty, that the whole people are
 willing to make common cause for this object; that if, as it
ever must be, some have been successful in the recent
election and some have been beaten, if some are satisﬁed
and some are dissatisﬁed, the defeated party are not in
favor of sinking the ship, but are desirous of running it
through the tempest in safety, and willing, if they think the
people have committed an error in their verdict now, to
wait in the hope of reversing it and setting it right next
time. I do not say that in the recent election the people did
the wisest thing, that could have been done — indeed, I do
not think they did; but I do say that in accepting the great
trust committed to me, which I do with a determination to
endeavor to prove worthy of it, I must rely upon you, upon
the people of the whole country, for support; and with their
sustaining aid, even I, humble as I am, cannot fail to carry
the ship of state safely through the storm.
I have now only to thank you warmly for your kind
attendance, and bid you all an aﬀectionate farewell.
 A
     A  H
 
  
 
  
  .
FEBRUARY 19, 1860
FELLOW-CITIZENS: — I see that you are providing a
platform for me. I shall have to decline standing upon it,
because the president of the company tells me that I shall
not have time to wait until it is brought to me. As I said
yesterday, 
under 
similar 
circumstances 
at 
another
gathering, you must not draw the inference that I have any
intention of deserting any platform with which I have a
legitimate connection because I do not stand on yours.
Allow me to thank you for this splendid reception, and I
now bid you farewell.
 A
     A        I    
 
  
  
FEBRUARY 19, 1861
LADIES AND GENTLEMEN: — I have but a moment to
stand before you to listen to and return your kind greeting.
I thank you for this reception, and for the pleasant manner
in which it is tendered to me by our mutual friends. I will
say in a single sentence, in regard to the diﬀiculties that lie
before me and our beloved country, that if I can only be as
generously 
and 
unanimously 
sustained 
as 
the
demonstrations I have witnessed indicate I shall be, I shall
not fail; but without your sustaining hands I am sure that
neither I nor any other man can hope to surmount these
diﬀiculties. I trust that in the course I shall pursue I shall
be sustained not only by the party that elected me, but by
the patriotic people of the whole country.
 A
     A   I H I    A
I
FEBRUARY 19, 1861
LADIES AND GENTLEMEN: — I appear before you not
to make a speech. I have not suﬀicient time, if I had the
strength, to repeat speeches at every station where the
people kindly gather to welcome me as we go along. If I
had the strength, and should take the time, I should not get
to Washington until after the inauguration, which you must
be aware would not ﬁt exactly. That such an untoward
event might not transpire, I know you will readily forego
any further remarks; and I close by bidding you farewell.
   
A    A   H  A  
  H
    
 
  
 
 I         A          
FELLOW-CITIZENS: — I have stepped before you
merely in compliance with what appears to be your wish,
and not with the purpose of making a speech. I do not
propose making a speech this afternoon. I could not be
heard by any but a small fraction of you, at best; but, what
is still worse than that, I have nothing just now to say that
is worthy of your hearing. I beg you to believe that I do not
now refuse to address you from any disposition to disoblige
you, but to the contrary. But, at the same time, I beg of you
to excuse me for the present.
 A
     A  
 
  
    I  
FEBRUARY 19, 1861
MR. CHAIRMAN AND GENTLEMEN: — I am rather an
old man to avail myself of such an excuse as I am now
about to do. Yet the truth is so distinct, and presses itself so
distinctly upon me, that I cannot well avoid it — and that is,
that I did not understand when I was brought into this
room that I was to be brought here to make a speech. It
was not intimated to me that I was brought into the room
where Daniel Webster and Henry Clay had made speeches,
and where one in my position might be expected to do
something like those men or say something worthy of
myself or my audience. I therefore beg you to make
allowance for the circumstances in which I have been by
surprise brought before you. Now I have been in the habit
of 
thinking 
and 
sometimes 
speaking 
upon 
political
questions that have for some years past agitated the
country; and, if I were disposed to do so, and we could take
up some one of the issues, as the lawyers call them, and I
were called upon to make an argument about it to the best
of my ability, I could do so without much preparation. But
that is not what you desire to have done here to-night.
I have been occupying a position, since the Presidential
election, of silence — of avoiding public speaking, of
 avoiding public writing. I have been doing so because I
thought, upon full consideration, that was the proper
course for me to take. I am brought before you now, and
required to make a speech, when you all approve more
than anything else of the fact that I have been keeping
silence. And now it seems to me that the response you give
to that remark ought to justify me in closing just here. I
have not kept silence since the Presidential election from
any party wantonness, or from any indiﬀerence to the
anxiety that pervades the minds of men about the aspect of
the political aﬀairs of this country. I have kept silence for
the reason that I supposed it was peculiarly proper that I
should do so until the time came when, according to the
custom of the country, I could speak oﬀicially.
I still suppose that, while the political drama being
enacted in this country at this time is rapidly shifting its
scenes — forbidding an anticipation with any degree of
certainty to-day of what we shall see to-morrow — it is
peculiarly ﬁtting that I should see it all, up to the last
minute, before I should take ground that I might be
disposed, by the shifting of the scenes afterward, also to
shift. I have said several times upon this journey, and I now
repeat it to you, that when the time does come, I shall then
take the ground that I think is right — right for the North,
for the South, for the East, for the West, for the whole
country. And in doing so I hope to feel no necessity pressing
upon me to say anything in conﬂict with the Constitution, in
conﬂict with the continued union of these States, in conﬂict
with the perpetuation of the liberties of this people, or
 anything in conﬂict with anything whatever that I have ever
given you reason to expect from me. And now, my friends,
have I said enough? [Loud cries of “No, no!” and, “Three
cheers for LINCOLN!”] Now, my friends, there appears to
be a diﬀerence of opinion between you and me, and I really
feel called upon to decide the question myself.
        
  H  
A 
  
  
 
  
    I  
FEBRUARY 20, 1861
MR. MAYOR: — It is with feelings of deep gratitude that I
make my acknowledgments for the reception that has been
given me in the great commercial city of New York. I
cannot but remember that it is done by the people who do
not, by a large majority, agree with me in political
sentiment. It is the more grateful to me because in this I
see that for the great principles of our Government the
people are pretty nearly or quite unanimous. In regard to
the diﬀiculties that confront us at this time, and of which
you have seen ﬁt to speak so becomingly and so justly, I can
only say I agree with the sentiments expressed. In my
devotion to the Union I hope I am behind no man in the
nation. As to my wisdom in conducting aﬀairs so as to tend
to the preservation of the Union, I fear too great conﬁdence
may have been placed in me. I am sure I bring a heart
devoted to the work. There is nothing that could ever bring
me to consent — willingly to consent — to the destruction
of this Union (in which not only the great city of New York,
but the whole country, has acquired its greatness), unless it
would be that thing for which the Union itself was made. I
understand that the ship is made for the carrying and
preservation of the cargo; and so long as the ship is safe
 with the cargo, it shall not be abandoned. This Union shall
never be abandoned, unless the possibility of its existence
shall cease to exist without the necessity of throwing
passengers and cargo overboard. So long, then, as it is
possible that the prosperity and liberties of this people can
be preserved within this Union, it shall be my purpose at all
tunes to preserve it. And now, Mr. Mayor, renewing my
thanks for this cordial reception, allow me to come to a
close.
 A
     A          I    
 
      
FEBRUARY 21, 1860
MR. DAYTON AND GENTLEMEN OF THE STATE OF
NEW JERSEY: — I shall only thank you brieﬂy for this very
kind reception given me, not personally, but as the
temporary representative of the majesty of the nation. To
the kindness of your hearts, and of the hearts of your
brethren in your State, I should be very proud to respond,
but I shall not have strength to address you or other
assemblages at length, even if I had the time to do so. I
appear before you, therefore, for little else than to greet
you, and to brieﬂy say farewell. You have done me the very
high honor to present your reception courtesies to me
through your great man a man with whom it is an honor to
be associated anywhere, and in owning whom no State can
be poor. He has said enough, and by the saying of it
suggested enough, to require a response of an hour, well
considered. I could not in an hour make a worthy response
to it. I therefore, ladies and gentlemen of New Jersey,
content myself with saying, most heartily do I indorse all
the sentiments he has expressed. Allow me, most gratefully,
to bid you farewell.
        
  H  
A 
  
  
 
A    
 
      
FEBRUARY 21, 1861.
MR. MAYOR: — I thank you for this reception at the city
of Newark. With regard to the great work of which you
speak, I will say that I bring to it a heart ﬁlled with love for
my country, and an honest desire to do what is right. I am
sure, however, that I have not the ability to do anything
unaided of God, and that without His support and that of
this free, happy, prosperous, and intelligent people, no man
can succeed in doing that the importance of which we all
comprehend. Again thanking you for the reception you have
given me, I will now bid you farewell, and proceed upon my
journey.
 A
     I
    
 
 A   H     
 
 H
  
FEBRUARY 21, 1861
I HAVE BEEN invited by your representatives to the
Legislature to visit this the capital of your honored State,
and in acknowledging their kind invitation, compelled to
respond to the welcome of the presiding oﬀicers of each
body, and I suppose they intended I should speak to you
through them, as they are the representatives of all of you;
and if I were to speak again here, I should only have to
repeat in a great measure much that I have said, which
would be disgusting to my friends around me who have met
here. I have no speech to make, but merely appear to see
you and let you look at me; and as to the latter I think I
have greatly the best of the bargain. My friends, allow me
to bid you farewell.
 A
      
  H    
A   
  
 
      
FEBRUARY 21, 1861
MR. PRESIDENT AND GENTLEMEN OF THE SENATE
OF THE STATE OF NEW JERSEY: — I am very grateful to
you for the honorable reception of which I have been the
object. I cannot but remember the place that New Jersey
holds in our early history. In the Revolutionary struggle few
of the States among the Old Thirteen had more of the
battle-ﬁelds of the country within their limits than New
Jersey. May I be pardoned if, upon this occasion, I mention
that away back in my childhood, the earliest days of my
being able to read, I got hold of a small book, such a one as
few of the younger members have ever seen Weems’s Life
of Washington. I remember all the accounts there given of
the battle-ﬁelds and struggles for the liberties of the
country; and none ﬁxed themselves upon my imagination so
deeply as the struggle here at Trenton, New Jersey. The
crossing of the river, the contest with the Hessians, the
great hardships endured at that time, all ﬁxed themselves
on my memory more than any single Revolutionary event;
and you all know, for you have all been boys, how these
early impressions last longer than any others. I recollect
thinking then, boy even though I was, that there must have
been something more than common that these men
 struggled for. I am exceedingly anxious that that thing that
something even more than national independence, that
something that held out a great promise to all the people of
the world to all time to come — I am exceedingly anxious
that this Union, the Constitution, and the liberties of the
people shall be perpetuated in accordance with the original
idea for which that struggle was made; and I shall be most
happy indeed if I shall be a humble instrument in the hands
of the Almighty, and of this his almost chosen people, for
perpetuating the object of that great struggle. You give me
this reception, as I understand, without distinction of party.
I learn that this body is composed of a majority of
gentlemen who, in the exercise of their best judgment in
the choice of a chief magistrate, did not think I was the
man. I understand, nevertheless, that they come forward
here to greet me as the constitutionally elected President of
the United States — as citizens of the United States to meet
the man who, for the time being, is the representative of
the majesty of the nation — united by the single purpose to
perpetuate the Constitution, the union, and the liberties of
the people. As such, I accept this reception more gratefully
than I could do did I believe it were tendered to me as an
individual.
 A
      
  H  A   
    
  
 
       
FEBRUARY 21, 1861
MR. SPEAKER AND GENTLEMEN: I have just enjoyed
the honor of a reception by the other branch of this
Legislature, and I return to you and them my thanks for the
reception which the people of New Jersey have given
through their chosen representatives to me as the
representative, for the time being, of the majesty of the
people of the United States. I appropriate to myself very
little of the demonstrations of respect with which I have
been greeted. I think little should be given to any man, but
that it should be a manifestation of adherence to the Union
and the Constitution. I understand myself to be received
here by the representatives of the people of New Jersey, a
majority of whom diﬀer in opinion from those with whom I
have acted. This manifestation is therefore to be regarded
by me as expressing their devotion to the Union, the
Constitution, and the liberties of the people.
You, Mr. Speaker, have well said that this is a time when
the bravest and wisest look with doubt and awe upon the
aspect presented by our national aﬀairs. Under these
circumstances you will readily see why I should not speak
in detail of the course I shall deem it best to pursue. It is
proper that I should avail myself of all the information and
 all the time at my command, in order that when the time
arrives in which I must speak oﬀicially, I shall be able to
take the ground which I deem best and safest, and from
which I may have no occasion to swerve. I shall endeavor to
take the ground I deem most just to the North, the East,
the West, the South, and the whole country. I shall take it, I
hope, in good temper, certainly with no malice toward any
section. I shall do all that may be in my power to promote a
peaceful settlement of all our diﬀiculties. The man does not
live who is more devoted to peace than I am, none who
would do more to preserve it, but it may be necessary to
put the foot down ﬁrmly. And if I do my duty and do right,
you will sustain me, will you not? [Loud cheers, and cries of
“Yes, yes; we will.”] Received as I am by the members of a
Legislature the majority of whom do not agree with me in
political sentiments, I trust that I may have their assistance
in piloting the ship of state through this voyage,
surrounded by perils as it is; for if it should suﬀer wreck
now, there will be no pilot ever needed for another voyage.
Gentlemen, I have already spoken longer than I intended,
and must beg leave to stop here.
        
  H  
A 
  
   HI A
   HIA
  
    A
IA
FEBRUARY 21, 1861
MR. 
MAYOR 
AND 
FELLOW-CITIZENS 
OF
PHILADELPHIA: — I appear before you to make no lengthy
speech, but to thank you for this reception. The reception
you have given me to-night is not to me, the man, the
individual, but to the man who temporarily represents, or
should represent, the majesty of the nation. It is true, as
your worthy mayor has said, that there is great anxiety
amongst the citizens of the United States at this time. I
deem it a happy circumstance that this dissatisﬁed portion
of our fellow-citizens does not point us to anything in which
they are being injured or about to be injured; for which
reason I have felt all the while justiﬁed in concluding that
the crisis, the panic, the anxiety of the country at this time
is artiﬁcial. If there be those who diﬀer with me upon this
subject, they have not pointed out the substantial diﬀiculty
that exists. I do not mean to say that an artiﬁcial panic may
not do considerable harm; that it has done such I do not
deny. The hope that has been expressed by your mayor, that
I may be able to restore peace, harmony, and prosperity to
the country, is most worthy of him; and most happy, indeed,
will I be if I shall be able to verify and fulﬁl that hope. I
 promise you that I bring to the work a sincere heart.
Whether I will bring a head equal to that heart will be for
future times to determine. It were useless for me to speak
of details of plans now; I shall speak oﬀicially next Monday
week, if ever. If I should not speak then, it were useless for
me to do so now. If I do speak then, it is useless for me to
do so now. When I do speak, I shall take such ground as I
deem best calculated to restore peace, harmony, and
prosperity to the country, and tend to the perpetuity of the
nation and the liberty of these States and these people.
Your worthy mayor has expressed the wish, in which I join
with him, that it were convenient for me to remain in your
city 
long 
enough 
to 
consult 
your 
merchants 
and
manufacturers; or, as it were, to listen to those breathings
rising 
within 
the 
consecrated 
walls 
wherein 
the
Constitution of the United States and, I will add, the
Declaration of Independence, were originally framed and
adopted. I assure you and your mayor that I had hoped on
this occasion, and upon all occasions during my life, that I
shall do nothing inconsistent with the teachings of these
holy and most sacred walls. I have never asked anything
that does not breathe from those walls. All my political
warfare has been in favor of the teachings that come forth
from these sacred walls. May my right hand forget its
cunning and my tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth if
ever I prove false to those teachings. Fellow-citizens, I have
addressed you longer than I expected to do, and now allow
me to bid you goodnight.
 A
     I
  H  HA   
  I
   
 
  
 HI A
   HIA
FEBRUARY 22, 1861
MR. CUYLER: — I am ﬁlled with deep emotion at ﬁnding
myself standing here, in this place, where were collected
together the wisdom, the devotion to principle, from which
sprang the institutions under which we live. You have
kindly suggested to me that in my hands is the task of
restoring peace to the present distracted condition of the
country. I can say in return, sir, that all the political
sentiments I entertain have been drawn, so far as I have
been able to draw them, from the sentiments which
originated and were given to the world from this hall. I
have never had a feeling politically that did not spring from
the 
sentiments 
embodied 
in 
the 
Declaration 
of
Independence. I have often pondered over the dangers
which were incurred by the men who assembled here and
framed and adopted that Declaration of Independence. I
have pondered over the toils that were endured by the
oﬀicers and soldiers of the army who achieved that
independence. I have often inquired of myself what great
principle or idea it was that kept the confederacy so long
together. It was not the mere matter of separation of the
colonies from the motherland, but that sentiment in the
 Declaration of Independence which gave liberty, not alone
to the people of this country, but, I hope, to the world for all
future time. It was that which gave promise that in due
time the weight would be lifted from the shoulders of all
men. This is the sentiment embodied in the Declaration of
Independence. Now, my friends, can the country be saved
upon that basis? If it can, I will consider myself one of the
happiest men in the world if I can help to save it. If it
cannot be saved upon that principle, it will be truly awful.
But if this country cannot be saved without giving up that
principle, I was about to say I would rather be assassinated
on this spot than surrender it. Now, in my view of the
present aspect of aﬀairs, there need be no bloodshed or
war. There is no necessity for it. I am not in favor of such a
course, and I may say, in advance, that there will be no
bloodshed unless it is forced upon the Government, and
then it will be compelled to act in self-defence.
My friends; this is wholly an unexpected speech, and I
did not expect to be called upon to say a word when I came
here. I supposed it was merely to do something toward
raising the ﬂag. I may, therefore, have said something
indiscreet. I have said nothing but what I am willing to live
by and, if it be the pleasure of Almighty God, die by.
        
  H  
I 
I
 
 
   
A I
FEBRUARY 22, 1861
MR. CHAIRMAN: — I feel highly ﬂattered by the
encomiums you have seen ﬁt to bestow upon me. Soon after
the nomination of General Taylor, I attended a political
meeting in the city of Wilmington, and have since carried
with me a fond remembrance of the hospitalities of the city
on that occasion. The programme established provides for
my presence in Harrisburg in twenty-four hours from this
time. I expect to be in Washington on Saturday. It is,
therefore, an impossibility that I should accept your kind
invitation. There are no people whom I would more gladly
accommodate than those of Delaware; but circumstances
forbid, gentlemen. With many regrets for the character of
the reply I am compelled to give you, I bid you adieu.
 A
     A   A
 A        
    A
IA
FEBRUARY 22, 1860
LADIES AND GENTLEMEN OF OLD LANCASTER: — I
appear not to make a speech. I have not time to make a
speech at length, and not strength to make them on every
occasion; and, worse than all, I have none to make. There is
plenty of matter to speak about in these times, but it is well
known that the more a man speaks the less he is
understood — the more he says one thing, the more his
adversaries contend he meant something else. I shall soon
have occasion to speak oﬀicially, and then I will endeavor to
put my thoughts just as plain as I can express myself —
true to the Constitution and Union of all the States, and to
the perpetual liberty of all the people. Until I so speak,
there is no need to enter upon details. In conclusion, I greet
you most heartily, and bid you an aﬀectionate farewell.
 A
      
  H    
I  A 
   
  
    A
IA  A  HA  I  
 
FEBRUARY 22, 1861
MR. SPEAKER OF THE SENATE, AND ALSO MR.
SPEAKER OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES, AND
GENTLEMEN OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF THE
STATE OF PENNSYLVANIA: — I appear before you only for
a very few brief remarks in response to what has been said
to me. I thank you most sincerely for this reception, and the
generous words in which support has been promised me
upon this occasion. I thank your great commonwealth for
the overwhelming support it recently gave, not me
personally, but the cause which I think a just one, in the
late election.
Allusion has been made to the fact — the interesting fact
perhaps we should say — that I for the ﬁrst time appear at
the capital of the great commonwealth of Pennsylvania
upon the birthday of the Father of his Country. In
connection with that beloved anniversary connected with
the history of this country, I have already gone through one
exceedingly 
interesting 
scene 
this 
morning 
in 
the
ceremonies at Philadelphia. Under the kind conduct of
gentlemen there, I was for the ﬁrst time allowed the
privilege of standing in old Independence Hall to have a
 few words addressed to me there, and opening up to me an
opportunity of manifesting my deep regret that I had not
more time to express something of my own feelings excited
by the occasion, that had been really the feelings of my
whole life.
Besides 
this, 
our 
friends 
there 
had 
provided 
a
magniﬁcent ﬂag of the country. They had arranged it so
that I was given the honor of raising it to the head of its
staﬀ, and when it went up I was pleased that it went to its
place by the strength of my own feeble arm. When,
according to the arrangement, the cord was pulled, and it
ﬂoated gloriously to the wind, without an accident, in the
bright, glowing sunshine of the morning, I could not help
hoping that there was in the entire success of that beautiful
ceremony at least something of an omen of what is to come.
Nor could I help feeling then, as I have often felt, that in
the whole of that proceeding I was a very humbled
instrument. I had not provided the ﬂag; I had not made the
arrangements for elevating it to its place; I had applied but
a very small portion of even my feeble strength in raising it.
In the whole transaction I was in the hands of the people
who had arranged it, and if I can have the same generous
co-operation of the people of this nation, I think the ﬂag of
our country may yet be kept ﬂaunting gloriously.
I recur for a moment but to repeat some words uttered at
the hotel in regard to what has been said about the military
support which the General Government may expect from
the commonwealth of Pennsylvania in a proper emergency.
To guard against any possible mistake do I recur to this. It
 is not with any pleasure that I contemplate the possibility
that a necessity may arise in this country for the use of the
military arm. While I am exceedingly gratiﬁed to see the
manifestation upon your streets of your military force here,
and exceedingly gratiﬁed at your promise to use that force
upon a proper emergency — while I make these
acknowledgments I desire to repeat, in order to preclude
any possible misconstruction, that I do most sincerely hope
that we shall have no use for them; that it will never
become their duty to shed blood, and most especially never
to shed fraternal blood. I promise that so far as I may have
wisdom to direct, if so painful a result shall in any wise be
brought about, it shall be through no fault of mine.
Allusion has also been made by one of your honored
speakers to some remarks recently made by myself at
Pittsburg in regard to what is supposed to be the especial
interest of this great commonwealth of Pennsylvania. I now
wish only to say in regard to that matter, that the few
remarks which I uttered on that occasion were rather
carefully worded. I took pains that they should be so. I have
seen no occasion since to add to them or subtract from
them. I leave them precisely as they stand, adding only now
that I am pleased to have an expression from you,
gentlemen of Pennsylvania, signifying that they are
satisfactory to you.
And now, gentlemen of the General Assembly of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, allow me again to return
to you my most sincere thanks.
        
  H  
A 
  
  
A HI
 
  
. .
FEBRUARY 27, 1861
MR. MAYOR: — I thank you, and through you the
municipal authorities of this city who accompany you, for
this welcome. And as it is the ﬁrst time in my life, since the
present phase of politics has presented itself in this
country, that I have said anything publicly within a region
of country where the institution of slavery exists, I will take
this occasion to say that I think very much of the ill feeling
that has existed and still exists between the people in the
section from which I came and the people here, is
dependent upon a misunderstanding of one another. I
therefore avail myself of this opportunity to assure you, Mr.
Mayor, and all the gentlemen present, that I have not now,
and never have had, any other than as kindly feelings
toward you as to the people of my own section. I have not
now, and never have had, any disposition to treat you in any
respect otherwise than as my own neighbors. I have not
now any purpose to withhold from you any of the beneﬁts
of the Constitution, under any circumstances, that I would
not feel myself constrained to withhold from my own
neighbors; and I hope, in a word, that when we shall
become better acquainted — and I say it with great
 conﬁdence — we shall like each other better. I thank you
for the kindness of this reception.
        
 A     
A
  A  
A HI
 
  
. .
FEBRUARY 28, 1861
MY FRIENDS: — I suppose that I may take this as a
compliment paid to me, and as such please accept my
thanks for it. I have reached this city of Washington under
circumstances considerably diﬀering from those under
which any other man has ever reached it. I am here for the
purpose of taking an oﬀicial position amongst the people,
almost all of whom were politically opposed to me, and are
yet opposed to me, as I suppose.
I propose no lengthy address to you. I only propose to
say, as I did on yesterday, when your worthy mayor and
board of aldermen called upon me, that I thought much of
the ill feeling that has existed between you and the people
of your surroundings and that people from among whom I
came, 
has 
depended, 
and 
now 
depends, 
upon 
a
misunderstanding.
I hope that, if things shall go along as prosperously as I
believe we all desire they may, I may have it in my power to
remove something of this misunderstanding; that I may be
enabled to convince you, and the people of your section of
the country, that we regard you as in all things our equals,
and in all things entitled to the same respect and the same
treatment that we claim for ourselves; that we are in no
 wise disposed, if it were in our power, to oppress you, to
deprive you of any of your rights under the Constitution of
the United States, or even narrowly to split hairs with you
in regard to these rights, but are determined to give you, as
far as lies in our hands, all your rights under the
Constitution — not grudgingly, but fully and fairly. I hope
that, by thus dealing with you, we will become better
acquainted, and be better friends.
And now, my friends, with these few remarks, and again
returning my thanks for this compliment, and expressing
my desire to hear a little more of your good music, I bid you
good-night.
 A HI
 
   
A   
A  H       
[DURING 
THE 
STRUGGLE 
over 
the 
appointments 
of
LINCOLN’s Cabinet, the President-elect spoke as follows:]
Gentlemen, it is evident that some one must take the
responsibility of these appointments, and I will do it. My
Cabinet is completed. The positions are not deﬁnitely
assigned, and will not be until I announce them privately to
the gentlemen whom I have selected as my Constitutional
advisers.
  I    I
A
 A  A
      
A  H       
FELLOW-CITIZENS OF THE UNITED STATES: — In
compliance with a custom as old as the Government itself, I
appear before you to address you brieﬂy, and to take in
your presence the oath prescribed by the Constitution of
the United States to be taken by the President “before he
enters on the execution of his oﬀice.”
I do not consider it necessary at present for me to
discuss those matters of administration about which there
is no special anxiety or excitement.
Apprehension seems to exist among the people of the
Southern States that by the accession of a Republican
administration their property and their peace and personal
security are to be endangered. There has never been any
reasonable cause for such apprehension. Indeed, the most
ample evidence to the contrary has all the while existed
and been open to their inspection. It is found in nearly all
the published speeches of him who now addresses you. I do
but quote from one of those speeches when I declare that
“I have no purpose, directly or indirectly, to interfere
with the institution of slavery in the States where it exists. I
believe I have no lawful right to do so, and I have no
inclination to do so.”
 Those who nominated and elected me did so with full
knowledge that I had made this and many similar
declarations, and had never recanted them. And, more than
this, they placed in the platform for my acceptance, and as
a law to themselves and to me, the clear and emphatic
resolution which I now read:
“Resolved, That the maintenance inviolate of the rights of
the States, and especially the right of each State to order
and control its own domestic institutions according to its
own judgment exclusively, is essential to that balance of
power on which the perfection and endurance of our
political fabric depend, and we denounce the lawless
invasion by armed force of the soil of any State or Territory,
no matter under what pretext, as amongst the gravest of
crimes.”
I now reiterate these sentiments; and, in doing so, I only
press upon the public attention the most conclusive
evidence of which the case is susceptible, that the property,
peace, and security of no section are to be in any wise
endangered by the now incoming administration. I add, too,
that all the protection which, consistently with the
Constitution and the laws, can be given, will be cheerfully
given to all the States when lawfully demanded, for
whatever cause — as cheerfully to one section as to
another.
There is much controversy about the delivering up of
fugitives from service or labor. The clause I now read is as
plainly written in the Constitution as any other of its
provisions:
 “No person held to service or labor in one State, under
the 
laws 
thereof, 
escaping 
into 
another, 
shall 
in
consequence of any law or regulation therein be discharged
from such service or labor, but shall be delivered up on
claim of the party to whom such service or labor may be
due.”
It is scarcely questioned that this provision was intended
by those who made it for the reclaiming of what we call
fugitive slaves; and the intention of the lawgiver is the law.
All members of Congress swear their support to the whole
Constitution — to this provision as much as to any other. To
the proposition, then, that slaves whose cases come within
the terms of this clause “shall be delivered up,” their oaths
are unanimous. Now, if they would make the eﬀort in good
temper, could they not with nearly equal unanimity frame
and pass a law by means of which to keep good that
unanimous oath?
There is some diﬀerence of opinion whether this clause
should be enforced by national or by State authority; but
surely that diﬀerence is not a very material one. If the slave
is to be surrendered, it can be of but little consequence to
him or to others by which authority it is done. And should
any one in any case be content that his oath shall go unkept
on a merely unsubstantial controversy as to how it shall be
kept?
Again, in any law upon this subject, ought not all the
safeguards of liberty known in civilized and humane
jurisprudence to be introduced, so that a free man be not,
in any case, surrendered as a slave? And might it not be
 well at the same time to provide by law for the enforcement
of that clause in the Constitution which guarantees that
“the citizens of each State shall be entitled to all privileges
and immunities of citizens in the several States”?
I 
take 
the 
oﬀicial 
oath 
to-day 
with 
no 
mental
reservations, and with no purpose to construe the
Constitution or laws by any hypercritical rules. And, while I
do not choose now to specify particular acts of Congress as
proper to be enforced, I do suggest that it will be much
safer for all, both in oﬀicial and private stations, to conform
to and abide by all those acts which stand unrepealed, than
to violate any of them, trusting to ﬁnd impunity in having
them held to be unconstitutional.
It is seventy-two years since the ﬁrst inauguration of a
President under our national Constitution. During that
period ﬁfteen diﬀerent and greatly distinguished citizens
have, in succession, administered the executive branch of
the Government. They have conducted it through many
perils, and generally with great success. Yet, with all this
scope of precedent, I now enter upon the same task for the
brief constitutional term of four years under great and
peculiar diﬀiculty. A disruption of the Federal Union,
heretofore only menaced, is now formidably attempted.
I hold that, in contemplation of universal law and of the
Constitution, the Union of these States is perpetual.
Perpetuity is implied, if not expressed, in the fundamental
law of all national governments. It is safe to assert that no
government proper ever had a provision in its organic law
for its own termination. Continue to execute all the express
 provisions of our national Constitution, and the Union will
endure forever — it being impossible to destroy it except by
some action not provided for in the instrument itself.
Again, if the United States be not a government proper,
but an association of States in the nature of contract
merely, can it as a contract be peaceably unmade by less
than all the parties who made it? One party to a contract
may violate it — break it, so to speak; but does it not
require all to lawfully rescind it?
Descending from these general principles, we ﬁnd the
proposition that in legal contemplation the Union is
perpetual conﬁrmed by the history of the Union itself. The
Union is much older than the Constitution. It was formed,
in fact, by the Articles of Association in 1774. It was
matured and continued by the Declaration of Independence
in 1776. It was further matured, and the faith of all the
then thirteen States expressly plighted and engaged that it
should be perpetual, by the Articles of Confederation in
1778. And, ﬁnally, in 1787 one of the declared objects for
ordaining and establishing the Constitution was “to form a
more perfect Union.”
But if the destruction of the Union by one or by a part
only of the States be lawfully possible, the Union is less
perfect than before the Constitution, having lost the vital
element of perpetuity.
It follows from these views that no State upon its own
mere motion can lawfully get out of the Union; that
resolves and ordinances to that eﬀect are legally void; and
that acts of violence, within any State or States, against the
 authority of the United States, are insurrectionary or
revolutionary, according to circumstances.
I therefore consider that, in view of the Constitution and
the laws, the Union is unbroken; and to the extent of my
ability I shall take care, as the Constitution itself expressly
enjoins upon me, that the laws of the Union be faithfully
executed in all the States. Doing this I deem to be only a
simple duty on my part; and I shall perform it so far as
practicable, unless my rightful masters, the American
people, shall withhold the requisite means, or in some
authoritative manner direct the contrary. I trust this will
not be regarded as a menace, but only as the declared
purpose of the Union that it will constitutionally defend and
maintain itself.
In doing this there needs to be no bloodshed or violence;
and there shall be none, unless it be forced upon the
national authority. The power conﬁded to me will be used to
hold, occupy, and possess the property and places
belonging to the Government, and to collect the duties and
imposts; but beyond what may be necessary for these
objects, there will be no invasion, no using of force against
or among the people anywhere. Where hostility to the
United States, in any interior locality, shall be so great and
universal as to prevent competent resident citizens from
holding the Federal oﬀices, there will be no attempt to
force obnoxious strangers among the people for that object.
While the strict legal right may exist in the government to
enforce the exercise of these oﬀices, the attempt to do so
would be so irritating, and so nearly impracticable withal,
 that I deem it better to forego for the time the uses of such
oﬀices.
The mails, unless repelled, will continue to be furnished
in all parts of the Union. So far as possible, the people
everywhere shall have that sense of perfect security which
is most favorable to calm thought and reﬂection. The
course here indicated will be followed unless current
events and experience shall show a modiﬁcation or change
to be proper, and in every case and exigency my best
discretion will be exercised according to circumstances
actually existing, and with a view and a hope of a peaceful
solution of the national troubles and the restoration of
fraternal sympathies and aﬀections.
That there are persons in one section or another who
seek to destroy the Union at all events, and are glad of any
pretext to do it, I will neither aﬀirm nor deny; but if there
be such, I need address no word to them. To those,
however, who really love the Union may I not speak?
Before entering upon so grave a matter as the
destruction of our national fabric, with all its beneﬁts, its
memories, and its hopes, would it not be wise to ascertain
precisely why we do it? Will you hazard so desperate a step
while there is any possibility that any portion of the ills you
ﬂy from have no real existence? Will you, while the certain
ills you ﬂy to are greater than all the real ones you ﬂy from
— will you risk the commission of so fearful a mistake?
All profess to be content in the Union if all constitutional
rights can be maintained. Is it true, then, that any right,
plainly written in the Constitution, has been denied? I think
 not. Happily the human mind is so constituted that no party
can reach to the audacity of doing this. Think, if you can, of
a single instance in which a plainly written provision of the
Constitution has ever been denied. If by the mere force of
numbers a majority should deprive a minority of any clearly
written constitutional right, it might, in a moral point of
view, justify revolution — certainly would if such a right
were a vital one. But such is not our case. All the vital
rights of minorities and of individuals are so plainly assured
to them by aﬀirmations and negations, guaranties and
prohibitions, in the Constitution, that controversies never
arise concerning them. But no organic law can ever be
framed with a provision speciﬁcally applicable to every
question which may occur in practical administration. No
foresight can anticipate, nor any document of reasonable
length 
contain, 
express 
provisions 
for 
all 
possible
questions. Shall fugitives from labor be surrendered by
national or by State authority? The Constitution does not
expressly say. May Congress prohibit slavery in the
Territories? The Constitution does not expressly say. Must
Congress 
protect 
slavery 
in 
the 
Territories? 
The
Constitution does not expressly say.
From questions of this class spring all our constitutional
controversies, and we divide upon them into majorities and
minorities. If the minority will not acquiesce, the majority
must, or the Government must cease. There is no other
alternative; for continuing the Government is acquiescence
on one side or the other.
 If a minority in such case will secede rather than
acquiesce, they make a precedent which in turn will divide
and ruin them; for a minority of their own will secede from
them whenever a majority refuses to be controlled by such
minority. For instance, why may not any portion of a new
confederacy a year or two hence arbitrarily secede again,
precisely as portions of the present Union now claim to
secede from it? All who cherish disunion sentiments are
now being educated to the exact temper of doing this.
Is there such perfect identity of interests among the
States to compose a new Union as to produce harmony
only, and prevent renewed secession?
Plainly, the central idea of secession is the essence of
anarchy. A majority held in restraint by constitutional
checks and limitations, and always changing easily with
deliberate changes of popular opinions and sentiments, is
the only true sovereign of a free people. Whoever rejects it
does, of necessity, ﬂy to anarchy or to despotism. Unanimity
is impossible; the rule of a minority, as a permanent
arrangement, is wholly inadmissible; so that, rejecting the
majority principle, anarchy or despotism in some form is all
that is left.
I do not forget the position assumed by some, that
constitutional questions are to be decided by the Supreme
Court; nor do I deny that such decisions must be binding, in
any case, upon the parties to a suit, as to the object of that
suit, while they are also entitled to very high respect and
consideration in all parallel cases by all other departments
of the government. And, while it is obviously possible that
 such decision may be erroneous in any given case, still the
evil eﬀect following it, being limited to that particular case,
with the chance that it may be overruled and never become
a precedent for other cases, can better be borne than could
the evils of a diﬀerent practice. At the same time, the
candid citizen must confess that if the policy of the
government, upon vital questions aﬀecting the whole
people, is to be irrevocably ﬁxed by decisions of the
Supreme Court, the instant they are made, in ordinary
litigation between parties in personal actions, the people
will have ceased to be their own rulers, having to that
extent practically resigned the government into the hands
of that eminent tribunal. Nor is there in this view any
assault upon the court or the judges. It is a duty from which
they may not shrink to decide cases properly brought
before them, and it is no fault of theirs if others seek to
turn their decisions to political purposes.
One section of our country believes slavery is right, and
ought to be extended, while the other believes it is wrong,
and ought not to be extended. This is the only substantial
dispute. The fugitive slave clause of the Constitution and
the law for the suppression of the foreign slave trade are
each as well enforced, perhaps, as any law can ever be in a
community where the moral sense of the people imperfectly
supports the law itself. The great body of the people abide
by the dry legal obligation in both cases, and a few break
over in each. This, I think, cannot be perfectly cured; and it
would be worse in both cases after the separation of the
sections than before. The foreign slave trade, now
 imperfectly suppressed, would be ultimately revived,
without restriction, in one section, while fugitive slaves,
now only partially surrendered, would not be surrendered
at all by the other.
Physically speaking, we cannot separate. We cannot
remove our respective sections from each other, nor build
an impassable wall between them. A husband and wife may
be divorced and go out of the presence and beyond the
reach of each other; but the diﬀerent parts of our country
cannot do this. They cannot but remain face to face, and
intercourse, either amicable or hostile, must continue
between them. Is it possible, then, to make that intercourse
more advantageous or more satisfactory after separation
than before? Can aliens make treaties easier than friends
can make laws? Can treaties be more faithfully enforced
between aliens than laws can among friends? Suppose you
go to war, you cannot ﬁght always; and when, after much
loss on both sides, and no gain on either, you cease
ﬁghting, the identical old questions as to terms of
intercourse are again upon you.
This country, with its institutions, belongs to the people
who inhabit it. Whenever they shall grow weary of the
existing government, they can exercise their constitutional
right of amending it, or their revolutionary right to
dismember or overthrow it. I cannot be ignorant of the fact
that many worthy and patriotic citizens are desirous of
having the national Constitution amended. While I make no
recommendation of amendments, I fully recognize the
rightful authority of the people over the whole subject, to
 be exercised in either of the modes prescribed in the
instrument 
itself, 
and 
I 
should, 
under 
existing
circumstances, favor rather than oppose a fair opportunity
being aﬀorded the people to act upon it. I will venture to
add that to me the convention mode seems preferable, in
that it allows amendments to originate with the people
themselves, instead of only permitting them to take or
reject propositions originated by others not especially
chosen for the purpose, and which might not be precisely
such as they would wish to either accept or refuse. I
understand a proposed amendment to the Constitution
which amendment, however, I have not seen — has passed
Congress, to the eﬀect that the Federal Government shall
never interfere with the domestic institutions of the States,
including that of persons held to service. To avoid
misconstruction of what I have said, I depart from my
purpose not to speak of particular amendments so far as to
say that, holding such a provision to now be implied
constitutional law, I have no objection to its being made
express and irrevocable.
The chief magistrate derives all his authority from the
people, and they have conferred none upon him to ﬁx terms
for the separation of the States. The people themselves can
do this also if they choose; but the executive, as such, has
nothing to do with it. His duty is to administer the present
government, as it came to his hands, and to transmit it,
unimpaired by him, to his successors.
Why should there not be a patient conﬁdence in the
ultimate justice of the people? Is there any better or equal
 hope in the world? In our present diﬀerences is either party
without faith of being in the right? If the Almighty Ruler of
nations, with his eternal truth and justice, be on your side
of the North, or on yours of the South, that truth and that
justice will surely prevail by the judgment of this great
tribunal of the American people.
By the frame of the government under which we live, this
same people have wisely given their public servants but
little power for mischief; and have, with equal wisdom,
provided for the return of that little to their own hands at
very short intervals. While the people retain their virtue
and vigilance, no administration, by any extreme of
wickedness 
or 
folly, 
can 
very 
seriously 
injure 
the
government in the short space of four years.
My countrymen, one and all, think calmly and well upon
this whole subject. Nothing valuable can be lost by taking
time. If there be an object to hurry any of you in hot haste
to a step which you would never take deliberately, that
object will be frustrated by taking time; but no good object
can be frustrated by it. Such of you as are now dissatisﬁed
still have the old Constitution unimpaired, and, on the
sensitive point, the laws of your own framing under it;
while the new administration will have no immediate
power, if it would, to change either. If it were admitted that
you who are dissatisﬁed hold the right side in the dispute,
there still is no single good reason for precipitate action.
Intelligence, patriotism, Christianity, and a ﬁrm reliance on
Him who has never yet forsaken this favored land, are still
 competent to adjust in the best way all our present
diﬀiculty.
In your hands, my dissatisﬁed fellow-countrymen, and
not in mine, is the momentous issue of civil war. The
government will not assail you. You can have no conﬂict
without being yourselves the aggressors. You have no oath
registered in heaven to destroy the government, while I
shall have the most solemn one to “preserve, protect, and
defend” it.
I am loath to close. We are not enemies, but friends. We
must not be enemies. Though passion may have strained, it
must not break, our bonds of aﬀection. The mystic chords
of memory, stretching from every battle-ﬁeld and patriot
grave to every living heart and hearthstone all over this
broad land, will yet swell the chorus of the Union when
again touched, as surely they will be, by the better angels
of our nature.
    
 A  
    
A 
    I
A I
TO WM. H. SEWARD.
E ECUTIVE MANSION, MARCH 4, 1861.
MY DEAR SIR: — Your note of the 2d instant, asking to
withdraw your acceptance of my invitation to take charge
of the State Department, was duly received. It is the
subject of the most painful solicitude with me, and I feel
constrained to beg that you will countermand the
withdrawal. The public interest, I think, demands that you
should; and my personal feelings are deeply enlisted in the
same direction. Please consider and answer by 9 A.M. to-
morrow.
Your obedient servant, A. LINCOLN.
        
  H    
    A
IA 
   
A I
WASHINGTON, MARCH 5, 1861
MR. 
CHAIRMAN 
AND 
GENTLEMEN 
OF 
THE
PENNSYLVANIAN DELEGATION: — As I have so frequently
said heretofore, when I have had occasion to address the
people of the Keystone, in my visits to that State, I can now
but repeat the assurance of my gratiﬁcation at the support
you gave me at the election, and at the promise of a
continuation of that support which is now tendered to me.
Allusion has been made to the hope that you entertain
that you have a President and a government. In respect to
that I wish to say to you that in the position I have assumed
I wish to do more than I have ever given reason to believe I
would do. I do not wish you to believe that I assume to be
any better than others who have gone before me. I prefer
rather to have it understood that if we ever have a
government on the principles we profess, we should
remember, while we exercise our opinion, that others have
also rights to the exercise of their opinions, and that we
should endeavor to allow these rights, and act in such a
manner as to create no bad feeling. I hope we have a
government and a President. I hope, and wish it to be
understood, that there may be no allusion to unpleasant
diﬀerences.
 We must remember that the people of all the States are
entitled to all the privileges and immunities of the citizens
of the several States. We should bear this in mind, and act
in such a way as to say nothing insulting or irritating. I
would inculcate this idea, so that we may not, like
Pharisees, set ourselves up to be better than other people.
Now, my friends, my public duties are pressing to-day,
and will prevent my giving more time to you. Indeed, I
should not have left them now, but I could not well deny
myself to so large and respectable a body.
        
  H  
A  A H
      
   
A I
WASHINGTON, MARCH 5, 1861
I AM THANKFUL for this renewed assurance of kind feeling
and conﬁdence, and the support of the old Bay State, in so
far as you, Mr. Chairman, have expressed, in behalf of
those whom you represent, your sanction of what I have
enunciated in my inaugural address. This is very grateful to
my feelings. The object was one of great delicacy, in
presenting views at the opening of an administration under
the peculiar circumstances attending my entrance upon the
oﬀicial duties connected with the Government. I studied all
the points with great anxiety, and presented them with
whatever of ability and sense of justice I could bring to
bear. If it met the approbation of our good friends in
Massachusetts, I shall be exceedingly gratiﬁed, while I
hope it will meet the approbation of friends everywhere. I
am thankful for the expressions of those who have voted
with us; and like every other man of you, I like them as
certainly as I do others. As the President in the
administration of the Government, I hope to be man enough
not to know one citizen of the United States from another,
nor one section from another. I shall be gratiﬁed to have
good friends of Massachusetts and others who have thus
 far supported me in these national views still to support me
in carrying them out.
  
       A     
A 
E ECUTIVE CHAMBER, MARCH 7, 1861
MY DEAR SIR: — Herewith is the diplomatic address and
my reply. To whom the reply should be addressed — that is,
by what title or style — I do not quite understand, and
therefore I have left it blank.
Will you please bring with you to-day the message from
the War Department, with General Scott’s note upon it,
which we had here yesterday? I wish to examine the
General’s opinion, which I have not yet done.
Yours very truly A. LINCOLN.
        
  H  
I  
A I   
  
WASHINGTON, THURSDAY, MARCH 7, 1861
MR. 
FIGANIERE 
AND 
GENTLEMEN 
OF 
THE
DIPLOMATIC BODY: — Please accept my sincere thanks for
your kind congratulations. It aﬀords me pleasure to conﬁrm
the conﬁdence you so generously express in the friendly
disposition of the United States, through me, towards the
sovereigns and governments you respectively represent.
With equal satisfaction I accept the assurance you are
pleased to give, that the same disposition is reciprocated by
your sovereigns, your governments, and yourselves.
Allow me to express the hope that these friendly
relations may remain undisturbed, and also my fervent
wishes for the health and happiness of yourselves
personally.
  
       A     
A 
E ECUTIVE MANSION, MARCH 11,1861
HON. SECRETARY OF STATE. DEAR SIR: — What think
you of sending ministers at once as follows: Dayton to
England; Fremont to France; Clay to Spain; Corwin to
Mexico?
We need to have these points guarded as strongly and
quickly as possible. This is suggestion merely, and not
dictation.
Your obedient servant, A. LINCOLN.
  
  .  
  A
 
E ECUTIVE MANSION, MARCH 12, 1861
HON. JACOB COLLAMER. MY DEAR SIR: — God help
me. It is said I have oﬀended you. I hope you will tell me
how.
Yours very truly, A. LINCOLN.
March 14, 1861. DEAR SIR: — I am entirely unconscious
that you have any way oﬀended me. I cherish no sentiment
towards you but that of kindness and conﬁdence. Your
humble servant, J. COLLAMER.
[Returned with indorsement:]
Very glad to know that I have n’t.
A. LINCOLN.
  
  H   
  
A     
 
  A .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, MARCH 13, 1861
HON. P. M. G.
DEAR SIR: — The bearer of this, Mr. C. T. Hempstow, is a
Virginian who wishes to get, for his son, a small place in
your Dept. I think Virginia should be heard, in such cases.
LINCOLN.
    A  I
  A I
   
 I
I
  
  
 
 
   .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, MARCH 15, 1861
THE HONORABLE SECRETARY OF WAR.
MY DEAR SIR: — Assuming it to be possible to now
provision Fort Sumter, under all the circumstances is it
wise to attempt it? Please give me your opinion in writing
on this question.
Your obedient servant, A. LINCOLN.
[Same to other members of the Cabinet.]
   
 A  A  I  A I
 
  A
  I A
 
A    I
TO THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
THE SENATE HAS transmitted to me a copy of the message
sent by my predecessor to that body on the 21st of
February last, proposing to take its advice on the subject of
a proposition made by the British Government through its
minister here to refer the matter in controversy between
that government and the Government of the United States
to the arbitrament of the King of Sweden and Norway, the
King of the Netherlands, or the Republic of the Swiss
Confederation.
In that message my predecessor stated that he wished to
present to the Senate the precise questions following,
namely: “Will the Senate approve a treaty referring to
either of the sovereign powers above named the dispute
now existing between the governments of the United States
and Great Britain concerning the boundary line between
Vancouver’s Island and the American continent? In case the
referee shall ﬁnd himself unable to decide where the line is
by the description of it in the treaty of June 15, 1846, shall
he be authorized to establish a line according to the treaty
as nearly as possible? Which of the three powers named by
 Great Britain as an arbiter shall be chosen by the United
States?”
I ﬁnd no reason to disapprove of the course of my
predecessor in this important matter; but, on the contrary, I
not only shall receive the advice of the Senate thereon
cheerfully, but I respectfully ask the Senate for their advice
on the three questions before recited.
ABRAHAM LINCOLN.
WASHINGTON, March 16, 1861
 A
 A  A
 IA  A  
I
 
 
 
TO SECRETARY SEWARD.
E ECUTIVE 
MANSION, 
MARCH 
18, 1861 HON.
SECRETARY OF STATE.
MY DEAR SIR: — I believe it is a necessity with us to
make the appointments I mentioned last night — that is,
Charles F. Adams to England, William L. Dayton to France,
George P. Marsh to Sardinia, and Anson Burlingame to
Austria. These gentlemen all have my highest esteem, but
no one of them is originally suggested by me except Mr.
Dayton. Mr. Adams I take because you suggested him,
coupled with his eminent ﬁtness for the place. Mr. Marsh
and Mr. Burlingame I take because of the intense pressure
of their respective States, and their ﬁtness also.
The objection to this card is that locally they are so
huddled up — three being in New England and two from a
single State. I have considered this, and will not shrink
from the responsibility. This, being done, leaves but ﬁve full
missions undisposed of — Rome, China, Brazil, Peru, and
Chili. And then what about Carl Schurz; or, in other words,
what about our German friends?
Shall we put the card through, and arrange the rest
afterward? What say you?
Your obedient servant, A. LINCOLN.
  
 
.  .  A   
.
E ECUTIVE MANSION, March 19, 1861.
TO MASTER GEO. EVANS PATTEN.
WHOM IT MAY CONCERN: — I did see and talk with
Master Geo. Evans Patten last May at Springﬁeld, Ill.
Respectfully, A. LINCOLN.
[Written because of a denial that any interview with
young Patten, then a schoolboy, had ever taken place.]
     
    
   
A   I
I     .  
 
 
  
MESSAGE TO THE SENATE.
TO THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES: — I have
received a copy of the resolution of the Senate, passed on
the 25th instant, requesting me, if in my opinion not
incompatible with the public interest, to communicate to
the Senate the despatches of Major Robert Anderson to the
War Department during the time he has been in command
of Fort Sumter. On examination of the correspondence thus
called for, I have, with the highest respect for the Senate,
come to the conclusion that at the present moment the
publication of it would be inexpedient.
A. LINCOLN WASHINGTON, MARCH 16, 1861
     A A I
 
   I    
A A  A  I
TO THE SECRETARY OF WAR
E ECUTIVE 
MANSION, 
MARCH 
29, 
1861
HONORABLE SECRETARY OF WAR.
SIR: — I desire that an expedition to move by sea be got
ready to sail as early as the 6th of April next, the whole
according 
to 
memorandum 
attached, 
and 
that 
you
cooperate with the Secretary of the Navy for that object.
Your obedient servant, A. LINCOLN.
[Inclosure.]
Steamers Pocahontas at Norfolk, Paunee at Washington,
Harriet Lane at New York, to be under sailing orders for
sea, with stores, etc., for one month. Three hundred men to
be kept ready for departure from on board the receiving-
ships at New York. Two hundred men to be ready to leave
Governor’s Island in New York. Supplies for twelve months
for one hundred men to be put in portable shape, ready for
instant 
shipping. 
A 
large 
steamer 
and 
three 
tugs
conditionally engaged.
  
 
 
    A  .
WASHINGTON, March 30, 1861
DEAR STUART: Cousin Lizzie shows me your letter of the
27th. The question of giving her the Springﬁeld post-oﬀice
troubles me. You see I have already appointed William
Jayne a Territorial governor and Judge Trumbull’s brother
to a land-oﬀice. Will it do for me to go on and justify the
declaration that Trumbull and I have divided out all the
oﬀices among our relatives? Dr. Wallace, you know, is
needy, and looks to me; and I personally owe him much.
I see by the papers, a vote is to be taken as to the post-
oﬀice. Could you not set up Lizzie and beat them all? She,
being here, need know nothing of it, so therefore there
would be no indelicacy on her part.
Yours as ever,
  
  H   
A
A
  
   H  
 
  
 
A    A 
.
NAVY DEPT., WASHINGTON, April 1, 1861
TO THE COMMANDANT OF THE NAVY-YARD, Brooklyn,
N. Y.
Fit out the Powhatan to go to sea at the earnest possible
moment under sealed orders. Orders by a conﬁdential
messenger go forward to-morrow.
A. LINCOLN.
  
  I 
  
A
  
. 
.  
   
E ECUTIVE MANSION, April 1, 1861
LIEUTENANT D. D. PORTER, United States Navy.
SIR: — You will proceed to New York, and with the least
possible delay, assuming command of any naval steamer
available, proceed to Pensacola Harbor, and at any cost or
risk prevent any expedition from the mainland reaching
Fort Pickens or Santa Rosa Island.
You will exhibit this order to any naval oﬀicer at
Pensacola, if you deem it necessary, after you have
established yourself within the harbor, and will request co-
operation by the entrance of at least one other steamer.
This order, its object, and your destination will be
communicated to no person whatever until you reach the
harbor of Pensacola.
A. LINCOLN.
Recommended, WILLIAM H. SEWARD.
    I       
I I
  
   
    
  
ORDER TO OFFICERS OF THE ARMY AND NAVY.
WASHINGTON, E ECUTIVE MANSION, April 1, 1861.
All oﬀicers of the army and navy to whom this order may
be exhibited will aid by every means in their power the
expedition under the command of Colonel Harvey Brown,
supplying him with men and material, and co-operating
with him as he may desire.
A. LINCOLN.
  
    
  A  AI
  A
   
     .
(Conﬁdential.) 
WASHINGTON CITY, APRIL 1, 1861
SIR: — Circumstances render it necessary to place in
command of your ship (and for a special purpose) an oﬀicer
who is fully informed and instructed in relation to the
wishes of the Government, and you will therefore consider
yourself detached. But in taking this step the Government
does not in the least reﬂect upon your eﬀiciency or
patriotism; on the contrary, have the fullest conﬁdence in
your ability to perform any duty required of you. Hoping
soon to be able to give you a better command than the one
you now enjoy, and trusting that you will have full
conﬁdence in the disposition of the Government toward
you, I remain, etc., A. LINCOLN.
       A     
A 
    I
  
   
 
MEMORANDUM FROM SECRETARY SEWARD, APRIL 1,
1861
SOME THOUGHTS FOR the President’s Consideration,
First. We are at the end of a month’s administration, and
yet without a policy either domestic or foreign.
Second. This, however, is not culpable, and it has even
been unavoidable. The presence of the Senate, with the
need to meet applications for patronage, have prevented
attention to other and more grave matters.
Third. But further delay to adopt and prosecute our
policies for both domestic and foreign aﬀairs would not
only bring scandal on the administration, but danger upon
the country.
Fourth. To do this we must dismiss the applicants for
oﬀice. But how? I suggest that we make the local
appointments forthwith, leaving foreign or general ones for
ulterior and occasional action.
Fifth. The policy at home. I am aware that my views are
singular, and perhaps not suﬀiciently explained. My system
is built upon this idea as a ruling one, namely, that we must
CHANGE THE QUESTION BEFORE THE PUBLIC FROM
ONE UPON SLAVERY, OR ABOUT SLAVERY, for a question
upon UNION OR DISUNION: In other words, from what
 would be regarded as a party question, to one of patriotism
or union.
The occupation or evacuation of Fort Sumter, although
not in fact a slavery or a party question, is so regarded.
Witness the temper manifested by the Republicans in the
free States, and even by the Union men in the South.
I would therefore terminate it as a safe means for
changing the issue. I deem it fortunate that the last
administration created the necessity.
For the rest, I would simultaneously defend and reinforce
all the ports in the gulf, and have the navy recalled from
foreign stations to be prepared for a blockade. Put the
island of Key West under martial law.
This will raise distinctly the question of union or
disunion. I would maintain every fort and possession in the
South.
FOR FOREIGN NATIONS,
I would demand explanations from Spain and France,
categorically, at once.
I would seek explanations from Great Britain and Russia,
and send agents into Canada, Mexico, and Central America
to rouse a vigorous continental spirit of independence on
this continent against European intervention.
And, if satisfactory explanations are not received from
Spain and France,
Would convene Congress and declare war against them.
But whatever policy we adopt, there must be an
energetic prosecution of it.
 For this purpose it must be somebody’s business to
pursue and direct it incessantly.
Either the President must do it himself, and be all the
while active in it, or Devolve it on some member of his
Cabinet. Once adopted, debates on it must end, and all
agree and abide.
It is not in my especial province; But I neither seek to
evade nor assume responsibility.
        
       A     
A 
 
 
 A
E ECUTIVE MANSION, APRIL 1, 1861
HON. W. H. SEWARD.
MY DEAR SIR: — Since parting with you I have been
considering your paper dated this day, and entitled “Some
Thoughts for the President’s Consideration.” The ﬁrst
proposition in it is, “First, We are at the end of a month’s
administration, and yet without a policy either domestic or
foreign.”
At the beginning of that month, in the inaugural, I said:
“The power conﬁded to me will be used to hold, occupy,
and possess the property and places belonging to the
Government, and to Collect the duties and imposts.” This
had your distinct approval at the time; and, taken in
connection with the order I immediately gave General
Scott, directing him to employ every means in his power to
strengthen and hold the forts, comprises the exact
domestic policy you now urge, with the single exception
that it does not propose to abandon Fort Sumter.
Again, I do not perceive how the reinforcement of Fort
Sumter would be done on a slavery or a party issue, while
that of Fort Pickens would be on a more national and
patriotic one.
 The news received yesterday in regard to St. Domingo
certainly brings a new item within the range of our foreign
policy; but up to that time we have been preparing
circulars and instructions to ministers and the like, all in
perfect harmony, without even a suggestion that we had no
foreign policy.
Upon your Closing propositions — that, “Whatever policy
we adopt, there must be an energetic prosecution of it.
“For this purpose it must be somebody’s business to
pursue and direct it incessantly.
“Either the President must do it himself, and be all the
while active in it, or, “Devolve it on some member of his
Cabinet. Once adopted, debates on it must end, and all
agree and abide” — I remark that if this must be done, I
must do it. When a general line of policy is adopted, I
apprehend there is no danger of its being changed without
good reason, or continuing to be a subject of unnecessary
debate; still, upon points arising in its progress I wish, and
suppose I am entitled to have, the advice of all the Cabinet.
Your obedient servant,
A. LINCOLN.
        
 A  
I       
  H   I 
I
IA
 
  
 I
  A  I         
HON. WILLIAM BALLARD PRESTON, ALE ANDER H.
H. STUART, GEORGE W. RANDOLPH, Esq.
GENTLEMEN: — As a committee of the Virginia
Convention now in Session, you present me a preamble and
resolution in these words:
“Whereas, in the opinion of this Convention, the
uncertainty which prevails in the public mind as to the
policy which the Federal Executive intends to pursue
toward the seceded States is extremely injurious to the
industrial and commercial interests of the country, tends to
keep up an excitement which is unfavorable to the
adjustment 
of 
pending 
diﬀiculties, 
and 
threatens 
a
disturbance of the public peace: therefore
“Resolved, that a committee of three delegates be
appointed by this Convention to wait upon the President of
the United States, present to him this preamble and
resolution, and respectfully ask him to communicate to this
Convention the policy which the Federal Executive intends
to pursue in regard to the Confederate States.
“Adopted by the Convention of the State of Virginia,
Richmond, April 8, 1861.”
In answer I have to say that, having at the beginning of
my oﬀicial term expressed my intended policy as plainly as
 I was able, it is with deep regret and some mortiﬁcation I
now learn that there is great and injurious uncertainty in
the public mind as to what that policy is, and what course I
intend to pursue. Not having as yet seen occasion to
change, it is now my purpose to pursue the course marked
out in the inaugural address. I commend a careful
consideration of the whole document as the best expression
I can give of my purposes.
As I then and therein said, I now repeat: “The power
conﬁded to me will be used to hold, occupy, and possess the
property and places belonging to the Government, and to
collect the duties and imposts; but beyond what is
necessary for these objects, there will be no invasion, no
using of force against or among the people anywhere.” By
the 
words 
“property 
and 
places 
belonging 
to 
the
Government,” I chieﬂy allude to the military posts and
property which were in the possession of the Government
when it came to my hands.
But if, as now appears to be true, in pursuit of a purpose
to drive the United States authority from these places, an
unprovoked assault has been made upon Fort Sumter, I
shall hold myself at liberty to repossess, if I can, like places
which had been seized before the Government was
devolved upon me. And in every event I shall, to the extent
of my ability, repel force by force. In case it proves true
that Fort Sumter has been assaulted, as is reported, I shall
perhaps cause the United States mails to be withdrawn
from all the States which claim to have seceded, believing
 that the commencement of actual war against the
Government justiﬁes and possibly demands this.
I scarcely need to say that I consider the military posts
and property situated within the States which claim to have
seceded as yet belonging to the Government of the United
States as much as they did before the supposed secession.
Whatever else I may do for the purpose, I shall not
attempt to collect the duties and imposts by any armed
invasion of any part of the country; not meaning by this,
however, that I may not land a force deemed necessary to
relieve a fort upon a border of the country.
From the fact that I have quoted a part of the inaugural
address, it must not be inferred that I repudiate any other
part, the whole of which I reaﬀirm, except so far as what I
now say of the mails may be regarded as a modiﬁcation.
   
  A
A I
  A  I
  
         
I I IA
AND CONVENING CONGRESS IN E TRA SESSION, APRIL
15, 1861.
BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES OF
AMERICA:
A Proclamation.
Whereas the laws of the United States have been for
some time past and now are opposed, and the execution
thereof obstructed, in the States of South Carolina,
Georgia, Alabama, Florida, Mississippi, Louisiana, and
Texas, by combinations too powerful to be suppressed by
the ordinary course of judicial proceedings, or by the
powers vested in the marshals bylaw:
Now, therefore, I, A. LINCOLN, President of the United
States, in virtue of the power in me vested by the
Constitution and the laws, have thought ﬁt to call forth, and
hereby do call forth, the militia of the several States of the
Union, to the aggregate number of seventy-ﬁve thousand,
in order to suppress said combinations, and to cause the
laws to be duly executed.
The 
details 
for 
this 
object 
will 
be 
immediately
communicated to the State authorities through the War
Department.
 I appeal to all loyal citizens to favor, facilitate, and aid
this eﬀort to maintain the honor, the integrity, and the
existence of our National Union, and the perpetuity of
popular government; and to redress wrongs already long
enough endured.
I deem it proper to say that the ﬁrst service assigned to
the forces hereby called forth will probably be to repossess
the forts, places, and property which have been seized from
the Union; and in every event the utmost care will be
observed, consistently with the objects aforesaid, to avoid
any devastation, any destruction of or interference with
property, or any disturbance of peaceful citizens in any part
of the country.
And I hereby command the persons composing the
combinations aforesaid to disperse and retire peacefully to
their respective abodes within twenty days from date.
Deeming that the present condition of public aﬀairs
presents an extraordinary occasion, I do hereby, in virtue of
the power in me vested by the Constitution, convene both
Houses of Congress. Senators and Representatives are
therefore summoned to assemble at their respective
chambers, at twelve o’clock noon, on Thursday, the fourth
day of July next, then and there to consider and determine
such measures as, in their wisdom, the public safety and
interest may seem to demand.
In witness whereof, I have hereunto set my hand, and
caused the seal of the United States to be aﬀixed.
Done at the city of Washington, this ﬁfteenth day of April,
in the year of our Lord one thousand eight hundred and
 sixty-one, and of the independence of the United States the
eighty-ﬁfth.
A. LINCOLN
By the President:
WILLIAM H. SEWARD, Secretary of State.
   
  A
A I
 
    
  A
   A  I         
BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES OF
AMERICA:
A PROCLAMATION.
Whereas an insurrection against the Government of the
United States has broken out in the States of South
Carolina, Georgia, Alabama, Florida, Mississippi, Louisiana,
and Texas, and the laws of the United States for the
collection of the revenue cannot be eﬀectually executed
therein conformably to that provision of the Constitution
which requires duties to be uniform throughout the United
States:
And Whereas a combination of persons engaged in such
insurrection have threatened to grant pretended letters of
marque to authorize the bearers thereof to commit assaults
on the lives, vessels, and property of good citizens of the
country lawfully engaged in commerce on the high seas,
and in waters of the United States:
And Whereas an executive proclamation has been
already issued requiring the persons engaged in these
disorderly proceedings to desist therefrom, calling out a
militia force for the purpose of repressing the same, and
convening Congress in extraordinary session to deliberate
and determine thereon:
 Now, therefore, I, Abraham LINCOLN, President of the
United States, with a view to the same purposes before
mentioned, and to the protection of the public peace, and
the lives and property of quiet and orderly citizens
pursuing their lawful occupations, until Congress shall have
assembled 
and 
deliberated 
on 
the 
said 
unlawful
proceedings, or until the same shall have ceased, have
further deemed it advisable to set on foot a blockade of the
ports within the States aforesaid, in pursuance of the laws
of the United States, and of the law of nations in such case
provided. For this purpose a competent force will be posted
so as to prevent entrance and exit of vessels from the ports
aforesaid. If, therefore, with a view to violate such
blockade, a vessel shall approach or shall attempt to leave
either of the said ports, she will be duly warned by the
commander of one of the blockading vessels, who will
indorse on her register the fact and date of such warning,
and if the same vessel shall again attempt to enter or leave
the blockaded port, she will be captured and sent to the
nearest convenient port, for such proceedings against her
and her cargo, as prize, as may be deemed advisable.
And I hereby proclaim and declare that if any person,
under the pretended authority of the said States, or under
any other pretense, shall molest a vessel of the United
States, or the persons or cargo on board of her, such
person will be held amenable to the laws of the United
States for the prevention and punishment of piracy.
In witness whereof, I have hereunto set my hand and
caused the seal of the United States to be aﬀixed.
 Done at the city of Washington, this nineteenth day of
April, in the year of our Lord one thousand eight hundred
and sixty-one, and of the independence of the United States
the eighty-ﬁfth.
A. LINCOLN.
By the President: WILLIAM H. SEWARD, Secretary of
State.
  
 
   
  HI    A
 
A 
    
.
WASHINGTON, April 20, 1861
GOVERNOR HICKS AND MAYOR BROWN.
GENTLEMEN: — Your letter by Messrs. Bond, Dobbin,
and Brune is received. I tender you both my sincere thanks
for your eﬀorts to keep the peace in the trying situation in
which you are placed.
For the future troops must be brought here, but I make
no point of bringing them through Baltimore. Without any
military knowledge myself, of course I must leave details to
General Scott. He hastily said this morning in the presence
of these gentlemen, “March them around Baltimore, and
not through it.” I sincerely hope the General, on fuller
reﬂection, will consider this practical and proper, and that
you will not object to it. By this a collision of the people of
Baltimore with the troops will be avoided, unless they go
out of their way to seek it. I hope you will exert your
inﬂuence to prevent this.
Now and ever I shall do all in my power for peace
consistently with the maintenance of the Government.
Your obedient servant, A. LINCOLN.
  
 
   
  HI   .
WASHINGTON, April 20, 1861
GOVERNOR HICKS: I desire to consult with you and the
Mayor of Baltimore relative to preserving the peace of
Maryland. Please come immediately by special train, which
you can take at Baltimore; or, if necessary, one can be sent
from here. Answer forthwith.
LINCOLN.
  
    
 
   
   
 A 
A   A
I
 
     I
ORDER TO GENERAL SCOTT. WASHINGTON, April 25,
1861
LIEUTENANT-GENERAL SCOTT.
MY DEAR SIR — The Maryland Legislature assembles to-
morrow at Annapolis, and not improbably will take action to
arm the people of that State against the United States. The
question has been submitted to and considered by me
whether it would not be justiﬁable, upon the ground of
necessary defense, for you, as General in Chief of the
United States Army, to arrest or disperse the members of
that body. I think it would not be justiﬁable nor eﬀicient for
the desired object.
First. They have a clearly legal right to assemble, and we
cannot know in advance that their action will not be lawful
and peaceful, and if we wait until they shall have acted
their arrest or dispersion will not lessen the eﬀect of their
action.
Secondly. We cannot permanently prevent their action. If
we arrest them, we cannot long hold them as prisoners,
and when liberated they will immediately reassemble and
take their action; and precisely the same if we simply
 disperse them — they will immediately reassemble in some
other place.
I therefore conclude that it is only left to the
Commanding General to watch and await their action,
which, if it shall be to arm their people against the United
States, he is to adopt the most prompt and eﬀicient means
to counteract, even, if necessary, to the bombardment of
their cities and, in the extremist necessity, the suspension
of the writ of habeas corpus.
Your obedient servant,
A. LINCOLN.
   
  A
A I
 
    
  A
   A  I         
BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES OF
AMERICA:
A PROCLAMATION.
Whereas, for the reasons assigned in my proclamation of
the nineteenth instant, a blockade of the ports of the States
of South Carolina, Georgia, Florida, Alabama, Louisiana,
Mississippi, and Texas was ordered to be established:
And whereas, since that date, public property of the
United States has been seized, the collection of the revenue
obstructed, and duly commissioned oﬀicers of the United
States, while engaged in executing the orders of their
superiors, have been arrested and held in custody as
prisoners, or have been impeded in the discharge of their
oﬀicial duties, without due legal process, by persons
claiming to act under authorities of the States of Virginia
and North Carolina:
An eﬀicient blockade of the ports of those States will also
be established.
In witness whereof I have hereunto set my hand and
caused the seal of the United States to be aﬀixed.
Done at the city of Washington, this twenty seventh day
of April, in the year of our Lord one thousand eight
 hundred and sixty-one, and of the independence of the
United States the eighty-ﬁfth.
A. LINCOLN.
   
A     
 A 
I I A    
 A
 
A HI
 
  A  I         
I HAVE DESIRED as sincerely as any man, and I sometimes
think more than any other man, that our present diﬀiculties
might be settled without the shedding of blood. I will not
say that all hope has yet gone; but if the alternative is
presented whether the Union is to be broken in fragments
and the liberties of the people lost, or blood be shed, you
will probably make the choice with which I shall not be
dissatisﬁed.
  
 A I  
     A  
  
 I  
  HA  A
 
  
TO GENERAL SCOTT.
TO THE COMMANDING GENERAL, ARMY OF THE
UNITED STATES.
You are engaged in suppressing an insurrection against
the laws of the United States. If at any point on or in the
vicinity of any military line which is now or which shall be
used between the City of Philadelphia and the city of
Washington you ﬁnd resistance which renders it necessary
to suspend the writ of habeas corpus for the public safety,
you personally, or through the oﬀicer in command at the
point at which resistance occurs, are authorized to suspend
that writ.
A. LINCOLN.
WASHINGTON, April 17, 1861
 I I A    
 
  
 
  
    .  
I   I I  
FROM THE SECRETARY OF WAR WAR DEPARTMENT,
April 30, 1861
TO CAPTAIN NATHANIEL LYON.
CAPT. NATHANIEL LYON, Commanding Department of
the West.
SIR: — The President of the United States directs that
you enroll in the military service of the United States the
loyal citizens of Saint Louis and vicinity, not exceeding,
with those heretofore enlisted, ten thousand in number, for
the purpose of maintaining the authority of the United
States; for the protection of the peaceful inhabitants of
Missouri; and you will, if deemed necessary for that
purpose by yourself, by Messrs. Oliver F. Ferny, John How,
James O. Broadhead, Samuel T. Glover, J. Wilzie, Francis P.
Blair, Jr., proclaim martial law in the city of Saint Louis.
The 
additional 
force 
hereby 
authorized 
shall 
be
discharged in part or in whole, if enlisted. As soon as it
appears to you and the gentlemen above mentioned that
there is no danger of an attempt on the part of the enemies
of the Government to take military possession of the city of
Saint Louis, or put the city in control of the combination
against the Government of the United States; and whilst
such additional force remains in the service the same shall
 be governed by the Rules and Articles of War, and such
special regulations as you may prescribe. I shall like the
force hereafter directed to be enrolled to be under your
command.
The arms and other military stores in the Saint Louis
Arsenal not needed for the forces of the United States in
Missouri must be removed to Springﬁeld, or some other
safe place of deposit in the State of Illinois, as speedily as
practicable, by the ordnance oﬀicers in charge at Saint
Louis.
(Indorsement.)
It is revolutionary times, and therefore I do not object to
the irregularity of this. W. S.
Approved, April 30, 1861.
A. LINCOLN.
Colonel Thomas will make this order. SIMON CAMERON,
Secretary of War.
  
  
   
     AI 
   
    .  
  
   I 
TO GUSTAVUS V. FO .
WASHINGTON, D.C., MAY 1, 1861
CAPTAIN G. V. Fox.
MY DEAR SIR: — I sincerely regret that the failure of the
late attempt to provision Fort Sumter should be the source
of any annoyance to you.
The practicability of your plan was not, in fact, brought
to a test. By reason of a gale, well known in advance to be
possible and not improbable, the tugs, an essential part of
the plan, never reached the ground; while, by an accident
for which you were in no wise responsible, and possibly I to
some extent was, you were deprived of a war vessel, with
her men, which you deemed of great importance to the
enterprise.
I most cheerfully and truly declare that the failure of the
undertaking has not lowered you a particle, while the
qualities 
you 
developed 
in 
the 
eﬀort 
have 
greatly
heightened you in my estimation.
For a daring and dangerous enterprise of a similar
character you would to-day be the man of all my
acquaintances whom I would select. You and I both
anticipated that the cause of the country would be
 advanced by making the attempt to provision Fort Sumter,
even if it should fail; and it is no small consolation now to
feel that our anticipation is justiﬁed by the result.
Very truly your friend, A. LINCOLN.
   
  A
A I
  A  I
  
       
 
 
     
MAY 3, 1861
BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES.
A Proclamation..
Whereas existing exigencies demand immediate and
adequate measures for the protection of the National
Constitution and the preservation of the National Union by
the suppression of the insurrectionary combinations now
existing in several States for opposing the laws of the
Union and obstructing the execution thereof, to which end
a military force in addition to that called forth by my
proclamation of the 15th day of April in the present year
appears to be indispensably necessary:
Now, therefore, I, Abraham Lincoln, President of the
United States and Commander in Chief of the Army and
Navy thereof and of the militia of the several States when
called into actual service, do hereby call into the service of
the United States 42,034 volunteers to serve for the period
of three years, unless sooner discharged, and to be
mustered into service as infantry and cavalry. The
proportions of each arm and the details of enrollment and
organization will be made known through the Department
of War.
 And I also direct that the Regular Army of the United
States be increased by the addition of eight regiments of
infantry, one regiment of cavalry, and one regiment of
artillery, making altogether a maximum aggregate increase
of 22,714 oﬀicers and enlisted men, the details of which
increase will also be made known through the Department
of War.
And I further direct the enlistment for not less than one
or more than three years of 18,000 seamen, in addition to
the present force, for the naval service of the United
States. The details of the enlistment and organization will
be made known through the Department of the Navy.
The call for volunteers hereby made and the direction for
the increase of the Regular Army and for the enlistment of
seamen 
hereby 
given, 
together 
with 
the 
plan 
of
organization adopted for the volunteer and for the regular
forces hereby authorized, will be submitted to Congress as
soon as assembled.
In the meantime I earnestly invoke the co-operation of all
good citizens in the measures hereby adopted for the
eﬀectual suppression of unlawful violence, for the impartial
enforcement of constitutional laws, and for the speediest
possible restoration of peace and order, and with these of
happiness and prosperity, throughout our country.
In testimony whereof I have hereunto set my band and
caused the seal of the United States to be aﬀixed................
A. LINCOLN.
By the President: WILLIAM H. SEWARD, Secretary of
State.
  
I A I
 
I H  I       I
 
TO VICE-PRESIDENT HAMLIN.
WASHINGTON, D.C., MAY 6, 1861
HON. H. HAMLIN, New York.
MY DEAR SIR:-Please advise me at the close of each day
what troops left during the day, where going, and by what
route; what remaining at New York, and what expected in
the next day. Give the numbers, as near as convenient, and
what corps they are. This information, reaching us daily,
will be very useful as well as satisfactory.
Yours very truly, A. LINCOLN.
  
    
  
 
   A
   
MAY 7, 1861
TO 
ALL 
WHO 
SHALL 
SEE 
THESE 
PRESENTS,
GREETING: Know ye that, reposing special trust and
conﬁdence in the patriotism, valor, ﬁdelity, and ability of
Colonel Robert Anderson, U. S. Army, I have empowered
him, and do hereby empower him, to receive into the army
of the United States as many regiments of volunteer troops
from the State of Kentucky and from the western part of
the State of Virginia as shall be willing to engage in the
Service of the United States for the term of three years,
upon the terms and according to the plan proposed by the
proclamation of May 3, 1861, and General Orders No. 15,
from the War Department, of May 4, 1861.
The troops whom he receives shall be on the same
footing in every respect as those of the like kind called for
in the proclamation above cited, except that the oﬀicers
shall be commissioned by the United States. He is therefore
carefully and diligently to discharge the duty hereby
devolved upon him by doing and performing all manner of
things thereunto belonging.
Given under my hand, at the city of Washington, this 7th
day of May, A. D. 1861, and in the eighty-ﬁfth year of the
independence of the United States.
 A. LINCOLN.
By the President: SIMON CAMERON, Secretary of War,
   
  A
A I
  
   
I
  H  
 I  
HA  A   
  
  I
   
 I
A
MAY 10, 1861.
BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES OP
AMERICA: A Proclamation.
Whereas an insurrection exists in the State of Florida, by
which the lives, liberty, and property of loyal citizens of the
United States are endangered: And whereas it is deemed
proper that all needful measures should be taken for the
protection of such citizens and all oﬀicers of the United
States in the discharge of their public duties in the State
aforesaid: Now, therefore, be it known that I, Abraham
LINCOLN, President of the United States, do hereby direct
the commander of the forces of the United States on the
Florida coast to permit no person to exercise any oﬀice or
authority upon the islands of Key West, the Tortugas, and
Santa Rosa, which may be inconsistent with the laws and
Constitution of the United States, authorizing him at the
same time, if he shall ﬁnd it necessary, to suspend there the
writ of habeas corpus, and to remove from the vicinity of
the United States fortresses all dangerous or suspected
persons.
In witness whereof, I have hereunto set my hand and
caused 
the 
seal 
of 
the 
United 
States 
to 
be
 aﬀixed.....................
A. LINCOLN.
By the President: WILLIAM H. SEWARD, Secretary of
State.
  
       A   
     .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, May 11, 1861
TO THE SECRETARY OF THE NAVY.
SIR:-Lieut. D. D. Porter was placed in command of the
steamer Powhatan, and Captain Samuel Mercer was
detached therefrom, by my special order, and neither of
them is responsible for any apparent or real irregularity on
their part or in connection with that vessel.
Hereafter Captain Porter is relieved from that special
service and placed under the direction of the Navy
Department, from which he will receive instructions and to
which he will report.
Very respectfully, A. LINCOLN.
     I
 
   I
 
 
    
     I
  
  A
I  
A I  
   A  H
WRITTEN BY THE SECRETARY OF STATE TO MINISTER
ADAMS
NO. 10.
DEPARTMENT OF STATE. WASHINGTON, May 21, 1861
SIR: — Mr. Dallas, in a brief despatch of May 2d (No.
333), tells us that Lord John Russell recently requested an
interview with him on account of the solicitude which his
lordship felt concerning the eﬀect of certain measures
represented as likely to be adopted by the President. In
that conversation the British secretary told Mr. Dallas that
the three representatives of the Southern Confederacy
were then in London, that Lord John Russell had not yet
seen them, but that he was not unwilling to see them
unoﬀicially. He further informed Mr. Dallas that an
understanding exists between the British and French
governments which would lead both to take one and the
same course as to recognition. His lordship then referred to
the rumor of a meditated blockade by us of Southern ports,
and a discontinuance of them as ports of entry. Mr. Dallas
answered that he knew nothing on those topics, and
therefore
 (The President’s corrections, both in notes and text, are
in
caps. All matter between brackets was to be marked
out.)
could say nothing. He added that you were expected to
arrive in two weeks. Upon this statement Lord John Russell
acquiesced in the expediency of waiting for the full
knowledge you were expected to bring.
Mr. Dallas transmitted to us some newspaper reports of
ministerial explanations made in Parliament.
You will base no proceedings on parliamentary debates
further than to seek explanations when necessary and
communicate them to this department. [We intend to have
a clear and simple record of whatever issue may arise
between us and Great Britain.]
The President [is surprised and grieved] regrets that Mr.
Dallas did not protest against the proposed unoﬀicial
intercourse between the British Government and the
missionaries of the insurgents [as well as against the
demand for explanations made by the British Government].
It is due, however, to Mr. Dallas to say that our instructions
had been given only to you and not to him, and that his
loyalty and ﬁdelity, too rare in these times [among our late
representatives 
abroad, 
are 
confessed 
and] 
are
appreciated.
Intercourse of any kind with the so-called commissioners
is liable to be construed as a recognition of the authority
which appointed them. Such intercourse would be none the
less [wrongful] hurtful to us for being called unoﬀicial, and
 it might be even more injurious, because we should have no
means of knowing what points might be resolved by it.
Moreover, unoﬀicial intercourse is useless and meaningless
if it is not expected to ripen into oﬀicial intercourse and
direct recognition. It is left doubtful here whether the
proposed unoﬀicial intercourse has yet actually begun.
Your own [present] antecedent instructions are deemed
explicit enough, and it is hoped that you have not
misunderstood them. You will in any event desist from all
intercourse whatever, unoﬀicial as well as oﬀicial, with the
British Government, so long as it shall continue intercourse
of either kind with the domestic enemies of this country
[conﬁning yourself to a delivery of a copy of this paper to
the Secretary of State. After doing this.] When intercourse
shall have been arrested for this cause, you will
communicate with this department and receive further
directions.
Lord John Russell has informed us of an understanding
between the British and French governments that they will
act together in regard to our aﬀairs. This communication,
however, 
loses 
something 
of 
its 
value 
from 
the
circumstance that the communication was withheld until
after knowledge of the fact had been acquired by us from
other sources. We know also another fact that has not yet
been oﬀicially communicated to us — namely, that other
European States are apprised by France and England of
their agreement, and are expected to concur with or follow
them in whatever measures they adopt on the subject of
recognition. The United States have been impartial and just
 in all their conduct toward the several nations of Europe.
They will not complain, however, of the combination now
announced by the two leading powers, although they think
they had a right to expect a more independent, if not a
more friendly, course from each of them. You will take no
notice of that or any other alliance. Whenever the
European governments shall see ﬁt to communicate
directly with us, we shall be, as heretofore, frank and
explicit in our reply.
As to the blockade, you will say that by [the] our own
laws [of nature] and the laws of nature and the laws of
nations, this Government has a clear right to suppress
insurrection. An exclusion of commerce from national ports
which have been seized by the insurgents, in the equitable
form of blockade, is the proper means to that end. You will
[admit] not insist that our blockade is [not] to be respected
if it be not maintained by a competent force; but passing by
that question as not now a practical, or at least an urgent,
one, you will add that [it] the blockade is now, and it will
continue to be so maintained, and therefore we expect it to
be respected by Great Britain. You will add that we have
already revoked the exequatur of a Russian consul who had
enlisted in the military service of the insurgents, and we
shall dismiss or demand the recall of every foreign agent,
consular or diplomatic, who shall either disobey the Federal
laws or disown the Federal authority.
As 
to 
the 
recognition 
of 
the 
so-called 
Southern
Confederacy, it is not to be made a subject of technical
deﬁnition. It is, of course, [quasi] direct recognition to
 publish an acknowledgment of the sovereignty and
independence of a new power. It is [quasi] direct
recognition to receive its ambassadors, ministers, agents,
or commissioners oﬀicially. A concession of belligerent
rights is liable to be construed as a recognition of them. No
one of these proceedings will [be borne] pass [unnoticed]
unquestioned by the United States in this case.
Hitherto recognition has been moved only on the
assumption that the so-called Confederate States are de
facto a self-sustaining power. Now, after long forbearance,
designed to soothe discontent and avert the need of civil
war, the land and naval forces of the United States have
been put in motion to repress the insurrection. The true
character of the pretended new State is at once revealed. It
is seen to be a power existing in pronunciamento only, It
has never won a ﬁeld. It has obtained no forts that were not
virtually betrayed into its hands or seized in breach of
trust. It commands not a single port on the coast nor any
highway out from its pretended capital by land. Under
these circumstances Great Britain is called upon to
intervene and give it body and independence by resisting
our measures of suppression. British recognition would be
British intervention to create within our own territory a
hostile state by overthrowing this republic itself. [When this
act of intervention is distinctly performed, we from that
hour shall cease to be friends, and become once more, as
we have twice before been forced to be, enemies of Great
Britain.]
 As to the treatment of privateers in the insurgent service,
you will say that this is a question exclusively our own. We
treat them as pirates. They are our own citizens, or persons
employed by our citizens, preying on the commerce of our
country. If Great Britain shall choose to recognize them as
lawful belligerents, and give them shelter from our pursuit
and punishment, the laws of nations aﬀord an adequate and
proper remedy [and we shall avail ourselves of it. And while
you need not say this in advance, be sure that you say
nothing inconsistent with it.]
Happily, however, her Britannic Majesty’s government
can avoid all these diﬀiculties. It invited us in 1856 to
accede to the declaration of the Congress of Paris, of which
body Great Britain was herself a member, abolishing
privateering everywhere in all cases and forever. You
already have our authority to propose to her our accession
to that declaration. If she refuse to receive it, it can only be
because she is willing to become the patron of privateering
when aimed at our devastation.
These positions are not elaborately defended now,
because to vindicate them would imply a possibility of our
waiving them.
1 We are not insensible of the grave importance of
1 (Drop all from this line to the end, and in lieu of it
write, “This paper is for your own guidance only, and not
[sic] to be read or shown to any one.”)
(Secretary Seward, when the despatch was returned to
him, added an introductory paragraph stating that the
 document was strictly conﬁdential. For this reason these
last two paragraphs remained as they are here printed.)
this occasion. We see how, upon the result of the debate
in which we are engaged, a war may ensue between the
United States and one, two, or even more European
nations. War in any case is as exceptionable from the habits
as it is revolting from the sentiments of the American
people. But if it come, it will be fully seen that it results
from the action of Great Britain, not our own; that Great
Britain will have decided to fraternize with our domestic
enemy, either without waiting to hear from you our
remonstrances and our warnings, or after having heard
them. War in defense of national life is not immoral, and
war in defense of independence is an inevitable part of the
discipline of nations.
The dispute will be between the European and the
American branches of the British race. All who belong to
that race will especially deprecate it, as they ought. It may
well be believed that men of every race and kindred will
deplore it. A war not unlike it between the same parties
occurred at the close of the last century. Europe atoned by
forty years of suﬀering for the error that Great Britain
committed in provoking that contest. If that nation shall
now repeat the same great error, the social convulsions
which will follow may not be so long, but they will be more
general. When they shall have ceased, it will, we think, be
seen, whatever may have been the fortunes of other
nations, that it is not the United States that will have come
out of them with its precious Constitution altered or its
 honestly obtained dominion in any degree abridged. Great
Britain has but to wait a few months and all her present
inconveniences will cease with all our own troubles. If she
take a diﬀerent course, she will calculate for herself the
ultimate as well as the immediate consequences, and will
consider what position she will hold when she shall have
forever lost the sympathies and the aﬀections of the only
nation on whose sympathies and aﬀections she has a
natural claim. In making that calculation she will do well to
remember that in the controversy she proposes to open we
shall be actuated by neither pride, nor passion, nor
cupidity, nor ambition; but we shall stand simply on the
principle of self-preservation, and that our cause will
involve the independence of nations and the rights of
human nature.
I am, Sir, respectfully your obedient servant, W. H. S.
CHARLES FRANCIS ADAMS, Esq., etc,
  
  H        A   
  
A 
E ECUTIVE MANSION, May 21, 1861.
HON. SECRETARY OF WAR. MY DEAR SIR: — Why
cannot Colonel Small’s Philadelphia regiment be received?
I sincerely wish it could. There is something strange about
it. Give these gentlemen an interview, and take their
regiment.
Yours truly, A. LINCOLN.
  
 
   
  
 
A
.
WASHINGTON, May 12, 1861
GOVERNOR E. D. MORGAN, Albany, N.Y.
I wish to see you face to face to clear these diﬀiculties
about forwarding troops from New York.
A. LINCOLN.
  
  A  AI
 
AH 
   
.
E ECUTIVE, MANSION, May 23, 1863.
CAPT. DAHLGREEN.
MY DEAR SIR: — Allow me to introduce Col. J. A.
McLernand, M.C. of my own district in Illinois. If he should
desire to visit Fortress Monroe, please introduce him to the
captain of one of the vessels in our service, and pass him
down and back.
Yours very truly, A. LINCOLN.
        
   
  
    
 
  
   I  
 A  A  I 
TO COLONEL ELLSWORTH’S PARENTS, WASHINGTON,
D.C., May 25, 1861
TO THE FATHER AND MOTHER OF COL. ELMER E.
ELLSWORTH.
MY DEAR SIR AND MADAME: — In the untimely loss of
your noble son, our aﬄiction here is scarcely less than your
own. So much of promised usefulness to one’s country, and
of bright hopes for one’s self and friends, have never been
so suddenly dashed as in his fall. In size, in years, and in
youthful appearance a boy only, his power to command men
was surpassingly great. This power, combined with a ﬁne
intellectual and indomitable energy, and a taste altogether
military, constituted in him, as seemed to me, the best
natural talent in that department I ever knew. And yet he
was singularly modest and deferential in social intercourse.
My acquaintance with him began less than two years ago;
yet, through the latter half of the intervening period, it was
as intense as the disparity of our ages and my engrossing
engagements would permit. To me he appeared to have no
indulgences or pastimes, and I never heard him utter a
profane or an intemperate word. What was conclusive of
his good heart, he never forgot his parents. The honors he
 labored for so laudably, and for which, in the sad end, he so
gallantly gave his life, he meant for them no less than for
himself.
In the hope that it may be no intrusion upon the
sacredness of your sorrow, I have ventured to address you
this tribute to the memory of my young friend and your
brave and early fallen son.
May God give you the consolation which is beyond all
early power.
Sincerely your friend in common aﬄiction, A. LINCOLN.
  
  
 
    A      .
WASHINGTON, May 27, 1861
COL. W. A. BARTLETT, New York.
The Naval Brigade was to go to Fort Monroe without
trouble to the government, and must so go or not at all.
A. LINCOLN.
  
 A
 A 
  I
IA
A   
I
 
  .
WASHINGTON, JUNE 11, 1861
THE GOVERNMENT HAS already accepted ten regiments
from the State of Indiana. I think at least six more ought to
be received from that State, two to be those of Colonel
James W. McMillan and Colonel William L.
Brown, and the other four to be designated by the
Governor of the State of Indiana, and to be received into
the volunteer service of the United States according to the
“Plan of Organization” in the General Orders of the War
Department, No.15. When they report to Major-General
McClellan in condition to pass muster according to that
order, and with the approval of the Secretary of War to be
indorsed hereon, and left in his department, I direct that
the whole six, or any smaller number of such regiments, be
received.
A. LINCOLN.
  
  H        A   
  
A .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, JUNE 13, 1861
HON. SECRETARY OF WAR.
MY DEAR SIR: — There is, it seems, a regiment in
Massachusetts commanded by Fletcher Webster, and which
HON. Daniel Webster’s old friends very much wish to get
into the service. If it can be received with the approval of
your department and the consent of the Governor of
Massachusetts I shall indeed be much gratiﬁed. Give Mr.
Ashmun a chance to explain fully.
Yours truly, A. LINCOLN.
  
  H        A   
  
A .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, JUNE 13, 1861 HON. SECRETARY
OF WAR.
MY DEAR SIR — I think it is entirely safe to accept a ﬁfth
regiment from Michigan, and with your approbation I
should say a regiment presented by Col. T. B. W. Stockton,
ready for service within two weeks from now, will be
received. Look at Colonel Stockton’s testimonials.
Yours truly, A. LINCOLN.
  
  H        A   
  
A .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, June 17, 1861
HON. SECRETARY OF WAR.
MY DEAR SIR: — With your concurrence, and that of the
Governor of Indiana, I am in favor of accepting into what
we call the three years’ service any number not exceeding
four additional regiments from that State. Probably they
should come from the triangular region between the Ohio
and Wabash Rivers, including my own old boyhood home.
Please see HON. C. M. Allen, Speaker of the Indiana House
of Representatives, and unless you perceive good reason to
the contrary, draw up an order for him according to the
above.
Yours truly, A. LINCOLN.
  
  H        A   
  
A .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, JUNE 17,1861
HON. SECRETARY OF WAR. MY DEAR SIR: — With your
concurrence, and that of the Governor of Ohio, I am in
favor of receiving into what we call the three years’ service
any number not exceeding six additional regiments from
that State, unless you perceive good reasons to the
contrary. Please see HON. John A. Gurley, who bears this,
and make an order corresponding with the above.
Yours truly, A. LINCOLN.
  
 
. 
.  
A 
WASHINGTON, D. C., June 19, 1861
HON. N. W. EDWARDS MY DEAR SIR: ....When you wrote
me some time ago in reference to looking up something in
the departments here, I thought I would inquire into the
thing and write you, but the extraordinary pressure upon
me diverted me from it, and soon it passed out of my mind.
The thing you proposed, it seemed to me, I ought to
understand myself before it was set on foot by my direction
or permission; and I really had no time to make myself
acquainted with it. Nor have I yet. And yet I am unwilling,
of course, that you should be deprived of a chance to make
something, if it can be done without injustice to the
Government, or to any individual. If you choose to come
here and point out to me how this can be done I shall not
only not object, but shall be gratiﬁed to be able to oblige
you.
Your friend as ever A. LINCOLN.
  
       A    A
  
.
E ECUTIVE MANSION, June 20, 1861.
MY DEAR SIR: — Since you spoke to me yesterday about
General J. H. Lane, of Kansas, I have been reﬂecting upon
the subject, and have concluded that we need the service of
such a man out there at once; that we had better appoint
him a brigadier-general of volunteers to-day, and send him
oﬀ with such authority to raise a force (I think two
regiments better than three, but as to this I am not
particular) as you think will get him into actual work
quickest. Tell him, when he starts, to put it through not to
be writing or telegraphing back here, but put it through.
Yours truly, A. LINCOLN.
 H
.       A   
  
A .
[Indorsement.]
GENERAL 
LANE 
HAS 
been authorized to raise two
additional regiments of volunteers.
SIMON CAMERON, Secretary o f War.
  
  H    
 
    
   
A I
.
E ECUTIVE MANSION, June 29, 1861.
GENTLEMEN OF THE KENTUCKY DELEGATION WHO
ARE FOR THE UNION: I somewhat wish to authorize my
friend Jesse Bayles to raise a Kentucky regiment, but I do
not wish to do it without your consent. If you consent,
please write so at the bottom of this.
Yours truly, A. LINCOLN.
We consent:
R. MALLORY.
H. GRIDER.
G. W. DUNLAP.
J. S. JACKSON.
C. A. WICKLIFFE.
August 5, 1 8 6 1 .
I repeat, I would like for Col. Bayles to raise a regiment of
cavalry whenever the Union men of Kentucky desire or
consent to it.
A. LINCOLN.
  
   A
 H
 I I
 
 
  A    
    
 
   
  H  
 I  
  HA  A   
  
    
 
2, 1861 TO THE COMMANDING GENERAL, ARMY OF
THE UNITED STATES: You are engaged in suppressing an
insurrection against the laws of the United States. If at any
point on or in the vicinity of any military line which is now
or which shall be used between the city of New York and
the city of Washington you ﬁnd resistance which renders it
necessary to suspend the writ of habeas corpus for the
public safety, you personally, or through the oﬀicer in
command at the point where resistance occurs, are
authorized to suspend that writ.
Given under my hand and the seal of the United States at
the city of Washington, this second day of July, A.D. 1861,
and of the independence of the United States the eighty-
ﬁfth.
A. LINCOLN.
By the President: WILLIAM H. SEWARD, Secretary of
State.
  
       A     
A 
.
E ECUTIVE MANSION, JULY 3, 1861
HON. SECRETARY OF STATE.
MY DEAR SIR: — General Scott had sent me a copy of
the despatch of which you kindly sent one. Thanks to both
him and you. Please assemble the Cabinet at twelve to-day
to look over the message and reports.
And now, suppose you step over at once and let us see
General Scott (and) General Cameron about assigning a
position to General Fremont.
Yours as ever, A. LINCOLN.
    A
   
  
     I
     IA      I
JULY 4, 1861.
FELLOW-CITIZENS OF THE SENATE AND HOUSE OF
REPRESENTATIVES: — Having been convened on an
extraordinary occasion, as authorized by the Constitution,
your attention is not called to any ordinary subject of
legislation.
At the beginning of the present Presidential term, four
months ago, the functions of the Federal Government were
found to be generally suspended within the several States
of 
South 
Carolina, 
Georgia, 
Alabama, 
Mississippi,
Louisiana, and Florida, excepting only those of the Post-
Oﬀice Department.
Within these States all the forts, arsenals, dockyards,
custom-houses, and the like, including the movable and
stationary property in and about them, had been seized,
and were held in open hostility to this government,
excepting only Forts Pickens, Taylor, and Jeﬀerson, on and
near the Florida coast, and Fort Sumter, in Charleston
Harbor, South Carolina. The forts thus seized had been put
in improved condition, new ones had been built, and armed
forces had been organized and were organizing, all
avowedly with the same hostile purpose.
 The forts remaining in the possession of the Federal
Government in and near these States were either besieged
or menaced by warlike preparations, and especially Fort
Sumter was nearly surrounded by well-protected hostile
batteries, with guns equal in quality to the best of its own,
and outnumbering the latter as perhaps ten to one. A
disproportionate share of the Federal muskets and riﬂes
had somehow found their way into these States, and had
been 
seized 
to 
be 
used 
against 
the 
government.
Accumulations of the public revenue lying within them had
been seized for the same object. The navy was scattered in
distant seas, leaving but a very small part of it within the
immediate reach of the government. Oﬀicers of the Federal
army and navy had resigned in great numbers; and of those
resigning a large proportion had taken up arms against the
government. Simultaneously, and in connection with all
this, the purpose to sever the Federal Union was openly
avowed. In accordance with this purpose, an ordinance had
been adopted in each of these States, declaring the States
respectively to be separated from the national Union. A
formula for instituting a combined government of these
States had been promulgated; and this illegal organization,
in the character of confederate States, was already
invoking recognition, aid, and intervention from foreign
powers.
Finding this condition of things, and believing it to be an
imperative duty upon the incoming executive to prevent, if
possible, the consummation of such attempt to destroy the
Federal Union, a choice of means to that end became
 indispensable. This choice was made and was declared in
the inaugural address. The policy chosen looked to the
exhaustion of all peaceful measures before a resort to any
stronger ones. It sought only to hold the public places and
property not already wrested from the government, and to
collect the revenue, relying for the rest on time, discussion,
and the ballot-box. It promised a continuance of the mails,
at government expense, to the very people who were
resisting the government; and it gave repeated pledges
against any disturbance to any of the people, or any of their
rights. Of all that which a President might constitutionally
and justiﬁably do in such a case, everything was forborne
without which it was believed possible to keep the
government on foot.
On the 5th of March (the present incumbent’s ﬁrst full
day in oﬀice), a letter of Major Anderson, commanding at
Fort Sumter, written on the 28th of February and received
at the War Department on the 4th of March, was by that
department placed in his hands. This letter expressed the
professional opinion of the writer that reinforcements could
not be thrown into that fort within the time for his relief,
rendered necessary by the limited supply of provisions, and
with a view of holding possession of the same, with a force
of less than twenty thousand good and well-disciplined
men. This opinion was concurred in by all the oﬀicers of his
command, and their memoranda on the subject were made
inclosures of Major Anderson’s letter. The whole was
immediately laid before Lieutenant-General Scott, who at
once concurred with Major Anderson in opinion. On
 reﬂection, however, he took full time, consulting with other
oﬀicers, both of the army and the navy, and at the end of
four days came reluctantly but decidedly to the same
conclusion as before. He also stated at the same time that
no such suﬀicient force was then at the control of the
government, or could be raised and brought to the ground
within the time when the provisions in the fort would be
exhausted. In a purely military point of view, this reduced
the duty of the administration in the case to the mere
matter of getting the garrison safely out of the fort.
It was believed, however, that to so abandon that
position, under the circumstances, would be utterly
ruinous; that the necessity under which it was to be done
would not be fully understood; that by many it would be
construed as a part of a voluntary policy; that at home it
would discourage the friends of the Union, embolden its
adversaries, and go far to insure to the latter a recognition
abroad; that in fact, it would be our national destruction
consummated. This could not be allowed. Starvation was
not yet upon the garrison, and ere it would be reached Fort
Pickens might be reinforced. This last would be a clear
indication of policy, and would better enable the country to
accept the evacuation of Fort Sumter as a military
necessity. An order was at once directed to be sent for the
landing of the troops from the steamship Brooklyn into Fort
Pickens. This order could not go by land, but must take the
longer and slower route by sea. The ﬁrst return news from
the order was received just one week before the fall of Fort
Sumter. The news itself was that the oﬀicer commanding
 the Sabine, to which vessel the troops had been transferred
from the Brooklyn, acting upon some quasi armistice of the
late administration (and of the existence of which the
present administration, up to the time the order was
despatched, had only too vague and uncertain rumors to ﬁx
attention), had refused to land the troops. To now reinforce
Fort Pickens before a crisis would be reached at Fort
Sumter was impossible — rendered so by the near
exhaustion of provisions in the latter-named fort. In
precaution against such a conjuncture, the government
had, a few days before, commenced preparing an
expedition as well adapted as might be to relieve Fort
Sumter, which expedition was intended to be ultimately
used, or not, according to circumstances. The strongest
anticipated case for using it was now presented, and it was
resolved to send it forward. As had been intended in this
contingency, it was also resolved to notify the governor of
South Carolina that he might expect an attempt would be
made to provision the fort; and that, if the attempt should
not be resisted, there would be no eﬀort to throw in men,
arms, or ammunition, without further notice, or in case of
an attack upon the fort. This notice was accordingly given;
whereupon the fort was attacked and bombarded to its fall,
without even awaiting the arrival of the provisioning
expedition.
It is thus seen that the assault upon and reduction of Fort
Sumter was in no sense a matter of self-defense on the part
of the assailants. They well knew that the garrison in the
fort could by no possibility commit aggression upon them.
 They knew — they were expressly notiﬁed — that the giving
of bread to the few brave and hungry men of the garrison
was all which would on that occasion be attempted, unless
themselves, by resisting so much, should provoke more.
They knew that this government desired to keep the
garrison in the fort, not to assail them, but merely to
maintain visible possession, and thus to preserve the Union
from actual and immediate dissolution — trusting, as
hereinbefore stated, to time, discussion, and the ballot-box
for ﬁnal adjustment; and they assailed and reduced the fort
for precisely the reverse object — to drive out the visible
authority of the Federal Union, and thus force it to
immediate dissolution. That this was their object the
executive well understood; and having said to them in the
inaugural address, “You can have no conﬂict without being
yourselves the aggressors,” he took pains not only to keep
this declaration good, but also to keep the case so free from
the power of ingenious sophistry that the world should not
be able to misunderstand it. By the aﬀair at Fort Sumter,
with its surrounding circumstances, that point was
reached. 
Then 
and 
thereby 
the 
assailants 
of 
the
government began the conﬂict of arms, without a gun in
sight or in expectancy to return their ﬁre, save only the few
in the fort sent to that harbor years before for their own
protection, and still ready to give that protection in
whatever was lawful. In this act, discarding all else, they
have forced upon the country the distinct issue, “immediate
dissolution or blood.”
 And this issue embraces more than the fate of these
United States. It presents to the whole family of man the
question whether a constitutional republic or democracy —
a government of the people by the same people — can or
cannot maintain its territorial integrity against its own
domestic 
foes. 
It 
presents 
the 
question 
whether
discontented individuals, too few in numbers to control
administration according to organic law in any case, can
always, upon the pretenses made in this case, or on any
other pretenses, or arbitrarily without any pretense, break
up their government, and thus practically put an end to
free government upon the earth. It forces us to ask: Is
there in all republics this inherent and fatal weakness?
Must a government, of necessity, be too strong for the
liberties of its own people, or too weak to maintain its own
existence?
So viewing the issue, no choice was left but to call out
the war power of the government, and so to resist force
employed for its destruction by force for its preservation.
The call was made, and the response of the country was
most gratifying, surpassing in unanimity and spirit the most
sanguine expectation. Yet none of the States commonly
called slave States, except Delaware, gave a regiment
through regular State organization. A few regiments have
been organized within some others of those States by
individual enterprise, and received into the government
service. Of course the seceded States, so called (and to
which Texas had been joined about the time of the
inauguration), gave no troops to the cause of the Union.
 The border States, so called, were not uniform in their
action, some of them being almost for the Union, while in
others — as Virginia, North Carolina, Tennessee, and
Arkansas — the Union sentiment was nearly repressed and
silenced. The course taken in Virginia was the most
remarkable — perhaps the most important. A convention
elected by the people of that State to consider this very
question of disrupting the Federal Union was in session at
the capital of Virginia when Fort Sumter fell. To this body
the people had chosen a large majority of professed Union
men. Almost immediately after the fall of Sumter, many
members of that majority went over to the original disunion
minority, and with them adopted an ordinance for
withdrawing the State from the Union. Whether this
change was wrought by their great approval of the assault
upon 
Sumter, 
or 
their 
great 
resentment 
at 
the
government’s resistance to that assault, is not deﬁnitely
known. 
Although 
they 
submitted 
the 
ordinance 
for
ratiﬁcation to a vote of the people, to be taken on a day
then somewhat more than a month distant, the convention
and the Legislature (which was also in session at the same
time and place), with leading men of the State not members
of either, immediately commenced acting as if the State
were already out of the Union. They pushed military
preparations vigorously forward all over the State. They
seized the United States armory at Harper’s Ferry, and the
navy-yard at Gosport, near Norfolk. They received perhaps
invited — into their State large bodies of troops, with their
warlike appointments, from the so-called seceded States.
 They formally entered into a treaty of temporary alliance
and co-operation with the so-called “Confederate States,”
and sent members to their congress at Montgomery. And
ﬁnally, they permitted the insurrectionary government to be
transferred to their capital at Richmond.
The people of Virginia have thus allowed this giant
insurrection to make its nest within her borders; and this
government has no choice left but to deal with it where it
ﬁnds it. And it has the less regret as the loyal citizens have,
in due form, claimed its protection. Those loyal citizens this
government is bound to recognize and protect, as being
Virginia.
In the border States, so called, — in fact, the middle
States, — there are those who favor a policy which they call
“armed neutrality”; that is, an arming of those States to
prevent the Union forces passing one way, or the disunion
the other, over their soil. This would be disunion completed.
Figuratively speaking, it would be the building of an
impassable wall along the line of separation — and yet not
quite an impassable one, for under the guise of neutrality it
would tie the hands of Union men and freely pass supplies
from among them to the insurrectionists, which it could not
do as an open enemy. At a stroke it would take all the
trouble oﬀ the hands of secession, except only what
proceeds from the external blockade. It would do for the
disunionists that which, of all things, they most desire —
feed them well and give them disunion without a struggle
of their own. It recognizes no ﬁdelity to the Constitution, no
obligation to maintain the Union; and while very many who
 have favored it are doubtless loyal citizens, it is,
nevertheless, very injurious in eﬀect.
Recurring to the action of the government, it may be
stated that at ﬁrst a call was made for 75,000 militia; and,
rapidly following this, a proclamation was issued for closing
the ports of the insurrectionary districts by proceedings in
the nature of blockade. So far all was believed to be strictly
legal. At this point the insurrectionists announced their
purpose to enter upon the practice of privateering.
Other calls were made for volunteers to serve for three
years, unless sooner discharged, and also for large
additions to the regular army and navy. These measures,
whether strictly legal or not, were ventured upon, under
what appeared to be a popular demand and a public
necessity; trusting then, as now, that Congress would
readily ratify them. It is believed that nothing has been
done beyond the constitutional competency of Congress.
Soon after the ﬁrst call for militia, it was considered a
duty to authorize the commanding general in proper cases,
according to his discretion, to suspend the privilege of the
writ of habeas corpus, or, in other words, to arrest and
detain, without resort to the ordinary processes and forms
of law, such individuals as he might deem dangerous to the
public safety. This authority has purposely been exercised
but very sparingly. Nevertheless, the legality and propriety
of what has been done under it are questioned, and the
attention of the country has been called to the proposition
that one who has sworn to “take care that the laws be
faithfully executed” should not himself violate them. Of
 course some consideration was given to the questions of
power and propriety before this matter was acted upon.
The whole of the laws which were required to be faithfully
executed were being resisted and failing of execution in
nearly one third of the States. Must they be allowed to
ﬁnally fail of execution, even had it been perfectly clear
that by the use of the means necessary to their execution
some single law, made in such extreme tenderness of the
citizen’s liberty that, practically, it relieves more of the
guilty than of the innocent, should to a very limited extent
be violated? To state the question more directly, are all the
laws but one to go unexecuted, and the government itself
go to pieces lest that one be violated? Even in such a case,
would not the oﬀicial oath be broken if the government
should 
be 
overthrown 
when 
it 
was 
believed 
that
disregarding the single law would tend to preserve it? But
it was not believed that this question was presented. It was
not believed that any law was violated. The provision of the
Constitution that “the privilege of the writ of habeas corpus
shall not be suspended, unless when, in cases of rebellion
or invasion, the public safety may require it,” is equivalent
to a provision — is a provision — that such privilege may be
suspended when, in case of rebellion or invasion, the public
safety does require it. It was decided that we have a case of
rebellion, and that the public safety does require the
qualiﬁed suspension of the privilege of the writ which was
authorized to be made. Now it is insisted that Congress,
and not the executive, is vested with this power. But the
Constitution itself is silent as to which or who is to exercise
 the power; and as the provision was plainly made for a
dangerous emergency, it cannot be believed the framers of
the instrument intended that in every case the danger
should run its course until Congress could be called
together, the very assembling of which might be prevented,
as was intended in this case, by the rebellion.
No more extended argument is now oﬀered, as an
opinion at some length will probably be presented by the
attorney-general. Whether there shall be any legislation
upon the subject, and if any, what, is submitted entirely to
the better judgment of Congress.
The forbearance of this government had been so
extraordinary and so long continued as to lead some
foreign nations to shape their action as if they supposed the
early destruction of our national Union was probable. While
this, on discovery, gave the executive some concern, he is
now happy to say that the sovereignty and rights of the
United States are now everywhere practically respected by
foreign powers; and a general sympathy with the country is
manifested throughout the world.
The reports of the Secretaries of the Treasury, War, and
the Navy will give the information in detail deemed
necessary and convenient for your deliberation and action;
while the executive and all the departments will stand
ready to supply omissions, or to communicate new facts
considered important for you to know.
It is now recommended that you give the legal means for
making this contest a short and decisive one: that you place
at the control of the government for the work at least four
 hundred thousand men and  400,000,000. That number of
men is about one-tenth of those of proper ages within the
regions where, apparently, all are willing to engage; and
the sum is less than a twenty-third part of the money value
owned by the men who seem ready to devote the whole. A
debt of  600,000,000 now is a less sum per head than was
the debt of our Revolution when we came out of that
struggle; and the money value in the country now bears
even a greater proportion to what it was then than does the
population. Surely each man has as strong a motive now to
preserve our liberties as each had then to establish them.
A right result at this time will be worth more to the world
than ten times the men and ten times the money. The
evidence reaching us from the country leaves no doubt that
the material for the work is abundant, and that it needs
only the hand of legislation to give it legal sanction, and the
hand of the executive to give it practical shape and
eﬀiciency. 
One 
of 
the 
greatest 
perplexities 
of 
the
government is to avoid receiving troops faster than it can
provide for them. In a word, the people will save their
government if the government itself will do its part only
indiﬀerently well.
It might seem, at ﬁrst thought, to be of little diﬀerence
whether the present movement at the South be called
“secession” or “rebellion.” The movers, however, well
understand the diﬀerence. At the beginning they knew they
could never raise their treason to any respectable
magnitude by any name which implies violation of law. They
knew their people possessed as much of moral sense, as
 much of devotion to law and order, and as much pride in
and reverence for the history and government of their
common country as any other civilized and patriotic people.
They knew they could make no advancement directly in the
teeth of these strong and noble sentiments. Accordingly,
they commenced by an insidious debauching of the public
mind. They invented an ingenious sophism which, if
conceded, was followed by perfectly logical steps, through
all the incidents, to the complete destruction of the Union.
The sophism itself is that any State of the Union may
consistently with the national Constitution, and therefore
lawfully and peacefully, withdraw from the Union without
the consent of the Union or of any other State. The little
disguise that the supposed right is to be exercised only for
just cause, themselves to be the sole judges of its justice, is
too thin to merit any notice.
With rebellion thus sugar-coated they have been
drugging the public mind of their section for more than
thirty years, and until at length they have brought many
good men to a willingness to take up arms against the
government the day after some assemblage of men have
enacted the farcical pretense of taking their State out of
the Union, who could have been brought to no such thing
the day before.
This sophism derives much, perhaps the whole, of its
currency 
from 
the 
assumption 
that 
there 
is 
some
omnipotent and sacred supremacy pertaining to a State —
to each State of our Federal Union. Our States have neither
more nor less power than that reserved to them in the
 Union by the Constitution — no one of them ever having
been a State out of the Union. The original ones passed into
the Union even before they cast oﬀ their British colonial
dependence; and the new ones each came into the Union
directly from a condition of dependence, excepting Texas.
And even Texas in its temporary independence was never
designated a State. The new ones only took the designation
of States on coming into the Union, while that name was
ﬁrst adopted for the old ones in and by the Declaration of
Independence. 
Therein 
the 
“United 
Colonies” 
were
declared to be “free and independent States”; but even
then 
the 
object 
plainly 
was 
not 
to 
declare 
their
independence of one another or of the Union, but directly
the contrary, as their mutual pledge and their mutual action
before, at the time, and afterward, abundantly show. The
express plighting of faith by each and all of the original
thirteen in the Articles of Confederation, two years later,
that the Union shall be perpetual, is most conclusive.
Having never been States either in substance or in name
outside of the Union, whence this magical omnipotence of
“State rights,” asserting a claim of power to lawfully
destroy the Union itself? Much is said about the
“sovereignty” of the States; but the word even is not in the
national Constitution, nor, as is believed, in any of the State
constitutions. What is “sovereignty” in the political sense of
the term? Would it be far wrong to deﬁne it as “a political
community without a political superior”? Tested by this, no
one of our States except Texas ever was a sovereignty. And
even Texas gave up the character on coming into the
 Union; by which act she acknowledged the Constitution of
the United States, and the laws and treaties of the United
States made in pursuance of the Constitution, to be for her
the supreme law of the land. The States have their status in
the Union, and they have no other legal status. If they
break from this, they can only do so against law and by
revolution. The Union, and not themselves separately,
procured their independence and their liberty. By conquest
or purchase the Union gave each of them whatever of
independence or liberty it has. The Union is older than any
of the States, and, in fact, it created them as States.
Originally some dependent colonies made the Union, and,
in turn, the Union threw oﬀ their old dependence for them,
and made them States, such as they are. Not one of them
ever had a State constitution independent of the Union. Of
course, it is not forgotten that all the new States framed
their 
constitutions 
before 
they 
entered 
the 
Union
nevertheless, dependent upon and preparatory to coming
into the Union.
Unquestionably the States have the powers and rights
reserved to them in and by the national Constitution; but
among these surely are not included all conceivable
powers, however mischievous or destructive, but, at most,
such only as were known in the world at the time as
governmental powers; and certainly a power to destroy the
government 
itself 
had 
never 
been 
known 
as 
a
governmental, as a merely administrative power. This
relative matter of national power and State rights, as a
principle, is no other than the principle of generality and
 locality. Whatever concerns the whole should be conﬁded to
the whole — to the General Government; while whatever
concerns only the State should be left exclusively to the
State. This is all there is of original principle about it.
Whether the national Constitution in deﬁning boundaries
between the two has applied the principle with exact
accuracy, is not to be questioned. We are all bound by that
deﬁning, without question.
What is now combated is the position that secession is
consistent with the Constitution — is lawful and peaceful. It
is not contended that there is any express law for it; and
nothing should ever be implied as law which leads to unjust
or absurd consequences. The nation purchased with money
the countries out of which several of these States were
formed. Is it just that they shall go oﬀ without leave and
without refunding? The nation paid very large sums (in the
aggregate, I believe, nearly a hundred millions) to relieve
Florida of the aboriginal tribes. Is it just that she shall now
be oﬀ without consent or without making any return? The
nation is now in debt for money applied to the beneﬁt of
these so-called seceding States in common with the rest. Is
it just either that creditors shall go unpaid or the remaining
States pay the whole? A part of the present national debt
was contracted to pay the old debts of Texas. Is it just that
she shall leave and pay no part of this herself?
Again, if one State may secede, so may another; and
when all shall have seceded, none is left to pay the debts. Is
this quite just for creditors? Did we notify them of this sage
view of ours when we borrowed their money? If we now
 recognize this doctrine by allowing the seceders to go in
peace, it is diﬀicult to see what we can do if others choose
to go or to extort terms upon which they will promise to
remain.
The seceders insist that our Constitution admits of
secession. They have assumed to make a national
constitution of their own, in which of necessity they have
either discarded or retained the right of secession as they
insist it exists in ours. If they have discarded it, they
thereby admit that on principle it ought not to be in ours. If
they have retained it, by their own construction of ours,
they show that to be consistent they must secede from one
another whenever they shall ﬁnd it the easiest way of
settling their debts, or eﬀecting any other selﬁsh or unjust
object. The principle itself is one of disintegration and upon
which no government can possibly endure.
If all the States save one should assert the power to drive
that one out of the Union, it is presumed the whole class of
seceder politicians would at once deny the power and
denounce the act as the greatest outrage upon State rights.
But suppose that precisely the same act, instead of being
called “driving the one out,” should be called “the seceding
of the others from that one,” it would be exactly what the
seceders claim to do, unless, indeed, they make the point
that the one, because it is a minority, may rightfully do
what the others, because they are a majority, may not
rightfully do. These politicians are subtle and profound on
the rights of minorities. They are not partial to that power
 which made the Constitution and speaks from the preamble
calling itself “We, the People.”
It may well be questioned whether there is to-day a
majority of the legally qualiﬁed voters of any State except
perhaps South Carolina in favor of disunion. There is much
reason to believe that the Union men are the majority in
many, if not in every other one, of the so-called seceded
States. The contrary has not been demonstrated in any one
of them. It is ventured to aﬀirm this even of Virginia and
Tennessee; for the result of an election held in military
camps, where the bayonets are all on one side of the
question voted upon, can scarcely be considered as
demonstrating popular sentiment. At such an election, all
that large class who are at once for the Union and against
coercion would be coerced to vote against the Union.
It may be aﬀirmed without extravagance that the free
institutions we enjoy have developed the powers and
improved the condition of our whole people beyond any
example in the world. Of this we now have a striking and an
impressive illustration. So large an army as the government
has now on foot was never before known without a soldier
in it but who has taken his place there of his own free
choice. But more than this, there are many single
regiments whose members, one and another, possess full
practical knowledge of all the arts, sciences, professions,
and whatever else, whether useful or elegant, is known in
the world; and there is scarcely one from which there could
not be selected a President, a Cabinet, a Congress, and
perhaps a court, abundantly competent to administer the
 government itself. Nor do I say this is not true also in the
army of our late friends, now adversaries in this contest;
but if it is, so much better the reason why the government
which has conferred such beneﬁts on both them and us
should not be broken up. Whoever in any section proposes
to abandon such a government would do well to consider in
deference to what principle it is that he does it; what better
he is likely to get in its stead; whether the substitute will
give, or be intended to give, so much of good to the people.
There are some foreshadowings on this subject. Our
adversaries 
have 
adopted 
some 
declarations 
of
independence in which, unlike the good old one, penned by
Jeﬀerson, they omit the words “all men are created equal.”
Why? They have adopted a temporary national constitution,
in the preamble of which, unlike our good old one, signed
by Washington, they omit “We, the People,” and substitute,
“We, the deputies of the sovereign and independent
States.” Why? Why this deliberate pressing out of view the
rights of men and the authority of the people?
This is essentially a people’s contest. On the side of the
Union it is a struggle for maintaining in the world that form
and substance of government whose leading object is to
elevate the condition of men to lift artiﬁcial weights from
all shoulders; to clear the paths of laudable pursuit for all;
to aﬀord all an unfettered start, and a fair chance in the
race of life. Yielding to partial and temporary departures,
from necessity; this is the leading object of the government
for whose existence we contend.
 I am most happy to believe that the plain people
understand and appreciate this. It is worthy of note that,
while in this the government’s hour of trial large numbers
of those in the army and navy who have been favored with
the oﬀices have resigned and proved false to the hand
which had pampered them, not one common soldier or
common sailor is known to have deserted his ﬂag.
Great honor is due to those oﬀicers who remained true,
despite the example of their treacherous associates; but the
greatest honor, and most important fact of all, is the
unanimous ﬁrmness of the common soldiers and common
sailors. To the last man, so far as known, they have
successfully resisted the traitorous eﬀorts of those whose
commands, but an hour before, they obeyed as absolute
law. This is the patriotic instinct of the plain people. They
understand, without an argument, that the destroying of
the government which was made by Washington means no
good to them.
Our popular government has often been called an
experiment. Two points in it our people have already
settled — the successful establishing and the successful
administering of it. One still remains — its successful
maintenance against a formidable internal attempt to
overthrow it. It is now for them to demonstrate to the world
that those who can fairly carry an election can also
suppress a rebellion; that ballots are the rightful and
peaceful successors of bullets; and that when ballots have
fairly and constitutionally decided, there can be no
successful appeal back to bullets; that there can be no
 successful 
appeal, 
except 
to 
ballots 
themselves, 
at
succeeding elections. Such will be a great lesson of peace:
teaching men that what they cannot take by an election,
neither can they take it by a war; teaching all the folly of
being the beginners of a war.
Lest there be some uneasiness in the minds of candid
men as to what is to be the course of the government
toward the Southern States after the rebellion shall have
been suppressed, the executive deems it proper to say it
will be his purpose then, as ever, to be guided by the
Constitution and the laws; and that he probably will have
no diﬀerent understanding of the powers and duties of the
Federal Government relatively to the rights of the States
and the people, under the Constitution, than that expressed
in the inaugural address.
He desires to preserve the government, that it may be
administered for all as it was administered by the men who
made it. Loyal citizens everywhere have the right to claim
this of their government, and the government has no right
to withhold or neglect it. It is not perceived that in giving it
there is any coercion, any conquest, or any subjugation, in
any just sense of those terms.
The Constitution provides, and all the States have
accepted the provision, that “the United States shall
guarantee to every State in this Union a republican form of
government.” But if a State may lawfully go out of the
Union, having done so it may also discard the republican
form of government, so that to prevent its going out is an
indispensable means to the end of maintaining the
 guarantee mentioned; and when an end is lawful and
obligatory, the indispensable means to it are also lawful and
obligatory.
It was with the deepest regret that the executive found
the duty of employing the war power in defense of the
government forced upon him. He could but perform this
duty or surrender the existence of the government. No
compromise by public servants could, in this case, be a
cure; not that compromises are not often proper, but that
no popular government can long survive a marked
precedent that those who carry an election can only save
the government from immediate destruction by giving up
the main point upon which the people gave the election.
The people themselves, and not their servants, can safely
reverse their own deliberate decisions.
As a private citizen the executive could not have
consented that these institutions shall perish; much less
could he in betrayal of so vast and so sacred a trust as
these free people had conﬁded to him. He felt that he had
no moral right to shrink, nor even to count the chances of
his own life, in what might follow. In full view of his great
responsibility he has, so far, done what he has deemed his
duty. You will now, according to your own judgment,
perform yours. He sincerely hopes that your views and your
action may so accord with his as to assure all faithful
citizens who have been disturbed in their rights of a certain
and speedy restoration to them, under the Constitution and
the laws.
 And having thus chosen our course, without guile and
with pure purpose, let us renew our trust in God, and go
forward without fear and with manly hearts.
A. LINCOLN,
July 4, 1861
  
  H        A   
   H  I
   I
 .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, July 6, 1861.
HON. SEC. OF INTERIOR.
MY DEAR SIR: — Please ask the Comr. of Indian Aﬀairs,
and of the Gen’l Land Oﬀice to come with you, and see me
at once. I want the assistance of all of you in overhauling
the list of appointments a little before I send them to the
Senate.
Yours truly, A. LINCOLN.
    A
   
  H  H
   
         
 A I   .
TO THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES: 
IN 
ANSWER 
TO 
the 
resolution 
of 
the 
House 
of
Representatives of the 9th instant, requesting a copy of
correspondence upon the subject of the incorporation of
the Dominican republic with the Spanish monarchy, I
transmit a report from the Secretary of State; to whom the
resolution was referred.
WASHINGTON, July 11, 1861.
    A
   
  
    .
TO THE SENATE AND HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES: 
I TRANSMIT TO Congress a copy of correspondence between
the Secretary of State and her Britannic Majesty’s envoy
extraordinary and minister plenipotentiary accredited to
this government, relative to the exhibition of the products
of industry of all nations, which is to take place at London
in the course of next year. As citizens of the United States
may justly pride themselves upon their proﬁciency in
industrial arts, it is desirable that they should have proper
facilities toward taking part in the exhibition. With this
view I recommend such legislation by Congress at this
session as may be necessary for that purpose.
A. LINCOLN.
WASHINGTON, July 16, 1861
    A
   
  
    .
TO THE SENATE AND HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES: 
AS THE UNITED States have, in common with Great Britain
and France, a deep interest in the preservation and
development of the ﬁsheries adjacent to the northeastern
coast and islands of this continent, it seems proper that we
should concert with the governments of those countries
such measures as may be conducive to those important
objects. With this view I transmit to Congress a copy of a
correspondence between the Secretary of State and the
British minister here, in which the latter proposes, on
behalf of his government, the appointment of a joint
commission to inquire into the matter, in order that such
ulterior measures may be adopted as may be advisable for
the objects proposed. Such legislation recommended as
may be necessary to enable the executive to provide for a
commissioner 
on 
behalf 
of 
the 
United 
States:
WASHINGTON, JULY 19, 1861. A. LINCOLN.
  
  H  A
 
 A
  
 
  A
WASHINGTON, JULY 19, 1861
ADJUTANT-GENERAL:
I have agreed, and do agree, that the two Indian
regiments named within shall be accepted if the act of
Congress shall admit it. Let there be no further question
about it.
A. LINCOLN.
  
 A
A 
  
I I A    
 I    
    
    H   
    
 
   A .  
     
1861
1. Let the plan for making the blockade eﬀective be
pushed forward with all possible despatch.
2. Let the volunteer forces at Fort Monroe and vicinity
under General Butler be constantly drilled, disciplined, and
instructed without more for the present.
3. Let Baltimore be held as now, with a gentle but ﬁrm
and certain hand.
4. Let the force now under Patterson or Banks be
strengthened and made secure in its position.
5. Let the forces in Western Virginia act till further
orders according to instructions or orders from General
McClellan.
6. [Let] General Fremont push forward his organization
and operations in the West as rapidly as possible, giving
rather special attention to Missouri.
7. Let the forces late before Manassas, except the three-
months men, be reorganized as rapidly as possible in their
camps here and about Arlington.
8. Let the three-months forces who decline to enter the
longer service be discharged as rapidly as circumstances
will permit.
 9. Let the new volunteer forces be brought forward as
fast as possible, and especially into the camps on the two
sides of the river here.
When the foregoing shall be substantially attended to:
1. Let Manassas Junction (or some point on one or other
of the railroads near it) and Strasburg be seized, and
permanently held, with an open line from Washington to
Manassas, and an open line from Harper’s Ferry to
Strasburg the military men to ﬁnd the way of doing these.
2. This done, a joint movement from Cairo on Memphis;
and from Cincinnati on East Tennessee.
  
  H  
   
  
  
 
       .
WASHINGTON, D.C., July 24, 1861
THE GOVERNOR OF NEW JERSEY.
SIR: — Together with the regiments of three years’
volunteers which the government already has in service in
your State, enough to make eight in all, if tendered in a
reasonable time, will be accepted, the new regiments to be
taken, as far as convenient, from the three months’ men
and oﬀicers just discharged, and to be organized, equipped,
and sent forward as fast as single regiments are ready, On
the same terms as were those already in the service from
that State.
Your obedient servant, A. LINCOLN.
[Indorsement.]
This order is entered in the War Department, and the
Governor of New Jersey is authorized to furnish the
regiments with wagons and horses.
S. CAMERON, Secretary of War.
    A
   
  H  H
   
         
 A I   .
TO THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES: 
IN 
ANSWER 
TO 
the 
resolution 
of 
the 
House 
of
Representatives of the 22d instant; requesting a copy of the
correspondence between this, government and foreign
powers with reference to maritime right, I transmit a report
from the Secretary of State.
A. LINCOLN.
WASHINGTON, July 25, 1861
    A
   
  H  H
   
         
 A I   .
TO THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES: 
IN 
ANSWER 
TO 
the 
resolution 
of 
the 
House 
of
Representatives of the 15th instant, requesting a copy of
the correspondence between this government and foreign
powers on the subject of the existing insurrection in the
United States, I transmit a report from the Secretary of
State.
WASHINGTON, July 25, 1861.
A. LINCOLN.
  
       A    HA  .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, JULY 16, 1861
MR CHASE: — The bearer, Mr. —— — , wants —— — in
the custom house at Baltimore. If his recommendations are
satisfactory, and I recollect them to have been so, the fact
that he is urged by the Methodists should be in his favor, as
they complain of us some.
LINCOLN.
    A
   
  H  H
   
         
 A I   .
TO THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES: 
IN 
ANSWER 
TO 
the 
resolution 
of 
the 
House 
of
Representatives of the 24th instant, asking the grounds,
reasons, 
and 
evidence 
upon 
which 
the 
police
Commissioners of Baltimore were arrested and are now
detained as prisoners at Port McHenry, I have to state that
it is judged to be incompatible with the public interest at
this time to furnish the information called for by the
resolution.
A. LINCOLN. WASHINGTON, JULY 27, 1861
    A
   
  H    
A  .
TO THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES: 
IN ANSWER TO the resolution of the Senate of the 19th
instant 
requesting 
information 
concerning 
the 
quasi
armistice alluded to in my message of the 4th instant, I
transmit a report from the Secretary of the Navy.
A. LINCOLN. JULY 30, 1861
    A
   
  H    
A  .
TO THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES: 
IN ANSWER TO the resolution of the Senate of the 23d
instant 
requesting 
information 
concerning 
the
imprisonment of Lieutenant John J. Worden (John L.
Worden) of the United States navy, I transmit a report from
the Secretary of the Navy.
A. LINCOLN.
July 30, 1861
  
    
 
I  
   A    
A  HA  .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, D.C., JULY 31,
1861
THE MARSHALS OF the United States in the vicinity of forts
where political prisoners are held will supply decent
lodging and sustenance for such prisoners unless they shall
prefer to provide in those respects for themselves, in which
case they will be allowed to do so by the commanding
oﬀicer in charge.
Approved, and the Secretary of the State will transmit
the order to the Marshals, to the Lieutenant-General, and
the Secretary of the Interior.
A. LINCOLN.
    A
   
  H  H
   
         
 A I   .
TO THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES: 
IN 
ANSWER 
TO 
the 
resolution 
of 
the 
House 
of
Representatives 
of 
yesterday, 
requesting 
information
regarding the imprisonment of loyal citizens of the United
States by the forces now in rebellion against this
government, I transmit a report from the Secretary of
State, and the copy of a telegraphic despatch by which it
was accompanied.
A. LINCOLN.
WASHINGTON, August 2, 1861.
    A
   
  H    
A  .
TO THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES: 
IN ANSWER TO the resolution of your honorable body of
date July 31, 1861, requesting the President to inform the
Senate whether the Hon. James H. Lane, a member of that
body from Kansas, has been appointed a brigadier-general
in the army of the United States, and if so, whether he has
accepted such appointment, I have the honor to transmit
herewith certain papers, numbered 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, and 7,
which, taken together, explain themselves, and which
contain all the information I possess upon the questions
propounded.
It was my intention, as shown by my letter of June 20,
1861, to appoint Hon. James H. Lane, of Kansas, a
brigadier-general 
of 
United 
States 
volunteers 
in
anticipation of the act of Congress, since passed, for raising
such volunteers; and I have no further knowledge upon the
subject, except as derived from the papers herewith
enclosed.
E ECUTIVE MANSION, August 5, 1861
  
       A    A
  
.
E ECUTIVE MANSION, AUGUST 7, 1861
HON. SECRETARY OF WAR
MY DEAR SIR: — The within paper, as you see, is by
HON. John S. Phelps and HON. Frank P. Blair, Jr., both
members of the present Congress from Missouri. The
object is to get up an eﬀicient force of Missourians in the
southwestern part of the State. It ought to be done, and Mr.
Phelps ought to have general superintendence of it. I see
by a private report to me from the department that
eighteen regiments are already accepted from Missouri.
Can it not be arranged that part of them (not yet organized,
as I understand) may be taken from the locality mentioned
and put under the control of Mr. Phelps, and let him have
discretion to accept them for a shorter term than three
years — or the war — understanding, however, that he will
get them for the full term if he can? I hope this can be
done, because Mr. Phelps is too zealous and eﬀicient and
understands his ground too well for us to lose his service.
Of course provision for arming, equipping, etc., must be
made. Mr. Phelps is here, and wishes to carry home with
him authority for this matter.
Yours truly, A. LINCOLN
   
  A
A I
 
  A 
A I
A   A   
A 
A
           .
BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES OF
AMERICA 
A PROCLAMATION.
Whereas a joint committee of both houses of Congress
has waited on the President of the United States and
requested him to “recommend a day of public humiliation,
prayer, and fasting to be observed by the people of the
United States with religious solemnities and the oﬀering of
fervent supplications to Almighty God for the safety and
welfare of these States, His blessings on their arms, and a
speedy restoration of peace”; and Whereas it is ﬁt and
becoming in all people at all times to acknowledge and
revere the supreme government of God, to bow in humble
submission to His chastisements, to confess and deplore
their sins and transgressions in the full conviction that the
fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom, and to pray
with all fervency and contrition for the pardon of their past
oﬀences and for a blessing upon their present and
prospective action; and Whereas when our own beloved
country, once, by the blessing of God, united, prosperous,
and happy, is now aﬄicted with faction and civil war, it is
peculiarly ﬁt for us to recognize the hand of God in this
terrible visitation, and in sorrowful remembrance of our
 own faults and crimes as a nation and as individuals to
humble ourselves before Him and to pray for His mercy-to
pray that we may be spared further punishment, though
most justly deserved, that our arms may be blessed and
made eﬀectual for the re-establishment of order, law, and
peace throughout the wide extent of our country, and that
the inestimable boon of civil and religious liberty, earned
under His guidance and blessing by the labors and
suﬀerings of our fathers, may be restored in all its original
excellence.
Therefore I, Abraham Lincoln, President of the United
States, do appoint the last Thursday in September next as a
day of humiliation, prayer, and fasting for all the people of
the nation. And I do earnestly recommend to all the people,
and especially to all ministers and teachers of religion of all
denominations and to all heads of families, to observe and
keep that day according to their several creeds and modes
of worship in all humility and with all religious solemnity, to
the end that the united prayer of the nation may ascend to
the Throne of Grace and bring down plentiful blessings
upon our country.
In testimony whereof I have hereunto set my hand and
caused the seal of the United States to [SEAL.]
be aﬀixed, this twelfth day of August, A. D.
1861, and of the independence of the United States of
America the eighty-sixth.
A. LINCOLN.
By the President: WILLIAM H. SEWARD, Secretary of
State.
  
  A
    
  
  .
WASHINGTON, AUGUST 15, 1861
HON. JAMES POLLOCK.
MY DEAR SIR: — You must make a job for the bearer of
this — make a job of it with the collector and have it done.
You can do it for me and you must.
Yours as ever, A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
   
  
.  . 
  
.
WASHINGTON, D.C., AUGUST 15, 1861
GOVERNOR 
MORTON, 
INDIANA: 
Start 
your 
four
regiments to St. Louis at the earliest moment possible. Get
such harness as may be necessary for your riﬂed gums. Do
not delay a single regiment, but hasten everything forward
as soon as any one regiment is ready. Have your three
additional regiments organized at once. We shall endeavor
to send you the arms this week.
A. LINCOLN
     
 A
  
 
 
  A     
 
WASHINGTON, August 15, 1861
TO MAJOR-GENERAL FREMONT: Been answering
your messages since day before yesterday. Do you receive
the answers? The War Department has notiﬁed all the
governors you designate to forward all available force. So
telegraphed you. Have you received these messages?
Answer immediately.
A. LINCOLN.
   
  A
A I
  
  I
I
 I
    
  
I H         A     A
           .
BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES OF
AMERICA: 
A PROCLAMATION.
Whereas on the ﬁfteenth day of April, eighteen hundred
and sixty-one, the President of the United States, in view of
an 
insurrection 
against 
the 
laws, 
Constitution, 
and
government of the United States which had broken out
within the States of South Carolina, Georgia, Alabama,
Florida, 
Mississippi, 
Louisiana, 
and 
Texas, 
and 
in
pursuance of the provisions of the act entitled “An act to
provide for calling forth the militia to execute the laws of
the Union, suppress insurrections, and repel invasions, and
to repeal the act now in force for that purpose,” approved
February twenty-eighth, seventeen hundred and ninety-ﬁve,
did call forth the militia to suppress said insurrection, and
to cause the laws of the Union to be duly executed, and the
insurgents have failed to disperse by the time directed by
the President; and whereas such insurrection has since
broken out and yet exists within the States of Virginia,
North Carolina, Tennessee, and Arkansas; and whereas the
insurgents in all the said States claim to act under the
authority thereof, and such claim is not disclaimed or
repudiated by the persons exercising the functions of
 government in such State or States, or in the part or parts
thereof in which such combinations exist, nor has such
insurrection 
been 
suppressed 
by 
said 
States: 
Now,
therefore, I, Abraham Lincoln, President of the United
States, in pursuance of an act of Congress approved July
thirteen, eighteen hundred and sixty-one, do hereby
declare that the inhabitants of the said States of Georgia,
South Carolina, Virginia, North Carolina, Tennessee,
Alabama, Louisiana, Texas, Arkansas, Mississippi, and
Florida (except the inhabitants of that part of the State of
Virginia lying west of the Allegheny Mountains, and of such
other parts of that State, and the other States hereinbefore
named, as may maintain a loyal adhesion to the Union and
the Constitution, or may be time to time occupied and
controlled by forces of the United States engaged in the
dispersion of said insurgents), are in a state of insurrection
against the United States, and that all commercial
intercourse between the same and the inhabitants thereof,
with the exceptions aforesaid, and the citizens of other
States and other parts of the United States, is unlawful,
and will remain unlawful until such insurrection shall cease
or has been suppressed; that all goods and chattels, wares
and merchandise, coming from any of said States, with the
exceptions aforesaid, into other parts of the United States,
without the special license and permission of the President,
through the Secretary of the Treasury, or proceeding to any
of said States, with the exceptions aforesaid, by land or
water, together with the vessel or vehicle conveying the
same, or conveying persons to or from said States, with
 said exceptions, will be forfeited to the United States; and
that from and after ﬁfteen days from the issuing of this
proclamation all ships and vessels belonging in whole or in
part to any citizen or inhabitant of any of said States, with
said exceptions, found at sea, or in any port of the United
States, will be forfeited to the United States; and I hereby
enjoin upon all district attorneys, marshals, and oﬀicers of
the revenue and of the military and naval forces of the
United States to be vigilant in the execution of said act, and
in the enforcement of the penalties and forfeitures imposed
or declared by it; leaving any party who may think himself
aggrieved thereby to his application to the Secretary of the
Treasury for the remission of any penalty or forfeiture,
which the said Secretary is authorized by law to grant if, in
his judgment, the special circumstances of any case shall
require such remission.
In witness whereof, I have hereunto set my hand,....
A. LINCOLN.
By the President: WILLIAM H. SEWARD, Secretary of
Sate.
  
       A    A
  
.
E ECUTIVE MANSION, August 17, 1861
HON. SECRETARY OF WAR.
MY DEAR SIR: — Unless there be reason to the contrary,
not known to me, make out a commission for Simon B.
Buckner, of Kentucky, as a brigadier-general of volunteers.
It is to be put into the hands of General Anderson, and
delivered to General Buckner or not, at the discretion of
General Anderson. Of course it is to remain a secret unless
and until the commission is delivered.
Yours truly, A. LINCOLN
Same day made.
[Indorsement.]
  
 
   
  
A
  I
WASHINGTON, D.C., AUGUST 24, 1861
TO HIS E CELLENCY B. MAGOFFIN, Governor of the
State of Kentucky.
SIR: — Your letter of the 19th instant, in which you urge
the “removal from the limits of Kentucky of the military
force now organized and in camp within that State,” is
received.
I may not possess full and precisely accurate knowledge
upon this subject; but I believe it is true that there is a
military force in camp within Kentucky, acting by authority
of the United States, which force is not very large, and is
not now being augmented.
I also believe that some arms have been furnished to this
force by the United States.
I 
also 
believe 
this 
force 
consists 
exclusively 
of
Kentuckians, having their camp in the immediate vicinity of
their own homes, and not assailing or menacing any of the
good people of Kentucky.
In all I have done in the premises I have acted upon the
urgent solicitation of many Kentuckians, and in accordance
with what I believed, and still believe, to be the wish of a
majority of all the Union-loving people of Kentucky.
 While I have conversed on this subject with many
eminent men of Kentucky, including a large majority of her
members of Congress, I do not remember that any one of
them, or any other person, except your Excellency and the
bearers of your Excellency’s letter, has urged me to remove
the military force from Kentucky or to disband it. One other
very worthy citizen of Kentucky did solicit me to have the
augmenting of the force suspended for a time.
Taking all the means within my reach to form a
judgment, I do not believe it is the popular wish of
Kentucky that this force shall be removed beyond her
limits; and, with this impression, I must respectfully decline
to so remove it.
I most cordially sympathize with your Excellency in the
wish to preserve the peace of my own native State,
Kentucky. It is with regret I search, and cannot ﬁnd, in your
not very short letter, any declaration or intimation that you
entertain any desire for the preservation of the Federal
Union.
Your obedient servant,
A. LINCOLN.
  
 
 
  A     
 .
WASHINGTON, D.C., SEPTEMBER 2, 1861
MAJOR-GENERAL FREMONT.
MY DEAR SIR: — Two points in your proclamation of
August 30 give me some anxiety.
First. Should you shoot a man, according to the
proclamation, the Confederates would very certainly shoot
our best men in their hands in retaliation; and so, man for
man, indeﬁnitely. It is, therefore, my order that you allow
no man to be shot under the proclamation without ﬁrst
having my approbation or consent.
Second. I think there is great danger that the closing
paragraph, in relation to the conﬁscation of property and
the liberating slaves of traitorous owners, will alarm our
Southern Union friends and turn them against us; perhaps
ruin our rather fair prospect for Kentucky. Allow me,
therefore, to ask that you will, as of your own motion,
modify that paragraph so as to conform to the ﬁrst and
fourth sections of the act of Congress entitled “An act to
conﬁscate property used for insurrectionary purposes,”
approved August 6, 1861, and a copy of which act I
herewith send you.
This letter is written in a spirit of caution, and not of
censure. I send it by special messenger, in order that it may
 certainly and speedily reach you.
Yours very truly, A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
   
 
WASHBURN OF MAINE, FAIRBANKS OF VERMONT,
BERRY 
OF 
NEW 
HAMPSHIRE, 
ANDREW 
OF
MASSACHUSETTS, BUCKINGHAM OF CONNECTICUT,
AND SPRAGUE OF RHODE ISLAND.
WAR DEPARTMENT, September 11, 1861.
General Butler proposes raising in New England six
regiments, to be recruited and commanded by himself, and
to go on special service.
I shall be glad if you, as governor of —— — , will answer
by telegraph if you consent.
A. LINCOLN.
  
 
 
  A     
 .
WASHINGTON, D.C., SEPTEMBER 11, 1861
MAJOR-GENERAL JOHN C. FREMONT.
SIR:-Yours of the 8th, in answer to mine of the 2d instant,
is just received. Assuming that you, upon the ground, could
better judge of the necessities of your position than I could
at this distance, on seeing your proclamation of August 30 I
perceived no general objection to it. The particular clause,
however, in relation to the conﬁscation of property and the
liberation of slaves appeared to me to be objectionable in
its nonconformity to the act of Congress passed the 6th of
last August upon the same subjects; and hence I wrote you,
expressing my wish that that clause should be modiﬁed
accordingly. Your answer, just received, expresses the
preference on your part that I should make an open order
for the modiﬁcation, which I very cheerfully do. It is
therefore ordered that the said clause of said proclamation
be so modiﬁed, held, and construed as to conform to, and
not to transcend, the provisions on the same subject
contained in the act of Congress entitled “An act to
conﬁscate property used for insurrectionary purposes,”
approved August 6, 1861, and that said act be published at
length with this order.
Your obedient servant, A. LINCOLN.
  
 
  .    
 .
WASHINGTON, D.C., September 12, 1861
MRS. GENERAL FREMONT.
MY DEAR MADAM: — Your two notes of to-day are
before me. I answered the letter you bore me from General
Fremont on yesterday, and not hearing from you during the
day, I sent the answer to him by mail. It is not exactly
correct, as you say you were told by the elder Mr. Blair, to
say that I sent Postmaster-General Blair to St. Louis to
examine into that department and report. Postmaster-
General Blair did go, with my approbation, to see and
converse with General Fremont as a friend. I do not feel
authorized to furnish you with copies of letters in my
possession without the consent of the writers. No
impression has been made on my mind against the honor or
integrity of General Fremont, and I now enter my protest
against being understood as acting in any hostility toward
him.
Your obedient servant, A. LINCOLN.
  
  
   H H
  
E ECUTIVE MANSION, SEPTEMBER 12, 1861
HON. JOSEPH HOLT.
DEAR SIR: — Yours of this day in relation to the late
proclamation of General Fremont is received yesterday I
addressed a letter to him, by mail, on the same subject, and
which is to be made public when he receives it. I herewith
send you a copy of that letter, which perhaps shows my
position as distinctly as any new one I could write. I will
thank you not to make it public until General Fremont shall
have had time to receive the original.
Your obedient servant, A. LINCOLN.
  
 
 
  A    
 
WASHINGTON, D.C., September 16, 1861.
DEAR SIR: — Since conversing with you I have concluded
to request you to frame an order for recruiting North
Carolinians at Fort Hatteras. I suggest it to be so framed as
for us to accept a smaller force — even a company — if we
cannot get a regiment or more. What is necessary to now
say about oﬀicers you will judge. Governor Seward says he
has a nephew (Clarence A. Seward, I believe) who would be
willing to go and play colonel and assist in raising the
force. Still it is to be considered whether the North
Carolinians will not prefer oﬀicers of their own. I should
expect they would.
Yours very truly, A. LINCOLN.
  
       A    A
  
.
E ECUTIVE MANSION, September 18, 1861
HON. SECRETARY OF WAR. MY DEAR SIR: — To guard
against misunderstanding, I think ﬁt to say that the joint
expedition of the army and navy agreed upon some time
since, and in which General T. W. Sherman was and is to
bear a conspicuous part, is in no wise to be abandoned, but
must be ready to move by the 1st of, or very early in,
October. Let all preparations go forward accordingly.
Yours truly, A. LINCOLN.
  
 
 
  A     
 
WASHINGTON, SEPTEMBER 12, 1861
MAJOR-GENERAL 
FREMONT: 
Governor 
Morton
telegraphs as follows: “Colonel Lane, just arrived by special
train, 
represents 
Owensborough, 
forty 
miles 
above
Evansville, in possession of secessionists. Green River is
navigable. Owensborough must be seized. We want a
gunboat sent up from Paducah for that purpose.” Send up
the gunboat if, in your discretion, you think it right.
Perhaps you had better order those in charge of the Ohio
River to guard it vigilantly at all points.
A. LINCOLN.
  o 
. H.   
I
.
(Private and Conﬁdential)
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON SEPTEMBER
22, 1861 HON. O. H. BROWNING.
MY DEAR SIR: — Yours of the 17th is just received; and
coming from you, I confess it astonishes me. That you
should object to my adhering to a law which you had
assisted in making and presenting to me less than a month
before is odd enough. But this is a very small part. General
Fremont’s proclamation as to conﬁscation of property and
the liberation of slaves is purely political and not within the
range of military law or necessity. If a commanding general
ﬁnds a necessity to seize the farm of a private owner for a
pasture, an encampment, or a fortiﬁcation, he has the right
to do so, and to so hold it as long as the necessity lasts; and
this is within military law, because within military necessity.
But to say the farm shall no longer belong to the owner, or
his heirs forever, and this as well when the farm is not
needed for military purposes as when it is, is purely
political, without the savor of military law about it. And the
same is true of slaves. If the general needs them, he can
seize them and use them; but when the need is past, it is
not for him to ﬁx their permanent future condition. That
must be settled according to laws made by law-makers, and
 not by military proclamations. The proclamation in the
point in question is simply “dictatorship.” It assumes that
the general may do anything he pleases conﬁscate the
lands and free the slaves of loyal people, as well as of
disloyal ones. And going the whole ﬁgure, I have no doubt,
would be more popular with some thoughtless people than
that which has been done, But I cannot assume this
reckless position, nor allow others to assume it on my
responsibility.
You speak of it as being the only means of saving the
government. On the contrary, it is itself the surrender of
the government. Can it be pretended that it is any longer
the Government of the United States — any government of
constitution and laws wherein a general or a president may
make permanent rules of property by proclamation? I do
not say Congress might not with propriety pass a law on
the point, just such as General Fremont proclaimed.
I do not say I might not, as a member of Congress, vote
for it. What I object to is, that I, as President, shall
expressly or impliedly seize and exercise the permanent
legislative functions of the government.
So much as to principle. Now as to policy. No doubt the
thing was popular in some quarters, and would have been
more so if it had been a general declaration of
emancipation. The Kentucky Legislature would not budge
till that proclamation was modiﬁed; and General Anderson
telegraphed me that on the news of General Fremont
having actually issued deeds of manumission, a whole
company of our volunteers threw down their arms and
 disbanded. I was so assured as to think it probable that the
very arms we had furnished Kentucky would be turned
against us. I think to lose Kentucky is nearly the same as to
lose the whole game. Kentucky gone, we cannot hold
Missouri, nor, as I think, Maryland. These all against us,
and the job on our hands is too large for us. We would as
well consent to separation at once, including the surrender
of this Capital. On the contrary, if you will give up your
restlessness for new positions, and back me manfully on
the grounds upon which you and other kind friends gave
me the election and have approved in my public
documents, we shall go through triumphantly. You must not
understand I took my course on the proclamation because
of Kentucky. I took the same ground in a private letter to
General Fremont before I heard from Kentucky.
You think I am inconsistent because I did not also forbid
General Fremont to shoot men under the proclamation. I
understand that part to be within military law, but I also
think, and so privately wrote General Fremont, that it is
impolitic in this, that our adversaries have the power, and
will certainly exercise it, to shoot as many of our men as we
shoot of theirs. I did not say this in the public letter,
because it is a subject I prefer not to discuss in the hearing
of our enemies.
There has been no thought of removing General Fremont
on any ground connected with his proclamation, and if
there has been any wish for his removal on any ground, our
mutual friend Sam. Glover can probably tell you what it
was. I hope no real necessity for it exists on any ground.
 Your friend, as ever,
A. LINCOLN.
  
 A
  
  A   A
 
   A
 AI
[OCTOBER 1?] 1861
ON OR ABOUT the 5th of October (the exact date to be
determined hereafter) I wish a movement made to seize
and hold a point on the railroad connecting Virginia and
Tennessee near the mountain-pass called Cumberland Gap.
That point is now guarded against us by Zollicoﬀer, with
6000 or 8000 rebels at Barboursville Ky., — say twenty-ﬁve
miles from the Gap, toward Lexington. We have a force of
5000 or 6000 under General Thomas, at Camp Dick
Robinson, about twenty-ﬁve miles from Lexington and
seventy-ﬁve from Zollicoﬀer’s camp, On the road between
the two. There is not a railroad anywhere between
Lexington and the point to be seized, and along the whole
length of which the Union sentiment among the people
largely predominates. We have military possession of the
railroad from Cincinnati to Lexington, and from Louisville
to Lexington, and some home guards, under General
Crittenden, are on the latter line. We have possession of the
railroad from Louisville to Nashville, Tenn., so far as
Muldraugh’s Hill, about forty miles, and the rebels have
possession of that road all south of there. At the Hill we
have a force of 8000, under General Sherman, and about an
 equal force of rebels is a very short distance south, under
General Buckner.
We have a large force at Paducah, and a smaller at Port
Holt, both on the Kentucky side, with some at Bird’s Point,
Cairo, Mound City, Evansville, and New Albany, all on the
other side, and all which, with the gunboats on the river,
are perhaps suﬀicient to guard the Ohio from Louisville to
its mouth.
About supplies of troops, my general idea is that all from
Wisconsin, Minnesota, Iowa, Illinois, Missouri, and Kansas,
not now elsewhere, be left to Fremont. All from Indiana and
Michigan, not now elsewhere, be sent to Anderson at
Louisville. All from Ohio needed in western Virginia be sent
there, and any remainder be sent to Mitchell at Cincinnati,
for Anderson. All east of the mountains be appropriated to
McClellan and to the coast.
As to movements, my idea is that the one for the coast
and that on Cumberland Gap be simultaneous, and that in
the meantime preparation, vigilant watching, and the
defensive only be acted upon; this, however, not to apply to
Fremont’s operations in northern and middle Missouri.
That before these movements Thomas and Sherman shall
respectively watch but not attack Zollicoﬀer and Buckner.
That when the coast and Gap movements shall be ready
Sherman is merely to stand fast, while all at Cincinnati and
all at Louisville, with all on the line, concentrate rapidly at
Lexington, and thence to Thomas’s camp, joining him, and
the whole thence upon the Gap. It is for the military men to
decide whether they can ﬁnd a pass through the mountains
 at or near the Gap which cannot be defended by the enemy
with a greatly inferior force, and what is to be done in
regard to this.
The coast and Gap movements made, Generals McClellan
and Fremont, in their respective departments, will avail
themselves of any advantages the diversions may present.
[He was entirely unable to get this started, Sherman
would have taken an active part if given him, the others
were too busy getting lines of communication guarded —
and discovering many “critical” supply items that had not
been sent them. Also the commanding general did not like
it. D.W.]
  
  H        A   
    A  .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, October 4, 1861
HONORABLE SECRETARY OF STATE.
DEAR SIR: — Please see Mr. Walker, well vouched as a
Union man and son-in-law of Governor Morehead, and
pleading for his release. I understand the Kentucky arrests
were not made by special direction from here, and I am
willing if you are that any of the parties may be released
when James Guthrie and James Speed think they should be.
Yours truly, A. LINCOLN.
  
  H   I   
  
       .
WASHINGTON, October 11, 1861.
GREAT AND GOOD FRIEND: — I have received from Mr.
Thayer, Consul-General of the United States at Alexandria,
a full account of the liberal, enlightened, and energetic
proceedings which, on his complaint, you have adopted in
bringing to speedy and condign punishment the parties,
subjects of your Highness in Upper Egypt, who were
concerned in an act of criminal persecution against Faris,
an agent of certain Christian missionaries in Upper Egypt. I
pray your Highness to be assured that these proceedings,
at once so prompt and so just, will be regarded as a new
and unmistakable proof equally of your Highness’s
friendship for the United States and of the ﬁrmness,
integrity and wisdom, with which the government of your
Highness is conducted. Wishing you great prosperity and
success, I am your friend, A. LINCOLN.
HIS HIGHNESS MOHAMMED SAID PACHA, Viceroy of
Egypt and its Dependencies, etc.
By the President: WILLIAM H. SEWARD, Secretary of
State.
  
   A
 H
 I I
  
   
 I
 
   H
 I  
  HA  A   
  
 .
October 14 1861
LIEUTENANT-GENERAL 
WINFIELD 
SCOTT: 
The
military line of the United States for the suppression of the
insurrection may be extended so far as Bangor, in Maine.
You and any oﬀicer acting under your authority are hereby
authorized to suspend the writ of habeas corpus in any
place between that place and the city of Washington.
A. LINCOLN.
By the President: WILLIAM H. SEWARD, Secretary of
State.
  
       A   
  I
   I
 .
E ECUTIVE MANSION, October 14, 1861
HON. SEC. OF INTERIOR.
DEAR SIR: — How is this? I supposed I was appointing
for register of wills a citizen of this District. Now the
commission comes to me “Moses Kelly, of New Hampshire.”
I do not like this.
Yours truly, A. LINCOLN.
  
  
  
H
 
A
   
 
 
TO MAJOR RAMSEY.
E ECUTIVE MANSION, OCTOBER 17, 1861
MAJOR RAMSEY.
MY DEAR SIR: — The lady bearer of this says she has
two sons who want to work. Set them at it if possible.
Wanting to work is so rare a want that it should be
encouraged.
Yours truly, A. LINCOLN.
  
 
 
  A   H
A  
.  H  
A
.
WASHINGTON, October 18, 1861.
GENERAL THOMAS SHERMAN, Annapolis, Md.:
Your despatch of yesterday received and shown to
General McClellan. I have promised him not to direct his
army here without his consent. I do not think I shall come
to Annapolis.
A. LINCOLN.
  
 
 
  A   
  I   
I H I
  
 
   .
WASHINGTON, October 24, 1861
BRIGADIER-GENERAL S. R. CURTIS.
MY DEAR SIR: — Herewith is a document — half letter,
half order — which, wishing you to see, but not to make
public, I send unsealed. Please read it and then inclose it to
the oﬀicer who may be in command of the Department of
the West at the time it reaches him. I cannot now know
whether Fremont or Hunter will then be in command.
Yours truly, A. LINCOLN.
 A HI
 
  
cto er        
BRIGADIER-GENERAL S. R. CURTIS.
DEAR SIR: — On receipt of this, with the accompanying
inclosures, you will take safe, certain, and suitable
measures to have the inclosure addressed to Major-General
Fremont delivered to him with all reasonable despatch,
subject to these conditions only: that if, when General
Fremont shall be reached by the messenger — yourself or
any one sent by you — he shall then have, in personal
command, fought and won a battle, or shall then be
actually in a battle, or shall then be in the immediate
presence of the enemy in expectation of a battle, it is not to
be delivered, but held for further orders. After, and not till
after, the delivery to General Fremont, let the inclosure
addressed to General Hunter be delivered to him.
Your obedient servant, A. LINCOLN.
(General Orders No. 18.) HEADQUARTERS OF THE
ARMY, WASHINGTON, October 24, 1861
Major-General Fremont, of the United States Army, the
present commander of the Western Department of the
same, will, on the receipt of this order, call Major-General
Hunter, of the United States Volunteers, to relieve him
temporarily in that command, when he (Major-General
 Fremont) will report to general headquarters by letter for
further orders.
WINFIELD SCOTT. By command: E. D. TOWNSEND,
Assistant Adjutant-General.
 A HI
 
  
cto er        
TO THE COMMANDER OF THE DEPARTMENT OF THE
WEST.
SIR: — THE command of the Department of the West
having devolved upon you, I propose to oﬀer you a few
suggestions. Knowing how hazardous it is to bind down a
distant commander in the ﬁeld to speciﬁc lines and
operations, as so much always depends on a knowledge of
localities and passing events, it is intended, therefore, to
leave a considerable margin for the exercise of your
judgment and discretion.
The main rebel army (Price’s) west of the Mississippi is
believed to have passed Dade County in full retreat upon
northwestern Arkansas, leaving Missouri almost freed from
the enemy, excepting in the southeast of the State.
Assuming this basis of fact, it seems desirable, as you are
not likely to overtake Price, and are in danger of making
too long a line from your own base of supplies and
reinforcements, that you should give up the pursuit, halt
your main army, divide it into two corps of observation, one
occupying Sedalia and the other Rolla, the present termini
of railroads; then recruit the condition of both corps by re-
establishing 
and 
improving 
their 
discipline 
and
instructions, perfecting their clothing and equipments, and
 providing less uncomfortable quarters. Of course, both
railroads must be guarded and kept open, judiciously
employing just so much force as is necessary for this. From
these two points, Sedalia and Rolla, and especially in
judicious cooperation with Lane on the Kansas border, it
would be so easy to concentrate and repel any army of the
enemy returning on Missouri from the southwest, that it is
not probable any such attempt will be made before or
during the approaching cold weather. Before spring the
people of Missouri will probably be in no favorable mood to
renew for next year the troubles which have so much
aﬄicted and impoverished them during this. If you adopt
this line of policy, and if, as I anticipate, you will see no
enemy in great force approaching, you will have a surplus
of force which you can withdraw from these points and
direct to others as may be needed, the railroads furnishing
ready means of reinforcing these main points if occasion
requires. Doubtless local uprisings will for a time continue
to occur, but these can be met by detachments and local
forces of our own, and will ere long tire out of themselves.
While, as stated in the beginning of the letter, a large
discretion must be and is left with yourself, I feel sure that
an indeﬁnite pursuit of Price or an attempt by this long and
circuitous route to reach Memphis will be exhaustive
beyond endurance, and will end in the loss of the whole
force engaged in it.
Your obedient servant, A. LINCOLN.
  
      I I
 
 
  A    
   A
A  
I
 I
GENERAL McCLELLAN HIS SUCCESSOR. (General
Orders, No.94.) 
WAR DEPARTMENT, ADJUTANT-GENERAL’S OFFICE
WASHINGTON, November 1, 1861
The following order from the President of the United
States, announcing the retirement from active command of
the honored veteran Lieutenant general Winﬁeld Scott, will
be read by the army with profound regret:
     
 I   
A
 I
  
A HI
 
.
November 1, 1861
ON THE 1ST day of November, A.D. 1861, upon his own
application to the President of the United States, Brevet
Lieutenant-General Winﬁeld Scott is ordered to be placed,
and hereby is placed, upon the list of retired oﬀicers of the
army of the United States, without reduction in his current
pay, subsistence, or allowances.
The American people will hear with sadness and deep
emotion that General Scott has withdrawn from the active
control of the army, while the President and a unanimous
Cabinet express their own and the nation’s sympathy in his
personal aﬄiction and their profound sense of the
important public services rendered by him to his country
during his long and brilliant career, among which will ever
be gratefully distinguished his faithful devotion to the
Constitution, the Union, and the ﬂag when assailed by
parricidal rebellion.
A. LINCOLN
The President is pleased to direct that Major general
George B. McClellan assume the command of the army of
the United States. The headquarters of the army will be
established in the city of Washington. All communications
intended for the commanding general will hereafter be
 addressed direct to the adjutant-general. The duplicate
returns, orders, and other papers heretofore sent to the
assistant adjutant-general, headquarters of the army, will
be discontinued.
By order of the Secretary of War: L. THOMAS, Adjutant
General.
  
   A   
 I
  H    A
 
  
   
A
    
  
I  
 I.
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON,
NOVEMBER 5, 1861.
The Governor of the State of Missouri, acting under the
direction of the convention of that State, proposes to the
Government of the United States that he will raise a
military force to serve within the State as State militia
during the war there, to cooperate with the troops in the
service of the United States in repelling the invasion of the
State and suppressing rebellion therein; the said State
militia to be embodied and to be held in the camp and in
the ﬁeld, drilled, disciplined, and governed according to the
Army Regulations and subject to the Articles of War; the
said State militia not to be ordered out of the State except
for the immediate defense of the State of Missouri, but to
co-operate with the troops in the service of the United
States in military operations within the State or necessary
to its defense, and when oﬀicers of the State militia act
with oﬀicers in the service of the United States of the same
grade the oﬀicers of the United States service shall
command the combined force; the State militia to be
armed, equipped, clothed, subsisted, transported, and paid
by the United States during such time as they shall be
 actually engaged as an embodied military force in service
in accordance with regulations of the United States Army
or general orders as issued from time to time.
In order that the Treasury of the United States may not
be burdened with the pay of unnecessary oﬀicers, the
governor proposes that, although the State law requires
him to appoint upon the general staﬀ an adjutant-general, a
commissary-general, 
an 
inspector-general, 
a
quartermaster-general, 
a 
paymaster-general, 
and 
a
surgeon-general, each with the rank of colonel of cavalry,
yet he proposes that the Government of the United States
pay only the adjutant-general, the quartermaster-general,
and inspector-general, their services being necessary in the
relations which would exist between the State militia and
the United States. The governor further proposes that
while he is allowed by the State law to appoint aides-de-
camp to the governor at his discretion, with the rank of
colonel, three only shall be reported to the United States
for payment. He also proposes that the State militia shall
be commanded by a single major-general and by such
number of brigadier-generals as shall allow one for a
brigade of not less than four regiments, and that no greater
number of staﬀ oﬀicers shall be appointed for regimental,
brigade, and division duties than as provided for in the act
of Congress of the 22d July, 1861; and that, whatever be
the rank of such oﬀicers as ﬁxed by the law of the State,
the compensation that they shall receive from the United
States shall only be that which belongs to the rank given by
 said act of Congress to oﬀicers in the United States service
performing the same duties.
The ﬁeld oﬀicers of a regiment in the State militia are
one colonel, one lieutenant-colonel, and one major, and the
company oﬀicers are a captain, a ﬁrst lieutenant, and a
second lieutenant. The governor proposes that, as the
money to be disbursed is the money of the United States,
such staﬀ oﬀicers in the service of the United States as may
be necessary to act as disbursing oﬀicers for the State
militia shall be assigned by the War Department for that
duty; or, if such cannot be spared from their present duty,
he will appoint such persons disbursing oﬀicers for the
State militia as the President of the United States may
designate. Such regulations as may be required, in the
judgment of the President, to insure regularity of returns
and to protect the United States from any fraudulent
practices shall be observed and obeyed by all in oﬀice in
the State militia.
The above propositions are accepted on the part of the
United States, and the Secretary of War is directed to make
the necessary orders upon the Ordnance, Quartermaster’s,
Commissary, Pay, and Medical departments to carry this
agreement into eﬀect. He will cause the necessary staﬀ
oﬀicers in the United States service to be detailed for duty
in connection with the Missouri State militia, and will order
them to make the necessary provision in their respective
oﬀices for fulﬁlling this agreement. All requisitions upon
the diﬀerent oﬀicers of the United States under this
agreement to be made in substance in the same mode for
 the Missouri State militia as similar requisitions are made
for troops in the service of the United States; and the
Secretary of War will cause any additional regulations that
may be necessary to insure regularity and economy in
carrying this agreement into eﬀect to be adopted and
communicated to the Governor of Missouri for the
government of the Missouri State militia.
[Indorsement.]
November 6, 1861.
This plan approved, with the modiﬁcation that the
governor stipulates that when he commissions a major-
general of militia it shall be the same person at the time in
command of the United States Department of the West; and
in case the United States shall change such commander of
the department, he (the governor) will revoke the State
commission given to the person relieved and give one to
the person substituted to the United States command of
said department.
A. LINCOLN.
        
  H  
I
I       
  
 
 
.
November 8, 1861.
SIR: — I receive with great pleasure a Minister from
Sweden. That pleasure is enhanced by the information
which preceded your arrival here, that his Majesty, your
sovereign, had selected you to ﬁll the mission upon the
grounds of your derivation from an ancestral stock
identiﬁed with the most glorious era of your country’s
noble history, and your own eminent social and political
standing in Sweden. This country, sir, maintains, and means
to maintain, the rights of human nature, and the capacity of
men for self-government. The history of Sweden proves that
this is the faith of the people of Sweden, and we know that
it is the faith and practice of their respected sovereign.
Rest assured, therefore, that we shall be found always just
and paternal in our transactions with your government, and
that nothing will be omitted on my part to make your
residence in this capital agreeable to yourself and
satisfactory to your government.
 I
   
 
  A
 H
 I I
 
A  IA   A
 I
 AI
   
I .
St. Louis, November 20, 1861. (Received Nov. 20th.) 
GENERAL MCCLELLAN, For the President of the United
States.
No written authority is found here to declare and enforce
martial law in this department. Please send me such
written authority and telegraph me that it has been sent by
mail.
H. W. HALLECK, Major-General.
[Indorsement.] November 21, 1861.
If General McClellan and General Halleck deem it
necessary to declare and maintain martial law in Saint
Louis, the same is hereby authorized.
A. LINCOLN.
       
  
   A   A
 
I       IA   I
  I
 
 
A I
  
 H
 A   
     
TO GOVERNOR WALKER.
WASHINGTON, NOVEMBER 21, 1861
DEAR GOVERNOR: — I have thought over the interview
which Mr. Gilmore has had with Mr. Greeley, and the
proposal that Greeley has made to Gilmore, namely, that he
[Gilmore] shall communicate to him [Greeley] all that he
learns from you of the inner workings of the administration,
in return for his [Greeley’s] giving such aid as he can to the
new magazine, and allowing you [Walker] from time to time
the use of his [Greeley’s] columns when it is desirable to
feel of, or forestall, public opinion on important subjects.
The arrangement meets my unqualiﬁed approval, and I
shall further it to the extent of my ability, by opening to you
— as I do now — fully the policy of the Government, — its
present views and future intentions when formed, giving
you permission to communicate them to Gilmore for
Greeley; and in case you go to Europe I will give these
things direct to Gilmore. But all this must be on the express
and 
explicit 
understanding 
that 
the 
fact 
of 
these
communications coming from me shall be absolutely
conﬁdential, — not to be disclosed by Greeley to his nearest
 friend, or any of his subordinates. He will be, in eﬀect, my
mouthpiece, but I must not be known to be the speaker.
I need not tell you that I have the highest conﬁdence in
Mr. Greeley. He is a great power. Having him ﬁrmly behind
me will be as helpful to me as an army of one hundred
thousand men.
This was to be most severely regretted, when Greeley
became a traitor to the cause, editorialized for compromise
and separation — and promoted McClellan as Democratic
candidate for the Presidency.
That he has ever kicked the traces has been owing to his
not being fully informed. Tell Gilmore to say to him that, if
he ever objects to my policy, I shall be glad to have him
state to me his views frankly and fully. I shall adopt his if I
can. If I cannot, I will at least tell him why. He and I should
stand together, and let no minor diﬀerences come between
us; for we both seek one end, which is the saving of our
country. Now, Governor, this is a longer letter than I have
written in a month, — longer than I would have written for
any other man than Horace Greeley.
Your friend, truly,
A. LINCOLN.
P. S. — The sooner Gilmore sees Greeley the better, as
you may before long think it wise to ventilate our policy on
the Trent aﬀair.
  
   A
 H
 I I
 
 
  A  HA       
 
   
  H  
 I  
  HA  A   
  
 
DECEMBER 2, 1861.
MAJOR-GENERAL H. W. HALLECK, Commanding in the
Department of Missouri.
GENERAL: — As an insurrection exists in the United
States, and is in arms in the State of Missouri, you are
hereby authorized and empowered to suspend the writ of
habeas corpus within the limits of the military division
under your command, and to exercise martial law as you
ﬁnd it necessary in your discretion to secure the public
safety and the authority of the United States.
In witness whereof I have hereunto set my hand and
caused the seal of the United States to be aﬀixed at
Washington, this second day of December, A.D. 1861.
A. LINCOLN.
By the President: WILLIAM H. SEWARD, Secretary of
State.
 A
 A  
   A
   
  
    .
WASHINGTON, December 3, 1861
FELLOW-CITIZENS OF THE SENATE AND HOUSE OF
REPRESENTATIVES: — In the midst of unprecedented
political troubles we have cause of great gratitude to God
for unusual good health and most abundant harvests.
You will not be surprised to learn that in the peculiar
exigencies of the times our intercourse with foreign nations
has been attended with profound solicitude, chieﬂy turning
upon our own domestic aﬀairs.
A disloyal portion of the American people have during
the whole year been engaged in an attempt to divide and
destroy the Union. A nation which endures factious
domestic division is exposed to disrespect abroad, and one
party, if not both, is sure sooner or later to invoke foreign
intervention.
Nations thus tempted to interfere are not always able to
resist the counsels of seeming expediency and ungenerous
ambition, 
although 
measures 
adopted 
under 
such
inﬂuences seldom fail to be unfortunate and injurious to
those adopting them.
The disloyal citizens of the United States who have
oﬀered the ruin of our country in return for the aid and
comfort which they have invoked abroad have received less
 patronage 
and 
encouragement 
than 
they 
probably
expected. If it were just to suppose, as the insurgents have
seemed to assume, that foreign nations in this case,
discarding all moral, social, and treaty obligations, would
act solely and selﬁshly for the most speedy restoration of
commerce, including especially the acquisition of cotton,
those nations appear as yet not to have seen their way to
their 
object 
more 
directly 
or 
clearly 
through 
the
destruction than through the preservation of the Union. If
we could dare to believe that foreign nations are actuated
by no higher principle than this, I am quite sure a sound
argument could be made to show them that they can reach
their aim more readily and easily by aiding to crush this
rebellion than by giving encouragement to it.
The principal lever relied on by the insurgents for
exciting foreign nations to hostility against us, as already
intimated, is the embarrassment of commerce. Those
nations, however, not improbably saw from the ﬁrst that it
was the Union which made as well our foreign as our
domestic commerce. They can scarcely have failed to
perceive that the eﬀort for disunion produces the existing
diﬀiculty, and that one strong nation promises more
durable peace and a more extensive, valuable, and reliable
commerce than can the same nation broken into hostile
fragments.
It is not my purpose to review our discussions with
foreign states, because, whatever might be their wishes or
dispositions, the integrity of our country and the stability of
our government mainly depend not upon them, but on the
 loyalty, virtue, patriotism, and intelligence of the American
people. 
The 
correspondence 
itself, 
with 
the 
usual
reservations, is herewith submitted.
I venture to hope it will appear that we have practiced
prudence and liberality toward foreign powers, averting
causes of irritation and with ﬁrmness maintaining our own
rights and honor.
Since, however, it is apparent that here, as in every other
state, 
foreign 
dangers 
necessarily 
attend 
domestic
diﬀiculties, 
I 
recommend 
that 
adequate 
and 
ample
measures be adopted for maintaining the public defenses
on every side. While under this general recommendation
provision for defending our seacoast line readily occurs to
the mind, I also in the same connection ask the attention of
Congress to our great lakes and rivers. It is believed that
some fortiﬁcations and depots of arms and munitions, with
harbor and navigation improvements, all at well-selected
points upon these, would be of great importance to the
national defense and preservation I ask attention to the
views of the Secretary of War, expressed in his report, upon
the same general subject.
I deem it of importance that the loyal regions of east
Tennessee 
and 
western 
North 
Carolina 
should 
be
connected with Kentucky and other faithful parts of the
Union by rail-road. I therefore recommend, as a military
measure, that Congress provide for the construction of
such rail-road as speedily as possible. Kentucky will no
doubt co-operate, and through her Legislature make the
most judicious selection of a line. The northern terminus
 must connect with some existing railroad, and whether the
route shall be from Lexington or Nicholasville to the
Cumberland Gap, or from Lebanon to the Tennessee line, in
the direction of Knoxville, or on some still diﬀerent line,
can easily be determined. Kentucky and the General
Government co-operating, the work can be completed in a
very short time, and when done it will be not only of vast
present 
usefulness 
but 
also 
a 
valuable 
permanent
improvement, worth its cost in all the future.
Some treaties, designed chieﬂy for the interests of
commerce, and having no grave political importance, have
been negotiated, and will be submitted to the Senate for
their consideration.
Although we have failed to induce some of the
commercial powers to adopt a desirable melioration of the
rigor of maritime war, we have removed all obstructions
from the way of this humane reform except such as are
merely of temporary and accidental occurrence.
I invite your attention to the correspondence between
her 
Britannic 
Majesty’s 
minister 
accredited 
to 
this
government and the Secretary of State relative to the
detention of the British ship Perthshire in June last by the
United States steamer Massachusetts for a supposed
breach of the blockade. As this detention was occasioned
by an obvious misapprehension of the facts, and as justice
requires that we should commit no belligerent act not
founded in strict right as sanctioned by public law, I
recommend that an appropriation be made to satisfy the
 reasonable demand of the owners of the vessel for her
detention.
I repeat the recommendation of my predecessor in his
annual message to Congress in December last in regard to
the disposition of the surplus which will probably remain
after satisfying the claims of American citizens against
China, pursuant to the awards of the commissioners under
the act of the 3d of March, 1859. If, however, it should not
be deemed advisable to carry that recommendation into
eﬀect, I would suggest that authority be given for investing
the principal, or the proceeds of the surplus referred to, in
good securities, with a view to the satisfaction of such
other just claims of our citizens against China as are not
unlikely to arise hereafter in the course of our extensive
trade with that empire.
By the act of the 5th of August last Congress authorized
the President to instruct the commanders of suitable
vessels to defend themselves against and to capture
pirates. His authority has been exercised in a single
instance only. For the more eﬀectual protection of our
extensive and valuable commerce in the Eastern seas
especially, it seems to me that it would also be advisable to
authorize the commanders of sailing vessels to recapture
any prizes which pirates may make of United States vessels
and their cargoes, and the consular courts now established
by law in Eastern countries to adjudicate the cases in the
event that this should not be objected to by the local
authorities.
 If any good reason exists why we should persevere
longer in withholding our recognition of the independence
and sovereignty of Haiti and Liberia, I am unable to discern
it. Unwilling, however, to inaugurate a novel policy in
regard to them without the approbation of Congress, I
submit for your consideration the expediency of an
appropriation for maintaining a charge d’aﬀaires near each
of those new States. It does not admit of doubt that
important commercial advantages might be secured by
favorable treaties with them.
The operations of the treasury during the period which
has elapsed since your adjournment have been conducted
with signal success. The patriotism of the people has placed
at the disposal of the government the large means
demanded by the public exigencies. Much of the national
loan has been taken by citizens of the industrial classes,
whose conﬁdence in their country’s faith and zeal for their
country’s deliverance from present peril have induced them
to contribute to the support of the government the whole of
their limited acquisitions. This fact imposes peculiar
obligations to economy in disbursement and energy in
action.
The revenue from all sources, including loans, for the
ﬁnancial year ending on the 30th of June, 1861, was
 86,835,900.27, and the expenditures for the same period,
including payments on account of the public debt, were
 84,578,834.47, leaving a balance in the treasury on the
1st of July of  2,257,065.80. For the ﬁrst quarter of the
ﬁnancial year ending on the 30th of September, 1861, the
 receipts from all sources, including the balance of the 1st
of 
July, 
were 
 102,532,509.27, 
and 
the 
expenses
 98,239733.09, leaving a balance on the 1st of October,
1861, of  4,292,776.18.
Estimates for the remaining three quarters of the year
and for the ﬁnancial year 1863, together with his views of
ways and means for meeting the demands contemplated by
them, will be submitted to Congress by the Secretary of the
Treasury. It is gratifying to know that the expenditures
made necessary by the rebellion are not beyond the
resources of the loyal people, and to believe that the same
patriotism which has thus far sustained the government
will continue to sustain it till peace and union shall again
bless the land.
I respectfully refer to the report of the Secretary of War
for information respecting the numerical strength of the
army and for recommendations having in view an increase
of its eﬀiciency and the well-being of the various branches
of the service intrusted to his care. It is gratifying to know
that the patriotism of the people has proved equal to the
occasion, and that the number of troops tendered greatly
exceeds the force which Congress authorized me to call
into the ﬁeld.
I refer with pleasure to those portions of his report which
make allusion to the creditable degree of discipline already
attained by our troops and to the excellent sanitary
condition of the entire army.
The recommendation of the Secretary for an organization
of the militia upon a uniform basis is a subject of vital
 importance to the future safety of the country, and is
commended to the serious attention of Congress.
The large addition to the regular army, in connection
with the defection that has so considerably diminished the
number of its oﬀicers, gives peculiar importance to his
recommendation for increasing the corps of cadets to the
greatest capacity of the Military Academy.
By mere omission, I presume, Congress has failed to
provide chaplains for hospitals occupied by volunteers. This
subject was brought to my notice, and I was induced to
draw up the form of a letter, one copy of which, properly
addressed, has been delivered to each of the persons, and
at the dates respectively named and stated in a schedule,
containing also the form of the letter, marked A, and
herewith transmitted.
These gentlemen, I understand, entered upon the duties
designated at the times respectively stated in the schedule,
and have labored faithfully therein ever since. I therefore
recommend that they be compensated at the same rate as
chaplains in the army. I further suggest that general
provision be made for chaplains to serve at hospitals, as
well as with regiments.
The report of the Secretary of the Navy presents in detail
the operations of that branch of the service, the activity
and energy which have characterized its administration,
and the results of measures to increase its eﬀiciency and
power such have been the additions, by construction and
purchase, that it may almost be said a navy has been
 created and brought into service since our diﬀiculties
commenced.
Besides blockading our extensive coast, squadrons larger
than ever before assembled under our ﬂag have been put
aﬂoat and performed deeds which have increased our naval
renown.
I would invite special attention to the recommendation of
the Secretary for a more perfect organization of the navy
by introducing additional grades in the service.
The present organization is defective and unsatisfactory,
and the suggestions submitted by the department will, it is
believed, if adopted, obviate the diﬀiculties alluded to,
promote harmony, and increase the eﬀiciency of the navy.
There are three vacancies on the bench of the Supreme
Court — two by the decease of Justices Daniel and McLean
and one by the resignation of Justice Campbell. I have so
far forborne making nominations to ﬁll these vacancies for
reasons which I will now state. Two of the outgoing judges
resided within the States now overrun by revolt, so that if
successors were appointed in the same localities they could
not now serve upon their circuits; and many of the most
competent men there probably would not take the personal
hazard of accepting to serve, even here, upon the Supreme
bench. I have been unwilling to throw all the appointments
north-ward, thus disabling myself from doing justice to the
South on the return of peace; although I may remark that
to transfer to the North one which has heretofore been in
the South would not, with reference to territory and
population, be unjust.
 During the long and brilliant judicial career of Judge
McLean his circuit grew into an empire-altogether too
large for any one judge to give the courts therein more
than a nominal attendance — rising in population from
1,470,018 in 1830 to 6,151,405 in 1860.
Besides this, the country generally has outgrown our
present judicial system. If uniformity was at all intended,
the 
system 
requires 
that 
all 
the 
States 
shall 
be
accommodated with circuit courts, attended by Supreme
judges, while, in fact, Wisconsin, Minnesota, Iowa, Kansas,
Florida, Texas, California, and Oregon have never had any
such courts. Nor can this well be remedied without a
change in the system, because the adding of judges to the
Supreme Court, enough for the accommodation of all parts
of the country with circuit courts, would create a court
altogether too numerous for a judicial body of any sort. And
the evil, if it be one, will increase as new States come into
the Union. Circuit courts are useful or they are not useful.
If useful, no State should be denied them; if not useful, no
State should have them. Let them be provided for all or
abolished as to all.
Three modiﬁcations occur to me, either of which, I think,
would be an improvement upon our present system. Let the
Supreme Court be of convenient number in every event;
then, ﬁrst, let the whole country be divided into circuits of
convenient size, the Supreme judges to serve in a number
of 
them 
corresponding 
to 
their 
own 
number, 
and
independent circuit judges be provided for all the rest; or,
secondly, let the Supreme judges be relieved from circuit
 duties and circuit judges provided for all the circuits; or,
thirdly, dispense with circuit courts altogether, leaving the
judicial functions wholly to the district courts and an
independent Supreme Court.
I respectfully recommend to the consideration of
Congress the present condition of the statute laws, with the
hope that Congress will be able to ﬁnd an easy remedy for
many of the inconveniences and evils which constantly
embarrass those engaged in the practical administration of
them. Since the Organization of the government, Congress
has enacted some 5000 acts and joint resolutions, which ﬁll
more than 6000 closely printed pages and are scattered
through many volumes. Many of these acts have been
drawn in haste and without suﬀicient caution, so that their
provisions are often obscure in themselves or in conﬂict
with each other, or at least so doubtful as to render it very
diﬀicult for even the best-informed persons to ascertain
precisely what the statute law really is.
It seems to me very important that the statute laws
should be made as plain and intelligible as possible, and be
reduced to as small a compass as may consist with the
fullness and precision of the will of the Legislature and the
perspicuity of its language. This well done would, I think,
greatly facilitate the labors of those whose duty it is to
assist in the administration of the laws, and would be a
lasting beneﬁt to the people, by placing before them in a
more accessible and intelligible form the laws which so
deeply concern their interests and their duties.
 I am informed by some whose opinions I respect that all
the acts of Congress now in force and of a permanent and
general nature might be revised and rewritten so as to be
embraced in one volume (or at most two volumes) of
ordinary and convenient size; and I respectfully recommend
to Congress to consider of the subject, and if my suggestion
be approved to devise such plan as to their wisdom shall
seem most proper for the attainment of the end proposed.
One of the unavoidable consequences of the present
insurrection is the entire suppression in many places of all
the ordinary means of administering civil justice by the
oﬀicers and in the forms of existing law. This is the case, in
whole or in part, in all the insurgent States; and as our
armies advance upon and take possession of parts of those
States the practical evil becomes more apparent. There are
no courts or oﬀicers to whom the citizens of other States
may apply for the enforcement of their lawful claims
against citizens of the insurgent States, and there is a vast
amount of debt constituting such claims. Some have
estimated it as high as  200,000,000, due in large part
from insurgents in open rebellion to loyal citizens who are
even now making great sacriﬁces in the discharge of their
patriotic duty to support the government.
Under these circumstances I have been urgently solicited
to establish, by military power, courts to administer
summary justice in such cases. I have thus far declined to
do it, not because I had any doubt that the end proposed —
the collection of the debts — was just and right in itself, but
because I have been unwilling to go beyond the pressure of
 necessity in the unusual exercise of power. But the powers
of Congress, I suppose, are equal to the anomalous
occasion, and therefore I refer the whole matter to
Congress, with the hope that a plan maybe devised for the
administration of justice in all such parts of the insurgent
States and Territories as may be under the control of this
government, whether by a voluntary return to allegiance
and order or by the power of our arms; this, however, not to
be a permanent institution, but a temporary substitute, and
to cease as soon as the ordinary courts can be
reestablished in peace.
It is important that some more convenient means should
be provided, if possible, for the adjustment of claims
against the government, especially in view of their
increased number by reason of the war. It is as much the
duty of government to render prompt justice against itself
in favor of citizens as it is to administer the same between
private individuals. The investigation and adjudication of
claims in their nature belong to the judicial department.
Besides, it is apparent that the attention of Congress will
be more than usually engaged for some time to come with
great 
national 
questions. 
It 
was 
intended 
by 
the
organization of the Court of Claims mainly to remove this
branch of business from the halls of Congress; but, while
the court has proved to be an eﬀective and valuable means
of investigation, it in great degree fails to eﬀect the object
of its creation for want of power to make its judgments
ﬁnal.
 Fully aware of the delicacy, not to say the danger of the
subject, I commend to your careful consideration whether
this power of making judgments ﬁnal may not properly be
given to the court, reserving the right of appeal on
questions of law to the Supreme Court, with such other
provisions as experience may have shown to be necessary.
I ask attention to the report of the Postmaster general,
the following being a summary statement of the condition
of the department:
The revenue from all sources during the ﬁscal year
ending June 30, 1861, including the annual permanent
appropriation of  700,000 for the transportation of “free
mail matter,” was  9,049,296.40, being about 2 per cent.
less than the revenue for 1860.
The expenditures were  13,606,759.11, showing a
decrease of more than 8 per cent. as compared with those
of the previous year and leaving an excess of expenditure
over the revenue for the last ﬁscal year of  4,557,462.71.
The gross revenue for the year ending June 30, 1863, is
estimated at an increase of 4 per cent. on that of 1861,
making  8,683,000, to which should be added the earnings
of the department in carrying free matter, viz.,  700,000,
making  9,383,000.
The total expenditures for 1863 are estimated at
 12,528,000, leaving an estimated deﬁciency of  3,145,000
to be supplied from the treasury in addition to the
permanent appropriation.
The present insurrection shows, I think, that the
extension of this District across the Potomac River at the
 time of establishing the capital here was eminently wise,
and consequently that the relinquishment of that portion of
it which lies within the State of Virginia was unwise and
dangerous. I submit for your consideration the expediency
of regaining that part of the District and the restoration of
the original boundaries thereof through negotiations with
the State of Virginia.
The report of the Secretary of the Interior, with the
accompanying documents, exhibits the condition of the
several branches of the public business pertaining to that
department. The depressing inﬂuences of the insurrection
have been specially felt in the operations of the Patent and
General Land Oﬀices. The cash receipts from the sales of
public lands during the past year have exceeded the
expenses of our land system only about  200,000. The sales
have been entirely suspended in the Southern States, while
the interruptions to the business of the country and the
diversion of large numbers of men from labor to military
service have obstructed settlements in the new States and
Territories of the Northwest.
The receipts of the Patent Oﬀice have declined in nine
months about  100,000.00 rendering a large reduction of
the force employed necessary to make it self-sustaining.
The demands upon the Pension Oﬀice will be largely
increased by the insurrection. Numerous applications for
pensions, based upon the casualties of the existing war,
have already been made. There is reason to believe that
many who are now upon the pension rolls and in receipt of
the bounty of the government are in the ranks of the
 insurgent army or giving them aid and comfort. The
Secretary of the Interior has directed a suspension of the
payment of the pensions of such persons upon proof of
their disloyalty. I recommend that Congress authorize that
oﬀicer to cause the names of such persons to be stricken
from the pension rolls.
The relations of the government with the Indian tribes
have been greatly disturbed by the insurrection, especially
in the southern superintendency and in that of New
Mexico. The Indian country south of Kansas is in the
possession of insurgents from Texas and Arkansas. The
agents of the United States appointed since the 4th of
March for this superintendency have been unable to reach
their posts, while the most of those who were in oﬀice
before that time have espoused the insurrectionary cause,
and assume to exercise the powers of agents by virtue of
commissions from the insurrectionists. It has been stated in
the public press that a portion of those Indians have been
organized as a military force and are attached to the army
of the insurgents. Although the government has no oﬀicial
information upon this subject, letters have been written to
the Commissioner of Indian Aﬀairs by several prominent
chiefs giving assurance of their loyalty to the United States
and expressing a wish for the presence of Federal troops to
protect them. It is believed that upon the repossession of
the country by the Federal forces the Indians will readily
cease all hostile demonstrations and resume their former
relations to the government.
 Agriculture, confessedly the largest interest of the
nation, has not a department nor a bureau, but a clerkship
only, assigned to it in the government. While it is fortunate
that this great interest is so independent in its nature as
not to have demanded and extorted more from the
government, I respectfully ask Congress to consider
whether something more cannot be given voluntarily with
general advantage.
Annual 
reports 
exhibiting 
the 
condition 
of 
our
agriculture, commerce, and manufactures would present a
fund of information of great practical value to the country.
While I make no suggestion as to details, I venture the
opinion that an agricultural and statistical bureau might
proﬁtably be organized.
The execution of the laws for the suppression of the
African slave trade has been conﬁded to the Department of
the Interior. It is a subject of gratulation that the eﬀorts
which have been made for the suppression of this inhuman
traﬀic have been recently attended with unusual success.
Five vessels being ﬁtted out for the slave trade have been
seized and condemned. Two mates of vessels engaged in
the trade and one person in equipping a vessel as a slaver
have been convicted and subjected to the penalty of ﬁne
and imprisonment, and one captain, taken with a cargo of
Africans on board his vessel, has been convicted of the
highest grade of oﬀense under our laws, the punishment of
which is death.
The Territories of Colorado, Dakota, and Nevada, created
by the last Congress, have been organized, and civil
 administration 
has 
been 
inaugurated 
therein 
under
auspices especially gratifying when it is considered that the
leaven of treason was found existing in some of these new
countries when the Federal oﬀicers arrived there.
The abundant natural resources of these Territories, with
the 
security 
and 
protection 
aﬀorded 
by 
organized
government, will doubtless invite to them a large
immigration when peace shall restore the business of the
country 
to 
its 
accustomed 
channels. 
I 
submit 
the
resolutions of the Legislature of Colorado, which evidence
the patriotic spirit of the people of the Territory. So far the
authority of the United States has been upheld in all the
Territories, as it is hoped it will be in the future. I commend
their interests and defense to the enlightened and generous
care of Congress.
I recommend to the favorable consideration of Congress
the interests of the District of Columbia. The insurrection
has been the cause of much suﬀering and sacriﬁce to its
inhabitants, and as they have no representative in Congress
that body should not overlook their just claims upon the
government.
At your late session a joint resolution was adopted
authorizing the President to take measures for facilitating a
proper representation of the industrial interests of the
United States at the exhibition of the industry of all nations
to be holden at London in the year 1862. I regret to say I
have been unable to give personal attention to this subject
— a subject at once so interesting in itself and so
extensively and intimately connected with the material
 prosperity of the world. Through the Secretaries of State
and of the Interior a plan or system has been devised and
partly matured, and which will be laid before you.
Under and by virtue of the act of Congress entitled “An
act 
to 
conﬁscate 
property 
used 
for 
insurrectionary
purposes,” approved August 6, 1861, the legal claims of
certain persons to the labor and service of certain other
persons have become forfeited, and numbers of the latter
thus liberated are already dependent on the United States,
and must be provided for in some way. Besides this, it is not
impossible that some of the States will pass similar
enactments for their own beneﬁt respectively, and by
operation of which persons of the same class will be thrown
upon them for disposal. In such case I recommend that
Congress provide for accepting such persons from such
States, according to some mode of valuation, in lieu, pro
tanto, of direct taxes, or upon some other plan to be agreed
on with such States respectively; that such persons, on
such acceptance by the General Government, be at once
deemed free, and that in any event steps be taken for
colonizing both classes (or the one ﬁrst mentioned if the
other shall not be brought into existence) at some place or
places in a climate congenial to them. It might be well to
consider, too, whether the free colored people already in
the United States could not, so far as individuals may
desire, be included in such colonization.
To carry out the plan of colonization may involve the
acquiring of territory, and also the appropriation of money
beyond that to be expended in the territorial acquisition.
 Having practised the acquisition of territory for nearly sixty
years, the question of constitutional power to do so is no
longer an open one with us. The power was questioned at
ﬁrst by Mr. Jeﬀerson, who, however, in the purchase of
Louisiana, yielded his scruples on the plea of great
expediency. If it be said that the only legitimate object of
acquiring territory is to furnish homes for white men, this
measure eﬀects that object, for emigration of colored men
leaves additional room for white men remaining or coming
here. Mr. Jeﬀerson, however, placed the importance of
procuring Louisiana more on political and commercial
grounds than on providing room for population.
On this whole proposition, including the appropriation of
money with the acquisition of territory, does not the
expediency amount to absolute necessity — that without
which the government itself cannot be perpetuated?
The war continues. In considering the policy to be
adopted for suppressing the insurrection I have been
anxious and careful that the inevitable conﬂict for this
purpose shall not degenerate into a violent and remorseless
revolutionary struggle. I have therefore in every case
thought it proper to keep the integrity of the Union
prominent as the primary object of the contest on our part,
leaving all questions which are not of vital military
importance 
to 
the 
more 
deliberate 
action 
of 
the
Legislature.
In the exercise of my best discretion I have adhered to
the blockade of the ports held by the insurgents, instead of
 putting in force by proclamation the law of Congress
enacted at the late session for closing those ports.
So also, obeying the dictates of prudence, as well as the
obligations of law, instead of transcending I have adhered
to the act of Congress to conﬁscate property used for
insurrectionary purposes. If a new law upon the same
subject shall be proposed, its propriety will be duly
considered. The Union must be preserved, and hence all
indispensable means must be employed. We should not be
in haste to determine that radical and extreme measures,
which may reach the loyal as well as the disloyal, are
indispensable.
The 
inaugural 
address 
at 
the 
beginning 
of 
the
Administration and the message to Congress at the late
special session were both mainly devoted to topics
domestic controversy out of which the insurrection and
consequent war have sprung. Nothing now occurs to add or
subtract to or from the principles or general purposes
stated and expressed in those documents.
The last ray of hope for preserving the Union peaceably
expired at the assault upon Fort Sumter, and a general
review of what has occurred since may not be unproﬁtable.
What was painfully uncertain then is much better deﬁned
and more distinct now, and the progress of events is plainly
in the right direction. The insurgents conﬁdently claimed a
strong support from north of Mason and Dixon’s line, and
the friends of the Union were not free from apprehension
on the point. This, however, was soon settled deﬁnitely, and
on the right side. South of the line noble little Delaware led
 oﬀ right from the ﬁrst. Maryland was made to seem against
the Union. Our soldiers were assaulted, bridges were
burned, and railroads torn up within her limits, and we
were many days at one time without the ability to bring a
single regiment over her soil to the capital. Now her
bridges and railroads are repaired and open to the
government; she already gives seven regiments to the
cause of the Union, and none to the enemy; and her people,
at a regular election, have sustained the Union by a larger
majority and a larger aggregate vote than they ever before
gave to any candidate or any question. Kentucky, too, for
some time in doubt, is now decidedly and, I think,
unchangeably ranged on the side of the Union. Missouri is
comparatively quiet, and, I believe, can, not again be
overrun by the insurrectionists. These three States of
Maryland, Kentucky, and Missouri, neither of which would
promise a single soldier at ﬁrst, have now an aggregate of
not less than forty thousand in the ﬁeld for the Union, while
of their citizens certainly not more than a third of that
number, and they of doubtful whereabouts and doubtful
existence, are in arms against us. After a somewhat bloody
struggle of months, winter closes on the Union people of
western Virginia, leaving them masters of their own
country.
An insurgent force of about ﬁfteen hundred, for months
dominating the narrow peninsular region constituting the
counties of Accomac and Northampton, and known as
Eastern Shore of Virginia, together with some contiguous
parts of Maryland, have laid down their arms, and the
 people there have renewed their allegiance to and accepted
the protection of the old ﬂag. This leaves no armed
insurrectionist north of the Potomac or east of the
Chesapeake.
Also we have obtained a footing at each of the isolated
points on the southern coast of Hatteras, Port Royal, Tybee
Island (near Savannah), and Ship Island; and we likewise
have some general accounts of popular movements in
behalf of the Union in North Carolina and Tennessee.
These things demonstrate that the cause of the Union is
advancing steadily and certainly southward.
Since your last adjournment Lieutenant-General Scott
has retired from the head of the army. During his long life
the nation has not been unmindful of his merit; yet on
calling to mind how faithfully, ably, and brilliantly he has
served the country, from a time far back in our history,
when few of the now living had been born, and
thenceforward continually, I cannot but think we are still
his debtors. I submit, therefore, for your consideration
what further mark of recognition is due to him, and to
ourselves as a grateful people.
With the retirement of General Scott came the Executive
duty of appointing in his stead a general-in-chief of the
army. It is a fortunate circumstance that neither in council
nor country was there, so far as I know, any diﬀerence of
opinion as to the proper person to be selected. The retiring
chief repeatedly expressed his judgment in favor of General
McClellan for the position, and in this the nation seemed to
give a unanimous concurrence. The designation of General
 McClellan is therefore in considerable degree the selection
of the country as well as of the Executive, and hence there
is better reason to hope there will be given him the
conﬁdence and cordial support thus by fair implication
promised, and without which he cannot with so full
eﬀiciency serve the country.
It has been said that one bad general is better than two
good ones, and the saying is true if taken to mean no more
than that an army is better directed by a single mind,
though inferior, than by two superior ones at variance and
cross-purposes with each other.
And the same is true in all joint operations wherein those
engaged can have none but a common end in view and can
diﬀer only as to the choice of means. In a storm at sea no
one on hoard can wish the ship to sink, and yet not
unfrequently all go down together because too many will
direct and no single mind can be allowed to control.
It continues to develop that the insurrection is largely, if
not exclusively, a war upon the ﬁrst principle of popular
government — the rights of the people. Conclusive
evidence of this is found in the most grave and maturely
considered public documents, as well as in the general tone
of the insurgents. In those documents we ﬁnd the
abridgment of the existing right of suﬀrage and the denial
to the people of all right to participate in the selection of
public oﬀicers except the legislative boldly advocated, with
labored arguments to prove that large control of the people
in government is the source of all political evil. Monarchy
 itself is sometimes hinted at as a possible refuge from the
power of the people.
In my present position I could scarcely be justiﬁed were I
to omit raising a warning voice against this approach of
returning despotism. It is not needed nor ﬁtting here that a
general argument should be made in favor of popular
institutions, but there is one point, with its connections, not
so hackneyed as most others, to which I ask a brief
attention. It is the eﬀort to place capital on an equal footing
with, if not above, labor in the structure of government. It
is assumed that labor is available only in connection with
capital; that nobody labors unless somebody else, owning
capital, somehow by the use of it induces him to labor. This
assumed, it is next considered whether it is best that
capital shall hire laborers, and thus induce them to work by
their own consent, or buy them and drive them to it without
their consent. Having proceeded so far, it is naturally
concluded that all laborers are either hired laborers or
what we call slaves. And further, it is assumed that whoever
is once a hired laborer is ﬁxed in that condition for life.
Now there is no such relation between capital and labor
as assumed, nor is there any such thing as a free man being
ﬁxed for life in the condition of a hired laborer. Both these
assumptions are false, and all inferences from them are
groundless.
Labor is prior to and independent of capital. Capital is
only the fruit of labor, and could never have existed if labor
had not ﬁrst existed. Labor is the superior of capital, and
deserves much the higher consideration. Capital has its
 rights, which are as worthy of protection as any other
rights. Nor is it denied that there is, and probably always
will be, a relation between labor and capital producing
mutual beneﬁts. The error is in assuming that the whole
labor of community exists within that relation. A few men
own capital, and that few avoid labor themselves, and with
their capital hire or buy another few to labor for them. A
large majority belong to neither class — neither work for
others nor have others working for them. In most of the
Southern States a majority of the whole people of all colors
are neither slaves nor masters, while in the Northern a
large majority are neither hirers nor hired. Men, with their
families — wives, sons, and daughters, — work for
themselves on their farms, in their houses, and in their
shops, taking the whole product to themselves, and asking
no favors of capital on the one hand nor of hired laborers or
slaves on the other. It is not forgotten that a considerable
number of persons mingle their own labor with capital; that
is, they labor with their own hands and also buy or hire
others to labor for them; but this is only a mixed and not a
distinct class. No principle stated is disturbed by the
existence of this mixed class.
Again, as has already been said, there is not of necessity
any such thing as the free hired laborer being ﬁxed to that
condition for life. Many independent men everywhere in
these States a few years back in their lives were hired
laborers. The prudent, penniless beginner in the world
labors for wages awhile, saves a surplus with which to buy
tools or land for himself, then labors on his own account
 another while, and at length hires another new beginner to
help him. This is the just and generous and prosperous
system which opens the way to all, gives hope to all, and
consequent energy and progress and improvement of
condition to all. No men living are more worthy to be
trusted than those who toil up from poverty; none less
inclined to take or touch aught which they have not
honestly earned. Let them beware of surrendering a
political power which they already possess, and which if
surrendered will surely be used to close the door of
advancement against such as they and to ﬁx new
disabilities and burdens upon them till all of liberty shall be
lost.
From the ﬁrst taking of our national census to the last
are seventy years, and we ﬁnd our population at the end of
the period eight times as great as it was at the beginning.
The increase of those other things which men deem
desirable has been even greater. We thus have at one view
what the popular principle, applied to government through
the machinery of the States and the Union, has produced in
a given time, and also what if ﬁrmly maintained it promises
for the future. There are already among us those who if the
Union be preserved will live to see it contain 200,000,000.
The struggle of to-day is not altogether for to-day; it is for a
vast future also. With a reliance on Providence all the more
ﬁrm and earnest, let us proceed in the great task which
events have devolved upon us.
A. LINCOLN.
    A
   
  
    .
WASHINGTON, December 20, 1861.
TO THE SENATE AND HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES:
I transmit to Congress a letter from the secretary of the
executive committee of the commission appointed to
represent the interests of those American citizens who may
desire to become exhibitors at the industrial exhibition to
be held in London in 1862, and a memorial of that
commission, with a report of the executive committee
thereof and copies of circulars announcing the decisions of
Her Majesty’s commissioners in London, giving directions
to be observed in regard to articles intended for exhibition,
and also of circular forms of application, demands for
space, approvals, etc., according to the rules prescribed by
the British commissioners.
As these papers fully set forth the requirements
necessary to enable those citizens of the United States who
may wish to become exhibitors to avail themselves of the
privileges of the exhibition, I commend them to your early
consideration, especially in view of the near approach of
the time when the exhibition will begin.
A. LINCOLN.
        
      I
A
  
 
 
  A  H
  
TO GENERAL HUNTER.
E ECUTIVE MANSION, WASHINGTON, Dec.31, 1861
MAJOR-GENERAL HUNTER.
DEAR SIR: — Yours of the 23d is received, and I am
constrained to say it is diﬀicult to answer so ugly a letter in
good temper. I am, as you intimate, losing much of the
great conﬁdence I placed in you, not from any act or
omission of yours touching the public service, up to the
time you were sent to Leavenworth, but from the ﬂood of
grumbling despatches and letters I have seen from you
since. I knew you were being ordered to Leavenworth at
the time it was done; and I aver that with as tender a
regard for your honor and your sensibilities as I had for my
own, it never occurred to me that you were being
“humiliated, insulted, and disgraced”; nor have I, up to this
day, heard an intimation that you have been wronged,
coming from any one but yourself. No one has blamed you
for the retrograde movement from Springﬁeld, nor for the
information you gave General Cameron; and this you could
readily understand, if it were not for your unwarranted
assumption that the ordering you to Leavenworth must
necessarily have been done as a punishment for some fault.
I thought then, and think yet, the position assigned to you
 is as responsible, and as honorable, as that assigned to
Buell — I know that General McClellan expected more
important results from it. My impression is that at the time
you were assigned to the new Western Department, it had
not been determined to replace General Sherman in
Kentucky; but of this I am not certain, because the idea
that a command in Kentucky was very desirable, and one in
the farther West undesirable, had never occurred to me.
You constantly speak of being placed in command of only
3000. Now, tell me, is this not mere impatience? Have you
not known all the while that you are to command four or
ﬁve times that many.
I have been, and am sincerely your friend; and if, as
such, I dare to make a suggestion, I would say you are
adopting the best possible way to ruin yourself. “Act well
your part, there all the honor lies.” He who does something
at the head of one regiment, will eclipse him who does
nothing at the head of a hundred.
Your friend, as ever, A. LINCOLN.
     
 A
  
 
 
  A  HA     .
WASHINGTON, D.C., December 31, 1861
GENERAL H. W. HALLECK, St. Louis, Missouri: General
McClellan is sick. Are General Buell and yourself in
concert? When he moves on Bowling Green, what hinders it
being 
reinforced 
from 
Columbus? 
A 
simultaneous
movement by you on Columbus might prevent it.
A. LINCOLN.
[Similar despatch to Buell same date.]
